Major had been at home in Huntingdon recovering from a wisdom tooth operation during the first leadership ballot.
To some extent, these critics of Major's policy were later vindicated when, in an article published in 2011, the then-Defence Secretary Malcolm Rifkind accepted that the arms embargo was a "serious mistake" by the UN.
Following boundary changes, Major became the MP for the newly formed seat of Huntingdon in 1983, and retained the seat in 1987, 1992 and 1997.
His task became even more difficult after the well-received election of Tony Blair as Labour Leader in July 1994.
This meant that, despite only being in the Cabinet for little over two years, Major had gone from the most junior position in the Cabinet to holding two of the Great Offices of State.
From 1994 to 1997, Major privatised British rail, splitting it up into franchises to be run by the private sector.
What's Lyndon B. Johnson's maxim?"
By April 2013, vCJD - the human form of the disease had killed 280 people (176 of them in Britain).
In November 1976, Major was selected to be the candidate for the safe Conservative seat of Huntingdonshire.
The following year, Major watched his first debate in the House of Commons, where Harold Macmillan presented his only Budget as Chancellor of the Exchequer, and has attributed his political ambitions to that event.
A portrait of Major, painted in 1996 by June Mendoza, is part of the parliamentary collection, as is a bronze bust by Anne Curry.
Even ''The Sun'' newspaper, which had championed the Conservatives five years earlier and claimed to have won the 1992 general election for the party, declared its support for Tony Blair's "New Labour", condemning the Tories as "tired, divided and rudderless".
Major then famously announced to the press that he intended to go with his family to The Oval to watch Surrey play cricket.
Major himself was re-elected in his own constituency of Huntingdon with an increased majority of 18,140, but 179 other Conservative MPs were defeated, including present and former Cabinet Ministers such as Norman Lamont, Malcolm Rifkind and Michael Portillo.
The former Labour MP Tony Banks said of Major in 1994 that, "He was a fairly competent Chairman of Housing on Lambeth Council.
Another scandal was "Cash for Questions", in which first Graham Riddick, and David Tredinnick accepted money to ask questions in the House of Commons in a newspaper "sting", and later Tim Smith and Neil Hamilton were found to have received money from Mohamed Al-Fayed, also to ask questions in the House.
Within two months of Major becoming Prime Minister, Major was required to lead Britain through the first Gulf War, playing a key role in persuading US President George H. W. Bush to support no-fly zones.
He won the seat in the 1979 general election.
Major's comfortable re-election as Conservative Leader failed to restore his authority.
In October 1990, Major and Douglas Hurd, Major's successor as Foreign Secretary, persuaded Thatcher to support British entry to the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, a move which she had resisted for many years, and which had played a part in the resignation of Nigel Lawson.
Major was born in 1943 at St Helier Hospital in Sutton, Surrey, the son of Gwen Major,  Coates, and former music hall performer Tom Major-Ball who was 64 years old when John was born.
Around this time Major – who in an unfortunate phrase denounced the Labour Leader John Smith as "Monsieur Oui, the poodle of Brussels" – tried to demand an increase in the Qualified Majority needed for voting in the newly enlarged European Union (i.e.
By this time billionaire Sir James Goldsmith had set up his own Referendum Party, siphoning off some Conservative support, and at the 1997 General Election many Conservative candidates were openly expressing reluctance to join.
In a press statement, Major said that he was "ashamed" by the affair and that his wife had forgiven him.
Despite these predictions, the Conservatives won the election, gaining in excess of 14&nbsp;million votes, the highest popular vote ever recorded by a British political party in a general election to date.
Shortly after this, even though a staunch supporter of the ERM, the Major Government became responsible for British exit from the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) after Black Wednesday on 16 September 1992.
Although Labour supported the treaty, they tactically opposed certain provisions of the Treaty to exploit divisions in the Government.
Disliking this job, he quit.
keeping lists of his enemies in a Rymans Notebook called his "Bastards Book") and featuring "my wife Norman" and "Mr Dr Mawhinney" as recurring characters.
This event led to a loss of confidence in Conservative economic policies and Major was never able to achieve a lead in opinion polls again.
Encouraged by fellow Conservative Derek Stone, he started giving speeches on a soap-box in Brixton Market.
On 22 July 1993, several Conservative MPs, known as the Maastricht Rebels, voted against the Treaty, and the Government was defeated.
This opposition included passing an amendment that required a vote on the Social Chapter aspects of the Treaty before it could be ratified.
Even these moves towards greater European integration met with vehement opposition from the Eurosceptic wing of Major's party and his Cabinet, as the Government attempted to ratify the Maastricht Treaty in the first half of 1993.
Bell also used the humorous possibilities of the Cones Hotline, a means for the public to inform the authorities of potentially unnecessary traffic cones, which was part of the Citizen's Charter project established by John Major.
By this time, the Labour Party had moved to the centre-left under the leadership of Tony Blair and won a large number of by-elections, eventually depriving the Government of its majority in February 1997.
''The Sun'' newspaper, still at this stage supporting the Conservative Party, had lost faith in Major and declared its support for Redwood in the leadership election, running the front page headline "Redwood versus Deadwood".
On the night of the election, exit polls indicated a very slim Labour lead, which most observers predicted would translate into either a hung parliament or a small Labour majority, with Major's best hope of retaining power being with the Tories remaining in government as a minority government or as part of a coalition.
The tape of this conversation was leaked to the ''Daily Mirror'' and widely reported, embarrassing Major.
The following day Major travelled to Buckingham Palace to inform the Queen of his resignation as Prime Minister.
The Government's reasoning was that an arms embargo would only create a "level killing field" and that air strikes would endanger UN peacekeepers and the humanitarian aid effort.
He stood as a candidate for Lambeth London Borough Council at the age of 21 in 1964, and was elected in the Conservative landslide in 1968.
He was later made Under-Secretary of State for Social Security in 1985, before being promoted to become Minister of State in the same department in 1986, first attracting national media attention over cold weather payments to the elderly in January 1987, when Britain was in the depths of a severe winter.
He denied all accusations and promised to wield the "sword of truth" in libel proceedings which he brought against ''The Guardian'' and the producers of ''World in Action'' Granada Television.
David Ashby was "outed" by his wife after sleeping with men.
Major was also one of the prime ministers portrayed in the 2013 stage play ''The Audience'', played by Paul Ritter.
He was sent to work in Jos, Nigeria by the bank in 1967 and he nearly died in a car accident there.
The upheaval caused by the day's events was such that Major came close to resigning as Prime Minister, preparing an unsent letter of resignation addressed to the Queen.
In 1992, David Mellor, a cabinet minister, had been exposed as having an extramarital affair and for accepting hospitality from the daughter of a leading member of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In March 1995, Major refused to answer the phone calls of United States President Bill Clinton for several days because of his anger at Clinton's decision to invite Gerry Adams to the White House for St Patrick's Day.
He attended primary school at Cheam Common and from 1954 he attended Rutlish Grammar School (now known as Rutlish School) in Merton.
He publicised it as ''a budget for savings'' and announced the Tax-Exempt Special Savings Account (TESSA), arguing that measures were required to address the marked fall in the household savings ratio that had been apparent during the previous financial year.
They met on polling day for the Greater London Council elections in London.
For example: "Fifty years on from now, Britain will still be the country of long shadows on cricket grounds, warm beer, invincible green suburbs, dog lovers and pools fillers".
Peter Oborne, writing in 2012, asserts that Major's government looks ever more successful as time goes by.
He later gained three more O-levels by correspondence course, in the British Constitution, Mathematics and Economics.
He wrote that he took a stern line against financial impropriety, but was angered at the way in which a host of scandals, many of them petty sexual misdemeanours by a small number of MPs, were exploited by the press and Opposition for political advantage.
Major is the author of three best-selling books – ''John Major The Autobiography''; ''More than a Game'', a history of cricket; and ''My Old Man'', a history of Music Hall.
He was an especially active figure on the side of the Remain campaign preceding the European Union membership referendum, 2016 that resulted in the United Kingdom voting to leave the European Union.
In 1996 European governments banned British beef over claims that it was infected with Mad Cow Disease – the British government withheld co-operation with the EU over the issue, but did not succeed in getting the ban lifted, only a timetable of lifting it.
Less than a year of his triumphant election victory, public opinion on Major personally plummeted, with Black Wednesday, mine closures, the Maastricht dispute and high unemployment being cited as four key areas of dissatisfaction with the Prime Minister.
The Conservatives had been consistently behind Labour in the opinion polls since 1989, and the gap had widened significantly during 1990.
In 2010, Major became a key loyalist to the Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition, and said that he hoped for a "liberal conservative" alliance beyond 2015, and has criticised Ed Miliband and the Labour Party, for "party games" rather than helping in the national interest.
Their relationship lasted from 1963 to sometime after 1968.
The media (particularly ''The Guardian'' cartoonist Steve Bell) used the allegation by Alastair Campbell that he had observed Major tucking his shirt into his underpants to caricature him wearing his pants outside his trousers, as a pale grey echo of both Superman and Supermac, a parody of Harold Macmillan.
During his leadership of the Conservative Party, Major was portrayed as honest ("Honest John") but unable to rein in the philandering and bickering within his party.
Major never succeeded in reconciling the "Euro-rebels" among his MPs to his European policy, who although relatively few in number – in spite of the fact that their views were much more widely supported amongst Conservative activists and voters – wielded great influence because of his small majority, and episodes such as the Maastricht Rebellion inflicted serious political damage on him and his government.
Salter died on 22 November 2002 from cancer.
The process was controversial at the time, and its success is hotly debated, with a large increase in passenger numbers and investment in the network balanced by worries about the level of rail subsidy.
From the dispossessed and the never-possessed.
The huge election defeat also left the Conservatives without any MPs in Scotland or Wales for the first time in history.
His mother died eight and a half years later in September 1970 at the age of 65.
Also according to Seldon, the formative political influence on Major was Jean Kierans, a divorcée 13 years his elder, who became his political mentor and his lover, too.
The party would not return to government until 2010, and did not win a parliamentary majority until 2015 (both victories being achieved under the leadership of David Cameron).
In spite of Labour Leader Neil Kinnock's repeated calls for an immediate general election after Major became Prime Minister, it wasn't until February 1992 that Major called an election for 9 April.
The UK's forced withdrawal from the ERM was succeeded by a partial economic recovery with a new policy of flexible exchange rates, allowing lower interest rates and devaluation, thereby increasing demand for UK goods in export markets.
Major refused, saying: "It would be terrible, because I would be presiding with no authority over a number of candidates fighting for the crown.
He formed a temporary Shadow Cabinet, but with seven of his Cabinet Ministers having lost their seats at the election, and with few senior MPs left to replace them, several MPs had to hold multiple briefs.
On 1 May 1997, the Conservative Party suffered the worst electoral defeat by a ruling party since the Reform Act 1832.
After defeat, Major resigned as Prime Minister and was succeeded as Leader of the Conservative Party by William Hague.
Major won by 218 votes to Redwood's 89, with 12 spoiled ballots, eight 'active' abstentions and two MPs abstaining, enough to easily win in the first round.
Few observers doubted that he was an honest man, or that he made sincere and sometimes successful attempts to improve life in Britain and to unite his deeply divided party.
making it easier for Britain, in alliance with other countries, to block federalist measures).
His daughter Elizabeth married Luke Salter on 26 March 2000, having been in a relationship since 1988.
He went on to retire from active politics, leaving the House of Commons at the 2001 general election.
Two years later, in a surprise July 1989 reshuffle, Major succeeded Geoffrey Howe as Foreign Secretary.
Chancellor Ken Clarke) favoured joining and insisted that Britain retain a completely free choice, whilst increasing numbers of others expressed their reluctance to join.
Major denied doing so, saying that he had not heard of the request until the scheduled release date and had merely asked to look at the papers himself.
Since leaving office Major has maintained a low profile, indulging his love of cricket as president of Surrey County Cricket Club until 2002 (and Honorary Life Vice-President since 2002) and commentating on political developments in the manner of a wise elder statesman.
Unfortunately for John Major, his attempts to win public support and swing the election in favour of the Tories did not work.
In February 2005, it was reported that Major and Norman Lamont delayed the release of papers on Black Wednesday under the Freedom of Information Act.
Shortly before this he had announced his intention to also resign as Conservative Leader, giving his final statement outside 10 Downing Street in which he said; "When the curtain falls, it is time to get off the stage—and that is what I propose to do."
The 1991 Japan Festival also took place under his Premiership.
He has been a member of the Carlyle Group's European Advisory Board since 1998 and was appointed Chairman of Carlyle Europe in May 2001.
Thatcher's nomination papers for the second ballot were sent to him by car for him to sign – it later emerged that he had signed both Thatcher's papers and a set of papers for his own candidacy in case she withdrew.
On 8 May 2012, Major was personally decorated at the Imperial Palace in Tokyo by the Emperor of Japan with the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun in recognition of his invaluable contributions to Japan–UK relations through his work in the political and economic arena, and also in promoting mutual understanding.
He was also perceived as a weak and ineffectual figure, and his approval ratings for most of his time in office were low, particularly after "Black Wednesday" in September 1992.
You are the Prime Minister, with a majority of 18&nbsp;... where do you think most of the poison is coming from?
When he declared to the House of Commons in November 1993 that "to sit down and talk with Mr Adams and the Provisional IRA&nbsp;... would turn my stomach", Sinn Féin gave the media an outline of the secret talks indeed held regularly since that February.
''Private Eye'' parodied Sue Townsend's ''The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole, age 13¾'' to write ''The Secret Diary of John Major, age 47¾'', in which Major was portrayed as a naive nincompoop (e.g.
Throughout the rest of Major's time as Prime Minister the exact identity of the three was blurred, with John Redwood's name frequently appearing in a list along with two of the others.
Major joined the Young Conservatives in Brixton at this time.
While Prime Minister, Major had pursued energetic campaigns aimed at boosting bilateral trade – "Priority Japan" (1991–94) and "Action Japan" (1994–97).
On 20 June 2008, Major was granted the Freedom of the City of Cork.
Comparisons were being drawn up with an earlier Conservative prime minister, Anthony Eden – who had risen through the ranks as a highly respected government minister before becoming prime minister, only to be seen as a disappointment after he did take over.
On 22 June 1995, tired of continual threats of leadership challenges that never arose, Major resigned as Leader of the Conservative Party and announced he would contest the resulting leadership election – he continued to serve as Prime Minister while the leadership was vacant, but would have resigned had he not been re-elected by a large enough majority.
He was appointed as a Parliamentary Private Secretary in 1981, becoming an assistant whip in 1983.
Do we want three more of the bastards out there?
Major served as Leader of the Opposition for seven weeks whilst the leadership election to replace him was underway.
Although many Conservative MPs wanted Major to resign as leader immediately, there was a movement among the grassroots of the party, encouraged by his political allies, to have him stay on as leader until the autumn.
A series of scandals among leading Conservative MPs also did Major and his government no favours.
During the campaign, both parties were either tied or within one point of each other in opinion polls, leading to uncertainty over who would win – or whether there would be an outright election winner at all.
Every time he gets up now I keep thinking, 'What on earth is Councillor Major doing?'
His son James, a former nightclub promoter and flooring contractor, married gameshow hostess Emma Noble and together they had a son, Harrison.
Major had previously declined a life peerage on standing down from Parliament.
Unlike in the first ballot, a candidate only required a simple majority of Conservative MPs to win, in this case 187 of 375 MPs.
Government policy was to maintain the United Nations arms embargo which restricted the flow of weapons into the region and to oppose air strikes against Bosnian Serbs.
Later that day, Major gave an interview to ITN's Michael Brunson.
He replied: "Just think it through from my perspective.
Stephen Milligan was found dead having apparently auto-asphyxiated whilst performing a solitary sex act (his Eastleigh seat was lost in what was to be an ongoing stream of hefty by-election defeats).
He was touted as a possible Conservative candidate for the Mayor of London elections in 2008, but turned down an offer from Conservative leader David Cameron.
Major's first job was as a clerk in the insurance brokerage firm Pratt & Sons in 1959.
On 23 April 2005, Major was bestowed with a knighthood as a Companion of the Order of the Garter by Queen Elizabeth II.
In spite of this, conflict raged within the Parliamentary Conservative Party, particularly over the extent of Britain's integration with the European Union.
Major took his campaign onto the streets, delivering many addresses from an upturned soapbox as he had done in his days on Lambeth Council.
After Major became Prime Minister it was misreported that his failure to get a job as a bus conductor resulted from his failing to pass a maths test.
Critics from all corners were also criticising his 'consensus' approach to politics, which contrasted sharply to the more confrontational approach of Margaret Thatcher – while others were keen to point out that a less confrontational approach to the job was something that many observers had been hoping for when Margaret Thatcher was leaving office in 1990.
A string of other Conservative MPs, including Alan Amos, Tim Yeo, and Michael Brown, were involved in sexual scandals.
Newspapers which traditionally supported the Conservatives and had championed Major at the election were now being severely critical of him on an almost daily basis.
Major was interested in politics from an early age.
Major's resignation as Conservative Leader formally took effect on 19 June 1997 after the election of William Hague.
Major's mild-mannered style and moderate political stance made him theoretically well-placed to act as a conciliatory leader of his party.
After Michael Heseltine challenged Thatcher for the leadership of the Conservative Party in November 1990, Major and Douglas Hurd were the proposer and seconder on her nomination papers for the leadership ballot.
His Resignation Honours were announced in August 1997.
Early in 1994 Major vetoed the Belgian politician Jean-Luc Dehaene to succeed Jacques Delors as President of the European Commission for being excessively federalist, only to find that he had to accept a Luxembourg politician of similar views, Jacques Santer, instead.
By April 1993, a mere 12 months after his general election triumph, John Major's popularity as Prime Minister had slumped.
The conflict has been named the Beef war.
Some leading Conservatives (e.g.
Major opened talks with the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) upon taking office.
At an early stage in the trial, it became apparent that he had lied under oath, and he was subsequently (after the Major government had fallen from power) convicted of perjury and sentenced to a term of imprisonment.
Arguments continued over Europe.
He had in fact passed all of the necessary tests but had been passed over owing to his height.
During an unguarded moment when Major thought that the microphones had been switched off, Brunson asked why he did not sack the ministers who were conspiring against him.
They had two children; a son, James, and a daughter, Elizabeth.
With no remaining challengers, Major was formally named Leader of the Conservative Party that evening and was duly appointed Prime Minister the following day.
Major kept his economic team unchanged for seven months after Black Wednesday before eventually sacking Norman Lamont as Chancellor of the Exchequer, replacing him with Kenneth Clarke.
For example, in ''Spitting Image'', Major's puppet was changed from a circus performer to that of a grey man who ate dinner with his wife in silence, occasionally saying "nice peas, dear", whilst at the same time nursing an unrequited crush on his colleague Virginia Bottomley – an invention, but an ironic one in view of his affair with Edwina Currie, which was not then a matter of public knowledge.
He lost his seat in 1971.
He earns over £25,000 per engagement for his "insights and his own opinions on the expanding European Union, the future of the world in the 21st century, and also about Britain", according to his agency.
Major later commented in his memoirs on the "routine" with which he would be telephoned over the weekend to be warned of the latest embarrassing story due to break.
Despite efforts to improve the popularity of the Conservative Party, Labour remained far ahead in the opinion polls as the election loomed, despite the economic boom that had followed the exit from recession four years earlier, and the swift fall in unemployment.
Despite the eventual revival of economic growth amongst other successes such as the beginnings of the Northern Ireland peace process, by the mid-1990s the Conservative Party was embroiled in ongoing sleaze scandals involving various MPs, including Cabinet Ministers.
In 2005 he was elected to the Committee of the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), historically the governing body of the sport, and still guardian of the laws of the game.
Defence Minister Jonathan Aitken was accused by the ITV investigative journalism series ''World in Action'' and ''The Guardian'' newspaper of secretly doing deals with leading Saudi princes.
Major was 19 years old when his father died at the age of 82 on 27 March 1962.
Major went on to lose the 1997 general election months later in one of the largest electoral defeats since the Great Reform Act of 1832.
He was installed at St George's Chapel, Windsor on 13 June.
Although this translated into a much-reduced majority of 21 seats in the House of Commons, this was enough for Major to return as Prime Minister elected in his own right and give the Conservatives their fourth consecutive victory, although the relatively small majority would go on to cause problems for Major throughout his second term.
Major defended his government in his memoirs, focusing particularly on how under him the British economy had recovered from the recession of 1990–92.
Although Tim Smith stepped down from the House of Commons at the 1997 General Election, both Neil Hamilton and Jonathan Aitken sought re-election for their seats, and were both defeated, in Hamilton's case by the former BBC Reporter Martin Bell, who stood as an anti-sleaze candidate, both the Labour and Liberal Democrat candidates withdrawing in his favour, amidst further publicity unfavourable to the Conservatives.
Major was an active Young Conservative, and according to his biographer Anthony Seldon brought "youthful exuberance" to the Tories in Brixton, but was often in trouble with the professional agent Marion Standing.
They argued that remaining as leader for a few months would give the party time to come to terms with the scale of defeat before electing a successor.
He stood down in August 2004.
While on the Council he was Chairman of the Housing Committee, being responsible for overseeing the building of several large council housing estates.
In December 2006, Major led calls for an independent inquiry into Tony Blair's decision to invade Iraq, following revelations made by Carne Ross, a former British senior diplomat, that contradict Blair's case for the invasion.
The Downing Street Declaration was issued on 15 December 1993 by Major and Albert Reynolds, the Irish Taoiseach, with whom he had a friendly relationship: an IRA ceasefire followed in 1994.
On 26 April 2010, Major gave a speech in the Cambridge Union, after which he was granted honorary membership of the society.
Major remained active in Parliament after his resignation, regularly attending and contributing in debates.
According to the ''London Evening Standard'', Major has become a prolific after-dinner speaker.
This approach stood in contrast to the Labour Party's seemingly slicker campaign and it chimed with the electorate, along with hard-hitting negative campaign advertising focusing on the issue of Labour's approach to taxation.
Immediately after Black Wednesday, the Conservatives fell far behind Labour in the opinion polls and Major would never be able to regain the lead for the rest of his time as Prime Minister, being trounced in local council elections and the European parliament elections on the way, as well as suffering a string of by-election defeats which gradually wiped out the Conservative majority.
Conversely on occasions he attracted criticism for pursuing schemes favoured by the right of his party, notably the privatisation of British Rail.
Sleaze will be one of the things which brings this government down."
After a period of unemployment, Major started working at the London Electricity Board in 1963 which is where incidentally his successor as Prime Minister, Tony Blair, also worked when he was young.
He retired from Parliament in 2001.
The magazine also ran a series of cartoons called ''101 Uses for a John Major'' (based on a comic book of some ten years earlier, called ''101 Uses for a Dead Cat''), in which Major was illustrated serving a number of bizarre purposes, such as a train-spotter's anorak.
He also wrote newspaper columns, and appeared on TV shows such as ''Have I Got News for You''.
This came after months of press criticism of Lamont and a heavy defeat at a by-election in Newbury.
He later publicly approved the release of the papers.
The ballot was held on the afternoon of 27 November; although Major fell two votes short of the required winning total, he polled far enough ahead of both Douglas Hurd and Michael Heseltine to secure immediate concessions from them.
After Thatcher was unable to win enough support to prevent a second ballot, she announced her resignation as Prime Minister and Conservative Leader.
Criticism of Major's leadership reached such a pitch that he chose to resign as leader in June 1995, challenging his critics to either back him or challenge him; he was duly challenged by John Redwood but was easily re-elected.
Paddy Ashdown, the Leader of the Liberal Democrats during Major's term of office, once described him in the House of Commons as a "decent and honourable man".
During this period, Major and his Cabinet survived an IRA assassination attempt by mortar attack.
Following their divorce, James married Kate Postlethwaite (née Dorrell), the mother of his second son, on 31 March 2012.
By the end of his premiership his puppet would often be shown observing the latest fiasco and ineffectually murmuring "oh dear".
He stood down from the House of Commons at the 2001 general election, having announced his retirement live on BBC One's breakfast television show with David Frost in October 2000.
He went on to lead the Conservatives to a fourth consecutive election victory, winning the most votes in British electoral history with over 14 million in the 1992 general election, with a reduced majority in the House of Commons.
In recent history, Sir Winston Churchill, Sir Edward Heath, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown have not been elevated to the House of Lords.
By December 1996, by-election losses and defections meant that the Conservatives had lost their majority in the House of Commons.
They made him Prime Minister."
Major married Norma Johnson (now Dame Norma Major, DBE) on 3 October 1970 at St Matthew's Church, Brixton.
Major stood for election to Parliament in St Pancras North in both United Kingdom general elections in 1974, but was unsuccessful each time.
Later, David Willetts resigned as Paymaster General after he was accused of rigging evidence to do with ''Cash for Questions''.
Major subsequently announced on 22 November that he would stand in the second ballot.
Major took up a post as an executive at the Standard Chartered Bank in May 1965 and he rose quickly through the ranks.
Following the 1987 election, Major was promoted to the Cabinet as Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
Membership of the Order of the Garter is limited in number to 24, and as a personal gift of the Queen is an honour traditionally bestowed on former Prime Ministers.
Major paved the way for the Good Friday Agreement, also known as the 'Belfast Agreement', which was signed after he left office.
A spokesperson for Major said "his political career is behind him".
