They dated for three weeks, until Cash was deployed to Germany for a three-year tour.
Cash wrote that his reception at the 1994 Glastonbury Festival was one of the highlights of his career.
Cash nurtured and defended artists (such as Bob Dylan) on the fringes of what was acceptable in country music even while serving as the country music establishment's most visible symbol.
In January 2006, the house was sold to Bee Gees vocalist Barry Gibb and wife Linda, and titled to their Florida limited liability company for $2.3&nbsp;million.
It was once rumored that Phillips told Cash to "go home and sin, then come back with a song I can sell", although in a 2002 interview Cash denied that Phillips made any such comment.
A box set titled ''Unearthed'' was issued posthumously.
A biblical scholar, he penned a Christian novel, ''Man in White'', and in the introduction Cash writes about a reporter who, interested in Cash's religious beliefs, questions whether the book is written from a Baptist, Catholic, or Jewish perspective.
The Statler Brothers opened up for him in every episode; the Carter Family and rockabilly legend Carl Perkins were also part of the regular show entourage.
He concludes the letter, "Ira Hayes is strong medicine&nbsp;...
On the contrary, Hilburn writes, it was Columbia that presented Cash with the song, which Cash - who had previously scored major chart hits with comedic material such as "A Boy Named Sue" and "One Piece at a Time" - accepted enthusiastically, performing the song live on stage and filming a comedic music video in which he dresses up in a superhero-like bank robber costume.
His most infamous run-in with the law occurred while on tour in 1965, when he was arrested October 4 by a narcotics squad in El Paso, Texas.
I demand a recount.
With the video, Johnny Cash became the oldest artist ever nominated for an MTV Video Music Award.
In June 2005, Cash's lakeside home on Caudill Drive in Hendersonville was put up for sale by his estate.
He was honorably discharged as a staff sergeant on July 3, 1954, and returned to Texas.
Under Rubin's supervision, he recorded ''American Recordings'' (1994) in his living room, accompanied only by his Martin Dreadnought guitar&nbsp;– one of many Cash played throughout his career.
On April 10, 2007, during a major restoration of the property by the new owner, Cash's home was accidentally destroyed in a spontaneous combustion-ignited fire caused by workers using linseed oil products.
Cash used the uppers to stay awake during tours.
A majority of "Unchained" was recorded at Sound City Studios and featured guest appearances by Lindsay Buckingham, Mick Fleetwood and Marty Stuart.
A new museum, founded by Shannon and Bill Miller, opened April 26, 2013 in downtown Nashville.
In 1981, he starred in ''The Pride of Jesse Hallam'', winning fine reviews for a film that called attention to adult illiteracy.
Robert Hilburn, veteran ''Los Angeles Times'' pop music critic, the journalist who accompanied Cash in his 1968 Folsom prison tour, and interviewed Cash many times throughout his life including months before his death, published a 688-page biography with 16 pages of photographs in 2013.
He and his band had initially worn black shirts because that was the only matching color they had among their various outfits.
However, his first autobiography, ''Man in Black'', was published in 1975 and sold 1.3&nbsp;million copies.
Cash's career was handled by Saul Holiff, a London, Ontario, promoter, and this relationship was the subject of Saul's son's biopic ''My Father and the Man in Black''.
Cash began using amphetamines again in 1977.
During this time, he recorded an album of new versions of some of his best-known Sun and Columbia hits, as well as ''Water from the Wells of Home'', a duets album that paired him with, among others, his children Rosanne Cash and John Carter Cash, as well as Paul McCartney.
In 1971, Cash wrote the song "Man in Black," to help explain his dress code:
The old are still neglected, the poor are still poor, the young are still dying before their time, and we're not making many moves to make things right.
Although Cash carefully cultivated a romantic outlaw image, he never served a prison sentence.
After more unsuccessful recordings were released in 1984-85, Cash left Columbia (At least as a solo artist; he continued to record for Columbia on non-solo projects until as late as 1990, recording a duets album with Waylon Jennings and two albums as a member of The Highwaymen.)
BBC4 1969 Bio Documentary by Robert Elfstromg; archive footage
"I had to fight back when I realized that so many stations are afraid of Ira Hayes.
''Million Dollar Quartet'', a musical portraying the early Sun recording sessions involving Cash, Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Carl Perkins, debuted on Broadway on April 11, 2010.
Taught guitar by his mother and a childhood friend, Cash began playing and writing songs at the age of twelve.
To him, it was his own rebirth.
A limited-edition Forever stamp honoring Cash went on sale  June 5, 2013.
The only VMA the video won was that for Best Cinematography.
In his remarks when introducing Cash, Nixon joked that one thing he'd learned about the singer was one didn't tell him what to sing.
A one-off Christmas album recorded for Delta Records followed his Mercury contract.
In a behind-the-scenes look at ''The Johnny Cash Show'', Cash claims to have "tried every drug there was to try."
He wore 'black' on behalf of the poor and hungry, on behalf of "the prisoner who has long paid for his crime," and on behalf of those who have been betrayed by age or drugs.
On August 7, 1954, one month after his discharge, they were married at St. Ann's Roman Catholic Church in San Antonio.
In 1997, Cash was diagnosed with the neurodegenerative disease Shy–Drager syndrome, a form of multiple system atrophy; according to biographer Robert Hilburn, the disease was originally misdiagnosed as Parkinson's disease, and Cash even announced to a concert audience that he had Parkinson's during a show in Flint, Michigan, on October 25, 1997, after he nearly collapsed on stage; soon after his diagnosis was changed to Shy–Drager and Cash was told he had approximately 18 months to live.
At a hospital visit in 1988, this time to watch over Waylon Jennings (who was recovering from a heart attack), Jennings suggested that Cash have himself checked into the hospital for his own heart condition.
His family's economic and personal struggles during the Great Depression inspired many of his songs, especially those about other people facing similar difficulties.
In 1968, 13 years after they first met backstage at the Grand Ole Opry, Cash proposed to June, during a live performance in London, Ontario.
In 1999, Cash received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.
In 1969 Cash became an international hit when he eclipsed even the Beatles by selling 6.5 million albums.
Nonetheless, he continued to find success and in 1967, Cash's duet with June Carter, "Jackson," won a Grammy Award.
There's still plenty of darkness to carry off."
Prior to this, having been closed for a number of years, the museum had been featured in Cash's music video for "Hurt."
In her book, ''I Walked the Line: My Life with Johnny'', Liberto states that Cash gave Carter the credit for monetary reasons.
Quinn, Medicine Woman'' in recurring roles.
Biographer Robert Hilburn, in the 2013-published ''Johnny Cash: The Life'' disputes the claim made that Cash chose to record an intentionally poor song in protest of Columbia's treatment of him.
Cash had tried for years to make the film, for which he won acclaim.
In 1984, Cash released a self-parody recording titled "Chicken in Black," about Cash's brain being transplanted into a chicken and Cash receiving a bank robber's brain in return.
Much of Cash's music contained themes of sorrow, moral tribulation and redemption, especially in the later stages of his career.
The AM versions of the latter contained profanities which were edited out.
Cash began performing concerts at prisons starting in the late 1950s.
He made commercials for Amoco and STP, an unpopular enterprise in an era in which oil companies made high profits while consumers suffered through high gasoline prices and shortages.
Both recovered, although Cash refused to use any prescription painkillers, fearing a relapse into dependency.
In the mid-1970s, Cash's popularity and number of hit songs began to decline.
The album's single, "The Ballad of Ira Hayes," was neglected by non-political radio at the time, and the record label denied it any promotion due to its provocative protesting and thus "unappealing" nature.
The modern CD versions are unedited and thus also longer than the original vinyl albums, though they retain the audience reaction overdubs of the originals.
He was the first radio operator to pick up the news of the death of Joseph Stalin.
Cash was unrepentant and claimed, "I don't care about your damn yellow buzzards."
In the early 1960s, Cash toured with the Carter Family, which by this time regularly included Mother Maybelle's daughters, Anita, June and Helen.
Because the pills were prescription drugs rather than illegal narcotics, he received a suspended sentence.
Cash continued to record until shortly before his death.
Perkins and Grant were known as the Tennessee Two.
He descended deeper into the cave, trying to lose himself and "just die," when he passed out on the floor.
During that period, Cash appeared in a number of television films.
During that time, the couple exchanged hundreds of pages of love letters.
This was the beginning of a decade of music industry accolades and commercial success.
According to Hilburn, Cash's enthusiasm for the song waned after Waylon Jennings told Cash he looked "like a buffoon" in the music video (which was showcased during Cash's 1984 Christmas TV special), and Cash subsequently demanded that Columbia withdraw the music video from broadcast and recall the single from stores—interrupting its bona fide chart success—and termed the venture "a fiasco.
The video for "Hurt," a cover of the song by Nine Inch Nails, from ''American IV'', received particular critical and popular acclaim.
The live album ''På Österåker'' ("At Österåker") was released in 1973.
The book reportedly does not hold back any details about the darker side of Johnny Cash and includes details about his affair with his pregnant wife June Carter's sister.
On November 22, 1974, CBS ran his one-hour TV special entitled "Riding The Rails", a musical history of trains.
He recorded ''Johnny Cash Reads The Complete New Testament'' in 1990.
In June 1965, his camper caught fire during a fishing trip with his nephew Damon Fielder in Los Padres National Forest in California, triggering a forest fire that burnt several hundred acres and nearly killed Cash.
He started working in cotton fields at age five, singing along with his family while working.
1 on the country charts and entered the pop charts Top 20.
Cash was very close to his older brother, Jack.
Although no longer sought after by major labels, he was offered a contract with producer Rick Rubin's American Recordings label, which had recently been rebranded from Def American, under which name it was better known for rap and hard rock.
In the 1960s, he appeared on Pete Seeger's short lived television series ''Rainbow Quest''.
The outdated US Navy's winter blue uniform used to be referred to by sailors as "Johnny Cashes," as the uniform's shirt, tie, and trousers are solid black.
He also lent his voice for a cameo role in ''The Simpsons'' episode "El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)", as the "Space Coyote" that guides Homer Simpson on a spiritual quest.
During the last stage of his career, Cash covered songs by several late 20th century rock artists, notably "Hurt" by Nine Inch Nails and "Personal Jesus" by Depeche Mode.
In 2004, ''Rolling Stone'' ranked Cash No.
June had told Cash to keep working, so he continued to record, completing 60 more songs in the last four months of his life, and even performed a couple of surprise shows at the Carter Family Fold outside Bristol, Virginia.
Although he was Sun's most consistently selling and prolific artist at that time, Cash felt constrained by his contract with the small label partly due to the fact that Phillips wasn't keen on Johnny recording gospel, and he was getting only a 3% royalty as opposed to the standard rate of 5%.
John Carter Cash, the son of Johnny and June, served as an executive producer.
Decades later, Cash spoke of looking forward to meeting his brother in Heaven.
Accordingly, Cash is said to have "contained multitudes," and has been deemed "the philosopher-prince of American country music."
His final recordings were made on August 21, 2003, and consisted of "Like the 309," which would appear on ''American V: A Hundred Highways'' in 2006, and the final song he completed, "Engine 143," which was recorded for his son John Carter Cash for a planned Carter Family tribute album.
He was buried next to his wife in Hendersonville Memory Gardens near his home in Hendersonville, Tennessee.
In 1966, in response to his activism, the singer was adopted by the Seneca Nation's Turtle Clan.
Cash's next record, "Folsom Prison Blues", made the country Top 5, and "I Walk the Line" became No.
Despite landing in jail seven times for misdemeanors, each stay lasted only a single night.
They had four daughters: Rosanne, Kathy, Cindy, and Tara.
At the middle of the fifth inning, people in oversized foam caricature costumes depicting Cash, as well as George Jones and Reba McEntire, race around the warning track at First Tennessee Park from center field to the home plate side of the first base dugout.
Cash had also been arrested on May 11, 1965, in Starkville, Mississippi, for trespassing late at night onto private property to pick flowers.
Just one question: WHY???"
Throughout the multiple rehab visits and years of drug abuse, June's love and devotion never wavered.
Cash was also in the studio and the four started an impromptu jam session.
31 on their "100 Greatest Artists of All Time" list and No.
Cash declined to play the first two and instead selected other songs, including "The Ballad of Ira Hayes" (about a brave Native American World War II veteran who was mistreated upon his return to Arizona), and his own compositions, "What Is Truth" and "Man in Black".
The musical was nominated for three awards at the 2010 Tony Awards, and won one.
Cash often spoke of the horrible guilt he felt over this incident.
The album featured covers of contemporary artists selected by Rubin and had a great deal of critical and commercial success, winning a Grammy for Best Contemporary Folk Album.
In total, he wrote over 1,000 songs and released dozens of albums.
In recognition of his lifelong support of SOS Children's Villages, his family invited friends and fans to donate to the Johnny Cash Memorial Fund in his memory.
Don't put me in another box."
Cash was a musician who was not defined by a single genre.
He said he was the only person ever sued by the government for starting a forest fire.
As his career was taking off in the late 1950s, Cash started drinking heavily and became addicted to amphetamines and barbiturates.
Johnny and June also appeared in ''Dr.
Cash and Carter continued to work, raise their children, create music, and tour together for 35 years until June's death in May 2003.
According to ''Cash: The Autobiography'', his father was away that morning, but he and his mother, and Jack himself, all had premonitions or a sense of foreboding about that day, causing his mother to urge Jack to skip work and go fishing with his brother.
His diversity was evidenced by his presence in four major music halls of fame: the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame (1977), the Country Music Hall of Fame (1980), the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (1992), and the Memphis Music Hall of Fame (2013).
At birth, Cash was named J. R. Cash.
When the judge asked Cash why he did it, Cash said, "I didn't do it, my truck did, and it's dead, so you can't question it."
1 on the country charts and entering the Top 20 on the pop charts.
The Johnny Cash Museum, located in one of Cash's properties in Hendersonville until 2006, dubbed the ''House of Cash,'' was sold based on Cash's will.
The stamp features a promotional picture of Cash taken around the 1963 release of "Ring of Fire: The Best of Johnny Cash.
His first prison concert was on January 1, 1958, at San Quentin State Prison.
The Folsom Prison record was introduced by a rendition of his "Folsom Prison Blues," while the San Quentin record included the crossover hit single "A Boy Named Sue," a Shel Silverstein-penned novelty song that reached No.
Although he was in many ways spiraling out of control, Cash's frenetic creativity was still delivering hits.
In 1992, he entered the Loma Linda Behavioral Medicine Center in Loma Linda, California, for his final rehabilitation (several months later, his son followed him into this facility for treatment).
Early in his career, he was given the teasing nickname ''The Undertaker'' by fellow artists because of his habit of wearing black clothes - though he did so only because they were easier to keep looking clean on long tours.
The Cash children were: Roy, Margaret Louise, Jack, J. R., Reba, Joanne, and Tommy.
He traditionally began his concerts with the simple "Hello, I'm Johnny Cash", followed by his signature "Folsom Prison Blues".
In the mid-1960s, Cash released a number of concept albums, including ''Sings the Ballads of the True West'' (1965), an experimental double record mixing authentic frontier songs with Cash's spoken narration, and ''Bitter Tears'' (1964), with songs highlighting the plight of the Native Americans.
Presley had already left Sun, and Phillips was focusing most of his attention and promotion on Lewis.
They both performed their own vocals in the film (with their version of "Jackson" being released as a single), and Phoenix learned to play guitar for the role.
The album featured stories of a multitude of native peoples, mostly of their violent oppression by white settlers: The Pima ("The Ballad of Ira Hayes"), Navajo ("Navajo"), Apache ("Apache Tears"), Lakota ("Big Foot"), Seneca ("As Long as the Grass Shall Grow"), and Cherokee ("Talking Leaves").
On March 12, 2006, ''Ring of Fire'', a jukebox musical of the Cash oeuvre, debuted on Broadway at the Ethel Barrymore Theater, but closed due to harsh reviews and disappointing sales on April 30.
Around this time, Cash also recorded an album of gospel recordings that ended up being released by another label around the time of his departure from Columbia (this due to Columbia closing down its Priority Records division that was to have released the recordings).
The listing agent was Cash's younger brother, Tommy.
Cash wrote that the reasons for denying Nixon's song choices were not knowing them and having fairly short notice to rehearse them, rather than any political reason.
These performances led to a pair of highly successful live albums, ''Johnny Cash at Folsom Prison'' (1968) and ''Johnny Cash at San Quentin'' (1969).
In reaction, on August 22, 1964, the singer posted a letter as an advertisement in Billboard Magazine, calling the record industry cowardly.
Cash eventually settled the case and paid $82,001.
'''John R.''' "'''Johnny'''" '''Cash''' (born '''J.
Phoenix received a Grammy Award for his contributions to the soundtrack.
On December 4, 1956, Elvis Presley dropped in on Phillips while Carl Perkins was in the studio cutting new tracks, with Jerry Lee Lewis backing him on piano.
He wore other colors on stage early in his career, but he claimed to like wearing black both on and off stage.
He was hospitalized in 1998 with severe pneumonia, which damaged his lungs.
Cash enlisted in the United States Air Force on July 7, 1950.
Believing he did not explain enough of himself in his 1975 autobiography ''Man in Black'', he wrote ''Cash: The Autobiography'' in 1997.
(This incident gave the spark for the song "Starkville City Jail", which he discussed on his live ''At San Quentin'' album.)
In 1955, Cash made his first recordings at Sun, "Hey Porter" and "Cry!
On November 2–4, 2007, the Johnny Cash Flower Pickin' Festival was held in Starkville, Mississippi, where Cash had been arrested more than 40 years earlier and held overnight at the city jail on May 11, 1965.
Cash worked up the courage to visit the Sun Records studio, hoping to get a recording contract.
Both live albums reached number 1 on Billboard country album music and the latter crossed over to reach the top of the Billboard pop album chart.
June later recalled admiring him from afar during these tours.
His career was rejuvenated in the 1990s, leading to popularity with an audience which was not traditionally considered interested in country music.
On his deathbed, Jack said he had visions of Heaven and angels.
Reflecting on his past in a 1997 interview, Cash noted: "I was taking the pills for awhile, and then the pills started taking me."
He also played at the D-Q University in the 1980s.
Cash kept promoting the song himself and used his influence on radio disc jockeys he knew eventually to make the song climb to number three on the country charts, while the album rose to number two on the album charts.
He gave a performance as John Brown in the 1985 American Civil War television mini-series ''North and South''.
Cash wrote three of the songs himself and one with the help of Johnny Horton, but the majority of the protest songs were written by folk artist Peter La Farge  (son of activist and Pulitzer prizewinner Oliver La Farge), whom Cash met in New York in the 1960s and whom he admired for his activism.
Cash died four months later.
On July 18, 1951, while in Air Force training, Cash met 17-year-old Vivian Liberto at a roller skating rink in her native San Antonio.
The family farm was flooded on at least two occasions, which later inspired him to write the song "Five Feet High and Rising".
In the same year, Cash appeared as a "very special guest star" in an episode of the ''Muppet Show''.
He regularly performed dressed all in black, wearing a long black knee-length coat.
The film featured Joaquin Phoenix as Johnny (for which he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor) and Reese Witherspoon as June (for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress).
In ''Cash: the Autobiography'', Cash wrote that he was the one farthest from the microphone and was singing in a higher pitch to blend in with Elvis.
He realized that his record label of nearly 30 years, Columbia, was growing indifferent to him and was not properly marketing him (he was "invisible" during that time, as he said in his autobiography).
She had agreed to marry Cash after he had "cleaned up."
His contributions to the genre have been recognized by the Rockabilly Hall of Fame.
He was closest to Jimmy Carter, with whom he became close friends and who was a distant cousin of his wife, June Carter Cash.
Phoenix and Witherspoon also won the Golden Globe for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy and Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy, respectively.
Cash declared he was "the biggest sinner of them all", and viewed himself overall as a complicated and contradictory man.
In 1980, Cash became the  Country Music Hall of Fame's youngest living inductee at age 48, but during the 1980s his records failed to make a major impact on the country charts, although he continued to tour successfully.
In 1996, Cash enlisted the accompaniment of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers and released ''Unchained'' (also known as ''American Recordings II''), which won the Best Country Album Grammy in 1998.
In March 1935, when Cash was three years old, the family settled in Dyess, Arkansas.
That same year Cash became the first Sun artist to release a long-playing album.
WWE Superstar The Undertaker used Cash's version of "Ain't No Grave" at WrestleMania XXVII as his entrance theme.
He performed benefits in 1968 at the Rosebud Reservation, close to the historical landmark of the massacre at Wounded Knee, to raise money to help build a school.
The album was produced by Rick Rubin with Sylvia Massy engineering and mixing.
Of the group's four members, Cash was the only non-Texan.
After basic training at Lackland Air Force Base and technical training at Brooks Air Force Base, both in San Antonio, Texas, Cash was assigned to the 12th Radio Squadron Mobile of the U.S. Air Force Security Service at Landsberg, Germany as a Morse Code operator intercepting Soviet Army transmissions.
"San Quentin" was recorded with Cash replacing "San Quentin" with "Österåker".
Doctors recommended preventive heart surgery, and Cash underwent double bypass surgery in the same hospital.
He stated that, political reasons aside, he simply liked black as his on-stage color.
Cash received the Kennedy Center Honors in 1996, and stated that his induction into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1980 was his greatest professional achievement.
: ''See Johnny Cash albums discography, Johnny Cash singles discography and Johnny Cash Sun Records discography.''
Cash faced resistance and was even urged by an editor of a country music magazine to leave the Country Music Association: "You and your crowd are just too intelligent to associate with plain country folks, country artists and country DJs."
By 1983, he was once again addicted and entered the Betty Ford Clinic in Rancho Mirage, California for rehabilitation.
In 2015, a new species of black tarantula was identified near Folsom Prison, and named Aphonopelma johnnycashi in his honor.
His rendition of "Ring of Fire" was a crossover hit, reaching No.
Cash curtailed his use of drugs for several years in 1968, after a spiritual epiphany in the Nickajack Cave, when he attempted to commit suicide while under the heavy influence of drugs.
Grant claims that the birth of Cash's son, John Carter Cash inspired Cash to end his dependence.
In 1954, Cash and Vivian moved to Memphis, Tennessee, where he sold appliances while studying to be a radio announcer.
Cash was known for his deep, calm bass-baritone voice, the distinctive sound of his Tennessee Three backing band, a rebelliousness coupled with an increasingly somber and humble demeanor, free prison concerts, and a trademark look, which earned him the nickname "The Man in Black".
