Sam Spade, in ''The Maltese Falcon'', Huston's first film, ends up minus one partner and one woman he thought he could trust.
But whatever doubts Warners had were soon removed, as the film achieved widespread public and critical acclaim.
He wrote the screenplays for most of the 37 feature films he directed, many of which are today considered classics: ''The Maltese Falcon'' (1941), ''The Treasure of the Sierra Madre'' (1948), ''Key Largo'' (1948), ''The Asphalt Jungle'' (1950), ''The African Queen'' (1951), ''Moulin Rouge'' (1952), ''The Misfits'' (1961), and ''The Man Who Would Be King'' (1975).
Also in 1948 he directed his next film, ''Key Largo'', again with Humphrey Bogart starring.
Huston liked the town where filming took place so much that he bought a house near there.
He had been cast in the role of a high-ranking Nazi fugitive who manages to settle in New England under an assumed name.
It was a command: "Don't stop!"
Huston was nominated for two Academy Awards—best director and best screenplay.
However, the "outstanding performances" by all the actors saved the film, and Claire Trevor won an Oscar for best supporting actress.
It would subsequently become a model for many similar movies by other filmmakers.
In addition, ''House Divided'' was directed by William Wyler, who gave Huston his first real "inside view" of the filmmaking process during all stages of production.
His first job was as scriptwriter with Warner Brothers Studio, with his personal longterm goal of directing his own scripts.
The film was also a success on the independent circuit.
Roger Ebert eventually placed it in his Great Movies list; a section of movies he claims to be some of the best ever made.
In any case, notes Flint, Huston took "uncommon care to preserve the writer's styles and values&nbsp;... and sought repeatedly to transpose the interior essence of literature to film with dramatic and visual tension", as he did in ''Red Badge of Courage,'' ''Moby Dick,'' and ''Under the Volcano.''
Huston agreed, and the ending was rewritten.
His father was an actor, initially in vaudeville, and later in films.
When Huston became unavailable Orson Welles was offered the opportunity to direct.
Although De Laurentis had ambitions for a broader story, he realized that the subject could not be adequately covered and limited the story to the first half of the Book of Genesis.
Besides sports and adventure, he enjoyed hard liquor and relationships with women of all types&nbsp;— one of the reasons he was married five times.
Upon receiving immediate enthusiastic response by the public and critics, Warners was surprised.
The film, also starring Humphrey Bogart, was the story of three drifters who band together to prospect for gold.
A film school is now dedicated to him on the NUIG campus.
Four of his marriages ended in divorce.
Huston describes those years as a "series of misadventures and disappointments", however.
Huston did an uncredited rewrite of Anthony Veiller's screenplay for ''The Stranger'' (1946), a film he was to have directed.
So this ''Fat City'' is a theme we find in Huston's work, but rarely does he fit it to characters and a time and place so well as in ''Fat City''.
Huston adapted the stage play by Tennessee Williams.
Without Huston's input, they cut down the running time of the film from eighty-eight minutes to sixty-nine, added narration, and deleted what Huston felt was a crucial scene.
Besides directing, he also narrates portions of the story.
Everyone is a loser in ''The Treasure of the Sierra Madre'', and the gold blows back into the dust and is lost in it.
During summer vacations, he traveled with each of his parents separately&nbsp;— with his father on vaudeville tours, and with his mother to racetracks or other sports events.
He continued to explore the visual aspects of his films throughout his career: sketching each scene on paper beforehand, then carefully framing his characters during the shooting.
Steven Spielberg has cited the film as one of his inspirations for his film ''Raiders of the Lost Ark''.
Before becoming a Hollywood filmmaker, he had been an amateur boxer, reporter, short-story writer, portrait artist in Paris, a cavalry rider in Mexico, and a documentary filmmaker during World War II.
If it wasn't his mother, it was his idea of his mother."
After an interview a few years before he died, the reporter writes that "Huston said he missed the major studio era when people savored making movies, not just money."
Huston explains how he became interested in psychotherapy, the subject of the film:
According to Kaminsky, Huston's stories were often about "failed quests" by a group of different people.
Perhaps Huston's most highly regarded film of the 1970s, ''The Man Who Would Be King'' was both a critical and commercial success.
Huston writes that ''Sergeant York'', which was directed by Howard Hawks, has "gone down as one of Howard's best pictures, and Gary Cooper had a triumph playing the young mountaineer."
He died on August 28, 1987, in his rented home in Middletown, Rhode Island, from pneumonia as a complication of lung disease.
As a young man he studied at the Smith School of Art in Los Angeles but dropped out within a few months.
He returned with an offbeat and somewhat controversial film based on the novel ''Wise Blood''.
It co-starred Lauren Bacall, Claire Trevor,  Edward G. Robinson, and Lionel Barrymore.
They had allowed Huston to film on location in Mexico, which was a "radical move" for a studio at the time.
Sarris also notes the similar themes in many of Huston's films, as exemplified by this one: "His protagonists almost invariably fail at what they set out to do."
He was the only child of Rhea (née Gore) and Canadian-born Walter Huston, originally Walter Houghston.
One time I started to walk away from her, and she reached out and took my wrist with her trunk and pulled me back to her side.
According to Kaminsky, much of Huston's vision probably came from his early experience as a painter on the streets of Paris.
However, the film failed at the box office, with some critics, like David Robinson, suggesting that the movie lacked the "mysticism of the book" and thereby "loses its significance."
The filming would take place in a beach cove called Mismaloya, about thirty minutes south of town.
Marlon Brando's career Army officer in ''Reflections in a Golden Eye'', even Bogart and Hepburn in ''The African Queen'' – they all fall short of their plans.
As the film begins, Huston describes Freud as a "kind of hero or God on a quest for mankind":
He would later become highly successful on both Broadway and then in motion pictures.
John uses it like a sniper."
Noah scratches the elephant's belly and walks away, and the elephant pulls him back to her time after time.
At Universal, he got a job in the script department, and began by writing dialogue for a number of films in 1932, including ''Murders in the Rue Morgue'', ''A House Divided'', and ''Law and Order''.
Besides directing he also played the role of Noah and the voice of God.
Huston died nearly four months before the film's release date.
Huston won Oscars for Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay; his father won for Best Supporting Actor.
Stevens describes him as someone who "lived life to its fullest".
The movie did poorly at the box office.
The film stars Richard Burton and Ava Gardner, and was nominated for several Academy Awards.
She agrees that for her father, "it was a form of study, and my father was a painter, a very good one."
By the last year of his life he could not breathe for more than twenty minutes without needing oxygen.
Religion is also a theme that runs through many of Huston's films.
Those types of characters are exemplified by Bogart in ''The Maltese Falcon'', and Montgomery Clift in ''Freud.''
Grobel wrote, "When I interviewed some of the women who had loved him, they inevitably referred to his mother as the key to unlocking Huston's psyche."
(Steve Hodell states "Their marriage lasted seven years, from 1926 to 1933.")
A subsequent inquest absolved Huston of any blame for the accident.
According to actress Olivia de Havilland, "she his mother was the central character.
In many of his films, therefore, he tried to express his interest by developing themes involving some of the "grand narratives" of the twentieth century, such as "faith, meaning, truth, freedom, psychology, colonialism, war and capitalism".
For his next film, Huston once again traveled down to Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, after meeting an architect by the name of Guillermo Wulff who owned property and businesses in the town.
He had owned a wide collection of art, including a notable collection of Pre-Columbian art.
#Lesley Black&nbsp;— It was during his marriage to Black that he embarked on an affair with married New York socialite Marietta FitzGerald.
http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001379/bio?mode=desktop&ref_=m_ft_dsk
Huston likes describing details about the filming:
He won two Oscars, for directing and writing the screenplay for ''The Treasure of the Sierra Madre''.
Huston explored the use of "stylistic framing", especially well-planned close-ups, in much of his directing.
In 1942, he directed two more hits, ''In This Our Life'' (1942), starring Bette Davis, and ''Across the Pacific'', another thriller starring Humphrey Bogart.
He later studied at the Art Students League of New York.
It also won other awards in the U.S. and overseas.
He remembers, while watching his father rehearse, being fascinated with the mechanics of acting:
Guillermo Wulff and Huston became friends and always spent time together while Huston was in town, more frequently at Wulff's El Dorado Restaurant on Los Muertos Beach.
I used it in the picture.
In ''The Night of the Iguana,'' Kaminsky notes how Richard Burton, while preaching a sermon to his congregation, seems "lost, confused, his speech is gibberish", and leads his congregation to turn away from him.
He acted in Roman Polanski's ''Chinatown'' (1974) as the film's master villain, and as Teddy Roosevelt's secretary of state John Hay in ''The Wind and the Lion''.
Huston visited Ireland in 1951 and stayed at Luggala, County Wicklow, the home of Garech Browne, a member of the Guinness family.
This is the story of Freud's descent into a region as black as hell, man's unconscious, and how he let in the light.
He received a script editing contract with Samuel Goldwyn Productions, but after six months of receiving no assignments, quit to work for Universal Studios, where his father was by then a star.
One of the elephants, Candy, loved to be scratched on the belly behind her foreleg.
Huston was becoming a recognized and respected screenwriter.
The last two also starred his father, Walter Huston.
In addition to his children with Soma, he fathered a son, actor Danny Huston, with author Zoe Sallis.
His brief career as a Hollywood writer ended suddenly after a car he was driving struck and killed a young female pedestrian.
Huston achieved that effect by giving "deep attention" to the plot, involving a large jewelry theft, by examining the minute, step by step details and difficulties each of the characters had of carrying it out.
They also knew that Huston was gaining a reputation as "one of the wild men of Hollywood."
He also worked for a period on the ''New York Graphic.''
He also married Lesley Black.
If I wanted to direct, why, they'd give me a shot at it, and if it didn't come off all that well, they wouldn't be too disappointed as it was to be a very small picture.
However, his father died in 1950, and he chose Gregory Peck to play the starring role of Captain Ahab.
(written with Janet Roach and James Costigan)
Huston was annoyed that the studio cut several scenes from the final release without his agreement.
Huston's last film set in Mexico stars Albert Finney as an alcoholic ambassador during the beginnings of World War II.
Most of Huston's films were adaptations of important novels, often depicting a "heroic quest," as in ''Moby Dick'', or ''The Red Badge of Courage''.
Soma also had a daughter, Allegra Huston, as the result of an extramarital affair with John Julius Norwich; Huston treated the girl as one of his own children following Soma's death four years later.
''Time'' magazine described it as "one of the best things Hollywood has done since it learned to talk."
I'd scratch her and she would lean farther and farther toward me until there was some danger of her toppling over on me.
Film historian Stuart M. Kaminsky notes that Huston presents Sigmund Freud, played by Montgomery Clift, "as a kind of savior and messiah", with an "almost Biblical detachment."
Of his next five films, only ''The Misfits'' (1961), found critical approval.
The film became the hit Huston wanted.
Flint adds, however, that he "bucked Hollywood's penchant for happy endings", and many of his stories ended with "love unsatisfied".
"It's a cinch," he once said, "and they pay you damn near as much as you make directing."
He ended his brief boxing career after suffering a broken nose.
As did Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor.
''Herald Tribune'' critic Howard Barnes called it a "triumph."
In 1952 Huston moved to Ireland as a result of his "disgust" at the "witch-hunt" and the "moral rot" he felt was created by House Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC), which had affected many of his friends in the movie industry.
The film, however, was given only a small B-movie budget, and received minimal publicity by Warners, as they had low expectations.
Huston is also famous to a generation of fans of J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth stories as the voice of the wizard Gandalf in the Rankin/Bass animated adaptations of ''The Hobbit'' (1977) and ''The Return of the King'' (1980).
Among his life's adventures before becoming a Hollywood filmmaker, he had been an amateur boxer, reporter, short-story writer, portrait artist in Paris, a cavalry rider in Mexico, and a documentary filmmaker during World War II.
Not only of the picture, but of life."
In addition, the quest "is preferable to the spiritless, amoral routines of life".
Huston loved the outdoors, especially sports such as hunting while living in Ireland.
Walter Huston appealed to MGM studio boss Louis B. Mayer to use his influence with the LAPD regarding any questions of alcohol being involved.
Although Huston had personally hired Bradbury to adapt Herman Melville's novel into a screenplay, Bradbury and Huston did not get along during pre-production, and Bradbury later dramatized their relationship in the short story "Banshee"; Peter O'Toole would later play the role based on John Huston when "Banshee" was adapted into an episode of Ray Bradbury Theater.
For the starring role, Huston chose World War II hero Audie Murphy to play the young Union soldier who deserts his company out of fear, but later returns to fight alongside them.
He was able to persuade Warners to give him a chance to direct, under the condition that his next script also became a hit.
The film gained a strong critical reception, most notably for Finney's portrayal of a desperate and depressed alcoholic.
Kaminsky also notes that most of Huston's films "reflected this prime interest in the image, the moving portrait and the use of color."
Based on Leonard Gardner's 1969 novel of the same name, it was about an aging, washed-up alcoholic boxer in Stockton, California trying to get his name back on the map, while having a new relationship with a world weary alcoholic, and an amateur boxer trying to find success in boxing.
''Moby Dick'' (1956), however, was written by Ray Bradbury, although Huston had his name added to the screenplay credit after the completion of the project.
In 1960, Huston was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contribution to motion pictures.
While in the army during World War II, he became interested in Stephen Crane's classic American Civil War novel of the same title.
It starred Sterling Hayden and Huston's personal friend, Sam Jaffe.
Between 1960 and 1971 he served as Master of Fox Hounds (MFH) of the County Galway Hunt – the famous "Galway Blazers" – whose kennels are at Craughwell.
His daughter Anjelica attended school in Ireland at Kylemore Abbey for a number of years.
Huston's parents divorced in 1913, when he was 6, and as a result much of his childhood was spent living in boarding schools.
He tries to describe in general the types of people who were alleged communists:
Ahab, in ''Moby Dick''.
Warners kept their end of the bargain, and gave Huston his choice of subject.
Huston was an accomplished painter who wrote in his autobiography, "Nothing has played a more important role in my life".
He returned to Los Angeles and married a girlfriend from high school, Dorothy Harvey.
The film was praised for its use of old fashioned escapism and entertainment.
It also made Humphrey Bogart a star with his first major role, as a gunman on the run.
Huston took producing, writing, and directing credits for his next two films: ''Moulin Rouge'' (1953); and ''Beat the Devil'' (1953).
Bogart, however, won an Oscar for best actor, his first time winning.
It also became the first serious role for Marilyn Monroe, according to Huston: "it was, of course, where Marilyn Monroe got her start."
I always felt that John was ridden by witches.
Barson calls it "one of the most popular Hollywood movies of all time."
#Evelyn Keyes&nbsp; (1916–2008) — The Hustons adopted a son Pablo, from Mexico.
I first got into that through an experience in a hospital during the war, where I made a documentary about patients suffering from battle neuroses.
The movie was filmed on location in North Africa.
Hollywood writer James Agee called it "one of the most beautiful and visually alive movies I have ever seen."
Many of his films involved themes such as religion, meaning, truth, freedom, psychology, colonialism and war.
#Dorothy Harvey&nbsp; (1906–1982) — This marriage ended after a year in 1926.
George Stevens, Jr. notes that while many directors rely on post-production editing to shape their final work, Huston instead created his films while they were being shot:  "I don't even know the editor of my films most of the time," Huston said.
As a child he was often ill and was treated for an enlarged heart and kidney ailments.
The film succeeded at the box office and Huston was again nominated for an Oscar for best screenplay and best director, along with winning the Screen Directors Guild Award.
The next script he was given to work on was ''High Sierra'' (1941), to be directed by Raoul Walsh.
It was the story about a disillusioned returning veteran clashing with gangsters on a remote Florida key.
In 1981 his film ''Escape to Victory'' was nominated for the Golden Prize at the 12th Moscow International Film Festival.
He seemed pursued by something destructive.
Huston also won a Golden Globe for that film and received multiple lifetime achievement awards (including one from American Film Institute in 1982).
It became Huston's most successful film financially, and "it remains one of his finest works."
During his 46-year career, Huston received 15 Oscar nominations, won twice, and directed both his father, Walter Huston, and daughter, Anjelica Huston, to Oscar wins in different films.
While in uniform with the rank of captain, he directed and produced three films that some critics rank as "among the finest made about World War II: ''Report from the Aleutians'' (1943), about soldiers preparing for combat; ''The Battle of San Pietro'' (1945), the story (censored by the Army) of a failure by America's intelligence agencies which resulted in many deaths, and ''Let There Be Light'' (1946), about psychologically damaged veterans, also censored for 35 years, until 1981.
Huston later commented about this period in her career: "Marilyn was on her way out.
Huston spent long evenings carousing in the Nevada casinos after filming, surrounded by reporters and beautiful women, gambling, drinking, and smoking cigars.
I was in the army and made the picture "Let There Be Light".
He renounced his U.S. citizenship and became an Irish citizen in 1964.
The group would persist in the face of poor odds, doomed at the outset by the circumstances created by an impossible situation.
Clark Gable, the star, died of a heart attack a few days after the filming was completed; Marilyn Monroe never did another film and died a year later; and costars Montgomery Clift and Thelma Ritter also died over the next few years.
Huston gained a reputation as a "lusty, hard-drinking libertine" during his first years as a writer in Hollywood.
He also played the Lawgiver in ''Battle for the Planet of the Apes''.
To me the ideal film&nbsp;— which I've never succeeded in making&nbsp;— would be as though the reel were behind one's eyes and you were projecting it yourself, seeing what you wish to see.
In 1942 he served in the United States Army during World War II to make films for the Army Signal Corps.
Author Ian Freer describes him as "cinema's Ernest Hemingway"—a filmmaker who was "never afraid to tackle tough issues head on."
He claimed that he had no orthodox religion.
For the next four years, he co-wrote scripts for major films such as ''Jezebel, '' ''The Amazing Dr. Clitterhouse'', ''Juarez'', ''Dr.
However, some members of the doomed group usually survive, those who are "cool" and "intelligent", or someone who "will sacrifice everything for self-understanding and independence".
Bogart was happy to take the role, as he liked working with Huston.
It starred Stacy Keach, a young Jeff Bridges, and Susan Tyrrell, in which she was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.
Among his friends were Orson Welles and Ernest Hemingway.
Critics hailed the film as a "classic", and up until the present day it is claimed by many to be the "best detective melodrama ever made."
Huston again received an Academy Award nomination for the screenplay.
Film writer Peter Flint also agrees and points out other benefits to that style: "He shot economically, eschewing the many protective shots favored by timid directors, and edited cerebrally so that financial backers would have trouble trying to cut scenes."
Such religious themes were also seen in ''The Bible,'' and ''Wise Blood,''  for example.
Huston also gave a supporting role to his father, Walter Huston.
"These religious zealots counsel a move away from the pleasure of the world and human love, a world that Huston believes in," concludes Kaminsky.
Here, Huston showed his skills as a storyteller, and boldness when it came to difficult subjects such as religion.
Film historian James Goodwin adds that in virtually all of his films, there is some type of "heroic quest&nbsp;— even if it involves questionable motives or destructive alliances".
''The African Queen'' does have a happy ending, but it feels tacked-on and ridiculous, and the Queen destroys itself in destroying the German steamer.
It would become one of the films which established his reputation as a leading filmmaker.
The HUAC was calling numerous filmmakers, screenwriters, and actors to testify about any past affiliations.
MGM, however, saw the message of the movie as too antiwar.
As a result, his best films, according to Flint, "have lean, fast-paced scripts and vibrant plots and characterizations, and many of them deal ironically with vanity, avarice and unfulfilled quests".
After filming ''The Man Who Would Be King'', Huston took his longest break between directing films.
He followed ''The Misfits'' with ''Freud: The Secret Passion'', a film quite different from most of his others.
In many films, different groups of people, while struggling toward a common goal, would become doomed, forming "destructive alliances," giving the films a dramatic and visual tension.
