He confidently set high prices and turned down unsatisfactory sitters.
In a ''TIME'' magazine article from the 1980s,  critic Robert Hughes praised Sargent as ''"the unrivaled recorder of male power and female beauty in a day that, like ours, paid excessive court to both."''
Some portraits were done in the client's home, but more often in his studio, which was well-stocked with furniture and background materials he chose for proper effect.
At thirteen, his mother reported that John "sketches quite nicely, & has a remarkably quick and correct eye.
He became both a valuable friend and Sargent's primary connection with the American artists abroad.
In a time when the art world focused, in turn, on Impressionism, Fauvism, and Cubism, Sargent practiced his own form of Realism, which made brilliant references to Velázquez, Van Dyck, and Gainsborough.
The trip also re-awakened his own talent for music (which was nearly equal to his artistic talent), and which found visual expression in his early masterpiece ''El Jaleo'' (1882).
The truth of this may never be established.
Before Sargent's birth, his father, FitzWilliam (b.
Trips to Italy provided sketches and ideas for several Venetian street scenes genre paintings, which effectively captured gestures and postures he would find useful in later portraiture.
As Sargent wearied of portraiture he pursued architectural and landscapes subjects .
Evan Charteris wrote in 1927:
Sargent's first major success at the Royal Academy came in 1887, with the enthusiastic response to ''Carnation, Lily, Lily, Rose'', a large piece, painted on site, of two young girls lighting lanterns in an English garden in Broadway in the Cotswolds.
Sargent enjoyed international acclaim as a portrait painter, although not without controversy and some critical reservation; an early submission to the Paris Salon, his "Portrait of Madame X", was intended to consolidate his position as a society painter, but it resulted in scandal instead.
After leaving Carolus-Duran's atelier, Sargent visited Spain.
The Galleries held a major retrospective exhibit of Sargent's work in 1924.
The second, ''Portrait of Robert Louis Stevenson and his Wife'' (1885), was one of his best known.
He also completed portraits of two U.S. presidents: Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson.
In the 1880s, he attended the Impressionist exhibitions and he began to paint outdoors in the ''plein-air'' manner after that visit to Monet.
On a visit to Monet at Giverny in 1885, Sargent painted one of his most Impressionistic portraits, of Monet at work painting outdoors with his new bride nearby.
They remained nomadic expatriates for the rest of their lives.
His ''An Interior in Venice'' (1900), a portrait of four members of the Curtis family in their elegant palatial home, ''Palazzo Barbaro'', was a resounding success.
Sargent's fame was still considerable and museums eagerly bought his works.
Foremost of Sargent's detractors was the influential English art critic Roger Fry, of the Bloomsbury Group, who at the 1926 Sargent retrospective in London dismissed Sargent's work as lacking aesthetic quality: "Wonderful indeed, but most wonderful that this wonderful performance should ever have been confused with that of an artist."
Early on, she gave him sketchbooks and encouraged drawing excursions.
This view is based on his friends and associations; the overall alluring remoteness of his portraits; the way several challenge nineteenth century notions of gender difference; his erotic and previously ignored male nudes; and some sensitive and erotic male portraits, including those as Thomas E. McKeller, Bartholomy Maganosco, Olimpio Fusco, and that of the handsome aristocratic artist Albert de Belleroche, which hung in his Chelsea dining room.
Sargent has been the subject of large-scale exhibitions in major museums, including a retrospective exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 1986, and a 1999 "blockbuster" traveling show that exhibited at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, the National Gallery of Art Washington, and the National Gallery, London.
He retorted, "Ingres, Raphael and El Greco, these are now my admirations, these are what I like."
His parents were American, but he was trained in Paris prior to moving to London.
1820 Gloucester, Massachusetts), was an eye surgeon at the Wills Eye Hospital in Philadelphia 1844–1854.
The first version of the portrait of Madame Gautreau, with the famously plunging neckline, white-powdered skin, and arrogantly cocked head, featured an off-the-shoulder dress strap which made the overall effect more daring and sensual.
Sargent spent much time painting outdoors in the English countryside when not in his studio.
In December 2004, ''Group with Parasols (A Siesta)'' (1905) sold for $US 23.5 million, nearly double the Sotheby's estimate of $12 million.
Of Sargent's early work, Henry James wrote that the artist offered "the slightly 'uncanny' spectacle of a talent which on the very threshold of its career has nothing more to learn."
He also failed to understand how these representations might be problematic for the Jews of Boston; he was both surprised and hurt when the paintings were criticized.
Sargent's mother was a fine amateur artist and his father was a skilled medical illustrator.
Young Sargent worked with care on his drawings, and he enthusiastically copied images from ''The Illustrated London News'' of ships and made detailed sketches of landscapes.
His portrait of Mrs. Hugh Hammersley (''Mrs.
Biographers once portrayed him as a staid reticent individual; however recent scholarship has suggested that he was a private, complex and passionate man with a homosexual identity that shaped his art.
Four more children were born abroad, of whom only two lived past childhood.
Each destination offered pictorial stimulation and treasure.
In the last decade of his life, he produced many watercolors in Maine, Florida, and in the American West, of fauna, flora, and native peoples.
Sargent drew on his extensive travels and museum visits to create a dense art historial melange.
During Sargent's long career, he painted more than 2,000 watercolors, roving from the English countryside to Venice to the Tyrol, Corfu, the Middle East, Montana, Maine, and Florida.
By the time Sargent finished his portrait of John D. Rockefeller in 1917, most critics began to consign him to the masters of the past, "a brilliant ambassador between his patrons and posterity."
Part of Sargent's devaluation is also attributed to his expatriate life, which made him seem less American at a time when "authentic" socially conscious American art, as exemplified by the Stieglitz circle and by the Ashcan School, was on the ascent.
With his watercolors, Sargent was able to indulge his earliest artistic inclinations for nature, architecture, exotic peoples, and noble mountain landscapes.
He filled in the gaps between commissions with many non-commissioned portraits of friends and colleagues.
He was a frenzied bugger."
His colors were sometimes extremely vivid and as one reviewer noted, "Everything is given with the intensity of a dream."
His seemingly effortless facility for paraphrasing the masters in a contemporary fashion led to a stream of commissioned portraits of remarkable virtuosity (''Arsène Vigeant'', 1885, Musées de Metz; ''Mr.
The painting was purchased in 1936 by the Currier Museum of Art, where it is on display.
File:John D. Rockefeller 1917 painting.jpg|''John D. Rockefeller'', 1917
In 1909, he exhibited eighty-six watercolors in New York City, eighty-three of which were bought by the Brooklyn Museum.
His ''oeuvre'' documents worldwide travel, from Venice to the Tyrol, Corfu, the Middle East, Montana, Maine, and Florida.
Sargent purchased four Monet works for his personal collection during that time.
His mother was quite convinced that traveling around Europe, and visiting museums and churches, would give young Sargent a satisfactory education.
In his large painting ''Gassed'' and in many watercolors, he depicted scenes from the Great War.
Sargent also took some lessons from Léon Bonnat.
There were many friendships with women: it has been suggested that those with his sitters Rosina Ferrara, Amélie Gautreau, and Judith Gautier may have tipped into infatuation.
Asher Wertheimer, a wealthy Jewish art dealer living in London, commissioned from Sargent a series of a dozen portraits of his family, the artist's largest commission from a single patron.
He was fluent in French, Italian, and German.
Sargent's excellent command of French and his superior talent made him both popular and admired.
They are in the Boston Public Library, the Museum of Fine Arts, and Harvard's Widener Library.
Sargent's friends and supporters Henry James, Isabella Stewart Gardner (who commissioned and purchased works from Sargent, and sought his advice on other acquisitions), and Edward VII., and Paul César Helleu His associations also included Prince Edmond de Polignac and Count Robert de Montesquiou.
Notwithstanding the Madame X scandal, he had considered moving to London as early as 1882; he had been urged to do so repeatedly by his new friend, the novelist Henry James.
His first trip to New York and Boston as a professional artist in 1887–88 produced over twenty important commissions, including portraits of Isabella Stewart Gardner, the famed Boston art patron.
File:Brooklyn Museum - Gourds - John Singer Sargent.jpg|''Gourds'', 1906–10, watercolor, Brooklyn Museum
Upon his return, Sargent quickly received several portrait commissions.
His portrait of Mrs. Adrian Iselin, wife of a New York businessman, revealed her character in one of his most insightful works.
Art historians generally ignored the society artists such as Sargent until the late 20th century.
Sargent had no assistants; he handled all the tasks, such as preparing his canvases, varnishing the painting, arranging for photography, shipping, and documentation.
It took well over a year to complete the painting.
From 1907 on, Sargent largely forsook portrait painting and focused on landscapes in his later years.
Wertheimer bequeathed most of the paintings to the National Gallery.
He immediately demonstrated the concentration and stamina that enabled him to paint with workman-like steadiness for the next twenty-five years.
He commanded about $5,000 per portrait, or about $130,000 in current dollars.
There he studied the paintings of Velázquez with a passion, absorbing the master's technique, and in his travels gathered ideas for future works.
It was an approach that relied on the proper placement of tones of paint.
Some American clients traveled to London at their own expense to have Sargent paint their portrait.
If we could afford to give him really good lessons, he would soon be quite a little artist."
In 1925, soon before he died, Sargent painted his last oil portrait, a canvas of Grace Curzon, Marchioness Curzon of Kedleston.
File:John Singer Sargent - The Fountain, Villa Torlonia, Frascati, Italy - Google Art Project.jpg|''The Fountain, Villa Torlonia, Frascati, Italy'', 1907
FitzWilliam had hoped that his son's interest in ships and the sea might lead him toward a naval career.
Sargent kept the painting prominently displayed in his London studio until he sold it to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1916, a few months after Gautreau's death.
And it is in some of his late works where one senses Sargent painting most purely for himself.
One reviewer seeing his portrait of ''Mrs.
French commissions dried up and he told his friend Edmund Gosse in 1885 that he contemplated giving up painting for music or business.
when unveiled in Paris at the 1884 Salon, it aroused such a negative reaction that it likely prompted Sargent's move to London.
Sargent wrote to a mutual acquaintance:
Several attempts to have him formally schooled failed, owing mostly to their itinerant life.
The paintings were objectionable to Boston Jews since they seemed to show Judaism defeated, and Christianity triumphant.
Back in London, Sargent was quickly busy again.
His hundreds of watercolors of Venice are especially notable, many done from the perspective of a gondola.
Sargent's best portraits reveal the individuality and personality of the sitters; his most ardent admirers think he is matched in this only by Velázquez, who was one of Sargent's great influences.
Sargent's first major portrait was of his friend Fanny Watts in 1877, and was also his first Salon admission.
At seventeen, Sargent was described as "willful, curious, determined and strong" (after his mother) yet shy, generous, and modest (after his father).
As a young man, Sargent also courted for a time Louise Burkhardt, the model for ''Lady with the Rose''.
Here he became friends with painter Dennis Miller Bunker who traveled to England in the summer of 1888 to paint with him en plein air and is the subject of Sargents painting 'Dennis Miller Bunker Painting at Calcot' 1888.
Between 1900 and 1907, Sargent continued his high productivity, which included, in addition to dozens of oil portraits, hundreds of portrait drawings at about $400 each.
The murals were restored in 2003–2004.
His ''Claude Monet Painting at the Edge of a Wood'' is rendered in his own version of the impressionist style.
His most controversial work, ''Portrait of Madame X'' (Madame Pierre Gautreau) (1884) is now considered one of his best works, and was the artist's personal favorite; he stated in 1915, "I suppose it is the best thing I have done."
The Grand Central Art Galleries also organized a posthumous exhibition in 1928 of previously unseen sketches and drawings from throughout his career.
Although not generally accorded the critical respect given Winslow Homer, perhaps America's greatest watercolorist, scholarship has revealed that Sargent was fluent in the entire range of opaque and transparent watercolor technique, including the methods used by Homer.
Although Sargent was an American expatriate, he returned to the United States many times, often to answer the demand for commissioned portraits.
After securing a commission through negotiations which he carried out, Sargent would visit the client's home to see where the painting was to hang.
He lived most of his life in Europe.
But Sargent's paintings of "The Church" and "The Synagogue," installed in late 1919, inspired a debate about whether the artist had represented Judaism in a stereotypical, or even an anti-Semitic, manner.
By the time of his death he was dismissed as an anachronism, a relic of the Gilded Age and out of step with the artistic sentiments of post-World War I Europe.
He was well-acquainted with many of the great masters from first hand observation, as he wrote in 1874, "I have learned in Venice to admire Tintoretto immensely and to consider him perhaps second only to Michelangelo and Titian."
Sargent quietly accepted the criticism, but refused to alter his negative opinions of modern art.
His second salon entry was the ''Oyster Gatherers of Cançale'', an impressionistic painting of which he made two copies, one of which he sent back to the United States, and both received warm reviews.
and Mrs. Isaac Newton Phelps-Stokes'', 1897, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York) and earned Sargent the moniker, "the Van Dyck of our times."
Memorial exhibitions of Sargent's work were held in Boston in 1925, and at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and the Royal Academy and Tate Gallery in London in 1926.
After John's older sister died at the age of two, his mother, Mary (née Singer), suffered a breakdown, and the couple decided to go abroad to recover.
Although his education was far from complete, Sargent grew up to be a highly literate and cosmopolitan young man, accomplished in art, music, and literature.
In 1879, at the age of 23, Sargent painted a portrait of teacher Carolus-Duran; the virtuoso effort met with public approval, and announced the direction his mature work would take.
His career was launched.
Commissions for history paintings were still considered more prestigious, but were much harder to get.
Sargent painted a series of three portraits of Robert Louis Stevenson.
They were attached to the walls of the library by means of marouflage.
Prior to the Madame X scandal of 1884, Sargent had painted exotic beauties such as Rosina Ferrara of Capri, and the Spanish expatriate model Carmela Bertagna, but the earlier pictures had not been intended for broad public reception.
He worked on the cycle for almost thirty years but never completed the final mural.
His commissioned works were consistent with the grand manner of portraiture, while his informal studies and landscape paintings displayed a familiarity with Impressionism.
In later life Sargent expressed ambivalence about the restrictions of formal portrait work, and devoted much of his energy to mural painting and working ''en plein air''.
All of Sargent's murals are to be found in the Boston/Cambridge area.
They generally avoided society and other Americans except for friends in the art world.
The painter Jacques-Émile Blanche, who was one of his early sitters, said after Sargent's death that his sex life "was notorious in Paris, and in Venice, positively scandalous.
Henry White'' (1883).
He then returned to England, where he died on April 14, 1925 of heart disease.
Elizabeth Prettejohn suggests that the decline of Sargent's reputation was due partly to the rise of anti-Semitism, and the resultant intolerance of 'celebrations of Jewish prosperity.'
The painting was immediately purchased by the Tate Gallery.
A year later, his sister Mary was born.
That year he declined a knighthood and decided instead to keep his American citizenship.
English critics were not warm at first, faulting Sargent for his "clever" "Frenchified" handling of paint.
In Boston, Sargent was honored with his first solo exhibition, which presented twenty-two of his paintings.
Henry White'' described his technique as "hard" and "almost metallic" with "no taste in expression, air, or modeling."
In 1922 Sargent co-founded New York City's Grand Central Art Galleries together with Edmund Greacen, Walter Leighton Clark, and others.
One such client, Betty Wertheimer, wrote that when in Venice Sargent "was only interested in the Venetian gondoliers".
Sargent became a strong advocate for modern composers, especially Gabriel Fauré.
The Boston newspapers also followed the controversy, noting that while many found the paintings offensive, not everyone was in agreement.
It has been suggested that Sargent's reputation in the 1890s as "the painter of the Jews" may have been due to his empathy with, and complicit enjoyment of their mutual social otherness.
As his father wrote home, "He is quite a close observer of animated nature."
During his career, he created roughly 900 oil paintings and more than 2,000 watercolors, as well as countless sketches and charcoal drawings.
Sargent had a long and intense romantic friendship with Belleroche, whom he met in 1882, and who later went on to marry: a surviving drawing hints that Sargent may have used him as a model for ''Madame X''.
The double staircase built in 1654 is the design of architect and sculptor Orazio Torriani (fl.1602–1657).
In watercolors, he playfully portrayed his friends and family dressed in Orientalist costume, relaxing in brightly lit landscapes that allowed for a more vivid palette and experimental handling than did his commissions (''The Chess Game'', 1906).
In the end, Sargent abandoned his plan to finish the murals, and the controversy eventually died down.
These included the portraits of ''Dr.
While Mary was pregnant, they stopped in Florence, Tuscany, because of a cholera epidemic.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in his portrait ''Almina, Daughter of Asher Wertheimer'' (1908), in which the subject is seen wearing a Persian costume, a pearl encrusted turban, and strumming an Indian tambura, accoutrements all meant to convey sensuality and mystery.
And, in the 1930s, Lewis Mumford led a chorus of the severest critics: "Sargent remained to the end an illustrator ... the most adroit appearance of workmanship, the most dashing eye for effect, cannot conceal the essential emptiness of Sargent's mind, or the contemptuous and cynical superficiality of a certain part of his execution."
In the 1890s, he averaged fourteen portrait commissions per year, none more beautiful than the genteel ''Lady Agnew of Lochnaw'', 1892.
His fine manners, perfect French, and great skill made him a standout among the newer portraitists, and his fame quickly spread.
A photograph very similar to the painting suggests that Sargent occasionally used photography as an aid to composition.
He took drawing classes, which included anatomy and perspective, and gained a silver prize.
His first major solo exhibit of watercolor works was at the Carfax Gallery in London in 1905.
Henry James also gave the artist "a push to the best of my ability."
Carolus-Duran's expertise in portraiture finally influenced Sargent in that direction.
Its showing at the Paris Salon was both a tribute to his teacher and an advertisement for portrait commissions.
But, Whistler did not approve of the looseness of Sargent's brushwork, which he summed up as "smudge everywhere."
He usually kept up pleasant conversation and sometimes he would take a break and play the piano for his sitter.
During a visit to Rome in 1906 Sargent made an oil painting and several pencil sketches of the exterior staircase and balustrade in front of the Church of Saints Dominic and Sixtus, now the church of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, ''Angelicum''.
Before arriving in England, Sargent began sending paintings for exhibition at the Royal Academy.
In 1874, on the first attempt, Sargent passed the rigorous exam required to gain admission to the École des Beaux-Arts, the premier art school in France.
Hugh Hammersley'', 1892) was equally well received for its lively depiction of one of London's most notable hostesses.
Sargent was the star student in short order.
But they all have mood, every one of them has a different mood."''
Carolus-Duran's atelier was progressive, dispensing with the traditional academic approach, which required careful drawing and underpainting, in favor of the ''alla prima'' method of working directly on the canvas with a loaded brush, derived from Diego Velázquez.
Although based in Paris, Sargent's parents moved regularly with the seasons to the sea and the mountain resorts in France, Germany, Italy, and Switzerland.
Sargent was referred to as "the Van Dyck of our times."
Relieved, he stated, "Painting a portrait would be quite amusing if one were not forced to talk while working…What a nuisance having to entertain the sitter and to look happy when one feels wretched."
He also painted extensively family, friends, gardens, and fountains.
Sargent changed the strap to try to dampen the furor, but the damage had been done.
Through his friendship with Paul César Helleu, Sargent would meet giants of the art world, including Degas, Rodin, Monet, and Whistler.
Although only in his forties, Sargent began to travel more and to devote relatively less time to portrait painting.
As a portrait painter in the grand manner, Sargent had unmatched success; he portrayed subjects who were at once ennobled and often possessed of nervous energy.
In the Middle East and North Africa Sargent painted Bedouins, goatherds, and fisherman.
Modernists treated him more harshly, considering him completely out of touch with the reality of American life and with emerging artistic trends including Cubism and Futurism.
The Spanish master's spell is apparent in Sargent's ''The Daughters of Edward Darley Boit'', 1882, a haunting interior that echoes Velázquez's ''Las Meninas''.
They lived modestly on a small inheritance and savings, living a quiet life with their children.
Between 1905 and 1914, Sargent's frequent traveling companions were the married artist couple Wilfrid de Glehn and Jane Emmet de Glehn.
At the age of thirteen, he received some watercolor lessons from Carl Welsch, a German landscape painter.
Music would continue to play a major part in his social life as well, as he was a skillful accompanist of both amateur and professional musicians.
Sargent was similarly inspired to do a portrait of his artist friend Paul César Helleu, also painting outdoors with his wife by his side.
The trio would often spend summers in France, Spain or Italy and all three would depict one another in their paintings during their travels.
Through Helleu, Sargent met and painted the famed French sculptor Auguste Rodin in 1884, a rather somber portrait reminiscent of works by Thomas Eakins.
Weir met Sargent in 1874 and noted that Sargent was "one of the most talented fellows I have ever come across; his drawings are like the old masters, and his color is equally fine."
He would often review a client's wardrobe to pick suitable attire.
To live with Sargent's water-colours is to live with sunshine captured and held, with the luster of a bright and legible world, 'the refluent shade' and 'the Ambient ardours of the noon.'
It has been suggested that the exotic qualities inherent in his work appealed to the sympathies of the Jewish clients whom he painted from the 1890s on.
Drawing upon iconography that was used in medieval paintings, Sargent portrayed Judaism and the synagogue as a blind, ugly hag, and Christianity and the church as a lovely, and radiant young woman.
The previous highest price for a Sargent painting was $US 11 million.
In 1907 he wrote: "I did in Rome a study of a magnificent curved staircase and balustrade, leading to a grand facade that would reduce a millionaire to a worm...." The painting now hangs at the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford University and the pencil sketches are in the collection of the Harvard University art collection of the Fogg Museum.
Sargent is usually not thought of as an Impressionist painter, but he sometimes used impressionistic techniques to great effect.
From the beginning his work was characterized by remarkable technical facility, particularly in his ability to draw with a brush, which in later years inspired admiration as well as criticism for a supposed superficiality.
Although the British critics classified Sargent in the Impressionist camp, the French Impressionists thought otherwise.
Sargent is interred in Brookwood Cemetery near Woking, Surrey.
As in many of his early portraits, Sargent confidently tries different approaches with each new challenge, here employing both unusual composition and lighting to striking effect.
