The ''Philadelphia Press'' drama critic said, "Without having his brother Edwin's culture and grace, Mr. Booth has far more action, more life, and, we are inclined to think, more natural genius."
He fell gravely ill and made a deathbed confession that he was the fugitive assassin, but he then recovered and fled, eventually committing suicide in 1903 in Enid, Oklahoma under the alias "David E. George".
One called him a genius, praising his acting for "never failing to delight with his masterly impressions."
Booth was already growing more obsessed with the South's worsening situation in the Civil War and angered at Lincoln's re-election.
Others have seen less unselfish motives such as shame, ambition, and sibling rivalry for achievement and fame.
These bones are still on display at the National Museum of Health and Medicine in Washington, D.C.
On November 25, 1864, Booth performed for the only time with his brothers Edwin and Junius in a single engagement production of ''Julius Caesar'' at the Winter Garden Theatre in New York.
The very nomination of Abraham Lincoln, four years ago, spoke plainly war upon Southern rights and institutions."
Atzerodt lost his nerve and spent the evening drinking alcohol; he never made an attempt to kill Johnson.
There, his corpse was taken aboard the ironclad USS ''Montauk'' and brought to the Washington Navy Yard for identification and an autopsy.
Lincoln won a landslide re-election in early November 1864 on a platform advocating passage of the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution to abolish slavery altogether, and Booth devoted increasing energy and money to his kidnap plot.
The next day, Booth and Herold arrived at the home of Samuel Cox around 4&nbsp;a.m. As the two fugitives hid in the woods nearby, Cox contacted Thomas A. Jones, his foster brother and a Confederate agent in charge of spy operations in the southern Maryland area since 1862.
On January 23, 1853, the 14-year-old Booth was baptized at St. Timothy's Protestant Episcopal Church.
When the Civil War began on April 12, 1861, Booth was starring in Albany, New York.
Booth was the only one of the assassins to succeed.
Booth's letter was seized by Federal troops, along with other family papers at Asia's house, and published by ''The New York Times'' while the manhunt was underway.
As the Confederacy's defeat became more certain in 1865, Booth decried the end of slavery and Lincoln's election to a second term, "making himself a king", the actor fumed, in "wild tirades", his sister recalled.
The family hopes to obtain DNA samples from artifacts belonging to John Wilkes, or from remains such as vertebrae stored at the National Museum of Health and Medicine in Maryland.
The previous day, Booth was in the crowd outside the White House when Lincoln gave an impromptu speech from his window.
Like his sister Asia, he received education at a school established by an official of the Catholic Church.
She was unaware of Booth's deep antipathy towards President Lincoln.
Booth informed Powell, Herold, and Atzerodt of his intention to kill Lincoln.
Later that year, Booth played the part of Mohegan Indian Chief Uncas in a play staged in Petersburg, Virginia, and then became a stock company actor at the Richmond Theatre in Virginia, where he became increasingly popular with audiences for his energetic performances.
On opening night, he experienced stage fright and stumbled over his line.
Herold would assist in their escape into Virginia.
The possibility of assassinating the Union Army's commanding general as well was foiled when Grant declined the theatre invitation at his wife's insistence.
No gravestone marks the precise location where Booth is buried in the family's gravesite.
On April 12, 1861, the Civil War began, and eventually 11 Southern states seceded from the Union.
As the Civil War went on, Booth increasingly quarreled with his brother Edwin, who declined to make stage appearances in the South and refused to listen to John Wilkes' fiercely partisan denunciations of the North and Lincoln.
He is made the tool of the North, to crush out slavery."
Booth was pro-Confederate, but his family was divided, like many Marylanders.
The third, fourth, and fifth vertebrae were removed during the autopsy to allow access to the bullet.
They met often at the house of Maggie Branson, a known Confederate sympathizer, at 16&nbsp;North Eutaw Street in Baltimore.
Booth had promised his mother at the outbreak of war that he would not enlist as a soldier, but he increasingly chafed at not fighting for the South, writing in a letter to her, "I have begun to deem myself a coward and to despise my own existence."
The application was blocked, however, by Baltimore Circuit Court Judge Joseph H. H. Kaplan, who cited, among other things, "the unreliability of petitioners' less-than-convincing escape/cover-up theory" as a major factor in his decision.
By the age of 16, Booth was interested in the theatre and in politics, and he became a delegate from Bel Air to a rally by the Know Nothing Party for Henry Winter Davis, the anti-immigrant party's candidate for Congress in the 1854 elections.
Aboard the train was Clarence Depew, president of the New York Central Railroad, who said, "As we sped over the rails at night, the scene was the most pathetic ever witnessed.
On March 17, Booth learned that Lincoln would be attending a performance of the play ''Still Waters Run Deep'' at a hospital near the Soldier's Home.
The 1998 book ''The Curse of Cain: The Untold Story of John Wilkes Booth'' contended that Booth had escaped, sought refuge in Japan, and eventually returned to the United States.
On April 18, mourners waited seven abreast in a mile-long line outside the White House for the public viewing of the slain president, reposing in his open walnut casket in the black-draped East Room.
By targeting Lincoln and his two immediate successors to the presidency, Booth seems to have intended to decapitate the Union government and throw it into a state of panic and confusion.
Booth aspired to follow in the footsteps of his father and his actor brothers Edwin and Junius Brutus, Jr..
Conger tracked down Jett and interrogated him, learning of Booth's location at the Garrett farm.
Mary Surratt, Lewis Powell, David Herold, and George Atzerodt were hanged in the Old Arsenal Penitentiary on July 7, 1865.
All the elements in Booth's nature came together at once—his hatred of tyranny, his love of liberty, his passion for the stage, his sense of drama, and his lifelong quest to become immortal.
The fleeing assassin galloped into southern Maryland, accompanied by David Herold, having planned his escape route to take advantage of the sparsely settled area's lack of telegraphs and railroads, along with its predominantly Confederate sympathies.
Booth ignored an invitation to visit Lincoln between acts, however.
In response, the Maryland Historical Society published an account in 1913 by Baltimore mayor William M. Pegram, who had viewed Booth's remains upon the casket's arrival at the Weaver funeral home in Baltimore on February 18, 1869 for burial at Green Mount Cemetery.
The owner of the horse had warned Booth that the horse was high spirited and would break halter if left unattended.
Booth said that, of all Shakespearean characters, his favorite role was Brutus, the slayer of a tyrant.
In his dying moments, he reportedly whispered, "Tell my mother I died for my country."
Others positively identified this body as Booth at the funeral home, including Booth's mother, brother, and sister, along with his dentist and other Baltimore acquaintances.
Historian Constance Head also declared that Booth was of this religion.
The secession of Maryland would leave the Federal capital of Washington, D.C. an indefensible enclave within the Confederacy, so Lincoln suspended the writ of ''habeas corpus'' and imposed martial law in Baltimore and portions of the state, ordering the imprisonment of pro-secession Maryland political leaders at Ft. McHenry and the stationing of Federal troops in Baltimore.
A cross of lilies was at the head and roses covered the coffin's lower half.
Booth also railed against Lincoln in conversations with his sister Asia, saying, "That man's appearance, his pedigree, his coarse low jokes and anecdotes, his vulgar similes, and his policy are a disgrace to the seat he holds.
Lincoln was elected president on November 6, 1860, and the following month Booth drafted a long speech, apparently undelivered, that decried Northern abolitionism and made clear his strong support of the South and the institution of slavery.
Other writers exploring possible connections between Booth's planning and Confederate agents include Nathan Miller's ''Spying For America'' and William Tidwell's ''Come Retribution: the Confederate Secret Service and the Assassination of Lincoln''.
The majority of Northerners viewed Booth as a madman or monster who murdered the savior of the Union, while in the South, many cursed Booth for bringing upon them the harsh revenge of an incensed North instead of the reconciliation promised by Lincoln.
In January, he played the title role in ''Richard III'' in St. Louis and then made his Chicago debut.
Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia had surrendered four days earlier, but Booth believed that the American Civil War was not yet over because Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston's army was still fighting the Union Army.
Eight other conspirators or suspects were tried and convicted, and four were hanged shortly thereafter.
Lincoln watched the play from his box.
The funeral train slowly made its way westward through seven states, stopping en route at Harrisburg, Philadelphia, Trenton, New York, Albany, Buffalo, Cleveland, Columbus, Cincinnati, and Indianapolis during the following days.
Lincoln stated that he was in favor of granting suffrage to the former slaves, and Booth declared that it would be the last speech that Lincoln would ever make.
The ''National Intelligencer'' said of Booth's Romeo, "the most satisfactory of all renderings of that fine character," especially praising the death scene.
In Booth's native Maryland, the slaveholding portion of the population favored joining the Confederate States of America.
She wrote the paper "Insights on John Wilkes Booth from His Sister Asia's Correspondence" (1982) published in the ''Lincoln Herald'', in which she quotes from a letter of Booth's sister Asia Booth Clarke, in which she wrote that her brother was a Roman Catholic.
Booth, said Garrett, displayed no reaction other than to ask if the family would turn in the fugitive should they have the opportunity.
He said that the actor thrilled him, prompting Booth to give Tad a rose.
Other Southerners feared that a vengeful North would exact a terrible retribution upon the defeated former Confederate states.
News of the assassination reached the far corners of the nation, and indignation was aroused against Lincoln's critics, whom many blamed for encouraging Booth to act.
In December 2010, descendants of Edwin Booth reported that they obtained permission to exhume the Shakespearean actor's body to obtain DNA samples.
The 23-year-old Herold knew the area well, having frequently hunted there, and recognized a nearby farm as belonging to a Confederate sympathizer.
In the crowd below were Powell, Atzerodt, and Herold.
As a popular actor in the 1860s, Booth continued to travel extensively to perform in the North and South, and as far west as New Orleans, Louisiana.
The Booth family had traditionally been Episcopalian.
Booth stabbed Rathbone when the startled officer lunged at him.
By mid-1860, he was playing in such cities as New York, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, St. Louis, Columbus, Georgia, Montgomery, Alabama, and New Orleans.
Each day he received fan mail from infatuated women.
O'Laughlen died in a yellow fever epidemic there in 1867.
The President replied, "He does look pretty sharp at me, doesn't he?"
Russell Conwell visited homes in the vanquished former Confederate states during this time, and he found that hatred of Lincoln till smoldered.
Senator John P. Hale of New Hampshire, and they became secretly engaged when Booth received his mother's blessing for their marriage plans.
Among the identifying features used to make sure that the man that was killed was Booth was a tattoo on his left hand with his initials J.W.B., and a distinct scar on the back of his neck.
On March 30, 2013, museum spokeswoman Carol Johnson announced that the family's request had been rejected to extract DNA from the vertebrae.
Booth embarked on his first national tour as a leading actor after finishing the 1859–1860 theatre season in Richmond, Virginia.
Booth was surprised to find little public sympathy for his action, especially from those anti-Lincoln newspapers that had previously excoriated the President in life.
Various accounts state that Booth injured his leg when his spur snagged a decorative U.S. Treasury Guard flag while leaping to the stage.
While Lincoln's funeral train was in New York City on April 24, Lieutenant Edward P. Doherty was dispatched from Washington at 2&nbsp;p.m. with a detachment of 26&nbsp;Union soldiers from the 16th New York Cavalry Regiment to capture Booth in Virginia, accompanied by Lieutenant Colonel Everton Conger, an intelligence officer assigned by Lafayette Baker.
Kauffman contends that Booth was injured later that night during his flight to escape when his horse tripped and fell on him, calling Booth's claim to the contrary an exaggeration to portray his own actions as heroic.
As Booth moved about inside the blazing barn, Sergeant Boston Corbett shot him.
He assigned Powell to assassinate Secretary of State William H. Seward and Atzerodt to assassinate Vice President Andrew Johnson.
Albany's drama critics were kinder, however, giving him rave reviews.
At midnight, Booth and Herold arrived at Surratt's Tavern on the Brandywine Pike,  from Washington, where they had stored guns and equipment earlier in the year as part of the kidnap plot.
The Maryland Court of Special Appeals upheld the ruling.
As the 1864 Presidential election drew near, the Confederacy's prospects for victory were ebbing, and the tide of war increasingly favored the North.
Booth and a group of co-conspirators originally plotted to kidnap Lincoln but later planned to kill him, Vice President Andrew Johnson, and Secretary of State William H. Seward in a bid to help the Confederacy's cause.
Booth and Herold had been led to the farm on April 24 by William S. Jett, a former private in the 9th Virginia Cavalry whom they had met before crossing the Rappahannock.
According to Corbett's later account, he fired at Booth because the fugitive "raised his pistol to shoot" at them.
He also began acting at Baltimore's Holliday Street Theater, owned by John T. Ford, where the Booths had performed frequently.
The detachment steamed  down the Potomac River on the boat ''John S. Ide'', landing at Belle Plain, Virginia at 10&nbsp;p.m.
And while there is no reasonable cause to connect Booth's religious preference and his 'mad act', the few who knew of his conversion must have decided after the assassination that for the good of the church, it was best never to mention it.
Starting in January 1863, he returned to the Boston Museum for a series of plays, including the role of villain Duke Pescara in ''The Apostate'' that won acclaim from audiences and critics.
He assembled a loose-knit band of Southern sympathizers, including David Herold, George Atzerodt, Lewis Powell (also known as Lewis Payne or Paine), and John Surratt, a rebel agent.
Earlier, ''The New York Times'' had published an account by their reporter in 1911 detailing the burial of Booth's body at the cemetery and those who were witnesses.
Historian Benjamin Platt Thomas wrote that Booth "won celebrity with theater-goers by his romantic personal attraction", but that he was "too impatient for hard study" and his "brilliant talents had failed of full development."
That same day, the nine-car funeral train bearing Lincoln's body departed Washington on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, arriving at Baltimore's Camden Station at 10&nbsp;a.m., the first stop on a 13-day journey to Springfield, Illinois, its final destination.
According to his sister Asia, Booth confided to her that he also used his position to smuggle quinine to the South during his travels there, helping the Confederacy obtain the needed drug despite the Northern blockade.
Booth's body was shrouded in a blanket and tied to the side of an old farm wagon for the trip back to Belle Plain.
Robert E. Lee also expressed regret at Lincoln's death by Booth's hand.
The partners invested in a  site along the Allegheny River at Franklin, Pennsylvania in late 1863 for drilling.
He played Mark Antony and his brother Edwin had the larger role of Brutus in a performance acclaimed as "the greatest theatrical event in New York history."
Dorothy Kunhardt called the funeral train's journey "the mightiest outpouring of national grief the world had yet seen."
In this play, Booth portrayed a Greek sculptor in costume, making marble statues come to life.
In 1994 two historians together with several descendants sought a court order for the exhumation of Booth's body at Green Mount Cemetery which was, according to their lawyer, "intended to prove or disprove longstanding theories on Booth's escape" by conducting a photo-superimposition analysis.
However, Garrett was present at the time and, as such, was more likely to know the facts than are later biographers.
Afterward, Edwin led the younger Booth to the theatre's footlights and said to the audience, "I think he's done well, don't you?"
"You have so often been dead in love," his mother counseled Booth in a letter, "be well assured she is really and truly devoted to you."
By April 20, he was aware that some of his co-conspirators were already arrested: Mary Surratt, Powell (or Paine), Arnold, and O'Laughlen.
They began to meet routinely at the boarding house of Surratt's mother Mrs. Mary Surratt.
Booth then jumped from the President's box to the stage, where he raised his knife and shouted "''Sic semper tyrannis''" (Latin for "Thus always to tyrants," attributed to Brutus at Caesar's assassination and the Virginia state motto), while others said that he added, "I have done it, the South is avenged!"
"Photographs of Wilkes Booth, with the last words of great martyrs printed upon its borders ... adorn their drawing rooms".
At every crossroads the glare of innumerable torches illuminated the whole population, kneeling on the ground."
Booth was strongly opposed to the abolitionists who sought to end slavery in the U.S.
The body was then buried in a storage room at the Old Penitentiary, later moved to a warehouse at the Washington Arsenal on October 1, 1867.
He wrote an epitaph of Booth in his 1929 book ''John Wilkes Booth'': "In the terrible deed he committed, he was actuated by no thought of monetary gain, but by a self-sacrificing, albeit wholly fanatical devotion to a cause he thought supreme."
The Garretts were unaware of Lincoln's assassination; Booth was introduced to them as "James W. Boyd", a Confederate soldier, they were told, who had been wounded in the battle of Petersburg and was returning home.
While there, he was told by John Ford's brother that President and Mrs. Lincoln would be attending the play ''Our American Cousin'' at Ford's Theatre that evening, accompanied by Gen. and Mrs. Ulysses S. Grant.
No conclusive proof has linked Booth's kidnapping or assassination plots to a conspiracy involving the leadership of the Confederate government, although historians such as David Herbert Donald have said, "It is clear that, at least at the lower levels of the Southern secret service, the abduction of the Union President was under consideration."
Booth's parents were noted British Shakespearean actor Junius Brutus Booth and his mistress Mary Ann Holmes, who moved to the United States from England in June 1821.
The rumor periodically revived, as in the 1920s when a corpse was exhibited on a national tour by a carnival promoter and advertised as the "Man Who Shot Lincoln".
Nobody knows exactly what Booth said to the Garretts, or they to him."
Powell was able to stab Seward, who was bedridden as a result of an earlier carriage accident.
The Garretts also finally learned of Lincoln's death and the substantial reward for Booth's capture.
At his request, he was billed as "J.B. Wilkes", a pseudonym meant to avoid comparison with other members of his famous thespian family.
On October 5, 1858, Booth played the part of Horatio in ''Hamlet'', alongside his older brother Edwin in the title role.
Still not aware of their guest's true identity, one of the older Garrett sons averred that they might, if only because they needed the money.
The ''National Republican'' drama critic said that Booth "took the hearts of the audience by storm" and termed his performance "a complete triumph".
The editor's introduction of the 1874 memoir of Booth's sister Asia Booth Clarke states that no individual church was preeminent in the Booth household during her childhood.
Booth, fatally wounded in the neck, was dragged from the barn to the porch of Garrett's farmhouse where he died three hours later, aged 26.
In his 2005 analysis of Lincoln's assassination, Thomas Goodrich writes:
Booth's scheme to kidnap Lincoln was no longer feasible with the Union Army's capture of Richmond and Lee's surrender, and he changed his goal to assassination.
He stood  tall, had jet-black hair, and was lean and athletic.
Back in Washington in April, he played the title roles in ''Hamlet'' and ''Richard III,'' one of his favorites.
The partners were impatient to increase the well's output and attempted the use of explosives, which wrecked the well and ended production.
He engaged Philadelphia attorney Matthew Canning to serve as his agent.
Historian Dorothy Kunhardt writes: "Almost every family who kept a photograph album on the parlor table owned a likeness of John Wilkes Booth of the famous Booth family of actors.
Harbin took Booth and Herold to another Confederate agent in the area named William Bryant who supplied them with horses.
He shot Lincoln once in the back of the head, and the President died the next morning.
Booth made the final appearance of his acting career at Ford's on March 18, 1865, when he again played Duke Pescara in ''The Apostate.''
In May 1862, he made his Boston debut, playing nightly at the Boston Museum in ''Richard III'' (May 12, 15, and 23), ''Romeo and Juliet'' (May 13), ''The Robbers'' (May 14 and 21), ''Hamlet'' (May 16), ''The Apostate'' (May 19), ''The Stranger'' (May 20), and ''The Lady of Lyons'' (May 22).
after hearing the news of Lincoln's death.
Poet and journalist Walt Whitman said of Booth's acting, "He would have flashes, passages, I thought of real genius."
Booth had been rehearsing at the Richmond Theatre when he abruptly decided to join the Richmond Grays, a volunteer militia of 1,500&nbsp;men travelling to Charles Town for Brown's hanging, to guard against an attempt by abolitionists to rescue Brown from the gallows by force.
After having dinner with the Garretts that evening, Booth learned of the surrender of Johnston's army, the last Confederate armed force of any size.
Booth was a member of the prominent 19th-century Booth theatrical family from Maryland and, by the 1860s, was a well-known actor.
Author Francis Wilson was 11 years old at the time of Lincoln's assassination.
Historian Michael W. Kauffman questioned this legend in his book ''American Brutus: John Wilkes Booth and the Lincoln Conspiracies'', writing in 2004 that eyewitness accounts of Booth's hurried stage exit made it unlikely that his leg was broken then.
He attended the Bel Air Academy (now Bel Air High School), a sometimes indifferent student whom the headmaster described as "not deficient in intelligence, but disinclined to take advantage of the educational opportunities offered him.
Thus the secret remained so well guarded that even the most rabidly anti-Catholic writers who tried to depict the assassination of Lincoln as a Jesuit or Papist plot were puzzled by the seemingly accurate information that John Wilkes Booth was an Episcopalian."
Mourners were viewing Lincoln's remains when the funeral train steamed into Harrisburg at 8:20&nbsp;p.m., while Booth and Herold were provided with a boat and compass by Jones to cross the Potomac at night on April 21.
Asking that his hands be raised to his face so that he could see them, Booth uttered his last words, "Useless, useless," and died as dawn was breaking.
The pair finally reached the Virginia shore near Machodoc Creek before dawn on April 23.
Booth left the horse with Edmund Spangler and Spangler arranged for Burroughs to hold it.
The pursuers crossed the Rappahannock River and tracked Booth and Herold to Richard H. Garrett's farm, just south of Port Royal, Caroline County, Virginia.
Testimony given at the trial of John Surratt showed that at his death, Booth had a Catholic medal on his person.
Instead, the Grants departed Washington by train that evening for a visit to relatives in New Jersey.
Instead of reaching Virginia, however, they mistakenly navigated upriver to a bend in the broad Potomac River, coming ashore again in Maryland on April 22.
There was no attempt to assassinate Lincoln during the inauguration.
In January 1865, he acted in Shakespeare's ''Romeo and Juliet'' in Washington, again garnering rave reviews.
The War Department advertised a $100,000&nbsp;reward ($ in  USD) by order of Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton for information leading to the arrest of Booth and his accomplices, and Federal troops were dispatched to search southern Maryland extensively, following tips reported by Federal intelligence agents to Col. Lafayette Baker.
Great indignation was directed towards Booth as the assassin's identity was telegraphed across the nation.
Edmund Spangler was given a six-year term in prison.
Of the conspirators, only Booth was completely successful in carrying out his part of the plot.
According to his account, Booth and Herold arrived at the Garretts' farm, located on the road to Bowling Green, around 3&nbsp;p.m. on Monday afternoon.
Garrett's 11-year-old son Richard was an eyewitness.
In October, Booth made an unexplained trip to Montreal, which was then a well-known center of clandestine Confederate activity.
About 7&nbsp;million people lined the railroad tracks along the  route, holding aloft signs with legends such as "We mourn our loss," "He lives in the hearts of his people," and "The darkest hour in history."
Forty years later, when the centenary of Lincoln's birth was celebrated in 1909, a border state official reflected on Booth's assassination of Lincoln.
", causing the audience to roar with laughter.
In the ensuing pandemonium inside Ford's Theatre, Booth fled by a stage door to the alley, where his getaway horse was held for him by Joseph "Peanuts" Burroughs.
He spent ten days in the city, staying for a time at St. Lawrence Hall, a rendezvous for the Confederate Secret Service, and meeting several Confederate agents there.
Booth invested some of his growing wealth in various enterprises during the early 1860s, including land speculation in Boston's Back Bay section.
Biographer Theodore Roscoe said of Garrett's account, "Almost nothing written or testified in respect to the doings of the fugitives at Garrett's farm can be taken at face value.
In Booth's pockets were found a compass, a candle, pictures of five women (actresses Alice Grey, Helen Western, Effie Germon, Fannie Brown, and Booth's fiancée Lucy Hale), and his diary, where he had written of Lincoln's death, "Our country owed all her troubles to him, and God simply made me the instrument of his punishment."
Booth recruited his friends Samuel Arnold and Michael O'Laughlen as accomplices.
He thought that the area's dense forests and swampy terrain of Zekiah Swamp made it ideal for an escape route into rural Virginia.
Once in Confederate hands, Lincoln would be exchanged for the release of Confederate Army prisoners of war held captive in Northern prisons and, Booth reasoned, bring the war to an end by emboldening opposition to the war in the North or forcing Union recognition of the Confederate government.
Its capitulation meant that the Civil War was unquestionably over and Booth's attempt had failed to save the Confederacy by Lincoln's assassination.
Court evidence showed his attending a Roman Catholic church service on at least two occasions.
On another occasion, Lincoln's son Tad saw Booth perform.
He bored a spyhole into the door of the presidential box earlier that day so that he could check that his intended victim had made it to the play and observe the box's occupants.
On the morning of Good Friday, April 14, 1865, Booth went to Ford's Theatre to get his mail.
David Herold surrendered, but Booth refused Conger's demand to surrender, saying, "I prefer to come out and fight."
Family friend John T. Ford opened 1,500-seat Ford's Theatre on November&nbsp;9 in Washington, D.C. Booth was one of the first leading men to appear there, playing in Charles Selby's ''The Marble Heart''.
In response, the audience applauded loudly and cried, "Yes!
As a boy, Booth was athletic and popular, and he became skilled at horsemanship and fencing.
He also met with several well-known Confederate sympathizers at The Parker House in Boston.
Throughout the Civil War, the Confederacy maintained a network of underground operators in southern Maryland, particularly Charles and St. Mary's counties, smuggling recruits across the Potomac River into Virginia and relaying messages for Confederate agents as far north as Canada.
