His Westerns had a great influence on me, as I think they had on everybody.
At a crucial meeting of the Guild, DeMille's faction spoke for four hours until Ford spoke against DeMille and proposed a vote of confidence in Mankiewicz, which was passed.
He made numerous films with the same major collaborators, including producer and business partner Merian C. Cooper, scriptwriters Nunnally Johnson, Dudley Nichols and Frank S. Nugent, and cinematographers Ben F. Reynolds, John W. Brown and George Schneiderman (who between them shot most of Ford's silent films), Joseph H. August, Gregg Toland, Winton Hoch, Charles Lawton Jr., Bert Glennon, Archie Stout and William H. Clothier.
Below are some of the people who were directly influenced by Ford, or greatly admired his work:
Katharine Hepburn reportedly facilitated a rapprochement between the two men, ending a long-running feud, and she convinced Tracy to take the lead role, which had originally been offered to Orson Welles (but was turned down by Welles' agent without his knowledge, much to his chagrin).
Ford's last film of 1917, ''Bucking Broadway'', was long thought to have been lost, but in 2002 the only known surviving print was discovered in the archives of the French National Center for Cinematography and it has since been restored and digitized.
It did considerably better business than either of Ford's two preceding films, grossing $950,000 in its first year although cast member Anna Lee stated that Ford was "disappointed with the picture" and that Columbia had not permitted him to supervise the editing.
A faction of the Directors Guild of America, led by Cecil B. DeMille, had tried to make it mandatory for every member to sign a loyalty oath.
Though it is often claimed that budget constraints necessitated shooting most of the film on soundstages on the Paramount lot, studio accounting records show that this was part of the film's original artistic concept, according to Ford biographer Joseph McBride.
There is some uncertainty about the identity of Ford's first film as director—film writer Ephraim Katz notes that Ford might have directed the four-part film ''Lucille the Waitress'' as early as 1914—but most sources cite his directorial début as the silent two-reeler ''The Tornado'', released in March 1917.
Barbara Curran had been born in the Aran Islands, in the town of Kilronan on the island of Inishmore (Inis Mór).
In making the film Ford and Carey ignored studio orders and turned in five reels instead of two, and it was only through the intervention of Carl Laemmle that the film escaped being cut for its first release, although it was subsequently edited down to two reels for re-release in the late 1920s.
It was a real thing."
It was nominated for seven Academy Awards and won Ford his fourth Oscar for Best Director, as well a second Best Cinematography Oscar for Winton Hoch.
Ford created a part for the recovering Ward Bond, who needed money.
From the early Thirties onwards, he always wore dark glasses and a patch over his left eye, which was only partly to protect his poor eyesight.
Ford eventually rose to become a top adviser to OSS head William Joseph Donovan.
The supporting cast included Dolores del Río, J. Carrol Naish, Ward Bond, Leo Carrillo and Mel Ferrer (making his screen début) and a cast of mainly Mexican extras.
It was a loose adaptation of Graham Greene's ''The Power and the Glory'', which Ford had originally intended to make at Fox before the war, with Thomas Mitchell as the priest.
John Wayne had good reason to be grateful for Ford's support; ''Stagecoach'' provided the actor with the career breakthrough that elevated him to international stardom.
Unusual for Ford, it was shot in continuity for the sake of the performances and he therefore exposed about four times as much film as he usually shot.
''Time'' magazine's Richard Corliss named it one of the "Top 10 DVDs of 2007", ranking it at #1.
* François Truffaut
* Jean Renoir – After seeing ''The Informer'', he reportedly told George Seaton: "I learned so much today ...
With film production affected by the Depression, Ford made two films each in 1932 and 1933—''Air Mail'' (made for Universal) with a young Ralph Bellamy and ''Flesh'' (for MGM) with Wallace Beery.
''The Fugitive'' (1947), again starring Fonda, was the first project of Argosy Pictures.
''Fort Apache'' was followed by another Western, ''3 Godfathers'', a remake of a 1916 silent film starring Harry Carey (to whom Ford's version was dedicated), which Ford had himself already remade in 1919 as ''Marked Men'', also with Carey and thought lost.
During 1960, Ford made his third TV production, ''The Colter Craven Story'', a one-hour episode of the network TV show ''Wagon Train'', which included footage from Ford's ''Wagon Master'' (on which the series was based).
A notable example is the famous scene in ''She Wore a Yellow Ribbon'' in which the cavalry troop is photographed against an oncoming storm.
Ford repeatedly declared that he disliked the film and had never watched it, complaining that he had been forced to make it, although it was strongly championed by filmmaker Lindsay Anderson.
The script was written by Philip Dunne from the best-selling novel by Richard Llewellyn.
As time went on, however, Ford became more publicly allied with the Republican Party, declaring himself a 'Maine Republican' in 1947.
Although low-budget western features and serials were still being churned out in large numbers by "Poverty Row" studios, the genre had fallen out of favor with the big studios during the 1930s and they were regarded as B-grade "pulp" movies at best.
Production chief Walter Wanger urged Ford to hire Gary Cooper and Marlene Dietrich for the lead roles, but eventually accepted Ford's decision to cast Claire Trevor as Dallas and a virtual unknown, his friend John Wayne, as Ringo; Wanger reportedly had little further influence over the production.
During his first decade as a director Ford honed his craft on dozens of features (including many westerns) but only ten of the more than sixty silent films he made between 1917 and 1928 still survive in their entirety.
Filmed on location in Africa, it was photographed by British cinematographer Freddie Young and starred Ford's old friend Clark Gable, with Ava Gardner, Grace Kelly (who replaced an ailing Gene Tierney) and Donald Sinden.
One famous event, witnessed by Ford's friend actor Frank Baker, strikingly illustrates the tension between the public persona and the private man.
However, prints of several Ford 'silents' previously thought lost have been rediscovered in foreign film archives over recent years—in 2009 a trove of 75 Hollywood silent films was rediscovered in the New Zealand Film Archive, among which was the only surviving print of Ford's 1927 silent comedy ''Upstream''.
He likewise belittled Victor McLaglen, on one occasion reportedly bellowing through the megaphone: "D'ya known, McLaglen, that Fox are paying you $1200 a week to do things that I could get any child off the street to do better?".
(1952), a World War I drama, the first of two films Ford made with James Cagney (''Mister Roberts'' was the other) which also did good business at the box office ($2&nbsp;million).
It was a big box-office success, grossing $1.25&nbsp;million in its first year in the US and earning Edna May Oliver a Best Supporting Actress Oscar nomination for her performance.
However, its reputation has grown greatly over the intervening years—it was named the Greatest Western of all time by the American Film Institute in 2008 and also placed 12th on the Institute's 2007 list of the Top 100 greatest movies of all time.
It reunited Ford with Henry Fonda (as Earp) and co-starred Victor Mature in one of his best roles as the consumptive, Shakespeare-loving Doc Holliday, with Ward Bond and Tim Holt as the Earp brothers, Linda Darnell as sultry saloon girl Chihuahua, a strong performance by Walter Brennan (in a rare villainous role) as the venomous Old Man Clanton, with Jane Darwell and an early screen appearance by John Ireland as Billy Clanton.
Script development could be intense but, once approved, his screenplays were rarely rewritten; he was also one of the first filmmakers to encourage his writers and actors to prepare a full back story for their characters.
It was followed by his next feature, ''The Horse Soldiers'' (Mirisch Company-United Artists, 1959), a Civil War story starring John Wayne and William Holden.
Ford's next film, the biopic ''Young Mr Lincoln'' (1939) starring Henry Fonda, was less successful than ''Stagecoach'', attracting little critical attention and winning no awards.
''Donovan's Reef'' (Paramount, 1963) was Ford's last film with John Wayne.
Ford is famous for his exciting tracking shots, such as the Apache chase sequence in ''Stagecoach'' or the attack on the Comanche camp in ''The Searchers''.
He was the first recipient of the American Film Institute Life Achievement Award in 1973.
''Gideon's Day'' (titled ''Gideon of Scotland Yard'' in the US) was adapted from the novel by British writer John Creasey.
It earned great critical praise, was nominated for Best Picture, won Ford his first Academy Award for Best Director, and was hailed at the time as one of the best films ever made, although its reputation has diminished considerably compared to other contenders like ''Citizen Kane'', or Ford's own later ''The Searchers'' (1956).
They start juggling scenes around and taking out this and putting in that.
The film failed to recoup its costs, earning less than half ($100,000) its negative cost of just over $256,000 and it stirred up some controversy in Ireland.
Over 35 years Wayne appeared in 24 of Ford's films and three television episodes.
Other films of this period include the South Seas melodrama ''The Hurricane'' (1937) and the lighthearted Shirley Temple vehicle ''Wee Willie Winkie'' (1937), each of which had a first-year US gross of more than $1&nbsp;million.
I cut in the camera and that's it.
According to Ford's own story, he was given the job by Universal boss Carl Laemmle who supposedly said, "Give Jack Ford the job—he yells good".
It was followed by ''Wagon Master'', starring Ben Johnson and Harry Carey Jr, which is particularly noteworthy as the only Ford film since 1930 that he scripted himself.
Many of his sound films include renditions or quotations of his favorite hymn, "Shall We Gather at the River?
In 2007, Twentieth Century Fox released "Ford at Fox", a DVD boxed set of 24 of Ford's films.
In 1955, Ford made the lesser-known West Point drama ''The Long Gray Line'' for Columbia Pictures, the first of two Ford films to feature Tyrone Power, who had originally been slated to star as the adult Huw in ''How Green Was My Valley'' back in 1941.
As a result, Ford shopped the project around Hollywood for almost a year, offering it unsuccessfully to both Joseph Kennedy and David O. Selznick before finally linking with Walter Wanger, an independent producer working through United Artists.
In fact, Eastman used to complain that I exposed so little film.
If a doomed character was shown playing poker (such as Liberty Valance or gunman Tom Tyler in ''Stagecoach''), the last hand he plays is the "death hand"—two eights and two aces, one of them the ace of spades—so-called because Wild Bill Hickok is said to have held this hand when he was murdered.
Ford's films, particularly the Westerns, express a deep aesthetic sensibility for the American past and the spirit of the frontier ... his compositions have a classic strength in which masses of people and their natural surroundings are beautifully juxtaposed, often in breathtaking long shots.
Francis gave his younger brother his first acting role in ''The Mysterious Rose'' (November 1914).
He won two more Academy Awards during this time, one for the semi-documentary ''The Battle of Midway'' (1942), and a second for the propaganda film ''December 7th'' (1943).
A testament to Ford's legendary efficiency, ''Rio Grande'' was shot in just 32&nbsp;days, with only 352 takes from 335 camera setups, and it was a solid success, grossing $2.25&nbsp;million in its first year.
Ford made frequent use of location shooting and long shots, in which his characters were framed against a vast, harsh and rugged natural terrain.
The movement of men and horses in his Westerns has rarely been surpassed for regal serenity and evocative power.
His pride and joy was his yacht, ''Araner (yacht)'', which he bought in 1934 and on which he lavished hundreds of thousands of dollars in repairs and improvements over the years; it became his chief retreat between films and a meeting place for his circle of close friends, including John Wayne and Ward Bond.
1935 trying to protect themselves from the advances of a barbaric Mongolian warlord.
It was shot in England with a British cast headed by Jack Hawkins, whom Ford (unusually) lauded as "the finest dramatic actor with whom I have worked".
The musical score, often variations on folk themes, plays a more important part than dialogue in many Ford films.
One notable feature of John Ford's films is that he used a 'stock company' of actors, far more so than many directors.
But people who go to pictures for the sake of seeing pictures will see a great one.
For the rest of the picture, he was able to use a crutch on the final march.
Ford's last silent feature ''Hangman's House'' (1928) is notable as one of the first credited screen appearances by John Wayne.
Who do think you are to talk to me this way?"
''Cheyenne Autumn'' (Warner Bros, 1964) was Ford's epic farewell to the West, which he publicly declared to be an elegy to the Native American.
It fared poorly at the box office and its failure contributed to the subsequent collapse of Argosy Pictures.
As a producer he received nominations for Best Picture for ''The Quiet Man'' and ''The Long Voyage Home''.
Ford was also present on Omaha Beach on D-Day.
* Peter Bogdanovich
The statue made by New York sculptor George M. Kelly, cast at Modern Art Foundry, Astoria, NY, and commissioned by Louisiana philanthropst Linda Noe Laine was unveiled on 12 July 1998 at Gorham's Corner in Portland, Maine, United State, as part of a celebration of Ford that was later to include renaming the auditorium of Portland High School the John Ford Auditorium.
His three films of 1930 were ''Men Without Women'', ''Born Reckless'' and ''Up the River'', which is notable as the debut film for both Spencer Tracy and Humphrey Bogart, who were both signed to Fox on Ford's recommendation (but subsequently dropped).
He was an inveterate pipe-smoker and while he was shooting he would chew on a linen handkerchief—each morning his wife would give him a dozen fresh handkerchiefs, but by the end of a day's filming the corners of all of them would be chewed to shreds.
''Rio Grande'' (Republic, 1950), the third part of the 'Cavalry Trilogy', co-starred John Wayne and Maureen O'Hara, with Wayne's son Patrick Wayne making his screen debut (he appeared in several subsequent Ford pictures including ''The Searchers'').
It is certainly the best picture Darryl F. Zanuck has produced or Nunnally Johnson scripted.
John Wayne remarked that "Nobody could handle actors and crew like Jack."
The Dudley Nichols–Ben Hecht screenplay was based on an Ernest Haycox story that Ford had spotted in ''Collier's'' magazine and he purchased the screen rights for just $2500.
Despite its uncompromising humanist and political stance, Ford's screen adaptation of John Steinbeck's ''The Grapes of Wrath'' (scripted by Nunnally Johnson and photographed by Gregg Toland) was both a big box office hit and a major critical success, and it is still widely regarded as one of the best Hollywood films of the era.
Another reported factor was the nervousness of Fox executives about the pro-union tone of the story.
Ford was renowned for his intense personality and his many idiosyncrasies and eccentricities.
During the 1920s, Ford also served as president of the Motion Picture Directors Association, a forerunner to today's Directors Guild of America.
They married in 1875 and became American citizens five years later on September 11, 1880.
It remains one of the most admired and imitated of all Hollywood movies, not least for its climactic stagecoach chase and the hair-raising horse-jumping scene, performed by the stuntman Yakima Canutt.
This feat was later matched by Joseph L. Mankiewicz exactly ten years later, when he won consecutive awards for Best Director in 1950 and 1951.
A television special featuring Ford, John Wayne, James Stewart, and Henry Fonda was broadcast over the CBS network on December 5, 1971 called ''The American West of John Ford'', featuring clips from Ford's career interspersed with interviews conducted by Wayne, Stewart, and Fonda, who also took turns narrating the hourlong documentary.
On the eighth day he ripped the sign down and returned to his normal bullying behaviour."
Ford's last silent Western was ''3 Bad Men'' (1926), set during the Dakota land rush and filmed at Jackson Hole, Wyoming and in the Mojave Desert.
He was listed as the fifth most influential director of all time by ''MovieMaker''.
Both of Ford's 1958 films were made for Columbia Pictures and both were significant departures from Ford's norm.
By the time Jack Ford was given his first break as a director, Francis' profile was declining and he ceased working as a director soon after.
''Stagecoach'' (1939) was Ford's first western since ''3 Bad Men'' in 1926, and it was his first with sound.
Despite an often combative relationship, within three years Jack had progressed to become Francis' chief assistant and often worked as his cameraman.
While making ''Drums Along the Mohawk'', Ford neatly sidestepped the challenge of shooting a large and expensive battle scene—he had Henry Fonda improvise a monologue while firing questions from behind the camera about the course of the battle (a subject on which Fonda was well-versed) and then simply editing out the questions.
Some time later, Ford purchased a house for the couple and pensioned them for life.
''The Rising of the Moon'' (Warner Bros, 1957) was a three-part 'omnibus' movie shot on location in Ireland and based on Irish short stories.
'''John Ford''' (February 1, 1894 – August 31, 1973) was an American film director.
Ford's next film was the romance-adventure ''Mogambo'' (MGM, 1953), a loose remake of the celebrated 1932 film ''Red Dust''.
In November he made ''The Bamboo Cross'' (Lewman Ltd-Revue, 1955) for the ''Fireside Theater'' series; it starred Jane Wyman with an Asian-American cast and Stock Company veterans Frank Baker and Pat O'Malley in minor roles.
John Wayne's first appearance in ''Stagecoach'').
It was very successful upon its first release and became one of the top 20 films of the year, grossing $4.45&nbsp;million, although it received no Academy Award nominations.
In contrast to his contemporary Alfred Hitchcock, Ford never used storyboards, composing his pictures entirely in his head, without any written or graphic outline of the shots he would use.
Ford's work was held in high regard by his colleagues, with Orson Welles and Ingmar Bergman among those who have named him one of the greatest directors of all time.
A strain would have been Ford's many extramarital relationships.
John Augustine and Barbara Curran arrived in Boston and Portland respectively in May and June 1872.
I do cut in the camera.
''The Long Voyage Home'' (1940) was, like ''Stagecoach'', made with Walter Wanger through United Artists.
''Steamboat Round The Bend'' was his third and final film with Will Rogers; it is probable they would have continued working together, but their collaboration was cut short by Rogers' untimely death in a plane crash in May 1935, which devastated Ford.
''Tobacco Road'' (1941) was a rural comedy scripted by Nunnally Johnson, adapted from the long-running Jack Kirkland stage version of the novel by Erskine Caldwell.
As his career took off in the mid-Twenties his annual income significantly increased.
The logistics were enormous—two entire towns were constructed, there were 5000 extras, 100 cooks, 2000 rail layers, a cavalry regiment, 800 Indians, 1300 buffalo, 2000 horses, 10,000 cattle and 50,000 properties, including the original stagecoach used by Horace Greeley, Wild Bill Hickok's derringer pistol and replicas of the "Jupiter" and "119" locomotives that met at Promontory Point when the two ends of the line were joined on 10 May 1869.
He couldn't have stood through that sad story without breaking down.
", such as its parodic use to underscore the opening scenes of ''Stagecoach'', when the prostitute Dallas is being run out of town by local matrons.
One of the films for which he won the award, ''How Green Was My Valley'', also won Best Picture.
Released several months after the end of the war, it was among the year's top 20 box-office draws, although Tag Gallagher notes that many critics have incorrectly claimed that it lost money.
Ford's first feature-length production was ''Straight Shooting'' (August 1917), which is also his earliest complete surviving film as director, and one of only two survivors from his twenty-five film collaboration with Harry Carey.
He always had music played on the set and would routinely break for tea (Earl Grey) at mid-afternoon every day during filming.
According to Lee Marvin in a filmed interview, Ford had fought hard to shoot the film in black-and-white to accentuate his use of shadows.
In contrast to the string of successes in 1939–41, it won no major American awards, although it was awarded a silver ribbon for Best Foreign Film in 1948 by the Italian National Syndicate of Film Journalists, and it was a solid financial success, grossing $2.75&nbsp;million in the United States and $1.75&nbsp;million internationally in its first year of release.
His four Academy Awards for Best Director (in 1935, 1940, 1941, and 1952) remain a record.
before storming out of the room.
Ford's health deteriorated rapidly in the early 1970s; he suffered a broken hip in 1970 which put him in a wheelchair.
He crossed the English Channel on the , anchored off Omaha Beach at 0600 where he observed the first wave land on the beach from the ship, landing on the beach himself later with a team of US Coast Guard cameramen who filmed the battle from behind the beach obstacles, with Ford directing operations.
The John Ford Ireland Film Symposium was held again in Dublin in Summer 2013.
There, an ambulance was waiting to take the man's wife to the hospital where a specialist, flown in from San Francisco at Ford's expense, performed the operation.
Ford is widely considered to be among the most influential of Hollywood's filmmakers.
His depiction of the Navajo in ''Wagon Master'' included their characters speaking the Navajo language.
It was a big commercial success, grossing nearly $5&nbsp;million worldwide in its first year and ranking in the Top 20 box office hits of 1948.
He was extremely sensitive to criticism and was always particularly angered by any comparison between his work and that of his older brother Francis.
He rarely drank during the making of a film, but when a production wrapped he would often lock himself in his study, wrapped only in a sheet, and go on a solitary drinking binge for several days, followed by routine contrition and a vow never to drink again.
His work was also restricted by the new regime in Hollywood, and he found it hard to get many projects made.
''Drums Along the Mohawk'' (1939) was a lavish frontier drama co-starring Henry Fonda and Claudette Colbert; it was also Ford's first movie in color and included uncredited script contributions by William Faulkner.
It would be thirteen years before he made his next Western, ''Stagecoach'', in 1939.
It co-starred John Wayne and James Stewart, with Vera Miles, Edmond O'Brien, Andy Devine as the inept marshal Appleyard, Denver Pyle, John Carradine, and Lee Marvin in one of his first major roles as the brutal Valance, with Lee Van Cleef and Strother Martin as his henchmen.
It was one of Ford's personal favorites; stills from it decorated his home and O'Neill also reportedly loved the film and screened it periodically.
''The Tornado'' was quickly followed by a string of two-reeler and three-reeler "quickies"—''The Trail of Hate'', ''The Scrapper'', ''The Soul Herder'' and ''Cheyenne's Pal''; these were made over the space of a few months and each typically shot in just two or three days; all are now presumed lost.
Several weeks later we discovered the cause from Ford's brother-in-law: before emigrating to America, Ford's grandfather had been a labourer on the estate in Ireland of the then Lord Wallscourt: Ford was now getting his own back at his descendant.
His ideas and his characters are, like many things branded "American", deceptively simple.
He is renowned both for Westerns such as ''Stagecoach'' (1939), ''The Searchers'' (1956), and ''The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance'' (1962), as well as adaptations of classic 20th-century American novels such as the film ''The Grapes of Wrath'' (1940).
On ''The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance'', Ford ran through a scene with Edmond O'Brien and ended by drooping his hand over a railing.
His father, John Augustine, was born in Spiddal, County Galway, Ireland in 1854.
It is also notable as the film in which Wayne first used his trademark phrase "Pilgrim" (his nickname for James Stewart's character).
''Two Rode Together'' (Ford Productions-Columbia, 1961) co-starred James Stewart and Richard Widmark, with Shirley Jones and Stock Company regulars Andy Devine, Henry Brandon, Harry Carey Jr, Anna Lee, Woody Strode, Mae Marsh and Frank Baker, with an early screen appearance by Linda Cristal, who went on to star in the Western TV series ''The High Chaparral''.
Ford made a wide range of films in this period, and he became well known for his Western and 'frontier' pictures, but the genre rapidly lost its appeal for major studios in the late 1920s.
''The Grapes of Wrath'' was followed by two less successful and lesser known films.
* David Lean took inspiration from ''The Searchers'' for his film ''Lawrence of Arabia''
His words were recorded by a stenographer:
Ford died on 31 August 1973 at Palm Desert and his funeral was held on 5 September at Hollywood's Church of the Blessed Sacrament.
Others, who were merely annoyed at the exaggerations, propaganda and phony pathos of John Steinbeck's best selling novel, may just stay away.
* Frank Capra – Referred to Ford as the "king of directors"
None of us could understand the reason for this appalling treatment, which the dear kind man in no way deserved.
The Irish Academy stated that through John Ford Ireland, they hope to lay the foundations for honoring, examining and learning from the work and legacy of John Ford, who is widely regarded as one of the most important and influential filmmakers of his generation.
The print was restored in New Zealand by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences before being returned to America, where it was given a "repremiere" at the Samuel Goldwyn Theater in Beverly Hills on August 31, 2010, featuring a newly commissioned score by Michael Mortilla.
Ford was also named Best Director by the New York Film Critics, and this was one of the few awards of his career that he collected in person (he generally shunned the Oscar ceremony).
Production fell behind schedule, delayed by constant bad weather and the intense cold, and Fox executives repeatedly demanded results, but Ford would either tear up the telegrams or hold them up and have stunt gunman Edward "Pardner" Jones shoot holes through the sender's name.
His only completed film of that year was the second instalment of his Cavalry Trilogy, ''She Wore a Yellow Ribbon'' (Argosy/RKO, 1949), starring John Wayne and Joanne Dru, with Victor McLaglen, John Agar, Ben Johnson, Mildred Natwick and Harry Carey Jr. Again filmed on location in Monument Valley, it was widely acclaimed for its stunning Technicolor cinematography (including the famous cavalry scene filmed in front of an oncoming storm); it won Winton Hoch the 1950 Academy Award for Best Color Cinematography and it did big business on its first release, grossing more than $5&nbsp;million worldwide.
''Fort Apache'' (Argosy/RKO, 1948) was the first part of Ford's so-called 'Cavalry Trilogy', all of which were based on stories by James Warner Bellah.
); he also employed gestural motifs in many films, notably the throwing of objects and the lighting of lamps, matches or cigarettes.
As the man related his misfortunes, Ford appeared to become enraged and then, to the horror of onlookers, he launched himself at the man, knocked him to the floor and shouted "How dare you come here like this?
Although it did far smaller business than most of his other films in this period, Ford cited ''Wagon Master'' as his personal favorite out of all his films, telling Peter Bogdanovich that it "came closest to what I had hoped to achieve".
Ford also championed the value and force of the group, as evidenced in his many military dramas ... (he) expressed a similar sentiment for camaraderie through his repeated use of certain actors in the lead and supporting roles ... he also felt an allegiance to places ...
Refusing a lucrative contract offered by Zanuck at 20th Century Fox that would have guaranteed him $600,000 per year, Ford launched himself as an independent director-producer and made many of his films in this period with Argosy Pictures Corporation, which was a partnership between Ford and his old friend and colleague Merian C. Cooper.
In 1973, he was awarded the Medal of Freedom by President Nixon, whose campaign he had publicly supported.
''Stagecoach'' became the first in the series of seven classic Ford Westerns filmed on location in Monument Valley, with additional footage shot at another of Ford's favorite filming locations, the Iverson Movie Ranch in Chatsworth, Calif., where he had filmed much of ''Wee Willie Winkie'' two years earlier.
It would be the best John Ford had directed if he had not already made ''The Informer''.
He also visited the set of ''The Alamo'', produced, directed by, and starring John Wayne, where his interference caused Wayne to send him out to film second-unit scenes which were never used (nor intended to be used) in the film.
Many of his supporting actors appeared in multiple Ford films, often over a period of several decades, including Ben Johnson, Chill Wills, Andy Devine, Ward Bond, Grant Withers, Mae Marsh, Anna Lee, Harry Carey, Jr., Ken Curtis, Frank Baker, Dolores del Río, Pedro Armendáriz, Hank Worden, John Qualen, Barry Fitzgerald, Arthur Shields, John Carradine, O.Z.
Noted critic Andrew Sarris described it as the movie that transformed Ford from "a storyteller of the screen into America's cinematic poet laureate".
Ford typically shot only the footage he needed and often filmed in sequence, minimizing the job of his film editors.
It starred veteran actor Charley Grapewin and the supporting cast included Ford regulars Ward Bond and Mae Marsh, with Francis Ford in an uncredited bit part; it is also notable for early screen appearances by future stars Gene Tierney and Dana Andrews.
Character names also recur in many Ford films—the name Quincannon, for example, is used in several films including ''The Lost Patrol'', ''Rio Grande'', ''She Wore A Yellow Ribbon'' and ''Fort Apache''.
Despite his often difficult and demanding personality, many actors who worked with Ford acknowledged that he brought out the best in them.
In a career that spanned more than 50&nbsp;years, Ford directed more than 140 films (although most of his silent films are now lost) and he is widely regarded as one of the most important and influential film-makers of his generation.
Carey credits Ford with the inspiration of Carey's final film, ''Comanche Stallion'' (2005).
The all-star cast was headed by Richard Widmark, with Carroll Baker, Karl Malden, Dolores del Río, Ricardo Montalbán, Gilbert Roland, Sal Mineo, James Stewart as Wyatt Earp, Arthur Kennedy as Doc Holliday, Edward G. Robinson, Patrick Wayne, Elizabeth Allen, Mike Mazurki and many of Ford's faithful Stock Company, including John Carradine, Ken Curtis, Willis Bouchey, James Flavin, Danny Borzage, Harry Carey, Jr., Chuck Hayward, Ben Johnson, Mae Marsh and Denver Pyle.
In the summer of 1955 he made ''Rookie of the Year'' (Hal Roach Studios) for the TV series ''Studio Directors Playhouse''; scripted by Frank S. Nugent, it featured Ford regulars John and Pat Wayne, Vera Miles and Ward Bond, with Ford himself appearing in the introduction.
O'Brien noticed this but deliberately ignored it, placing his hand ''on'' the railing instead; Ford would not explicitly correct him and he reportedly made O'Brien play the scene forty-two times before the actor relented and did it Ford's way.
It was nominated for seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director, and won two Oscars, for Best Supporting Actor (Thomas Mitchell) and Best Score.
A statue of Ford in Portland, Maine depicts him sitting in a director's chair.
Ford usually gave his actors little explicit direction, although on occasion he would casually walk through a scene himself, and actors were expected to note every subtle action or mannerism; if they did not, Ford would make them repeat the scene until they got it right, and he would often berate and belittle those who failed to achieve his desired performance.
It was made by Four Province Productions, a company established by Irish tycoon Lord Killanin, who had recently become Chair of the International Olympic Committee, and to whom Ford was distantly related.
I felt so right when I saw a film by John Ford and I was in front of those people.
Tracy plays an aging politician fighting his last campaign, with Jeffrey Hunter as his nephew.
He claimed he didn't vote for either Goldwater or Johnson in 1964, but he supported Richard Nixon in 1968 and became a supporter of the Vietnam War.
It was very successful, grossing over $3&nbsp;million in its first year, although the lead casting stretched credibility—the characters played by Stewart (then 53) and Wayne (then 54) were meant to be in their early 20s, and Ford reportedly considered casting a younger actor in Stewart's role but feared it would highlight Wayne's age.
It starred Victor McLaglen as The Sergeant—the role played by his brother Cyril McLaglen in the earlier version—with Boris Karloff, Wallace Ford, Alan Hale and Reginald Denny (who went on to found a company that made radio-controlled target aircraft during World War II).
''Stagecoach'' is significant for several reasons—it exploded industry prejudices by becoming both a critical and commercial hit, grossing over US$1&nbsp;million in its first year (against a budget of just under $400,000), and its success (along with the 1939 Westerns Destry Rides Again with Dietrich and Michael Curtiz's  Dodge City with Erroll Flynn) revitalized the moribund genre, showing that Westerns could be "intelligent, artful, great entertainment—and profitable".
