Smugglers violated the Navigation Acts by trading with ports outside of the British Empire and avoiding import taxes.
For instance, Edward Randolph, the appointed head of customs in New England brought 36 seizures to trial from 1680 to the end of 1682 – and all but two of these were acquitted.
After Parliament partially repealed the Townshend duties in 1770, Boston's boycott of British goods ended.
He used his influence to ensure that Massachusetts ratified the United States Constitution in 1788.
Hancock was celebrated as a hero for his role in getting the troops withdrawn.
After dragging out for nearly five months, the proceedings against Hancock were dropped without explanation.
Hancock governed until his surprise resignation on January 29, 1785.
Unsuccessful in this, they attempted to prevent the tea from being unloaded after three tea ships had arrived in Boston Harbor.
After its victory in the Seven Years' War (1756–1763), the British Empire was deep in debt.
The Hancocks lived a comfortable life, and owned one slave to help with household work.
On July 9, 1778, Hancock and the other Massachusetts delegates joined the representatives from seven other states in signing the Articles of Confederation; the remaining states were not yet prepared to sign, and the Articles would not be ratified until 1781.
Hancock worked hard, but he also enjoyed playing the role of a wealthy aristocrat and developed a fondness for expensive clothes.
Hancock joined the resistance to the Stamp Act by participating in a boycott of British goods, which made him popular in Boston.
Hancock's speech denounced the presence of British troops in Boston, who he said had been sent there "to enforce obedience to acts of Parliament, which neither God nor man ever empowered them to make".
A riot broke out when officials began to tow the ''Liberty'' out to the ''Romney''.
The turmoil that Hancock avoided ultimately blossomed as Shays's Rebellion, which Hancock's successor James Bowdoin had to deal with.
Despite his grand funeral, Hancock faded from popular memory after his death.
Lord Hillsborough, secretary of state for the colonies, sent four regiments of the British Army to Boston to support embattled royal officials, and instructed Governor Bernard to order the Massachusetts legislature to revoke the Circular Letter.
This meant that until a second broadside was issued six months later with all of the signers listed, Hancock was the only delegate whose name was publicly attached to the treasonous document.
When Harvard replaced Hancock as treasurer, his ego was bruised, and for years he declined to settle the account or pay the interest on the money he had held, despite pressure put on him by Bowdoin and other political opponents.
A challenge facing Hancock biographers is that, compared to prominent Founding Fathers like Jefferson and John Adams, Hancock left relatively few personal writings for historians to use in interpreting his life.
When Congress voted to thank Hancock for his service, Adams and the other Massachusetts delegates voted against the resolution, as did a few delegates from other states.
The household slaves continued to work for John and his aunt, but were eventually freed through the terms of Thomas Hancock's will; there is no evidence that John Hancock ever bought or sold slaves.
With John Adams serving as his lawyer, Hancock was prosecuted in a highly publicized trial by a vice admiralty court, which had no jury and did not always allow the defense to cross-examine the witnesses.
After much delay, the new Massachusetts Constitution finally went into effect in October 1780.
Upon graduation, he began to work for his uncle, just as the French and Indian War (1754–1763) had begun.
The next incident proved to be a major event in the coming of the American Revolution.
According to Proctor, Adams evidently projected his own disapproval of 1920s businessmen onto Hancock, and ended up misrepresenting several key events in Hancock's career.
In 1876, with the centennial of American independence renewing popular interest in the Revolution, plaques honoring Hancock were put up in Boston.
Hancock nominally commanded 6,000 militiamen in the campaign, although he let the professional soldiers do the planning and issue the orders.
Many places and things in the United States have been named in honor of John Hancock.
The British troops remained, however, and tensions between soldiers and civilians eventually resulted in the killing of five civilians in the Boston Massacre of March 1770.
He chaired the Marine Committee, and took pride in helping to create a small fleet of American frigates, including the USS ''Hancock'', which was named in his honor.
The accuracy of this characterization has been questioned.
If convicted, the defendants would have had to pay a penalty of triple the value of the wine, which came to £9,000.
Looking for new sources of revenue, the British Parliament sought, for the first time, to directly tax the colonies, beginning with the Sugar Act of 1764.
Over the next few months, Hancock was disabled by gout, which would trouble him with increasing frequency in the coming years.
On April 9, 1768, two customs employees (called ''tidesmen'') boarded Hancock's brig ''Lydia'' in Boston Harbor.
For the first time in years, Samuel Adams supported Hancock's position.
On June 10, customs officials seized the ''Liberty''.
Whigs insisted that the customs officials were exaggerating the danger so that London would send troops to Boston.
Lawyer and historian Bernard Knollenberg concluded that the customs officials had the right to seize Hancock's ship, but towing it out to the ''Romney'' had been illegal.
Legal historian John Phillip Reid argued that the testimony of both sides was so politically partial that it is not possible to objectively reconstruct the incident.
The first suit, filed on June 22, 1768, resulted in the confiscation of the ''Liberty'' in August.
When custom officers inspected the ship the next morning, they found that it contained 25 pipes of wine, just one fourth of the ship's carrying capacity.
Dickerson believed that there is no reliable evidence that Hancock was guilty in the ''Liberty'' case, and that the purpose of the trials was to punish Hancock for political reasons and to plunder his property.
Hancock was one of Boston's leaders during the crisis that led to the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War in 1775.
Ten states have a Hancock County named for him; other places named after him include Hancock, Massachusetts; Hancock, Michigan; Hancock, New Hampshire; Hancock, New York; and Mount Hancock in New Hampshire.
No full-length biography of Hancock appeared until the 20th century.
Hancock rejoined the Continental Congress in Pennsylvania in June 1778, but his brief time there was unhappy.
Hancock was put forth as a candidate in the 1789 U. S. presidential election.
Hancock paid the duties on the 25 pipes of wine, but officials suspected that he had arranged to have more wine unloaded during the night to avoid paying the duties for the entire cargo.
To some, it seemed that Adams and Hancock were indeed at odds: when Adams formed the Boston Committee of Correspondence in November 1772 to advocate colonial rights, Hancock declined to join, creating the impression that there was a split in the Whig ranks.
Before Hancock reported to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia, the Provincial Congress unanimously reelected him as their president in February 1775.
Historian James Truslow Adams portrayed Hancock as shallow and vain, easily manipulated by Adams.
Within a few months, Hancock had changed his mind, although he continued to disapprove of violence and the intimidation of royal officials by mobs.
Hutchinson knew that Hancock was bluffing, but the soldiers were in a precarious position when garrisoned within the town, and so Dalrymple agreed to remove both regiments to Castle William.
Hancock sent a copy of the Dunlap broadside to George Washington, instructing him to have it read to the troops "in the way you shall think most proper".
When he had resigned as governor in 1785, Hancock was again elected as a delegate to the Continental Congress, known as the Confederation Congress after the ratification of the Articles of Confederation in 1781.
Colonial merchants developed an impressive repertoire of evasive maneuvers to conceal the origin, nationality, routes and content of their illicit cargoes.
He and Lydia, along with several servants and slaves, lived in Hancock Manor on Beacon Hill.
In the rush of events at the onset of the Revolutionary War, Hancock had been unable to return the money and accounts to Harvard before leaving for Congress.
Hutchinson was replaced as governor by General Thomas Gage, who arrived in May 1774.
As a result, most depictions of Hancock have relied on the voluminous writings of his political opponents, who were often scathingly critical of him.
Hancock mostly remained silent during the contentious debates, but as the convention was drawing to close, he gave a speech in favor of ratification.
Hancock got along poorly with Samuel Adams, and missed his wife and newborn son.
He served more than two years in the Continental Congress in Philadelphia, and as president of Congress, was the first to sign the Declaration of Independence.
From Boston, Joseph Warren dispatched messenger Paul Revere to warn Hancock and Adams that British troops were on the move and might attempt to arrest them.
Hancock cited his failing health as the reason, but he may have become aware of growing unrest in the countryside and wanted to get out of office before the trouble came.
He served as president of the Second Continental Congress and was the first and third Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Adams "presented a series of disparaging incidents and anecdotes, sometimes partially documented, sometimes not documented at all, which in sum leave one with a distinctly unfavorable impression of Hancock".
Historian Oliver Dickerson argued that Hancock was the victim of an essentially criminal racketeering scheme perpetrated by Governor Bernard and the customs officials.
Quite the contrary."
He also had to handle a great deal of official correspondence, and he found it necessary to hire clerks at his own expense to help with the paperwork.
Hancock was offended, but he turned over more than £16,000, though not all of the records, to the college.
In 1896, a memorial column was finally erected over Hancock's essentially unmarked grave in the Granary Burying Ground.
Soon after, Parliament passed the 1765 Stamp Act, a tax on legal documents, such as wills, that had been levied in Britain for many years but which was wildly unpopular in the colonies, producing riots and organized resistance.
He was their idol."
But whatever their differences, Hancock and Adams came together again in 1773 with the renewal of major political turmoil.
When released, the tidesmen were subjected to "such threats and denunciation of vengeance, death and destruction in case they divulged the affair."
When one of them later managed to get into the hold, Hancock's men forced the tidesman back on deck.
He is primarily remembered by Americans for his large, flamboyant signature on the Declaration, so much so that "John Hancock" became, in the United States, an informal synonym for ''signature''.
Like everyone else, Hancock knew that George Washington was going to be elected as the first president, but Hancock may have been interested in being vice president, despite his poor health.
Hancock declined the office, however, not wanting to appear to have been co-opted by the governor.
In March 1765, he was elected as one of Boston's five selectmen, an office previously held by his uncle for many years.
He was experienced, having often presided over legislative bodies and town meetings in Massachusetts.
His position was somewhat ambiguous, because the role of the president was not fully defined, and it was not clear if Randolph had resigned or was on a leave of absence.
After Hancock's father died in 1744, John was sent to live with his uncle and aunt, Thomas Hancock and Lydia (Henchman) Hancock.
Hancock's support was probably a deciding factor in the ratification.
By March 5, 1774, he had recovered enough to deliver the fourth annual Massacre Day oration, a commemoration of the Boston Massacre.
Upon returning to Boston, Hancock gradually took over the House of Hancock as his uncle's health failed, becoming a full partner in January 1763.
Hancock's multiple roles gave him enormous influence in Massachusetts, and as early as January 1774 British officials had considered arresting him.
Hancock returned to Massachusetts and was elected governor of the Commonwealth, serving in that role for most of his remaining years.
Hancock's name was printed, not signed, on the Dunlap broadside; his iconic signature appears on a different document—a sheet of parchment that was carefully handwritten sometime after July 19 and signed on August 2 by Hancock and those delegates present.
Hancock tried to improve his relationship with Governor Hutchinson, who in turn sought to woo Hancock away from Adams's influence.
In an effort to remedy the perceived defects of the Articles of Confederation, delegates were first sent to the Annapolis Convention in 1786 and then to the Philadelphia Convention in 1787, where they drafted the United States Constitution, which was then sent to the states for ratification or rejection.
It was a fiasco: French Admiral d'Estaing abandoned the operation, after which Hancock's militia mostly deserted Sullivan's Continentals.
Meeting with Bernard's successor, Governor Thomas Hutchinson, and the British officer in command, Colonel William Dalrymple, Hancock claimed that there were 10,000 armed colonists ready to march into Boston if the troops did not leave.
Fifteen years older than Hancock, Adams had a somber, Puritan outlook that stood in marked contrast to Hancock's taste for luxury and extravagance.
Customs officials wanted to file charges, but the case was dropped when Massachusetts Attorney General Jonathan Sewall ruled that Hancock had broken no laws.
Apocryphal stories later portrayed Adams as masterminding Hancock's political rise so that the merchant's wealth could be used to further the Whig agenda.
The ''Liberty'' affair reinforced a previously made British decision to suppress unrest in Boston with a show of military might.
According to many historical accounts, Gage also instructed his men to arrest Hancock and Adams; if so, the written orders issued by Gage made no mention of arresting the Patriot leaders.
His reelection to the Massachusetts House in May was nearly unanimous.
Colonial merchants, even those not involved in smuggling, found the new regulations oppressive.
The speech, probably written by Hancock in collaboration with Adams, Joseph Warren, and others, was published and widely reprinted, enhancing Hancock's stature as a leading Patriot.
They cooperated in the revelation of private letters of Thomas Hutchinson, in which the governor seemed to recommend "an abridgement of what are called English liberties" to bring order to the colony.
Hancock returned to Boston in July 1778, motivated by the opportunity to finally lead men in combat.
John W. Tyler identified 23 smugglers in his study of more than 400 merchants in revolutionary Boston, but found no written evidence that Hancock was one of them.
The couple, who did not have any children of their own, became the dominant influence on John's life.
Thomas Hancock's highly successful business made him one of Boston's richest and best-known residents.
Their daughter Lydia Henchman Hancock was born in 1776 and died ten months later.
The purpose of the British expedition was to seize and destroy military supplies that the colonists had stored in Concord.
Opposed to Dickerson's interpretation were Kinvin Wroth and Hiller Zobel, the editors of John Adams's legal papers, who argued that "Hancock's innocence is open to question", and that the British officials acted legally, if unwisely.
By this time Hancock had become estranged from Samuel Adams, who disapproved of what he viewed as Hancock's vanity and extravagance, which Adams believed were inappropriate in a republican leader.
Hancock joined other Bostonians in calling for a boycott of British imports until the Townshend duties were repealed.
'''John Hancock ''' (October 8, 1793) was an American merchant, smuggler, statesman, and prominent Patriot of the American Revolution.
Dunlap produced the first published version of the Declaration, the widely distributed Dunlap broadside.
He sent Congress a letter of resignation in 1786.
The second trial began in October 1768, when charges were filed against Hancock and five others for allegedly unloading 100 pipes of wine from the ''Liberty'' without paying the duties.
The Sugar Act provoked outrage in Boston, where it was widely viewed as a violation of colonial rights.
Customs officials then used the ship for anti-smuggling operations until it was burned by angry colonists in Rhode Island the following year.
Like other presidents of Congress, Hancock's authority was mostly limited to that of a presiding officer.
Hancock governed Massachusetts through the end of the Revolutionary War and into an economically troubled postwar period, repeatedly winning reelection by wide margins.
In May, Hutchinson even approved Hancock's election to the Council, the upper chamber of the General Court, whose members were elected by the House but subject to veto by the governor.
From 1760 to 1761, Hancock lived in England while building relationships with customers and suppliers.
He suffered the misfortune of being known to later generations almost entirely through the judgments of his detractors, Tory and Whig."
Hancock's most influential 20th-century detractor was historian James Truslow Adams, who wrote negative portraits of Hancock in ''Harper's Magazine'' and the ''Dictionary of American Biography'' in the 1930s.
Nevertheless, Hancock used the improved relationship to resolve an ongoing dispute.
Hancock suffered some criticism for the debacle but emerged from his brief military career with his popularity intact.
Hancock was at the fateful meeting on December 16, where he reportedly told the crowd, "Let every man do what is right in his own eyes."
Biographer William Fowler concluded that while Hancock was probably engaged in some smuggling, most of his business was legitimate, and his later reputation as the "king of the colonial smugglers" is a myth without foundation.
According to historian Charles Akers, "The chief victim of Massachusetts historiography has been John Hancock, the most gifted and popular politician in the Bay State's long history.
The couple was married on August 28 in Fairfield, Connecticut.
Hancock did not take part in the Boston Tea Party that night, but he approved of the action, although he was careful not to publicly praise the destruction of private property.
Hancock did not serve in the first Congress, possibly for health reasons, or possibly to remain in charge while the other Patriot leaders were away.
To no one's surprise, Hancock was elected Governor of Massachusetts in a landslide, garnering over 90% of the vote.
The issue dragged on until after Hancock's death, when his estate finally paid the college more than £1,000 to resolve the matter.
On November 5, Hancock was elected as moderator at a Boston town meeting that resolved that anyone who supported the Tea Act was an "Enemy to America".
Hancock was immensely popular and unquestionably patriotic given his personal sacrifices and his leadership of the Second Continental Congress.
Hancock began his political career in Boston as a protégé of Samuel Adams, an influential local politician, though the two men later became estranged.
Although Washington was short on manpower, he nevertheless sent fifteen horsemen to accompany Hancock on his journey home.
John Hancock learned much about his uncle's business during these years and was trained for eventual partnership in the firm.
Hutchinson had dared to hope that he could win over Hancock and discredit Adams.
With his wife at his side, he died in bed on October 8, 1793, at 56 years of age.
When Bernard returned to England in 1769, Bostonians celebrated.
In their enforcement of the customs regulations, the Customs Board targeted Hancock, Boston's wealthiest Whig.
One month later, while the British warship HMS ''Romney'' was in port, one of the tidesmen changed his story, saying that he had been forcibly held on the ''Liberty'' on the orders of John Hancock while it had been illegally unloaded.
His house on Beacon Hill was torn down in 1863 after both the city of Boston and the Massachusetts legislature decided against maintaining it.
Aside from the ''Liberty'' affair, the degree to which Hancock was engaged in smuggling, which may have been widespread in the colonies, has been questioned.
This included the frequent use of fraudulent paperwork to make the cargo appear legal and authorised.
And much to the frustration of the British authorities, when seizures did happen local merchants were often able to use sympathetic provincial courts to reclaim confiscated goods and have their cases dismissed.
With the war underway, Hancock made his way to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia with the other Massachusetts delegates.
He was the son of the Reverend John Hancock of Braintree and Mary Hawke Thaxter (widow of Samuel Thaxter Junior), who was from nearby Hingham.
In 1777, a Harvard committee headed by James Bowdoin, Hancock's chief political and social rival in Boston, sent a messenger to Philadelphia to retrieve the money and records.
The confrontation escalated when sailors and marines coming ashore to seize the ''Liberty'' were mistaken for a press gang.
Parliament hoped that the new system would reduce smuggling and generate revenue for the government.
If Hancock was a smuggler, no documentation of this has been found.
Hancock took a hands-off approach to governing, avoiding controversial issues as much as possible.
The two men made an unlikely pair.
"Hancock's guilt or innocence and the exact charges against him", wrote historian John W. Tyler in 1986, "are still fiercely debated."
By order of acting governor Samuel Adams, the day of Hancock's burial was a state holiday; the lavish funeral was perhaps the grandest given to an American up to that time.
According to the Gregorian calendar, John Hancock was born on January 23, 1737; according to the Julian calendar then in use, the date was January 12, 1736.
Contrary to popular mythology, there was no ceremonial signing of the Declaration on July 4, 1776.
Singling out Hancock and Adams in this manner only added to their renown among Patriots.
After the riot, customs officials relocated to the ''Romney'', and then to Castle William (an island fort in the harbor), claiming that they were unsafe in town.
Their son John was born in 1778 and died in 1787 after suffering a head injury while ice skating.
The financial company passed on the name to the John Hancock Tower in Boston, the John Hancock Center in Chicago, as well as the John Hancock Student Village at Boston University.
Politics became quieter in Massachusetts, although tensions remained.
In April 1772, Hutchinson approved Hancock's election as colonel of the Boston Cadets, a militia unit whose primary function was to provide a ceremonial escort for the governor and the General Court.
He became a member of the Masonic Lodge of St. Andrew in October 1762, which connected him with many of Boston's most influential citizens.
Hancock, still considering himself a militia colonel, wanted to take the field with the Patriot militia at Lexington, but Adams and others convinced him to avoid battle, arguing that he was more valuable as a political leader than as a soldier.
The Massachusetts House, blaming Hutchinson for the military occupation of Boston, called for his removal as governor.
Hancock received only four electoral votes in the election, however, none of them from his home state; the Massachusetts electors all voted for another Massachusetts native, John Adams, who received the second-highest number of electoral votes and thus became vice president.
On May 24, 1775, he was unanimously elected President of the Continental Congress, succeeding Peyton Randolph after Henry Middleton declined the nomination.
The British government believed that a more efficient customs system was necessary because many colonial American merchants had been smuggling.
James Bowdoin, his principal opponent, was cast by Hancock's supporters as unpatriotic, citing among other things his refusal (which was due to poor health) to serve in the First Continental Congress.
Revere reached Lexington around midnight and gave the warning.
Given the clandestine nature of smuggling, records are scarce.
Years later, Adams wrote that Hancock had shown great disappointment at not getting the command for himself.
Soon after the battle, Gage issued a proclamation granting a general pardon to all who would "lay down their arms, and return to the duties of peaceable subjects"—with the exceptions of Hancock and Samuel Adams.
The decision had been prompted by Samuel Adams's 1768 Circular Letter, which was sent to other British American colonies in hopes of coordinating resistance to the Townshend Acts.
In October 1774, Gage canceled the scheduled meeting of the General Court.
According to Young, the conservative "new elite" of Massachusetts "was not comfortable with a rich man who pledged his fortune to the cause of revolution".
Although his finances had suffered greatly because of the war, he gave to the poor, helped support widows and orphans, and loaned money to friends.
After Congress approved the wording of the text on July 4, the ''fair copy'' was sent to be printed.
Since that time, historians have usually presented a more favorable portrait of Hancock, while acknowledging that he was not an important writer, political theorist, or military leader.
Hancock and others tried to force the resignation of the agents who had been appointed to receive the tea shipments.
As early as 1809, John Adams lamented that Hancock and Samuel Adams were "almost buried in oblivion".
Gage received a letter from Lord Dartmouth on April 14, 1775, advising him "to arrest the principal actors and abettors in the Provincial Congress whose proceedings appear in every light to be acts of treason and rebellion".
In December 1777, he was reelected as a delegate to the Continental Congress and as moderator of the Boston town meeting.
When Thomas Hancock died in August 1764, John inherited the business, Hancock Manor, two or three household slaves, and thousands of acres of land, becoming one of the wealthiest men in the colonies.
Bostonians were already angry because the captain of the ''Romney'' had been impressing colonists, and not just deserters from the Royal Navy, an arguably illegal activity.
Known as the engrossed copy, this is the famous document on display at the National Archives in Washington, D.C.
After Bostonians learned of the impending repeal of the Stamp Act, Hancock was elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in May of 1766.
Hancock's political success benefited from the support of Samuel Adams, the clerk of the House of Representatives and a leader of Boston's "popular party", also known as "Whigs" and later as "Patriots".
As in previous years, his philanthropy made him popular.
Hancock's previous elections to the Council had been vetoed, but now Hutchinson allowed the election to stand.
Hancock admired and supported General Washington, even though Washington politely declined Hancock's request for a military appointment.
Even with the support of Hancock and Adams, the Massachusetts convention narrowly ratified the Constitution by a vote of 187 to 168.
