Bill once bragged, "I cheat my boys every chance I get.
Additional fields were discovered in Burma and Java.
Rockefeller founded Standard Oil Company, Inc. in 1870 as an Ohio partnership with his brother William along with Henry Flagler, Jabez A. Bostwick, Samuel Andrews, and a silent partner, Stephen V. Harkness.
In full retirement at age 63, Rockefeller earned over $58 million in investments in 1902.
Born in upstate New York, he was shaped by his con man father and religious mother.
Rockefeller became an assistant bookkeeper at the age of 16, and went into a business partnership with Maurice B. Clark and his brothers at 20.
For with the measure you use, it will be measured to you."''
It added its own pipelines, tank cars, and home delivery network.
The casualties suffered at Ludlow were successfully labeled a massacre and mobilized public opinion against the Rockefellers and the coal industry.
He bought them out—a crucial step in his career.
According to the New York Times obituary, "it was estimated after Mr. Rockefeller retired from business that he had accumulated close to $1,500,000,000 out of the earnings of the Standard Oil trust and out of his other investments.
At the height of Rockefeller's power as monopolist there began rumors that the family guards as an "embarrassing secret".
It endowed Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health, the first of its kind.
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1911 that Standard Oil must be dismantled because it violated federal anti-trust laws; it was broken up into 34 separate entities that included companies that would become ExxonMobil, Chevron, and others.
He was able to do this through the creation of foundations that had a major effect on medicine, education and scientific research.
When he was a boy, his family moved to Moravia, New York, and in 1851 to Owego, New York, where he attended Owego Academy.
I would have deplored the necessity which compelled the officers of the company to resort to such measures to supplement the State forces to maintain law and order."
When testifying on the Ludlow Massacre, and asked what action he would have taken as Director, John D. Rockefeller stated, "I would have taken no action.
But in the aftermath of that battle, in 1879 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania indicted Rockefeller on charges of monopolizing the oil trade, starting an avalanche of similar court proceedings in other states and making a national issue of Standard Oil's business practices.
In September 1855, when Rockefeller was sixteen, he got his first job as an assistant bookkeeper working for a small produce commission firm called Hewitt & Tuttle.
Much of his giving was church-related.
Eliza, a homemaker and a devout Baptist, struggled to maintain a semblance of stability at home, as Bill was frequently gone for extended periods.
Although 85% of world crude production was still coming from Pennsylvania wells in the 1880s, drilling in Russia and Asia began to reach the world market.
Osgood left the company in 1904 and devoted his efforts to operating competing coal and coke operations.
He had many siblings, including William, who would enter the oil business with him.
Despite improving the quality and availability of kerosene products while greatly reducing their cost to the public (the price of kerosene dropped by nearly 80% over the life of the company), Standard Oil's business practices created intense controversy.
The name Rockenfeller (''from Rockenfeld'') refers to ''Rockenfeld'' () in the district of Neuwied.
One of Flagler's guests at the Ormond Hotel was his former business partner John D. Rockefeller, who first stayed at the hotel in 1914.
Then, he took a ten-week business course at Folsom's Commercial College, where he studied bookkeeping.
The daily management of the trust was turned over to John Dustin Archbold and Rockefeller bought a new estate, Pocantico Hills, north of New York City, turning more time to leisure activities including the new sports of bicycling and golf.
His foundations pioneered the development of medical research and were instrumental in the eradication of hookworm and yellow fever.
Biographer Ron Chernow wrote of Rockefeller:
The study had been undertaken by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching; it revolutionized the study of medicine in the United States.
Due to reduced demand for coal resulting from an economic downturn many of CF&I's coal mines never reopened and many men were thrown out of work.
Rockefeller was under great strain during the 1870s and 1880s when he was carrying out his plan of consolidation and integration and being attacked by the press.
By 1901 he did not have a hair on his body, and he began wearing wigs.
He gave money to the Union cause, as did many rich Northerners who avoided combat.
In the 1890s, Rockefeller expanded into iron ore and ore transportation, forcing a collision with steel magnate Andrew Carnegie, and their competition became a major subject of the newspapers and cartoonists.
In 1853, his family moved to Strongsville, Ohio and he attended Cleveland's Central High School, the first high school in Cleveland and the first free, public high school west of the Alleghenies.
It changed its name to Rockefeller University in 1965, after expanding its mission to include graduate education.
Few of the miners actually belonged to the union or participated in the strike call, but the majority honored it.
Rockefeller called her "Miss Tarbarrel" in private but held back in public saying only, "not a word about that misguided woman."
Standard countered and held back its shipments and, with the help of other railroads, started a price war that dramatically reduced freight payments and caused labor unrest.
He was a devout and devoted Northern Baptist, and supported many church-based institutions.
It claims a connection to 23 Nobel laureates.
Part of this scheme was the announcement of sharply increased freight charges.
*John Davison Rockefeller, Jr. (January 29, 1874 – May 11, 1960)
Rockefeller retained his nominal title as president until 1911 and he kept his stock.
In 1867, Henry Flagler entered the partnership.
To the critics Rockefeller replied, "In a business so large as ours&nbsp;... some things are likely to be done which we cannot approve.
In 1887, Congress created the Interstate Commerce Commission which was tasked with enforcing equal rates for all railroad freight, but by then Standard depended more on pipeline transport.
Though he had long maintained a policy of active silence with the press, he decided to make himself more accessible and responded with conciliatory comments such as "capital and labor are both wild forces which require intelligent legislation to hold them in restriction."
One of the most effective attacks on Rockefeller and his firm was the 1904 publication of ''The History of the Standard Oil Company,'' by Ida Tarbell, a leading muckraker.
The cartel received preferential treatment as a high-volume shipper, which included not just steep rebates of up to 50% for their product but also rebates for the shipment of competing products.
Rockefeller created the Rockefeller Foundation in 1913 to continue and expand the scope of the work of the Sanitary Commission, which was closed in 1915.
Standard Oil gradually gained almost complete control of oil refining and marketing in the United States through horizontal integration.
In between the births of Lucy and John, Bill and his mistress/housekeeper Nancy Brown had a daughter named Clorinda who died young.
As a percentage of the United States' GDP, no other American fortune — including those of Bill Gates or Sam Walton — would even come close.
On 10 January, 1870, Rockefeller abolished the partnership of Rockefeller, Andrews & Flagler, forming Standard Oil of Ohio, which rapidly became the most profitable refiner in Ohio.
He also had a deep love of music and dreamed of it as a possible career.
Rockefeller prevailed and the railroad sold its oil interests to Standard.
Rockefeller went steadily ahead in business from there, making money each year of his career.
The companies' combined net worth rose fivefold and Rockefeller’s personal wealth jumped to $900 million.
His image is an amalgam of all of these experiences and the many ways he was viewed by his contemporaries.
"I never had an animus against their size and wealth, never objected to their corporate form.
It would be Rockefeller's winter home during the latter part of his life.
Rockefeller gave $80 million to the University of Chicago under William Rainey Harper, turning a small Baptist college into a world-class institution by 1900.
Lamont Montgomery Bowers, Rockefeller's man, remained in the background.
In 1882, Rockefeller's lawyers created an innovative form of corporation to centralize their holdings, giving birth to the Standard Oil Trust.
His General Education Board made a dramatic impact by funding the recommendations of the ''Flexner Report'' of 1910.
Some of them are still among companies with the largest revenue.
It also built the Peking Union Medical College in China into a notable institution.
Rockefeller also gave considerable donations to Denison University and other Baptist colleges.
Tarbell's father had been driven out of the oil business during the "South Improvement Company" affair.
John Jr.'s youngest son David Rockefeller was a leading New York banker, serving for over 20 years as CEO of Chase Manhattan (now part of JPMorgan Chase).
Amid the frenetic expansion, Rockefeller began to think of retirement.
In spite of the formation of the trust and its perceived immunity from all competition, by the 1880s Standard Oil had passed its peak of power over the world oil market.
His mother was deeply religious and disciplined, and had a major influence on him in religious matters.
"All the fortune that I have made has not served to compensate me for the anxiety of that period."
In 1901, he founded the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York City.
He was an excellent debater and expressed himself precisely.
The strike, called in September 1913, by the United Mine Workers over the issue of union representation, was against coal mine operators in Huerfano and Las Animas counties in southern Colorado where the majority of CF&I's coal and coke production was located, and was fought by the coal mine operators association and its steering committee which included Welborn, president of CF&I, who was spokesman for the coal operators.
Rockefeller later commented:
The court ruled that the trust originated in illegal monopoly practices and ordered it to be broken up into 34 new companies.
The camp burned, and 15 women and children in the camp were burned to death.
By the time of his death in 1937, Rockefeller's remaining fortune, largely tied up in permanent family trusts, was estimated at $1.4 billion, while the total national GDP was $92 billion.
These certificates became traded by speculators, thus creating the first oil-futures market which effectively set spot market prices from then on.
The railroad, seeing Standard's incursion into the transportation and pipeline fields, struck back and formed a subsidiary to buy and build oil refineries and pipelines.
Standard Oil dominated the oil industry and was the first great business trust in the United States.
In 1864, Rockefeller married Laura Celestia "Cettie" Spelman (1839–1915), daughter of Harvey Buell Spelman and Lucy Henry.
More threatening to Standard's power was the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, originally used to control unions, but later central to the breakup of the Standard Oil trust.
Striking miners were forced to abandon their homes in company towns and lived in tent cities erected by the union such as the tent city at Ludlow, a railway stop north of Trinidad.
By the time he was twenty, his charity exceeded ten percent of his income.
On Gates' advice, Rockefeller became one of the first great benefactors of medical science.
This touched off a firestorm of protest from independent oil well owners, including boycotts and vandalism, which led to the discovery of Standard Oil's part in the deal.
A major New York refiner, Charles Pratt and Company, headed by Charles Pratt and Henry H. Rogers, led the opposition to this plan, and railroads soon backed off.
Rockefeller's fourth main philanthropy, the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial Foundation, was created in 1918.
A Baptist preacher once encouraged him to ''"make as much money as he could, and then give away as much as he could"''.
I was willing that they should combine and grow as big and wealthy as they could, but only by legitimate means.
With the help of funds from the Rockefeller Foundation relief programs were organized by the Colorado Committee on Unemployment and Relief, a state agency created by Governor Carlson, offering work to unemployed miners building roads and doing other useful projects.
Thrifty by nature and necessity, she taught her son that "willful waste makes woeful want".
Bill was first a lumberman and then a traveling salesman who identified himself as a "botanic physician" and sold elixirs.
It kept oil prices low to stave off competitors, made its products affordable to the average household, and, to increase market penetration, sometimes sold below cost.
Its share of world oil refining topped out above 90% but slowly dropped to about 80% for the rest of the century.
Full of work and full of play—
In 1859, Rockefeller went into the produce commission business with a partner, Maurice B. Clark, and they raised $4,000 (equivalent to $ in  dollars) in capital.
According to some methods of wealth calculation, Rockefeller's net worth over the last decades of his life would easily place him as the wealthiest known person in recent history.
The firm was attacked by journalists and politicians throughout its existence, in part for these monopolistic methods, giving momentum to the antitrust movement.
The "trust" was a corporation of corporations, and the entity's size and wealth drew much attention.
In 1901, U.S. Steel, then controlled by J. Pierpont Morgan, having bought Andrew Carnegie's steel assets, offered to buy Standard's iron interests as well.
In 1866, his brother William Rockefeller Jr. built another refinery in Cleveland and brought John into the partnership.
Burton Folsom Jr. has noted, ''he sometimes gave tens of thousands of dollars to Christian groups, while, at the same time, he was trying to borrow over a million dollar to expand his business.
Throughout his life, Bill was notorious for shady schemes.
His church was later affiliated with the Northern Baptist Convention, which formed from American Baptists in the North with ties to their historic missions to establish schools and colleges for freedmen in the South after the American Civil War.
In 1867, Henry M. Flagler became a partner, and the firm of Rockefeller, Andrews & Flagler was established.
He founded the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission in 1909, an organization that eventually eradicated the hookworm disease, which had long plagued rural areas of the American South.
Ohio was especially vigorous in applying its state anti-trust laws, and finally forced a separation of Standard Oil of Ohio from the rest of the company in 1892, the first step in the dissolution of the trust.
Grandchildren Abigail Aldrich "Abby" Rockefeller and John Davison Rockefeller III became philanthropists.
Grandson Laurance Spelman Rockefeller became a conservationist.
Undeterred, though vilified for the first time by the press, Rockefeller continued with his self-reinforcing cycle of buying competing refiners, improving the efficiency of his operations, pressing for discounts on oil shipments, undercutting his competition, making secret deals, raising investment pools, and buying rivals out.
The public and the press were immediately suspicious of this new legal entity, and other businesses seized upon the idea and emulated it, further inflaming public sentiment.
The oldest existing building on Spelman's campus, Rockefeller Hall, is named after him.
Henry Flagler, one of the co-founders of Standard Oil along with Rockefeller, bought the Ormond Hotel in 1890, located in Ormond Beach, Florida, two years after it opened.
He bought a residence in 1884 on 54th Street near the mansions of other magnates such as William Henry Vanderbilt.
I only know he conceived the idea."
Flagler expanded it to accommodate 600 guests and the hotel soon became one in a series of Gilded Age hotels catering to passengers aboard Flagler's Florida East Coast Railway.
While traveling the South, he would donate large sums of money to churches belonging to the Southern Baptist Convention, various Black churches, as well as other Christian denominations.
Rockefeller had a long and controversial career in the oil industry followed by a long career in philanthropy.
Over time foreign competition and new finds abroad eroded his dominance.
Rockefeller adhered to total abstinence from alcohol and tobacco throughout his life.
In 1884, Rockefeller provided major funding for a college in Atlanta for African-American women, which became Spelman College (named for Rockefeller's in-laws who were ardent abolitionists before the Civil War).
While his brother Frank fought in the Civil War, Rockefeller tended his business and hired substitute soldiers.
Rockefeller had enormous influence on the railroad industry, which transported his oil around the country.
In the aftermath, Rockefeller's control over the oil industry was somewhat reduced but over the next 10 years, the breakup also proved immensely profitable for him.
He worked long hours and delighted, as he later recalled, in "all the methods and systems of the office."
Despite his father's absences and frequent family moves, young John was a well-behaved, serious, and studious boy.
At last in 1911, the Supreme Court of the United States found Standard Oil Company of New Jersey in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
Rockefeller, who had rarely sold shares, held over 25% of Standard's stock at the time of the breakup.
Through this, he supported work in the social studies; this was later absorbed into the Rockefeller Foundation.
The National Petroleum Exchange opened in Manhattan in late 1882 to facilitate the trading of oil futures.
If they refused his offer, he told them he would run them into bankruptcy and then cheaply buy up their assets at auction.
He was a faithful congregant of the Erie Street Baptist Mission Church, where he taught Sunday school, and served as a trustee, clerk, and occasional janitor.
His fortune was mainly used to create the modern systematic approach of targeted philanthropy.
This was probably the greatest amount of wealth that any private citizen had ever been able to accumulate by his own efforts."
They had four daughters and one son together.
He borrowed heavily, reinvested profits, adapted rapidly to changing markets, and fielded observers to track the quickly expanding industry.
These included, among many others, Continental Oil, which became Conoco, now part of ConocoPhillips; Standard of Indiana, which became Amoco, now part of BP; Standard of California, which became Chevron; Standard of New Jersey, which became Esso (and later, Exxon), now part of ExxonMobil; Standard of New York, which became Mobil, now part of ExxonMobil; and Standard of Ohio, which became Sohio, now part of BP.
As he said, "God gave me money", and he did not apologize for it.
Under the protection of the National Guard, some miners returned to work and some strikebreakers imported from the eastern coalfields joined them as Guard troops protected their movements.
Control was passed from the Iowa Group to Gould and Rockefeller interests in 1903 with Gould in control and Rockefeller and Gates representing a minority interests.
Great-grandson John Davison "Jay" Rockefeller IV served from 1985 until 2015 as a Democratic Senator from West Virginia after serving as governor of West Virginia, and another, Winthrop, served as Lieutenant Governor of Arkansas for a decade.
After wholesale foodstuffs, the partners built an oil refinery in 1863 in "The Flats", then Cleveland's burgeoning industrial area.
Rockefeller attended Baptist churches every Sunday; when traveling he would often attend services at African-American Baptist congregations, leaving a substantial donation.
Rockefeller finally gave up his dream of controlling all the world's oil refining, he admitted later, "We realized that public sentiment would be against us if we actually refined all the oil."
By the end of the 1870s, Standard was refining over 90% of the oil in the U.S. Rockefeller had already become a millionaire ($1 million is equivalent to $ in  dollars).
He went on a massive buying spree acquiring leases for crude oil production in Ohio, Indiana, and West Virginia, as the original Pennsylvania oil fields began to play out.
The commercial oil business was then in its infancy.
A Standard Oil of Ohio successor of Rockefeller
By 1868, with Rockefeller continuing practices of borrowing and reinvesting profits, controlling costs, and using refineries' waste, the company owned two Cleveland refineries and a marketing subsidiary in New York; it was the largest oil refinery in the world.
The company's vast American empire included 20,000 domestic wells, 4,000 miles of pipeline, 5,000 tank cars, and over 100,000 employees.
A good measure, pressed down, shaken together and running over, will be poured into your lap.
Gould, via Frederick Taylor Gates, Rockefeller's financial adviser, brought John D. Rockefeller in to help finance the loan.
Rather than try to influence the price of crude oil directly, Standard Oil had been exercising indirect control by altering oil storage charges to suit market conditions.
The Paris Rothschilds jumped into the fray providing financing.
In less than four months in 1872, in what was later known as "The Cleveland Conquest" or "The Cleveland Massacre", Standard Oil absorbed 22 of its 26 Cleveland competitors.
He was particularly adept at calculating transportation costs, which served him well later in his career.
He said later, "Her judgment was always better than mine.
He adopted the name William Levingston and married, as a bigamist in Norwich, Ontario, Margaret L. Allen (1834–1910), without issue.
He came to associate the church with charity.
In February 1914 a substantial portion of the troops were withdrawn, but a substantial contingent remained at Ludlow.
Pratt's son, Charles Millard Pratt, became Secretary of Standard Oil.
He and all other stockholders received proportionate shares in each of the 34 companies.
Rockefeller liked the Ormond Beach area so much that after four seasons at the hotel, he bought an estate in Ormond Beach called "The Casements".
In 1902, facing cash flow problems, John Cleveland Osgood turned to George Jay Gould a principle stockholder of the Denver and Rio Grande for a loan.
He felt at ease and righteous following Methodist preacher John Wesley's dictum, "gain all you can, save all you can, and give all you can."
Standard's most potent weapons against competitors were underselling, differential pricing, and secret transportation rebates.
Standard Oil had gained an aura of invincibility, always prevailing against competitors, critics, and political enemies.
That orderly, economic, efficient flow is what we now, many years later, call 'vertical integration'  I do not know whether Mr. Rockefeller ever used the word 'integration'.
Bower was relieved of duty and Welborn restored to control in 1915 and industrial relations improved.
Later in his life, Rockefeller recalled: ''"It was at this moment, that the financial plan of my life was formed"''.
The refinery was directly owned by Andrews, Clark & Company, which was composed of Clark & Rockefeller, chemist Samuel Andrews, and M. B. Clark's two brothers.
*Elizabeth "Bessie" Rockefeller (August 23, 1866 – November 14, 1906)
Critics found his writing to be sanitized and disingenuous and thought that statements such as "the underlying, essential element of success in business is to follow the established laws of high-class dealing" seemed to be at odds with his true business methods.
He was well positioned to take advantage of postwar prosperity and the great expansion westward fostered by the growth of railroads and an oil-fueled economy.
He ran it until officially retiring in 1897.
The union was forced to discontinue strike benefits in February 1915.
The locals referred to the mysterious but fun-loving man as "Big Bill" and "Devil Bill".
As a youth, Rockefeller reportedly said that his two great ambitions were to make $100 thousand (equivalent to $ in  dollars) and to live 100 years.
His philosophy of giving was founded upon biblical principles.
He was a sworn foe of conventional morality who had opted for a vagabond existence and who returned to his family infrequently.
Scabs were threatened and sometimes attacked.
Rockefeller believed in the Efficiency Movement, arguing that: "To help an inefficient, ill-located, unnecessary school is a waste&nbsp;... it is highly probable that enough money has been squandered on unwise educational projects to have built up a national system of higher education adequate to our needs, if the money had been properly directed to that end."
I dropped the worry on the way—
Biographer Allan Nevins, answering Rockefeller's enemies, concluded:
Rockefeller was an abolitionist who voted for President Abraham Lincoln and supported the then-new Republican Party.
As a result, Rockefeller and his associates owned dozens of separate corporations, each of which operated in just one state; the management of the whole enterprise was rather unwieldy.
For many of his competitors, Rockefeller had merely to show them his books so they could see what they were up against and make them a decent offer.
But they had never played fair, and that ruined their greatness for me."
*Edith Rockefeller (August 31, 1872 – August 25, 1932)
In keeping with the historic missions of the Baptists, it was especially active in supporting black schools in the South.
