Because ''Marbury v. Madison'' decided that a jurisdictional statute passed by Congress was unconstitutional, that was technically a victory for the Jefferson administration (so it could not easily complain).
Playing chess was "a favorite pastime" of Chief Justice Marshall.
Also, in 1914, an engraved portrait of Marshall was used as the central vignette on series 1914 $500 federal reserve notes.
In 1797, he accepted when President John Adams appointed him to a three-member commission to represent the United States in France.
He was Secretary of State under President John Adams from 1800 to 1801.
Although books were a rarity for most in the territory, Thomas Marshall's library was exceptional.
Nevertheless, Marshall built up the third branch of the federal government, and augmented federal power in the name of the Constitution, and the rule of law.
President Thomas Jefferson took the position that the Court could not give him a mandamus (i.e.
Like ''Marbury'', this ''Cohens'' case was largely about the Supreme Court's jurisdiction.
In particular, he repeatedly confirmed the supremacy of federal law over state law, and supported an expansive reading of the enumerated powers.
He adjusted his role to accommodate other members of the court as they developed.
After the Court came to a decision, he would usually write it up himself.
If the legislative power of the Union can reach them, it must be for national purposes; it must be where the power is expressly given for a special purpose, or is clearly incidental to some power which is expressly given.
For example, he said, "Congress has a right to punish murder in a fort, or other place within its exclusive jurisdiction; but no general right to punish murder committed within any of the States."
His body, which was taken to Richmond, lies in Shockoe Hill Cemetery.
In this case, he established that the Federal judiciary could hear appeals from decisions of state courts in criminal cases as well as the civil cases over which the court had asserted jurisdiction in ''Martin v. Hunter's Lessee'' (1816).
He helped to establish the Supreme Court as the final authority on the meaning of the Constitution in cases and controversies that must be decided by the federal courts.
In contrast to Waldron and Ackerman, Ely and Dworkin were long-time advocates of the principle of defending the Constitution upon the lines of support they saw as strongly associated with enhanced versions of judicial review in the federal government.
Although Marshall won before Chancellor George Wythe and the specific slaves were ultimately freed, in the final opinions in that case, Virginia justice Spencer Roane (who would become Marshall's rival) began enunciating the rationale for slaveholding as a property right, contrary to the lofty principles of natural law enunciated by Judge Wythe (and his former pupil Thomas Jefferson in the U.S.
From a young age, he was noted for his good humor and black eyes, which were "strong and penetrating, beaming with intelligence and good nature".
According to ''The New York Times'', "Marshall did not intend his words as license for Congress to do whatever it wishes."
In 1795, Marshall declined Washington's offer of Attorney General of the United States and, in 1796, declined to serve as minister to France.
An engraved portrait of Marshall appears on U.S. paper money on the series 1890 and 1891 treasury notes.
The Marshall family occupied Monumental Church's pew No.
Having grown from a Reformed Church academy, Marshall College, named upon the death of Chief Justice John Marshall, officially opened in 1836 with a well-established reputation.
The Marshalls had long before decided that John was to be a lawyer.
As a result, the jury acquitted the defendant, leading to increased animosity between the President and the Chief Justice.
... After striking out every thing which in my judgment could be properly excluded the volume will contain at least 400 pages."
In 1782, Marshall won a seat in the Virginia House of Delegates, in which he served until 1789 and again from 1795 to 1796.
When John was 17, Thomas Marshall built Oak Hill there, a seven-room frame home with four rooms on the first floor and three above.
It was the first of dozens of communities and counties named for him.
Marshall was confirmed by the Senate on January 27, 1801, and received his commission on January 31, 1801.
The case allowed Marshall to proclaim the doctrine of judicial review, which reserves to the Supreme Court final authority to judge whether or not actions of the president or of the congress are within the powers granted to them by the Constitution.
The Marshall Court struck down an act of Congress in only one case (''Marbury v. Madison'' in 1803) but that established the Court as a center of power that could overrule the Congress, the President, the states, and all lower courts if that is what a fair reading of the Constitution required.
In 1833 he wrote, "I have at length completed an abridgment of the Life of Washington for the use of schools.
Marshall also left Richmond for several weeks each year to serve on the circuit court in Raleigh, North Carolina.
William Blackstone's ''Commentaries on the Laws of England'' had been published in America and Thomas Marshall bought a copy for his own use and for John to read and study.
Afterward, Thomas Marshall arranged for a minister to be sent who could double as a teacher for the local children.
His opinions were workmanlike but not especially eloquent or subtle.
The Constitution does not explicitly give judicial review to the Court, and Jefferson was very angry with Marshall's position, for he wanted the President to decide whether his acts were constitutional or not.
He served first as a Lieutenant in the Culpeper Minutemen from 1775 to 1776, and went on to serve as a Lieutenant and then a Captain in the Eleventh Virginia Continental Regiment from 1776 to 1780.
His influence on learned men of the law came from the charismatic force of his personality and his ability to seize upon the key elements of a case and make highly persuasive arguments  Together with his vision of the future greatness of the nation, these qualities are apparent in his historic decisions and gave him the sobriquet, ''The Great Chief Justice''.
During his time in the army, he enjoyed running races with the other soldiers and was nicknamed Silverheels for the white heels his mother had sewn into his stockings.
On May 7, 1799, President Adams nominated Congressman Marshall as Secretary of War.
Jay's letter arrived on January 20, 1801, and as there was precious little time left, Adams surprised Marshall, who was with him at the time and able to accept the nomination immediately.
Flanders also wrote that the reader "cannot fail to be impressed with the vigor, rigorous analysis, and close reasoning that mark every sentence of it."
John Marshall was of almost entirely English ancestry, though his mother also had some distant Scottish ancestry as well.
His collection of literature, some of which was borrowed from Lord Fairfax, was relatively substantial and included works by the ancient Roman historian Livy, the ancient Roman poet Horace, and the English writers Alexander Pope, John Dryden, John Milton, and William Shakespeare.
Marshall had charm, humor, a quick intelligence, and the ability to bring men together.
''Marbury'' was the first and only case in which the Marshall Court ruled an act of Congress unconstitutional, and thereby reinforced the doctrine of judicial review.
Marshall's forceful personality allowed him to steer his fellow Justices; only once did he find himself on the losing side in a constitutional case.
In 1828, Marshall  presided over a convention to promote internal improvements in Virginia.
(William McKinley replaced Marshall on the $500 bill in 1928.)
A number of high schools around the nation have also been named for him.
That in turn lowered prices and promoted free enterprise.
In 1799, Marshall reluctantly ran for a seat in the United States House of Representatives.
When the Court was in session in Washington, the justices boarded together in the same rooming house, avoided outside socializing, and discussed each case intently among themselves.
John remained at the academy one year, after which he was brought home.
According to the Oyez Project, Marshall's impact on constitutional law is without peer, and his imprint on the Court's jurisprudence remains indelible.
President John Adams offered this appraisal of Marshall's impact: "My gift of John Marshall to the people of the United States was the proudest act of my life."
He remained a stalwart advocate of Federalism and a nemesis of the Jeffersonian school of government throughout its heyday.
The Constitution itself is the supreme law, and when the Court believes that a specific law or action is in violation of it, the Court must uphold the Constitution and set aside that other law or action, assuming that a party has standing to properly invoke the Court's jurisdiction.
The Virginia General Assembly elected him to serve on the Council of State later in the same year.
The college went on to become one of the nation's foremost liberal arts colleges.
Prior to the trial, President Jefferson condemned Burr and strongly supported conviction.
Marshall himself never declared another law of Congress or act of a president unconstitutional.
Thomas Marshall was not yet well established, so he leased it from Colonel Richard Henry Lee.
After all, Marshall also wrote:
Most notably, he reinforced the principle that federal courts are obligated to exercise judicial review, by disregarding purported laws if they violate the constitution.
Marshall himself was not religious, and although his grandfather was a priest, never formally joined a church.
Marshall's opinion expressed and fixed in the American tradition and legal system a more basic theory—government under law.
His influential rulings reshaped American government, making the Supreme Court the final arbiter of constitutional interpretation.
Lawyers appearing before the court, including the most brilliant in the United States, typically gave oral arguments and often did not present written briefs.
It was then revealed that the land grant had been approved in return for bribes, and therefore voters rejected most of the incumbents; the next legislature repealed the law and voided all subsequent transactions (even honest ones) that resulted from the Yazoo land scandal.
Previously, each Justice would author a separate opinion (known as a ''seriatim'' opinion) as was done in the Virginia Supreme Court of his day and is still done today in the United Kingdom and Australia.
The first volume was reissued in 1824 separately as ''A History of the American Colonies''.
Decisions were quickly made usually in a matter of days.
As Secretary of State, Marshall directed the negotiation of the Convention of 1800, which ended the Quasi-War with France and brought peace to the new nation.
In his 34-year tenure, Marshall gave it the energy, weight, and dignity of what many would say is a third co-equal branch of the U.S. government.
Marshall wrote that his court did have appellate jurisdiction, but then went on to affirm the decision of the Virginia Supreme Court on the merits.
an order) even if the Court had jurisdiction:
Those who apply the rule to particular cases must, of necessity, expound and interpret that rule.
Although John Marshall lived his later life in Richmond, Virginia, and Washington D.C., he kept his Fauquier County property, making substantial improvements to the house until he transferred the property as  a wedding present to his eldest son Thomas in 1809.
There were no schools in the region at the time, so home schooling was pursued.
''Marbury v. Madison'' (1803) was the first important case before Marshall's Court.
Marshall also got rid of the tradition that U.S. Supreme Court justices had inherited from the British of wearing ornate powdered wigs and red robes with ermine trim.
Daniel Webster argued that the Constitution, by empowering Congress to regulate interstate commerce, implied that states do not have any concurrent power to regulate interstate commerce.
It is the peculiar province of the legislature to prescribe general rules for the government of society; the application of those rules to individuals in society would seem to be the duty of other departments.
According to New Jersey Senator Jonathan Dayton, the Senate finally relented "lest another not so qualified, and more disgusting to the Bench, should be substituted, and because it appeared that this gentleman Marshall was not privy to his own nomination".
Under Marshall, however, the Supreme Court adopted the practice of handing down a single opinion of the Court, allowing it to present a clear rule.
Henry Flanders in his biography of Marshall remarked that Marshall's argument in ''Ware v. Hylton'' "elicited great admiration at the time of its delivery, and enlarged the circle of his reputation."
However, he regularly curbed his own viewpoints, preferring to arrive at decisions by consensus.
While Marshall was attentive when listening to oral arguments and often persuaded other justices to adopt his interpretation of the law, he was not widely read in the law, and seldom cited precedents.
When Thomson left at the end of the year, John had begun reading and transcribing Horace and Livy.
The immediate impact of the historic decision in ''Gibbons'' was to end many state-granted monopolies.
In 1825, as Chief Justice, Marshall wrote an opinion in the case of the captured slave ship ''Antelope'', in which he acknowledged that slavery was against natural law, but upheld the continued enslavement of approximately 1/3 of the ship's cargo (although the remainder were to be sent to Liberia).
Virginia State Route 55, from Front Royal, Virginia to Gainesville, Virginia, is named "John Marshall Highway" in Marshall's honor.
In June 1835, Marshall again traveled to Philadelphia for medical treatment, where he died on July 6 at the age of 79, having served as Chief Justice for over 34 years.
At the age of twelve John had transcribed Alexander Pope's ''An Essay on Man'' and some of his ''Moral Essays''.
After a merger with Franklin College in 1853, the school was renamed Franklin and Marshall College.
In ''Mima Queen v. John Hepburn'' the majority opinion written by Marshall argued against the use of hearsay evidence stating "That hearsay evidence is incompetent to establish any specific fact, which fact is in its nature susceptible of being proved by witnesses who speak from their own knowledge."
The following year, Marshall was a delegate to the state constitutional convention of 1829–30, where he was again joined by fellow American statesman and loyal Virginians, James Madison and James Monroe, although all were quite old by that time (Madison was 78, Monroe 71, and Marshall 74).
The statue was originally dedicated in 1884.
All of the Marshall children were accomplished, literate, and self-educated under their parents' supervision.
Although his congressional district (which included the city of Richmond) favored the Democratic-Republican Party, Marshall won the race, in part due to his conduct during the XYZ Affair and in part due to the support of Patrick Henry.
The oldest of fifteen, John had eight sisters and six brothers.
The new farm was located adjacent to the main stage road (now US&nbsp;17) between Salem (the modern day village of Marshall, Virginia) and Delaplane.
The Court held that the bank was authorized by the clause of the Constitution that states that Congress can implement its powers by making laws that are "necessary and proper", which Marshall said does not refer to one ''single'' way that Congress is allowed to act, but rather refers to ''various'' possible acts that implement all constitutionally established powers.
In Marshall's day, the Court had not yet been given the discretion whether or not to take cases.
The Abridgment was not published until 1838, three years after Marshall died.
Marshall emphasized that the rescinding act would seize property from individuals who had honestly acquired it, and transfer that property to the public without any compensation.
Let the end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the constitution, and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the constitution, are constitutional.
The Marshalls called their new home "the Hollow", and the ten years they resided there were John Marshall's formative years.
If two laws conflict with each other, the Courts must decide on the operation of each.
Marshall's handling of the affair, as well as public resentment toward the French, made him popular with the American public when he returned to the United States.
The justices did not have clerks, so they listened closely to the oral arguments, and decided among themselves what the decision should be.
This diplomatic scandal became known as the XYZ Affair, inflaming anti-French opinion in the United States.
He was especially active in defense of Article III, which provides for the Federal judiciary.
The University of Virginia recently placed many volumes of Marshall's papers online as a searchable digital edition.
Among his classmates was James Monroe, the future president.
The decision in ''Cohens'' demonstrated that the federal judiciary can act directly on private parties and state officials, and has the power to declare and impose on the states the Constitution and federal laws, but Marshall stressed that federal laws have limits.
Marshall County, Kentucky was named in his honor.
''Fletcher v. Peck'' (1810) was the first case in which the Supreme Court ruled a state law unconstitutional, though the Court had long before voided a state law as conflicting with the combination of the Constitution together with a treaty (Marshall had represented the losing side in that 1796 case).
While in Richmond, Marshall attended St. John's Church on Church Hill until 1814 when he led the movement to hire Robert Mills as architect of Monumental Church, which was near his home and rebuilt to commemorate 72 people who died in a theater fire.
These rare notes are in great demand by note collectors today.
As a young attorney, he represented prominent Virginia abolitionist Robert Pleasants, who sought to enforce his father's will and free slaves, although such was illegal at the time his late father had written the will.
Marshall wrote nearly half the decisions during his 33 years in office.
As Oliver Wolcott observed when both he and Marshall served in the Adams administration, Marshall had the knack of "putting his own ideas into the minds of others, unconsciously to them".
Marshall was among many slave owners who supported the abolition movement.
Chief Justice Marshall avoided that issue about the exclusivity of the federal commerce power because that issue was not necessary to decide the case.
In his last will and testament, Marshall gave his elderly manservant the choice either of freedom and travel to Liberia, or continued enslavement under his choice of Marshall's children.
Marshall greatly admired George Washington, and between 1804 and 1807 published an influential five-volume biography.
Marshall was also elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1813.
While Marshall officially took office on February 4, at the request of the President he continued to serve as Secretary of State until Adams' term expired on March 4.
As Marshall was almost always the author of this opinion, he essentially became the Court's sole spokesman in important cases.
Marshall, along with Daniel Webster (who argued some of the cases), was the leading Federalist of the day, pursuing Federalist Party approaches to build a stronger federal government over the opposition of the Jeffersonian Republicans, who wanted stronger state governments.
In 1773, the Marshall family moved once again.
To say that the intention of the instrument must prevail; that this intention must be collected from its words; that its words are to be understood in that sense in which they are generally used by those for whom the instrument was intended; that its provisions are neither to be restricted into insignificance, nor extended to objects not comprehended in them, nor contemplated by its framers—is to repeat what has been already said more at large, and is all that can be necessary.
Marshall loved his home, built in 1790, in Richmond, Virginia, and spent as much time there as possible in quiet contentment.
While Marshall's opinion in ''McCulloch'' was consistent with ''Marbury v. Madison'', it cut the other way by affirming the constitutionality of a federal statute while preventing states from passing laws that violate federal law.
In ''Fletcher'', the Georgia legislature had approved a land grant, known as the Yazoo Land Act of 1795.
The longest-serving Chief Justice and the fourth longest-serving justice in U.S. Supreme Court history, Marshall dominated the Court for over three decades and played a significant role in the development of the American legal system.
Marshall was therefore based in Richmond, his hometown, for most of the year.
With his associate justices, especially Joseph Story, William Johnson, and Bushrod Washington, Marshall's Court brought to life the constitutional standards of the new nation.
While Chief Justice, he was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1804.
He also maintained the D. S. Tavern property in Albemarle County, Virginia from 1810–1813.
Baume identified John Hart Ely alongside Dworkin as the foremost defenders of Marshall's principle in recent years, while the opposition to this principle of "compatibility" were identified as Bruce Ackerman and Jeremy Waldron.
Thomas Marshall was employed in Fauquier County as a surveyor and land agent by Lord Fairfax, which provided Marshall with a substantial income.
The enumeration presupposes something not enumerated; and that something, if we regard the language or the subject of the sentence, must be the exclusively internal commerce of a state.....Inspection laws, quarantine laws, health laws of every description, as well as laws for regulating the internal commerce of a State, and those which respect turnpike roads, ferries, &c., are....subject to State legislation.
I have endeavored to compress it as much as possible.
Of course, the steamboats in this case did cross a state line, but Marshall suggested that his opinion had a broader scope than that.
''Cohens v. Virginia'' (1821) displayed Marshall's nationalism as he enforced the supremacy of federal law over state law, under the Constitution's Supremacy Clause.
John's father superintended the English part of his education.
After completing the revision to his biography of Washington, Marshall prepared an abridgment.
Historians mostly agree that the framers of the Constitution did plan for the Supreme Court to have some sort of judicial review; Marshall made their goals operational.
However, when the envoys arrived, the French refused to conduct diplomatic negotiations unless the United States paid enormous bribes.
But, the opinion in ''Gibbons'' can also be read more narrowly.
Additionally, four law schools and at least two colleges today bear his name: The Marshall-Wythe School of Law (now William and Mary Law School at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia; The Cleveland-Marshall College of Law in Cleveland, Ohio; John Marshall Law School in Atlanta, Georgia; and, The John Marshall Law School in Chicago, Illinois.
His younger brother, James Markham Marshall, also served briefly in a newly created judgeship for the Federal judiciary on the Circuit Court of the District of Columbia  from 1801 to 1803, and three of his brothers, Keith, William and Charles were lawyers.
Example of both notes are available for viewing on the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco website.
In the case of Marbury and Madison, the federal judges declared that commissions, signed and sealed by the President, were valid, although not delivered.
Thomas Marshall, by then a man of substantial means, purchased an estate adjacent to North Cobbler Mountain in Delaplane.
Among his strongest followers in the European tradition has been Hans Kelsen for the inclusion of the principle of judicial review in the constitutions of both Czechoslovakia and Austria.
Marshall, Michigan was named in his honor five years before Marshall's death.
Ultimately, though, Marshall grounded the Court's opinion in the restrictions imposed by the federal Constitution.
He stressed that one must look at whether the commerce in question has wide-ranging effects, suggesting that commerce which does "affect other states" may be interstate commerce, even if it does not cross state lines.
The one or the other would be treason to the constitution.
Meanwhile, Marshall's private law practice continued to flourish.
Two days before his death, Marshall enjoined his friends to place only a plain slab over his and his wife's graves, and wrote the simple inscription himself.
It is emphatically the province and duty of the Judicial Department to say what the law is.
Another casting of the statue is located at Constitution Ave. and 4th Street in Washington D.C. and a third on the grounds of the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
Marshall was in the dissenting minority only eight times throughout his tenure at the Court, partly because of his influence over the associate justices.
In that case—''Ogden v. Saunders'' in 1827—Marshall set forth his general principles of constitutional interpretation:
The United States Bar Association commissioned sculptor William Wetmore Story to execute the statue of Marshall that now stands inside the Supreme Court on the ground floor.
His most prominent opponent at the ratification convention was Anti-Federalist leader Patrick Henry.
In 1785, Marshall took up the additional office of Recorder of the Richmond City Hustings Court.
Thus, although the Court indicated that the Jefferson administration was violating another law, the Court said it could not do anything about it due to its own lack of jurisdiction.
Ultimately, the convention approved the Constitution by a vote of 89–79.
For approximately three months each year, Marshall lived in Washington during the Court's annual term, boarding with Justice Story during his final years at the Ringgold-Carroll House.
Marshall used Federalist approaches to build a strong federal government over the opposition of the Jeffersonian Republicans, who wanted stronger state governments.
Marshall laid down the basic theory of implied powers under a written Constitution; intended, as he said "to endure for ages to come, and, consequently, to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs ...." Marshall envisaged a federal government which, although governed by timeless principles, possessed the powers "on which the welfare of a nation essentially depends."
Ironically what was unconstitutional was Congress' granting a certain power to the Supreme Court itself.
They cannot issue a mandamus to the President or legislature, or to any of their officers.
Justices Bushrod Washington and Joseph Story proved to be his strongest allies in these cases.
Marshall took advantage of the resources at Greenway Court and borrowed freely from the extensive collection of classical and contemporary literature.
He was an active Freemason and served as Grand Master of Masons in Virginia in 1794–1795 of the Most Worshipful Grand Lodge of Ancient, Free, and Accepted Masons of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
Marshall served as Chief Justice during the administrations of six Presidents: John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, James Monroe, John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson.
Marshall wrote of his father, "... and to his care I am indebted for anything valuable which I may have acquired in my youth.
His court opinions helped lay the basis for United States constitutional law and many say made the Supreme Court of the United States a coequal branch of government along with the legislative and executive branches.
Marshall's early education was superintended by his father who gave him an early taste for history and poetry.
The Supreme Court, like many state supreme courts, was a minor organ of government.
Marshall ran a congenial court; there was seldom any bickering.
Some of his decisions were unpopular.
The Reverend James Thomson, a recently ordained deacon from Glasgow, Scotland, resided with the Marshall family and tutored the children in Latin in return for his room and board.
Instead, Marshall relied on an actual, existing federal statute for licensing ships, and he held that that federal law was a legitimate exercise of the congressional power to regulate interstate commerce, so the federal law superseded the state law granting the monopoly.
It is often reported that in response to the ''Worcester'' decision President Andrew Jackson declared "John Marshall has made his decision; now let him enforce it!"
Marshall was thrust into the office of Chief Justice in the wake of the presidential election of 1800.
Indeed, Marshall's opinion in ''Gibbons'' would be cited by the Supreme Court much later when it upheld aspects of the New Deal in cases like ''Wickard v. Filburn'' in 1942.
Historians have often praised its accuracy and well-reasoned judgments, while noting his frequent paraphrases of published sources such as William Gordon's 1801 history of the Revolution and the British ''Annual Register.''
Previously, Marshall had been a leader of the Federalist Party in Virginia and served in the United States House of Representatives from 1799 to 1800.
