It was "through his letters to her that he developed a voice and purpose."
This road roughly follows part of the route Muir took on his first walk to Yosemite.
By age 11, young Muir had learned to recite "by heart and by sore flesh" all of the New Testament and most of the Old Testament.
* Mount Muir (elevation 4688') in Angeles National Forest north of Pasadena, California
He climbed a number of mountains, including Cathedral Peak and Mount Dana, and hiked the old Indian trail down Bloody Canyon to Mono Lake.
From this developed his core belief that "wild is superior".
With his money running low and winter coming, he reunited with his brother Daniel near Meaford, Ontario, who persuaded him to work with him at the sawmill and rake factory of William Trout and Charles Jay.
The destruction of the charming groves and gardens, the finest in all California, goes to my heart."
His first appearance in print was by accident, writes Miller; a person he did not know submitted, without his permission or awareness, a personal letter to his friend Jeanne Carr, describing ''Calypso borealis'', a rare flower he had encountered.
an American pioneer, an American hero."
In 1899, Muir accompanied railroad executive E. H. Harriman and esteemed scientists on the famous exploratory voyage along the Alaska coast aboard the luxuriously refitted  steamer, the ''George W.
He returned to the hills to recover, climbing Mt.
He was confined to a darkened room for six weeks, worried whether he would ever regain his sight.
Carr, a fair assistant, was asked by fair officials to review Muir's exhibits to see if they had merit.
East Lothian in Scotland also celebrates John Muir day, the play ''Thank God for John Muir'', by Andrew Dallmeyer is based on his life.
One week later Muir was elected president, Warren Olney was elected vice-president, and a board of directors was chosen that included David Starr Jordan, president of the new Stanford University.
He often described his observations in terms of light.
His friend, Henry Fairfield Osborn, observed that as a result of his religious upbringing, Muir retained "this belief, which is so strongly expressed in the Old Testament, that all the works of nature are directly the work of God."
With population growth continuing in San Francisco, political pressure increased to dam the Tuolumne River for use as a water reservoir.
Historian Catherine Albanese stated that in one of his letters, "Muir's eucharist made Thoreau's feast on wood-chuck and huckleberry seem almost anemic."
He proved valuable to his employers because of his inventiveness in improving the machines and processes; he rose to supervisor at $25 a week.
Although he spent the majority of his life in America, Muir never forgot his roots in Scotland.
Senger and San Francisco attorney Warren Olney sent out invitations "for the purpose of forming a 'Sierra Club.'
In the opinion of Enos Mills, a contemporary who established Rocky Mountain National Park, Muir's writings would "likely to be the most influential force in this century."
It was during this time that he became interested in natural history and the works of Scottish naturalist Alexander Wilson.
As a dreamer and activist, his eloquent words changed the way Americans saw their mountains, forests, seashores, and deserts, said nature writer Gretel Ehrlich.
He was a highly productive writer and had many of his accounts and papers published as far away as New York.
As a result, Muir received a diploma and a monetary award for his handmade clocks and thermometer.
It was a night Roosevelt never forgot.
Muir joined Roosevelt in Oakland, California, for the train trip to Raymond.
One day's exposure to mountains is better than a cartload of books."
Muir's friend, zoologist Henry Fairfield Osborn, writes that Muir's style of writing did not come to him easily, but only with intense effort.
He was generally unsatisfied with the finished result, finding prose "a weak instrument for the reality he wished to convey."
After Muir returned to the United States, he spent the next four years exploring Yosemite, while at the same time writing articles for publication.
While doing his studies of nature, he would try to remember everything he observed as if his senses were recording the impressions, until he could write them in his journal.
"He is a very firm believer in Thoreau and starts by reading deeply of this author."
The house and part of the ranch are now the John Muir National Historic Site.
Muir then increased efforts by the Sierra Club to consolidate park management.
At one point she asked Muir to read a book she felt would influence his thinking, Lamartine's ''The Stonemason of Saint Point''.
As a professional forester, his view was that "forestry is tree farming," without destroying the long-term viability of the forests.
Muir was given the Stickeen (Muir's spelling, coastal tribe) name "Ancoutahan" meaning "adopted chief".
Williams notes that Muir's philosophy and world view rotated around his perceived dichotomy between civilization and nature.
Muir's friendship with Jeanne Carr had a lifelong influence on his career as a naturalist and writer.
Muir often used the term "home" as a metaphor for both nature and his general attitude toward the "natural world itself," notes Holmes.
He wrote to his friend Vernon Kellogg, "As to the loss of the Sierra Park Valley Hetch Hetchy it's hard to bear.
he groans over his labors, he writes and rewrites and interpolates."
John Muir was survived by two daughters and ten grandchildren.
In one of his essays, he gave an example of the deficiencies of writing versus experiencing nature.
He often used domestic language to describe his scientific observations, as when he saw nature as providing a home for even the smallest plant life: "the little purple plant, tended by its Maker, closed its petals, crouched low in its crevice of a home, and enjoyed the storm in safety."
Muir is one of three people so honored in California, along with Harvey Milk Day and Ronald Reagan Day.
While there, he continued "botanizing", exploring the Escarpment, bogs, and collecting and cataloging plants.
According to Muir biographer Bonnie Johanna Gisel, the Carrs recognized his "pure mind, unsophisticated nature, inherent curiosity, scholarly acumen, and independent thought."
During these years in Yosemite, Muir was unmarried, often unemployed, with no prospects for a career, and had "periods of anguish," writes naturalist author John Tallmadge.
However, three days after accepting to work for Hodgson, Muir almost died of a malarial sickness.
On December 6, 2006, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted John Muir into the California Hall of Fame located at The California Museum for History, Women, and the Arts.
In 1906 Congress transferred the Mariposa Grove and Yosemite Valley to the park.
In his later years, he used the metaphor of nature as home in his writings to promote wilderness preservation.
* Muir Pass Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks, the divide at 11,955' above sea level, between Evolution Creek and Middle Fork of Kings River
In one letter she wrote to Muir while he was living in Yosemite, she tried to keep him from despairing as to his purpose in life.
A 32-cent stamp issued on February 3, 1998, was part of the "Celebrate the Century" series, and showed Muir in Yosemite Valley, with the inscription "John Muir, Preservationist".
But as Muir became attached to the American natural landscapes he explored, Williams notes that he began to see another "primary source for understanding God: the Book of Nature."
Muir had no such fear and promptly made a moonlit survey of new talus piles created by earthquake-triggered rockslides.
Fifty years later, the naturalist Muir described the day in his autobiography.
Muir has been considered "an inspiration to both Scots and Americans".
* John Muir National Historic Site in Martinez, California
Theodore Roosevelt about John Muir: "I was interested and a little surprised to find that, unlike John Burroughs, John Muir cared little for birds or bird songs, and knew little about them.
He envisioned the Yosemite area and the Sierra as pristine lands.
Stephen Fox recounts that Muir's father found the Church of Scotland insufficiently strict in faith and practice, leading to their emigration and joining a congregation of the Campbellite Restoration Movement, called the Disciples of Christ .
He often encouraged city dwellers to experience nature for its spiritual nourishment.
As Tallmadge notes, Muir's belief in this "Book of Nature" compelled him to tell the story of "this creation in words any reader could understand."
It was the story of a man whose life she hoped would "metabolize in Muir," writes Gisel, and "was a projection of the life she envisioned for him."
He usually spent his evenings sitting by a campfire in his overcoat, reading Emerson under the stars.
John Muir's Birthplace is a four-story stone house in Dunbar, East Lothian, Scotland.
He came to believe that God was always active in the creation of life and thereby kept the natural order of the world.
She also tried to promote Muir's writings by submitting his letters to a monthly magazine for publication.
Muir boarded the ship, and while in Havana, he spent his hours studying shells and flowers and visiting the botanical garden in the city.
There, under a towering black locust tree beside North Hall, Muir took his first botany lesson.
After entering the park and seeing the magnificent splendor of the valley, the president asked Muir to show him the real Yosemite.
On April 21, 2013, the first ever John Muir Day was celebrated in Scotland, which marked the 175th anniversary of his birth, paying homage to the conservationist.
In 1863, his brother Daniel left Wisconsin and headed east to Southern Ontario (then known as ''Canada West'' in the United Canadas) to avoid the draft during the U.S. Civil War.
In contrast, Muir proclaimed, "Dam Hetch Hetchy!
Muir valued nature for its spiritual and transcendental qualities.
The importance of Carr, who continually gave Muir reassurance and inspiration, "cannot be overestimated," adds Gisel.
His parents were Daniel Muir and Ann Gilrye.
This philosophical divide soon expanded and split the conservation movement into two camps: the preservationists, led by Muir; and Pinchot's camp, who co-opted the term "conservation."
After obtaining copies of their private letters from Carr, and despite pleadings from Muir to return them, he instead published articles about their friendship, using those letters as a primary source.
As a result, his writings are commonly discussed in books and journals, and he is often quoted by nature photographers such as Ansel Adams.
He is today referred to as the "Father of the National Parks" and the National Park Service has produced a short documentary about his life.
Miller writes that what was most important about his writings was not their quantity, but their "quality".
Muir remained president until his death 22 years later.
As Muir's ideas spread, Whitney tried to discredit Muir by branding him as an amateur.
His earliest recollections were of taking short walks with his grandfather when he was three.
According to Williams, he speculated that the world was an unchanging entity that was interpreted by the brain through the senses, and, writes Muir, "If the creator were to bestow a new set of senses upon us .
John Muir died at California Hospital (now California Hospital Medical Center) in Los Angeles on December 24, 1914, of pneumonia at age 76, after a brief visit to Daggett, California, to see his daughter Helen Muir Funk.
One source appears to indicate he worked at the mill/factory until the summer of 1865, while another says he stayed on at Trout Hollow until after a fire burned it down in February 1866.
In 1888 after seven years of managing the Strentzel fruit ranch in Alhambra Valley, CA, his health began to suffer.
Muir first traveled to Alaska in 1879 and was the first Euro-American to explore Glacier Bay.
Muir came to trust Carr as his "spiritual mother," and they remained friends for 30 years.
Muir's biographer, Frederick Turner, notes Muir's journal entry upon first visiting the valley and writes that his description "blazes from the page with the authentic force of a conversion experience."
He often compiled and organized such earlier writings as collections of essays or included them as part of narrative books.
His letters, essays, and books telling of his adventures in nature, especially in the Sierra Nevada of California, have been read by millions.
He thought the greatest threat to the Yosemite area and the Sierra was domesticated livestock—especially domestic sheep, which he referred to as "hoofed locusts".
But to Muir's dismay, the bill left Yosemite Valley under state control, as it had been since the 1860s.
Muir lived with the Trout family in an area called Trout Hollow, south of Meaford, on the Bighead River.
In 1864, he left Wisconsin to begin exploring the Canadian wilderness and, while there, began corresponding with her about his activities.
As a freshman, Muir studied chemistry with Professor Ezra Carr and his wife Jeanne; they became lifelong friends and Muir developed a lasting interest in chemistry and the sciences.
They first met in the fall of 1860, when, at age 22, he entered a number of his homemade inventions in the Wisconsin State Agricultural Society Fair.
Muir wrote in 1872, "No amount of word-making will ever make a single soul to 'know' these mountains.
"Muir has profoundly shaped the very categories through which Americans understand and envision their relationships with the natural world," writes Holmes.
He later returned to Yosemite and worked as a shepherd for a season.
His nature writings became a "synthesis of natural theology" with scripture that helped him understand the origins of the natural world.
In 1873 and 1874, he made field studies along the western flank of the Sierra on the distribution and ecology of isolated groves of Giant Sequoia.
The primary aim of Muir's nature philosophy, writes Wilkins, was to challenge mankind's "enormous conceit," and in so doing, he moved beyond the Transcendentalism of Emerson to a "biocentric perspective on the world".
Muir also saw nature as his own home, as when he wrote friends and described the Sierra as "God's mountain mansion."
She thought they did and "saw in his entries evidence of genius worthy of special recognition," notes Miller.
Their contrasting views were highlighted again when the United States was deciding whether to dam Hetch Hetchy Valley.
He was the third of eight children: Margaret, Sarah, David, Daniel, Ann and Mary (twins), and the American-born Joanna.
Muir took an eclectic approach to his studies, attending classes for two years but never being listed higher than a first-year student due to his unusual selection of courses.
However, Muir took his journal entries further than recording factual observations.
His secretary, Marion Randall Parsons, also noted that "composition was always slow and laborious for him.
He held a strong connection with his home country and Scottish identity throughout his life and was frequently heard talking about his childhood spent amid the East Lothian countryside.
On September 30, 1890, the U.S. Congress passed a bill that essentially followed recommendations that Muir had suggested in two ''Century'' articles, ''The Treasure of the Yosemite'' and ''Features of the Proposed National Park'', both published in 1890.
In addition to his geologic studies, Muir also investigated the plant life of the Yosemite area.
They also introduced Muir to notables such as Emerson, as well as leading scientists such as Louis Agassiz, John Tyndall, John Torrey, Clinton Hart Merriam, and Joseph LeConte.
Rainier in Washington and writing ''Ascent of Mount Rainier''.
He also never lost his strong Scottish accent after many years living in America.
He once told a visitor to his ranch there, "This is a good place to be housed in during stormy weather, .
As a result, his writings were to become "prophecy, for they sought to change our angle of vision."
A quotation of his appears on the reverse side of the Indianapolis Prize Lilly Medal for conservation.
* John Muir Wilderness (southern and central Sierra Nevada)
The value of their friendship was first disclosed by a friend of Carr's, clergyman and writer G. Wharton James.
Seeing it for the first time, Muir notes that "He was overwhelmed by the landscape, scrambling down steep cliff faces to get a closer look at the waterfalls, whooping and howling at the vistas, jumping tirelessly from flower to flower."
Carr wrote Muir in return and encouraged him in his explorations and writings, eventually having an important influence over his personal goals.
Elsewhere in his writings, he described the conventional image of a Creator, "as purely a manufactured article as any puppet of a half-penny theater."
In 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt accompanied Muir on a visit to Yosemite.
From that point on, he determined to "be true to himself" and follow his dream of exploration and study of plants.
Muir confronted Pinchot and demanded an explanation.
Muir was extremely fond of Thoreau and was probably influenced more by him than even Emerson.
Soon after he returned to the Oakland area, he was introduced by Jeanne Carr to Louisa Strentzel, daughter of a prominent physician and horticulturist with a  fruit orchard in Martinez, California, northeast of Oakland.
In 1849, Muir's family immigrated to the United States, starting a farm near Portage, Wisconsin, called Fountain Lake Farm.
A large earthquake centered near Lone Pine, California, in Owens Valley (see 1872 Lone Pine earthquake) strongly shook occupants of Yosemite Valley in March 1872.
In his later life, Muir devoted most of his time to the preservation of the Western forests.
In September 1867, Muir undertook a walk of about  from Kentucky to Florida, which he recounted in his book ''A Thousand-Mile Walk to the Gulf''.
* Muir Glacier, Alaska
In his autobiography, he described his boyhood pursuits, which included fighting, either by re-enacting romantic battles from the Wars of Scottish Independence or just scrapping on the playground, and hunting for birds' nests (ostensibly to one-up his fellows as they compared notes on who knew where the most were located).
Muirite (a mineral), ''Erigeron muirii'', ''Carlquistia muirii'' (two species of aster), ''Ivesia muirii'' (a member of the rose family), ''Troglodytes troglodytes muiri'' (a wren), ''Ochotona princeps muiri'' (a pika), ''Thecla muirii'' (a butterfly), and ''Amplaria muiri'' (a millipede) were all named after John Muir.
The hermit-thrushes meant nothing to him, the trees and the flowers and the cliffs everything."
* Camp Muir in Mount Rainier National Park
A 5-cent stamp issued on April 29, 1964, was designed by Rudolph Wendelin, and showed Muir's face superimposed on a grove of redwood trees, and the inscription, "John Muir Conservationist".
In July 1896, Muir became associated with Gifford Pinchot, a national leader in the conservation movement.
Muir was often invited to the Carrs' home; he shared Jeanne's love of plants.
* John Muir Trails in California, Tennessee, Connecticut, and Wisconsin
Muir threw himself into the preservationist role with great vigor.
When Pinchot reiterated his position, Muir told him: "I don't want any thing more to do with you."
Both men opposed reckless exploitation of natural resources, including clear-cutting of forests.
In spite of that, he had a great deal of sympathy for their "being robbed of their lands and pushed ruthlessly back into narrower and narrower limits by alien races who were cutting off their means of livelihood."
He wrote, "I never tried to abandon creeds or code of civilization; they went away of their own accord... without leaving any consciousness of loss."
Muir later wrote, "This affliction has driven me to the sweet fields.
Muir and Roosevelt set off largely by themselves and camped in the back country.
Muir has been called the "patron saint of the American wilderness" and its "archetypal free spirit."
Emerson spent only the one day with Muir, although he offered him a teaching position at Harvard, which Muir declined.
He petitioned the U.S. Congress for the National Park bill that was passed in 1890, establishing Yosemite National Park.
"Daily he rose at 4:30 o'clock, and after a simple cup of coffee labored incessantly .
Muir passionately opposed the damming of Hetch Hetchy Valley because he found Hetch Hetchy as stunning as Yosemite Valley.
The presidential entourage then traveled by stagecoach into the park.
When he did, "he saw the world—and his purpose—in a new light".
His views eventually clashed with Muir's and highlighted two diverging views of the use of the country's natural resources.
At one meeting in the fall of 1895 that included Muir, Joseph LeConte, and William R. Dudley, the Sierra Club discussed the idea of establishing 'national forest reservations', which were later called National Forests.
In early 1892, Professor Henry Senger, a philologist at the University of California, Berkeley, contacted Muir with the idea of forming a local 'alpine club' for mountain lovers.
He had no specific route chosen, except to go by the "wildest, leafiest, and least trodden way I could find."
Muir biographer Steven Holmes notes that Muir used words like "glory" and "glorious" to suggest that light was taking on a religious dimension: "It is impossible to overestimate the importance of the notion of glory in Muir's published writings, where no other single image carries more emotional or religious weight," adding that his words "exactly parallels its Hebraic origins," in which biblical writings often indicate a divine presence with light, as in the burning bush or pillar of fire, and described as "the glory of God."
The  John Muir Trail, a hiking trail in the Sierra Nevada, was named in his honor.
Other such places include Muir Woods National Monument, Muir Beach, John Muir College, Mount Muir, Camp Muir and Muir Glacier.
Muir's father read Josephus's ''War of the Jews'' to understand the culture of first-century Palestine, as it was written by an eyewitness, and illuminated the culture during the period of the New Testament.
Muir served as an officer in the United States Coast Survey, a uniformed government service agency.
His early encounters with the Paiute in California left him feeling ambivalent after seeing their lifestyle, which he described as "lazy" and "superstitious".
Muir and Hudson Stuck are honored with a feast day on the liturgical of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America on April 22.
* Muir's Peak next to Mount Shasta, California (also known as Black Butte)
* Muir Woods National Monument just north of San Francisco, California
He later relied on his friendship with Harriman to pressure Congress to pass conservation legislation.
He sometimes took his daughters with him.
Pinchot favored damming the valley as "the highest possible use which could be made of it."
During his career as writer and while living in the mountains, Muir continued to experience the "presence of the divine in nature," writes Holmes His personal letters also conveyed these feelings of ecstasy.
He returned for further explorations in Southeast Alaska in 1880, and in 1881 was with the party that landed on Wrangel Island on the USS ''Corwin'' and claimed that island for the United States.
Jeanne Carr, 35 years of age, especially appreciated his youthful individuality, along with his acceptance of "religious truths" that were much like her own.
While traveling to the park, Muir told the president about state mismanagement of the valley and rampant exploitation of the valley's resources.
And for Muir, Emerson's visit came like a laying on of hands."
In one such article, his focus was Muir's debt to Carr, stating that she was his "guiding star" who "led him into the noble paths of life, and then kept him there."
Finally settling in San Francisco, Muir immediately left for a week-long visit to Yosemite, a place he had only read about.
Records showed his class status as "irregular gent" and, even though he never graduated, he learned enough geology and botany to inform his later wanderings.
Muir made four trips to Alaska as far as Unalaska, Alaska and Barrow, Alaska.
Muir was noted for being an ecological thinker, political spokesman, and religious prophet, whose writings became a personal guide into nature for countless individuals, making his name "almost ubiquitous" in the modern environmental consciousness.
This notion was in stark contradiction to the accepted contemporary theory, promulgated by Josiah Whitney (head of the California Geological Survey), which attributed the formation of the valley to a catastrophic earthquake.
This event led more people to believe in Muir's ideas about the formation of the valley.
Muir's biographer, Steven J. Holmes, believes that Muir has become "one of the patron saints of twentieth-century American environmental activity," both political and recreational.
In maturity, while remaining a deeply spiritual man, Muir may have changed his orthodox beliefs.
Williams concludes that Muir saw nature as a great teacher, "revealing the mind of God," and this belief became the central theme of his later journeys and the "subtext" of his nature writing.
Muir hiked along the Niagara Escarpment, including much of today's Bruce Trail.
Muir often referred to himself as a "disciple" of Thoreau.
Johnson agreed to publish any article Muir wrote on the subject of excluding livestock from the Sierra high country.
