Those who were regarded to have achieved it were grouped in select societies or bands.
While the English panicked, the Moravians calmly sang hymns and prayed.
The divide between Wesley and the Church of England widened.
Wesley wryly reported in his journal, "I did not forsake her, I did not dismiss her, I will not recall her."
In 1770, the controversy broke out anew with violence and bitterness, as people's view of God related to their views of men and their possibilities.
(Wesley studied Eastern Orthodoxy and particularly the doctrine of Theosis).
Wesley also regarded the contempt with which he and his group were held to be a mark of a true Christian.
Educated at Charterhouse School and Oxford University, Wesley was elected a fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford in 1726 and ordained a priest two years later.
Moving across Great Britain and Ireland, he helped form and organise small Christian groups that developed intensive and personal accountability, discipleship and religious instruction.
On his return to England, Wesley drew up rules for the "bands" into which the Fetter Lane Society was divided and published a collection of hymns for them.
In spite of the proliferation of his literary output, Wesley was challenged for plagiarism for borrowing heavily from an essay by Samuel Johnson, publishing in March 1775.
Wesley's house and chapel, which he built in 1778 on City Road in London, are still intact today and the chapel has a thriving congregation with regular services as well as the Museum of Methodism in the crypt.
The Church of England had been disestablished in the United States, where it had been the state church in most of the southern colonies.
Wesley continues to be the primary theological influence on Methodists and Methodist-heritage groups the world over; the largest bodies being the United Methodist Church, the Methodist Church of Great Britain and the African Methodist Episcopal Church.
I felt I did trust in Christ, Christ alone for salvation, and an assurance was given me that he had taken away my sins, even mine, and saved me from the law of sin and death."
Wesley defined the witness of the Spirit as: "an inward impression on the soul of believers, whereby the Spirit of God directly testifies to their spirit that they are the children of God."
Sanctification he described in 1790 as the "grand ''depositum'' which God has lodged with the people called `Methodists'."
Wesley's noted "Aldersgate experience" of 24 May 1738, at a Moravian meeting in Aldersgate Street, London, in which he heard a reading of Martin Luther's preface to the Epistle to the Romans, revolutionised the character and method of his ministry.
Wesley's legacy is preserved in Kingswood School, which he founded in 1748 in order to educate the children of the growing number of Methodist preachers.
He subsequently departed from the Moravians, beginning his own ministry.
While his ministry has often been judged to have been a failure in comparison to his later success as a leader in the Evangelical Revival, Wesley gathered around him a group of devoted Christians who met in a number of small group religious societies.
The prejudices of his high-church training, his strict notions of the methods and proprieties of public worship, his views of the apostolic succession and the prerogatives of the priest, even his most cherished convictions, were not allowed to stand in the way.
Molly, as she was known, was to return and leave him again on several occasions before their final separation."
Wesley's prose ''Works'' were first collected by himself (32 vols., Bristol, 1771–74, frequently reprinted in editions varying greatly in the number of volumes).
Out of this grew the Methodist class-meeting system in 1742.
He wanted to teach the truth that "God willeth all men to be saved."
On 24 May 1738 he experienced what has come to be called his evangelical conversion, when he felt his "heart strangely warmed".
Whitefield was one of many who responded.
As he lay dying, his friends gathered around him, Wesley grasped their hands and said repeatedly, "Farewell, farewell."
Wesley also wrote on divine physics, such as in ''Desideratum'', subtitled ''Electricity made Plain and Useful by a Lover of Mankind and of Common Sense'' (1759).
He married Susanna, the twenty-fifth child of Samuel Annesley, a dissenting minister, in 1689.
He met frequently with this and other religious societies in London but did not preach often in 1738, because most of the parish churches were closed to him.
He believed he was commissioned by God to bring about revival in the church, and no opposition, persecution, or obstacles could prevail against the divine urgency and authority of this commission.
The most notable of his controversies was that on Calvinism.
Wesley hesitated to accept Whitefield's call to copy this bold step.
He could not give up the doctrine of an inward and present salvation by faith itself.
Daniel L. Burnett writes: “The significance of Wesley’s Aldersgate Experience is monumental.
With stairs aflame and the roof about to collapse, Wesley was lifted out of the second floor window by a parishioner standing on another man’s shoulders.
He published a pamphlet on slavery, titled ''Thoughts Upon Slavery,'' in 1774.
About a quarter before nine, while he was describing the change which God works in the heart through faith in Christ, I felt my heart strangely warmed.
Late in 1739 Wesley broke with the Moravians in London.
From then on he took the opportunities to preach wherever an assembly could be brought together, more than once using his father's tombstone at Epworth as a pulpit.
Along with two fellow students, he formed a small club for the purpose of study and the pursuit of a devout Christian life.
He based this doctrine upon certain Biblical passages (see Romans 8:15–16 as an example).
He understood that Christian orthodoxy insisted that salvation was only possible by the sovereign grace of God.
For all of his outward piety, Wesley sought to cultivate his inner holiness or at least his sincerity as evidence of being a true Christian.
At the end, he said, "The best of all is, God is with us", lifted his arms and raised his feeble voice again, repeating the words, "The best of all is, God is with us."
It was at this point that he turned to the Moravians.
Going to the neighbouring village of Kingswood, in February 1739, Whitefield preached in the open air to a company of miners.
The two men separated their practice in 1741.
Wesley felt that the church failed to call sinners to repentance, that many of the clergy were corrupt, and that people were perishing in their sins.
After an unsuccessful ministry of two years at Savannah in the Georgia Colony, Wesley returned to London and joined a religious society led by Moravian Christians.
Wesley ordained Thomas Coke as superintendent of Methodists in the United States by the laying on of hands (although Coke was already a priest in the Church of England).
One would be able to keep from committing what Wesley called, "sin rightly so-called."
In 2009, a more ambitious feature film, ''Wesley'', was released by Foundery Pictures, starring Burgess Jenkins as John Wesley, with June Lockhart as Susanna Wesley, R. Keith Harris as Charles Wesley, and the Golden Globe winner Kevin McCarthy as Bishop Ryder.
Following her marriage to William Williamson, Wesley believed Sophia's former zeal for practising the Christian faith declined.
Although Wesley rejoiced that the Methodists in America were free, he advised his English followers to remain in the established church and he himself died within it.
Apart from his disciplined upbringing, a rectory fire which occurred on 9 February 1709, when Wesley was five years old, left an indelible impression.
They were denounced as promulgators of strange doctrines, fomenters of religious disturbances; as blind fanatics, leading people astray, claiming miraculous gifts, attacking the clergy of the Church of England, and trying to re-establish Catholicism.
In strictly applying the rubrics of the Book of Common Prayer, Wesley denied her communion after she failed to signify to him in advance her intention of taking it.
They were considered to be religious "enthusiasts" which in the context of the time meant religious fanatics.
There also was a category of penitents which consisted of backsliders.
His evangelicalism, firmly grounded in sacramental theology, maintained that means of grace were the manner by which God sanctifies and transforms the believer, encouraging people to experience Jesus Christ personally.
Whitefield, Harris, Cennick, and others, became the founders of Calvinistic Methodism.
Wesley contended that a part of the theological method would involve experiential faith.
Wesley was unhappy about the idea of field preaching as he believed Anglican liturgy had much to offer in its practice.
The film was directed by the award-winning film-maker John Jackman.
From 1739 onward, Wesley and the Methodists were persecuted by clergy and magistrates for various reasons.
He did not divorce faith from reason.
Some time after 11:00&nbsp;p.m., the rectory roof caught on fire.
Prevenient grace was the theological underpinning of his belief that all persons were capable of being saved by faith in Christ.
In his Watch Night service, he made use of a pietist prayer now generally known as the Wesley Covenant Prayer, perhaps his most famous contribution to Christian liturgy.
Wesley's call to personal and social holiness continues to challenge Christians who attempt to discern what it means to participate in the Kingdom of God.
In his view, a person must ultimately believe the Good News for himself or herself; no one could be in relation to God for another.
As the number of societies increased, Wesley could not keep personal contact, so in 1743 he drew up a set of  "General Rules" for the "United Societies".
As the number of preachers and preaching-places increased, doctrinal and administrative matters needed to be discussed; so John and Charles Wesley, along with four other clergy and four lay preachers, met for consultation in London in 1744.
Circuit officials met quarterly under a senior traveling preacher or "assistant."
Samuel Wesley was a graduate of the University of Oxford and a poet who, from 1696, was rector of Epworth.
His chief prose works are a standard publication in seven octavo volumes of the Methodist Book Concern, New York.
This was the first Methodist conference; subsequently, the conference (with Wesley as its president) became the ruling body of the Methodist movement.
A "lasting peace" could be secured in no other way.
The Bristol chapel (built in 1739) was at first in the hands of trustees.
Currents of opposition became a furor following the mental breakdown and death of a group member, William Morgan.
Initially denying the charge, Wesley later recanted and apologised officially.
Wesley married very unhappily at the age of 48 to a widow, Mary Vazeille, described as "a well-to-do widow and mother of four children."
Later in his ministry, Wesley was a keen abolitionist, speaking out and writing against the slave trade.
They fasted on Wednesdays and Fridays until three o'clock as was commonly observed in the ancient church.
Wesley practised a vegetarian diet and abstained from wine.
As in many families at the time, Wesley's parents gave their children their early education.
The deeply personal religion that the Moravian pietists practised heavily influenced Wesley's theology of Methodism.
Given the low ebb of spirituality in Oxford at that time, it was not surprising that Wesley's group provoked a negative reaction.
He returned to Oxford in November 1729 at the request of the Rector of Lincoln College and to maintain his status as junior fellow.
Ultimately, she bore him nineteen children, of which nine lived beyond infancy.
Augustus Montague Toplady, Rowland, Richard Hill and others were engaged on one side, while Wesley and Fletcher stood on the other.
Following his lead, Methodist churches became pioneers in the Temperance movement of the 19th and 20th centuries.
Although his primary goal was to evangelise the Native Americans, a shortage of clergy in the colony largely limited his ministry to European settlers in Savannah.
After attending a performance in Bristol Cathedral in 1758, Wesley said: "I went to the cathedral to hear Mr. Handel's ''Messiah''.
by N. Curnock containing notes from unpublished diaries, 6 vols., vols.
Wesley had helped them organise the Fetter Lane Society, and those converted by his preaching and that of his brother and Whitefield had become members of their bands.
In March 1726, Wesley was unanimously elected a fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford.
A large debt was contracted, and Wesley's friends urged him to keep it under his own control, so the deed was cancelled and he became sole trustee.
Classes of a dozen or so society members under a leader met weekly for spiritual fellowship and guidance.
Wesley continued for fifty years – entering churches when he was invited, and taking his stand in the fields, in halls, cottages, and chapels, when the churches would not receive him.
As the societies multiplied, they adopted the elements of an ecclesiastical system.
He did not contend for "sinless perfection"; rather, he contended that a Christian could be made "perfect in love".
In these we may think and let think; we may 'agree to disagree.'
Nonetheless, Wesley's High Church ministry was controversial amongst the colonists and it ended in disappointment after Wesley fell in love with a young woman named Sophia Hopkey.
He based this on Christ's quote that the second great command is "to love your neighbour as you love yourself."
This love, plus the love for God that could be the central focus of a person's faith, would be what Wesley referred to as "a fulfilment of the law of Christ."
Throughout his life, Wesley remained within the established Anglican church, insisting that the Methodist movement lay well within its tradition.
The ''Poetical Works'' of John and Charles, ed.
It has been said that "when John Wesley was carried to his grave, he left behind him a good library of books, a well-worn clergyman's gown" and the Methodist Church.
In 1745 Wesley wrote that he would make any concession which his conscience permitted, in order to live in peace with the clergy.
Ordained a priest on 22 September 1728, Wesley served as a parish curate for two years.
Wesleyan teachings also serve as a basis for the holiness movement, which includes denominations like the Wesleyan Church, the Free Methodist Church, the Church of the Nazarene, the Christian and Missionary Alliance, the Church of God (Anderson, IN), and several smaller groups, and from which Pentecostalism and parts of the Charismatic Movement are offshoots.
When in 1739 Wesley preached a sermon on ''Freedom of Grace'', attacking the Calvinistic understanding of predestination as blasphemous, as it represented "God as worse than the devil," Whitefield asked him not to repeat or publish the discourse, as he did not want a dispute.
Two years later, to help preachers work more systematically and societies receive services more regularly, Wesley appointed "helpers" to definitive circuits.
Both the ''Sermons'' (about 140) and the ''Notes'' are doctrinal standards.
He recognised the open-air services were successful in reaching men and women who would not enter most churches.
Wesley adapted the Book of Common Prayer for use by American Methodists.
By this he meant a conscious or intentional breach of God's will or laws.
The site also is now both a place of worship and a visitor attraction, incorporating the Museum of Methodism and John Wesley's House.
Most importantly, he appointed itinerant, unordained evangelists to travel and preach as he did and to care for these groups of people.
In 1770, at the death of George Whitefield, Wesley wrote a memorial sermon which praised Whitefield's admirable qualities and acknowledged the two men's differences: "There are many doctrines of a less essential nature ...
Without it the names of Wesley and Methodism would likely be nothing more than obscure footnotes in the pages of church history.”
In 1724, he graduated as a Bachelor of Arts and decided to pursue a Master of Arts degree.
As he put it in a letter to his father, "Till he be thus contemned, no man is in a state of salvation."
Although he was not a systematic theologian, Wesley argued for the notion of Christian perfection and against Calvinismand, in particular, against its doctrine of predestination.
Each circuit included at least 30 appointments a month.
He wrote that he was "a scriptural ''episkopos'' as much as many men in England."
Because of his charitable nature he died poor, leaving as the result of his life's work 135,000 members and 541 itinerant preachers under the name "Methodist".
Susanna Wesley examined each child before the midday meal and before evening prayers.
Wesley's Oxford friend, the evangelist George Whitefield, was also excluded from the churches of Bristol upon his return from America.
So, tradition was considered the second aspect of the Quadrilateral.
In 1744, there were 77 such members.
A list of "General Questions" which he developed in 1730 evolved into an elaborate grid by 1734 in which he recorded his daily activities hour-by-hour, resolutions he had broken or kept, and ranked his hourly "temper of devotion" on a scale of 1 to 9.
They preached, educated, and relieved jailed debtors whenever possible, and cared for the sick.
Wesley warned against the dangers of alcohol abuse in his famous sermon, "The Use of Money," and in his letter to an alcoholic.
Also, one of the four form houses at the St Marylebone Church of England School, London, is named after John Wesley.
John Wesley was born in 1703 in Epworth, 23 miles (37&nbsp;km) north-west of Lincoln, as the fifteenth child of Samuel Wesley and his wife Susanna Wesley (née Annesley).
The ''Collection'' was the first Anglican hymnal published in America, and the first of many hymn-books Wesley published.
Children were not allowed to eat between meals and were interviewed singularly by their mother one evening each week for the purpose of intensive spiritual instruction.
Wesley arrived in the colony in February 1736.
His written sermons are characterised by spiritual earnestness and simplicity.
The group met daily from six until nine for prayer, psalms, and reading of the Greek New Testament.
In 1787, Coke and Asbury persuaded the American Methodists to refer to them as bishops rather than superintendents, overruling Wesley's objections to the change.
In 1730, the group began the practice of visiting prisoners in jail.
He also was a noted hymn-writer, translator and compiler of a hymnal.
This experience led Wesley to believe that the Moravians possessed an inner strength which he lacked.
Toplady was editor of ''The Gospel Magazine'', which had articles covering the controversy.
Wesley influenced George Whitefield to journey to the colonies, spurring the transatlantic debate on slavery.
As his societies needed houses to worship in, Wesley began to provide chapels, first in Bristol at the New Room, then in London (first The Foundery and then Wesley's Chapel) and elsewhere.
A person could still be able to sin, but intentional or wilful sin could be avoided.
In 1831, Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut, was the first institution of higher education in the United States to be named after Wesley.
Though Wesley had been ordained an Anglican priest, many other Methodist leaders had not received ordination.
Whitefield and Wesley, however, were soon back on friendly terms, and their friendship remained unbroken although they travelled different paths.
Secondly, to be made perfect in love meant, for Wesley, that a Christian could live with a primary guiding regard for others and their welfare.
The previous week he had been highly impressed by the sermon of John Heylyn, whom he was assisting in the service at St Mary-le-Strand.
The now secular institution was founded as an all-male Methodist college.
This expansion of lay preachers was one of the keys of the growth of Methodism.
Those deemed unworthy did not receive new tickets and dropped out of the society without disturbance.
Nevertheless, some believe that Wesley was secretly consecrated a bishop in 1763 by Erasmus of Arcadia, and that Wesley could not openly announce his episcopal consecration without incurring the penalty of the Præmunire Act.
It was on the voyage to the colonies that the Wesleys first came into contact with Moravian settlers.
He held that, in this life, Christians could achieve a state where the love of God "reigned supreme in their hearts", giving them outward holiness.
His system of thought has become known as Wesleyan Arminianism, the foundations of which were laid by Wesley and Fletcher.
His mission was to spread "Scriptural holiness";  his means and plans were such as Providence indicated.
Wesley recounted his Aldersgate experience in his journal: "In the evening I went very unwillingly to a society in Aldersgate Street, where one was reading Luther’s Preface to the Epistle to the Romans.
The reading of Law's ''Christian Perfection'' and ''A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life'' gave him, he said, a sublimer view of the law of God; and he resolved to keep it, inwardly and outwardly, as sacredly as possible, believing that in obedience he would find salvation.
In August 1727, after taking his master's degree, Wesley returned to Epworth.
But it was still a depressed Wesley who attended a service on the evening of 24 May.
He undertook to visit each society regularly in what became the quarterly visitation, or conference.
He evaluated and approved men who were not ordained by the Anglican Church to preach and do pastoral work.
He knew how to lead and control men to achieve his purposes.
In 1738 he went to Herrnhut, the Moravian headquarters in Germany, to study.
When, in 1746, Wesley read Lord King on the primitive church, he became convinced that the concept of apostolic succession in Anglicanism was a "fable".
Wesley later utilised the phrase, "a brand plucked out of the fire", quoting Zechariah 3:2, to describe the incident.
John Singleton writes: "By 1758 she had left him – unable to cope, it is said, with the competition for his time and devotion presented by the ever-burgeoning Methodist movement.
They were expected to become proficient in Latin and Greek and to have learned major portions of the New Testament by heart.
This love would mean, first of all, that a believer's motives, rather than being self-centred, would be guided by the deep desire to please God.
He pursued a rigidly methodical and abstemious life, studied the Scriptures, and performed his religious duties diligently, depriving himself so that he would have alms to give.
Wesley published his sermon anyway.
He used his power, not to provoke rebellion, but to inspire love.
Wesley refused to leave the Church of England, believing that Anglicanism was "with all her blemishes, ... nearer the Scriptural plans than any other in Europe".
In 1778, Wesley began the publication of ''The Arminian Magazine'', not, he said, to convince Calvinists, but to preserve Methodists.
But, meantime, let us hold fast the essentials..." Wesley was the first to put the phrase "agree to disagree" in print.
In his view, this orientation would cause a person to avoid any number of sins against his neighbour.
And for his own part, Wesley flouted many regulations of the Church of England concerning parish boundaries and who had authority to preach.
He began to seek after holiness of heart and life.
It has been widely recognised that one of the most significant accomplishments of Wesley's Georgia mission was his publication of a ''Collection of Psalms and Hymns''.
The Foundery was an early chapel utilised by Wesley.
It included five hymns he translated from German.
Wesley wrote that those who held to unlimited atonement did not desire separation, but "those who held 'particular redemption' would not hear of any accommodation."
The centrality of Scripture was so important for Wesley that he called himself "a man of one book" – meaning the Bible – although he was well-read for his day.
Wesley and his followers continued to work among the neglected and needy.
They are doctrinal but not dogmatic.
He approached the Georgia mission as a High Churchman, seeing it as an opportunity to revive "primitive Christianity" in a primitive environment.
And every doctrine must be able to be defended rationally.
Later he preached in Whitefield's Tabernacle.
In the same letter, which was widely circulated, Wesley referred to the name "Methodist" which "some of our neighbors are pleased to compliment us."
Seeing that he and the few clergy co-operating with him could not do the work that needed to be done, he was led, as early as 1739, to approve local preachers.
