Mill argues that free discourse is a necessary condition for intellectual and social progress.
Mill's career as a colonial administrator at the British East India Company spanned from when he was 17 years old in 1823 until 1858, when the Company was abolished in favor of direct rule by the British crown over India.
Mill argued that "To suppose that the same international customs, and the same rules of international morality, can obtain between one civilized nation and another, and between civilized nations and barbarians, is a grave error....To characterize any conduct whatever towards a barbarous people as a violation of the law of nations, only shows that he who so speaks has never considered the subject."
We can never be sure, he contends, that a silenced opinion does not contain some element of the truth.
That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.”
In his views on religion, Mill was an agnostic.
During his time as an MP, Mill advocated easing the burdens on Ireland.
utilitarianism and its implementation after he and Bentham had died.
In ''The Subjection of Women'' Mill attempts to make a case for perfect equality.
He has been called "the most influential English-speaking philosopher of the nineteenth century."
At the age of fourteen, Mill stayed a year in France with the family of Sir Samuel Bentham, brother of Jeremy Bentham.
One of Mill's earliest poetry compositions was a continuation of the Iliad.
Later he altered his views toward a more socialist bent, adding chapters to his Principles of Political Economy in defence of a socialist outlook, and defending some socialist causes.
Government should interfere when it is for the protection of society.
Within this revised work he also made the radical proposal that the whole wage system be abolished in favour of a co-operative wage system.
The belief that the freedom of speech will advance the society was formed with trust of the public’s ability to filter.
This is, perhaps, in direct contrast with Bentham's statement that "Quantity of pleasure being equal, push-pin is as good as poetry", that, if a simple child's game like hopscotch causes more pleasure to more people than a night at the opera house, it is more imperative upon a society to devote more resources to propagating hopscotch than running opera houses.
He was sitting for the Liberal Party.
Mill regarded economic development as a function of land, labour and capital.
That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.
Mill went through months of sadness and pondered suicide at twenty years of age.
Mill became a strong advocate of such social reforms as labour unions and farm cooperatives.
But in chapter 3 he presents what is still one of the most eloquent cases for the value of participation by all citizens.
His book ''The Subjection of Women'' (1861, published 1869) is one of the earliest written on this subject by a male author.
There he met many leaders of the Liberal party, as well as other notable Parisians, including Henri Saint-Simon.
For example, if an influential politician points at a woman with a headscarf in front of an excited crowd of people and says she is part of ISIS, that is wrong, since it will cause clear danger to the woman who was pointed out.
He also argues that individuals should be prevented from doing lasting, serious harm to themselves or their property by the harm principle.
When the crown proposed to take direct control over the colonies in India, he was tasked with defending Company rule, penning ''Memorandum on the Improvements in the Administration of India during the Last Thirty Years'' among other petitions.
However, positive anyone's persuasion may be, not only of the faculty but of the pernicious consequences, but (to adopt expressions which I altogether condemn) the immorality and impiety of opinion.
He was therefore concerned about the growth in number of labourers who worked for hire.
Wages can increase by an increase in the capital used in paying wages, or by decrease in the number of workers.
However, a private charity board like a church would disburse the monies fairly to those who are in more need than others.
And if the fool, or the pig, are of a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the question."
It is important to emphasise that Mill did not consider giving offence to constitute "harm"; an action could not be restricted because it violated the conventions or morals of a given society.
It is the undertaking to decide that question ''for others'', without allowing them to hear what can be said on the contrary side.
John Stuart Mill's view on liberty, which was influenced by Joseph Priestley and Josiah Warren, is that the individual ought to be free to do as he wishes unless he harms others.
Mill also argues that people who, for example, are noble or practice philosophy, benefit society more than those who engage in individualist practices for pleasure, which are lower forms of happiness.
His father, a follower of Bentham and an adherent of associationism, had as his explicit aim to create a genius intellect that would carry on the cause of
By contrast, it does not count as harming someone if – without force or fraud – the affected individual consents to assume the risk: thus one may permissibly offer unsafe employment to others, provided there is no deception involved.
In 1851, Mill married Harriet Taylor after 21 years of an intimate friendship.
Comte's ''sociologie'' was more an early philosophy of science than we perhaps know it today, and the ''positive'' philosophy aided in Mill's broad rejection of Benthamism.
It is productive labourers who do productive consumption.
While land and labour are the two original factors of production, capital is "a stock, previously accumulated of the products of former labour."
He had also read a great deal of history in English and had been taught arithmetic, physics and astronomy.
He stated, "Society can and does execute its own mandates: and if it issues wrong mandates instead of right, or any mandates at all in things with which it ought not to meddle, it practices a social tyranny more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the soul itself."
He said that freedom of speech was a vital way to develop talents and realise a person's potential and creativity.
Laws were self-evident truths, which could be known without need for empirical verification.
But, the way to express those arguments should be a public speech or writing, not in a way that causes actual harm to others.
Let the opinions impugned be the belief of God and in a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality...
His main reading was still history, but he went through all the commonly taught Latin and Greek authors and by the age of ten could read Plato and Demosthenes with ease.
Shouting out “fire!” in dark theater, which accordingly makes people panic and gets them injured, is a case of that.
His relationship with Harriet Taylor reinforced Mill's advocacy of women's rights.
John Stuart was educated by his father, with the advice and assistance of Jeremy Bentham and Francis Place.
He also argues that allowing people to air false opinions is productive for two reasons.
At the age of three he was taught Greek.
He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1856.
Mill viewed countries such as India and China as having once been progressive, but that were now stagnant and barbarous, thus legitimizing British rule as benevolent despotism, "provided the end is the barbarians' improvement."
He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinion of others, to do so would be wise, or even right...The only part of the conduct of anyone, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns others.
'''John Stuart Mill''' (20 May 1806 – 8 May 1873) was an English philosopher, political economist and civil servant.
Mill states that it is acceptable to harm oneself as long as the person doing so is not harming others.
Mill supported the Malthusian theory of population.
The mountain scenery he saw led to a lifelong taste for mountain landscapes.
Thus, wage per worker can be derived by dividing the total circulating capital by the size of the working population.
This means saving is spending.
While coming and going from France, he stayed in Paris for a few days in the house of the renowned economist Jean-Baptiste Say, a friend of Mill's father.
With renewed joy, he continued to work towards a just society, but with more relish for the journey.
Mill's early economic philosophy was one of free markets.
His father also thought that it was important for Mill to study and compose poetry.
Mill's argument is that the "simple pleasures" tend to be preferred by people who have no experience with high art, and are therefore not in a proper position to judge.
(Walker); therefore, each additional worker was not providing more output than he needed for himself for survival.
Hence, wages are limited by existing capital for paying wages.
There, Mill comments on three major facets of women's lives that he felt are hindering them: society and gender construction, education, and marriage.
Thus, failing to rescue a drowning child counts as a harmful act, as does failing to pay taxes, or failing to appear as a witness in court.
In one section he appears to defend plural voting, in which more competent citizens are given extra votes (a view he later repudiated).
On the other hand, the disposition to save depends on (1) the rate of profit and (2) the desire to save, or what Mill called "effective desire of accumulation".
Mill is one of the few political philosophers ever to serve in government as an elected official.
In 1823 Mill and a friend were arrested while distributing pamphlets on birth control by Francis Place to women in working class areas.
But if the situation allows people to reason by themselves and decide to accept it or not, any argument or theology shouldn’t be blocked by anything.
As a nonconformist who refused to subscribe to the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England, Mill was not eligible to study at the University of Oxford or the University of Cambridge.
Considering public charities boards such as a government will disburse the money equally.
This absolutely extreme case of the law of force, condemned by those who can tolerate almost every other form of arbitrary power, and which, of all others, presents features the most revolting to the feeling of all who look at it from an impartial position, was the law of civilized and Christian England within the memory of persons now living: and in one half of Angle-Saxon America three or four years ago, not only did slavery exist, but the slave trade, and the breeding of slaves expressly for it, was a general practice between slave states.
According to Mill, the rate of capital accumulation depends on: (1) "the amount of fund from which saving can be made" or "the size of the net produce of the industry", and (2) the "disposition to save".
The rejection of censorship and paternalism is intended to provide the necessary social conditions for the achievement of knowledge and the greatest ability for the greatest number to develop and exercise their deliberative and rational capacities.
As Adam Smith's ''Wealth of Nations'' had during an earlier period, Mill's ''Principles'' dominated economics teaching.
Mill outlines the benefits of 'searching for and discovering the truth' as a way to further knowledge.
And so far from the assumption being less objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, this is the case of all others in which it is most fatal.
He talks about the role of women in marriage and how it needed to be changed.
Social liberty for Mill meant putting limits on the ruler's power so that he would not be able to use his power on his own wishes and make decisions which could harm society; in other words, people should have the right to have a say in the government's decisions.
He repeatedly said that eccentricity was preferable to uniformity and stagnation.
Mill added: "Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and the means justified by actually effecting that end.
A utilitarian society would agree that everyone should be equal one way or another.
However Mill is clear that his concern for liberty does not extend to all individuals and all societies.
In April 1868, Mill favoured in a Commons debate the retention of capital punishment for such crimes as aggravated murder; he termed its abolition "an effeminacy in the general mind of the country."
This is based on Mill's notion that "demand for commodities is not demand for labourers".
Mill's ''On Liberty'' addresses the nature and limits of the power that can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual.
The two values are obviously in tension, and some readers have concluded that he is an elitist democrat, while others count him as an earlier participatory democrat.
Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.
Increase in wealth is possible only if land and capital help to increase production faster than the labour force.
Therefore, receiving inheritance would put one ahead of society unless taxed on the inheritance.
Capital is the result of savings, and the savings come from the "abstinence from present consumption for the sake of future goods".
Mill believed that "the struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous feature in the portions of history."
Mill joined the debate over scientific method which followed on from John Herschel's 1830 publication of ''A Preliminary Discourse on the study of Natural Philosophy'', which incorporated inductive reasoning from the known to the unknown, discovering general laws in specific facts and verifying these laws empirically.
It implies that productive consumption is an input necessary to maintain productive labourers.
His heart answered "no" and unsurprisingly, he lost the happiness of striving towards this objective.
The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent.
It is productive labour that is productive of wealth and capital accumulation.
The question of what counts as a self-regarding action and what actions, whether of omission or commission, constitute harmful actions subject to regulation, continues to exercise interpreters of Mill.
Mill argued that even any arguments which are used in justifying murder or rebellion against the government shouldn’t be politically suppressed or socially persecuted.
Although capital is the result of saving, it is nevertheless consumed.
Wages generally exceed the minimum subsistence level, and are paid out of capital.
Jeremy Bentham's famous formulation of utilitarianism is known as the "greatest-happiness principle".
However, he accepted interventions in the economy, such as a tax on alcohol, if there were sufficient utilitarian grounds.
By population he meant the number of the working class only.
If any argument is really wrong or harmful, the public will judge it as wrong or harmful, and then those arguments cannot be sustained and will be excluded.
Mill's view of history was that right up until his time "the whole of the female" and "the great majority of the male sex" were simply "slaves".
''On Liberty'' involves an impassioned defense of free speech.
Bentham treats all forms of happiness as equal, whereas Mill argues that intellectual and moral pleasures (higher pleasures) are superior to more physical forms of pleasure (lower pleasures).
In Mill's Methods of induction, like Herschel's, laws were discovered through observation and induction, and required empirical verification.
In the majority opinion, Holmes writes:
In his three years in Parliament, he was more willing to compromise than the "radical" principles expressed in his writing would lead one to expect.
According to Mill, supply is very elastic in response to wages.
Mill also eloquently argued that freedom of expression allows for personal growth and self-realization.
I choose, by preference the cases which are least favourable to me – In which the argument opposing freedom of opinion, both on truth and that of utility, is considered the strongest.
So increased investment leads to increases in the wage fund and to economic progress.
By the age of eight, he had read ''Aesop's Fables'', Xenophon's ''Anabasis'', and the whole of Herodotus, and was acquainted with Lucian, Diogenes Laërtius, Isocrates and six dialogues of Plato.
In fact, many of the differences between him and his father stemmed from this expanded source of joy.
Mill originally believed that "equality of taxation" meant "equality of sacrifice" and that progressive taxation penalised those who worked harder and saved more and was therefore "a mild form of robbery".
In these and other cases, it is important to bear in mind that the arguments in ''On Liberty'' are grounded on the principle of Utility, and not on appeals to natural rights.
Mill, an employee for the British East India Company from 1823 to 1858, argued in support of what he called a 'benevolent despotism' with regard to the colonies.
Brilliant in her own right, Taylor was a significant influence on Mill's work and ideas during both friendship and marriage.
Mill died in 1873 of erysipelas in Avignon, France, where he was buried alongside his wife.
However, profit also depends on the cost of labour, and the rate of profit is the ratio of profits to wages.
In his spare time, he also enjoyed reading about natural sciences and popular novels, such as ''Don Quixote'' and ''Robinson Crusoe''.
Mill's ideas were opposed by Ernest Belfort Bax in his treatise, ''The Legal Subjection of Men''.
Taylor died in 1858 after developing severe lung congestion, after only seven years of marriage to Mill.
According to him, if rebellion is really necessary, people should rebel; if murder is truly proper, it should be allowed.
Given the improvements in technology and productivity that followed 1848, the original reasons that gave rise to the doctrine were seen to be unusual and not the basis for a universal law.
He argued that the oppression of women was one of the few remaining relics from ancient times, a set of prejudices that severely impeded the progress of humanity.
In 1869, Mill recanted his support of the Wage-Fund Doctrine due to recognition that capital is not necessarily fixed in that it can be supplemented through "income of the employer which might otherwise go into savings or be spent on consumption."
As Mill suggests in that text, utility is to be conceived in relation to humanity "as a progressive being", which includes the development and exercise of rational capacities as we strive to achieve a "higher mode of existence".
(Spiegel, p.&nbsp;390) Walker also states in "The Wages Question" that the limits on capital and the growth in population "were accidental, not essential" to the formation of the doctrine.
Mill's conception of liberty justified the freedom of the individual in opposition to unlimited state control.
A member of the Liberal Party, he was the first Member of Parliament to call for women's suffrage.
In ''On Liberty'', ''A Few Words on Non-Intervention'', and other works, Mill defended British imperialism by arguing that a fundamental distinction existed between civilized and barbarous peoples.
Since saving depends on the net produce of the industry, it grows with profits and rent which go into making the net produce.
All such harmful omissions may be regulated, according to Mill.
First, individuals are more likely to abandon erroneous beliefs if they are engaged in an open exchange of ideas.
Individuals are rational enough to make decisions about their well being.
Profits earned by employing unproductive labours are merely transfers of income; unproductive labour does not generate wealth or income".
In the following year he was introduced to political economy and studied Adam Smith and David Ricardo with his father, ultimately completing their classical economic view of factors of production.
In Montpellier, he attended the winter courses on chemistry, zoology, logic of the ''Faculté des Sciences'', as well as taking a course of the higher mathematics.
But I must be permitted to observe that it is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call an assumption of infallibility.
Those who donate should consider and choose carefully where their money goes—some charities are more deserving than others.
One of the most influential thinkers in the history of liberalism, he contributed widely to social theory, political theory and political economy.
Mill's major work on political democracy, ''Considerations on Representative Government'', defends two fundamental principles, extensive participation by citizens and enlightened competence of rulers.
If wages rise, supply of labour will rise.
In 1866, Mill became the first person in the history of Parliament to call for women to be given the right to vote, vigorously defending this position in subsequent debate.
He was offered a seat on the Council of India, the body created to advise the new Secretary of State for India, but declined, citing his disapproval of the new system of rule.
However, in Mill's view, limiting the power of government was not enough.
Mill was a notably precocious child.
He describes his education in his autobiography.
Because no one exists in isolation, harm done to oneself may also harm others, and destroying property deprives the community as well as oneself.
Eventually, the poetry of William Wordsworth showed him beauty generates compassion for others and stimulates joy.
His father's work, ''The History of British India'' was published in 1818; immediately thereafter, about the age of twelve, Mill began a thorough study of the scholastic logic, at the same time reading Aristotle's logical treatises in the original language.
Second, by forcing other individuals to re-examine and re-affirm their beliefs in the process of debate, these beliefs are kept from declining into mere dogma.
Nonetheless, some of his views on the idea of flat taxation remained, albeit altered in the third edition of the ''Principles of Political Economy'' to reflect a concern for differentiating restrictions on "unearned" incomes, which he favoured, and those on "earned" incomes, which he did not favour.
Along those same lines Mill wrote, "unmeasured vituperation, employed on the side of prevailing opinion, really does deter people from expressing contrary opinions, and from listening to those who express them."
– yet if, in pursuance of that private judgement, though backed by the public judgement of his country or contemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its defence, he assumes infallibility.
He introduced a number of different concepts of the form tyranny can take, referred to as social tyranny, and tyranny of the majority.
Mill's ''Principles'', first published in 1848, was one of the most widely read of all books on economics in the period.
For him, liberty in antiquity was a "contest... between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the government."
And as most opinions are neither completely true nor completely false, he points out that allowing free expression allows the airing of competing views as a way to preserve partial truth in various opinions.
Mill was a proponent of utilitarianism, an ethical theory developed by his predecessor Jeremy Bentham, and contributed significantly to the theory of the scientific method.
He also accepted the principle of legislative intervention for the purpose of animal welfare.
Liberty, as a principle, has no application to any state of things anterior to the time when mankind have become capable of being improved by free and equal discussion."
The form of association, however, which if mankind continue to improve, must be expected in the end to predominate, is not that which can exist between a capitalist as chief, and work-people without a voice in the management, but the association of the labourers themselves on terms of equality, collectively owning the capital with which they carry on their operations, and working under managers elected and removable by themselves.
He argued that even if an opinion is false, the truth can be better understood by refuting the error.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, Associate Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. made the standard of “clear and present danger”   based on Mill’s idea.
For example, Mill explicitly states that "harms" may include acts of omission as well as acts of commission.
He said that social liberty was "the nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual".
He considered this one of the most pivotal shifts in his thinking.
And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the less if it is put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions.
Mill distinguishes between happiness and contentment, claiming that the former is of higher value than the latter, a belief wittily encapsulated in the statement that "it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied.
Taylor was married when they met, and their relationship was close but generally believed to be chaste during the years before her first husband died.
If the earth must lose that great portion of its pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited increase of wealth and population would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of enabling it to support a larger, but not a better or a happier population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that they will be content to be stationary, long before necessity compel them to it.
William Whewell expanded on this in his 1837 ''History of the Inductive Sciences, from the Earliest to the Present Time'' followed in 1840 by ''The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, Founded Upon their History'', presenting induction as the mind superimposing concepts on facts.
He states that "Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians".
The limitation on the growth of industrial capacity placed a limit on the number of workers who could be accommodated more than the limit on capital.
The lively and friendly way of life of the French also left a deep impression on him.
It is not enough for Mill that one simply has an unexamined belief that happens to be true; one must understand why the belief in question is the true one.
In ''Considerations on Representative Government'', Mill called for various reforms of Parliament and voting, especially proportional representation, the Single Transferable Vote, and the extension of suffrage.
(Mill does, however, recognise one limit to consent: society should not permit people to sell themselves into slavery).
He believed that the incompetence of the masses could eventually be overcome if they were given a chance to take part in politics, especially at the local level.
This is the Harm Principle.
He believed that population control was essential for improving the condition of the working class so that they might enjoy the fruits of the technological progress and capital accumulation.
Mill excuses those who are "incapable of self-government" from this principle, such as young children or those living in "backward states of society".
For example, in American law some exceptions limit free speech such as obscenity, defamation, breach of peace, and "fighting words."
Competition among workers not only brings down wages, but also keeps some workers out of employment.
It means that income invested as advances of wages to labour creates employment, and not income spent on consumer goods.
Nowadays, Mill’s argument is generally accepted by many democratic countries, and they have laws about the harm principle.
