Prior tradition suggested that a society's form of government need not be codified in a single document.
Reason third, you can write ten times better than I can."
Though raised in modest surroundings, Adams felt an acute responsibility to live up to his family's heritage of reverence.
In October 1775, he was also appointed the chief judge of the Massachusetts Superior Court, but he never served, and resigned in February 1777.
To which Adams responded, "I will not – reasons enough."
When you have drawn it up, we will have a meeting."
Adams did not speak French, the international language of diplomacy at the time.
The missives lasted fourteen years, and consisted of 158 letters–109 from Adams and 49 from Jefferson.
Adams also rebuilt the Navy, adding six fast, powerful frigates, most notably the USS ''Constitution''.
When aristocracies are established by human laws and honour, wealth, and power are made hereditary by municipal laws and political institutions, then I acknowledge artificial aristocracy to commence."
Adams brought in John Marshall as Secretary of State and demobilized the emergency army.
In ''Novanglus'' ("New Englander") Adams gave a point-by-point refutation of Leonard's essays, and then provided one of the most extensive and learned arguments made by the colonists against British imperial policy.
He spoke out in 1777 against a bill to emancipate slaves in Massachusetts, saying that the issue was presently too divisive, and so the legislation should "sleep for a time."
He was re-elected Vice President in 1792.
The treatise also defended bicameralism, for "a single assembly is liable to all the vices, follies and frailties of an individual".
As a result, he did not attend Jefferson's inauguration, departing the White House at 4:00&nbsp;a.m. that day, and making him one of only four presidents surviving in office not to attend his successor's inauguration.
Nevertheless, most Americans were initially pro-French due to France's assistance during the Revolutionary War, and would not have sufficiently rallied behind anyone to stop France.
Adams filled the vacancies created in this statute by appointing a series of judges, whom his opponents called the "Midnight Judges" because most of them were appointed just days before his presidential term expired.
John Adams vehemently supported the right of all Americans to jury trials.
He was also referred to as a "one man war department", working eighteen-hour days and mastering the details of raising, equipping and fielding an army under civilian control.
Jefferson died earlier the same day.
Their letters represent an insight into both the period and the minds of the two revolutionary leaders and Presidents.
Goff (1993) acknowledges Fielding's "persuasive argument that Adams never was a deist because he allowed the suspension of the laws of nature and believed that evil was internal, not the result of external institutions."
By building a large standing army, Hamilton's supporters raised popular alarms and played into the hands of the Democratic-Republicans.
"Well," said Jefferson, "if you are decided, I will do as well as I can."
The Alien Friends Act and the Alien Enemies Act allowed the president to deport any foreigner (from friendly and hostile nations, respectively) which he considered dangerous to the country.
In 1992, the Revolutionary War historian and biographer John E. Ferling published his acclaimed ''John Adams: A Life'', also noted for its psychological sensitivity.
Adams in the 1776 session of Congress drafted the preamble to the Lee resolution of colleague Richard Henry Lee (Virginia), which called on the colonies to adopt new independent governments.
For a generation, Chinard's work was regarded as the best life of Adams, and it is still an important text in illustrating the themes of Adams' biographical and historical scholarship.
On March 5, 1770, a street confrontation, known as the Boston Massacre, resulted in British soldiers killing five civilians.
Although Hamilton supported Adams, his more austere background made him somewhat resentful; some suspected Hamilton of supporting Pinckney over Adams, though this was later demonstrated to be false–Hamilton was more determined to defeat Jefferson.
Hamilton tried his hardest to sabotage Adams' campaign in the hope of boosting Pinckney's chances of winning the presidency.
By the time of John Adams' birth in 1735, Puritan tenets such as predestination were no longer as widely accepted, and many of their stricter practices had moderated with time, but Adams "considered them bearers of freedom, a cause that still had a holy urgency."
Washington wanted Hamilton to be his second-in-command and Adams reluctantly accommodated.
Reason second, I am obnoxious, suspected, and unpopular.
William Smith, a Congregational minister at Weymouth, Massachusetts.
"May none but honest and wise Men ever rule under this roof."
Adams contended that social classes exist in every political society, and that a good government must accept that reality.
Adams was unsurpassed in his dedication to establishing checks and balances as a governing strategem.
Due to his strong posture on defense, Adams is "often called the father of the American Navy".
Many of these attacks are considered to have been scurrilous, including suggestions that he was planning to "crown himself king" and "grooming John Quincy as heir to the throne".
Many Federalists would have preferred Hamilton to be a candidate.
He was acutely aware that he was the first in his family that "degenerated from the virtues of the house so far as not to have been an officer in the militia."
Adams signed the controversial Alien and Sedition Acts, and built up the army and navy in the face of an undeclared naval "Quasi-War" with France.
He purchased a large brick house on Queen Street, not far from his office.
By 9:00 PM on the night of the 16th, the work of the protesters was done – they had demolished 342 chests of tea worth about ten thousand pounds – today's equivalent of about $1 million.
Indeed, the Federalist administration initiated fourteen or more indictments under the Sedition Act, as well as suits against five of the six most prominent Democratic-Republican newspapers.
A number of delegates sought Adams' advice about forming new governments, and found his views so convincing they urged him to commit them to paper.
His innovative ideas were frequently published.
However, other historians have emphasized that the Acts were employed for political targeting from the outset, causing many aliens to leave the country.
All questions on the matter ended when his father commanded that he remain in school saying, "You shall comply with my desires."
While in London, Adams published a work entitled ''A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States'' (1787).
John Adams was born on October 30, 1735 (October 19, 1735 Old Style, Julian calendar), to John Adams Sr. (1691–1761) and Susanna Boylston (1708–1797).
Indeed, Hiller B. Zobel, a scholar who has most closely studied the trial, concluded, "we can be fairly sure that before a single witness had been sworn, the outcome of the trial was certain."
The French had supported Jefferson for president and became even more belligerent at his loss.
In February 1782 the Frisian states was the first Dutch province to recognize the United States, while France had been the first European country to grant diplomatic recognition in 1778.
In the fall of 1775 no one in Congress labored more ardently than Adams to hasten America's separation from Great Britain.
The correspondence that they resumed in 1812 lasted the rest of their lives, and has been hailed as among their great legacies of American literature.
In the closing months of his term Adams became the first president to occupy the new, but unfinished President's Mansion (later known as the White House) beginning November 1, 1800.
He collaborated with his cousin, revolutionary leader Samuel Adams, but he established his own prominence prior to the American Revolution.
His first stay in Europe, between April 1, 1778, and June 17, 1779, was otherwise unremarkable, and he returned to his home in Braintree in early August 1779.
But his views did not always align with Washington, who joined Franklin as the object of Adams' ire, as shown in this quote: "The History of our Revolution will be one continued lie.
It would always be true, Adams argued, that fate would bestow influence on some men for reasons other than true wisdom and virtue.
Frazer further argues that Adams' "theistic rationalism, like that of the other Founders, was a sort of middle ground between Protestantism and deism."
His wife Abigail died of typhoid on October 28, 1818.
Overall, however, patriotic sentiments and a series of naval victories, popularized the war as well as the president.
It became apparent that Hamilton was truly in charge due to Washington's advanced years.
Adams proudly avoided war, but deeply split his party in the process.
Back home, Adams became one of the founders and charter members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1780.
The essays were offered anonymously, with Adams using the nom de plume "Humphrey Ploughjogger"; this author reappeared in the ''Boston Gazette'' in 1765 to oppose the Stamp Act.
The premier modern biography was ''Honest John Adams'', a 1933 biography by the noted French specialist in American history Gilbert Chinard, who came to Adams after writing his acclaimed 1929 biography of Thomas Jefferson.
Adams married his third cousin Abigail Smith (1744–1818) on October 25, 1764.
Adams learned many years later that his name was on a list of people specifically excluded from Howe's pardon-granting authority.
Although aware of the Hamilton factor, Adams was convinced their retention ensured a smoother succession.
Governor Thomas Hutchinson and his judges until 1772 received their salaries from the Massachusetts legislature.
Not only were several jurors closely tied through business arrangements to the British army, but five ultimately became Loyalist exiles."
On New Year's Day Adams sent a brief, friendly note to Jefferson to accompany the delivery of "two pieces of homespun," a two-volume collection of lectures on rhetoric by John Quincy Adams.
Adams favored grandiose titles derived from British Crown tradition, such as "His Majesty the President" or "His High Mightiness, the President of the United States and Protector of Their Liberties."
Some pro-French Democratic-Republicans even fostered a movement in America, similar to the French Revolution, to overthrow the Federalists.
The American negotiators were able to secure a favorable treaty securing most lands east of the Mississippi, and the document was signed on September 3, 1783.
On June 7, 1776 he seconded the resolution, which stated, "These colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent states."
They also alienated Adams and his large personal following.
Nevertheless, his remnant Puritanism frequently prompted reservations about his hunger for fame, which he once referred to as mere "trumpery", and he questioned his not properly attending to the "happiness of his fellow men."
A Committee of Five was charged with drafting the Declaration, and included Adams, along with Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Robert R. Livingston and Roger Sherman.
Many sought to vest Hamilton with command authority over the army, and they also resisted giving prominent Democratic-Republicans positions in the army, which Adams wanted to do in order to gain bipartisan support.
Adams followed Washington's lead in using the presidency to exemplify republican values and civic virtue; and his service was free of scandal.
From an early age, he developed the habit of writing descriptions of events and impressions of men which are scattered through his diary, which included his report of the 1761 argument of James Otis, Jr. in the Massachusetts Superior Court as to the legality of Writs of Assistance.
In time Lee was recalled and Adams later developed his own enmity towards the older Franklin, whom the younger, more aggressive Adams felt was overly deferential to the French.
The Committee, after discussing the general outline that the document should follow, decided that Jefferson would write the first draft.
Jay, Adams, and Franklin played the major part in the final negotiations.
The perceived pomposity of his stance, along with his being overweight, led to Adams earning the nickname "His Rotundity."
He took all his courses under the tutorship of Joseph Mayhew who administered his entrance exam.
Adams vowed he would resign if elected to the second place spot of vice-president under Jefferson.
Adams was briefly retained by the ''Dartmouth'' owners regarding the question of their liability for the destroyed shipment.
October 19&#93;&nbsp;1735&nbsp;– July 4, 1826) was an American lawyer, author, statesman, and diplomat.
Adams was the primary author of the Massachusetts Constitution in 1780 which influenced American political theory, as did his earlier ''Thoughts on Government'' (1776).
He also believed that regular church service was beneficial to man's moral sense.
The Quasi-War with France resulted in the detachment from European affairs that Washington had sought.
Adams later said, "I longed more ardently to be a Soldier than I ever did to be a Lawyer."
He had two younger brothers, Peter and Elihu.
When Lord Howe unhappily stated he could view the American delegates only as British subjects, Adams replied, "Your lordship may consider me in what light you please, ...except that of a British subject."
Jefferson particularly thought Adams should write the document; but Adams persuaded the Committee to choose Jefferson while agreeing to consult with Jefferson personally.
He wrote that, "There is no good government but what is republican.
He delivered a speech in December before the governor and council in which he pronounced the Stamp Act invalid on the ground that Massachusetts, being without representation in Parliament, had not given its assent to it.
Her parents were Elizabeth Quincy and Rev.
He and his wife established a family of politicians, diplomats, and historians now referred to as the Adams political family.
He later observed that many protests were sparked by an oft-reprinted sermon of the Boston minister, Jonathan Mayhew, invoking Romans 13 to justify insurrection.
As Benjamin Rush reported, he was acknowledged "to be the first man in the House."
The Prussian ambassador in The Hague, Friedrich Wilhelm von Thulemeyer, was involved, as were Jefferson and Franklin, who were in Paris.
In June 1775, with a view of promoting union among the colonies, he nominated George Washington of Virginia as commander-in-chief of the army then assembled around Boston.
Marshall's long tenure represents the most lasting influence of the Federalists, as he infused the Constitution with a judicious and carefully reasoned nationalistic interpretation and established the Judicial Branch as the equal of the Executive and Legislative branches.
At the Convention of 1800 the Treaty of Alliance of 1778 was superseded and the United States was then free of foreign entanglements, as Washington had advised in his farewell address.
For centuries, dating back to Aristotle, a mixed regime balancing monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy—that is, the king, the nobles, and the people—was required to preserve order and liberty.
That the only valuable part of the British constitution is so because the very definition of a republic is an empire of laws, and not of men."
So impressed was Richard Henry Lee that, with Adams's consent, he had the most comprehensive letter printed.
51, explaining the separation of powers established under the new Constitution.
Indeed, if Washington got his men, the British would be "ruined".
He also suggested that there should be a separation of powers between the executive, the judicial and the legislative branches, and further recommended that if a continental government were to be formed then it "should sacredly be confined" to certain enumerated powers.
Son John Quincy came to the rescue by purchasing from him his properties in Weymouth and Quincy, including Peacefield, for the sum of $12,800.
Adams was thought to have overlooked this evolution and revealed his continued attachment to the older version of politics.
Adams recorded his exchange with Jefferson on the question: Jefferson asked, "Why will you not?
Historians debate his decision to retain en masse the members of Washington's cabinet.
This was the undeclared naval war between the U.S. and France–the Quasi-War which broke out in 1798.
The years of retirement in the Adams' household were not without some temporary financial adversity; in 1803 the bank holding his cash reserves of about $13,000 collapsed.
Deism rejected any and all supernatural activity and intervention by God; consequently, deists did not believe in miracles or God's providence....Adams, however, did believe in miracles, providence, and, to a certain extent, the Bible as revelation."
Adams' political views and his attempt to assume a more active role in the Senate made him a natural target for critics of the Washington administration.
On July 4, 1826, the fiftieth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, Adams died at his home in Quincy, at approximately 6:20 PM.
He also negotiated a loan of five million guilders financed by Nicolaas van Staphorst and Wilhelm Willink.
In the end, Adams lost narrowly to Jefferson by 65 to 73 electoral votes, with New York providing the decisive margin.
Boston radicals protested and asked John Adams to proclaim their objections.
Though he aligned with the Federalists, he was somewhat a party unto himself, disagreeing with the Federalists as much as he did the Democratic-Republicans.
The plain "President of the United States" eventually won the debate.
He also was against use of black soldiers in the Revolution, due to opposition from southerners.
He assisted Thomas Jefferson in drafting the Declaration of Independence in 1776, and was its foremost advocate in the Congress.
Adams used his wide knowledge of English and colonial legal history to argue that the provincial legislatures were fully sovereign over their own internal affairs, and that the colonies were connected to Great Britain only through the king.
Howe's authority was premised on the Colonists' submission, so no common ground was to be found.
In 1777, Adams began serving as the head of the Board of War and Ordnance; in fact, he sat on no less than ninety committees, chairing twenty-five.
Many colonists, including Adams, believed these courts, which operated without a jury, were corrupt and unfair.
Adams ultimately agreed to defend them, though he feared it would hurt his reputation.
When Washington won the presidential election of 1789 with 69 votes in the electoral college, Adams came in second with 34 votes and became Vice President; in that capacity, he became under the Constitution the President of the United States Senate.
In August 1765, reprising his pen name "Humphrey Ploughjogger", he contributed four articles to the ''Boston Gazette'' (republished in ''The London Chronicle'' in 1768 as ''True Sentiments of America'', also known as ''A Dissertation on the Canon and Feudal Law'').
When Democratic-Republicans in some states refused to enforce federal laws, some Federalists voiced the intention to send in an army and force them to capitulate.
In 1796, Adams denounced political opponent Thomas Paine's deistic criticisms of Christianity in ''The Age of Reason'', saying, "The Christian religion is, above all the religions that ever prevailed or existed in ancient or modern times, the religion of wisdom, virtue, equity and humanity, let the Blackguard Paine say what he will."
The Massachusetts Constitution of that year, to which Adams was a primary contributor, structured its government closely on his views of politics and society; in 1779, he drafted the document together with Samuel Adams and James Bowdoin.
And Adams responded, "Reason first, you are a Virginian, and a Virginian ought to appear at the head of this business.
The house that Adams bought during this stay in The Netherlands became the first American-owned embassy on foreign soil.
The majority of the legal actions began in 1798 and 1799, and went to trial on the eve of the 1800 presidential election–timing that hardly appeared coincidental, according to biographer Ferling.
There is not such a thought expressed or intimated in any public writing or private letter of mine, and I may safely challenge all of mankind to produce such a passage and quote the chapter and verse."
The Federalist Party, however, campaigned for him, while the Democratic-Republicans campaigned for Jefferson.
His father was a Congregationalist deacon, a farmer, a cordwainer, and a lieutenant in the militia.
Birth and wealth are conferred on some men as imperiously by nature, as genius, strength, or beauty.
Adams was educated at Harvard when the influence of deism was growing there, and sometimes used deistic terms in his speeches and writing.
Indeed, while Jefferson was laboring over the Declaration of Independence, Adams worked on the Model Treaty.
He was often described as "prickly", but his tenacity was fed by good decisions made in the face of universal opposition.
The instructions were a succinct and forthright defense of colonial rights and liberties.
The first seven chapters were produced by Adams' son John Quincy Adams.
May we not even say that the form of government is best which provides most effectually for a pure selection of these natural aristocrats into the offices of government?"
Frazer (2004) notes that while Adams shared many perspectives with deists, "Adams clearly was not a deist.
Once the resolution passed, independence became inevitable, though it still had to be declared formally.
I am in it by 6 in the Morning – I am in it at 9 at night.
After the Boston Massacre, despite severe local anti-British sentiment, he provided a successful though unpopular legal defense of the accused British soldiers, driven by his devotion to the right to counsel and the Presumption of innocence|"protection of innocence".
The acts became controversial from prosecution thereunder of a Congressman and a number of newspaper editors.
Overruling Franklin and distrustful of Vergennes, Jay and Adams decided not to consult with France; instead, they dealt directly with the British commissioners.
In July 1780 Adams replaced Laurens as the ambassador to the Dutch Republic, then one of the few other Republics in the world.
After graduating in 1755 with an A.B.
The death of Washington in 1799 weakened the Federalists, as they lost the one man who united the party.
In the book, Adams suggested that "the rich, the well-born and the able" should be set apart from other men in a senate—that would prevent them from dominating the lower house.
If a workable line could not be drawn between parliamentary sovereignty and the total independence of the colonies, he continued, the colonies would have no other choice but independence from England.
In the spring of 1776 Adams advocated in Congress that independence was necessary in order to establish trade, and conversely trade was essential for the attainment of independence; he specifically urged negotiation of a commercial treaty with France.
Adams' mother was from a leading medical family of current Brookline, Massachusetts.
Modern historians in the aggregate have ranked his administration favorably.
He moved the family to Boston in April of 1768, renting a clapboard house on Brattle Street, a place known locally as the "White House."
Adams often praised his father and recalled their close relationship.
In 1975, Peter Shaw published ''The Character of John Adams,'' a thematic biography noted for its psychological insight into Adams' life.
He specifically stated that he wanted to stay out of what he called the "silly and wicked game" of campaigning for office.
When Adams entered office, he decided to continue Washington's policy of staying out of the European war.
Adams never bought a slave and declined on principle to utilize slave labor, saying, "I have, through my whole life, held the practice of slavery in such abhorrence, that I have never owned a negro or any other slave, though I have lived for many years in times, when the practice was not disgraceful, when the best men in my vicinity thought it not inconsistent with their character, and when it has cost me thousands of dollars for the labor and subsistence of free men, which I might have saved by the purchase of negroes at times when they were very cheap."
He also noted on the day of the family's move, "Now my family is away, I feel no Inclination at all, no Temptation, to be any where but at my Office.
Following the opening of the Adams family papers in the 1950s, Page Smith published the first major biography to use these previously inaccessible primary sources; his biography won a 1962 Bancroft Prize but was criticized for its scanting of Adams' intellectual life and its diffuseness.
He continued to strengthen the central government by expanding the navy and army.
And indeed it would have been inconsistent in creation to have formed man for the social state, and not to have provided virtue and wisdom enough to manage the concerns of society.
In keeping with the current practice, Adams stayed in his home town (as did the others) rather than actively campaign for the Presidency.
Many years later Jefferson hailed Adams as "the pillar of the Declaration's support on the floor of Congress, its ablest advocate and defender against the multifarious assaults it encountered."
He sailed for France with his 10-year-old son John Quincy aboard the frigate ''Boston'' early that year.
As a diplomat in Europe, he helped negotiate the eventual peace treaty with Great Britain, and acquired vital governmental loans from Amsterdam bankers.
In 1784 and 1785, he was one of the architects of extensive trade relations between the United States and Prussia.
In arguing their case, Adams made his legendary statement regarding jury decisions: "Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be our wishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passion, they cannot alter the state of facts and evidence."
He did so in separate letters to these colleagues, each missive a bit longer and more thoughtful.
This was published between 1850 and 1856 by Charles C. Little and James Brown in Boston.
At the start of Washington's administration, Adams became deeply involved in a month-long Senate controversy over the official title of the President.
After defeating the Continental Army at the Battle of Long Island on August 27, 1776, British Admiral Richard Howe mistakenly assumed a strategic advantage to be at hand, and requested the Second Continental Congress send representatives in an attempt to negotiate peace.
After Jefferson's retirement from public life in 1809, Adams became more vocal.
Jefferson described Adams' proposed titles as "superlatively ridiculous."
Beyond Adams' nominal position in the Senate (he was allowed a vote as a tiebreaker when required), he otherwise played a minor role in the politics of the early 1790s.
Toward the end of his first term, as a result of a threatened resolution that would have silenced him except for procedural and policy matters, he began to exercise more restraint.
It also had psychological benefits, allowing America to view itself as holding its own against a European power.
Hamilton assumed control in the War department, and the rift between Adams' and Hamilton's supporters widened.
Adams was the father of John Quincy Adams, the sixth President of the United States.
The French and Indian War began in 1754 and Adams began to struggle with the issue of a young man's responsibility in the conflict; contemporaries of his social position were largely spectators, while those who were less solvent joined the battle as a means to make some money.
The Acts as well allowed for prosecution of many who opposed the Federalists, even on the floor of Congress.
