When Audubon reached his house, he was relieved to find no major damage, but the area was shaken by aftershocks for months.
I thought he had suddenly foundered, and, speaking to him, was on point of dismounting and leading him, when he all of a sudden fell a-groaning pieteously, hung his head, spread out his forelegs, as if to save himself from falling, and stood stock still, continuing to groan.
(The roughly 20-acre estate came to be known as Audubon Park in the 1860s when Audubon's widow began selling off parcels of the estate for the development of free-standing single family homes.).
''Birds of America'' became very popular during Europe's Romantic era.
He was the second American to be elected after statesman Benjamin Franklin.
But what is description compared to reality!
The terms of the dissolution of the partnership include those by Audubon:
London's Royal Society recognized Audubon's achievement by electing him as a fellow.
Then he would draw the rest of the day before returning to the field in the evening, a routine he kept up for weeks and months.
In the posthumously published book,  ''The Life of John James Audubon'', edited by his wife and derived primarily from his notes, Audubon related visiting the northeastern Florida coastal sugar plantation of John Joachim Bulow for Christmas 1831/early January 1832.
On a prospecting trip down the Ohio River with a load of goods, Audubon joined up with Shawnee and Osage hunting parties, learning their methods, drawing specimens by the bonfire, and finally parting "like brethren."
Audubon caught yellow fever upon arrival in New York City.
Studying his surroundings, Audubon quickly learned the ornithologist's rule, which he wrote down as, "The nature of the place—whether high or low, moist or dry, whether sloping north or south, or bearing tall trees or low shrubs—generally gives hint as to its inhabitants."
He also hunted animals and shipped the valued skins to British friends.
* The Audubon Museum at John James Audubon State Park in Henderson, Kentucky, houses many of Audubon's original watercolors, oils, engravings and personal memorabilia.
During this period (1822–1823), Audubon also worked as an instructor at Jefferson College in Washington, Mississippi.
1 1846) in collaboration with his good friend Rev John Bachman of Charleston, South Carolina, who supplied much of the scientific text.
He had become proficient at specimen preparation and taxidermy.
Who can tell the sensations which I experienced when I found myself rocking, as it were, upon my horse, and with him moving to and fro like a child in a cradle, with the most imminent danger around me.
(Some critics thought he should have organized the plates in Linnaean order as befitting a "serious" ornithological treatise.)
He added colored chalk or pastel to add softness to feathers, especially those of owls and herons.
All but 80 of the original copper plates were melted down when Lucy Audubon, desperate for money, sold them for scrap to the Phelps Dodge Corporation.
Audubon developed his own methods for drawing birds.
The senior Audubon had commanded ships.
All anxieties and fears which overshadowed his work in its beginning had passed away.
The pages were organized for artistic effect and contrasting interest, as if the reader were taking a visual tour.
When working on a major specimen like an eagle, he would spend up to four 15-hour days, preparing, studying, and drawing it.
Risking conscription in France, Audubon returned in 1805 to see his father and ask permission to marry.
This monumental work consists of 435 hand-colored, life-size prints of 497 bird species, made from engraved copper plates of various sizes depending on the size of the image.
Lucy became the steady breadwinner for the couple and their two young sons.
After settling business affairs, Lucy accompanied him back to England.
A great walker, he loved roaming in the woods, often returning with natural curiosities, including birds' eggs and nests, of which he made crude drawings.
The original edition was engraved in aquatint by Robert Havell, Jr., who took over the task after the first ten plates engraved by W. H. Lizars were deemed inadequate.
Due to rising tensions with the British, President Jefferson ordered an embargo on British trade in 1808, adversely affecting Audubon's trading business.
At times, as with woodpeckers, he combined several species on one page to offer contrasting features.
He frequently turned to hunting and fishing to feed his family, as business was slow.
''Birds of America'' is still considered one of the greatest examples of book art.
Both books were published between 1827 and 1839.
Genevieve on April 6, 1811.
He attempted to paint one page each day.
After 1819, Audubon went bankrupt and was thrown into jail for debt.
He took oil painting lessons from Sully and met Charles Bonaparte, who admired his work and recommended he go to Europe to have his bird drawings engraved.
Genevieve, Missouri, a former French colonial settlement west of the Mississippi River and south of St. Louis.
The two young people shared many common interests, and early on began to spend time together, exploring the natural world around them.
Jean Audubon and Claude Rozier arranged a business partnership for their sons to pursue in Pennsylvania.
Audubon's influence on ornithology and natural history was far reaching.
After they had enjoyed all the portrait patronage to be expected in Natchez, Mississippi, during January–March 1823, they resolved to travel together as perambulating portrait-artists.)
His father encouraged his interest in nature:
He was reunited with his family.
In 1791 he arranged for his natural children Jean and Muguet, who was majority-white in ancestry, to be transported and delivered to him in France.
The plantation site is preserved today as the Bulow Plantation Ruins Historic State Park.
He responded, " 'The Birds of America' will then raise in value as much as they are now depreciated by certain fools and envious persons."
He would speak of their departure and return with the seasons.
Soon he was drawing bird specimens again.
His father already had an unknown number of mixed-race children (among them a daughter named Marie-Madeleine), some by his mulatto housekeeper, Catherine "Sanitte" Bouffard (described as a quadroon, meaning she was three-quarters European in ancestry).
Audubon spent much time on "subscription gathering trips", drumming up sales of the octavo edition, as he hoped to leave his family a sizable income.
In 1810, Audubon moved his business further west to the less competitive Henderson, Kentucky area.
They nursed Audubon to recovery and taught him English, including the Quaker form of using "thee" and "thou", otherwise then archaic.
He employed multiple layers of watercoloring, and sometimes used gouache.
There Audubon and his assistants documented 36 species of birds.
Audubon found that during his absence, he had lost some subscribers due to the uneven quality of coloring of the plates.
He called my attention to their show of pleasure or sense of danger, their perfect forms and splendid attire.
His father hoped that the lead mines on the property could be commercially developed, as lead was an essential component of bullets.
His paintings of birds are set true-to-life in their natural habitat.
He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1830.
After his return to Kentucky, he found that rats had eaten his entire collection of more than 200 drawings.
They were printed on sheets measuring about 39 by .
The quake is estimated by scholars to have ranked from 8.4 to 8.8 on today's Richter Scale of severity, stronger than the San Francisco earthquake of 1906 which is estimated at 7.8.
She boarded with their children at the home of a wealthy plantation owner, as was often the custom of the time.
In 1842, he published an octavo edition of ''Birds of America'', with 65 additional plates.
Audubon and his wife, Lucy, are the chief characters in the "June" section of  the Maureen Howard novel ''Big as Life: Three Tales for Spring''.
Though their finances were tenuous, the Audubons started a family.
but the animal knew better than I what was forthcoming, and instead of going faster, so nearly stopped that I remarked he placed one foot after another on the ground with as much precaution as if walking on a smooth piece of ice.
In the fields and forests, Audubon wore typical frontier clothes and moccasins, having "a ball pouch, a buffalo horn filled with gunpowder, a butcher knife, and a tomahawk on his belt."
Audubon also admired the skill of Kentucky riflemen and the "regulators", citizen lawmen who created a kind of justice on the Kentucky frontier.
During the 1830s, Audubon continued making expeditions in North America.
He was committed to find and paint all the birds of North America for eventual publication.
Known as the Double Elephant folio after its double elephant paper size, it is often regarded as the greatest picture book ever produced and the finest aquatint work.
Audubon painted some of his works while staying at the Key West house and gardens of Capt.
Audubon had  decided to work at ornithology and art, and wanted to return to Lucy and their son in Kentucky.
I thought my horse was about to die, and would have sprung from his back had a minute more elapsed; but as that instant all the shrubs and trees began to move from their very roots, the ground rose and fell in successive furrows, like the ruffled water of a lake, and I became bewildered in my ideas, as I too plainly discovered, that all this awful commotion was the result of an earthquake.
On the return voyage, their ship ''Ripley'' made a stop at St. George's, Newfoundland.
Audubon lived with the tenants in the two-story stone house, in an area that he considered a paradise.
His mother died when the boy was a few months old, as she had suffered from tropical disease since arriving on the island.
Though low-paying, the job was ideal, as it afforded him much time to roam and paint in the woods.
Audubon's great work was a remarkable accomplishment.
The  homestead is located on the Perkiomen Creek a few miles from Valley Forge.
* The homestead Mill Grove in Audubon, Pennsylvania, is open to the public and contains a museum presenting all his major works, including ''Birds of America''.
In France during the chaotic years of the French Revolution and its aftermath, the younger Audubon grew up to be a handsome and gregarious man.
Audubon made some excursions out West where he hoped to record Western species he had missed, but his health began to fail.
He raised enough money to begin publishing his ''Birds of America''.
In 1803, his father obtained a false passport so that Audubon could go to the United States to avoid conscription in the Napoleonic Wars.
In 1848, he manifested signs of senility or possibly dementia from what is now called Alzheimer's disease, his "noble mind in ruins."
The work contains slightly more than 700 North American bird species.
"I felt an intimacy with them...bordering on frenzy that must accompany my steps through life."
He had earned the enmity of some of the city's leading scientists at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia.
It took more than 14 years of field observations and drawings, plus his single-handed management and promotion of the project to make it a success.
He would point out the elegant movement of the birds, and the beauty and softness of their plumage.
In 1824, Audubon returned to Philadelphia to seek a publisher for his bird drawings.
Rozier agreed to pay Audubon $3,000 (equivalent to ~$120,000 in 2010 dollars), with $1,000 in cash and the balance to be paid over time.
He retained some land for investment.
When Audubon, at age 18, boarded ship in 1803 to immigrate to the United States, he changed his name to an anglicized form: John James Audubon.
While there, he met the naturalist and physician Charles-Marie D'Orbigny, who improved Audubon's taxidermy skills and taught him scientific methods of research.
Peale's bird exhibits were considered scientifically advanced.
Though he met Thomas Sully, one of the most famous portrait painters of the time and a valuable ally, Audubon was rebuffed for publication.
Audubon bought land and slaves, founded a flour mill, and enjoyed his growing family.
This site was preserved as the Audubon House and Tropical Gardens.
(Audubon's account reveals that he learned oil painting in December 1822 from Jacob Stein, an itinerant portrait artist.
He wrote, "My heart was sorely heavy, for scarcely had I enough to keep my dear ones alive; and yet through these dark days I was being led to the development of the talents I loved."
Trained as a teacher, she conducted classes for children in their home.
* On December 6, 2010, a copy of ''Birds of America'' was sold at a Sotheby's auction for $11.5&nbsp;million, the second highest price for a single printed book.
After failing the officer's qualification test, Audubon ended his incipient naval career.
The portrait was hung at the entrance of his exhibitions, promoting his rustic image.
Audubon's dramatic portraits of birds appealed to people in this period's fascination with natural history.
He then used wires to prop them into a natural position, unlike the common method of many ornithologists, who prepared and stuffed the specimens into a rigid pose.
(The plantation has been preserved as the Audubon State Historic Site, and is located at 11788 Highway 965, between Jackson and St.
Six months later, he married Lucy Bakewell.
Audubon was working in Missouri and out riding when the 1811 New Madrid earthquake struck.
I John Audubon, having this day mutual consent with Ferdinand Rozier, dissolved and forever closed the partnership and firm of Audubon and Rozier, and having Received from said Ferdinand Rozier payment and notes to the full amount of my part of the goods and debts of the late firm of Audubon and Rozier, I the said John Audubon one of the firm aforesaid do hereby release and forever quit claim to all and any interest which I have or may have in the stock on hand and debts due to the late firm of Audubon and Rozier assign, transfer and set over to said Ferdinand Rozier, all my rights, titles, claims and interest in the goods, merchandise and debts due to the late firm of Audubon and Rozier, and do hereby authorize and empower him for my part, to collect the same in any manner what ever either privately or by suit or suits in law or equity hereby declaring him sole and absolute proprietor and rightful owner of all goods, merchandise and debts of this firm aforesaid, as completely as they were the goods and property of the late firm Audubon and Rozier.
He usually illustrated male and female variations, and sometimes juveniles.
Audubon's room was brimming with birds' eggs, stuffed raccoons and opossums, fish, snakes, and other creatures.
Although his return ship was overtaken by an English privateer, Audubon and his hidden gold coins survived the encounter.
Audubon realized the ambitious project would take him away from his family for months at a time.
Despite some errors in field observations, he made a significant contribution to the understanding of bird anatomy and behavior through his field notes.
Between 1812 and the Panic of 1819, times were good.
His major work, a color-plate book entitled ''The Birds of America'' (1827–1839), is considered one of the finest ornithological works ever completed.
The little money he earned was from drawing portraits, particularly death-bed sketches, greatly esteemed by country folk before photography.
Audubon resumed his bird studies and created his own nature museum, perhaps inspired by the great museum of natural history created by Charles Willson Peale in Philadelphia.
In 1841, having finished the ''Ornithological Biography'', Audubon returned to the United States with his family.
He also began drawing and painting birds, and recording their behavior.
His 1833 trip to Labrador is the subject of the novel ''Creation'' by Katherine Govier.
Charles Darwin quoted Audubon three times in ''On the Origin of Species'' and also in later works.
During a trip to Key West, a companion wrote in a newspaper article, "Mr. Audubon is the most enthusiastic and indefatigable man I ever knew...Mr. Audubon was neither dispirited by heat, fatigue, or bad luck...he rose every morning at 3&nbsp;o'clock and went out...until 1&nbsp;o'clock."
During a visit to Philadelphia in 1812 following Congress' declaration of war against Great Britain, Audubon became an American citizen and had to give up his French citizenship.
The ship's captain placed him in a boarding house run by Quaker women.
Audubon set about to study American birds, determined to illustrate his findings in a more realistic manner than most artists did then.
King George IV was among the avid fans of Audubon and subscribed to support publication of the book.
The mill was destroyed in 1836 in the Seminole Wars.
Audubon was a hit in France as well, gaining the King and several of the nobility as subscribers.
He was married to Lucy five years later.
They had two sons: Victor Gifford (1809–1860) and John Woodhouse Audubon (1812–1862); and two daughters who died while young: Lucy at two years (1815–1817) and Rose at nine months (1819–1820).
At Mill Grove, Audubon met the owner of the nearby estate "Fatland Ford", William Bakewell, and his daughter Lucy.
He traveled with George Lehman, a professional Swiss landscape artist.
"I have been received here in a manner not to be expected during my highest enthusiastic hopes."
He noted that as the earthquake retreated, "the air was filled with an extremely disagreeable sulphurous odor."
He also needed to discuss family business plans.
With letters of introduction to prominent Englishmen, Audubon gained their quick attention.
Audubon discovered 25 new species and 12 new subspecies.
Audubon was born in Les Cayes in the French colony of Saint-Domingue (now Haiti) on his father's sugarcane plantation.
Audubon had great respect for Native Americans: "Whenever I meet Indians, I feel the greatness of our Creator in all its splendor, for there I see the man naked from His hand and yet free from acquired sorrow."
Others were in arrears in their payments.
Audubon returned to America in 1829 to complete more drawings for his magnum opus.
Audubon based his paintings on his extensive field observations.
Nearly all later ornithological works were inspired by his artistry and high standards.
He used several birds in a drawing to present all views of anatomy and wings.
On October 12, 1820, Audubon traveled into Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida in search of ornithological specimens.
His father planned to make a seaman of his son.
Deeming the mining venture too risky, with his father's approval Audubon sold part of the Mill Grove farm, including the house and mine.
He and his small family took over an abandoned log cabin.
Smaller species were usually placed on branches with berries, fruit, and flowers.
* He was honored by the United States Postal Service with a 22¢ Great Americans series postage stamp.
Audubon is buried in the graveyard at the Church of the Intercession in the Trinity Church Cemetery and Mausoleum at 155th Street and Broadway in Manhattan, near his home.
In 1794 they formally adopted both his natural children to regularize their legal status in France.
The protective Mr. Bakewell wanted to see the young Frenchman established in a solid career before releasing his daughter to him.
This could provide his son with a profitable occupation.
Bouffard also took care of the infant boy Jean.
He met with great acceptance as he toured around England and Scotland, and was lionized as "the American woodsman."
A contemporary French critic wrote, "A magic power transported us into the forests which for so many years this man of genius has trod.
Audubon sold oil-painted copies of the drawings to make extra money and publicize the book.
The cost of printing the entire work was $115,640 (over $2,000,000 today), paid for from advance subscriptions, exhibitions, oil painting commissions, and animal skins, which Audubon hunted and sold.
Audubon also visited the dissecting theatre of the anatomist Robert Knox.
After weeks of depression, he took to the field again, determined to re-do his drawings to an even higher standard.
He quickly found out that he was susceptible to seasickness and not fond of mathematics or navigation.
He began conducting the first known bird-banding on the continent: he tied yarn to the legs of eastern phoebes and determined that they returned to the same nesting spots year after year.
Shipping goods ahead, Audubon and Rozier started a general store in Louisville, Kentucky on the Ohio River; the city had an increasingly important slave market and was the most important port between Pittsburgh and New Orleans.
He hired hunters to gather specimens for him.
Larger birds were often placed in their ground habitat or perching on stumps.
"Hunting, fishing, drawing, and music occupied my every moment; cares I knew not, and cared naught about them."
Student Charles Darwin was in the audience.
Increasing tension in Saint-Domingue between the colonists and the African slaves, who greatly outnumbered them, convinced Jean Audubon to return to France, where he became a member of the Republican Guard.
Audubon and Ferdinand Rozier moved their merchant business partnership west at various stages, ending ultimately in Ste.
Audubon sometimes used his drawing talent to trade for goods or sell small works to raise cash.
* In 1905, the National Audubon Society was incorporated and named in his honor.
In 1833, Audubon sailed north from Maine, accompanied by his son John, and five other young colleagues, to explore the ornithology of Labrador.
In 1808, Audubon moved to Kentucky, which was rapidly being settled.
Colorists applied each color in assembly-line fashion (over fifty were hired for the work).
Later she was hired as a local teacher in Louisiana.
He regularly burned his earlier efforts to force continuous improvement.
First, he killed them using fine shot.
After his release, he helped the American cause.
He happened to grab Audubon's favourite violin in an effort to knock the bat down, resulting in the destruction of the violin.
This was in stark contrast to the stiff representations of birds by his contemporaries, such as Alexander Wilson.
The work was completed by Audubon's sons and son-in-law, and the second volume was published posthumously in 1851.
His engraver fixed the plates and Audubon reassured subscribers, but a few begged off.
Audubon called his future work ''Birds of America''.
The British could not get enough of his images of backwoods America and its natural attractions.
The children were raised in Couëron, near Nantes, France, by Audubon and his French wife Anne Moynet Audubon, whom he had married years before his time in Saint-Domingue.
Learned and ignorant alike were astonished at the spectacle...It is a real and palpable vision of the New World."
Audubon writes that while on horseback, he first believed the distant rumbling to be the sound of a tornado,
After an accidental fall into a creek, Audubon contracted a severe fever.
