One of his last published works was ''Travels with Charley'', a travelogue of a road trip he took in 1960 to rediscover America.
Again he holds his position as an independent expounder of the truth with an unbiased instinct for what is genuinely American, be it good or bad."
The declassified documents showed that he was chosen as the best of a bad lot.
In June 1949, Steinbeck met stage-manager Elaine Scott at a restaurant in Carmel, California.
An exception was his first novel, ''Cup of Gold'', which concerns the pirate Henry Morgan, whose adventures had captured Steinbeck's imagination as a child.
Steinbeck called the period one of the "strangest and most frightening times a government and people have ever faced."
In Monterey, Ed Ricketts' laboratory survives (though it is not yet open to the public) and at the corner which Steinbeck describes in ''Cannery Row'', also the store which once belonged to Lee Chong, and the adjacent vacant lot frequented by the hobos of Cannery Row.
Although Carol accompanied Steinbeck on the trip, their marriage was beginning to suffer, and ended a year later, in 1941, even as Steinbeck worked on the manuscript for the book.
The site of the ''Hovden Sardine Cannery'' next to Doc's laboratory is now occupied by the Monterey Bay Aquarium.
Of the controversy, Steinbeck wrote, "The vilification of me out here from the large landowners and bankers is pretty bad.
It portrays the adventures of a group of classless and usually homeless young men in Monterey after World War I, just before U.S. prohibition.
The selection was heavily criticized, and described as "one of the Academy's biggest mistakes" in one Swedish newspaper.
In 1953, he wrote that he considered cartoonist Al Capp, creator of the satirical ''Li'l Abner'', "possibly the best writer in the world today."
Whatever food they had, they shared with their friends.
In 1952, John Steinbeck appeared as the on-screen narrator of 20th Century Fox's film, ''O.
The award citation lauded Steinbeck "for his realistic and imaginative writings, combining as they do sympathetic humour and keen social perception".
While working at Spreckels Sugar Company, he sometimes worked in their laboratory, which gave him time to write.
John Steinbeck died in New York City on December 20, 1968, of heart disease and congestive heart failure.
Claiming the book was both obscene and misrepresented conditions in the county, the Kern County Board of Supervisors banned the book from the county's publicly funded schools and libraries in August 1939.
The elder Steinbecks gave John free housing,  paper for his manuscripts, and from 1928,  loans that allowed him to write without looking for work.
The family farm in Heiligenhaus, Mettmann, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany, is still named "Großsteinbeck."
It was critically acclaimed and Steinbeck's 1962 Nobel Prize citation called it a "little masterpiece".
Their correspondence continued until his death.
Ricketts was Steinbeck's model for the character of "Doc" in ''Cannery Row'' (1945) and ''Sweet Thursday'' (1954), "Friend Ed" in ''Burning Bright'', and characters in ''In Dubious Battle'' (1936) and ''The Grapes of Wrath'' (1939).
His father's cottage on Eleventh Street in Pacific Grove, where Steinbeck wrote some of his earliest books, also survives.
The ''Grapes of Wrath'' is set in the Great Depression and describes a family of sharecroppers, the Joads, who were driven from their land due to the dust storms of the Dust Bowl.
In 1944, suffering from homesickness for his Pacific Grove/Monterey life of the 1930s, he wrote ''Cannery Row'' (1945), which became so famous that Ocean View Avenue in Monterey, the location of the book, was renamed Cannery Row in 1958.
The restored camper truck is on exhibit in the National Steinbeck Center in Salinas.
In 1962, Steinbeck won the Nobel Prize for literature for his "realistic and imaginative writing, combining as it does sympathetic humor and keen social perception."
In 1966, Steinbeck traveled to Tel Aviv to visit the site of Mount Hope, a farm community established in Israel by his grandfather, whose brother, Friedrich Grosssteinbeck, was murdered by Arab marauders in 1858 in what became known as the Outrages at Jaffa.
In 1947, Steinbeck made the first of many trips to the Soviet Union, this one with photographer Robert Capa.
To commemorate the 112th anniversary of Mr. Steinbeck's birthday on February 27, 2014, Google displayed an interactive doodle utilizing animation which included illustrations portraying scenes and quotes from several novels by the author.
Steinbeck followed this wave of success with ''The Grapes of Wrath'' (1939), based on newspaper articles about migrant agricultural workers that he had written in San Francisco.
When those sources failed, Steinbeck and his wife accepted welfare, and on rare occasions, stole bacon from the local produce market.
The book has a very different tone from Steinbeck's amoral and ecological stance in earlier works like ''Tortilla Flat'' and ''Cannery Row''.
His works frequently explored the themes of fate and injustice, especially as applied to downtrodden or everyman protagonists.
This third marriage for Steinbeck lasted until his death in 1968.
Steinbeck's wife began working at the lab as secretary-bookkeeper.
It has been said that in the United States this book came as a welcome antidote to the gloom of the then prevailing depression."
When their money ran out six months later due to a slow market, Steinbeck and Carol moved back to Pacific Grove, California, to a cottage owned by his father, on the Monterey Peninsula a few blocks outside the Monterey city limits.
Steinbeck may also have been concerned about the safety of his son serving in Vietnam.
However, in 1951, Steinbeck republished the narrative portion of the book as ''The Log from the Sea of Cortez'', under his name only (though Ricketts had written some of it).
The title is a reference to the Battle Hymn of the Republic.
Ricketts died hours before Steinbeck arrived.
Steinbeck's contacts with leftist authors, journalists, and labor union figures may have influenced his writing.
There he learned of the harsher aspects of the migrant life and the darker side of human nature, which supplied him with material expressed in such works as ''Of Mice and Men''.
Steinbeck's 1948 book about their experiences, ''A Russian Journal'', was illustrated with Capa's photos.
He travelled to New York City where he took odd jobs while trying to write.
Works such as ''Of Mice and Men'' are short and easy to read, and compassionately illustrate universal themes that are still relevant in the 21st century.
In 2012, (50 years later), the Nobel Prize opened its archives and it was revealed that Steinbeck was a "compromise choice" among a shortlist consisting of Steinbeck, British authors Robert Graves and Lawrence Durrell, French dramatist Jean Anouilh and Danish author Karen Blixen.
In presenting the 1962 Nobel Prize to Steinbeck, the Swedish Academy cited "spicy and comic tales about a gang of ''paisanos'', asocial individuals who, in their wild revels, are almost caricatures of King Arthur's Knights of the Round Table.
John's mother, Olive Hamilton (1867–1934), a former school teacher, shared Steinbeck's passion for reading and writing.
Steinbeck achieved his first critical success with ''Tortilla Flat'' (1935), a novel set in post-war Monterey, California, that won the California Commonwealth Club's Gold Medal.
''Tortilla Flat'' was adapted as a 1942 film of the same name, starring Spencer Tracy, Hedy Lamarr and John Garfield, a friend of Steinbeck.
Steinbeck helped on an informal basis.
In 1930, Steinbeck met the marine biologist Ed Ricketts, who became a close friend and mentor to Steinbeck during the following decade, teaching him a great deal about philosophy and biology.
''The Grapes of Wrath'' was banned by school boards: in August 1939, Kern County Board of Supervisors banned the book from the county's publicly funded schools and libraries.
Ricketts became a proponent of ecological thinking, in which man was only one part of a great chain of being, caught in a web of life too large for him to control or understand.
It was illustrated by John Alan Maxwell.
His later work reflected his wide range of interests, including marine biology, politics, religion, history and mythology.
In 1933 Steinbeck published ''The Red Pony'', a 100-page, four-chapter story weaving in memories of Steinbeck's childhood.
Steinbeck refused to travel from his home in California to attend any performance of the play during its New York run, telling director George S. Kaufman that the play as it existed in his own mind was "perfect" and that anything presented on stage would only be a disappointment.
Through Francis Whitaker, a member of the Communist Party USA’s John Reed Club for writers, Steinbeck met with strike organizers from the Cannery and Agricultural Workers' Industrial Union.
Later that year, it won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and was adapted as a film directed by John Ford, starring Henry Fonda as Tom Joad; Fonda was nominated for the best actor Academy Award.
On December 5, 2007, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted Steinbeck into the California Hall of Fame, located at the California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.
He spent his summers working on nearby ranches and later with migrant workers on Spreckels sugar beet farms.
Steinbeck returned from the war with a number of wounds from shrapnel and some psychological trauma.
The award of the 1962 Nobel Prize for Literature to Steinbeck was controversial in the United States.
Meanwhile, Ricketts operated a biological lab on the coast of Monterey, selling biological samples of small animals, fish, rays, starfish, turtles, and other marine forms to schools and colleges.
Steinbeck and Scott eventually began a relationship and in December 1950 Steinbeck and Scott married, within a week of the finalizing of Scott's own divorce from actor Zachary Scott.
These included ''In Dubious Battle'', ''Of Mice and Men'' and ''The Grapes of Wrath''.
In his acceptance speech later in the year in Stockholm, he said:
Steinbeck traveled to Mexico for the filming with Wagner who helped with the script; on this trip he would be inspired by the story of Emiliano Zapata, and subsequently wrote a film script (''Viva Zapata!'')
''To a God Unknown'', named after a Vedic hymn, follows the life of a homesteader and his family in California, depicting a character with a primal and pagan worship of the land he works.
Most of his early work dealt with subjects familiar to him from his formative years.
During the Great Depression, Steinbeck bought a small boat, and later claimed that he was able to live on the fish and crab that he gathered from the sea, and fresh vegetables from his garden and local farms.
Steinbeck, when asked on the day of the announcement if he deserved the Nobel, replied: "Frankly, no."
In 1952 Steinbeck's longest novel, ''East of Eden'', was published.
Steinbeck nicknamed his truck ''Rocinante'' after Don Quixote's "noble steed".
But he asserted that "Steinbeck didn't need the Nobel Prize— the Nobel judges needed him."
''Of Mice and Men'' is a tragedy that was written as a play in 1937.
It was burned in Salinas on two different occasions.
Steinbeck's last novel, ''The Winter of Our Discontent'' (1961), examines moral decline in America.
Steinbeck wrote two more stage plays (''The Moon Is Down'' and ''Burning Bright'').
The area is now sometimes referred to as "Steinbeck Country".
In accordance with his wishes, his body was cremated, and interred on March 4, 1969 at the Hamilton family gravesite in Salinas, with those of his parents and maternal grandparents.
With some of the proceeds, he built a summer ranch-home in Los Gatos.
Another film based on the novella was made in 1992 starring Gary Sinise as George and John Malkovich as Lennie.
The FBI denied that Steinbeck was under investigation.
The film versions of ''The Grapes of Wrath'' and ''Of Mice and Men'' (by two different movie studios) were in production simultaneously, allowing Steinbeck to spend a full day on the set of ''The Grapes of Wrath'' and the next day on the set of ''Of Mice and Men.''
The novel is an imaginative telling of a story which Steinbeck had heard in La Paz in 1940, as related in ''The Log From the Sea of Cortez'', which he described in Chapter 11 as being "so much like a parable that it almost can't be".
During the war, Steinbeck accompanied the commando raids of Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.'s Beach Jumpers program, which launched small-unit diversion operations against German-held islands in the Mediterranean.
The ''New York Times'' asked why the Nobel committee gave the award to an author whose "limited talent is, in his best books, watered down by tenth-rate philosophising", noting that "The international character of the award and the weight attached to it raise questions about the mechanics of selection and how close the Nobel committee is to the main currents of American writing.... We think it interesting that the laurel was not awarded to a writer ... whose significance, influence and sheer body of work had already made a more profound impression on the literature of our age".
Biographer Jackson Benson notes, "This honor was one of the few in the world that one could not buy nor gain by political maneuver.
In 1967, at the behest of ''Newsday'' magazine, Steinbeck went to Vietnam to report on the war.
Dana Gioia (chair of the National Endowment for the Arts) told an audience at the center, "This is really the best modern literary shrine in the country, and I've seen them all."
The ''New York Times'' ran an article by Arthur Mizener entitled "Does a Writer with a Moral Vision of the 1930s Deserve the Nobel Prize?"
He was 66, and had been a lifelong smoker.
The story first appeared in the December 1945 issue of Woman's Home Companion magazine as "The Pearl of the World."
In 1967, when he was sent to Vietnam to report on the war, his sympathetic portrayal of the United States Army led the ''New York Post'' to denounce him for betraying his liberal past.
that claimed Steinbeck was undeserving of the prestigious prize as he was a "limited talent" whose works were "watered down by tenth-rate philosophizing".
The reaction of American literary critics was also harsh.
With his second wife Steinbeck had two sons, Thomas ("Thom") Myles Steinbeck (1944-2016) and John Steinbeck IV (1946–1991).
In 1962, Steinbeck began acting as friend and mentor to the young writer and naturalist Jack Rudloe, who was trying to establish his own biological supply company, now Gulf Specimen Marine Laboratory in Florida.
In June 1957, Steinbeck took a personal and professional risk by supporting him when Miller refused to name names in the House Un-American Activities Committee trials.
At one point being allowed to man a machine-gun watch position at night at a firebase, while his son and other members of his platoon slept.
It was not a critical success.
Steinbeck was mentored by radical writers Lincoln Steffens and his wife Ella Winter.
It is completely out of hand; I mean a kind of hysteria about the book is growing that is not healthy."
''The Pastures of Heaven'', published in 1932, consists of twelve interconnected stories about a valley near Monterey, which was discovered by a Spanish corporal while chasing runaway Indian slaves.
He had written to his doctor that he felt deeply "in his flesh" that he would not survive his physical death, and that the biological end of his life was the final end to it.
In 1945, Steinbeck received the Haakon VII Cross of freedom for his literary contributions to the Norwegian resistance movement.
Later he used actual American conditions and events in the first half of the 20th century, which he had experienced first-hand as a reporter.
Documents, released by the Central Intelligence Agency in 2012, indicate that Steinbeck offered his services to the Agency in 1952, while planning a European tour, and the Director of Central Intelligence, Walter Bedell Smith, was eager to take him up on the offer.
The National Steinbeck Center, two blocks away at 1 Main Street is the only museum in the U.S. dedicated to a single author.
Steinbeck complained publicly about government harassment.
He was of German, English, and Irish descent.
It was presumed that the unnamed country of the novel was Norway and the occupiers the Nazis.
It is commonly considered his greatest work.
''Of Mice and Men'' was also adapted as a 1939 Hollywood film, with Lon Chaney, Jr. as Lennie (he had filled the role in the Los Angeles stage production) and Burgess Meredith as George.
According to ''The New York Times'', it was the best-selling book of 1939 and 430,000 copies had been printed by February 1940.
Johann Adolf Großsteinbeck (1828–1913), Steinbeck's paternal grandfather, shortened the family name to Steinbeck when he immigrated to the United States.
Their joint book about a collecting expedition to the Gulf of California in 1940, which was part travelogue and part natural history, published just as the U.S. entered World War II, never found an audience and did not sell well.
Steinbeck's novel ''The Moon Is Down'' (1942), about the Socrates-inspired spirit of resistance in an occupied village in Northern Europe, was made into a film almost immediately.
Many of Steinbeck's works are required reading in American high schools.
They visited Moscow, Kiev, Tbilisi, Batumi and Stalingrad, some of the first Americans to visit many parts of the USSR since the communist revolution.
Carol became the model for Mary Talbot in Steinbeck's novel Cannery Row.
Steinbeck was born on February 27, 1902, in Salinas, California.
'''John Ernst Steinbeck, Jr.''' (February 27, 1902&nbsp;– December 20, 1968) was an American author of 27 books, including 16 novels, six non-fiction books, and five collections of short stories.
After the war, he wrote ''The Pearl'' (1947), knowing it would be filmed.
Some critics found it too sympathetic to the workers' plight and too critical of capitalism but found a large audience of its own.
He wrote Alfred Hitchcock's movie, ''Lifeboat'' (1944), and the film, ''A Medal for Benny'' (1945), with screenwriter Jack Wagner about paisanos from ''Tortilla Flat'' going to war.
The street that Steinbeck described as "Cannery Row" in the novel, once named ''Ocean View Avenue'', was renamed ''Cannery Row'' in honor of the novel, in 1958.
At his own first Nobel Prize press conference he was asked his favorite authors and works and replied: "Hemingway's short stories and nearly everything Faulkner wrote."
directed by Elia Kazan and starring Marlon Brando and Anthony Quinn.
It is getting tiresome."
In the 1930s and 1940s, Ed Ricketts strongly influenced Steinbeck's writing.
They think I am an enemy alien.
On February 27, 1979 (the 77th anniversary of the writer's birth), the United States Postal Service issued a stamp featuring Steinbeck, starting the Postal Service’s Literary Arts series honoring American writers.
I'm frightened at the rolling might of this damned thing.
In this sometimes comical, sometimes melancholic book, Steinbeck describes what he sees from Maine to Montana to California, and from there to Texas and Louisiana and back to his home on Long Island.
His childhood friend, Max Wagner, a brother of Jack Wagner and who later became a film actor, served as inspiration for ''The Red Pony''.
Many reviewers recognized the importance of the novel, but were disappointed that it was not another ''Grapes of Wrath''.
Some of his writings from this period were incorporated in the documentary ''Once There Was a War'' (1958).
The story is about two traveling ranch workers, George and Lennie, trying to earn enough money to buy their own farm/ranch.
It was at that time he became friends with Will Lang, Jr. of ''Time''/''Life'' magazine.
The story follows two families: the Hamiltons&nbsp;– based on Steinbeck's own maternal ancestry&nbsp;– and the Trasks, reprising stories about the Biblical Adam and his progeny.
They married in January 1930 in Los Angeles, where, with friends, he attempted to make money by manufacturing plaster mannequins.
Poore noted a "preachiness" in Steinbeck's work, "as if half his literary inheritance came from the best of Mark Twain— and the other half from the worst of Cotton Mather."
This first novel tells the story of a fruit pickers' strike in California which is both aided and damaged by the help of "the Party," generally taken to be the Communist Party, although this is never spelled out in the book.
Along with ''The Grapes of Wrath'', ''East of Eden'', and ''The Pearl'', ''Of Mice and Men'' is one of Steinbeck's best known works.
The British newspaper ''The Guardian'', in a 2013 article that revealed that Steinbeck had been a compromise choice for the Nobel Prize, called him a "Giant of American Letters".
When Steinbeck became emotionally upset, Ricketts sometimes played music for him.
The winner of the 1962 Nobel Prize in Literature, he has been called "a giant of American letters".
Steinbeck's close relations with Ricketts ended in 1941 when Steinbeck moved away from Pacific Grove and divorced his wife Carol.
Ricketts, usually very quiet, yet likable, with an inner self-sufficiency and an encyclopedic knowledge of diverse subjects, became a focus of Steinbeck's attention.
The latest is a rumor started by them that the Okies hate me and have threatened to kill me for lying about them.
Steinbeck frequently took small trips with Ricketts along the California coast to give himself time off from his writing and to collect biological specimens, which Ricketts sold for a living.
In the first 75 years after it was published, it sold 14 million copies.
In a 1942 letter to United States Attorney General Francis Biddle, John Steinbeck wrote: "Do you suppose you could ask Edgar's boys to stop stepping on my heels?
In 1948, the year the book was published, Steinbeck was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters.
By doing so, these people will naturally become the enemies of the political status quo."
According to his third wife, Elaine, he considered it his ''magnum opus'', his greatest novel.
Most of Steinbeck's work is set in southern and central California, particularly in the Salinas Valley and the California Coast Ranges region.
Between 1930 and 1936, Steinbeck and Ricketts became close friends.
The Pulitzer Prize-winning ''The Grapes of Wrath'' (1939) is considered Steinbeck's masterpiece and part of the American literary canon.
''Grapes'' was controversial.
In his subsequent novels, Steinbeck found a more authentic voice by drawing upon direct memories of his life in California.
Henry's Full House''.
'', Steinbeck collaborated with Kazan on ''East of Eden'', James Dean's film debut.
Steinbeck often populated his stories with struggling characters; his works examined the lives of the working class and migrant workers during the Dust Bowl and the Great Depression.
About the same time, Steinbeck recorded readings of several of his short stories for Columbia Records;  the recordings provide a record of Steinbeck's deep, resonant voice.
Between 1930 and 1933, Steinbeck produced three shorter works.
Following the success of ''Viva Zapata!
Meredith and Steinbeck became close friends for the next two decades.
Ricketts' biographer Eric Enno Tamm notes that, except for ''East of Eden'' (1952), Steinbeck's writing declined after Ricketts' untimely death in 1948.
He treated himself, as ever, by writing.
''Travels with Charley: In Search of America'' is a travelogue of his 1960 road trip with his poodle Charley.
Although modest about his own talent as a writer, Steinbeck talked openly of his own admiration of certain writers.
He had considerable mechanical aptitude and fondness for repairing things he owned.
In the Nobel Prize presentation speech next year, however, the Swedish Academy cited it most favorably: "Here he attained the same standard which he set in The Grapes of Wrath.
Steinbeck graduated from Salinas High School in 1919 and went on to study English Literature at Stanford University near Palo Alto, leaving, without a degree, in 1925.
He is widely known for the comic novels ''Tortilla Flat'' (1935) and ''Cannery Row'' (1945), the multi-generation epic ''East of Eden'' (1952), and the novellas ''Of Mice and Men'' (1937) and ''The Red Pony'' (1937).
Contra-wise, Steinbeck's works have been frequently banned in the United States.
In the United Kingdom, ''Of Mice and Men'' is one of the key texts used by the examining body AQA for its English Literature GCSE.
This work remains in print today.
Steinbeck was a close associate of playwright Arthur Miller.
Although the committee believed Steinbeck's best work was behind him by 1962, committee member Anders Österling believed the release of his novel ''The Winter of Our Discontent'' showed that "after some signs of slowing down in recent years, Steinbeck has regained his position as a social truth-teller and is an authentic realist fully equal to his predecessors Sinclair Lewis and Ernest Hemingway."
According to the American Library Association Steinbeck was one of the ten most frequently banned authors from 1990 to 2004, with ''Of Mice and Men'' ranking sixth out of 100 such books in the United States.
According to Steinbeck's son Thom, Steinbeck went on the trip, because he knew he was dying and wanted to see the country one last time.
''Of Mice and Men'' was a drama about the dreams of two migrant agricultural laborers in California.
Steinbeck began to write a series of "California novels" and Dust Bowl fiction, set among common people during the Great Depression.
Salinas, Monterey and parts of the San Joaquin Valley were the setting for many of his stories.
His son, author Thomas Steinbeck, accepted the award on his behalf.
Thomas Steinbeck, the author's eldest son, said that J. Edgar Hoover, director of the FBI at the time, could find no basis for prosecuting Steinbeck and therefore used his power to encourage the U.S. Internal Revenue Service to audit Steinbeck's taxes every single year of his life, just to annoy him.
Its stage production was a hit, starring Wallace Ford as George and Broderick Crawford as George's companion, the mentally childlike, but physically powerful itinerant farmhand Lennie.
Its "Steinbeckiana" includes "Rocinante", the camper-truck in which Steinbeck made the cross-country trip described in ''Travels with Charley''.
He also wrote an article series called ''The Harvest Gypsies'' for the ''San Francisco News'' about the plight of the migrant worker.
He joined the League of American Writers, a Communist organization, in 1935.
When he failed to publish his work, he returned to California and worked in 1928 as a tour guide and caretaker at Lake Tahoe, where he met Carol Henning, his first wife.
