Milton's father's prosperity provided his eldest son with a private tutor, Thomas Young, a Scottish Presbyterian with an M.A.
John Milton was born in Bread Street, London on 9 December 1608, the son of composer John Milton and his wife Sarah Jeffrey.
Woolrych speaks of "the gulf between Milton's vision of the Commonwealth's future and the reality".
Modern scholars of Milton's life, politics, and work are known as Miltonists: "his work is the subject of a very large amount of academic scholarship".
Harold Bloom, in ''The Anxiety of Influence'', wrote that "Milton is the central problem in any theory and history of poetic influence in English ...".
Milton's ''magnum opus'', the blank-verse epic poem ''Paradise Lost'', was composed by the blind and impoverished Milton from 1658 to 1664 (first edition), with small but significant revisions published in 1674 (second edition).
The title of Philip Pullman's ''His Dark Materials'' trilogy is derived from a quotation, "His dark materials to create more worlds", line 915 of Book II in ''Paradise Lost''.
The German-language Milton tradition returned to England in the person of the artist Henry Fuseli.
In 1654, Milton completed the second defence of the English nation ''Defensio secunda'' in response to an anonymous Royalist tract ''"Regii sanguinis clamor"'', a work that made many personal attacks on Milton.
Historian Christopher Hill cautiously notes that Milton was "apparently" rusticated, and that the differences between Chappell and Milton may have been either religious or personal.
The group of disaffected republicans included, besides Vane, John Bradshaw, John Hutchinson, Edmund Ludlow, Henry Marten, Robert Overton, Edward Sexby and John Streater; but not Marvell, who remained with Cromwell's party.
In ''The Madwoman in the Attic'', Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar note that Mary Shelley's novel ''Frankenstein'' is, in the view of many critics, "one of the key 'Romantic' readings of ''Paradise Lost''."
Milton was probably rusticated (suspended) for quarrelling in his first year with his tutor, Bishop William Chappell.
While there, Milton enjoyed many of the sites and structures of the city.
The Restoration of 1660 deprived Milton, now completely blind, of his public platform, but this period saw him complete most of his major works of poetry.
Within a dominant culture that stressed elegance and finish, he granted primacy to freedom, breadth and imaginative suggestiveness, eventually developed into the romantic vision of sublime terror.
In his 1641 treatise, ''Of Reformation'', Milton expressed his dislike for Catholicism and episcopacy, presenting Rome as a modern Babylon, and bishops as Egyptian taskmasters.
Milton was disdainful of the university curriculum, which consisted of stilted formal debates conducted in Latin on abstruse topics.
In 1749, Thomas Newton published an extensive edition of Milton's poetical works with annotations provided by himself, Dryden, Pope, Addison, the Richardsons (father and son) and others.
Milton married for a third time on 24 February 1662 to Elizabeth Mynshull (1638–1728), the niece of Thomas Mynshull, a wealthy apothecary and philanthropist in Manchester.
In his early poems, the poet narrator expresses a tension between vice and virtue, the latter invariably related to Protestantism.
This attitude cut right across the grain of popular opinion of the time, which swung decisively behind the restoration of the Stuart monarchy that took place later in the year.
However, Milton's basic approval of divorce within strict parameters set by the biblical witness was typical of many influential Christian intellectuals, particularly the Westminster divines.
At the time, poetic blank verse was considered distinct from its use in verse drama, and ''Paradise Lost'' was taken as a unique examplar.
Milton's ode ''At a solemn Musick'' was set for choir and orchestra as ''Blest Pair of Sirens'' by Hubert Parry (1848-1918), and Milton's poem ''On the Morning of Christ's Nativity'' was set as a large-scale choral work by Cyril Rootham (1875-1938).
It has been argued that the poem reflects his personal despair at the failure of the Revolution, yet affirms an ultimate optimism in human potential.
Very early on, though, he was championed by Whigs, and decried by Tories: with the regicide Edmund Ludlow he was claimed as an early Whig, while the High Tory Anglican minister Luke Milbourne lumped Milton in with other "Agents of Darkness" such as John Knox, George Buchanan, Richard Baxter, Algernon Sidney and John Locke.
Milton tried to break this powerful image of Charles I (the literal translation of Eikonoklastes is 'the image breaker').
By the late 1650s, Milton was a proponent of monism or animist materialism, the notion that a single material substance which is "animate, self-active, and free" composes everything in the universe: from stones and trees and bodies to minds, souls, angels, and God.
In addition to John Dryden, among them were Alexander Pope, Joseph Addison, Thomas Newton, and Samuel Johnson.
Reaction to Milton's poetic worldview included, grudgingly, acknowledgement that of poet's resemblance to classical writers (Greek and Roman poetry being unrhymed).
Milton's first foray into polemics was ''Of Reformation touching Church Discipline in England'' (1641), followed by ''Of Prelatical Episcopacy'', the two defences of Smectymnuus (a group of Presbyterian divines named from their initials; the "TY" belonged to Milton's old tutor Thomas Young), and ''The Reason of Church-Government Urged against Prelaty''.
In Venice, Milton was exposed to a model of Republicanism, later important in his political writings, but he soon found another model when he travelled to Geneva.
On 24 February 1652, Milton published his Latin defence of the English people ''Defensio pro Populo Anglicano'', also known as the ''First Defence''.
In October 1649, he published ''Eikonoklastes'', an explicit defence of the regicide, in response to the ''Eikon Basilike'', a phenomenal best-seller popularly attributed to Charles I that portrayed the King as an innocent Christian martyr.
(A plaque on the wall of Mynshull's House in Manchester describes Elizabeth as Milton's "3rd and Best wife".)
Palmer expressed his disapproval in a sermon addressed to the Westminster Assembly.
Neither the Assembly nor Parliament condemned Milton or his ideas.
Milton had argued for an awkward position, in the ''Ready and Easy Way'', because he wanted to invoke the Good Old Cause and gain the support of the republicans, but without offering a democratic solution of any kind.
Just before his death in 1674, Milton supervised a second edition of ''Paradise Lost'', accompanied by an explanation of "why the poem rhymes not", and prefatory verses by Andrew Marvell.
He was certainly at home in the Lent Term 1626; there he wrote his ''Elegia Prima'', a first Latin elegy, to Charles Diodati, a friend from St Paul's.
After leaving Florence, he travelled through Lucca, Bologna, and Ferrara before coming to Venice.
In 1643, Milton had a brush with the authorities over these writings, in parallel with Hezekiah Woodward, who had more trouble.
He re-emerged after a general pardon was issued, but was nevertheless arrested and briefly imprisoned before influential friends intervened, such as Marvell, now an MP.
"Miltonic verse" might be synonymous for a century with blank verse as poetry, a new poetic terrain independent from both the drama and the heroic couplet.
In London, the senior John Milton married Sarah Jeffrey (1572–1637) and found lasting financial success as a scrivener.
He left Florence in September to continue to Rome.
F. R. Leavis, in ''The Common Pursuit'', responded to the points made by Eliot, in particular the claim that "the study of Milton could be of no help: it was only a hindrance", by arguing, "As if it were a matter of deciding ''not'' to study Milton!
A friend and ally in the pamphlet wars was Marchamont Nedham.
The language of Thomson's finest poems (e.g.
Both these works were referred to in the Exclusion debate, the attempt to exclude the heir presumptive from the throne of England—James, Duke of York—because he was Roman Catholic.
After his divorce writings, ''Areopagitica'', and a gap, he wrote in 1649–54 in the aftermath of the execution of Charles I, and in polemic justification of the regicide and the existing Parliamentarian regime.
He was introduced to Cardinal Francesco Barberini who invited Milton to an opera hosted by the Cardinal.
Milton also wrote the hymn Let us with a gladsome mind, a versification of Psalm 136.
As a result of such intensive study, Milton is considered to be among the most learned of all English poets.
Milton himself wrote that "Worthy deeds are not often destitute of worthy relaters", in Book II of his ''History of Britain''.
In May 1638, Milton embarked upon a tour of France and Italy that lasted up to July or August 1639.
By the time of his death in 1674, Milton was impoverished and on the margins of English intellectual life, yet famous throughout Europe and unrepentant for his political choices.
This pursuit of freedom was largely a reaction against conservative values entrenched within the rigid heroic couplet.
He also published his ''Sonnet 16'' in praise of "Cromwell, our chief of men" in 1652.
Keats felt that ''Paradise Lost'' was a "beautiful and grand curiosity", but his own unfinished attempt at epic poetry, ''Hyperion'', was unsatisfactory to the author because, amongst other things, it had too many "Miltonic inversions".
It is also possible that, like Isaac Newton four decades later, Milton was sent home because of the plague, by which Cambridge was badly affected in 1625.
The Restoration of the Stuart monarchy in 1660 began a new phase in Milton's work.
He also befriended Anglo-American dissident and theologian Roger Williams.
In addition to these literary defences of the Commonwealth and his character, Milton continued to translate official correspondence into Latin.
The elder Milton was noted for his skill as a musical composer, and this talent left his son with a lifelong appreciation for music and friendships with musicians such as Henry Lawes.
At Cambridge, Milton was on good terms with Edward King, for whom he later wrote "Lycidas".
On 27 April 1667, Milton sold the publication rights for ''Paradise Lost'' to publisher Samuel Simmons for £5, equivalent to approximately £7,400 income in 2008, with a further £5 to be paid if and when each print run sold out of between 1,300 and 1,500 copies.
During this period, Milton published several minor prose works, such as the grammar textbook ''Art of Logic'' and a ''History of Britain''.
According to James Tully:
Milton's key beliefs were idiosyncratic, not those of an identifiable group or faction, and often they go well beyond the orthodoxy of the time.
Even here, though, his originality is qualified: Thomas Gataker had already identified "mutual solace" as a principal goal in marriage.
Unrhymed lyrics like Collins' ''Ode to Evening'' (in the meter of Milton's translation of Horace's ''Ode to Pyrrha'') were not uncommon after 1740.
Milton continued to write poetry during this period of study; his ''Arcades'' and ''Comus'' were both commissioned for masques composed for noble patrons, connections of the Egerton family, and performed in 1632 and 1634 respectively.
Many enlightenment thinkers of the 18th century revered and commented on Milton's poetry and non-poetical works.
His own corpus is not devoid of humour, notably his sixth prolusion and his epitaphs on the death of Thomas Hobson.
His main job description was to compose the English Republic's foreign correspondence in Latin, but he also was called upon to produce propaganda for the regime and to serve as a censor.
It included many Latinate neologisms, as well as obsolete words already dropped from popular usage so completely that their meanings were no longer understood.
Edmund Burke was a theorist of the sublime, and he regarded Milton's description of Hell as exemplary of sublimity as an aesthetic concept.
From Switzerland, Milton travelled to Paris and then to Calais before finally arriving back in England in either July or August 1639.
Milton's poetry was slow to see the light of day, at least under his name.
In ''Paradise Lost'', ''Paradise Regained'' and ''Samson Agonistes'', Milton mourns the end of the godly Commonwealth.
Milton embraced many heterodox Christian theological views.
He also lived at Horton, Berkshire, from 1635 and undertook six years of self-directed private study.
In 1732, the classical scholar Richard Bentley offered a corrected version of ''Paradise Lost''.
This story is now disputed, though certainly Milton disliked Chappell.
Illustrated by ''Paradise Lost'' is mortalism, the belief that the soul lies dormant after the body dies.
He lived in and worked from a house on Bread Street, where the Mermaid Tavern was located in Cheapside.
Milton studied, travelled, wrote poetry mostly for private circulation, and launched a career as pamphleteer and publicist under the increasingly personal rule of Charles I and its breakdown in constitutional confusion and war.
from the University of St. Andrews.
Milton followed up the publication ''Paradise Lost'' with its sequel ''Paradise Regained'', which was published alongside the tragedy ''Samson Agonistes'' in 1671.
*''The Ready and Easy Way to Establishing a Free Commonwealth'', in two editions, responded to General Monck's march towards London to restore the Long Parliament (which led to the restoration of the monarchy).
He cast a formidable shadow over English poetry in the 18th and 19th centuries; he was often judged equal or superior to all other English poets, including Shakespeare.
While at Cambridge, he wrote a number of his well-known shorter English poems, among them "On the Morning of Christ's Nativity", his "Epitaph on the admirable Dramatick Poet, W. Shakespeare" (his first poem to appear in print), ''L'Allegro'', and ''Il Penseroso''.
Milton probably visited the Florentine Academy and the Academia della Crusca along with smaller academies in the area, including the Apatisti and the Svogliati.
Jonathan Richardson, senior, and Jonathan Richardson, the younger, co-wrote a book of criticism.
In ''Areopagitica'', Milton aligns himself with the parliamentary cause, and he also begins to synthesize the ideal of neo-Roman liberty with that of Christian liberty.
There are other records, including some letters and some references in his other prose tracts, but the bulk of the information about the tour comes from a work that, according to Barbara Lewalski, "was not intended as autobiography but as rhetoric, designed to emphasise his sterling reputation with the learned of Europe."
Milton wrote  The Doctrine & Discipline of Divorce in 1643, at the beginning of the English Civil War.
For specific details of what happened within Milton's "grand tour", there appears to be just one primary source: Milton's own ''Defensio Secunda''.
In order to support this symmetry, lines were most often octo- or deca-syllabic, with no enjambed endings.
He was supported by his father's investments, but Milton became a private schoolmaster at this time, educating his nephews and other children of the well-to-do.
Preparing to become an Anglican priest, Milton stayed on to obtain his Master of Arts degree on 3 July 1632.
There was an early, partial translation of ''Paradise Lost'' into German by Theodore Haak, and based on that a standard verse translation by Ernest Gottlieb von Berge.
An orthodox Presbyterian view of the time was that Milton's views on divorce constituted a one-man heresy:
Milton's pure Latin prose and evident learning exemplified in the ''First Defence'' quickly made him a European reputation, and the work ran to numerous editions.
William Hayley's 1796 biography called him the "greatest English author", and he remains generally regarded "as one of the preeminent writers in the English language", though critical reception has oscillated in the centuries since his death (often on account of his republicanism).
He reached Florence in July 1638.
Milton's first datable compositions are two psalms done at age 15 at Long Bennington.
The Assembly convened on  1 July against the will of King  Charles I.
Milton's ''Areopagitica'' is still cited as relevant to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Palmer, who was a member of the Westminster Assembly, wrote:
The first run was a quarto edition priced at three shillings per copy, published in August 1667, and it sold out in eighteen months.
(Anna Beer, one of Milton's most recent biographers, points to a lack of evidence and the dangers of cynicism in urging that it was not necessarily the case that the private life so animated the public polemicising.)
A quotation from ''Areopagitica''—"A good book is the precious lifeblood of a master spirit, embalmed and treasured up on purpose to a life beyond life"—is displayed in many public libraries, including the New York Public Library.
As a blind poet, Milton dictated his verse to a series of aides in his employ.
It was the hostile response accorded the divorce tracts that spurred Milton to write ''Areopagitica'', his celebrated attack on pre-printing censorship.
His candour of manner and erudite neo-Latin poetry earned him friends in Florentine intellectual circles, and he met the astronomer Galileo who was under house arrest at Arcetri, as well as others.
Milton's views developed from his very extensive reading, as well as travel and experience, from his student days of the 1620s to the English Civil War.
He contributed his pastoral elegy ''Lycidas'' to a memorial collection for one of his Cambridge classmates.
After Young's tutorship, Milton attended St Paul's School in London.
Samuel Johnson praised ''Paradise Lost'' as "a poem which...with respect to design may claim the first place, and with respect to performance, the second, among the productions of the human mind", though he (a Tory and recipient of royal patronage) described Milton's politics as those of an "acrimonious and surly republican".
In 1740, Francis Peck identified some examples of Milton's "old" words (now popular).
Milton devised this position to avoid the mind-body dualism of Plato and Descartes as well as the mechanistic determinism of Hobbes.
For Burke, it was to set alongside mountain-tops, a storm at sea, and infinity.
Through Scudamore, Milton met Hugo Grotius, a Dutch law philosopher, playwright, and poet.
The work is an impassioned, bitter, and futile jeremiad damning the English people for backsliding from the cause of liberty and advocating the establishment of an authoritarian rule by an oligarchy set up by unelected parliament.
Dryden's ''The State of Innocence and the Fall of Man: an Opera'' (1677) is evidence of an immediate cultural influence.
As the Republic disintegrated, Milton wrote several proposals to retain a non-monarchical government against the wishes of parliament, soldiers, and the people.
During that time, he was introduced to Giovanni Battista Manso, patron to both Torquato Tasso and to Giovanni Battista Marino.
He knew at least four commentaries on ''Genesis'': those of John Calvin, Paulus Fagius, David Pareus and Andreus Rivetus.
Milton addressed the Assembly on the matter of divorce in August 1643, at a moment when the Assembly was beginning to form its opinion on the matter.
Milton's thinking on divorce caused him considerable trouble with the authorities.
By 1654, Milton had become totally blind; the cause of his blindness is debated but bilateral retinal detachment or glaucoma are most likely.
Milton collected his work in ''1645 Poems'' in the midst of the excitement attending the possibility of establishing a new English government.
''Comus'' argues for the virtuousness of temperance and chastity.
Both of these works also resonate with Milton's post-Restoration political situation.
In ''The Beautiful and the Sublime'', he wrote: "No person seems better to have understood the secret of heightening, or of setting terrible things, if I may use the expression, in their strongest light, by the force of a judicious obscurity than Milton."
Milton's use of blank verse, in addition to his stylistic innovations (such as grandiloquence of voice and vision, peculiar diction and phraseology) influenced later poets.
He graduated with a B.A.
Milton in fact stayed another seven months on the continent, and spent time at Geneva with Diodati's uncle after he returned to Rome.
Isaac Watts preferred his lines distinct from each other, as did Oliver Goldsmith, Henry Pemberton, and Scott of Amwell, whose general opinion it was that Milton's frequent omission of the initial unaccented foot was "displeasing to a nice ear".
The shift in accepted attitudes in government placed him in public office under the Commonwealth of England, from being thought dangerously radical and even heretical, and he even acted as an official spokesman in certain of his publications.
Herbert Palmer (Puritan) condemned Milton in the strongest possible language.
A 1668 edition of ''Paradise Lost'', reported to have been Milton's personal copy, is now housed in the archives of the University of Western Ontario.
The anonymous edition of ''Comus'' was published in 1637, and the publication of ''Lycidas'' in 1638 in ''Justa Edouardo King Naufrago'' was signed J. M. Otherwise.
Nigel Smith writes that
''The Seasons'', ''Castle of Indolence'') was self-consciously modelled after the Miltonian dialect, with the same tone and sensibilities as ''Paradise Lost''.
His poetic abilities impressed those like Giovanni Salzilli, who praised Milton within an epigram.
Though he may have maintained his personal faith in spite of the defeats suffered by his cause, the ''Dictionary of National Biography'' recounted how he had been alienated from the Church of England by Archbishop William Laud, and then moved similarly from the Dissenters by their denunciation of religious tolerance in England.
thou should'st be living at this hour" and modelled ''The Prelude'', his own blank verse epic, on ''Paradise Lost''.
The Victorian age witnessed a continuation of Milton's influence, George Eliot and Thomas Hardy being particularly inspired by Milton's poetry and biography.
John acted as a secretary, and Edward was Milton's first biographer.
Pullman was concerned to produce a version of Milton's poem accessible to teenagers, and has spoken of Milton as "our greatest public poet".
The years 1641–42 were dedicated to church politics and the struggle against episcopacy.
William Wordsworth began his sonnet "London, 1802" with "Milton!
These views were bound up in Protestant views of the Millennium, which some sects, such as the Fifth Monarchists predicted would arrive in England.
His only explicitly political tracts were the 1672 ''Of True Religion'', arguing for toleration (except for Catholics), and a translation of a Polish tract advocating an elective monarchy.
Once ''Paradise Lost'' was published, Milton's stature as epic poet was immediately recognised.
The Scottish commissioner Robert Baillie described Palmer's sermon as one “of the most Scottish and free sermons that ever I heard any where.”
The Romantic poets valued his exploration of blank verse, but for the most part rejected his religiosity.
These analogies conform to Milton's puritanical preference for Old Testament imagery.
A source has interpreted him as broadly Protestant, if not always easy to locate in a more precise religious category.
In the meantime, her desertion prompted Milton to publish a series of pamphlets over the next three years arguing for the legality and morality of divorce.
The second defence praised Oliver Cromwell, now Lord Protector, while exhorting him to remain true to the principles of the Revolution.
*''Proposals of certain expedients for the preventing of a civil war now feared'', written in November 1659.
T. S. Eliot believed that "of no other poet is it so difficult to consider the poetry simply as poetry, without our theological and political dispositions... making unlawful entry".
In addition to his years of private study, Milton had command of Latin, Greek, Hebrew, French, Spanish, and Italian from his school and undergraduate days; he also added Old English to his linguistic repertoire in the 1650s while researching his ''History of Britain'', and probably acquired proficiency in Dutch soon after.
In 1673, Milton republished his ''1645 Poems'', as well as a collection of his letters and the Latin prolusions from his Oxford days.
Then in 1659–60 he foresaw the Restoration, and wrote to head it off.
Following to Milton, English poetry from Pope to John Keats exhibited a steadily increasing attention to the connotative, the imaginative and poetic, value of words.
On returning to England where the Bishops' Wars presaged further armed conflict, Milton began to write prose tracts against episcopacy, in the service of the Puritan and Parliamentary cause.
Research suggests that Young's influence served as the poet's introduction to religious radicalism.
In the  Doctrine & Discipline of Divorce, Milton argued that divorce was a private matter, not a legal or ecclesiastical one.
In ''Defensio Secunda'', Milton proclaimed that he was warned against a return to Rome because of his frankness about religion, but he stayed in the city for two months and was able to experience Carnival and meet Lukas Holste, a Vatican librarian who guided Milton through its collection.
The phases of Milton's life parallel the major historical and political divisions in Stuart Britain.
A month later, however, the exiled Charles II and his party published the defence of monarchy ''Defensio Regia pro Carolo Primo'', written by leading humanist Claudius Salmasius.
Through the Interregnum, Milton often presents England, rescued from the trappings of a worldly monarchy, as an elect nation akin to the Old Testament Israel, and shows its leader, Oliver Cromwell, as a latter-day Moses.
Upon receiving his M.A.
In 1659, he published ''A Treatise of Civil Power'', attacking the concept of a state-dominated church (the position known as Erastianism), as well as ''Considerations touching the likeliest means to remove hirelings'', denouncing corrupt practises in church governance.
Bentley was considered presumptuous, and was attacked in the following year by Zachary Pearce.
Nevertheless, reaction among Puritans to Milton's views on divorce was mixed.
Milton wrote during a period when thoughts about divorce were anything but simplistic; rather, there was active debate among thought-leaders.
The “Miltonian dialect” as it was called, was emulated by later poets; Pope used the diction of ''Paradise Lost'' in his Homer translation, while the lyric poetry of Gray and Collins was frequently criticised for their use of “obsolete words out of Spenser and Milton”.
Milton tutored Williams in Hebrew in exchange for lessons in Dutch.
In the early version of his ''History of Britain'', begun in 1649, Milton was already writing off the members of the Long Parliament as incorrigible.
He himself considered the rhymeless quality of ''Paradise Lost'' to be an extension of his own personal liberty:
The political ideas of Milton, Locke, Sidney, and James Harrington strongly influenced the Radical Whigs, whose ideology in turn was central to the American Revolution.
Admirers remained hesitant to adopt such departures from traditional metrical schemes: “The English&nbsp;... had been writing separate lines for so long that they could not rid themselves of the habit”.
Nephews Edward and John Phillips (sons of Milton's sister Anne) were educated by Milton and became writers themselves.
Hill argues that this was not retreat into a rural idyll; Hammersmith was then a "suburban village" falling into the orbit of London, and even Horton was becoming deforested and suffered from the plague.
In the work, Aubrey quotes Christopher, Milton's younger brother: "When he was young, he studied very hard and sat up very late, commonly till twelve or one o'clock at night".
"Milton argued for disestablishment as the only effective way of achieving broad toleration.
Blair Worden remarks that both Milton and Nedham, with others such as Andrew Marvell and James Harrington, would have taken the problem with the Rump Parliament to be not the republic, but the fact that it was not a proper republic.
Milton deemed these features to be reflective of "the transcendental union of order and freedom".
Samuel Johnson wrote numerous essays on ''Paradise Lost'', and Milton was included in his ''Lives of the Most Eminent English Poets'' (1779–1781).
His 'L'Allegro' and 'Il Penseroso', with additional material, were magnificently set by Handel (1740).
In his ''Milton a Poem'', Blake uses Milton as a character.
Having watched his fellow students attempting comedy upon the college stage, he later observed 'they thought themselves gallant men, and I thought them fools'.
Like many Renaissance artists before him, Milton attempted to integrate Christian theology with classical modes.
