Among professional economists the revival of Keynesian economics has been even more divisive.
Some economists, such as Robert Lucas, questioned the theoretical basis for stimulus packages.
Initially the society had little impact on the wider world – according to Hayek it was as if Keynes had been raised to sainthood after his death and that people refused to allow his work to be questioned.
Following the outbreak of World War II, the leading Western economies  adopted Keynes's policy recommendations, and in the two decades following Keynes's death in 1946, almost all capitalist governments had done so.
During the Second World War, Keynes argued in ''How to Pay for the War'', published in 1940, that the war effort should be largely financed by higher taxation and especially by compulsory saving (essentially workers lending money to the government), rather than deficit spending, in order to avoid inflation.
He was tutored at home by a governess, Beatrice Mackintosh, and his mother.
Compulsory saving would act to dampen domestic demand, assist in channelling additional output towards the war efforts, would be fairer than punitive taxation and would have the advantage of helping to avoid a post war slump by boosting demand once workers were allowed to withdraw their savings.
Keynes's economic thinking only began to achieve close to universal acceptance in the last few years of his life.
The work was a notable contribution to the philosophical and mathematical underpinnings of probability theory, championing the important view that ''probabilities'' were no more or less than truth values intermediate between simple truth and falsity.
At the height of the Great Depression, in 1933, Keynes published ''The Means to Prosperity'', which contained specific policy recommendations for tackling unemployment in a global recession, chiefly counter-cyclical public spending.
Nevertheless, many models were developed by Keynesian economists, with a famous example being the Phillips curve which predicted an inverse relationship between unemployment and inflation.
Although many economists, such as George Akerlof, Paul Krugman, Robert Shiller, and Joseph Stiglitz, supported Keynesian stimulus, others did not believe higher government spending would help the United States economy recover from the Great Recession.
Although Keynes has been widely criticised – especially by members of the Chicago school of economics – for advocating irresponsible government spending financed by borrowing, in fact he was a firm believer in balanced budgets and regarded the proposals for programs of public works during the Great Depression as an exceptional measure to meet the needs of exceptional circumstances.
Unfortunately for Keynes, conservative powers in the coalition that emerged from the 1918 coupon election were able to ensure that both Keynes himself and the Treasury were largely excluded from formal high-level talks concerning reparations.
He wrote, "For Government borrowing of one kind or another is nature's remedy, so to speak, for preventing business losses from being, in so severe a slump as to present one, so great as to bring production altogether to a standstill."
Keynes successfully managed the endowment of King's College, Cambridge, with the active component of his portfolio outperforming a British equity index by an average of 8% a year over a quarter century, earning him favourable mention by later investors such as Warren Buffett and George Soros.
His ideas are the basis for the school of thought known as Keynesian economics and its various offshoots.
In 1906, Keynes had written of this infatuation that, "I seem to have fallen in love with Ray a little bit, but as she isn't male I haven't been able to think of any suitable steps to take."
In the ''General Theory'' and later, Keynes responded to the socialists and left-wing liberals who argued, especially during the Great Depression of the 1930s, that capitalism caused war.
The union was happy, with biographer Peter Clarke writing that the marriage gave Keynes "a new focus, a new emotional stability and a sheer delight of which he never wearied".
They remained in the same house throughout their lives, where the children were always welcome to return.
Keynes declined the invitation as he felt he would wield greater influence on events if he remained a free agent.
Keynes's relationship and later close friendship with Macmillan was to be fortunate, as Macmillan's company first published his tract ''Economic Consequences of the Peace''.
After the war, Winston Churchill attempted to check the rise of Keynesian policy-making in the United Kingdom and used rhetoric critical of the mixed economy in his 1945 election campaign.
Keynes had been in relationships while at Eton and Cambridge; significant among these early partners were Dilly Knox and Daniel Macmillan.
He instead argued that aggregate demand determined the overall level of economic activity and that inadequate aggregate demand could lead to prolonged periods of high unemployment.
The secretary of the Treasury was delighted to hear Keynes had amassed enough to provide a temporary solution for the British Government.
Keynes's speech at the closing of the Bretton Woods negotiations was received with a lasting standing ovation, rare in international relations, as the delegates acknowledged the scale of his achievements made despite poor health.
One line of attack held that he was uninterested in the long term ramifications of his theories because he had no children.
Some leaders and institutions, such as Angela Merkel
In part on the basis of these papers, Keynes wrote of Newton as "the last of the magicians."
According to the economist John Kenneth Galbraith (then a US government official charged with controlling inflation), in the rebound of the economy from wartime spending, "one could not have had a better demonstration of the Keynesian ideas."
Zhou argued that it was unfortunate that part of the reason for the Bretton Woods system breaking down was the failure to adopt Keynes's bancor.
Keynes had written against the folly of allowing "decadent and selfish" speculators and financiers the kind of influence they had enjoyed after World War I.
Keynes was deeply critical of the British government's austerity measures during the Great Depression.
Keynes's personal interest in classical opera and dance led him to support the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden and the Ballet Company at Sadler's Wells.
At Eton, Keynes experienced the first "love of his life" in Dan Macmillan, older brother of the future Prime Minister Harold Macmillan.
While economists and policy makers had become increasingly won over to Keynes's way of thinking in the mid and late 1930s, it was only after the outbreak of World War II that governments started to borrow money for spending on a scale sufficient to eliminate unemployment.
Keynes's widow, Lydia Lopokova, died in 1981.
In late 1933 Keynes was persuaded by Felix Frankfurter to address President Roosevelt directly, which he did by letters and face to face in 1934, after which the two men spoke highly of each other.
Classical economists had believed in Say's law, which, simply put, states that "supply creates its own demand", and that in a free market workers would always be willing to lower their wages to a level where employers could profitably offer them jobs.
For two decades after World War II the public opinion was strongly against private speculators, the disparaging label "Gnomes of Zürich" being typical of how they were described during this period.
Virginia Woolf's biographer tells an anecdote on how Virginia Woolf, Keynes and T. S. Eliot discussed religion at a dinner party, in the context of their struggle against Victorian era morality.
Keynesian principles fared increasingly poorly on the practical side of economics – by 1979 they had been displaced by monetarism as the primary influence on Anglo-American economic policy.
He also supported the German hyperinflation as a way to get free from reparations obligations.
Keynes has been characterised as being indifferent or even positive about mild inflation.
Ray Costelloe (who would later marry Oliver Strachey) was an early heterosexual interest of Keynes.
Although some have said that Friedman's monetary theory influenced the Federal Reserve's response to the global financial crisis of 2007–08, others have raised concerns about the validity and longevity of Friedman's theories and characterized government economic policies undertaken during that period as a worldwide resurgence in Keynesian thought.
The ''General Theory'' argues that demand, not supply, is the key variable governing the overall level of economic activity.
In 1931 Friedrich Hayek extensively critiqued Keynes's 1930 ''Treatise on Money''.
It implied that unemployment could be reduced by government stimulus with a calculable cost to inflation.
In February 2009 Robert J. Shiller and George Akerlof published ''Animal Spirits'', a book where they argue the current US stimulus package is too small as it does not take into account Keynes's insight on the importance of confidence and expectations in determining the future behaviour of businesspeople and other economic agents.
He enjoyed collecting books; he collected and protected many of Isaac Newton's papers.
However, America was against the plan; the US was then the largest creditor, and by this time Wilson had started to believe in the merits of a harsh peace and thought that his country had already made excessive sacrifices.
Before leaving Cambridge, Keynes became the President of the Cambridge Union Society and Cambridge University Liberal Club.
According to the economist and biographer Robert Skidelsky, Keynes's parents were loving and attentive.
Historian Peter Pugh has stated that a key cause of the economic problems afflicting America in the 1970s was the refusal to raise taxes to finance the Vietnam War, which was against Keynesian advice.
Also present was striking imagery such as "year by year Germany must be kept impoverished and her children starved and crippled" along with bold predictions which were later justified by events:  If we aim deliberately at the impoverishment of Central Europe, vengeance, I dare predict, will not limp.
They began during negotiations for the Anglo-American loan in Savannah, Georgia, where he was trying to secure favourable terms for the United Kingdom from the United States, a process he described as "absolute hell".
Alfred Marshall which Joseph Schumpeter called "the most brilliant life of a man of science I have ever read."
In 1902 Keynes left Eton for King's College, Cambridge, after receiving a scholarship for this also to read mathematics.
In 1921, Keynes wrote that he had fallen "very much in love" with Lydia Lopokova, a well-known Russian ballerina and one of the stars of Sergei Diaghilev's ''Ballets Russes''.
While he did not formally re-join the civil service in 1914, Keynes travelled to London at the government's request a few days before hostilities started.
He quickly showed a talent for arithmetic, but his health was poor leading to several long absences.
The British Government called on Keynes's expertise during the First World War.
As late as 1946, shortly before his death, Keynes declared eugenics to be "the most important, significant and, I would add, genuine branch of sociology which exists."
Like many members, Keynes retained a bond to the club after graduating and continued to attend occasional meetings throughout his life.
From the end of the Great Depression to the mid-1970s, Keynes provided the main inspiration for economic policy makers in Europe, America and much of the rest of the world.
of his hopes that Adam Smith's 'invisible hand' can help Britain out of the economic hole it is in: "I find myself more and more relying for a solution of our problems on the invisible hand which I tried to eject from economic thinking twenty years ago."
Following the war, Keynes was instrumental in establishing the Arts Council of Great Britain and was its founding chairman in 1946.
He was also appointed Officer of the Belgian Order of Leopold.
This is in stark contrast to the action imposed on Indonesia during the Asian financial crisis of 1997, when it was forced by the IMF to close 16 banks at the same time, prompting a bank run.
According to the journalists Larry Elliott and Dan Atkinson, 1968 was the pivotal year when power shifted in favour of private agents such as currency speculators.
So successful were these criticisms that by 1980 Robert Lucas claimed economists would often take offence if described as Keynesians.
'''John Maynard Keynes, 1st Baron Keynes'''  ( ; 5 June 1883 – 21 April 1946), was an English economist whose ideas fundamentally changed the theory and practice of macroeconomics and the economic policies of governments.
In 1924 Keynes wrote an obituary for his former tutor
According to economist Robert Lekachman, Keynes's "nerve and mastery became legendary" because of his performance of these duties, as in the case where he managed to assemble – with difficulty – a small supply of Spanish pesetas.
After the war started he roundly criticised the Left for losing their nerve to confront Hitler:
He built on and greatly refined earlier work on the causes of business cycles, and is widely considered to be one of the most influential economists of the 20th century and the founder of modern macroeconomics.
Scholars have suggested that these reflect clichés current at the time that he accepted uncritically, rather than any racism.
Keynes later commented to Strachey that beauty and intelligence were rarely found in the same person, and that only in Duncan Grant had he found the combination.
Friedman however began to emerge as a formidable critic of Keynesian economics from the mid-1950s, and especially after his 1963 publication of ''A Monetary History of the United States''.
By then, Keynes's views on the economy had become mainstream in the world's universities.
Joseph Schumpeter was an economist of the same age as Keynes and one of his main rivals.
Keynes joined the Pitt Club and was an active member of the semi-secretive Cambridge Apostles society, a debating club largely reserved for the brightest students.
Clemenceau also pushed for substantial reparations, though not as high as those proposed by the British, while on security grounds, France argued for an even more severe settlement than Britain.
Keynes's obituary in ''The Times'' included the comment:
During the 1920s Keynes's pro stimulus views had only limited effect on policy makers and mainstream academic opinion – according to Hyman Minsky one reason was that at this time his theoretical justification was "muddled".
The Keynes-plan, concerning an international clearing-union, argued for a radical system for the management of currencies.
Keynes suffered a series of heart attacks, which ultimately proved fatal.
Keynes himself included few formulas and no explicit mathematical models in his ''General Theory''.
(His father, John Neville Keynes, was also always known by his middle name).
The ''General Theory'' challenged the earlier neoclassical economic paradigm, which had held that provided it was unfettered by government interference, the market would naturally establish full employment equilibrium.
As a lifelong pacifist he had initially favoured peaceful containment of Nazi Germany, yet he began to advocate a forceful resolution while many conservatives were still arguing for appeasement.
Keynes's optimism was also cultural, in two senses: he was of the last generation raised by an empire still at the height of its power, and was also of the last generation who felt entitled to govern by culture, rather than by expertise.
Schuker also shows that, in the years after Versailles, Keynes became an informal reparations adviser to the German government, wrote one of the major German reparation notes, and actually supported the hyperinflation on political grounds.
Keynes's mother made her children's interests her own, and according to Skidelsky, "because she could grow up with her children, they never outgrew home".
Due in part to price stickiness, it was established that the interaction of "aggregate demand" and "aggregate supply" may lead to stable unemployment equilibria – and in those cases, it is the state, not the market, that economies must depend on for their salvation.
In the 1933 London Economic Conference opinions remained too diverse for a unified course of action to be agreed upon.
expressed concern over the potential impact on inflation, national debt and the risk that a too large stimulus will create an unsustainable recovery.
An innovation from Keynes was the concept of price stickiness – the recognition that in reality workers often refuse to lower their wage demands even in cases where a classical economist might argue it is rational for them to do so.
Bankers had been pushing for the suspension of specie payments – the convertibility of banknotes into gold – but with Keynes's help the Chancellor of the Exchequer (then Lloyd George) was persuaded that this would be a bad idea, as it would hurt the future reputation of the city if payments were suspended before absolutely necessary.
He founded the Political Economy Club a weekly discussion group.
In the world of policy making, free market influences broadly sympathetic to monetarism have remained very strong at government level – in powerful normative institutions like the World Bank, the IMF and US Treasury, and in prominent opinion-forming media such as the ''Financial Times'' and ''The Economist''.
The book advocated activist economic policy by government to stimulate demand in times of high unemployment, for example by spending on public works.
John Maynard Keynes was born in Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, England, to an upper-middle-class family.
In doing so Keynes was partly setting himself against his former teachers Marshall and Pigou.
Attitudes in the Bloomsbury Group, in which Keynes was avidly involved, were relaxed about homosexuality.
In 1897, Keynes won a scholarship to Eton College, where he displayed talent in a wide range of subjects, particularly mathematics, classics and history.
When ''Time'' magazine included Keynes among its Most Important People of the Century in 1999, it said that "his radical idea that governments should spend money they don't have may have saved capitalism."
In fact, the historian Stephen Schuker demonstrates in ''American 'Reparations' to Germany, 1919-33'', that the capital inflow from American loans substantially exceeded German outpayments so that, on a net basis, Germany received support equal to four times the amount of the post-World War II Marshal Plan.
Hence despite his best efforts, the end result of the conference was a treaty which disgusted Keynes both on moral and economic grounds, and led to his resignation from the Treasury.
His plans during World War II for post-war international economic institutions and policies (which contributed to the creation at Bretton Woods of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and later to the creation of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and eventually the World Trade Organization) were aimed to give effect to this vision.
"Let us be up and doing, using our idle resources to increase our wealth," he wrote in 1928.
Austrian School economist Friedrich Hayek was Keynes's most prominent contemporary critic, with sharply opposing views on the economy.
This work has been described as Keynes's best book, where he was able to bring all his gifts to bear – his passion as well as his skill as an economist.
In June 1919 he turned down an offer to become chairman of the British Bank of Northern Commerce, a job that promised a salary of £2000 in return for a morning per week of work.
The academic credibility of Keynesian economics was further undermined by additional criticism from other monetarists trained in the Chicago school of economics, by the Lucas critique and by criticisms from Hayek's Austrian School.
The two new institutions, later known as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), were founded as a compromise that primarily reflected the American vision.
According to one biographer, "he was never able to take religion seriously, regarding it as a strange aberration of the human mind."
Marxism "was founded upon nothing better than a misunderstanding of Ricardo", and, given time, he (Keynes) "would deal thoroughly with the Marxists" and other economists to solve the economic problems their theories "threaten to cause".
Keynes's earnings rose further as he began to take on pupils for private tuition.
Keynes had begun a theoretical work to examine the relationship between unemployment, money and prices back in the 1920s.
Keynes was a supporter of Zionism, serving on committees supporting the cause.
In the same month macroeconomist James K. Galbraith used the 25th Annual Milton Friedman Distinguished Lecture to launch a sweeping attack against the consensus for monetarist economics and argued that Keynesian economics were far more relevant for tackling the emerging crises.
For economists such as Hyman Minsky, Keynes's limited use of mathematics was partly the result of his scepticism about whether phenomena as inherently uncertain as economic activity could ever be adequately captured by mathematical models.
Keynes responded by writing ''The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill'' and continued to argue against the gold standard until Britain finally abandoned it in 1931.
In January 1892, at eight and a half, he started as a day pupil at St Faith's preparatory school.
Few senior American economists agreed with Keynes through most of the 1930s.
Geoffrey became a surgeon and Margaret married the Nobel Prize-winning physiologist Archibald Hill.
He argued that if capitalism were managed domestically and internationally (with coordinated international Keynesian policies, an international monetary system that didn't pit the interests of countries against each other, and a high degree of freedom of trade), then this system of managed capitalism could promote peace rather than conflict between countries.
By the end of December 2008, the ''Financial Times'' reported that "the sudden resurgence of Keynesian policy is a stunning reversal of the orthodoxy of the past several decades."
To Keynes's dismay, Lloyd George and Clemenceau were able to pressure Wilson to agree to include pensions in the reparations bill.
The USA's greater negotiating strength, however, meant that the final outcomes accorded more closely to the more conservative plans of Harry Dexter White.
However, orthodox economic opinion remained generally hostile regarding fiscal intervention to mitigate the depression, until just before the outbreak of war.
The economist Harry Johnson wrote that the optimism imparted by Keynes's early life is a key to understanding his later thinking.
Keynes had completed his ''A Treatise on Probability'' before the war, but published it in 1921.
Stimulus plans were credited for contributing to a better than expected economic outlook by both the OECD
A central idea of the work was that if the amount of money being saved exceeds the amount being invested – which can happen if interest rates are too high – then unemployment will rise.
According to Skidelsky, the sense of cultural unity current in Britain from the 19th century to the end of World War I provided a framework with which the well-educated could set various spheres of knowledge in relation to each other and to life, enabling them to confidently draw from different fields when addressing practical problems.
Keynes's influence waned in the 1970s, partly as a result of the severe stagflation that stalled the Anglo-American economies throughout that decade, and partly because of criticism of Keynesian theories by Milton Friedman, who had predicted that condition.
Other prominent economic commentators who have argued for Keynesian government intervention to mitigate the financial crisis include George Akerlof, J. Bradford DeLong,
In 1927 he wrote, "We will not have any more crashes in our time."
E. M. Forster would later write in contrition: "How we all used to underestimate her".
He took part in debates, further studied philosophy and attended economics lectures informally as a graduate student for one term, which constituted his only formal education in the subject.
Keynes once remarked that "the youth had no religion save communism and this was worse than nothing."
Keynes's friends in the Bloomsbury Group were initially surprised when, in his later years, he began dating and pursuing affairs with women, demonstrating himself to be bisexual.
In the "red 1930s", many young economists favoured Marxist views, even in Cambridge, and while Keynes was engaging principally with the right to try to persuade them of the merits of more progressive policy, the most vociferous criticism against him came from the left, who saw him as a supporter of capitalism.
The work was taken seriously by both the American and British governments, and according to Robert Skidelsky, helped pave the way for the later acceptance of Keynesian ideas, though it had little immediate practical influence.
Keynesian economics were officially discarded by the British Government in 1979, but forces had begun to gather against Keynes's ideas over 30 years earlier.
In 1931, he received considerable support for his views on counter-cyclical public spending in Chicago, then America's foremost centre for economic views alternative to the mainstream.
Among Keynes's Bloomsbury friends, Lopokova was, at least initially, subjected to criticism for her manners, mode of conversation and supposedly humble social origins – the last of the ostensible causes being particularly noted in the letters of Vanessa and Clive Bell, and Virginia Woolf.
Keynes was always confident he could find a solution to whatever problem he turned his attention to, and retained a lasting faith in the ability of government officials to do good.
A more typical response was to accept some elements of the criticisms while refining Keynesian economic theories to defend them against arguments that would invalidate the whole Keynesian framework – the resulting body of work largely composing New Keynesian economics.
The ''General Theory'' is often viewed as the foundation of modern macroeconomics.
In the 1920s, Keynes was seen as anti-establishment and was mainly attacked from the right.
A copy was sent to the newly elected President Franklin D. Roosevelt and other world leaders.
In the March 2009 speech entitled ''Reform the International Monetary System'', Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of the People's Bank of China, came out in favour of Keynes's idea of a centrally managed global reserve currency.
From the 1950s and onwards, most of the attacks against Keynes have again been from the right.
Keynes had no children.
Apart from Great Britain, Keynes's attention was primarily focused on the United States.
Keynes envisaged these institutions managing an international trade and payments system with strong incentives for countries to avoid substantial trade deficits or surpluses.
By 1894, Keynes was top of his class and excelling at mathematics.
Keynes may have been confirmed, but according to Cambridge University he was clearly an agnostic, which he remained until his death.
This is in part a result of people not wanting to spend too high a proportion of what employers pay out, making it difficult, in aggregate, for employers to make a profit.
It could force countries to pursue deflationary policies at exactly the time when expansionary measures were called for to address rising unemployment.
and Axel Leijonhufvud.
His written work was published under the name "J M Keynes", though to his family and friends he was known as Maynard.
Political opponents have used Keynes's sexuality to attack his academic work.
He considered Keynes to have a kind of unconscious patriotism that caused him to fail to understand the problems of other nations.
Despite his popularity as a war hero, Churchill suffered a landslide defeat to Clement Attlee whose government's economic policy continued to be influenced by Keynes's ideas.
Keynes was ultimately a successful investor, building up a private fortune.
Yet his ideas were soon to achieve widespread acceptance, with eminent American professors such as Alvin Hansen agreeing with the ''General Theory'' before the outbreak of World War II.
Yet Schumpeter remained critical about Keynes's economics, linking Keynes's childlessness to what Schumpeter saw as an essentially short term view.
He was an outspoken campaigner for reform of the law on homosexuality.
In October 1906, Keynes's Civil Service career began as a clerk in the India Office.
''The Economist'' has  described Keynes  as "Britain's most famous 20th-century economist."
In the early 1970s stagflation appeared in both the US and Britain just as Friedman had predicted, with economic conditions deteriorating further after the 1973 oil crisis.
Lloyd George did however win some loyalty from Keynes with his actions at the Paris conference by intervening against the French to ensure the dispatch of much-needed food supplies to German civilians.
His nephews include Richard Keynes (1919–2010), a physiologist, and Quentin Keynes (1921–2003), an adventurer and bibliophile.
On several occasions Keynes used his influence to help his Jewish friends, most notably when he successfully lobbied for Ludwig Wittgenstein to be allowed residency in the United Kingdom, explicitly in order to rescue him from being deported to Nazi-occupied Austria.
Friedman suggested that sustained Keynesian policies could lead to both unemployment and inflation rising at once – a phenomenon that soon became known as stagflation.
Another key theme of the book is the unreliability of financial indices for representing an accurate – or indeed meaningful – indication of general shifts in purchasing power of currencies over time.
Keynes advocated the use of fiscal and monetary policies to mitigate the adverse effects of economic recessions and depressions.
After a trip to Russia, he wrote in his ''Short View of Russia'' that there is "beastliness on the Russian and Jewish natures when, as now, they are allied together".
He also wrote that "out of the cruelty and stupidity of the Old Russia nothing could ever emerge, but (...) beneath the cruelty and stupidity of the New Russia a speck of the ideal may lie hid", which together with other comments may be construed as anti-Russian and antisemitic.
Aggregate demand, which equals total un-hoarded income in a society, is defined by the sum of consumption and investment.
It is precisely with these plants and these men that we shall afford them."
It involved the radical writing down of war debts, which would have had the possible effect of increasing international trade all round, but at the same time thrown the entire cost of European reconstruction on the United States.
Strachey had previously found himself put off by Keynes, not least because of his manner of "treating his love affairs statistically".
A series of major bailouts were pursued during the financial crisis, starting on 7 September with the announcement that the U.S. Government was to nationalise the two government-sponsored enterprises which oversaw most of the U.S. subprime mortgage market – Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
By 1913 he had published his first book, ''Indian Currency and Finance''.
In 1992 Alan Blinder wrote about a "Keynesian Restoration", as work based on Keynes's ideas had to some extent become fashionable once again in academia, though in the mainstream it was highly synthesised with monetarism and other neoclassical thinking.
However, there is a growing academic literature that shows that fiscal expansion helps an economy grow in the near term, and that certain types of fiscal stimulus are particularly effective.
In the 1917 King's Birthday Honours, Keynes was appointed Companion of the Order of the Bath for his wartime work, and his success led to the appointment that would have a huge effect on Keynes's life and career; Keynes was appointed financial representative for the Treasury to the 1919 Versailles peace conference.
After reading Hayek's ''The Road to Serfdom'', Keynes wrote to Hayek "Morally and philosophically I find myself in agreement with virtually the whole of it", but concluded the letter with the recommendation:  On the pressing issue of the time, whether deficit spending could lift a country from depression, Keynes replied to Hayek's criticism in the following way:
He proposed the creation of a common world unit of currency, the bancor, and new global institutions – a world central bank and the International Clearing Union.
Wilson initially favoured relatively lenient treatment of Germany – he feared too harsh conditions could foment the rise of extremism, and wanted Germany to be left sufficient capital to pay for imports.
''The Means to Prosperity'' contains one of the first mentions of the multiplier effect.
However, many officials on both sides of the Atlantic retained a preference for Keynes, and in 1984 the Federal Reserve officially discarded monetarism, after which Keynesian principles made a partial comeback as an influence on policy making.
