Abbie Hoffman, the radical of the 1960s, paid tribute to Wayne's singularity, saying, "I like Wayne's wholeness, his style.
According to his son Patrick and his grandson Matthew Muñoz, a priest in the California Diocese of Orange, he converted to Roman Catholicism shortly before his death.
Wayne's other well-known Western roles include a cattleman driving his herd north on the Chisholm Trail in ''Red River'' (1948), a Civil War veteran whose young niece is abducted by a tribe of Comanches in ''The Searchers'' (1956), and a troubled rancher competing with a lawyer from the Eastern United States for a woman's hand in marriage in ''The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance'' (1962).
Reviewing ''The Cowboys'' (1972), Vincent Canby of the ''New York Times'', who did not particularly care for the film, wrote: "Wayne is, of course, marvelously indestructible, and he has become an almost perfect father figure."
He was a member of the Trojan Knights and Sigma Chi fraternities.
Books, was dying of cancer—the illness to which Wayne himself succumbed three years later.
He was fluent in Spanish and his three wives, each of Hispanic descent, were Josephine Alicia Saenz, Esperanza Baur, and Pilar Pallete.
Many contend that radioactive fallout from these tests contaminated the film location and poisoned the film crew working there.
He lost the leading role in ''The Gunfighter'' (1950) to Gregory Peck due to his refusal to work for Columbia Pictures because its chief, Harry Cohn, had mistreated him years before when he was a young contract player.
However, only a handful of theaters were equipped to show the film in its widescreen process, and the effort was largely wasted.
Born in Winterset, Iowa, Wayne grew up in Southern California.
He took part in creating the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals in February 1944, and was elected president of that organization in 1949.
Wayne supported Vice President Richard Nixon in the presidential election of 1960, but expressed his vision of patriotism when John F. Kennedy won the election: "I didn't vote for him but he's my president, and I hope he does a good job."
Wayne's career took off in 1939, with John Ford's ''Stagecoach'' making him an instant star.
Ground was broken for the New John Wayne Birthplace Museum and Learning Center at a ceremony consisting of over 30 of Wayne's family members, including Melinda Wayne Muñoz, Aissa, Ethan, and Marisa Wayne.
He played the lead, with his name over the title, in many low-budget "Poverty Row" Westerns, mostly at Monogram Pictures and serials for Mascot Pictures Corporation.
He appeared with many important Hollywood stars of his era, and his last public appearance was at the Academy Awards ceremony on April&nbsp;9,&nbsp;1979.
His pay was raised to $105 a week (worth $ today).
Wayne toured U.S. bases and hospitals in the South Pacific for three months in 1943 and 1944. with the USO By many accounts, his failure to serve in the military was the most painful part of his life.
Wayne's family moved to Palmdale, California, and then in 1916 to Glendale, California, where his father worked as a pharmacist.
The company wants a federal judge in Orange County, California, to declare that both brands can be allowed.
He was asked to be the running mate for Democratic Alabama Governor George Wallace in 1968, but he rejected the offer and actively campaigned for Richard Nixon; Wayne addressed the Republican National Convention on its opening day in August 1968.
He had three more children with Pilar: Aissa Wayne (born March 31, 1956), John Ethan Wayne (born February 22, 1962), and Marisa Wayne (born February 22, 1966).
Cast member Louise Platt credits Ford as saying at the time that Wayne would become the biggest star ever because of his appeal as the archetypal "everyman".
This came 17 years after his only other nomination.
His status grew so large and legendary that when Japanese Emperor Hirohito visited the United States in 1975, he asked to meet John Wayne, the symbolic representation of his country's former enemy.
He declined, joking that he did not believe the public would seriously consider an actor in the White House.
Wayne was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom on June 9, 1980, by President Jimmy Carter.
She believed that Wayne and co-star Gail Russell were having an affair, a claim which both Wayne and Russell denied.
After the commercial failure of ''The Big Trail'', Wayne was relegated to small roles in A-pictures, including Columbia Pictures's '''The Deceiver'' (1931), in which he played a corpse.
Many in the audience who saw it in Grandeur stood and cheered.
Wayne's height has been perennially described as at least .
380) in Brooklyn, New York, which boasts a 38-foot mosaic mural commission by New York artist Knox Martin entitled "John Wayne and the American Frontier"; and a 100-plus-mile trail named the "John Wayne Pioneer Trail" in Washington's Iron Horse State Park.
Wayne also appeared with his USC teammates playing football in ''Brown of Harvard'' (1926), ''The Dropkick'' (1927), and ''Salute'' (1929) and Columbia's ''Maker of Men'' (filmed in 1930, released in 1931).
With a total of 25 years on the list, Wayne has more appearances than any other star, beating Clint Eastwood (21) into second place.
His stormiest divorce was from Esperanza Baur, a former Mexican actress.
He lost his athletic scholarship, and without funds, had to leave the university.
Despite efforts by his business associates to prevent him from going public with his illness for fear that it would cost him work, Wayne announced he had cancer and called on the public to get preventive examinations.
Broderick Crawford, who eventually got the role, won the 1949 Oscar for best male actor, ironically beating out Wayne, who had been nominated for ''Sands of Iwo Jima.''
Wayne's yacht, the ''Wild Goose'', was one of his favorite possessions.
Wayne was married three times and divorced twice.
Wayne later credited his walk, talk, and persona to his acquaintance with Wyatt Earp, who was good friends with Tom Mix.
Wayne's enduring status as an iconic American was formally recognized by the U.S. government in the form of the two highest civilian decorations.
To take advantage of the breathtaking scenery, it was filmed in two versions, a standard 35-mm version and another in the new 70 mm Grandeur film process, using an innovative camera and lenses.
While these two polls are really an indication only of the popularity of series stars, Wayne also appeared in the Top Ten Money Makers Poll of all films from 1949 to 1957 and 1958 to 1974, taking first place in 1950, 1951, 1954, and 1971.
A local fireman at the station on his route to school in Glendale started calling him "Little Duke" because he never went anywhere without his huge Airedale Terrier, Duke.
Wayne's father, Clyde Leonard Morrison (1884–1937), was the son of American Civil War veteran Marion Mitchell Morrison (1845–1915).
Comes into us at midnight very clean.
A close friend of Wayne's, California Congressman Alphonzo E. Bell, Jr., wrote of him, "Duke's personality and sense of humor were very close to what the general public saw on the big screen.
Wayne was a prominent Republican in Hollywood, supporting anti-communist positions.
Batjac, the production company cofounded by Wayne, was named after the fictional shipping company Batjak in ''Wake of the Red Witch'' (1948), a film based on the novel by Garland Roark.
By the middle of his career, Wayne had developed a larger-than-life image, and as his career progressed, he selected roles that would not compromise his off-screen image.
The following year, he appeared in his only film directed by Cecil B. DeMille, the Technicolor epic ''Reap the Wild Wind'' (1942), in which he co-starred with Ray Milland and Paulette Goddard; it was one of the rare times he played a character with questionable values.
America's entry into World War II resulted in a deluge of support for the war effort from all sectors of society, and Hollywood was no exception.
56 F&AM, in Tucson, Arizona.
During the filming of ''The Green Berets'', the Degar or Montagnard people of Vietnam's Central Highlands, fierce fighters against communism, bestowed on Wayne a brass bracelet that he wore in the film and all subsequent films.
By Wayne's own estimation, he appeared in about 80 of these horse operas from 1930 to 1939.
''The Big Trail'' was to be the first big-budget outdoor spectacle of the sound era, made at a then-staggering cost of over $2 million, using hundreds of extras and wide vistas of the American southwest, still largely unpopulated at the time.
Wayne was born Marion Robert Morrison on May 26, 1907 at 224 South Second Street in Winterset, Iowa.
An ardent anti-communist and vocal supporter of the House Un-American Activities Committee, in 1952 he made ''Big Jim McLain'' to show his support for the anti-communist cause.
Harvard Square had become known for leftist intellectualism and protest throughout the 1960s and 1970s.
He instead attended the University of Southern California (USC), majoring in pre-law.
Only Clark Gable sold more tickets than Wayne, although the ticket prices were not commensurate since, although both actors started their careers at the same time, Gable's career height preceded Wayne's by approximately fifteen years.
Cohn had bought the project for Wayne, but Wayne's grudge was too deep, and Cohn sold the script to Twentieth Century Fox, which cast Peck in the role Wayne badly wanted but for which he refused to bend.
He would appear in more than 20 of John Ford's films throughout the next two decades, including ''She Wore a Yellow Ribbon'' (1949), ''The Quiet Man'' (1952), ''The Searchers'' (1956), ''The Wings of Eagles'' (1957), and ''The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance'' (1962) with James Stewart: the first movie in which he called someone "Pilgrim".
His support of the treaty brought him hate mail for the first time in his life.
In May 1971, ''Playboy'' magazine published an interview with Wayne which resulted in a firestorm of controversy.
The John Wayne Cancer Foundation was founded in 1985 in honor of John Wayne, after his family granted the use of his name for the continued fight against cancer.
During a widely noted appearance at Harvard University, Wayne was asked by a student "Is it true that your toupée is real mohair?"
In 1970, Wayne won a Golden Globe Award for his performance in ''True Grit''.
Wayne had several high-profile affairs, including one with Marlene Dietrich that lasted for three years and one with Merle Oberon that lasted from 1938 to 1947.
Wayne soon moved to bit parts, establishing a longtime friendship with the director who provided most of those roles, John Ford.
Wayne was a close friend of the late Panamanian leader Omar Torrijos Herrera, and Wayne's first wife, Josephine, was a native of Panama.
Donovan also issued an OSS Certificate of Service to Wayne.
On September 30, 2014, federal judge David Carter dismissed the suit against Duke University, saying the jurisdiction was incorrect.
Due to his enormous popularity and his status as the most famous Republican star in Hollywood, wealthy Texas Republican Party backers asked Wayne to run for national office in 1968, as had his friend and fellow actor Senator George Murphy.
The foundation's mission is to "bring courage, strength and grit to the fight against cancer".
There's so goddamn few of us left.
Wayne refused, believing the script to be un-American in many ways.
By the time of his last film ''The Shootist'' (1976), Wayne refused to allow his character to shoot a man in the back as was originally scripted, demanding "I've made over 250 pictures and have never shot a guy in the back.
Eighty-three of his movies were Westerns, and in them he played cowboys, cavalrymen, and unconquerable loners extracted from the Republic's central creation myth."
During the early 1960s, John Wayne traveled extensively to Panama, during which he purchased the island of Taborcillo off the main coast.
His footprints at Grauman's Chinese theater in Hollywood were laid in concrete that contained sand from Iwo Jima.
Wayne rose beyond the typical recognition for a famous actor to that of an enduring icon who symbolized and communicated American values and ideals.
In later years, Wayne was recognized as a sort of American natural resource, and his various critics, of his performances and his politics, viewed him with more respect.
As for his politics, well—I suppose even cavemen felt a little admiration for the dinosaurs that were trying to gobble them up."
''The Searchers'' (1956) continues to be widely regarded as arguably Wayne's finest and most complex performance.
''Stagecoach'' was a huge critical and financial success, and Wayne became a mainstream star.
He was a Freemason, a Master Mason in Marion McDaniel Lodge No.
In 1930, director Raoul Walsh saw him moving studio furniture while working as a prop boy and cast him in his first starring role in ''The Big Trail'' (1930).
Wayne's first color film was ''Shepherd of the Hills'' (1941), in which he co-starred with his longtime friend Harry Carey.
In his final screen performance, he starred as an aging gunfighter battling cancer in ''The Shootist'' (1976).
Wayne has been in the top ten in this poll for 19 consecutive years, starting in 1994, 15 years after his death.
Wayne also played on the USC football team under coach Howard Jones.
It's perfect when it arrives and it puts itself in our hands.
He appeared in the similar ''Box Office'' poll in 1939 and 1940.
Instead, he supported his friend Ronald Reagan's runs for Governor of California in 1966 and 1970.
Richard Howell, an attorney for John Wayne Enterprises, said the company supports a co-use agreement, though he believed the name "Duke" would be more likely associated with Wayne than with the university.
According to court documents, Duke has tried three times since 2005 to stop the company from trademarking the name.
The local paper,  ''Winterset Madisonian'', reported on page 4 of the May 30, 1907 edition that Wayne weighed 13 pounds at birth.
He was occasionally seen in public without the hairpiece (notably, according to ''Life'' magazine, at Gary Cooper's funeral).
Not these weak queers."
An internal investigation was launched into the Army's involvement in the day.
Wayne expressed his support for the Vietnam War, and made headlines for his resolute opinions about social issues and race relations in the United States:
He used his iconic star power to support conservative causes, including rallying support for the Vietnam War by producing, codirecting, and starring in the critically panned ''The Green Berets'' in 1968.
Wayne took on the role of gritty detective ''McQ'' in the 1974 crime drama.
Famed stuntman Yakima Canutt and he developed and perfected stunts and onscreen fisticuffs techniques still used today.
A celebration at the John Wayne birthplace in Winterset, Iowa, included chuck-wagon suppers, concerts by Michael Martin Murphey and Riders in the Sky, a Wild West Revue in the style of Buffalo Bill's Wild West show, and a Cowboy Symposium with Wayne's costars, producers, and costumers.
In 1949, director Robert Rossen offered the starring role of ''All the King's Men'' to Wayne.
(A spelling error by Wayne's secretary was allowed to stand, accounting for the variation.)
He had been a chain smoker of cigarettes since young adulthood and was diagnosed with lung cancer in 1964.
It hopes we've learned something from yesterday."
His first leading role came in Raoul Walsh's ''The Big Trail'' (1930), which led to leading roles in numerous B movies throughout the 1930s, many of them in the Western genre.
Wayne's films ran repetitively at the local theater.
Although the convoy was met with protests by members of the American Indian Movement and others, some of whom threw snowballs, Wayne received a standing ovation from the audience when he walked onto the stage.
Fox Studios chief Winfield Sheehan rejected it as sounding "too Italian".
In 1973, ''The Harvard Lampoon'', a satirical paper run by Harvard University students, invited Wayne to receive The Brass Balls Award, created in his "honor", after calling him "the biggest fraud in history".
Wayne attended Wilson Middle School in Glendale.
She never told him about it.
He went on to star in 142 pictures.
For a while, he was also a member of the anti-communist John Birch Society.
Naval Academy, but he was not accepted.
He was mentored by stuntmen in riding and other Western skills.
Wayne is the only actor to appear in every edition of the annual Harris Poll of Most Popular Film Actors, and the only actor to appear on the list after his death.
He kept it docked in Newport Harbor and it was listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places in 2011.
Newport Beach, California-based John Wayne Enterprises sells products such as Kentucky straight bourbon using Wayne's picture.
On May 26, 1979, he was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal.
His portrayal of a heroic copilot won widespread acclaim.
He appeared in the serial ''The Three Musketeers'' (1933), an updated version of the Alexandre Dumas novel in which the protagonists were soldiers in the French Foreign Legion in then-contemporary North Africa.
U.S. National Archives records indicate that Wayne had, in fact, made an application  to serve in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), that day's equivalent of the CIA, and had been accepted within the U.S. Army's allotted billet to the OSS.
Walsh then suggested "John Wayne".
Later that year, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver inducted Wayne into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.
The other was ''The Green Berets'' (1968), the only major film made during the Vietnam War to support the war.
In 2016 Republican assemblyman Matthew Harper proposed marking May 26 as "John Wayne Day" in California.
He found work at local film studios when he lost his football scholarship to the University of Southern California as a result of a bodysurfing accident.
Several celebrations took place on May 26, 2007, the centennial of Wayne's birth.
The foundation provides funds for innovative programs that improve cancer patient care, including research, education, awareness, and support.
Biographer Ronald Davis said, "John Wayne personified for millions the nation's frontier heritage.
He is also remembered for his roles in ''The Quiet Man'' (1952), ''Rio Bravo'' (1959), and ''The Longest Day'' (1962).
Wayne openly differed with the Republican Party over the issue of the Panama Canal, as he supported the Panama Canal Treaty in the mid-1970s; conservatives had wanted the U.S. to retain full control of the canal, but Wayne believed that the Panamanians had the right to the canal and sided with President Jimmy Carter and the Democrats.
He responded: "Well sir, that's real hair.
She published a biography of her life with him in 1983, titled ''Duke: A Love Story''.
Several of Wayne's children entered the film and television industry; Wayne's son Ethan was billed as John Ethan Wayne in a few films, and played one of the leads in the 1990s update of the ''Adam-12'' television series.
It was sold by his estate at his death and changed hands many times before being opened as a tourist attraction.
We got to play strong, tough characters.
He named his youngest son Ethan after the character.
Various public locations are named in honor of Wayne, including the John Wayne Airport in Orange County, California, where a nine-foot bronze statue of him stands at the entrance; the John Wayne Marina for which Wayne bequeathed the land, near Sequim, Washington; John Wayne Elementary School (P.S.
A broken collarbone injury curtailed his athletic career; Wayne later noted he was too terrified of Jones's reaction to reveal the actual cause of his injury, a bodysurfing accident.
The night the film ''Angel and the Badman'' (1947) wrapped, there was the usual party for cast and crew, and Wayne came home very late.
Wayne's rise to being the quintessential movie war hero began to take shape four years after World War II, when ''Sands of Iwo Jima'' (1949) was released.
Wayne biographer Michael Munn chronicled Wayne's drinking habits.
A larger than life-size bronze statue of Wayne atop a horse was erected at the corner of La Cienega Boulevard and Wilshire Boulevard in Beverly Hills, California, at the former offices of the Great Western Savings and Loan Corporation, for which Wayne had made a number of commercials.
In 1998, he was awarded the Naval Heritage Award by the US Navy Memorial Foundation for his support of the Navy and military during his film career.
The university's official position is not to object if Wayne's image is used, but if the company wants to use the Duke name without Wayne, the university says, "we are also committed to protecting the integrity of Duke University's trademarks."
Wayne did not attempt to prevent his reclassification as 1-A (draft eligible), but Republic Studios was emphatically resistant to losing him.
After his separation from his wife, Pilar, in 1973, Wayne became romantically involved and lived with his former secretary Pat Stacy (1941–1995) until his death in 1979.
Wayne's ancestry included English, Irish, Scots-Irish, and Scottish.
Wayne also appeared in some of the ''Three Mesquiteers'' Westerns, whose title was a play on the Dumas classic.
Wayne applied to the U.S.
His last film was ''The Shootist'' (1976), whose main character, J.
He requested that his tombstone read "Feo, Fuerte y Formal", a Spanish epitaph Wayne described as meaning "ugly, strong, and dignified".
Initially a self-described socialist during his college years, he voted for Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1936 presidential election and expressed admiration for Roosevelt's successor, fellow Democratic President Harry S. Truman.
Wayne's hair began thinning in the 1940s, and he started wearing a hairpiece by the end of that decade.
Wayne was exempted from service due to his age (34 at the time of Pearl Harbor) and family status, classified as 3-A (family deferment).
Not mine, but real hair."
In 1999, the American Film Institute (AFI) named Wayne 13th among the Greatest Male Screen Legends of Classic Hollywood cinema.
The weekend-long event each fall in Casa Grande, Arizona, includes a golf tournament, an auction of John Wayne memorabilia, and a team roping competition.
As shown below, Wayne was nominated for three Academy Awards, winning once for Best Actor in a Leading Role in 1970.
In the city of Maricopa, Arizona, part of Arizona State Route 347 is named John Wayne Parkway, which runs through the center of town.
Initially working for the Fox Film Corporation, he mostly appeared in small bit parts.
At a party in 1957, Wayne confronted actor Kirk Douglas about the latter's decision to play the role of Vincent van Gogh in the film ''Lust for Life'', saying: "Christ, Kirk, how can you play a part like that?
Wayne's mother, the former Mary "Molly" Alberta Brown (1885–1970), was from Lancaster County, Nebraska.
John Wayne won a Best Actor Oscar for ''True Grit'' (1969).
The ceremony was held on January 15, 1974, at the Harvard Square Theater and the award was officially presented in honor of Wayne's "outstanding machismo and penchant for punching people".
Sheehan agreed, and the name was set.
Five years later, Wayne was declared cancer-free.
Although he enrolled in a cancer vaccine study in an attempt to ward off the disease, Wayne died of stomach cancer at the age of 72 on June 11, 1979, at the UCLA Medical Center, and was interred in the Pacific View Memorial Park cemetery in Corona del Mar, Newport Beach.
Wayne accepted the invitation as a chance to promote the recently released film ''McQ'', and a Fort Devens Army convoy offered to drive him into the square on an armored personnel carrier.
Batjac (and its predecessor, Wayne-Fellows Productions) was the arm through which Wayne produced many films for himself and other stars.
He was also active as a member of the Order of DeMolay, a youth organization of the Freemasons.
Throughout most of his life, Wayne was a vocally prominent conservative Republican.
The grave, which went unmarked for 20 years, is now marked with a quotation from his controversial 1971 ''Playboy'' interview: "Tomorrow is the most important thing in life.
He became a 32nd Degree Scottish Rite Mason and later joined the Al Malaikah Shrine Temple in Los Angeles.
Despite the suggestion that Wayne's 1964 lung cancer and his 1979 stomach cancer resulted from nuclear contamination, he believed his lung cancer to have been a result of his six-packs-a-day cigarette habit.
After rejection by all the top studios, Ford struck a deal with independent producer Walter Wanger in which Claire Trevor—a much bigger star at the time—received top billing.
In the same ''Playboy'' interview, Wayne also responded to questions about whether social programs were good for the country:
His widow later suggested that his patriotism in later decades sprang from guilt, writing: "He would become a 'superpatriot' for the rest of his life trying to atone for staying home."
Early in this period, he had a minor, uncredited role as a guard in the 1926 film ''Bardelys the Magnificent''.
As a teen, he worked in an ice cream shop for a man who shod horses for Hollywood studios.
He became a member of the York Rite.
One of Wayne's most popular roles was in ''The High and the Mighty'' (1954), directed by William Wellman, and based on a novel by Ernest K. Gann.
In 2006, friends of Wayne and his former Arizona business partner, Louis Johnson, inaugurated the "Louie and the Duke Classics" events benefiting the John Wayne Cancer Foundation and the American Cancer Society.
He had attended Carter's inaugural ball "as a member of the loyal opposition", as he described it.
The film was shot in southwestern Utah, east of and generally downwind from the site of recent U.S. Government nuclear weapons tests in southeastern Nevada.
As a favor to USC football coach Howard Jones, who had given silent western film star Tom Mix tickets to USC games, director John Ford and Mix hired Wayne as a prop boy and extra.
He played football for the 1924 league champion Glendale High School team.
Among the cast and crew who filmed the 1956 film ''The Conqueror'' on location near St. George, Utah, 91 developed some form of cancer at various times, including stars Wayne, Susan Hayward, and Agnes Moorehead, and director Dick Powell.
In considering one's fellow man it's important to remember the good things&nbsp;... We should refrain from making judgments just because a fella happens to be a dirty, rotten SOB.'"
In the ''Motion Picture Herald'' Top Ten Money-Making Western Stars poll, Wayne was listed in 1936 and 1939.
Recently declassified Soviet documents reveal that, despite being a fan of Wayne's movies, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin contemplated Wayne's assassination as a result of his frequently espoused anti-communist politics.
