Getting in was tough, but tuition was free.
However, the National Foundation "swiftly put its full weight behind Salk.
Six months before Salk's announcement, optimism and hope were so widespread, the Polio Fund in the U.S. had already contracted to purchase enough of the Salk vaccine to immunize 9,000,000 children and pregnant women the following year.
What improvements can be made?"
One of the unfortunate results caused by the controversy was that "many authorities have deplored the confusion that has been created in the public mind."
After one presentation that Salk made to a medical conference, "Sabin mounted a full-scale offensive, engaging in a piecemeal demolition of his presentation."
'It was as if a war had ended', one observer recalled."
Salk preferred not to have his career as a scientist affected by too much personal attention, as he had always tried to remain independent and private in his research and life, but this proved to be impossible.
:"He's been using it criticism for years.
The family moved from East Harlem to 853 Elsmere Place, the Bronx, with some time spent in Queens (439 Beach 69th Street, Arverne, New York).
Salk describes his "biophilosophy" as the application of a "biological, evolutionary point of view to philosophical, cultural, social and psychological problems."
As a result of Salk's preliminary results in 1954, "when polio was destroying more American children than any other communicable disease, his vaccine was ready for field testing."
Although many advances have been made in treating AIDS, "the world still waited for the miracle vaccine the conqueror of polio had sought", wrote historian Alan Axelrod.
Anyone who would seek to prevent its use for other than unanswerable scientific reasons would be acting neither as a scientist nor as a humanitarian....
I did not intend to practice medicine, although in medical school, and in my internship, I did all the things that were necessary to qualify me in that regard.
Two years later he was granted a fellowship at the University of Michigan, where he would study flu viruses with his mentor Thomas Francis, Jr..
In some parts of the country, concern assumed almost the dimensions of panic.
No vaccine in the history of the world has ever had such a test for safety.
Subsequently, as more states began recording instances of the disease, the numbers of victims grew larger.
:In an interview about his future hopes at the institute, he said, "In the end, what may have more significance is my creation of the institute and what will come out of it, because of its example as a place for excellence, a creative environment for creative minds."
In 1966, ''The New York Times'' referred to him as the "Father of Biophilosophy."
Oshinsky writes that as "headlines screamed, 'Polio Scourge,' 'Polio Panic', and 'Polio's Deadly Path'," parents "faced a dilemma" and a feeling of personal helplessness in the midst of an "apparently runaway epidemic."
It's much more important to cooperate and collaborate.
Americans turned on their radios to hear the details, department stores set up loudspeakers, and judges suspended trials so everyone in the courtroom could hear.
When Murrow asked him, "Who owns this patent?
:"Although he is distinctly future-oriented, Dr. Salk has not lost sight of the institute's immediate aim, which is the development and use of the new biology, called molecular and cellular biology, described as part physics, part chemistry and part biology.
He was later approached by the director of research at the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis and asked whether he would like to participate in the foundation's polio project which had earlier been established by President Franklin D. Roosevelt, at the time thought to be a victim of polio himself.
As a result, scientists were in a frantic race to find a way to prevent or cure the disease.
Twentieth Century-Fox began writing a screenplay and Warner Brothers filed a claim to the title ''The Triumph of Dr. Jonas Salk'' shortly after the formal announcement of the vaccine.
Sabin's polio vaccine is no longer available in the United States.
For the first year he gathered supplies and researchers including Dr. Julius Youngner, Byron Bennett, Dr. L. James Lewis, and secretary Lorraine Friedman joined Salk's team, as well.
His vaccine was a modern medical miracle."
The doodle shows happy and healthy children and adults playing and going about their lives with two children hold up a sign saying, "Thank you, Dr.
Jonas Edward Salk was born in New York City on October 28, 1914.
Despite a general lack of enthusiasm for this approach, O'Connor backed Salk handsomely.
According to Debbie Bookchin, "across the nation there were spontaneous celebrations... business came to a halt as the news spread.
He continued to conduct research and publish books, including ''Man Unfolding'' (1972), ''The Survival of the Wisest'' (1973), ''World Population and Human Values: A New Reality'' (1981), and ''Anatomy of Reality: Merging of Intuition and Reason'' (1983).
Salk's last years were spent searching for a vaccine against HIV.
The hospital administrators backed off and there was no further interference from the director.
Francis had recently joined the faculty of the medical school after working for the Rockefeller Foundation, where he had discovered the type B influenza virus.
Oshinsky interviewed a friend of Salk's, who said, "to intern there was like playing ball for the New York Yankees ... only the top men from the nation's medical schools dared apply.
According to ''The New York Times'', "Dr. Sabin recommended at a hearing before a House investigating subcommittee that Salk inoculations be suspended" until a safer preparation could be perfected.
In one test, six children were killed and three left crippled."
During Salk's medical studies, he stood out from his peers, according to Bookchin, "not just because of his continued academic prowess—he was Alpha Omega Alpha, the Phi Beta Kappa Society of medical education—but because he had decided he did not want to practice medicine."
In 1948, he undertook a project funded by the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis to determine the number of different types of polio virus.
At the age of 39, Roosevelt was left with severe paralysis and spent most of his presidency in a wheelchair.
But, concludes O'Neill, "polio was conquered all the same, even if not so quickly and safely as it might have been."
According to Oshinsky, NYU based its modest reputation on famous alumni, such as Walter Reed, who helped conquer yellow fever.
In the past epoch, man was concerned with death, high mortality; his attitudes were antideath, antidisease", he says.
After successful tests on laboratory animals, it next had to be tested on human beings.
Debbie Bookchin writes that he had been "perhaps accurately guessing that Salk was about to challenge him for ascendancy in the polio world."
This year we observe the 30th anniversary of the licensing and manufacturing of the vaccine discovered by this great American.
Salk quickly accepted the offer, saying he "would be happy to work on this important project."
By 1962, polio had become almost extinct, with only 910 cases reported that year—down from 37,476 in 1954.
It was also declared "a victory for the whole nation" as Jonas Salk became "world famous overnight and was showered with awards", wrote O'Neill.
Salk enrolled in CCNY from which he earned a Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry in 1934.
By 1952, it was killing more of them than was any other communicable disease.
I was merely interested in things human, the human side of nature, if you like, and I continue to be interested in that."
Few hospitals in Manhattan had the status of Mount Sinai, particularly among the city's Jews.
Here, finally, was a polio researcher, they said, who had accomplished something."
It took a long time to learn that the virus was transmitted by fecal matter and secretions of the nose and throat.
His definition of a "biophilosopher" is "Someone who draws upon the scriptures of nature, recognizing that we are the product of the process of evolution, and understands that we have become the process itself, through the emergence and evolution of our consciousness, our awareness, our capacity to imagine and anticipate the future, and to choose from among alternatives."
After three institutions turned him down, he received from William McEllroy, the dean of the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, an offer which included a promise that he would run his own lab.
Until 1955, when the Salk vaccine was introduced, polio was considered one of the most frightening public health problems in the world.
In an interview in 1980, he described his thoughts on the subject, including his feeling that a sharp rise and an expected leveling off in the human population would take place and eventually bring a change in human attitudes:
On July 2, 1952, assisted by the staff at the D.T.
For the ultimate purpose of science, humanism and the arts, in his judgment, is the freeing of each individual to cultivate his full creativity, in whichever direction it leads.
Because of his tireless work, untold hundreds of thousands who might have been crippled are sound in body today.
The Foundation was headed by Basil O'Connor who was the former law partner of President Roosevelt, the U.S.'s most famous polio victim.
", Salk replied, "No one.
The results of the tests were eventually deemed successful and, O'Neill wrote, "Salk had justified Basil O'Connor's faith."
While Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) is not recommended by the CDC, its website explained that Sabin's OPV is more suited to areas where polio is endemic, because of "its advantages over IPV Inactivated Polio Vaccine in providing intestinal immunity and providing secondary spread of the vaccine to unprotected contacts."
The Salk vaccine is safe and effective and will protect children from paralytic polio to the extent of 60 to 90 percent...
He received a presidential citation, a score of awards, four honorary degrees, half a dozen foreign decorations, and letters from thousands of fellow citizens.
Questions remained: "How long will the immunity last?
"This was the situation when young Jonas Salk, a medical doctor in charge of a virology laboratory at the University of Pittsburgh, decided to use the safer 'killed' virus," writes O'Neill.
I had worked with influenza viruses, helping to establish the efficacy of a 'killed'-virus vaccine...
His parents, Daniel and Dora (née Press) Salk, were Ashkenazi Jewish immigrants from Poland who had not received extensive formal education.
However, a year and a half after the Salk vaccine was introduced, a Sabin vaccine had still not yet been tested on humans.
Instead, he became absorbed in research, even taking a year off to study biochemistry.
"Overnight", she adds, "Salk had become an international hero and a household name.
The famous U.S. artist Andrew Wyeth created a painting in 1948 depicting his neighbor, Christina Olson, who was crippled with polio.
At the time, scientists had discovered three and they wanted to know if there were more types.
He had two younger brothers, Herman and Lee, a child psychologist.
She writes, "When O'Connor realized that success seemed imminent, he allowed the foundation to go into debt to finance the final research required to develop the Salk vaccine.
Instead, New York created eight "Jonas Salk Scholarships" for future medical students.
The AIDS vaccine project was discontinued in 2007, 12 years after Jonas Salk's death in 1995.
In the postwar United States, annual epidemics were increasingly devastating.
Meanwhile, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which has spent $1.5 billion, plans to spend another $1.8 billion through 2018 to help eradicate the virus.
By 2003, polio had been eradicated in all but a few countries, among them Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, and Pakistan However, mullahs in northern Nigeria began to oppose the vaccination program, claiming that it was a plot to spread AIDS and sterility, and prevented any vaccination.
The field trial set up to test the Salk vaccine was, according to O'Neill, "the most elaborate program of its kind in history, involving 20,000 physicians and public health officers, 64,000 school personnel, and 220,000 volunteers."
The 1952 U.S. epidemic was the worst outbreak in the nation's history.
With these same fears, Saudi Arabian officials imposed a polio vaccination requirement on certain visitors.
Salk served on the board of directors of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation.
Within minutes of Francis's declaration that the vaccine was safe and effective, the news of the event was carried coast to coast by wire services and radio and television newscasts.
At least 100 million people had contributed to the March of Dimes, and seven million had donated their time and labor, as well.
In high school "he was known as a perfectionist .
He announced that his wife and three sons had been among the first volunteers to be inoculated with his vaccine.
The fight against polio did not really get under way until 1938 when the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis was born.
New York alone had 9,023 cases, of which 2,448 (28%) resulted in death, and a larger number in paralysis.
But "despite such very nice tributes", ''The New York Times'' wrote, "Salk is profoundly disturbed by the torrent of fame that has descended upon him....
He accepted, and in the fall of that year, left Michigan and relocated to Pennsylvania.
Two months after the Salk vaccine was announced to the world, in 1955, Basil O'Connor found it necessary to respond to critics of the vaccine, especially Dr. Sabin.
It had been, Salk later described, "two and a half years of drudgery and hard work."
Born in New York City, he attended New York University School of Medicine, later choosing to do medical research instead of becoming a practicing physician.
A few years later, during a polio outbreak in Canada, "masked bandits" stole 75,000 Salk vaccine shots from a Montreal university research center.
Scientists from other nations reported similar experiences: Denmark, for example, "reported only a few sporadic cases among the 2,500,000 ... who received the vaccine."
*2012, October 24, in honor of his birthday, has been named "World Polio Day", and was originated by Rotary International over a decade earlier.
In what came to be known as the Cutter incident, a production error caused some lots of the Cutter vaccine to be tainted with live polio virus.
furthermore, most researchers were experimenting with highly dangerous 'live' vaccines.
There were no research laboratories; the library was inadequate.
Surgeon General, Luther Terry, recommended a temporary halt due to 16 cases of confirmed polio in adults.
The announcement was made at the University of Michigan, exactly 10 years to the day after the death of President Roosevelt.
He noted that the epidemics kept getting worse and its victims were usually children.
The promise, though, was not quite what he expected.
At his mother's urging, he put aside aspirations of becoming a lawyer, and instead concentrated on classes necessary for admission to medical school.
You look at him and you see him thinking, 'My God, this can be prevented'."
Sabin himself said, in October 1956, that "the Salk vaccine is still the only protection against polio available to the public."
At one point at the end of my first year of medical school, I received an opportunity to spend a year in research and teaching in biochemistry, which I did.
Today, polio is not a familiar disease to younger Americans, and many have difficulty appreciating the magnitude of the disorder that the Salk vaccine virtually wiped from the face of the Earth.
However, polio did not gain national attention until 1921, when Franklin D. Roosevelt, former vice presidential candidate and soon to be governor of New York, came down with a paralytic illness, diagnosed at the time as polio.
:"The presentation was numbing, but the results were clear: the vaccine worked.
Cases usually increased during the summer when children were home from school.
He realized his awesome responsibility, and so he continued his task with renewed vigor."
The public soon realized that this kind of research demanded "big money" and an "army of devoted volunteers", but Salk was determined to make it over this barrier.
He talks continually about getting out of the limelight and back to his laboratory... because of his genuine distaste for publicity, which he believes is inappropriate for a scientist."
They included fund-raisers, committee workers, and volunteers at clinics and record centers.
And at the end of that year, I was told that I could, if I wished, switch and get a Ph.D. in biochemistry, but my preference was to stay with medicine.
Students had to cram a four-year curriculum into just three years.
Since then, the Taliban has blocked all vaccinations in the Swat Valley of Pakistan.
On April 12, 1965, leaders of the Senate and House presented Salk with a joint resolution expressing the nation's gratitude to him, his colleagues in the project, and the March of Dimes, which helped to finance the work.
*2006, the United States Postal Service issued a 63-cent Distinguished Americans series postage stamp in his honor.
That same year, the state of New York's Health Department recommended "that the Salk vaccine be given preference over the Sabin oral vaccine..."
He enjoys talking to people he likes, and "he likes a lot of people", wrote the ''Times''.
Salk replied, "everyone should wear the badge as an act of solidarity."
The governor of Pennsylvania had a medal struck, and the state legislature gave him a chaired professorship.
As the fear of polio increased each year funds to combat it increased from $1.8 million to $67 million by 1955.
As a biologist, he believes that his science is on the frontier of tremendous new discoveries; and as a philosopher, he is convinced that humanists and artists have joined the scientists to achieve an understanding of man in all his physical, mental and spiritual complexity.
Beginning in the mid-1980s, Salk also engaged in research to develop a vaccine for another, more recent plague, AIDS.
As one of the only living scientists whose face was known the world over, Salk, in the public's eye, had a superstar aura.
No one got an advantage based on an accident of birth."
As if to prepare for Socratic encounters such as these, the institute's architect, Louis Kahn, has installed blackboards in place of concrete facings on the walls along the walks."
Although 200 of the applicants were Jewish, only five got in.
In 1960, he founded the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, California, which is today a center for medical and scientific research.
According to American historian William O'Neill, "Paralytic poliomyelitis (its formal name) was, if not the most serious, easily the most frightening public health problem of the postwar era."
"Citizens of urban areas were to be terrified every summer when this frightful visitor returned."
In September 1962, public health officials in the U.S. and Canada faced a "major dilemma": whether to continue using the recently begun Sabin vaccine inoculations until further studies were conducted, due to reports of polio cases among persons who had received it.
In 1948, Harry Weaver, the director of research at the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, which later became known as the March of Dimes, contacted Salk.
Next, he gave it to volunteers who had never had polio before.
The day after his graduation from medical school in 1939, Salk married Donna Lindsay, a master's candidate at the New York College of Social Work.
", wrote Denenberg.
A different OPV would continue to be administered, protecting against types 1 and 3, which are both still endemic in the wild in Nigeria, Afghanistan, and Pakistan.
The news was leaked after a Pittsburgh newspaper, the ''Sun-Telegraph'', reported that he had been giving injections to children suffering from cancer.
When news of the vaccine's success was made public on April 12, 1955, Salk was hailed as a "miracle worker" and the day almost became a national holiday.
Paul Offit writes about the event:
Once the research was finished Salk would be able to keep the facilities and continue his previous work.
"Citizens of urban areas were to be terrified every summer when this frightful visitor returned."
Many famous people were polio victims; most were able to overcome their disabilities, while others were less fortunate.
They had three children: Peter, Darrell, and Jonathan Salk.
With the hopes of the world upon him, "Salk worked sixteen hours a day, seven days a week, for years .
Dr. Francis reported that the vaccinations had been 80 to 90% effective on the basis of results in 11 states.
That belongs "in the category of mink coats and Cadillacs—unnecessary", he said.
He successfully vaccinated thousands of monkeys, but also used them as hosts to grow the virus, so he could make his vaccine Klein.
Dr. Jonas E. Salk changed all that.
At the end of his residency, Salk began applying for permanent research positions, but he discovered that many of the jobs he desired were closed to him due to Jewish quotas, which, according to Bookchin, "prevailed in so much of the medical research establishment."
Watson Home for Crippled Children, Jonas Salk injected 43 children with his killed-virus vaccine.
Author Jon Cohen noted, "Jonas Salk made scientists and journalists alike go goofy.
The past was dominated by death control; in the future, birth control will be more important.
In 1956, ''Wisdom'' magazine ran a cover story about Salk, summarizing some of the reasoning behind his desire to do research:
One intern recalled, "Jonas was a very staunch guy.
The mayor of New York City interrupted a city council meeting to announce the news, adding, 'I think we are all quite proud that Dr. Salk is a graduate of City College.'"
In the years after Salk's discovery, many supporters, in particular the National Foundation, "helped him build his dream of a research complex for the investigation of biological phenomena 'from cell to society'."
The lab given to him was much smaller than he had hoped and the university forced him to conform to many rules which stunted his research as a beginning virologist.
This testing started in 1954, and the vaccine was announced as safe on April 12, 1955.
According to Olson, "parents kept children home from school, avoided parks and swimming pools, and played only in small groups with the closest of friends."
He asked Salk to join the fight against polio and research/confirm how many polio types existed.
It's brought me enormous gratification, opened many opportunities, but at the same time placed many burdens on me.
Because Salk was the first to prove that a 'killed'-virus could prevent polio, medical historian Paul Offit wrote in 2007 that "for this observation alone, Salk should have been awarded the Nobel Prize.
Competition was intense, but the rules were fairly applied.
Salk became ambitious for his own lab and was finally granted one at the University of Pittsburgh.
Francis Crick, codiscoverer of the structure of the DNA molecule, was a leading professor at the institute until his death in 2004.
Salk stated afterwards, "It is true that we have been conducting experiments in many persons with a variety of cancer and cancer-like conditions ... but we have no treatment for cancer.
:"Those who would prevent its use must be prepared to be haunted for life by the crippled bodies of little children who could have been saved from paralysis had they been permitted to receive the Salk vaccine."
Nearly 58,000 cases of polio were reported in 1952, with 3,145 people dying and 21,269 left with mild to disabling paralysis.
*2009, BBYO boys chapter chartered in his honor in Scottsdale, Arizona, Named "Jonas Salk AZA #2357"
In the United States, Canada and Denmark, 7,675,000 children have actually received the Salk vaccine with no untoward results.
"This represents an historic triumph of preventive medicine—unparalleled in history", Dr. Terry said.
David Oshinsky writes that her father, Elmer Lindsay, "a wealthy Manhattan dentist, viewed Salk as a social inferior, several cuts below Donna's former suitors."
President Lyndon B. Johnson called him to the White House to congratulate him personally.
In 1988, numerous international medical organizations launched a campaign to eradicate polio globally, as had been successfully done for smallpox.
However, "Francis did not let him down," writes Bookchin.
:"There is talk here of the possibility, once the secret of how the cell is triggered to manufacture antibodies is discovered, that a single vaccine may be developed to protect a child against many common infectious diseases.
During his years at New York University Medical School, Salk worked as a laboratory technician during the school year and as a camp counselor in the summer.
Jonas Salk tested the vaccine on about one million children, who were known as the polio pioneers.
In the Eisenhower White House, plans were already afoot to present Salk a special presidential medal designating him "a benefactor of mankind" in a Rose Garden ceremony.
There is speculation about the power to isolate and perhaps eliminate genetic errors that lead to birth defects.
After graduating from medical school, Salk began his residency at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital, where he again worked in Francis's laboratory.
It was critical that Salk develop the trust of the U.S. public for his experiments and the mass tests that would become necessary.
He never took a backward step on that issue or any other issue of principle between us and the hospital."
By July, movie studios were already fighting for the motion-picture rights to his film biography.
