King Abdullah's eldest son, Prince Hussein is the current Crown Prince of Jordan.
Neighboring Iraq was also ruled by a Hashemite monarchy; Faisal II of Iraq, who was Hussein's cousin.
The national football team has improved in recent years, though it has yet to qualify for the World Cup.
Jordan has a diverse range of habitats, ecosystems and biota due, to its varied landscapes and environments.
Jordanian wine and beer are also sometimes used.
Amman Civil Airport serves several regional routes and charter flights while Queen Alia International Airport is the major international airport in Jordan and is the hub for Royal Jordanian, the flag carrier.
Jordan enjoys advanced status with the EU, which has facilitated greater access to export to European markets.
In 1833 Ibrahim Pasha turned on the Ottomans and established his rule over the Levant.
"Hashemite" is the house name of the royal family.
Many Iraqi Christians (Assyrians/Chaldeans) however settled temporarily or permanently in Jordan.
These are subdivided into a total of 52 nawahi, which are further divided into neighborhoods in urban areas or into towns in rural ones.
The refugee crisis effects include competition for job opportunities, water resources and other state provided services, along with the strain on the national infrastructure.
Summers, lasting from May to September, are hot and dry, with temperatures averaging around  and sometimes exceeding  between July and August.
79% of children go through primary education, while secondary school enrollment has increased from 63% to 97% of high school aged students in Jordan.
The government can be dismissed by a two-thirds vote of "no confidence" by the Chamber of Deputies.
After the decline of the Abbasid Caliphate, the area was ruled by the Fatimids, then by the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem (1115–1189).
No major terrorist attacks have occurred since then.
Nuclear science and technology is also expanding; nuclear facilities are undergoing construction.
Water and sanitation, available to only 10% of the population in 1950, now reach 98% of Jordanians.
Petra Engineering Industries Company which is considered to be one of the main pillars of Jordanian industry, has gained international recognition with its air-conditioning units reaching NASA.
Transjordan was an essential territory for the conquest of nearby Damascus.
Jordan captured the West Bank during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War and the name of the state was changed to ''The  Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan'' in 1949.
The most notable revolts were the Shoubak Revolt (1905) and the Karak Revolt (1910), which were brutally suppressed.
There are over 200,000 Jordanian students enrolled in universities each year.
Subsequently, Jordan renounced its claims to the West Bank in 1988.
All 65 members of the Senate are directly appointed by the King, they are usually veteran politicians or are known to have held previous positions in the Chamber of Deputies or in the government.
Some very well preserved historical cities include Petra and Jerash, the former being Jordan's most popular tourist attraction and an icon of the kingdom.
Phosphate mines in the south have made Jordan one of the largest producers and exporters of this mineral in the world.
Jordan has around 50 political parties representing leftist, pan-Arabist, Islamist and secularist ideologies.
The port was chosen due to it being a transit cargo port for other neighboring countries, its location between four countries and three continents, being an exclusive gateway for the local market and for the improvements it has recently witnessed.
There are about 50,000 Jordanian troops working with the United Nations in peacekeeping missions across the world.
The civil courts deal with civil and criminal matters, and have jurisdiction over all persons in all matters civil and criminal, including cases brought against the government.
In response, some Arab countries demanded Jordan's expulsion from the Arab League.
The origin of the river's name is debated, but the most common explanation is that it derives from the word "yarad" (the descender, "Yarden" is the Hebrew name for the river), found in Hebrew, Aramaic, and other Semitic languages.
The kingdom has continued to demonstrate hospitality, despite the substantial strain the flux of Syrian refugees places on the country.
The Greeks founded new cities in Jordan including Philadelphia (Amman), Gerasa (Jerash), Gedara (Umm Qays), Pella (Tabaqat Fahl) and Arbila (Irbid).
In 2016, the debt reached $35.1 billion representing 90.6% of its GDP.
English, though without official status, is widely spoken throughout the country and is the ''de facto'' language of commerce and banking, as well as a co-official status in the education sector; almost all university-level classes are held in English and almost all public schools teach English along with Standard Arabic.
Recently, the nightlife in Amman, Aqaba and Irbid has started to emerge and the number of bars, discos and nightclubs is on the rise.
Overall population however declined due to oppression and neglect.
The Hejaz Railway built during the Ottoman Empire which extended from Damascus to Mecca will act as a base for future railway expansion plans.
However, by the time of Roman rule in the Levant around 63 BC, the people of Ammon, Edom and Moab had lost their distinct identities, and were assimilated into Roman culture.
The revolt was supported by the Allies of World War&nbsp;I including Britain and France.
Most Jordanian Druze live in the eastern oasis town of Azraq, some villages on the Syrian border, and the city of Zarqa, while most Jordanian Bahá'ís live in the village of Adassiyeh bordering the Jordan Valley.
Christians today make up about 4% of the population, down from 20% in 1930.
The project is part of the kingdom's 2025 vision that aims at diversifying its energy resources.
Jerash contains a well-preserved Roman city that had 15,000 inhabitants at its height.
Over two thousand plant species have been recorded in Jordan.
Less common sports are gaining popularity.
Jordan contributes to 75% of the Arabic content on the Internet.
In 2013, Jordan lost a chance to play at the 2014 World Cup when they lost to Uruguay during inter-confederation play-offs.
Queen Alia International Airport expansion was completed in 2013 with new terminals costing $700 million, to handle over 16 million passengers annually.
There are around 1.2 million illegal and some 500,000 legal migrant workers in the kingdom.
The study excluded minority Christian groups and the thousands of western, Iraqi and Syrian Christians residing in Jordan.
The capital, Amman, is Jordan's most populous city as well as the country's economic, political and cultural centre.
Jordan ranked first among the Arab states and 78th globally in the Human Freedom Index in 2015, and ranked 55th out of 175 countries in the Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) issued by Transparency International in 2014, where 175th is most corrupt.
Winter also sees frequent showers and occasional snowfall in some western elevated areas.
The official currency is the Jordanian dinar, which is pegged to the IMF's special drawing rights (SDRs), equivalent to an exchange rate of  0.709 dinar, or approximately  1.41044 dollars.
The Great Recession and the turmoil caused by the Arab Spring have depressed Jordan's GDP growth, impacting trade, industry, construction and tourism.
This has attracted large foreign investments to Jordan and has enabled the country to export its workforce to Persian Gulf countries.
Jordan ranks third internationally in participation in U.N. peacekeeping missions, with one of the highest levels of peacekeeping troop contributions of all U.N. member states.
This is due to high immigration rates of Muslims into Jordan, higher emigration rates of Christians to the west and higher birth rates for Muslims.
The tourism sector is considered a cornerstone of the economy, being a large source of employment, hard currency and economic growth.
Roman remains include, in Amman, the Temple of Hercules at the Amman Citadel and the Roman theater.
The country's average elevation is  (SL).
Mansaf is eaten on different occasions such as funerals, weddings and on religious holidays.
The extraction of oil shale had been delayed by a couple of years due to the advanced level of technology that is required to extract it and its relatively higher cost.
Jordan is named after the Jordan River.
Although the desert parts of the kingdom reach high temperatures, the heat is usually moderated by low humidity and a daytime breeze, while the nights are cool.
Political parties contested a fifth of the seats in the 2016 elections, the remainder belonging to independent politicians.
Jordan is classified by the World Bank as an "upper-middle income" country; however, approximately 14.4% () of the population lives below the national poverty line.
Christians traditionally occupy two cabinet posts, and are reserved 9 seats out of the 130 in the parliament.
The Arab Spring began sweeping the Arab world in 2011, where large scale protests erupted demanding economic and political reforms.
The Ayyubids built a new castle at Ajloun and rebuilt the former Roman fort of Qasr Azraq.
Forests cover 1.5 million dunums (), less than 2% of Jordan, making Jordan among the world's least forested countries, the internationally average being 15%.
The Royal Jordanian Army, which boasts around 110,000 personnel, is considered to be among the most professional in the region, due to being particularly well-trained and organized.
Jordan also fought in the War of Attrition, which included the 1968 Battle of Karameh where the combined forces of the Jordanian Armed Forces and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) repelled an Israeli attack on the Karameh camp on the Jordanian border with the West Bank.
Between 79% and 85% of high school students in Jordan move on to higher education.
Local basketball teams include: Al-Orthodoxi Club, Al-Riyadi, Zain, Al-Hussein and Al-Jazeera.
The Constitution of Jordan was adopted in 1952 and has been amended a number of times, most recently in 2016.
Many Shia are Iraqi and Lebanese refugees.
The Jerash Festival is an annual music event that features popular Arab singers.
Frequent confrontations ensued and tensions between them increased.
Jordan is part of the Holy Land and has several biblical attractions that attract pilgrimage activities.
Remittances from Jordanian expatriates were $3.8 billion in 2015, a notable rise in the amount of transfers compared to 2014 where remittances reached over $3.66 billion listing Jordan as fourth largest recipient in the region.
The oldest evidence of inhabitants by humans dates back around 250,000 years.
Israel provided an antidote to the poison and released dozens of political prisoners, including Sheikh Ahmed Yassin after King Hussein threatened to annul the peace treaty.
While the Muslim forces lost to the Byzantines in their first direct engagement during the Battle of Mu'tah in 629, in what is now the Karak Governorate, the Byzantines lost control of the Levant when they were defeated by the Rashidun army in 636 at the Battle of Yarmouk just north of modern-day Jordan.
One record of this is the Mesha Stele  erected by the Moabite king Mesha around 840 BC on which he lauds himself for the building projects that he initiated in Moab and commemorates his glory and victory against the Israelites.
Flows of remittances to Jordan grew rapidly, particularly during the end of the 1970s and 1980s, and remains an important source of external funding.
It coexists with an indigenous Christian minority.
He also set up five other special economic zones.
Later rulers include the Nabataean Kingdom, the Roman Empire, and the Ottoman Empire.
The art scene has been developing in the past few years and Jordan has been a haven for artists from surrounding countries.
Jordan is bordered by Saudi Arabia to the east and south, Iraq to the north-east, Syria to the north, Israel, Palestine and the Dead Sea to the west and the Red Sea in its extreme south-west.
2.9 million (30%) were non-citizens, a figure including refugees and illegal immigrants.
The Jordanian military enjoys strong support and aid from the United States, the United Kingdom and France.
For this reason, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources launched several projects like Tafila Wind Farm and have set a target to obtain 10% of Jordan's electrical consumption from renewable resources by 2020.
Jordan's law enforcement was ranked 37th in the world and 3rd in the Middle East, in terms of police services' performance, by the 2016 World Internal Security and Police Index.
The result was $3.4 billion in tourism revenues, $4.4 billion with the inclusion of medical tourists.
The King Hussein Cancer Center is a leading cancer treatment center.
Three stable kingdoms emerged there at the end of the Bronze Age: Ammon, Moab and Edom.
Ayla city (modern day Aqaba) in southern Jordan also came under Byzantine Empire rule.
Major towns in the eastern part of the country are the oasis towns of Azraq and Ruwaished.
The name was changed in 1949 into "The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan".
Smaller religious minorities include Druze and Bahá'ís.
There is also an increasing growth of alternative Arabic music bands, who are dominating the scene in the Arab World, including; El Morabba3, Autostrad, JadaL, Akher Zapheer and Ayloul.
Agricultural villages in Jordan witnessed a period of relative prosperity in the 16th century, but were later abandoned.
Abdullah reaffirmed Jordan's commitment to the peace treaty with Israel and its relations with the United States.
In the south and east, the Nabataeans had an independent kingdom.
Jordan's location lies on a pilgrimage route taken by Muslims going to Mecca, which helped the population economically when the Ottomans constructed the Hejaz Railway linking Mecca with Istanbul in 1908.
In the 1970s, it was the first Arab country to include females in its police force.
Moreover, seaside recreation is present in on the shores of Aqaba and the Dead Sea through several international resorts.
On 12 June 1950, the Arab League declared the annexation was a temporary, practical measure and that Jordan was holding the territory as a "trustee" pending a future settlement.
The economy, which boasts a GDP of $38.210 billion (), grew at an average rate of 4.3% per annum between 2005 and 2010, and around 2.5% 2010 onwards.
Jordan was also selected as the location for the Synchrotron-Light for Experimental Science and Applications in the Middle East (SESAME) facility, which is supported by UNESCO and CERN.
Plaster statues estimated to date back to around 7250 BC were uncovered there, and are among the oldest large human statues ever found.
During crusader rule, it was called "Oultrejordain".
The proportion of skilled workers in Jordan is among the highest in the region in sectors such as ICT and industry, due to a relatively modern educational system.
The name was changed to "The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan" in 1949.
The Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace was signed on 26 October 1994.
Jordan's total foreign debt in 2012 was $22 billion, representing 72% of its GDP.
It ended in an Arab defeat and the West Bank came under Israeli control.
Jordanian Christians number around 250,000, all of whom are Arabic-speaking, according to a 2014 estimate by the Orthodox Church.
Another theory is that it is from the Arabic root word "wrd" (to come to), as in people coming to a major source of water.
Due to slow domestic growth, high energy and food subsidies and a bloated public-sector workforce, Jordan usually runs annual budget deficits.
Chechen, Circassian, Armenian, Tagalog, and Russian are popular among their communities.
The current prime minister is Hani Al-Mulki who received his position on 29 May 2016.
It is  large, and  long between its northernmost and southernmost points; Umm Qais and Aqaba respectively.
The winter, lasting from November to March, is relatively cool, with temperatures averaging around .
The highest point is Jabal Umm al Dami, at  above sea level, while the lowest is the Dead Sea , the lowest land point on earth.
As an old tradition, the dish is eaten using one's hands, but the tradition is not always used.
66% of Jordanians have medical insurance.
The prehistoric period of Jordan ended at around 2000 BC when the Semitic nomads known as the Amorites entered the region.
Jordan prides itself on its health services, some of the best in the region.
Despite plans to expand the private sector, the state remains the dominant force in Jordan's economy.
There are also a small number of Ahmadi Muslims, and some Shiites.
Since 2010, over 1.4 million Syrian refugees have fled to Jordan to escape the violence in Syria.
While Jordan continues to accept refugees, the recent large influx from Syria placed substantial strain on national resources and infrastructure.
Jordan sent a brigade to Syria to attack Israeli units on Syrian territory but did not engage Israeli forces from Jordanian territory.
The kingdom lies between 29° and 34° N, and 34° and 40° E. The east is an arid plateau irrigated by oases and seasonal water streams.
The majority of tourists coming to Jordan are from European and Arab countries.
During Roman rule the Nabataeans continued to flourish and replaced their local gods with Christianity.
The Emirate of Transjordan was established in 1921 by the then Emir Abdullah I and became a British protectorate.
It consists of a plate of rice with meat that was boiled in thick yogurt, sprayed with nuts and sometimes herbs.
The country is a constitutional monarchy, but the king holds wide executive and legislative powers.
This high infrastructural development is necessitated by its role as a transit country for goods and services to the Palestine and Iraq.
Popular Jordanian newspapers include: Ammon News, Ad-Dustour and Jordan Times.
The highest political position reached by a Christian is deputy prime minister, held by Marwan al-Muasher in 2005.
The tourism sector in Jordan has been severely affected by regional turbulence.
Abdullah was succeeded by his son Talal, however Talal soon abdicated due to illness in favor of his eldest son Hussein, who ascended the throne in 1953.
In the past, Jordan had given many Palestinian refugees citizenship, however recently Jordanian citizenship is given only in rare cases.
This is due to Jordan's critical position in the Middle East.
A typical Jordanian meze often contains koubba maqliya, labaneh, baba ghanoush, tabbouleh, olives and pickles.
Science and technology is the country's fastest developing economic sector.
Ibrahim Pasha, son of the governor of the Egypt Eyalet under the request of the Ottoman sultan, rooted out the Wahhabis between 1811 and 1818.
The most promising segment of this sector is construction.
Jordan is a founding member of the Arab League and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and is one of two Arab states to have signed a peace treaty with Israel.
In 2006, the port was ranked as being the "Best Container Terminal" in the Middle East by ''Lloyd's List''.
According to the World Bank, Syrian refugees have cost Jordan more than $2.5 billion a year, amounting to 6% of the GDP and 25% of the government's annual revenue.
Article 99 divides the courts into three categories: civil, religious, and special.
Jordan became a member of the United Nations on 14 December 1955.
Descendants of Armenians that sought refuge in the Levant during the 1915 Armenian Genocide number approximately 5,000 persons, mainly residing in Amman.
Jordan receives 330 days of sunshine per year, and wind speeds reach over 7&nbsp;m/s over the mountainous areas.
The rest is attributed to Circassians, Chechens and Armenians.
They are mentioned in ancient texts such as the Old Testament.
Jordan signed a contract with Russian company Rosatom in 2014 for the construction of two $5 billion nuclear reactors which are currently under planning and are expected to start delivering electricity in 2025.
The main industrial products are potash, phosphates, cement, clothes, and fertilizers.
In 2010, there were 8 million visitors to Jordan.
Under Umayyads rule, several desert castles were constructed, such as Qasr Al-Mshatta, Qasr Al-Hallabat, Qasr Al-Kharanah, Qasr Tuba, Qasr Amra, and a large administrative palace in Amman.
Until 1956 police duties were carried out by the Arab Legion and the Transjordan Frontier Force.
In 1997, Israeli agents allegedly entered Jordan using Canadian passports and poisoned Khaled Meshal, a senior Hamas leader.
It enjoys "advanced status" with the European Union and is part of the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims to increase links between the EU and its neighbours.
The kingdom has followed a pro-Western foreign policy and maintained close relations with the United States and the United Kingdom.
In the west a highland area of arable land and Mediterranean evergreen forestry drops suddenly into the Jordan Rift Valley.
Ottoman oppression provoked the region's both non-Bedouin and Bedouin tribes to revolt, Bedouin tribes like; Adwan, Bani Hassan, Bani Sakhr and the Howeitat.
Abdullah II has been credited with increasing foreign investment, improving public-private partnerships and providing the foundation for Aqaba's free-trade zone and Jordan's flourishing information and communication technology (ICT) sector.
This particle accelerator, which is expected to start operations in 2017, will allow collaboration between scientists across the Middle East despite the political conflicts.
Jordan Research and Training Reactor is a 5MW training reactor located in Jordan University of Science and Technology; the reactor is expected to start operations in 2017 and will be used by the university to train their students in the already existing nuclear engineering program.
Jordan is a founding member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and of the Arab League.
Muslims from what is now Saudi Arabia invaded the region from the south.
Jordan is the region's top medical tourism destination, as rated by the World Bank, and fifth in the world overall.
The leading cause of death is cardiovascular diseases, followed by cancer.
In 324 AD, the Roman Empire split, and the Eastern Roman Empire (later known as the Byzantine Empire) continued to control or influence the region until 636 AD.
Jordan's military industry thrived after the King Abdullah Design and Development Bureau (KADDB) defence company was established by King Abdullah II in 1999, to provide an indigenous capability for the supply of scientific and technical services to the Jordanian Armed Forces, and to become a global hub in security research and development.
1958 witnessed the emergence of the Arab Federation between the two kingdoms, as a response to the formation of the United Arab Republic between Egypt and Syria.
The official language is Modern Standard Arabic, a literary language taught in the schools.
The majority of patients come from Yemen, Libya and Syria due to the ongoing civil wars in those countries.
370,000 of these Palestinians live in UNRWA refugee camps.
The latest census, taken in 2015, showed the population numbered some 9.5 million.
The 2010 Arab Democracy Index from the Arab Reform Initiative ranked Jordan first in the state of democratic reforms out of fifteen Arab countries.
Islamic sites include shrines of the prophet Muhammad's companions such as 'Abd Allah ibn Rawahah, Zayd ibn Harithah and Muadh ibn Jabal.
The revolt was launched by the Hashemite clan of Hejaz, who claim descent from the Islamic prophet Muhammad, led by Sharif Hussein of Mecca.
The first police force in the Jordanian state was organized after the fall of the Ottoman Empire on 11 April 1921.
The most recent impact to the tourism sector was caused by the Arab Spring, which scared off tourists from the entire region.
The first organized army in Jordan was established on 22 October 1920, and was named the "Arab Legion".
Abdullah established the Emirate of Transjordan in 1921, which then became a British protectorate.
Multiple difficulties emerged upon the assumption of power in the region by the Hashemite leadership.
The Arab Christian Ghassanids, clients of the Byzantines, were defeated despite imperial support.
The climate in Jordan varies greatly.
