:Granted me books and night at one touch.
Borges, then suffering from depression caused by a failed romance, reluctantly accepted.
Borges' works have contributed to philosophical literature and the fantasy genre.
He translated works of literature in English, French, German, Old English, and Old Norse into Spanish.
Its eponymous hero became a symbol of Argentine sensibility, untied from European values – a gaucho, free, poor, ''pampas''-dwelling.
The plot of ''La Intrusa'' was based on a true story of two friends.
Nor should it define itself by the conscious rejection of its colonial past.
Abhorring sentimentality, he rejected the politics and poetics of cultural identity that held sway in Latin America for so long."
Borges was writing in a strongly European literary context, immersed in Spanish, English, French, German, Italian, Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse literature.
His first collection of short stories, ''El jardín de los senderos que se bifurcan'' (''The Garden of Forking Paths''), appeared in 1941, composed mostly of works previously published in ''Sur''.
Martínez states that Borges had, for example, at least a superficial knowledge of set theory, which he handles with elegance in stories such as  "The Book of Sand".
He received his baccalauréat from the Collège de Genève in 1918.
Religion and heresy are explored in such stories as "Averroes's Search", "The Writing of the God", "The Theologians", and "Three Versions of Judas".
The better way to go about it is to pretend that those books already exist, and offer a summary, a commentary on them."
His late-onset blindness strongly influenced his later writing.
He appears by name in Borges's "Dialogue about a Dialogue", in which the two discuss the immortality of the soul.
Borges responded with the essay "Yo, Judío" ("I, a Jew"), a reference to the old "Yo, Argentino" ("I, an Argentine"), a defensive phrase used during pogroms of Argentine Jews to make it clear to attackers that an intended victim was not Jewish.
In a key scene in the poem, Martín Fierro and El Moreno compete by improvising songs on universal themes such as time, night, and the sea, reflecting the real-world gaucho tradition of ''payadas'', improvised musical dialogues on philosophical themes.
Writer and essayist J. M. Coetzee said of him: "He, more than anyone, renovated the language of fiction and thus opened the way to a remarkable generation of Spanish American novelists."
A shame, because Argentina really has world-class scientists."
In addition to short stories for which he is most noted, Borges also wrote poetry, essays, screenplays, literary criticism, and edited numerous anthologies.
Borges grew up hearing about the faded family glory.
The second history was, according to Borges, "the theatrical one" composed of "tales and fables made for consumption by dolts."
He mixed the real and the fantastic, fact with fiction.
Due to the success of the "Forking Paths" story, the term "Borgesian" came to reflect a quality of narrative non-linearity.
In an interview with Burgin, Borges referred to Chilean poet Pablo Neruda as "a very fine poet" but a "very mean man" for unconditionally supporting the Soviet Union and demonizing the United States.
England and English pervaded the family home.
Paramount among his intellectual interests are elements of mythology, mathematics, theology, integrating these through literature, sometimes playfully, sometimes with great seriousness.
:''de Dios, que con magnífica ironía''
In fact, contrary to what is usually supposed, the geographies found in his fictions often do not correspond to those of real-world Argentina.
With many Swiss and Argentine dignitaries present, Pastor de Montmollin read the First Chapter of St. John's Gospel.
He also said about the war: "The Falklands thing was a fight between two bald men over a comb."
He read Thomas Carlyle in English, and he began to read philosophy in German.
His father gave up practicing law due to the failing eyesight that would eventually afflict his son.
Borges was also an admirer of some Oriental culture, e.g.
In the fall of 1967 and spring of 1968, he delivered the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures at Harvard University.
He lectured prolifically.
Critic Ángel Flores, the first to use the term magical realism to define a genre that reacted against the dominant realism and naturalism of the 19th century, considers the beginning of the movement to be the release of Borges' ''A Universal History of Infamy'' (''Historia universal de la infamia'').
In 1955, he was nominated to the directorship of the National Library.
Borges's 1929 book ''Cuaderno San Martín'' includes the poem "Isidoro Acevedo", commemorating his grandfather, Isidoro de Acevedo Laprida, a soldier of the Buenos Aires Army.
But Perón could be very cruel.
He also read translations of Near Eastern and Far Eastern works.
Eight of Borges's poems appear in the 1943 anthology of Spanish American Poets by H.R.
Jorge Luis Borges was born into an educated middle-class family on 24 August 1899.
The Argentine Society of Writers (SADE) held a formal dinner in his honour.
Borges's father died in 1938.
In the essay he says that he would be proud to be a Jew, with a backhanded reminder that any pure Castilian might be likely to have Jewish ancestry from a millennium ago.
The family lived in a large house with an English library of over one thousand volumes; Borges would later remark that "if I were asked to name the chief event in my life, I should say my father's library."
Although they do not appear in the stories, women are significantly discussed as objects of unrequited love in his short stories "The Zahir" and "The Aleph".
As his eyesight waned (it came and went, with a struggle between advancing age and advances in eye surgery), he increasingly focused on writing poetry, since he could memorize an entire work in progress.
In 1985 he wrote a short poem about the Falklands War called ''Juan López y John Ward'', about two fictional soldiers (one from each side), who died in the Falklands, in which he refers to "islands that were too famous".
Borges's opposition to the Party in this matter ultimately led to a permanent rift with his longtime lover, Argentine Communist Estela Canto.
Her family had been much involved in the European settling of South America and the Argentine War of Independence, and she spoke often of their heroic actions.
Neither, he argues, need the literature be bound to the heritage of old world Spanish or European tradition.
After Borges' death in 1986, the Peronist ''Partido Justicialista'' declined to send a delegate to the writer's memorial service in Buenos Aires.
Spurred by pride in his family's heritage, Borges often used those civil wars as settings in fiction and quasi-fiction (for example, "The Life of Tadeo Isidoro Cruz," "The Dead Man," "Avelino Arredondo") as well as poetry ("General Quiroga Rides to His Death in a Carriage").
"Well, I have been brought up to think that the individual should be strong and the State should be weak.
This world is so strange that anything may happen, or may not happen."
Borges was never awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature, something which continually distressed the writer.
Many of these lectures were anthologized in volumes such as ''Siete noches'' (''Seven Nights'') and ''Nueve ensayos dantescos'' (''Nine Dantesque Essays'').
A combination of book and maze, it can be read in many ways.
A descendant of the Argentine lawyer and politician Francisco Narciso de Laprida, Acevedo fought in the battles of Cepeda in 1859, Pavón in 1861, and Los Corrales in 1880.
He continued to publish books, among them ''El libro de los seres imaginarios'' (''Book of Imaginary Beings'', 1967, co-written with Margarita Guerrero), ''El informe de Brodie'' (''Dr.
It was then Argentina's most important literary journal and helped Borges find his fame.
Borges wrote that he considered Mexican essayist Alfonso Reyes to be "the best prose-writer in the Spanish language of any time."
His first publication, for a Buenos Aires newspaper, was a translation of Oscar Wilde's story "The Happy Prince" into Spanish when he was nine.
Isidoro de Acevedo Laprida died of pulmonary congestion in the house where his grandson Jorge Luis Borges was born.
In 1938, Borges found work as first assistant at the Miguel Cané Municipal Library.
Borges represented the humanist view of media that stressed the social aspect of art driven by emotion.
Borges denies that Argentine literature should distinguish itself by limiting itself to "local colour", which he equates with cultural nationalism.
His short story "Emma Zunz" was made into a film (under the name of ''Días de odio'', ''Days of Hate'', directed in 1954 by Leopoldo Torre Nilsson).
By the late 1950s, he had become completely blind.
:''esta declaración de la maestría''
Almost immediately, the spoils system was the rule of the day, as ideological critics of the ruling ''Partido Justicialista'' were fired from government jobs.
Borges said his father "tried to become a writer and failed in the attempt."
During these years, a family friend Macedonio Fernández became a major influence on Borges.
However, some critics would consider Borges to be a predecessor and not actually a magical realist.
His later collection of poetry, ''Elogio de la Sombra'' (''In Praise of Darkness''), develops this theme.
"The Garden of Forking Paths" (1941) presents the idea of forking paths through networks of time, none of which is the same, all of which are equal.
A spokesman for the Party said that this was in reaction to "certain declarations he had made about the country."
Borges was taught at home until the age of 11, was bilingual in Spanish and English, reading Shakespeare in the latter at the age of twelve.
Borges's "review" of the work of the fictional Menard uses tongue-in-cheek comparisons to explore the resonances that ''Don Quixote'' has picked up over the centuries since it was written.
Pastor de Montmollin concluded, "It is not man who discovers the word, it is the Word that comes to him."
He asserts that Argentine writers need to be free to define Argentine literature anew, writing about Argentina and the world from the point of view of those who have inherited the whole of world literature.
In 1946, Borges published the short story "Deutsches Requiem", which masquerades as the last testament of a condemned Nazi war criminal named Otto Dietrich zur Linde.
In 1984, he travelled to Athens, Greece and later to Rethymnon, Crete where he was awarded an honorary doctorate from the School of Philosophy at University of Crete.
His international reputation was consolidated in the 1960s, aided by his works being available in English, by the Latin American Boom and by the success of García Márquez's ''One Hundred Years of Solitude''.
Kodama, his widow and heir on the basis of the marriage and two wills, gained control over his works.
Williamson says "Borges's main argument is that the very fact of writing from the margins provides Argentine writers with a special opportunity to innovate without being bound to the canons of the centre,&nbsp;... at once a part of and apart from the centre, which gives them much potential freedom".
He argues that such books sacrifice culture, history and honesty in the name of defending German honour.
Due to the influence of Borges' mother and his own role on the opposition to Peron, the provisional government appointed Borges as the Director of the National Library.
I mean, he had people tortured, killed.
SADE official Luisa Mercedes Levinson noted, "We would gather every week to tell the latest jokes about the ruling couple and even dared to sing the songs of the French Resistance, as well as 'La Marseillaise'."
Along with other young Argentine writers of his generation, Borges initially rallied around the fictional character of Martín Fierro.
He further recalled that his opposition to Marxism and communism was absorbed in his childhood.
When infuriated politicians from the other parties demanded to know the real reason, the Peronists finally explained that Borges had made statements about Evita Perón which they called "unacceptable".
When Perón returned from exile in 1973 and regained the Presidency, Borges was enraged.
In 1951 he was asked by anti-Peronist friends to run for president of SADE.
Many other Latin American writers, such as Juan Rulfo, Juan José Arreola, and Alejo Carpentier, were also investigating these themes, influenced by the phenomenology of Husserl and Heidegger and the existentialism of Jean-Paul Sartre.
He finally manages to (re)create "the ninth and thirty-eighth chapters of the first part of ''Don Quixote'' and a fragment of chapter twenty-two."
That government's confiscation of Borges's job at the Miguel Cané Library fueled his skepticism of government.
The title story concerns a Chinese professor in England, Dr. Yu Tsun, who spies for Germany during World War I, in an attempt to prove to the authorities that an Asian person is able to obtain the information that they seek.
According to the literary review ''Sur,'' the book was one of the five books most noted and read by Borges.
He brought with him the doctrine of Ultraism and launched his career, publishing surreal poems and essays in literary journals.
Ocampo introduced Borges to Adolfo Bioy Casares, another well-known figure of Argentine literature, who was to become a frequent collaborator and close friend.
In the ''Book of Imaginary Beings'', a thoroughly researched bestiary of mythical creatures, Borges wrote, "There is a kind of lazy pleasure in useless and out-of-the-way erudition."
The Borges family decided that, due to political unrest in Argentina, they would remain in Switzerland during the war, staying until 1921.
Other books such as ''The Unimaginable Mathematics of Borges' Library of Babel'' by William Goldbloom Bloch (2008) and ''Unthinking Thinking: Jorge Luis Borges, Mathematics, and the New Physics'' by Floyd Merrell (1991) also explore this relationship.
His interest in compounding fantasy, philosophy, and the art of translation are evident in articles such as "The Translators of ''The Book of One Thousand and One Nights''".
Her assertive administration of his estate resulted in a bitter dispute with the French publisher Gallimard regarding the republication of the complete works of Borges in French, with Pierre Assouline in ''Le Nouvel Observateur'' (August 2006) calling her "an obstacle to the dissemination of the works of Borges".
As his eyesight deteriorated, Borges relied increasingly on his mother's help.
Perón's government had seized control of the Argentine mass media and regarded SADE with indifference.
Borges was a notable translator.
Borges was rooted in the Modernism predominant in its early years and was influenced by Symbolism.
In a 1967 interview with Burgin, Borges recalled how his interactions with Argentina's Nazi sympathisers led him to create the story.
Both before and during the Second World War, Borges regularly published essays attacking the Nazi police state and its racist ideology.
Borges employed the devices of literary forgery and the review of an imaginary work, both forms of modern pseudo-epigrapha.
He explained, however, that no man can reach that word through his own efforts and in trying becomes lost in a labyrinth.
In his essay ''L'Illusion Comique'', Borges wrote that there were two histories of Peronism in Argentina.
He labeled himself a ''Spencerian anarchist'', following his father.
His non-fiction explores many of the themes found in his fiction.
:''Nadie rebaje a lágrima o reproche''
Together they wrote a number of works, some under the ''nom de plume'' H. Bustos Domecq, including a parody detective series and fantasy stories.
Borges wrote: "When I think of what I've lost, I ask, 'Who know themselves better than the blind?'
And his wife was a common prostitute."
As Borges matured, he came to a more nuanced attitude toward the Hernández poem.
During this period, Borges was informed that he was being "promoted" from his position at the Miguel Cané Library to a post as inspector of poultry and rabbits at the Buenos Aires municipal market.
Numerous honors were to accumulate over the years such as a Special Edgar Allan Poe Award from the Mystery Writers of America "for distinguished contribution to the mystery genre" (1976), the Balzan Prize (for Philology, Linguistics and literary Criticism) and the Prix mondial Cino Del Duca, the Cervantes Prize (all 1980), as well as the French Legion of Honour (1983) and the Diamond Konex Award for Literature Arts as the most important writer in the last decade in his country.
Borges focused on universal themes, but also composed a substantial body of literature on themes from Argentine folklore and history.
It was in a working class area and there were so few books that cataloguing more than one hundred books per day, he was told, would leave little to do for the other staff and so look bad.
With his vision beginning to fade in his early thirties and unable to support himself as a writer, Borges began a new career as a public lecturer.
In an essay published in 1937, Borges attacked the Nazi Party's use of children's books to inflame antisemitism.
For a time, Argentines hesitated to wear band aids for fear friends would ask, 'Did the atomic bomb go off in your hand?'
During his final days in Geneva, Borges began brooding about the possibility of an afterlife.
He had little formal education, no qualifications and few friends.
According to Edwin Williamson,
On 16 September 1955, General Pedro Eugenio Aramburu's ''Revolución Libertadora'' toppled the ruling party and forced Perón to flee into exile.
Later, at the City Council of Buenos Aires, Peronist politicians refused to honor Borges as an Argentine, commenting that he "chose to die abroad."
Fritz Mauthner, philosopher of language and author ''Wörterbuch der Philosophie'' (''Dictionary of Philosophy''), had an important influence on Borges.
He then cites both ''Sartor Resartus'' and Samuel Butler's ''The Fair Haven'', remarking, however, that "those works suffer under the imperfection that they themselves are books, and not a whit less tautological than the others.
At the time of the Argentine Declaration of Independence in 1816, the population was predominantly ''criollo'' (of Spanish ancestry).
In his essay "The Argentine Writer and Tradition" (1951), Borges celebrates how Hernández expresses the Argentine character.
Borges wrote and lectured extensively on the art of translation, holding that a translation may improve upon the original, may even be unfaithful to it, and that alternative and potentially contradictory renderings of the same work can be equally valid.
While Borges was the great popularizer of the review of an imaginary work, he had developed the idea from Thomas Carlyle's ''Sartor Resartus'', a book-length review of a non-existent German transcendentalist work, and the biography of its equally non-existent author.
In response, Borges resigned from Government service the following day.
On his return to Argentina in 1921, Borges began publishing his poems and essays in surrealist literary journals.
Borges then listed the numerous conspiracy theories the ruling couple dictated to their followers and how those theories were accepted without question.
This was a particular tragedy for the writer as the two were very close.
Like much of the Argentine opposition to Perón, SADE had become marginalized due to persecution by the State, and very few active members remained.
While Beckett had garnered a distinguished reputation in Europe and America, Borges had been largely unknown and untranslated in the English-speaking world and the prize stirred great interest in his work.
If their posters and slogans again defile the city, I'll be glad I've lost my sight.
As a political conservative, Borges "was repulsed by Marxism in theory and practice.
The forking paths have branches to represent these choices that ultimately lead to different endings.
It was published in a local journal, but his friends thought the real author was his father.
In 1921, Borges returned with his family to Buenos Aires.
In 1962, two major anthologies of Borges's writings were published in English by New York presses: ''Ficciones'' and ''Labyrinths''.
In 1934, Argentine ultra-nationalists, sympathetic to Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party, asserted Borges was secretly Jewish, and by implication, not a true Argentine.
At times he wrote reviews of nonexistent writings by some other person.
His work was translated and published widely in the United States and in Europe.
His first poem, "Hymn to the Sea," written in the style of Walt Whitman, was published in the magazine ''Grecia''.
He discusses how much "richer" Menard's work is than that of Cervantes's, even though the actual text is exactly the same.
In later years, Borges frequently expressed contempt for Marxists and Communists within the Latin American intelligentsia.
Borges indignantly refused, calling it a ridiculous demand.
In the post-Peronist Argentina of the early 1960s, ''Contorno'' met with wide approval from the youth who challenged the authenticity of older writers such as Borges and questioned their legacy of experimentation.
He argued that, despite their claims to detest capitalism, Juan and Eva Perón "copied its methods, dictating names and slogans to the people" in the same way that multi-national corporations "impose their razor blades, cigarettes, and washing machines."
At that time, Borges discovered the writings of Arthur Schopenhauer and Gustav Meyrink's ''The Golem'' (1915) which became influential to his work.
Borges's maternal great-grandfather, Manuel Isidoro Suárez, was another military hero, whom Borges immortalized in the poem "A Page to Commemorate Colonel Suárez, Victor at Junín."
They were in comfortable circumstances but not wealthy enough to live in downtown Buenos Aires.
In 1955 he was appointed director of the National Public Library and professor of English Literature at the University of Buenos Aires.
In April 1986, a few months before his death, he married her via an attorney in Paraguay, in what was then a common practice among Argentines wishing to circumvent the Argentine laws of the time regarding divorce.
The city of Coronel Suárez in the south of Buenos Aires Province is named after him.
According to Williamson, Borges shouted, "Viva la Patria", until his voice grew hoarse.
Kodama took legal action against Assouline, considering the remark unjustified and defamatory, asking for a symbolic compensation of one euro.
He worked in a style that Argentine critic Ana María Barrenechea has called "Irreality."
The marriage lasted less than three years.
Father Jacquet also preached, saying that, when visiting Borges before his death, he had found "a man full of love, who received from the Church the forgiveness of his sins".
The policemen icily retorted that he would soon face the consequences.
His outrage was fueled by his deep love for German literature.
Existentialism saw its apogee during the years of Borges's greatest artistic production.
In 1914, the family moved to Geneva, Switzerland, and spent the next decade in Europe.
Numerous leading writers and critics from Argentina and throughout the Spanish-speaking world contributed writings to the "reparation" project.
In that year, Borges began lecture tours of Europe.
Borges later recalled, however, "Many distinguished men of letters did not dare set foot inside its doors."
His grave, marked by a rough-hewn headstone, is adorned with carvings derived from Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse art and literature.
Borges turned their fictional counterparts into brothers, excluding the possibility of a homosexual relationship.
He was one of several distinguished authors who never received the honour.
The Justicialist Party placed Borges under 24-hour surveillance and sent policemen to sit in on his lectures; in September they ordered SADE to be permanently closed down.
I couldn't be enthusiastic about theories where the State is more important than the individual."
At the dinner, a speech was read which Borges had written for the occasion.
Borges had an English paternal grandmother who, around 1870, married the ''criollo'' Francisco Borges, a man with a military command and a historic role in the Argentine Civil Wars in what is now Argentina and Uruguay.
Drawing on the influence of many times and places, Borges's work belittled nationalism and racism.
He was disgusted by what he described as Germany's "chaotic descent into darkness" and the attendant rewriting of history.
Borges saw man's search for meaning in a seemingly infinite universe as fruitless and instead uses the maze as a riddle for time, not space.
Everything is presented to them ready-made.
In his works he refutes the arch-nationalist interpreters of the poem and disdains others, such as critic Eleuterio Tiscornia, for their Europeanising approach.
After a legal separation, Borges moved back in with his mother, with whom he lived until her death at age 99.
In a 1938 essay, Borges reviewed an anthology which rewrote German authors of the past to fit the Nazi party line.
Scholars have suggested that his progressive blindness helped him to create innovative literary symbols through imagination.
While in Spain, he met noted Spanish writers, including Rafael Cansinos Assens and Ramón Gómez de la Serna.
However, there are some instances in Borges' later writings of romantic love, for example the story "Ulrikke" from ''The Book of Sand''.
