Jacques encouraged Conrad to continue writing the novel.
He joined the British merchant marine in 1878, and was granted British nationality in 1886.
Conrad was a Russian subject, having been born in the Russian part of what had once been the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
In December 1867, with the Russian government's permission, his father Apollo had taken him to the Austrian part of the former Commonwealth, which enjoyed considerable internal freedom and a degree of self-government.
They want to banish me to the middle of the ocean."
In one instance, Najder uses "several slips in vocabulary, typical for Conrad (Gallicisms) and grammar (usually Polonisms)" as part of internal evidence against Conrad's sometime literary collaborator Ford Madox Ford's claim to have written a certain instalment of Conrad's novel ''Nostromo'', for serialised publication in ''T.
English is so plastic—if you haven't got a word you need you can make it, but to write French you have to be an artist like Anatole France."
In the third and final phase, from the end of World War I to Conrad's death (1924), he at last finds an uneasy peace; it is, as C.&nbsp;McCarthy writes, as though "the War has allowed Conrad's psyche to purge itself of terror and anxiety."
They were probably the first Englishmen and non-sailors with whom Conrad struck up a friendship; he would remain in touch with both.
In 1975 the Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe published an essay, "An Image of Africa: Racism in Conrad's 'Heart of Darkness'", which provoked controversy by calling Conrad a "thoroughgoing racist".
In April 2013, a monument to Conrad was unveiled in the Russian town of Vologda, where he and his parents lived in exile in 1862–63.
Jessie Conrad would later write in her memoirs: "I understood my husband so much better after those months in Poland.
An evocative part of that view is expressed in an August 1901 letter that Conrad wrote to the editor of ''The New York Times Saturday Book Review'':
The boy's early reading introduced him to the two elements that later dominated his life: in Victor Hugo's ''Toilers of the Sea'' he encountered the sphere of activity to which he would devote his youth; Shakespeare brought him into the orbit of English literature.
An October 1923 visitor to Oswalds, Conrad's home at the time&nbsp;– Cyril Clemens, a cousin of Mark Twain&nbsp;– quoted Conrad as saying: "In everything I have written there is always one invariable intention, and that is to capture the reader's attention."
I used to prefer Mickiewicz's ''Konrad Wallenrod'' and ''Grażyna''.
After many travails and vicissitudes, at the beginning of November 1914 Conrad managed to bring his family back to England.
Polish literature, particularly patriotic literature, was held in high esteem by the area's Polish population.
Why then did he choose to write his books in, effectively, his third language?
Conrad roused interest among the Poles as a famous writer and an exotic compatriot from abroad.
But thirty-two-year-old Aniela Zagórska (daughter of the ''pension'' keeper), Conrad's niece who would translate his works into Polish in 1923–39, idolised him, kept him company, and provided him with books.
Hotels across the Far East still lay claim to him as an honoured guest, with, however, no evidence to back their claims: Singapore's Raffles Hotel continues to claim he stayed there though he lodged, in fact, at the Sailors' Home nearby.
He worked on a variety of ships as crew member (steward, apprentice, able-bodied seaman) and then as third, second and first mate, until eventually achieving captain's rank.
Unlike many authors who make it a point not to discuss work in progress, Conrad often did discuss his current work and even showed it to select friends and fellow authors, such as Edward Garnett, and sometimes modified it in the light of their critiques and suggestions.
Achebe's reading of ''Heart of Darkness'' can be (and has been) challenged by a reading of Conrad's other African story, "An Outpost of Progress", which has an omniscient narrator, rather than the embodied narrator, Marlow.
Conrad had a phobia of dentistry, neglecting his teeth until they had to be extracted.
She had thought Conrad's foreignness a positive merit.
At Cape Town, where the ''Torrens'' remained from 17 to 19 May, Galsworthy left the ship to look at the local mines.
The impracticality of working with a language which has long ceased to be one's principal language of daily use is illustrated by Conrad's 1921 attempt at translating into English the Polish columnist and comedy-writer Bruno Winawer's short play, ''The Book of Job''.
Nevertheless, after Conrad's death, Richard Curle published a heavily modified version of Conrad's diaries describing his experiences in the Congo; in 1978 a more complete version was published as  ''The Congo Diary and Other Uncollected Pieces''.
Achebe's essay, a landmark in postcolonial discourse, provoked debate, and the questions it raised have been addressed in most subsequent literary criticism of Conrad.
This makes his English seem unusual.
I thought, however, of your getting naturalized in Switzerland..."  In his next letter, Bobrowski supported Conrad's idea of seeking citizenship of the United States or of "one of the more important Southern Republics".
Its appearance marked his first use of the pen name "Joseph Conrad"; "Konrad" was, of course, the third of his Polish given names, but his use of it&nbsp;– in the anglicised version, "Conrad"&nbsp;– may also have been an homage to the Polish Romantic poet Adam Mickiewicz's patriotic narrative poem, ''Konrad Wallenrod''.
In fact, in the autumn of 1871, thirteen-year-old Conrad announced his intention to become a sailor.
Conrad looked with less optimism than Russell on the possibilities of scientific and philosophic knowledge.
This may account for his describing the admirable crew of the ''Judea'' in his 1898 story "Youth" as "Liverpool hard cases", whereas the crew of the ''Judea'''s actual 1882 prototype, the ''Palestine'', had included not a single Liverpudlian, and half the crew had been non-Britons; and for Conrad's turning the real-life 1880 criminally negligent British Captain J. L. Clark, of the , in his 1900 novel ''Lord Jim'', into the captain of the fictitious ''Patna''&nbsp;– "a sort of renegade New South Wales German" so monstrous in physical appearance as to suggest "a trained baby elephant."
Achebe also cited Conrad's description of an encounter with an African: "A certain enormous buck nigger encountered in Haiti fixed my conception of blind, furious, unreasoning rage, as manifested in the human animal to the end of my days."
The first half of the 1900 novel ''Lord Jim'' (the ''Patna'' episode) was inspired by the real-life 1880 story of the ; the second part, to some extent by the life of James Brooke, the first White Rajah of Sarawak.
He also complained of swollen hands "which made writing difficult".
Despite the opinions even of some who knew Conrad personally, such as fellow-novelist Henry James, Conrad&nbsp;– even when only writing elegantly crafted letters to his uncle and acquaintances&nbsp;– was always at heart a writer who sailed, rather than a sailor who wrote.
The elder, Borys, proved a disappointment in scholarship and integrity.
In 1878 Conrad's four-year experience in the French merchant marine had been cut short when the French discovered that he did not have a permit from the Imperial Russian consul to sail with the French.
Some younger scholars, such as Masood Ashraf Raja, have also suggested that if we read Conrad beyond ''Heart of Darkness'', especially his Malay novels, racism can be further complicated by foregrounding Conrad's positive representation of Muslims.
Taking his uncle Tadeusz Bobrowski's advice, he convalesced at a spa in Switzerland.
Conrad's paternal grandfather served under Prince Józef Poniatowski during Napoleon's Russian campaign and formed his own cavalry squadron during the November 1830 Uprising.
According to Najder, Conrad, the exile and wanderer, was aware of a difficulty that he confessed more than once: the lack of a common cultural background with his Anglophone readers meant he could not compete with English-language authors writing about the Anglosphere.
A newspaper review of a Conrad biography suggested that the book could have been subtitled ''Thirty Years of Debt, Gout, Depression and Angst''.
The near-novella "Freya of the Seven Isles" (completed in March 1911) was inspired by a story told to Conrad by a Malaya old hand and fan of Conrad's, Captain Carlos M. Marris.
He was subsequently known to his family as "Konrad", rather than "Józef".
"Those who read me," he wrote in the preface to ''A Personal Record'', "know my conviction that the world, the temporal world, rests on a few very simple ideas; so simple that they must be as old as the hills.
In vain might a Russian revolution seek advice or help from a materialistic and egoistic western Europe that armed itself in preparation for wars far more brutal than those of the past.
What his brief landfalls could not provide was a thorough understanding of exotic cultures.
Though Conrad had not completed secondary school, his accomplishments included fluency in French (with a correct accent), some knowledge of Latin, German and Greek, probably a good knowledge of history, some geography, and probably already an interest in physics.
Since he showed little inclination to study, it was essential that he learn a trade; his uncle saw him as a sailor-cum-businessman who would combine maritime skills with commercial activities.
Conrad's three-year appointment with a Belgian trading company included service as captain of a steamer on the Congo River, an episode that would inspire his novella, ''Heart of Darkness''.
The Korzeniowski family played a significant role in Polish attempts to regain independence.
Jessie was an unsophisticated, working-class girl, sixteen years younger than Conrad.
For Russia he predicted a violent outburst in the near future, but Russia's lack of democratic traditions and the backwardness of her masses made it impossible for the revolution to have a salutary effect.
On 3 August 1924, Conrad died at his house, Oswalds, in Bishopsbourne, Kent, England, probably of a heart attack.
If Conrad or his novel is racist, it is only in a weak sense, since ''Heart of Darkness'' acknowledges racial distinctions "but does not suggest an essential superiority" of any group.
Conrad was not a good student; despite tutoring, he excelled only in geography.
The protagonist of one of Galsworthy's first literary attempts, "The Doldrums" (1895–96), the first mate Armand, is obviously modeled on Conrad.
After sojourns in Lwów and several smaller localities, on 20 February 1869 they moved to Kraków (till 1596 the capital of Poland), likewise in Austrian Poland.
The prolific and destructive richness of tropical nature and the dreariness of human life within it accorded well with the pessimistic mood of his early works."
Conrad's story "The Secret Sharer" (completed 1909) was inspired by an 1880 incident when Sydney Smith, first mate of the ''Cutty Sark'', had killed a seaman and fled from justice, aided by the ship's captain.
Edward Said concludes the final chapter of his book, ''Joseph Conrad and the Fiction of Autobiography'':
Conrad in his correspondence often used the Latin expression meaning "to the very end", which he seems to have adopted from his faithful guardian, mentor and benefactor, his maternal uncle Tadeusz Bobrowski.
As a practical matter, by the time Conrad set about writing fiction, he had little choice but to write in English.
Conrad often borrowed the authentic names of actual individuals, e.g., Captain McWhirr (''Typhoon''), Captain Beard and Mr. Mahon ("Youth"), Captain Lingard (''Almayer's Folly'' and elsewhere), Captain Ellis (''The Shadow Line'').
He used his sailing experiences as a backdrop for many of his works, but he also produced works of similar world view, without the nautical motifs.
This, and some typically disastrous Conradian investments, had left him destitute and had precipitated a suicide attempt.
For his fictional characters he often borrowed the authentic names of actual persons.
On 13 October 1874 Bobrowski sent the sixteen-year-old to Marseilles, France, for a planned career at sea.
He also recalled having read books by the American James Fenimore Cooper and the English Captain Frederick Marryat.
However, in 1888 during a stop-over on Mauritius, Conrad developed a couple of romantic interests.
After nearly four years in France and on French ships, he joined the British merchant marine and for the next fifteen years served under the Red Ensign.
The owner's daughter recalled:
The essay begins with a statement about Russia's incurable weakness and ends with warnings against Prussia, the dangerous aggressor in a future European war.
To what extent the suicide attempt had been made in earnest, likely will never be known, but it is suggestive of a situational depression.
Conrad, like other artists, faced constraints arising from the need to propitiate his audience and confirm its own favourable self-regard.
I absolutely object to being called a ''tragedian''."
This had been accompanied by a faith in the Panslavic ideology – "surprising," Najder writes, "in a man who was later to emphasize his hostility towards Russia, a conviction that... Poland's superior civilization and... historic... traditions would let her play a leading role... in the Panslavic community, and his doubts about Poland's chances of becoming a fully sovereign nation-state."
Conrad regarded the formation of a representative government in Russia as unfeasible and foresaw a transition from autocracy to dictatorship.
During a brief call in India in 1885–86, 28-year-old Conrad sent five letters to Joseph Spiridion, a Pole eight years his senior whom he had befriended at Cardiff in June 1885 just before sailing for Singapore in the clipper ship ''Tilkhurst''.
Though he did not speak English fluently until he was in his twenties, he was a master prose stylist who brought a non-English sensibility into English literature.
He scorned sentimentality; his manner of portraying emotion in his books was full of restraint, scepticism and irony.
Haldin is tortured and hanged by the authorities.
On 28 July 1914, the day war broke out between Austro-Hungary and Serbia, Conrad and the Retingers arrived in Kraków (then in the Austro-Hungarian Empire), where Conrad visited childhood haunts.
Moreover, Conrad "could never have written in any other language save the English language....for he would have been dumb in any other language but the English."
Conrad's distrust of democracy sprang from his doubts whether the propagation of democracy as an aim in itself could solve any problems.
In ''Under Western Eyes'' (1911), Razumov betrays a fellow University of St. Petersburg student, the revolutionist Victor Haldin, who has assassinated a savagely repressive Russian government minister.
P.'s Weekly'', on behalf of an ill Conrad.
Conrad's modest funeral took place amid great crowds.
On his return, he was determined to work on swaying British opinion in favour of restoring Poland's sovereignty.
His first novel, ''Almayer's Folly'', set on the east coast of Borneo, was published in 1895.
Razumov falls in love with the sister and confesses his betrayal of her brother; later he makes the same avowal to assembled revolutionists, and their professional executioner bursts his eardrums, making him deaf for life.
While Conrad had only limited personal acquaintance with the peoples of Maritime Southeast Asia, the region looms large in his early work.
Zagórska introduced Conrad to Polish writers, intellectuals and artists who had also taken refuge in Zakopane, including novelist Stefan Żeromski and Tadeusz Nalepiński, a writer friend of anthropologist Bronisław Malinowski.
His narrative style and anti-heroic characters have influenced many authors, including T. S. Eliot, William Faulkner, Graham Greene, and Salman Rushdie.
Research has confirmed that in Port Louis at the time there was a 17-year-old Alice Shaw, whose father, a shipping agent, owned the only rose garden in town.
Conrad claimed that he "never kept a diary and never owned a notebook."
Certainly his mentor-uncle Tadeusz Bobrowski thought Conrad might write in Polish; in an 1881 letter he advised his 23-year-old nephew:
Conrad also preserves, in ''The Nigger of the 'Narcissus''', the authentic name of the ''Narcissus'', a ship in which he sailed in 1884.
These statements, as so often happens in Conrad's "autobiographical" writings, are subtly disingenuous.
Notwithstanding the undoubted sufferings that Conrad endured on many of his voyages, sentimentality and canny marketing place him at the best lodgings in several of his destinations.
But in 1922, near the end of his life and career, when another Scottish friend, Richard Curle, sent Conrad proofs of two articles he had written about Conrad, the latter objected to being characterised as a gloomy and tragic writer.
When Conrad's ''The Mirror of the Sea'' was published in 1906 to critical acclaim, he wrote to his French translator:  "The critics have been vigorously swinging the censer to me....
Of his 19-year merchant-marine career, only about half was spent actually at sea.
In a 23 October 1922 letter to mathematician-philosopher Bertrand Russell, in response to the latter's book, ''The Problem of China'', which advocated socialist reforms and an oligarchy of sages who would reshape Chinese society, Conrad explained his own distrust of political panaceas:
Because of the father's attempts at farming and his political activism, the family moved repeatedly.
Najder warns that this approach produces an incoherent and misleading picture.
The plot of ''Under Western Eyes'' (completed 1910) is kicked off by the assassination of a brutal Russian government minister, modelled after the real-life 1904 assassination of Russian Minister of the Interior Vyacheslav von Plehve.
Ending a passage that describes the condition of chained, emaciated slaves, the novelist remarks: "After all, I also was a part of the great cause of these high and just proceedings."
Conrad's was a starkly lucid view of the human condition&nbsp;– a vision similar to that which had been offered in two micro-stories by his ten-years-older Polish compatriot, Bolesław Prus (whose work Conrad greatly admired): "Mold of the Earth" (1884) and "Shades" (1885).
"An... uncritical linking of the two spheres, literature and private life, distorts each.
With the concurrence of his uncle Bobrowski, who had been summoned to Marseilles, Conrad decided to seek employment with the British merchant marine, which did not require Russia's permission.
Interestingly, it was apparently the French and Swedes – not the English – who favoured Conrad's candidacy.
Conrad scholar Peter Firchow writes that "nowhere in the novel does Conrad or any of his narrators, personified or otherwise, claim superiority on the part of Europeans on the grounds of alleged genetic or biological difference".
Apollo did his best to home-school Conrad.
Conrad encouraged and mentored younger writers.
In his letters he often described symptoms of depression; "the evidence," writes Najder, "is so strong that it is nearly impossible to doubt it."
For this he resorted, like other writers, to literary sources.
''The Secret Agent'' (completed 1906) was inspired by the French anarchist Martial Bourdin's 1894 death while apparently attempting to blow up the Greenwich Observatory.
She was already, however, engaged to marry her pharmacist cousin.
He charmed new acquaintances, especially women.
His father was a writer, translator, political activist, and would-be revolutionary.
Morel, who led international opposition to King Leopold II's rule in the Congo, saw Conrad's ''Heart of Darkness'' as a condemnation of colonial brutality and referred to the novella as "the most powerful thing written on the subject."
The two men's subsequent friendship and correspondence lasted, with long intervals, to the end of Conrad's life.
In 1919 and 1922 Conrad's growing renown and prestige among writers and critics in continental Europe fostered his hopes for a Nobel Prize in Literature.
Arguably his most influential work remains ''Heart of Darkness'' (1899), to which many have been introduced by Francis Ford Coppola's film, ''Apocalypse Now'' (1979), inspired by Conrad's novel and set during the Vietnam War; the novel's depiction of a journey into the darkness of the human psyche resonates with modern readers.
The second phase, spanning the war and following the popular success of ''Chance'' (1913), is marked by the advent of Conrad's public persona as "great writer".
He wrote stories and novels, many with a nautical setting, that depict trials of the human spirit in the midst of an impassive, inscrutable universe.
He was well read, particularly in Polish Romantic literature.
They left Kraków on 2 August.
I never wished you to become naturalized in France, mainly because of the compulsory military service...
In December 1867, Apollo took his son to the Austrian-held part of Poland, which for two years had been enjoying considerable internal freedom and a degree of self-government.
Conrad, who was noted by his Polish acquaintances to be fluent in his native tongue, participated in their impassioned political discussions.
Achebe's critics argue that he fails to distinguish Marlow's view from Conrad's, which results in very clumsy interpretations of the novella.
Lutosławski recalls that during their conversation Conrad explained why he did not write in Polish: "I value too much our beautiful Polish literature to introduce into it my worthless twaddle.
While he often adjusted his statements to accord to some extent with the views of his addressees, the theme of hopelessness concerning the prospects for Polish independence often occurs authentically in his correspondence and works before 1914.
Most of all, though, he read Polish Romantic poetry.
In June 1924, shortly before his death, he apparently expressed a desire that his son John marry a Polish girl and learn Polish, and toyed with the idea of returning for good to now independent Poland.
He was left with a painful sense of the hopelessness of the Polish question and an acceptance of England as a possible refuge.
I understood that his temperament was that of his countrymen."
So many characteristics that had been strange and unfathomable to me before, took, as it were, their right proportions.
while simultaneously (and fearfully) suspecting a common kinship between himself and these natives—leading Marlow to sneer the word "ugly."
Yet, in spite of having become a subject of Queen Victoria, Conrad had not ceased to be a subject of Tsar Alexander III.
Conrad also preserves, in ''The Nigger of the 'Narcissus''', the authentic name of the ship, the ''Narcissus'', in which he sailed in 1884.
He is the soul of all Poland".
Referring to Conrad as a "talented, tormented man", Achebe notes that Conrad (via the protagonist, Charles Marlow) reduces and degrades Africans to "limbs", "angles", "glistening white eyeballs", etc.
T. E. Lawrence, one of many writers whom Conrad befriended, offered some perceptive observations about Conrad's writing:
It was Conrad's hopeless fidelity to the memory of Poland that prevented him from believing in the idea of "international fraternity," which he considered, under the circumstances, just a verbal exercise.
Writing in what to the visual arts was the age of Impressionism, and what to music was the age of impressionist music, Conrad showed himself in many of his works a prose poet of the highest order: for instance, in the evocative ''Patna'' and courtroom scenes of ''Lord Jim''; in the scenes of the "melancholy-mad elephant" and the "French gunboat firing into a continent", in ''Heart of Darkness''; in the doubled protagonists of ''The Secret Sharer''; and in the verbal and conceptual resonances of ''Nostromo'' and ''The Nigger of the 'Narcissus'''.
Conrad's "Autocracy and War", Najder points out, showed a historical awareness "exceptional in the Western European literature of his time" – an awareness that Conrad had drawn from his membership in a very politically active family of a country that had for over a century been daily reminded of the consequences of neglecting the broad enlightened interests of the national polity.
Inscribed on his gravestone are the lines from Edmund Spenser's ''The Faerie Queene'' which he had chosen as the epigraph to his last complete novel, ''The Rover'':
Inevitably for a trilingual Polish–French–English-speaker, Conrad's writings occasionally show examples of "Franglais" and "Poglish"&nbsp;– of the inadvertent use of French or Polish vocabulary, grammar or syntax in his English compositions.
Conrad's short stories, other novels, and nonfiction writings also continue to find favour with many readers and filmmakers.
Thus we never learn the surname of the protagonist of ''Lord Jim''.
He resented some socialists' talk of freedom and world brotherhood while keeping silent about his own partitioned and oppressed Poland.
Conrad always retained a strong emotional attachment to his native language.
Though the island had been taken over in 1810 by Britain, many of the inhabitants were descendants of the original French colonists, and Conrad's excellent French and perfect manners opened all local salons to him.
Financial success long eluded Conrad, who often asked magazine and book publishers for advances, and acquaintances (notably John Galsworthy) for loans.
''Almayer's Folly'', together with its successor, ''An Outcast of the Islands'' (1896), laid the foundation for Conrad's reputation as a romantic teller of exotic tales&nbsp;– a misunderstanding of his purpose that was to frustrate him for the rest of his career.
According to his uncle, who was summoned by a friend, Conrad had fallen into debt.
Edward Said describes three phases to Conrad's literary career.
Yet, as his ideas were borne out by ensuing 20th-century events, in due course he came to be admired for beliefs that seemed to accord more closely with subsequent times than with his own.
To achieve the latter, he had to make many visits to the Russian Embassy in London and politely reiterate his request.
Renouf's eldest sister was the wife of Louis Edward Schmidt, a senior official in the colony; with them lived two other sisters and two brothers.
Jeffrey Meyers, ''Joseph Conrad: a Biography'', p. 10.
In their view, Conrad portrays Africans sympathetically and their plight tragically, and refers sarcastically to, and condemns outright, the supposedly noble aims of European colonists, thereby demonstrating his skepticism about the moral superiority of white men.
It rests, notably, among others, on the idea of Fidelity."
To his friends, she was an inexplicable choice of wife, and the subject of some rather disparaging and unkind remarks.
Had Conrad remained in the Francophone sphere or had he returned to Poland, the son of the Polish poet, playwright and translator Apollo Korzeniowski&nbsp;– from childhood exposed to Polish and foreign literature, and ambitious to himself become a writer – might have ended writing in French or Polish instead of English.
In August 1873 Bobrowski sent fifteen-year-old Conrad to Lwów to a cousin who ran a small boarding house for boys orphaned by the 1863 Uprising; group conversation there was in French.
According to Conrad's close friend and literary assistant Richard Curle, the fact of Conrad writing in English was "obviously misleading" because Conrad "is no more completely English in his art than he is in his nationality".
That&nbsp;– and no more, and it is everything.
However, according to other biographers such as Frederick Karl, Jessie provided what Conrad needed, namely a "straightforward, devoted, quite competent" companion.
The singularity of the universe depicted in Conrad's novels, especially compared to those of near-contemporaries like his friend and frequent benefactor John Galsworthy, is such as to open him to criticism similar to that later applied to Graham Greene.
His "view of the world", or elements of it, are often described by citing at once both his private and public statements, passages from his letters, and citations from his books.
He had absorbed enough of the history, culture and literature of his native land to be able eventually to develop a distinctive world view and make unique contributions to the literature of his adoptive Britain.
Conrad is also reported to have stayed at Hong Kong's Peninsula Hotel—a port that, in fact, he never visited.
He explained that, though he was familiar with French from childhood, "I would have been afraid to attempt expression in a language so perfectly 'crystallized'."
The young Conrad was placed in the care of Ewa's brother, Tadeusz Bobrowski.
The 1914 vacation with his wife and sons in Poland, at the urging of Józef Retinger, coincided with the outbreak of World War I.
He also borrowed from other, Polish- and French-language authors, to an extent sometimes skirting plagiarism.
Almost all of Conrad's writings were first published in newspapers and magazines: influential reviews like ''The Fortnightly Review'' and the ''North American Review''; avant-garde publications like the ''Savoy'', ''New Review'', and ''The English Review''; popular short-fiction magazines like ''The Saturday Evening Post'' and ''Harper's Magazine''; women's journals like the ''Pictorial Review'' and ''Romance''; mass-circulation dailies like the ''Daily Mail'' and the ''New York Herald''; and illustrated newspapers like ''The Illustrated London News'' and the ''Illustrated Buffalo Express''.
Conrad's sense of loneliness throughout his exile's life found memorable expression in the 1901 short story, "Amy Foster".
In May 1861 they moved to Warsaw, where Apollo joined the resistance against the Russian Empire.
When Conrad left London on 25 October 1892 aboard the clipper ship ''Torrens'',  one of the passengers was William Henry Jacques, a consumptive Cambridge graduate who died less than a year later (19 September 1893) and was, according to Conrad's ''A Personal Record'', the first reader of the still-unfinished manuscript of his ''Almayer's Folly''.
Conrad could not return to Ukraine, in the Russian Empire&nbsp;– he would have been liable to many years' military service and, as the son of political exiles, to harassment.
More to the point is Conrad's remark in ''A Personal Record'' that English was "the speech of my secret choice, of my future, of long friendships, of the deepest affections, of hours of toil and hours of ease, and of solitary hours, too, of books read, of thoughts pursued, of remembered emotions—of my very dreams!"
Sanderson continued his voyage and seems to have been the first to develop closer ties with Conrad.
Later I preferred Słowacki.
Garnett had shown the novel to his wife, Constance Garnett, later a well-known translator of Russian literature.
With wife Jessie and younger son John ill, Conrad decided to take refuge in the mountain resort town of Zakopane.
He was the only child of Apollo Korzeniowski and his wife Ewa Bobrowska.
Similarly, in his letters Conrad&nbsp;– during most of his literary career, struggling for sheer financial survival&nbsp;– often adjusted his views to the predilections of his correspondents.
He belonged to only the second generation in his family that had had to earn a living outside the family estates: he was a member of the second generation of the intelligentsia, a social class that was starting to play an important role in Central and Eastern Europe.
Many films have been adapted from, or inspired by, Conrad's works.
