When fully sealed into the Covenant, Smith said that no sin nor blasphemy (other than the eternal sin) could keep them from their exaltation in the afterlife.
Matter, in Smith's view, could neither be created nor destroyed; the creation involved only the reorganization of existing matter.
"The keys of the kingdom," he wrote, "have not been taken away from us".
The endowment was extended to women in 1843, though Smith never clarified whether women could be ordained to priesthood offices.
Around June 1838, recent convert Sampson Avard formed a covert organization called the Danites to intimidate Mormon dissenters and oppose anti-Mormon militia units.
Smith was said to have an ability to locate lost items by looking into a seer stone, which he also used in treasure hunting, including several unsuccessful attempts to find buried treasure sponsored by a wealthy farmer in Chenango County, New York.
Smith said that he believed the Bible had been corrupted through the ages, and that his revision worked to restore the original intent; it added long passages rewritten "according to his inspiration".
Membership in Young's denomination surpassed 14 million members in 2010.
There, they are divided into two factions: Nephites and Lamanites.
The Book of Abraham speaks of the founding of the Abrahamic nation, astronomy, cosmology, lineage and priesthood, and gave another account of the creation story.
Cowdery suspected that Smith had engaged in a relationship with his serving girl Fanny Alger.
Smith favored a strong central bank and high tariffs to protect American business and agriculture.
For at least some of the earliest dictation, Smith is said to have used the "Urim and Thummim", a pair of seer stones he said were buried with the plates.
Joseph Knight said that Smith saw the words of the translation while he gazed at the stone or stones in the bottom of his hat, excluding all light, a process similar to divining the location of treasure.
In March 1844, following a dispute with a federal bureaucrat, Smith organized the secret Council of Fifty with authority to decide which national or state laws Mormons should obey.
As a military endeavor, the expedition was a failure; the men were outnumbered and suffered from dissension and a cholera outbreak.
Believing the dissidents were plotting against his life, Smith excommunicated them on April 18, 1844.
The book explains itself to be largely the work of Mormon, a Nephite prophet and military figure.
Governor Lilburn Boggs then ordered that the Mormons be "exterminated or driven from the state".
In February 1828, Martin Harris arrived to assist Smith by transcribing his dictation.
Smith encouraged the Latter Day Saints to buy the notes and invested heavily in them himself, but the bank failed within a month.
After Cowdery baptized several new members, the Mormons received threats of mob violence; and before Smith could confirm the newly baptized members, he was arrested and brought to trial as a disorderly person.
The company  issued bank notes capitalized in part by real estate.
But after a month, he returned to Kirtland empty-handed.
(Rockwell was later tried and acquitted.)
Notable revelations include an 1831 revelation called "The Law" containing directions for missionary work, rules for organizing society in Zion, a reiteration of the Ten Commandments, an injunction to "administer to the poor and needy", and an outline for the law of consecration.
Many members of these smaller groups, including most of Smith's family, eventually coalesced in 1860 under the leadership of Joseph Smith III and formed what was known for more than a century as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (now Community of Christ), which now has about 250,000 members.
Hyrum, who was trying to secure the door, was killed instantly with a shot to the face.
Rigdon soon visited New York and quickly became Smith's primary assistant.
Smith and five others, including Rigdon, were charged with "overt acts of treason", and transferred to the jail at Liberty, Missouri, to await trial.
Smith initially fled across the Mississippi River, but shortly returned and surrendered to Ford.
In Smith's cosmology, those who became gods would reign, unified in purpose and will, leading spirits of lesser capacity to share immortality and eternal life.
With growing opposition in New York, Smith gave forth as revelation that Kirtland was the eastern boundary of the New Jerusalem and that his followers must gather there.
Five men were later tried for his murder, but all were acquitted.
This doctrine of endowment evolved through the 1830s, until in 1842, the Nauvoo endowment included an elaborate ceremony containing elements similar to Freemasonry and the Jewish tradition of Kabbalah.
On their way to Missouri, Cowdery's party passed through northeastern Ohio, where Sidney Rigdon and over a hundred followers of his variety of Campbellite Restorationism converted to Mormonism, more than doubling the size of the church.
When most Latter Day Saints moved west, she stayed in Nauvoo, married a non-Mormon, Major Lewis C. Bidamon, and withdrew from religion until 1860, when she affiliated with the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, first headed by her son, Joseph Smith III.
After armed bands exchanged fire and one Mormon and two non-Mormons were killed, the old settlers brutally expelled the Mormons from the county.
During the first half of the 20th century, some writers suggested that Smith might have suffered from epileptic seizures or from psychological disorders such as paranoid delusions or manic-depressive illness that might explain his visions and revelations.
In retaliation, Bennett wrote "lurid exposés of life in Nauvoo".
In a church-wide conference on August 8, most of the Latter Day Saints elected Young, who led them to the Utah Territory as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church).
Joseph Smith, Jr. was born on December 23, 1805, in Sharon, Vermont, to Lucy Mack Smith and her husband Joseph Sr., a merchant and farmer.
As a result, the Latter Day Saints in Kirtland suffered intense pressure from debt collectors and severe price volatility.
However, he opposed baptizing slaves without permission of their masters, and he opposed miscegenation.
"Lieutenant General" Smith and "Major General" Bennett became its commanders, thereby controlling by far the largest body of armed men in Illinois.
Throughout his life Smith had been sharply criticized by newspaper editors, and after his death newspapers were almost unanimous in portraying Smith as a religious fanatic.
Smith said that in 1823 while praying one night for forgiveness from his sins, he was visited by an angel named Moroni, who revealed the location of a buried book made of golden plates, as well as other artifacts, including a breastplate and a set of interpreters composed of two seer stones set in a frame, which had been hidden in a hill in Manchester near his home.
Smaller groups followed Sidney Rigdon and James J. Strang, who had based his claim on an allegedly-forged letter of appointment.
In response, Smith dictated a revelation which clarified his office as a prophet and an apostle and which declared that only he held "the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations" with the ability to inscribe scripture for the church.
Though he directed his followers to collect and publish their stories of persecution, he also urged them to moderate their antagonism toward non-Mormons.
During the 1830s, Smith sent out missionaries, published revelations, and supervised construction of the expensive Kirtland Temple.
In Smith's view, the opportunity to achieve exaltation extended to all humanity; those who died with no opportunity to accept saving ordinances could achieve exaltation by accepting them in the afterlife through ordinances performed on their behalf.
The two strongest succession candidates were Brigham Young, senior member and president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and Sidney Rigdon, the senior member of the First Presidency.
Smith had proposed several ways to choose his successor, but had never clarified his preference.
This revelation initiated a revision of the Bible on which Smith worked sporadically until 1833 and which remained unpublished at his death.
Smith implicitly endorsed this speech, and many non-Mormons understood it to be a thinly-veiled threat.
Smith ended the communitarian experiment and changed the name of the church to the "Church of Latter Day Saints" before leading a small paramilitary expedition, later called Zion's Camp, to aid the Missouri Mormons.
According to Parley P. Pratt, Smith dictated revelations orally, and they were recorded by a scribe without revisions or corrections.
Cowdery was also assigned the task of locating the site of the New Jerusalem.
After receiving noncommittal or negative responses, Smith announced his own third-party candidacy for President of the United States, suspended regular proselytizing, and sent out the Quorum of the Twelve and hundreds of other political missionaries.
The revelation was given in the voice of God rather than as a declaration mediated through Smith; and subsequent revelations assumed a similar authoritative style, often opening with words such as "Hearken O ye people which profess my name, saith the Lord your God."
In probable reference to this period of flight, Smith said that Peter, James, and John had appeared to him and had ordained him and Cowdery to a higher priesthood.
The Book of Mormon itself states only that its text will "come forth by the gift and power of God unto the interpretation thereof".
Smith explicitly approved of the expulsion of these men, who were known collectively as the "dissenters".
Soon after, on April 6, 1830, Smith and his followers formally organized the Church of Christ, and small branches were established in Palmyra, Fayette, and Colesville, New York.
Smith's revelations often came in response to specific questions.
The Book of Mormon has been called the longest and most complex of Smith's revelations.
The language of authority in Smith's revelations was appealing to converts, and the revelations were given with the confidence of an Old Testament prophet.
His teachings include unique views about the nature of God, cosmology, family structures, political organization, and religious collectivism.
Smith had assumed a role as prophet, seer, and apostle of Jesus Christ, and by early 1831, he was introducing himself as "Joseph the Prophet".
Smith was held responsible for the failure, and there were widespread defections from the church, including many of Smith's closest advisers.
Smith introduced baptism for the dead in 1840, and in 1841, construction began on the Nauvoo Temple as a place for recovering lost ancient knowledge.
Officials in Carthage responded by mobilizing their small detachment of the state militia, and Governor Thomas Ford appeared, threatening to raise a larger militia unless Smith and the Nauvoo city council surrendered themselves.
Smith taught that all existence was material, including a world of "spirit matter" so fine that it was invisible to all but the purest mortal eyes.
Smith, however, never viewed the wording to be infallible.
Another brother, William, was unable to attract a sufficient following.
Three months later, Smith gave a lengthy revelation called the "Olive Leaf" containing themes of cosmology and eschatology, and discussing subjects such as light, truth, intelligence, and sanctification; a related revelation given in 1833 put Christ at the center of salvation.
These men, known collectively as the Three Witnesses—along with a later group of Eight Witnesses composed of male members of the Whitmer and Smith families—signed statements testifying that they had seen the golden plates; the eight witnesses also said they had actually handled the plates.
Early Mormons understood the Book of Mormon to be a religious history of the indigenous peoples of the Americas.
For women, Smith introduced the Relief Society, a service club and sorority within which Smith predicted women would receive "the keys of the kingdom".
Smith said he did not believe blacks to be inherently inferior to whites; he welcomed both freemen and slaves into the church.
For instance, the doctrines of baptism for the dead and the nature of God were introduced in sermons, and one of Smith's most famed statements about there being "no such thing as immaterial matter" was recorded from a casual conversation with a Methodist preacher.
Although Smith had left his treasure hunting company, his former associates believed he had double-crossed them by taking for himself what they considered joint property.
Although the Book of Mormon drew many converts to the church, Fawn Brodie argued in 1945 that the "book lives today because of the prophet, not he because of the book."
Meanwhile Brigham Young, then-president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, rose to prominence among the Mormon faithful when he organized the move of about 14,000 Saints to Illinois and eastern Iowa.
Emma never denied Smith's prophetic gift or repudiated her belief in the authenticity of the Book of Mormon.
Joseph and Emma had four sons who lived to maturity: Joseph Smith III, Frederick Granger Williams Smith, Alexander Hale Smith, and David Hyrum Smith (born in 1844 after Smith's death).
Though Smith initially viewed God the Father as a spirit, he eventually began teaching that God was an advanced and glorified man, embodied within time and space.
Smith tamed these outbursts by producing two revelations that brought the Kirtland congregation under his own authority.
In 1831, Smith and his followers moved west, planning to build a communalistic American Zion.
Though Smith did not claim exclusive prophethood, an early revelation designated him as the only prophet allowed to issue commandments "as Moses".
In 1826, Smith was brought before a Chenango County court for "glass-looking", or pretending to find lost treasure.
God said thou shalt not kill—at another time he said thou shalt utterly destroy.
Smith's brother Hyrum, had he survived, would have had the strongest claim, followed by Smith's brother Samuel, who died mysteriously a month after his brothers.
By the end of his life, Smith was teaching that both God the Father and Jesus were distinct beings with physical bodies, but the Holy Spirit was a "personage of Spirit".
They eventually construct a ship and sail to a "promised land" in the Western Hemisphere.
For instance, Smith's revision nearly tripled the length of the first five chapters of Genesis in what would become the Book of Moses.
According to Smith, the angel Moroni took back the plates once Smith finished using them.
When Smith moved to Kirtland, Ohio, in January 1831, he encountered a religious culture that included enthusiastic demonstrations of spiritual gifts, including fits and trances, rolling on the ground, and speaking in tongues.
Smith advised them to bear the violence patiently until they were attacked a fourth time, after which they could fight back.
Although the church had publicly repudiated polygamy, in 1837 there was a rift between Smith and Oliver Cowdery over the issue.
Emma said that the very first time she ever became aware of a polygamy revelation being attributed to Smith by Mormons was when she read about it in Orson Pratt's periodical ''The Seer'' in 1853.
When the narrative described an institutional church and a requirement for baptism, Smith and Cowdery baptized each other.
Smith said that the angel returned the plates to him on September 22, 1828, and he resumed dictation in April 1829, after he met Oliver Cowdery, who replaced Harris as his scribe.
Harris also took a sample of the characters to a few prominent scholars, including Charles Anthon, who Harris said initially authenticated the characters and their translation but then retracted his opinion after learning that Smith was supposed to have received the plates from an angel.
The completed work, the Book of Mormon, was published in Palmyra on March 26, 1830, by printer E. B. Grandin, Martin Harris having mortgaged his farm to finance it.
This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the elders of the kingdom are placed.
Before 1832, most of Smith's revelations dealt with establishing the church, gathering his followers, and building the City of Zion, while later revelations dealt with the priesthood, endowment, and exaltation.
According to Smith, only one person on earth at a time—in this case, Smith—could possess this power of sealing.
Bennett used his connections in the Illinois legislature to obtain an unusually liberal charter for the new city, which Smith named "Nauvoo" (Hebrew נָאווּ, meaning "to be beautiful").
Smith fired a pepper-box pistol that a friend had lent him for self-defense, then sprang for the window.
Both also said that Smith had proposed marriage to their wives.
Smith said that the plates were engraved in an unknown language, reformed Egyptian, and he told associates that he was capable of reading and translating them.
They unleashed a flood of anti-Mormon rhetoric in newspapers and in stump speeches given during the 1838 election campaign.
It also attacked Smith's practice of polygamy, implying that Smith was using religion as a pretext to draw unassuming women to Nauvoo in order to seduce and marry them.
Later that year, when Smith promised to abandon treasure seeking, Hale offered to let the couple live on his property in Harmony and help Smith get started in business.
In 1844, Smith and the Nauvoo city council angered non-Mormons by destroying a newspaper that had criticized Smith's power and practice of polygamy.
No longer envisioning the building of Zion in Nauvoo, Smith viewed Zion as encompassing all of North and South America, with Mormon settlements being "stakes" of Zion's metaphorical tent.
Smith considered the U.S. Constitution, and especially the Bill of Rights, to be inspired by God and "the Latter Day Saints' best and perhaps only defense.".
In the summer of 1842, Smith revealed a plan to establish the millennial Kingdom of God, which would eventually establish theocratic rule over the whole earth.
The revelations were not God's words verbatim, but "couched in language suitable to Joseph's time".
During this dark period Smith briefly attended Methodist meetings with his wife until a cousin of hers objected to inclusion of a "practicing necromancer" on the Methodist class roll.
In 1835 Smith encouraged some Latter Day Saints in Kirtland to purchase rolls of ancient Egyptian papyri from a traveling exhibitor.
Smith was blamed for having promoted a church-sponsored bank that failed and accused of engaging in a sexual relationship with his serving girl, Fanny Alger.
Modern historian Fawn Brodie has called the Book of Mormon a response to pressing cultural and environmental issues of Smith's times, saying that Smith composed the Book of Mormon drawing from scraps of information available to him; Dan Vogel, another historian, says that the work is autobiographical in nature.
After suffering a crippling bone infection when he was seven, the younger Smith hobbled around on crutches for three years.
Fearing the newspaper would bring the countryside down on the Mormons, the Nauvoo city council declared the ''Expositor'' a public nuisance and ordered the Nauvoo Legion to destroy the press.
The Book of Moses begins with Moses' inquiring of God as to the purpose of creation, and is told in this account that God made the earth and heavens to bring humans to eternal life.
When the twins died, the Smiths adopted another set of twins, Julia and Joseph, whose mother had recently died in childbirth; Joseph died of measles in 1832.
Among Mormons, he is regarded as a prophet on par with Moses and Elijah.
After a warrant was issued for Smith's arrest on a charge of banking fraud, Smith and Rigdon fled Kirtland for Missouri on the night of January 12, 1838.
Smith was then released on a writ of habeas corpus from the Nauvoo municipal court.
Smith's first recorded revelation was a rebuke from God for having let Martin Harris lose 116 pages of Book of Mormon manuscript, chastising him for "fearing man more than God".
Smith and Emma eloped and were married on January 18, 1827, after which the couple began boarding with Smith's parents in Manchester.
In 1816–17, after an ill-fated business venture and three years of crop failures, the Smith family moved to the western New York village of Palmyra, and eventually took a mortgage on a  farm in the nearby town of Manchester.
Although Emma knew of some of her husband's marriages, she almost certainly did not know the extent of his polygamous activities.
Smith taught that the High Priesthood's endowment of heavenly power included the sealing powers of Elijah, allowing High Priests to effect binding consequences in the afterlife.
After Smith's death, Emma Smith quickly became alienated from Brigham Young and the church leadership.
The early Nauvoo years were a period of doctrinal innovation.
Smith never said how he produced the Book of Mormon, saying only that he translated by the power of God and implying that he had transcribed the words.
On June 27, 1844, an armed mob with blackened faces stormed Carthage Jail where Joseph and Hyrum were being held.
It is organized as a compilation of smaller books, each named after its main named narrator or a prominent leader.
With other family members, Smith also engaged in religious folk magic, not an uncommon practice at the time.
Though it is unclear how much Smith knew of the Danites' activities, he clearly approved of those of which he did know.
The story begins with a family that leaves Jerusalem, just before the Babylonian captivity.
Smith said that in June 1830, he received a "revelation of Moses" in which Moses saw "the world and the ends thereof" and asked God questions about the purpose of creation and man's relationship to God.
Smith attracted thousands of devoted followers before his death in 1844 and millions in the century that followed.
In January 1837, Smith and other church leaders created a joint stock company, called the Kirtland Safety Society, to act as a quasi-bank.
Zion also became less a refuge from an impending tribulation than a great building project.
In Jackson County, Missouri residents resented the Mormon newcomers for both political and religious reasons.
He died shortly after hitting the ground, but was shot several times more before the mob dispersed.
By the spring of 1844, a rift developed between Smith and a half dozen of his closest associates.
By the time of his death fourteen years later, he had attracted tens of thousands of followers and founded a religious culture that continues to the present.
An 1832 revelation called "The Vision" added to the fundamentals of sin and atonement, introduced doctrines of life after salvation, the theme of exaltation, and a heaven with degrees of glory.
Harris lost the manuscript—of which there was no other copy—at about the same time Smith's wife, Emma, gave birth to a son, Alvin, who died the same day.
While this ended the Missourians' attempts at extradition, it caused significant political fallout in Illinois.
Anthon denied Harris's account of the meeting, claiming instead that he had tried to convince Harris that he had been the victim of a fraud.
By the summer of 1835, there were fifteen hundred to two thousand Mormons in the vicinity, many expecting Smith to lead them shortly to the Millennial kingdom.
Nevertheless, Harris returned to Harmony in April 1828, encouraged to continue as Smith's scribe.
Smith said he told the experience to a preacher, who dismissed the story with contempt; but the experience was largely unknown, even to most Mormons, until the 1840s.
Nevertheless, spirits could not experience a "fullness of joy" unless joined with corporeal bodies, according to Smith.
Biographers, Mormon and non-Mormon, agree that Smith was one of the most influential, charismatic, and innovative figures in American religious history.
In foreign affairs, Smith was an expansionist, though he viewed "expansionism as brotherhood".
The book closes when Mormon's son, Moroni, finishes engraving and buries the records written on the golden plates.
During this period Smith's heated rhetoric encouraged some of his followers to take aggressive measures Smith himself might not have approved.
The revelations slowed in Kirtland during the autumn of 1833, and again after the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, as Smith relied more heavily on his own teachings.
Apart from those who committed the eternal sin, Smith taught that even the wicked and disbelieving would achieve a degree of glory in the afterlife.
Smith had promised church elders that in Kirtland they would receive an endowment of heavenly power, and at the June 1831 general conference, he introduced the greater authority of a High ("Melchizedek") Priesthood to the church hierarchy.
By this time, Smith's experiences with mob violence led him to believe that his faith's survival required greater militancy against anti-Mormons.
The book ends with Moroni's exhortation to "come unto Christ".
In the weeks and months after Smith and Rigdon arrived at Far West, thousands of Latter Day Saints followed them from Kirtland.
It tells the story of the rise and fall of a religious civilization beginning around 600 BC and ending in 421 AD.
Nevertheless, Zion's Camp transformed Mormon leadership, and many future church leaders came from among the participants.
These dissidents formed a competing church and the following month, at Carthage, the county seat, they procured indictments against Smith for perjury and polygamy.
He disfavored imprisonment of convicts except for murder, preferring efforts to reform criminals through labor; he also opposed courts-martial for military deserters.
Another 1832 revelation "on Priesthood" was the first to explain priesthood doctrine.
The first of Smith's wives, Emma Hale, gave birth to nine children during their marriage, five of whom died before the age of two.
Beginning in the mid-1830s and into the 1840s, as the Mormon people became involved in conflicts with the Missouri and Illinois state governments, Smith taught that "Congress has no power to make a law that would abridge the rights of my religion," and that they were not under the obligation to follow laws they deemed as being contrary to their "religious privilege".
Young, whom Emma feared and despised, was suspicious of her desire to preserve the family's assets from inclusion with those of the church, and thought she would be even more troublesome because she openly opposed plural marriage.
Later, however, he is said to have used a chocolate-colored stone he had found in 1822 that he had used previously for treasure hunting.
Whatever God requires is right&nbsp;... even things which may be considered abominable to all those who do not understand the order of heaven.
Although Smith's parents disagreed about religion, the family was caught up in this excitement.
By 1838, Smith had abandoned plans to redeem Zion in Jackson County.
Christian themes permeate the work; for instance, Nephite prophets in the Book of Mormon teach of Christ's coming, and talk of the star that will appear at his birth.
After an unknown assailant shot and wounded Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs in May 1842, anti-Mormons circulated rumors that Smith's bodyguard, Porter Rockwell, was the shooter.
Instead of presenting ideas with logical arguments, Smith dictated authoritative revelations and let people decide whether to believe.
After Smith was imprisoned in Carthage, Illinois, he was killed when a mob stormed the jailhouse.
Smith made Bennett Assistant President of the church, and Bennett was elected Nauvoo's first mayor.
Believers tended to focus on his achievements and religious teachings, deemphasizing his personal defects, while detractors focused on his mistakes, legal troubles, and controversial doctrines.
On April 6, 1839, after a grand jury hearing in Davis County, Smith and his companions escaped custody, almost certainly with the connivance of the sheriff and guards.
Mormons and ex-Mormons have produced a large amount of scholarly work about Smith, and to a large extent the result has been two discordant pictures of very different people: a man of God on the one hand, and on the other, a fraud preying on the ignorance of his followers.
When embarrassing rumors of "spiritual wifery" got abroad, Smith forced Bennett's resignation as Nauvoo mayor.
Most notably, William Law, Smith's trusted counselor, and Robert Foster, a general of the Nauvoo Legion, disagreed with Smith about how to manage Nauvoo's economy.
Although Smith may have understood the event as a personal conversion, this "First Vision" later grew in importance among Mormons, who today see it as the first event in the "restoration of the Gospel".
Smith was immediately brought before a military court, accused of treason, and sentenced to be executed the next morning; but Alexander Doniphan, Smith's former attorney and a brigadier general in the Missouri militia, refused to carry out the order.
Emma campaigned publicly against polygamy, and was the main signatory of a petition in 1842, with a thousand female signatures, denying that Smith was connected with polygamy.
These teachings implied a vast hierarchy of gods, with God himself having a father.
On August 6, 1838, non-Mormons in Gallatin tried to prevent Mormons from voting, and the election-day scuffles initiated the 1838 Mormon War.
He was acquitted, but both he and Cowdery had to flee Colesville to escape a gathering mob.
Smith declared that he would be one of the instruments in fulfilling Nebuchadnezzar's statue vision in the Book of Daniel: that secular government would be destroyed without "sword or gun", and would be replaced with a "theodemocratic" Kingdom of God.
