Priestley designed two ''Charts'' to serve as visual study aids for his  ''Lectures''.
Evil is therefore only an imperfect understanding of the world.
The Priestleys arrived in New York City in 1794, where they were fêted by various political factions vying for Priestley's endorsement.
In 1761, Priestley moved to Warrington and assumed the post of tutor of modern languages and rhetoric at the town's Dissenting academy, although he would have preferred to teach mathematics and natural philosophy.
Based on experiments with charged spheres, Priestley was among the first to propose that electrical force followed an inverse-square law, similar to Newton's law of universal gravitation.May we not infer from this experiment, that the attraction of electricity is subject to the same laws with that of gravitation, and is therefore according to the squares of the distances; since it is easily demonstrated, that were the earth in the form of a shell, a body in the inside of it would not be attracted to one side more than another?
Also, since 1952 Dickinson College, Pennsylvania, has presented the Priestley Award to a scientist who makes "discoveries which contribute to the welfare of mankind".
He continued to support institutionalised Unitarianism for the rest of his life, writing several ''Defenses'' of Unitarianism and encouraging the foundation of new Unitarian chapels throughout Britain and the United States.
On 23 June 1762, he married Mary Wilkinson of Wrexham.
When his father remarried in 1741, Priestley went to live with his aunt and uncle, the wealthy and childless Sarah and John Keighley,  from Fieldhead.
Assessing Priestley's works as a whole has been difficult for scholars because of his wide-ranging interests.
Priestley wrote a series of ''Letters to William Pitt'' and ''Letters to Burke'' in an attempt to persuade them otherwise, but these publications only further inflamed the populace against him.
Although Priestley was busy defending phlogiston theory from the "new chemists", most of what he published in Birmingham was theological.
In his metaphysical texts, Priestley attempted to combine theism, materialism, and determinism, a project that has been called "audacious and original".
Mary Priestley's health, already poor, deteriorated further; although William's wife, Margaret Foulke-Priestley, moved in with the couple to nurse Mary twenty-four hours a day, Mary Priestley died 17 September 1796.
(Impressed with his ''Charts'' and the manuscript of his history of electricity, Canton, Franklin, Watson, and Richard Price nominated Priestley for a fellowship in the Royal Society; he was accepted in 1766.)
Instead, he focused on gases and "changes in their sensible properties", as had natural philosophers before him.
Dissenters repeatedly petitioned Parliament to repeal the Acts, arguing that they were being treated as second-class citizens.
Around 1749, Priestley became seriously ill and believed he was dying.
It was found to contain three letters, one of which was signed by the radical printer John Hurford Stone.
He led and inspired British radicals during the 1790s, paved the way for utilitarianism, and helped found Unitarianism.
He also contended that discussing the soul is impossible because it is made of a divine substance, and humanity cannot perceive the divine.
He was able, then, to contrast his sweet reasonableness to their personal rancor", but as Schofield points out Priestley rarely altered his opinion as a result of these debates.
Since the study of history was a moral imperative for Priestley, he also promoted the education of middle-class women, which was unusual at the time.
Priestley also described his cheap and easy-to-assemble experimental apparatus; his colleagues therefore believed that they could easily reproduce his experiments.
In the early 20th century, Priestley was most often described as a conservative and dogmatic scientist who was nevertheless a political and religious reformer.
Priestley eventually decided to return to his theological studies and, in 1752, matriculated at Daventry, a Dissenting academy.
The main undergraduate chemistry laboratories at the University of Leeds were refurbished as part of a £4m refurbishment plan in 2006 and renamed as the Priestley Laboratories in his honour as a prominent chemist from Leeds.
Friends helped the couple rebuild their lives, contributing money, books, and laboratory equipment.
Mr. Lindsey's Proposal for a Reformed English Church'' (1774), claiming that only the form of worship had been altered, not its substance, and attacking those who followed religion as a fashion.
The rioters moved on to the New Meeting and Old Meeting churches—and burned both to the ground.
He paid careful attention to the history of optics and presented excellent explanations of early optics experiments, but his mathematical deficiencies caused him to dismiss several important contemporary theories.
In 1785, while Priestley was engaged in a pamphlet war over ''Corruptions'', he also published ''The Importance and Extent of Free Enquiry'', claiming that the Reformation had not really reformed the church.
One of the letters was addressed to "MBP", with a note: "I inclose a note for our friend MBP—but, as ignorant of the name he bears at present among you, I must beg you to seal and address it."
This discovery, along with his earlier work on what would later be recognised as gaseous diffusion, would eventually lead John Dalton and Thomas Graham to formulate the kinetic theory of gases.
Two educational institutions have been named in his honour—Priestley College in Warrington and Joseph Priestley College in Leeds (now part of Leeds City College)—and an asteroid, 5577 Priestley, discovered in 1986 by Duncan Waldron.
After returning to Britain in January 1775, he continued his experiments and discovered "vitriolic acid air" (sulphur dioxide, SO2).
share an optimism that God has chosen the chain of events benevolently; however, Priestley believed that the events were leading to a glorious Millennial conclusion, whereas for Leibniz the entire chain of events was optimal in and of itself, as compared with other conceivable chains of events.
Priestley's later radicalism emerged from his belief that the British government was infringing upon these individual freedoms.
In his absence, his wife Elizabeth Ryland-Priestley and Thomas Cooper became increasing close, collaborating in numerous political essays.
He gave lectures on anatomy and performed experiments regarding temperature with another tutor at Warrington, his friend John Seddon.
Despite his separation of the divine from the mortal, this position shocked and angered many of his readers, who believed that such a duality was necessary for the soul to exist.
Shelburne blamed Priestley's health, while Priestley claimed Shelburne had no further use for him.
Drove with vain hate&nbsp;....
When the Priestleys' third son was born on 24 May 1777, they named him Henry at the lord's request.
To earn extra money, Priestley proposed opening a school, but local families informed him that they would refuse to send their children.
According to Priestley's close friend Theophilus Lindsey, Priestley was "much improved by this view of mankind at large".
: Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the
He was hampered by lack of news from Europe; unaware of the latest scientific developments, Priestley was no longer on the forefront of discovery.
In a series of major metaphysical texts published between 1774 and 1780—''An Examination of Dr. Reid's Inquiry into the Human Mind'' (1774), ''Hartley's Theory of the Human Mind on the Principle of the Association of Ideas'' (1775), ''Disquisitions relating to Matter and Spirit'' (1777), ''The Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Illustrated'' (1777), and ''Letters to a Philosophical Unbeliever'' (1780)—he argues for a philosophy that incorporates four concepts: determinism, materialism, causation, and necessitarianism.
Political cartoons, one of the most effective and popular media of the time, skewered the Dissenters and Priestley.
Each year Priestley travelled to London to consult with his close friend and publisher, Joseph Johnson, and to attend meetings of the Royal Society.
Priestley's lectures on history were particularly revolutionary; he narrated a providentialist and naturalist account of history, arguing that the study of history furthered the comprehension of God's natural laws.
In Parliament, William Pitt and Edmund Burke argued against the repeal, a betrayal that angered Priestley and his friends, who had expected the two men's support.
: Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee.
As the penalties became harsher for those who spoke out against the government, Priestley examined options for removing himself and his family from England.
Priestley's text became the standard history of electricity for over a century; Alessandro Volta (who later invented the battery), William Herschel (who discovered infrared radiation), and Henry Cavendish (who discovered hydrogen) all relied upon it.
Priestley has been remembered by the towns in which he served as a reforming educator and minister and by the scientific organisations he influenced.
In his ''History of Electricity'', he described the scientist as promoting the "security and happiness of mankind".
He believed that a proper understanding of the natural world would promote human progress and eventually bring about the Christian Millennium.
Because his views of religion were deeply tied to his understanding of nature, the text's theism rested on the argument from design.
Barbara Lupton was the second cousin of Olive Middleton, née Lupton - the great grandmother of Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge.
Priestley's years in Calne were the only ones in his life dominated by scientific investigations; they were also the most scientifically fruitful.
After several variations of the experiment, with different substances as fuel and several different collecting apparatuses (which produced different results), he concluded that air could travel through more substances than previously surmised, a conclusion "contrary to all the known principles of hydrostatics".
The core of the group included men such as the manufacturer Matthew Boulton, the chemist and geologist James Keir, the inventor and engineer James Watt, and the botanist, chemist, and geologist William Withering.
Priestley was born to an established English Dissenting family (i.e.
This discovery overturned what he described as "one of the earliest and universally received maxims of electricity", that only water and metals could conduct electricity.
From "Religious Musings" (1796)
Unlike many schoolmasters of the time, Priestley taught his students natural philosophy and even bought scientific instruments for them.
This and other experiments on the electrical properties of materials and on the electrical effects of chemical transformations demonstrated Priestley's early and ongoing interest in the relationship between chemical substances and electricity.
Priestley followed up in 1786 with the provocatively titled book, ''An History of Early Opinions concerning Jesus Christ, compiled from Original Writers, proving that the Christian Church was at first Unitarian''.
Although Priestley's aunt had promised her support if he became a minister, she refused any further assistance when she realised he was no longer a Calvinist.
Priestley wrote a popular version of the ''History of Electricity'' for the general public titled ''A Familiar Introduction to the Study of Electricity'' (1768).
Two sons were born to the Priestleys in Leeds: Joseph junior on 24 July 1768 and William three years later.
He believed that each age would improve upon the previous and that the study of history allowed people to perceive and to advance this progress.
by Samuel Taylor Coleridge
Thomas Jefferson would later write of the profound effect that these two books had on him: "I have read his Corruptions of Christianity, and Early Opinions of Jesus, over and over again; and I rest on them&nbsp;... as the basis of my own faith.
He spent the last ten years of his life living in Northumberland County, Pennsylvania.
Fearful lest they be taken as evidence of him being a 'spy in the interest of France', Priestley sent a clumsy letter to numerous newspaper editors, in which he naively named "MBP" (Member of the British Parliament) as Mr. Benjamin Vaughan, who "like me, thought it necessary to leave England, and for some time is said to have assumed a feigned name."
Like the rest of nature, man's mind is subject to the laws of causation, Priestley contended, but because a benevolent God created these laws, the world and the people in it will eventually be perfected.
Despite Priestley's reduced scientific output, his presence stimulated American interest in chemistry.
One of these letters was read aloud to the Royal Society, and a paper outlining the discovery, titled "An Account of further Discoveries in Air", was published in the Society's journal ''Philosophical Transactions''.
Schofield argues that the most likely reason was Shelburne's recent marriage to Louisa Fitzpatrick—apparently, she did not like the Priestleys.
He fitted in well at Warrington, and made friends quickly.
Henry Priestley died 11 December 1795, possibly of malaria which he may have contracted after landing at New York.
His experiments were almost entirely confined to "airs", and out of this work emerged his most important scientific texts: the six volumes of ''Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air'' (1774–86).
In his third year at Daventry, Priestley committed himself to the ministry, which he described as "the noblest of all professions".
He recommended modern languages instead of classical languages and modern rather than ancient history.
This proved a very suitable and happy connexion, my wife being a woman of an excellent understanding, much improved by reading, of great fortitude and strength of mind, and of a temper in the highest degree affectionate and generous; feeling strongly for others, and little for herself.
Priestley was minister between 1793 and 1794 and the sermons he preached there, particularly the two Fast Sermons, reflect his growing millenarianism, his belief that the end of the world was fast approaching.
Hartley's psychological, philosophical, and theological treatise postulated a material theory of mind.
He did not emphasise his discovery of "dephlogisticated air" (leaving it to Part III of the volume) but instead argued in the preface how important such discoveries were to rational religion.
He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1782.
: I will lay me down in peace and sleep till
To ease his mother's burdens, Priestley was sent to live with his grandfather around the age of one.
Priestley founded the ''Theological Repository'' in 1768, a journal committed to the open and rational inquiry of theological questions.
Still, he contributed in a small way to the voyage: he provided the crew with a method for making soda water, which he erroneously speculated might be a cure for scurvy.
As an early biographer writes, "whatever he knows or thinks he tells: doubts, perplexities, blunders are set down with the most refreshing candour."
The carefully executed attacks of the "mob" and the farcical trials of only a handful of the "leaders" convinced many at the time—and modern historians later—that the attacks were planned and condoned by local Birmingham magistrates.
These experiments helped repudiate the last vestiges of the theory of four elements, which Priestley attempted to replace with his own variation of phlogiston theory.
According to that 18th-century theory, the combustion or oxidation of a substance corresponded to the release of a material substance, ''phlogiston''.
: I awake in the morning of the resurrection.
In his paper "Observations on Respiration and the Use of the Blood", Priestley was the first to suggest a connection between blood and air, although he did so using phlogiston theory.
While at Leeds he wrote controversial pamphlets on the Lord's Supper and on Calvinist doctrine; thousands of copies were published, making them some of Priestley's most widely read works.
In 1914, Olive and Noel  Middleton had married at Leeds' Mill Hill Chapel, which Priestly, as its minister, had once guided towards Unitarianism.
This, however, led him to conclude that there were only three types of "air": "fixed", "alkaline", and "acid".
On 17 April 1763, they had a daughter, whom they named Sarah after Priestley's aunt.
Theophilus Lindsey, a rector at Catterick, Yorkshire, became one of Priestley's few friends in Leeds, of whom he wrote: "I never chose to publish any thing of moment relating to theology, without consulting him."
Jefferson and Priestley became close, and when he had completed his ''General History of the Christian Church'', he dedicated it to President Jefferson, writing that "it is now only that I can say I see nothing to fear from the hand of power, the government under which I live being for the first time truly favourable to me."
however, unlike them, Leibniz argued for a "parallel universe" of immaterial objects (such as human souls) so arranged by God that its outcomes agree exactly with those of the material universe.
More recently, in 2001, historian of science Dan Eshet has argued that efforts to create a "synoptic view" have resulted only in a rationalisation of the contradictions in Priestley's thought, because they have been "organized around philosophical categories" and have "separated the producers of scientific ideas from any social conflict".
He criticised those whose faith was shaped by books and fashion, drawing an analogy between the scepticism of educated men and the credulity of the masses.
Many of the friends that Priestley made in Birmingham were members of the Lunar Society, a group of manufacturers, inventors, and natural philosophers who assembled monthly to discuss their work.
After comparing Biblical prophecies to recent history, Priestley concluded that the French Revolution was a harbinger of the Second Coming of Christ.
More importantly, he laid out his belief in Socinianism.
Because Priestley was precocious—at the age of four he could flawlessly recite all 107 questions and answers of the Westminster Shorter Catechism—his aunt sought the best education for the boy, intending him for the ministry.
He also presented a series of scientific lectures titled "Use of the Globes" that was more successful.
Using a pneumatic trough, he would mix nitrous air with a test sample, over water or mercury, and measure the decrease in volume—the principle of eudiometry.
A decree of 26 August 1792 by the French National Assembly conferred French citizenship on Joseph Priestley and others who had "served the cause of liberty" by their writings.
He isolated carbon monoxide (CO), but apparently did not realise that it was a separate "air".
In September 1799, William Cobbett printed extracts from this handbill, asserting that: "Dr Priestley has taken great pains to circulate this address, has travelled through the country for the purpose, and is in fact the patron of it."
In words that would boil over into a national debate, he challenged his readers to enact change:
Priestley's epitaph reads:
This principle of utility guided his unconventional curricular choices for Warrington's aspiring middle-class students.
He was therefore obliged to provide much of the journal's content himself (this material became the basis for many of his later theological and metaphysical works).
Priestley there, patriot, and saint, and sage,
Some contemporaries speculated that Priestley's outspokenness had hurt Shelburne's political career.
Schofield conjectures that they considered him a heretic.
He first tested it on mice, who surprised him by surviving quite a while entrapped with the air, and then on himself, writing that it was "five or six times better than common air for the purpose of respiration, inflammation, and, I believe, every other use of common atmospherical air".
Priestley defended his friend in the pamphlet ''Letter to a Layman, on the Subject of the Rev.
In his magisterial three-volume ''Institutes of Natural and Revealed Religion'' (1772–74), Priestley outlined his theories of religious instruction.
The doctrines he explicated would become the standards for Unitarians in Britain.
In the French National Convention election on 5 September 1792, Joseph Priestley was elected to the French National Convention by at least two departments, (Orne and Rhône-et-Loire).
He continued his intense study; this, together with the liberal atmosphere of the school, shifted his theology further leftward and he became a Rational Dissenter.
Priestley tried to continue his scientific investigations in America with the support of the American Philosophical Association.
Although Priestley's philosophical work has been characterised as "audacious and original", it partakes of older philosophical traditions on the problems of free will, determinism, and materialism.
The couple's friends urged them to leave Britain and emigrate to either France or the new United States, even though Priestley had received an appointment to preach for the Gravel Pit Meeting congregation.
Considering the extent of Priestley's influence, relatively little scholarship has been devoted to him.
Priestley wanted to return Christianity to its "primitive" or "pure" form by eliminating the "corruptions" which had accumulated over the centuries.
Although he promised to print any contribution, only like-minded authors submitted articles.
Priestley yearned for urban life and theological debate, whereas Needham Market was a small, rural town with a congregation wedded to tradition.
However, he declined the honor, on the grounds that he was not fluent in French.
On 17 April 1774, Lindsey held the first Unitarian service in Britain, at the newly formed Essex Street Chapel in London; he had even designed his own liturgy, of which many were critical.
When Priestley's friend Theophilus Lindsey decided to found a new Christian denomination that would not restrict its members' beliefs, Priestley and others hurried to his aid.
These charts are in fact timelines; they have been described as the most influential timelines published in the 18th century.
In March he wrote to several people regarding the new "air" that he had discovered in August.
Priestley's works had always had a millennial cast, but after the beginning of the French Revolution, this strain increased.
As relations between England and France worsened, however, a removal to France became impracticable.
Perhaps prompted by Mary Priestley's ill health, or financial problems, or a desire to prove himself to the community that had rejected him in his childhood, Priestley moved with his family from Warrington to Leeds in 1767, and he became Mill Hill Chapel's minister.
Immanuel Kant praised Priestley in his ''Critique of Pure Reason'' (1781), writing that he "knew how to combine his paradoxical teaching with the interests of religion".
Despite Priestley's busy teaching schedule, he decided to write a history of electricity.
Barely a month later, in November and December 1799, Priestley stepped forward in his own defence, with his ''Letters to the inhabitants of Northumberland''.
Paradoxically, a secular statesman, Burke, argued against science and maintained that religion should be the basis of civil society, whereas a Dissenting minister, Priestley, argued that religion could not provide the basis for civil society and should be restricted to one's private life.
Although the majority of his publications focused on defending phlogiston theory, he also did some original work on spontaneous generation and dreams.
After the publication of this seeming call for revolution in the midst of the French Revolution, pamphleteers stepped up their attacks on Priestley and he and his church were even threatened with legal action.
Priestley spent several days hiding with friends until he was able to travel safely to London.
He was the oldest of six children born to Mary Swift and Jonas Priestley, a finisher of cloth.
The intellectually stimulating atmosphere of Warrington, often called the "Athens of the North" (of England) during the 18th century, encouraged Priestley's growing interest in natural philosophy.
The 19th-century French naturalist George Cuvier, in his eulogy of Priestley, praised his discoveries while at the same time lamenting his refusal to abandon phlogiston theory, calling him "the father of modern chemistry who never acknowledged his daughter".
Priestley attended Lindsey's church regularly in the 1770s and occasionally preached there.
Priestley's Daventry friends helped him obtain another position and in 1758 he moved to Nantwich, Cheshire; this time there was happier.
While Priestley accepted parts of Lavoisier's theory, he was unprepared to assent to the major revolutions Lavoisier proposed: the overthrow of phlogiston, a chemistry based conceptually on elements and compounds, and a new chemical nomenclature.
For example, the 17th-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza argued for absolute determinism and absolute materialism.
In 1780 the Priestleys moved to Birmingham and spent a happy decade surrounded by old friends, until they were forced to flee in 1791 by religiously motivated mob violence in what became known as the Priestley Riots.
Furious, Priestley lashed out with his ''Remarks on Dr. Blackstone's Commentaries'' (1769), correcting Blackstone's interpretation of the law, his grammar (a highly politicised subject at the time), and history.
Similar international recognition was made on 7 August 2000, at Bowood House in Wiltshire, UK.
Of his marriage, Priestley wrote:
Joseph Priestley's son William was presented to the French Assembly and granted letters of naturalization on 8 June 1792.
In demanding that his readers apply the logic of the emerging sciences and comparative history to the Bible and Christianity, he alienated religious and scientific readers alike—scientific readers did not appreciate seeing science used in the defence of religion and religious readers dismissed the application of science to religion.
Faced with inconsistent experimental results, Priestley employed phlogiston theory.
In 1782 he published the fourth volume of his ''Institutes'', ''An History of the Corruptions of Christianity'', describing how he thought the teachings of the early Christian church had been "corrupted" or distorted.
These educational writings were some of Priestley's most popular works.
By studying the natural world, he argued, people would learn how to become more compassionate, happy, and prosperous.
However, as Schaffer explains, no convincing synthesis of his work has yet been expounded.
Lavoisier's work began the long train of discovery that produced papers on oxygen respiration and culminated in the overthrow of phlogiston theory and the establishment of modern chemistry.
''Lectures on History'' was well received and was employed by many educational institutions, such as New College at Hackney, Brown, Princeton, Yale, and Cambridge.
Methodists in Leeds penned a hymn asking God to "the Unitarian fiend expel / And chase his doctrine back to Hell."
Thomas Cooper, whose son, Thomas Jr., was living with the Priestleys, was a frequent visitor.
He had discovered oxygen gas (O2).
In 1798, when, in response to the Pinckney affair, a belligerent President Adams sought to enlarge the navy and mobilise the militia into what Priestley and Cooper saw as a 'standing army', Priestley published an anonymous newspaper article: ''Maxims of political arithmetic'', which attacked Adams, defended free trade, and advocated a form of Jeffersonian isolationism.
The text addresses issues ranging from the divinity of Christ to the proper form for the Lord's Supper.
By 1801, Priestley had become so ill that he could no longer write or experiment.
Before travelling to a new home in the backwoods of Northumberland County, Pennsylvania, at Point township (now Northumberland borough), Dr and Mrs Priestley lodged in Philadelphia, where Priestley gave a series of sermons which led to the founding of the First Unitarian Church of Philadelphia.
Many of Priestley's political writings supported the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts, which restricted the rights of Dissenters.
Priestley believed that the ''Corruptions'' was "the most valuable" work he ever published.
While in Paris, however, Priestley managed to replicate the experiment for others, including French chemist Antoine Lavoisier.
He wrote to a younger friend that while he himself would not see the Second Coming, his friend "may probably live to see it&nbsp;...
He made much in his later writings of the connections between "Gunpowder Joe", science, and Lavoisier—who was improving gunpowder for the French in their war against Britain.
By 1789, when Lavoisier published his ''Traité Élémentaire de Chimie'' and founded the ''Annales de Chimie'', the new chemistry had come into its own.
Priestley's son Joseph Priestley Jr. was a leading member of a consortium that had purchased 300,000 acres of virgin woodland between the forks of Loyalsock Creek, which they intended to lease or sell in 400-acre plots, with payment deferred to seven annual instalments, with interest.
Robert Schofield, Priestley's major modern biographer, describes his first "call" in 1755 to the Dissenting parish in Needham Market, Suffolk, as a "mistake" for both Priestley and the congregation.
The fourth part of the ''Institutes'', ''An History of the Corruptions of Christianity'', became so long that he was forced to issue it separately in 1782.
Priestley was considered for the position of astronomer on James Cook's second voyage to the South Seas, but was not chosen.
He exchanged letters regarding the proper structure of a university with Thomas Jefferson, who used this advice when founding the University of Virginia.
Finally Priestley himself followed with his wife, boarding the ''Sansom'' at Gravesend on 7 April 1793.
Priestley also became a political adviser to Shelburne, gathering information on parliamentary issues and serving as a liaison between Shelburne and the Dissenting and American interests.
When George III was eventually forced to send troops to the area, he said: "I cannot but feel better pleased that Priestley is the sufferer for the doctrines he and his party have instilled, and that the people see them in their true light."
He then published a pamphlet with ''Directions for Impregnating Water with Fixed Air'' (1772).
Priestley learned about it from the ''Morning Chronicle''.
Priestley's refusal to accept Lavoisier's "new chemistry"—such as the conservation of mass—and his determination to adhere to a less satisfactory theory has perplexed many scholars.
Rioters gathered outside the hotel during the banquet and attacked the attendees as they left.
