On 1 September 1939, the German invasion of its agreed upon portion of Poland started World War II.
Some areas of physics were criticized.
In early 2010 a Ukrainian court posthumously convicted Stalin of genocide against the Ukrainian nation during the Soviet famine of 1932–1933.
"Stalin" is based on the Russian word сталь ''stal'', meaning "steel", and the name as a whole is supposed to mean "man of steel".
Half of the respondents, aged from 16 to 19, agreed Stalin was a wise leader.
In the early morning of 22 June 1941, Adolf Hitler broke the pact by implementing Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union that began the war on the Eastern Front.
He stated the new government's primary task would be to prepare elections.
When Ioseb was sixteen, he received a scholarship to attend the Tiflis Spiritual Seminary, the leading Russian Orthodox seminary in Tiflis; the language of instruction was Russian.
In a 1956 speech, Nikita Khrushchev denounced Stalin's cult of personality with these words: "It is impermissible and foreign to the spirit of Marxism-Leninism to elevate one person, to transform him into a superman possessing supernatural characteristics akin to those of a god."
A Ukrainian court found Josef Stalin, Lazar Kaganovich, Stanislav Kosior and other leaders of the former Soviet Union guilty of genocide by "organizing mass famine in Ukraine in 1932–1933" in January 2010.
In November 1943, Stalin met with Churchill and Roosevelt in Tehran.
Victims of such plots included Yevhen Konovalets, Ignace Poretsky, Rudolf Klement, Alexander Kutepov, Evgeny Miller, Leon Trotsky and the Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM) leadership in Catalonia (e.g.
Rákosi employed "salami tactics", slicing up these enemies like pieces of salami, to battle the initial postwar political majority ready to establish a democracy.
After returning to Petrograd from his final exile, Stalin ousted Vyacheslav Molotov and Alexander Shlyapnikov as editors of ''Pravda''.
By December 1941, Hitler's troops had advanced to within 20 miles of the Kremlin in Moscow.
Jughashvili was arrested and exiled to Siberia numerous times, but often escaped.
Positive attitudes prevailed in East Ukraine (36%) and South Ukraine (27%), and negative attitudes in West Ukraine (64%) and Central Ukraine (39%).
In Abkhazia he maintained a mountain retreat.
Under his guiding hand, Soviet intelligence forces began to set up intelligence networks in most of the major nations of the world, including Germany (the famous ''Rote Kappelle'' spy ring), Great Britain, France, Japan, and the United States.
When Ioseb's mother enrolled him into a Greek Orthodox priesthood school against her husband's wishes, Ioseb's enraged father went on a drunken rampage.
While historians continue to disagree whether the policies that led to Holodomor fall under the legal definition of genocide, twenty-six countries have officially recognized the Holodomor as such.
In October 1917, the Bolshevik Central Committee voted in favor of an insurrection.
She may have committed suicide by shooting herself after a quarrel with Stalin, leaving a suicide note which according to their daughter was "partly personal, partly political."
Despite heavy human and territorial losses, Soviet forces managed to halt the Nazi incursion after the decisive Battles of Moscow and Stalingrad.
These allies prevented ''Lenin's Testament'' from being revealed to the Twelfth Party Congress in April 1923 (after Lenin's death the testament was read to selected groups of deputies to the Thirteenth Party Congress in May 1924 but it was forbidden to be mentioned at the plenary assemblies or any documents of the Congress).
Ioseb was born on 18 December 1878 in the town of Gori in the Tiflis Governorate of the Russian Empire (today in Georgia).
Continuous persecution in the 1930s resulted in its near-extinction as a public institution: by 1939, active parishes numbered in the low hundreds (down from 54,000 in 1917), many churches had been leveled, and tens of thousands of priests, monks and nuns were persecuted and killed.
Khrushchev's speech and especially the confirmation reflected in the decisions of the 22nd Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1961 led to the destruction of thousands of Stalin monuments not only in the Soviet Union but in many other Socialist countries in the following years.
From 1942 to 1945, 427,910 soldiers were assigned to penal battalions.
The CPSU Central Committee continued to promote atheism and the elimination of religion during the remainder of Stalin's lifetime after the 1943 concordat.
Stalin met in several conferences with British Prime Minister Winston Churchill (and later Clement Attlee) and/or U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt (and later Harry Truman) to plan military strategy and, later, to discuss Europe's postwar reorganization.
However, the most notable legacy during Stalin's time was his public endorsement of the agronomist Trofim Lysenko, who rejected Mendelian genetics as "bourgeois pseudoscience" and instead advocated Lamarckian inheritance and hybridization theories (which had been discredited by most Western countries by the 1920s in favor of Darwinian evolution), that caused widespread agricultural destruction and major setbacks in Soviet knowledge in biology.
Regarding the origins of the plot, people who knew Stalin, such as Khrushchev, suggest that Stalin had long harbored negative sentiments toward Jews, and anti-Semitic trends in the Kremlin's policies were further fueled by the exile of Leon Trotsky.
Two thirds of all polled regarded Stalin as a "murderous tyrant" while 23% stated to have "positive feelings" for Stalin.
The memory of the deportations has played a major part in the separatist movements in the Baltic States, Tatarstan and Chechnya.
However, Chiang quickly reversed the tables in the Shanghai massacre of 1927 by massacring the membership of the Communist party in Shanghai midway through the Northern Expedition.
Despite being trained as a priest, he became an atheist in his first year.
Stalin is believed to have started using the name "K. Stalin" sometime in 1912 as a pen name.
Stalin originally supported the creation of Israel in 1948.
With his second wife Nadezhda Alliluyeva Stalin had a son, Vasiliy, and a daughter, Svetlana.
After the Polish Army achieved initial successes, the Bolsheviks pushed the Polish forces back into central Poland in the summer of 1920.
Through his new allies, Kliment Voroshilov and Semyon Budyonny, Stalin imposed his influence on the military.
By 8 November, the Bolsheviks had stormed the Winter Palace and Kerensky's Cabinet had been arrested.
He generally put his alliance with Chiang against Japan ahead of helping his ideological allies in China in his priorities.
The degree to which Stalin himself relished the cult surrounding him is debatable.
Stalin eventually was convinced by Churchill and Roosevelt not to dismember Germany.
In an effort to demonstrate peaceful intentions toward Germany, on 13 April 1941, Stalin oversaw the signing of a neutrality pact with Axis power Japan.
In 1943, Stalin met with Churchill and Roosevelt in the Tehran Conference.
Bronze casts made in 1990 from plaster death mask and plaster casts of his hands clearly show a normal right hand and a withered left hand.
''Falsifiers'' was published in response to the documents made public in ''Nazi-Soviet Relations, 1939–1941: Documents from the Archives of The German Foreign Office'', which included the secret protocols of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact and other secret German-Soviet relations documents.
During the 1930s and 1940s, the Soviet leadership sent NKVD squads into other countries to murder defectors and other opponents of the Soviet regime.
The most notable foreign contractor was Albert Kahn's firm that designed and built 521 factories between 1930 and 1932.
After the capture of Berlin, Soviet troops reportedly raped from tens of thousands to two million women, and 50,000 during and after the occupation of Budapest.
Despite his short temper and tough-talking attitude, he could be charming and polite, mainly towards foreigners and visiting statesmen.
Indeed, after something like thirty years' experience of international conferences of one kind and another, if I had to pick a team for going into a conference room, Stalin would be my first choice.
The Russian Orthodox Church Synod's recognition of the Soviet government and of Stalin personally led to a schism with the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia.
On 4 March Stalin's illness was broadcast in the media with surprising detail such as pulse, blood pressure and urinalysis; for convenience the time of his stroke was said to be 2 March and his location as Moscow.
Olga, her daughter with Peters, now goes by the name Chrese Evans and lives in Portland, Oregon.
A frightened Lozgachev asked Stalin what happened to him, but all he could get out of him was unintelligible responses that sounded like "Dzhhhhh."
After facing stiff resistance in an invasion of Finland, an interim peace was entered, granting the Soviet Union the eastern region of Karelia (10% of Finnish territory).
The parties later agreed that Britain and America would launch a cross-channel invasion of France in May 1944, along with a separate invasion of southern France.
He criticized Stalin's political views, rude manners, and excessive power and ambition, and suggested that Stalin should be removed from the position of general secretary.
A recovery followed under the New Economic Policy, which allowed a degree of market flexibility within the context of socialism.
Again, Kamenev and Zinoviev helped to keep Lenin's Testament from going public.
His favourite films were westerns and Charlie Chaplin silent film episodes.
This was intended to increase agricultural output from large-scale mechanized farms, to bring the peasantry under more direct political control, and to make tax collection more efficient.
What will happen without me?
While the Germans pressed forward, Stalin was confident of an eventual Allied victory over Germany.
Historical studies, official accounts, memoirs and textbooks published in the Soviet Union used that depiction of events until the Soviet Union's dissolution.
The Communist Party accused the Kremlin in rigging the poll in order to prevent him or Lenin being given first place.
A cult of personality developed in the Soviet Union around both Stalin and Lenin.
On 3 March his double Felix Dadaev was recalled from vacation to Moscow "to be ready to stand in for Stalin if needed", but he never needed to.
Vovsi was released by Beria after Stalin's death in 1953, as was his son-in-law, the composer Mieczyslaw Weinberg.
In the 1930s, Stalin apparently became increasingly worried about the growing popularity of the Leningrad party boss Sergey Kirov.
The movies, being in foreign languages, were given a running translation by Ivan Bolshakov, people's commissar of cinema.
The economic changes coincided with the imprisonment of millions of people in Gulag labour camps.
in Poland), the revolutionary fires would have reached the entire continent.).
However, after Lenin prevailed at the April 1917 Communist Party conference, Stalin and ''Pravda'' shifted to opposing the provisional government.
In September 1941, Stalin told British diplomats that he wanted two agreements: (1) a mutual assistance/aid pact and (2) a recognition that, after the war, the Soviet Union would gain the territories in countries that it had taken pursuant to its division of Eastern Europe with Hitler in the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.
He also notes that Stalin experienced renal hemorrhages during his death, which is unlikely to be caused by high blood pressure.
In August 1920 Stalin returned to Moscow, where he defended himself and resigned his military command.
Vyacheslav Molotov once said: "Whether or not she was Stalin's wife is nobody else's business".
A 1974 Soviet work describes Stalin's leadership in the following manner:
Anthony Eden, the British Foreign Secretary noted: "Marshal Stalin as a negotiator was the toughest proposition of all.
After resistance by Churchill and Roosevelt, Stalin promised a re-organization of the current Communist puppet government on a broader democratic basis in Poland.
Collectivization also meant a drastic drop in living standards for many peasants, and it faced violent reaction among the peasantry.
Indeed, this might be the only means in which it could be built in a hostile environment.
The Finnish communist Arvo Tuominen records a sarcastic toast proposed by Stalin at a New Year's Party in 1935 in which he said "Comrades!
Although Stalin had been the ''de facto'' head of government for a decade and a half, he had concluded relations with Nazi Germany had deteriorated to such an extent that he needed to deal with the problem as ''de jure'' head of government as well.
The repression of so many formerly high-ranking revolutionaries and party members led Leon Trotsky to claim that a "river of blood" separated Stalin's regime from that of Lenin.
Khrushchev reports in his memoirs that Stalin was fond of American cowboy movies.
Notable people executed by NKVD were removed from the texts and photographs as though they never existed.
Nadezhda died in 1932, officially of illness.
In the age group 18–29, 16% had positive feelings towards Stalin.
Accordingly, if famine victims are included, a minimum of around 10 million deaths—6&nbsp;million from famine and 4&nbsp;million from other causes—are attributable to the regime, with a number of recent historians suggesting a likely total of around 20 million, citing much higher victim totals from executions, Gulag camps, deportations and other causes.
On 17 September the Red Army invaded eastern Poland and occupied the Polish territory assigned to it by the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, followed by co-ordination with German forces in Poland.
Among doctors, there are many Jewish nationalists."
I want to propose a toast to our Patriarch, life and sun, liberator of nations, architect of socialism he rattled off all the appellations applied to him in those days – Josef Vissarionovich Stalin, and I hope this is the first and last speech made to that genius this evening."
The Russian Civil War and wartime communism had a devastating effect on the country's economy.
Some of his poems were published in Ilia Chavchavadze's journal ''Iveria'' and later anthologized.
Stalin was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1945 and 1948.
Thereafter, civil war broke out in Russia, pitting Lenin's Red Army against the White Army, a loose alliance of anti-Bolshevik forces.
Industrial output in 1922 was 13% of that in 1914.
The parties also agreed to help those countries form interim governments "pledged to the earliest possible establishment through free elections" and "facilitate where necessary the holding of such elections."
Kursk marked the beginning of a period where Stalin became more willing to listen to the advice of his generals.
Among the Bolshevik revolutionaries who took part in the Russian Revolution of 1917, Stalin was appointed General Secretary of the party's Central Committee in 1922.
Tukhachevsky's forces engaged those of Polish commanders Józef Piłsudski and Władysław Sikorski at the pivotal Battle of Warsaw (12–25 August 1920), but Stalin refused to redirect his troops from Lwów to help Tukhachevsky.
During Stalin's reign his nicknames included:
He launched a massive purge against these internal enemies, putting them on rigged show trials and then having them executed or imprisoned in Siberian Gulags.
They diagnosed him with a cerebral hemorrhage (stroke) caused by hypertension (high blood pressure), with stomach hemorrhage facilitating.
Those officially defined as "kulaks", "kulak helpers", and, later, "ex-kulaks" were to be shot, placed into Gulag labor camps, or deported to remote areas of the country, depending on the charge.
During World War II, the Church was allowed a revival as a patriotic organization, and thousands of parishes were reactivated until a further round of suppression during Khrushchev's rule.
The Soviet military commander in Sofia assumed supreme authority, and the communists whom he instructed, including Kimon Georgiev, took full control of domestic politics.
The USSR was one of the first nations to recognize the new country.
Both countries provided military support to a new friendly state in North Korea.
At age 12, he injured his left arm in an accident involving a horse-drawn carriage, rendering it shorter and stiffer than its counterpart.
In the treating physicians' final report submitted to the Central Committee in July 1953, any mention of the stomach hemorrhage was "deleted or vastly subordinated to other information."
Stalin remains a controversial figure today, with many regarding him as a tyrant.
Shortly thereafter, Hitler issued a secret directive on the eventual attempts to invade the Soviet Union.
The flimsiest pretexts were often enough to brand someone an "enemy of the people", starting the cycle of public persecution and abuse, often proceeding to interrogation, torture and deportation, if not death.
Stalin felt dismayed in not being given much influence in occupied Japan.
Numerous towns, villages and cities were renamed after the Soviet leader (see List of places named after Stalin) and the Stalin Prize and Stalin Peace Prize were named in his honor.
After defeating the Axis powers on the Eastern Front, the Red Army captured Berlin in May 1945, effectively ending the war in Europe for the Allies.
While photographs and portraits portray Stalin as physically massive and majestic (he had several painters shot who did not depict him "right"), he was only  tall (President Harry S. Truman, who stood  himself, described Stalin as "a little squirt").
Accounts by Nikita Khrushchev and Anastas Mikoyan claim that, after the invasion, Stalin retreated to his dacha in despair for several days and did not participate in leadership decisions.
Germany later violated the agreement and launched a massive invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941.
The next day, in-between the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Soviet army invaded Japanese occupied Manchuria and quickly defeated the Kwantung Army.
He remained General Secretary until the post was abolished in 1952, concurrently serving as the Premier of the Soviet Union from 1941 onward.
In Asia, in addition to overrunning Manchuria, the Soviets had taken Korea from the Japanese and occupied it above the 38th parallel north.
At this conference, Stalin was elected to the Bolshevik Central Committee.
Besarion moved to Tiflis, leaving his wife and son behind in Gori.
Economic cooperation was so considerable that in 1939 Trotsky called Stalin  "Hitler's quartermaster".
Stalin and his supporters have highlighted the notion that socialism can be built and consolidated by a country ("Socialism in One Country") as underdeveloped as Russia during the 1920s.
Other historians hold it was largely the insufficient harvests of 1931 and 1932 caused by a variety of natural disasters that resulted in famine, with the successful harvest of 1933 ending the famine.
In November 1961, for example, the large Stalin Statue on Berlin's monumental Stalinallee (promptly renamed Karl-Marx-Allee) was removed in a clandestine operation.
In his most recent edition of ''The Great Terror'' (2007), Conquest states that while exact numbers may never be known with complete certainty, at least 15 million people were either executed or worked to death in the camps.
Communist governments loyal to the Soviet Union were established in most countries freed from German occupation by the Red Army, which later constituted the Eastern Bloc.
At the end of January 1953, Stalin's personal physician Miron Vovsi (cousin of Solomon Mikhoels, who was assassinated in 1948 at the orders of Stalin) was arrested within the frame of the plot.
In a March 2016 Levada Center poll 54% of Russians believe that Stalin played a positive role in the history and believed Stalin was a wise leader who led the Soviet Union to prosperity.
In February 1945, at the conference at Yalta, Stalin demanded a Soviet sphere of political influence in Eastern Europe.
Gradually, the history of revolution was transformed to a story about just two key characters: Lenin and Stalin.
The death toll from famine in the Soviet Union at this time is estimated at between 5 and 10 million people.
In Hungary, when the Soviets installed a communist government, Mátyás Rákosi, who described himself as "Stalin's best Hungarian disciple" and "Stalin's best pupil", took power.
The Bolsheviks lost the battles for both Lwów and Warsaw, and Stalin was blamed.
The occurrences of these diseases dropped to record low numbers, increasing life spans by decades.
There was friction between Stalin and Mao from the beginning.
Among these victims were old enemies, including Bukharin, Rykov, Kamenev and Zinoviev.
Beginning in late 1944, the Red Army occupied much of Eastern Europe during these conferences and the discussions shifted to a more intense focus on the reorganization of postwar Europe.
This post enabled Stalin to appoint many of his allies to government positions.
The North Korean Army struck in the pre-dawn hours of Sunday, 25 June 1950, crossing the 38th parallel behind a firestorm of artillery, beginning their invasion of South Korea.
They offered to exchange him for Field Marshal Friedrich Paulus, who had surrendered after Stalingrad, but Stalin turned the offer down, stating, "You have in your hands not only my son Yakov, but millions of my sons.
Science in the Soviet Union was under strict ideological control by Stalin and his government, along with art and literature.
He was a voracious reader and became a Georgian cultural nationalist.
At the time, while reviewing one such list, Stalin reportedly muttered to no one in particular: "Who's going to remember all this riff-raff in ten or twenty years' time?
The eastern part of Poland, Latvia, Estonia, Finland and part of Romania were recognized as parts of the Soviet sphere of influence, with Lithuania added in a second secret protocol in September 1939.
In 1936, Stalin announced that the society of the Soviet Union consisted of two non-antagonistic classes: workers and kolkhoz peasantry.
Mao ordered the flag be flown at half-mast, and banned recreation for three days; he also eulogized Stalin in an article "as a great leader, a Marxist theorist, and a friend of China".
According to Radzinsky and Montefiore, he also had a long-term relationship with his housekeeper Valentina Istomina, beginning in 1934.
The Soviet Union used numerous foreign experts to design new factories, supervise construction, instruct workers, and improve manufacturing processes.
Lenin nonetheless considered Stalin a loyal ally, and when he got mired in squabbles with Trotsky and other politicians, he decided to support Stalin.
Trotsky, Kamenev and Zinoviev grew increasingly isolated, and were eventually ejected from the Central Committee and then from the Party itself.
The Soviet Union soon after recognized Mao's People's Republic of China, which it regarded as a new ally.
In December 1934, the popular Communist Party boss in Leningrad, Sergei Kirov, was murdered.
Consequently, the Poles totally routed the four invading armies of Soviet Russia fighting for the Polish capital.
Stalin issued Order No.
At the beginning of the conference, Stalin repeated previous promises to Churchill that he would refrain from a "Sovietization" of Eastern Europe.
He was dismissed from office and later executed.
Approximately 350,000 Hungarian officials and intellectuals were purged from 1948 to 1956.
After the brief Nazi occupation of the Caucasus, the entire population of five of the small highland peoples and the Crimean Tatars – more than a million people in total – were deported without notice or any opportunity to take their possessions.
The phrase "death of one man is a tragedy, death of a million is a statistic" is sometimes attributed to Stalin, although there is no proof that he said it.
She died in Richland Center, Wisconsin on 22 November 2011, from complications of colon cancer.
Collectivization brought social change on a scale not seen since the abolition of serfdom in 1861 and alienation from control of the land and its produce.
Stalin's policies granted the Soviet people universal access to healthcare and education, effectively creating the first generation free from the fear of typhus, cholera, and malaria.
The translations were hilarious for the audience as Bolshakov spoke very basic English.
The Russian transliteration of his name Ио́сиф Виссарио́нович Джугашви́ли is in turn transliterated to English as "Iosif Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili".
Girls were given an adequate, equal education and women had equal rights in employment, improving lives for women and families.
Lenin formed a five-member Politburo, which included Stalin and Trotsky.
In a 2013 Q&A session, when asked whether Russia should restore statues of its Soviet-era leaders, Russian President Vladimir Putin replied "What is the essential difference between (Oliver) Cromwell and (Joseph) Stalin?
Who remembers the names now of the boyars Ivan the Terrible got rid of?
Researcher Robert Conquest, meanwhile, has revised his original estimate of up to 30 million victims down to 20&nbsp;million.
Results of a controversial poll taken in 2006 stated that over 35% of Russians would vote for Stalin if he were still alive.
These "special camps" were former Stalags, prisons, or Nazi concentration camps such as Sachsenhausen (special camp number 7) and Buchenwald (special camp number 2).
The doctors arrived in the early morning of 2 March when they changed Stalin's bedclothes and tended to him.
Stalin pushed for reparations from Germany without regard to the base minimum supply for German citizens' survival, which worried Truman and Churchill who thought that Germany would become a financial burden for Western powers.
In addition to failures regarding comprehensive recordings, as one additional example, Robert Gellately and Simon Sebag Montefiore argue that the many suspects beaten and tortured to death while in "investigative custody" were likely not to have been counted amongst the executed.
In addition to reparations, Stalin pushed for "war booty", which would permit the Soviet Union to directly seize property from conquered nations without quantitative or qualitative limitation, and a clause was added permitting this to occur with some limitations.
The Russian-language version of his birth name was Iosif Vissarionovich Dzhugashvili ().
60% of respondents did not want to live under a head of state who resembled Stalin.
Ellman also claims that, while this was not the only Soviet genocide (e.g., the Polish operation of the NKVD), it was the worst in terms of mass casualties.
In 1949, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Romania founded the Comecon in accordance with Stalin's desire to enforce Soviet domination of the lesser states of Central Europe and to mollify some states that had expressed interest in the Marshall Plan, and which were now, increasingly, cut off from their traditional markets and suppliers in Western Europe.
Stalin was raised in the Georgian Orthodox faith, but later gave it up.
Stalin introduced controversial military orders, such as Order No.
He then took a position in favor of supporting Alexander Kerensky's provisional government.
Nikita Khrushchev wrote that Stalin hinted him to incite anti-Semitism in the Ukraine, telling him that "the good workers at the factory should be given clubs so they can beat the hell out of those Jews."
He backed the Uyghur Communist Muslim leader Ehmetjan Qasim against the anti Communist Chinese Kuomintang forces.
During this period, the USSR became the second country in the world to successfully develop a nuclear weapon, as well as launching the Great Plan for the Transformation of Nature in response to another widespread famine and the Great Construction Projects of Communism.
Vasiliy rose through the ranks of the Soviet Air Force, officially dying of alcoholism in 1962; however, this is still in question.
On 9 March, the country observed a five-minute period of silence in Stalin's memory.
During World War II Stalin had supported the dictator of China, Chiang Kai-Shek, as a bulwark against Japan and had turned a blind eye to Chiang's mass killings of communists.
There was significant progress in "ideologically safe" domains, owing to the free Soviet education system and state-financed research.
