Kaufmann put him in touch with Gregor Strasser, a leading Nazi organizer in northern Germany, who hired him to work on their weekly newspaper and to do secretarial work for the regional party offices.
I have thought about it all and decided to stay here.
The resulting success took even Hitler and Goebbels by surprise: the party received 6.5 million votes nationwide and took 107 seats in the Reichstag, making it the second largest party in the country.
He joined the NSDAP around this time, becoming member number 8762.
In a process termed ''Gleichschaltung'' (co-ordination), the NSDAP proceeded to rapidly bring all aspects of life under control of the party.
After submitting the thesis and passing his oral examination, Goebbels earned his PhD in 1921.
From May 1940 he wrote frequent editorials that were published in ''Das Reich'' which were later read aloud over the radio.
Some Jews were shot immediately on arrival in destinations such as Riga and Kaunas.
Members of any chamber were not allowed to leave the country for their work without prior permission of their chamber.
Goebbels was subjected to a public speaking ban until the end of October.
He later died in hospital.
It was Waldberg who recommended Goebbels write his thesis on Wilhelm von Schütz.
After the Invasion of Poland in 1939, Goebbels used his propaganda ministry and the Reich chambers to control access to information domestically.
The destruction stopped after a conference held on 12 November, where Göring pointed out that the destruction of Jewish property was in effect the destruction of German property, since the intention was that it would all eventually be confiscated.
All civilian organisations, including agricultural groups, volunteer organisations, and sports clubs, had their leadership replaced with Nazi sympathisers or party members.
In the lead-up to the Sudetenland crisis in 1938, Goebbels took the initiative time and again to use propaganda to whip up sympathy for the Sudeten Germans while campaigning against the Czech government.
Hitler was opposed to the socialist leanings of the northern wing, stating it would mean "political bolshevization of Germany".
As a result of the Bamberg and Munich meetings, Strasser's new draft of the party programme was discarded.
His propaganda characterized the opposition as "November criminals", "Jewish wire-pullers", or a communist threat.
Goebbels was first offered the position of party ''Gauleiter'' for the Berlin section in August 1926.
In November 1938, the German diplomat Ernst vom Rath was killed in Paris by a young Jewish man.
He and Hitler arranged for the rally to be filmed.
Jews were attacked and synagogues destroyed all over Germany.
In this way anyone whose views were contrary to the regime could be excluded from working in their chosen field and thus silenced.
After Hitler's suicide, Goebbels was depressed.
In 1943, Goebbels began to pressure Hitler to introduce measures that would produce "total war", including closing businesses not essential to the war effort, conscripting women into the labour force, and enlisting men in previously exempt occupations into the Wehrmacht.
Goebbels was disappointed to not be given a post in Hitler's new cabinet.
In late 1924, Goebbels offered his services to Karl Kaufmann, who was ''Gauleiter'' (NSDAP district leader) for the Rhine-Ruhr District.
He believed that the more the people at home were involved in the war effort, the better their morale would be.
Throughout 1935 and 1936, hundreds of clergy, nuns, and lay leaders were arrested, often on trumped up charges of currency smuggling or sexual offences.
It did not seem to bother Goebbels that Gundolf was Jewish.
Goebbels converted the 1 May holiday from a celebration of workers' rights (observed as such especially by the communists) into a day celebrating the NSDAP.
Chuikov, as commander of the Soviet 8th Guards Army, commanded the Soviet forces in central Berlin.
However, Gundolf was no longer performing teaching duties, so he directed Goebbels to associate professor Max Freiherr von Waldberg.
On the evening of 1 May 1945, Goebbels arranged for an SS dentist, Helmut Kunz, to inject his six children with morphine so that when they were unconscious, an ampule of cyanide could be then crushed in each of their mouths.
Both of his parents were Catholics and from humble beginnings.
The propaganda ministry was organized into seven departments: administration and legal; mass rallies, public health, youth, and race; radio; national and foreign press; films and film censorship; art, music, and theatre; and protection against counter-propaganda, both foreign and domestic.
Berlin had little in the way of fortifications or artillery (or even ''Volkssturm'' units, 'civilian soldiers'), as almost everything had been sent to the front.
Untrained workers from elsewhere were not readily absorbed into the armaments industry, and likewise the new Wehrmacht recruits waited in barracks for their turn to be trained.
He was quick to fall in love, but easily tired of a relationship and moved on to someone new.
However, the regime continued to target the Christian churches and to try to weaken their influence.
The law required journalists to "regulate their work in accordance with National Socialism as a philosophy of life and as a conception of government."
"I love him&nbsp;...
The document made the Nazi policy clear: the Jewish population of Europe was to be sent to extermination camps in occupied areas of Poland and killed.
Hitler viewed Strasser's actions as a threat to his authority, and summoned 60&nbsp;''Gauleiters'' and party leaders, including Goebbels, to a special conference in Bamberg, in Streicher's ''Gau'' of Franconia, where he gave a two-hour speech repudiating Strasser's new political programme.
Albert Speer, Hitler's architect and later Minister for Armaments and War Production, later said the regime "made the complete use of all technical means for domination of its own country.
Goebbels was present at the arrest of SA leader Ernst Röhm in Munich.
Bernhard Rust was appointed as Minister of Culture, the post Goebbels was expecting to receive.
By 1930, the violence between the Nazis and communists led to local SA troop leader Horst Wessel being shot by two members of the Communist Party of Germany.
At the time of the Reoccupation of the Rhineland in 1936, Goebbels summed up his general attitude in his diary: "Now is the time for action.
At Freiburg, he met and fell in love with Anka Stalherm, who was three years his senior.
The following day, Goebbels and his wife committed suicide, after poisoning their six children with cyanide.
At his insistence, initially half the films made in wartime Germany were propaganda films (particularly on antisemitism) and war propaganda films (recounting both historical wars and current exploits of the Wehrmacht).
Receiving praise for doing well at these events led Goebbels to shape his political ideas to match Hitler's, and to admire and idolize him even more.
This gave him immunity from prosecution for a long list of outstanding charges, including a three-week jail sentence he received in April for insulting the deputy police chief Weiß.
Hitler made fewer public appearances and broadcasts as the war progressed, so Goebbels increasingly became the voice of the Nazi regime for the German people.
Goebbels was drawn to the NSDAP mostly because of Hitler's charisma and commitment to his beliefs.
While the NSDAP increased their number of seats and percentage of the vote, it was not the landslide expected by the party leadership.
The role of the new ministry, which set up its offices in the 18th-century Ordenspalais across from the Reich Chancellery, was to centralise Nazi control of all aspects of German cultural and intellectual life.
On 5 March, yet another Reichstag election took place, the last to be held before the defeat of the Nazis at the end of the Second World War.
Partly in response to being excluded from the Committee of Three, Goebbels pressured Hitler to introduce measures that would produce "total war", including closing businesses not essential to the war effort, conscripting women into the labour force, and enlisting men in previously exempt occupations into the Wehrmacht.
Goebbels continued his intensive antisemitic propaganda campaign that culminated in Hitler's 30 January 1939 Reichstag speech, which Goebbels helped to write:
Disseminating news from foreign broadcasts could result in the death penalty.
Members of Strasser's northern branch of the NSDAP, including Goebbels, had a more socialist outlook than the rival Hitler group in Munich.
Goebbels was also given control of other Nazi papers across the country, including the party's national newspaper, the ''Völkischer Beobachter'' (''People's Observer'').
By this time Goebbels had begun to distance himself from the church.
She also became an unofficial representative of the regime, receiving letters from all over Germany from women with questions about domestic matters or child custody issues.
One of Goebbels' first acts was to ban the evening edition of the ''Nationaler Sozialist''.
Intensive air raids on Berlin and other cities took the lives of thousands of people.
To his chagrin, his rival Joachim von Ribbentrop, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, continually challenged Goebbels' jurisdiction over the dissemination of international propaganda.
Aware of the value of publicity (both positive and negative), he deliberately provoked beer-hall battles and street brawls, including violent attacks on the Communist Party of Germany.
The rapid deterioration of the economy led to the resignation on 27 March 1930 of the coalition government that had been elected in 1928.
He studied literature and history at the universities of Bonn, Würzburg, Freiburg, and Munich, aided by a scholarship from the Albertus Magnus Society.
The Propaganda Ministry took over the broadcasting facilities of conquered countries immediately after surrender, and began broadcasting prepared material using the existing announcers as a way to gain the trust of the citizens.
Goebbels complained vehemently about the rival Strasser newspapers to Hitler, and admitted that their success was causing his own Berlin newspapers to be "pushed to the wall".
Topics for party propaganda included antisemitism, attacks on the Christian churches, and (after the start of the Second World War) attempting to shape morale.
He was aware throughout that the Jews were being exterminated, and completely supported this decision.
The lack of income from his literary works (he wrote two plays in 1923, neither of which sold) forced him to take jobs as a caller on the stock exchange and as a bank clerk in Cologne, a job which he detested.
Hitler was sentenced to five years prison, but was released on 20 December 1924, after serving just over a year.
Goebbels was particularly interested in controlling radio, which was then still a fairly new mass medium.
(H. R. Knickerbocker had written in 1941 that Goebbels and Himmler were "rivals in unpopularity", and that Goebbels "would be lucky to remain alive twenty-four hours after Hitler's protective hand was removed".)
The townsfolk lined the main street, which had been renamed in his honour.
Nevertheless, he continued to see her on and off until 1927.
He usually meticulously planned his speeches ahead of time, using pre-planned and choreographed inflection and gestures, but he was also able to improvise and adapt his presentation to make a good connection with his audience.
This was partly because Hitler had publicly stated just prior to the election that Point 17 of the party programme, which mandated the expropriation of land without compensation, would apply only to Jewish speculators and not private landholders.
Himmler, whose appointment as commander of Army Group Vistula had led to disaster on the Oder, was also in disgrace with Hitler.
Diary entries of mid-December 1923 forward show Goebbels was moving towards the ''völkisch'' nationalist movement.
The German Home Service, the Armed Forces Programme, and the German European Service were all rigorously controlled in everything from the information they were permitted to disseminate to the music they were allowed to play.
Göring's Luftwaffe attempted to retaliate with air raids on London in early 1944, but they no longer had sufficient aircraft to make much of an impact.
Much of this was spontaneous, but some was stage-managed as part of Goebbels' propaganda work.
"We are the masters of Germany", he commented in his diary entry of 3 May.
His writing during that time reflected his growing antisemitism and dislike for modern culture.
The programme was deeply unpopular.
Fortune favors the brave!
Hitler's speeches focused on blaming the country's economic woes on the Weimar Republic, particularly its adherence to the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, which called for war reparations that had proven devastating to the German economy.
For example, he initiated a programme for the collection of winter clothing and ski equipment for troops on the eastern front.
That evening Hitler and Goebbels both gave speeches at a beer hall rally.
It denounced the systematic hostility of the regime toward the church.
They would end their lives "side by side with the Führer".
His diary entries of the period show that he was well aware of the fate of the Jews.
His diaries, which he began in 1923 and continued for the rest of his life, provided an outlet for his desire to write.
Following the Allied invasion of Italy and the fall of Mussolini in September, he raised with Hitler the possibility of a separate peace, either with the Soviets or with Britain.
Through these efforts, he was able to free up an additional half a million men for military service.
Deportations of German Jews began in October 1941, with the first transport from Berlin leaving on 18 October.
By early 1943, the war produced a labour crisis for the regime.
In place of the usual ad hoc labour celebrations, he organized a huge party rally held at Tempelhof Field in Berlin.
Goebbels also undertook numerous speaking tours during these election campaigns.
To Goebbels' disappointment, circulation was initially small, only 2,000.
As a result of the propaganda campaign, enrolment in denominational schools dropped sharply, and by 1939 all such schools were disbanded or converted to public facilities.
He continued for several years to try to become a published author.
Voss later recounted Goebbels said: "It is a great pity that such a man is not with us any longer.
The NSDAP took advantage of the Reichstag fire of 27 February 1933, with Hindenburg passing the Reichstag Fire Decree the following day at Hitler's urging.
By this time, Goebbels had gained the position he had wanted so long&nbsp;– at the side of Hitler.
He and Magda may have discussed suicide and the fate of their young children in a long meeting on the night of 27 January.
Around 30,000 Jewish men were sent to concentration camps.
In February 1924, Hitler's trial for treason began in the wake of his failed attempt to seize power in the Beer Hall Putsch of November 8–9, 1923.
Hitler often vacillated on whether or not the ''Kirchenkampf'' (church struggle) should be a priority, but his frequent inflammatory comments on the issue were enough to convince Goebbels to intensify his work on the issue in the first half of 1937.
Goebbels was one of twelve NSDAP members to gain election to the Reichstag.
He composed the text of Hitler's decree authorizing the Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses, held on 1 April.
Many of Goebbels' campaign posters used violent imagery such as a giant half-clad male destroying political opponents or other perceived enemies such as "International High Finance".
That's the terrible thing: my inner support has been taken away", he wrote in his diary.
He enjoyed staying at the Goebbels' Berlin apartment, where he could relax.
After this was rejected, Goebbels decided that further efforts were futile.
After joining the NSDAP and meeting Hitler, his antisemitism grew and became more radical.
Adulation of Hitler was the focus of the 1934 Nuremberg Rally, where his moves were carefully choreographed.
In 1936, Goebbels met the Czech actress Lída Baarová and by the winter of 1937 began an intense affair with her.
Individuals selected for this position were chosen based on experiential, educational, and racial criteria.
Goebbels was successful at his job, however; ''Life'' wrote in 1938 that "personally he likes nobody, is liked by nobody, and runs the most efficient Nazi department."
I have nowhere to go because with little children I will not be able to make it, especially with a leg like mine...' "
There are several different accounts of this event.
For the following year's event, Goebbels was involved in the planning for the first time.
Even so, he was unable to persuade the majority of Germans to welcome the prospect of war.
He underwent a failed operation to correct it just prior to starting grammar school.
To boost morale, Goebbels continued to publish propaganda to the effect that further improvements to these weapons would have a decisive impact on the outcome of the war.
Goebbels had five siblings: Konrad (1893–1947), Hans (1895–1949), Maria (1896–1896), Elisabeth (1901–1915), and Maria (1910–1949), who married the German filmmaker Max W. Kimmich in 1938.
In late 1930 Goebbels met Magda Quandt, a divorcée who had joined the party a few months earlier.
After receiving an enthusiastic response to his speech of 30 January 1943 on the topic, Goebbels believed he had the support of the German people in his call for total war.
In 1933, Hitler signed the ''Reichskonkordat'' (Reich Concordat), a treaty with the Vatican that required the regime to honour the independence of Catholic institutions and prohibited clergy from involvement in politics.
Goebbels' SS adjutant Günther Schwägermann testified in 1948 that they walked ahead of him up the stairs and out into the Chancellery garden.
But there is nothing to be done.
Hitler was very fond of Magda Goebbels and the children.
Discriminatory measures he instituted in Berlin in the early years of the regime included bans against their using public transport and requiring that Jewish shops be marked as such.
In addition to his propaganda efforts, Goebbels actively promoted the persecution of the Jews through pogroms, legislation, and other actions.
"Such a sparkling mind can be my leader.
Some of these measures were implemented in an edict of 13 January, but to Goebbels' dismay, Göring demanded that his favourite restaurants in Berlin should remain open, and Lammers successfully lobbied Hitler to have women with children exempted from conscription, even if they had child care available.
His next speech, the Sportpalast speech of 18 February 1943, was a passionate demand for his audience to commit to total war, which he presented as the only way to stop the Bolshevik onslaught and save the German people from destruction.
Campaigning was undertaken on a huge scale, with thousands of meetings and speeches held all over the country.
What one calls a genius."
Privately, Goebbels was conflicted at pushing the case with Hitler since he did not want to lose the confidence of his Führer.
In actuality, the defence of areas other than Berlin remained in the hands of the local ''Gauleiters'', and his main tasks were limited to providing immediate aid to the affected civilians and using propaganda to improve their morale.
Results were poor, with the NSDAP losing nearly 100,000 voters and earning only 2.6 per cent of the vote nationwide.
Schwägermann then walked up the remaining stairs and, once outside, saw their lifeless bodies.
Upon receiving the news, Goebbels was relieved the "crisis" with the Strassers was finally over and glad that Otto Strasser had lost all power.
Results in Berlin were even worse, where they attained only 1.4 per cent of the vote.
Goebbels widely publicised the trials in his propaganda campaigns, showing the cases in the worst possible light.
The committee members were Hans Lammers (head of the Reich Chancellery), Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, chief of the ''Oberkommando der Wehrmacht'' (Armed Forces High Command; OKW), and Martin Bormann, who controlled the Party.
At Hitler's behest, the ''Volkssturm'' (People's Storm) – a nationwide militia of men previously considered unsuitable for military service – was formed on 18 October 1944.
He was particularly adept at using the relatively new media of radio and film for propaganda purposes.
When other Nazi leaders urged Hitler to leave Berlin and establish a new centre of resistance in the National Redoubt in Bavaria, Goebbels opposed this, arguing for a last heroic stand in Berlin.
On 6 March 1942, Goebbels received a copy of the minutes of the Wannsee Conference.
But he replied: 'The captain must not leave his sinking ship.
At the same time, Goebbels implemented changes to have more "entertaining material" in radio and film produced for the public, decreeing in late 1942 that 20 per cent of the films should be propaganda and 80 per cent light entertainment.
In the last months of the war, Goebbels' speeches and articles took on an increasingly apocalyptic tone.
In 1932, Goebbels published a pamphlet of his family tree to refute the rumors that his grandmother was of Jewish ancestry.
The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service, passed on 7 April 1933, forced all non-Aryans to retire from the legal profession and civil service.
In 1921 he wrote a semi-autobiographical novel, ''Michael'', a three-part work of which only Parts I and III have survived.
Historians, including Richard J. Evans and Roger Manvell, speculate that Goebbels' lifelong pursuit of women may have been in compensation for his physical disabilities.
He joined the Nazi Party in 1924, and worked with Gregor Strasser in their northern branch.
By the beginning of 1945, with the Soviets on the Oder River and the Western Allies preparing to cross the Rhine, he could no longer disguise the fact that defeat was inevitable.
They moved into the underground ''Vorbunker'', part of Hitler's underground bunker complex, on 22 April 1945.
In response to the persecution, Pope Pius XI had the ''"Mit brennender Sorge"'' ("With Burning Concern") Encyclical smuggled into Germany for Passion Sunday 1937 and read from every pulpit.
The ban on the NSDAP was lifted in early 1928, in time for the Reichstag elections, held on 20 May.
The Goebbels family included Harald Quandt (Magda's son from her first marriage; born 1921), plus Helga (1932), Hilde (1934), Helmuth (1935), Holde (1937), Hedda (1938), and Heide (1940).
Like other NSDAP officials, Goebbels had to deal with Hitler's leadership style of giving contradictory orders to his subordinates, while placing them into positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped.
It was around this time that he met and started having an affair with the actress Lída Baarová, whom he continued to see until 1938.
Seeing it as a threat to their power, Goebbels, Göring, and Speer worked together to bring it down.
Hitler then took secretary Traudl Junge to another room and dictated his last will and testament.
Material in the paper was highly anti-communist and antisemitic.
A major focus of Nazi propaganda was Hitler himself, who was glorified as a heroic and infallible leader and became the focus of a cult of personality.
He was one of the few top NSDAP officials to do so publicly.
His entrance (almost always late) was timed for maximum emotional impact.
Catholic schools were required to reduce religious instruction and crucifixes were removed from state buildings.
Goebbels' letter informed Chuikov of Hitler's death and requested a ceasefire.
Goebbels gave him the derogatory nickname "Isidore" and subjected him to a relentless campaign of Jew-baiting in the hope of provoking a crackdown he could then exploit.
The first Nazi concentration camps (initially created to house political dissenters) were founded shortly after Hitler seized power.
He also found work as a journalist and was published in the local newspaper.
He was rejected for military service in World War I due to his deformity.
Goebbels' notion that these men could effectively serve on the front lines against Soviet tanks and artillery was unrealistic at best.
This was the first of several pieces of legislation that dismantled democracy in Germany and put a totalitarian dictatorship—headed by Hitler—in its place.
Hitler suggested watering the beer and degrading the quality of the cigarettes so that more could be produced, but Goebbels refused, saying the cigarettes were already of such low quality that it was impossible to make them any worse.
For two further elections held in 1932, Goebbels organized massive campaigns that included rallies, parades, speeches, and Hitler travelling around the country by airplane with the slogan "the Führer over Germany".
In an effort to stabilize the country and improve economic conditions, Hindenburg appointed Hitler as Reich chancellor on 30 January 1933.
One of Goebbels' first productions was staging the Day of Potsdam, a ceremonial passing of power from Hindenburg to Hitler, held in Potsdam on 21 March.
Goebbels knew how to play on Hitler's fantasies, encouraging him to see the hand of providence in the death of United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt on 12 April.
Goebbels capitulated completely, offering Hitler his total loyalty&nbsp;– a pledge that was clearly sincere, and that he adhered to until the end of his life.
Goebbels was one of the most enthusiastic supporters of Hitler aggressively pursuing Germany's expansionist policies sooner rather than later.
Thereafter, Joseph and Magda seemed to reach a truce until the end of September.
Magda had a long conversation with Hitler about it on 15 August 1938.
Strasser disagreed with Hitler on many parts of the party platform, and in November 1926 began working on a revision.
Goebbels promoted the development of films with a Nazi slant, and ones that contained subliminal or overt propaganda messages.
