These viewpoints are considered by many scholars to be fringe revisionist history.
McCarthy characterized Truman and the Democratic Party as soft on, or even in league with, Communists, and spoke of the Democrats' "twenty years of treason".
As a nation we have come into our full inheritance at a tender age.
His advocacy in this area was associated by critics with a $20,000 personal loan McCarthy received from a Pepsi bottling executive, earning the Senator the derisive nickname "The Pepsi-Cola Kid".
Eisenhower refused, saying privately "nothing would please him McCarthy more than to get the publicity that would be generated by a public repudiation by the President."
McCarthy made various attempts to investigate, and hold accountable (as the practice was still against the law in many locations), persons whom he accused, or threatened to publicly accuse, of homosexuality.
Senator Margaret Chase Smith, a Maine Republican, delivered her "Declaration of Conscience" on June 1, 1950, calling for an end to the use of smear tactics without mentioning McCarthy or anyone else by name.
McCarthy's staff was heavily involved in the campaign, and collaborated in the production of a campaign tabloid that contained a composite photograph doctored to make it appear that Tydings was in intimate conversation with Communist leader Earl Russell Browder.
McCarthy experienced a meteoric rise in national profile on February 9, 1950, when he gave a Lincoln Day speech to the Republican Women's Club of Wheeling, West Virginia.
McCarthy died in Bethesda Naval Hospital on May 2, 1957, at the age of 48.
At the time of McCarthy's speech, communism was a significant concern in the United States.
McCarthy himself was taken aback by the massive media response to the Wheeling speech, and he was accused of continually revising both his charges and figures.
Frederick Woltman, a reporter with a long-standing reputation as a staunch anti-communist, wrote a five-part series of articles criticizing McCarthy in the ''New York World-Telegram.''
He suggested that a majority of those on the lists could legitimately have been considered security risks, but that a substantial minority could not.
He added, "I don't feel I've been lynched."
The Zwicker count was dropped by the full Senate on the grounds that McCarthy's conduct was arguably "induced" by Zwicker's own behavior.
This concern was exacerbated by the actions of the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe, the victory of the communists in the Chinese Civil War, the Soviets' development of a nuclear weapon the year before, and by the contemporary controversy surrounding Alger Hiss and the confession of Soviet spy Klaus Fuchs.
A Senate subcommittee later investigated this election and referred to it as "a despicable, back-street type of campaign", as well as recommending that the use of defamatory literature in a campaign be made grounds for expulsion from the Senate.
Six other Republican Senators – Wayne Morse, Irving Ives, Charles W. Tobey, Edward John Thye, George Aiken, and Robert C. Hendrickson – joined her in condemning McCarthy's tactics.
In that letter, Byrnes said State Department security investigations had resulted in "recommendation against permanent employment" for 284 persons, and that 79 of these had been removed from their jobs; this left 205 still on the State Department's payroll.
Barely a month after McCarthy's Wheeling speech, the term "McCarthyism" was coined by ''Washington Post'' cartoonist Herbert Block.
Among those implicated in files later made public from the Venona project and Soviet sources were Cedric Belfrage, Frank Coe, Lauchlin Currie, Harold Glasser, David Karr, Mary Jane Keeney, and Leonard Mins.
However, under the advice of conservative colleagues who were fearful that Eisenhower could lose Wisconsin if he alienated McCarthy supporters, he deleted this defense from later versions of his speech.
His mother, Bridget (Tierney), was from County Tipperary, Ireland.
Senator McCarthy's first three years in the Senate were unremarkable.
McCarthy subpoenaed Peress to appear before his subcommittee on January 30, 1954.
Although his impact on the elections was unclear, McCarthy was credited as a key Republican campaigner.
On several occasions Eisenhower is reported to have said of McCarthy that he did not want to "get down in the gutter with that guy".
The Democrats present unanimously favored condemnation and the Republicans were split evenly.
Wisconsin's constitution stipulates the number of signatures needed to force a recall election must exceed one-quarter the number of voters in the most recent gubernatorial election, requiring the anti-McCarthy movement to gather some 404,000 signatures in sixty days.
Political historian David Barrett uncovered Hillenkoetter's notes, which reveal the remainder of the statement: "While this agency will never employ homosexuals on its rolls, it might conceivably be necessary, and in the past has actually been valuable, to use known homosexuals as agents in the field.
Ed Kretzman, a policy advisor for the service, would later comment that it was VOA's "darkest hour when Senator McCarthy and his chief hatchet man, Roy Cohn, almost succeeded in muffling it".
Cohn toured Europe examining the card catalogs of the State Department libraries looking for works by authors he deemed inappropriate.
In Gallup polls of January 1954, 50% of those polled had a positive opinion of McCarthy.
His primary achievement has been in confusing the public mind, as between the internal and the external threats of Communism.
He went on the wagon (for him this meant beer instead of whiskey) for days and weeks at a time.
During the Korean War, when President Truman dismissed General Douglas MacArthur, McCarthy charged that Truman and his advisors must have planned the dismissal during late-night sessions when "they've had time to get the President cheerful" on bourbon and Bénédictine.
Herman quotes John Cogley of ''Commonweal'', a McCarthy critic, as stating, "A totally different selection of film would turn McCarthy into a man on a shining white steed—infinitely reasonable, burdened with the onus of single-handedly cleaning out subversives in the face of violent criticism."
He remains a major character in the 1962 film version.
He fought against continuation of wartime price controls, especially on sugar.
Unlike many Democrats, John F. Kennedy, who served in the Senate with McCarthy from 1953 until the latter's death in 1957, never attacked McCarthy.
The Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, usually chaired by McCarthy himself, was given the task of adjudicating these conflicting charges.
The previous cautious assessments had to be revised.
In the 1950 Maryland Senate election, McCarthy campaigned for John Marshall Butler in his race against four-term incumbent Millard Tydings, with whom McCarthy had been in conflict during the Tydings Committee hearings.
After reviewing evidence from Venona and other sources, historian John Earl Haynes concluded that, of 159 people identified on lists used or referenced by McCarthy, evidence was substantial that nine had aided Soviet espionage efforts.
McCarthy died at Bethesda Naval Hospital in Bethesda, Maryland on May 2, 1957, at the age of 48.
After being elected president, Eisenhower made it clear to those close to him that he did not approve of McCarthy and he worked actively to diminish his power and influence.
declared that "if Marshall were merely stupid, the laws of probability would dictate that part of his decisions would serve this country's interest"; and most famously, accused him of being part of "a conspiracy so immense and an infamy so black as to dwarf any previous venture in the history of man".
In his conclusion, Murrow said of McCarthy:
It was during this campaign that McCarthy started publicizing his war-time nickname "Tail-Gunner Joe", using the slogan, "Congress needs a tail-gunner".
McCarthy won reelection in 1952 with 54% of the vote, defeating former Wisconsin State Attorney General Thomas E. Fairchild but badly trailing a Republican ticket which swept the state of Wisconsin; all the other Republican winners, including Eisenhower himself, received at least 60% of the Wisconsin vote.
He dated two of Kennedy's daughters, Patricia and Eunice, and was godfather to Robert F. Kennedy's first child, Kathleen Kennedy.
In succeeding years after his 1950 speech, McCarthy made additional accusations of Communist infiltration into the State Department, the administration of President Harry S. Truman, the Voice of America, and the United States Army.
He had always been a heavy drinker, and there were times in those seasons of discontent when he drank more than ever.
Leadership, he explained, meant patience and conciliation, not 'hitting people over the head'."
As his fame grew, McCarthy increasingly became the target of ridicule and parody.
After two months of hearings and deliberations, the Watkins Committee recommended that McCarthy be censured on two of the 46 counts: his contempt of the Subcommittee on Rules and Administration, which had called him to testify in 1951 and 1952, and his abuse of General Zwicker in 1954.
After a worried Rhode Island newspaper editor protested to the syndicate that provided the strip, creator Walt Kelly began depicting the Malarkey character with a bag over his head, concealing his features.
Many Democrats were incensed at McCarthy's attack on the State Department of a Democratic administration, and had hoped to use the hearings to discredit him.
McCarthy's judicial career attracted some controversy because of the speed with which he dispatched many of his cases as he worked to clear the heavily backlogged docket he had inherited.
During the hearings, McCarthy moved on from his original unnamed Lee list cases and used the hearings to make charges against nine specific people: Dorothy Kenyon, Esther Brunauer, Haldore Hanson, Gustavo Durán, Owen Lattimore, Harlow Shapley, Frederick Schuman, John S. Service, and Philip Jessup.
became a rallying cry among many anti-communists and McCarthy supporters.
Kennan wrote that under the Roosevelt administration: "warnings which should have been heeded fell too often on deaf or incredulous ears."
Peress refused to answer McCarthy's questions, citing his rights under the Fifth Amendment.
McCarthy's methods also brought on the disapproval and opposition of many.
By the end of 1953, McCarthy had altered the "twenty years of treason" catchphrase he had coined for the preceding Democratic administrations and began referring to "twenty-''one'' years of treason" to include Eisenhower's first year in office.
McCarthy worked his way through college from 1930 to 1935, studying first engineering, then law, and receiving an LL.B.
The Democratic chairman of the subcommittee, Senator Millard Tydings, was reported to have said, "Let me have him McCarthy for three days in public hearings, and he'll never show his face in the Senate again."
Some biographers say this was caused, or exacerbated, by alcoholism.
Senator Alan K. Simpson has written, "The so-called 'Red Scare' has been the main focus of most historians of that period of time.
McCarthy's opposition failed to gain any traction, however, and he was the only Senator to vote against Brennan's confirmation.
McCarthy was born in 1908 in the Town of Grand Chute in Outagamie County, Wisconsin, and attended Marquette University, studying different subjects before deciding on law and earning an LL.B.
Shortly thereafter it came to the attention of the military bureaucracy that Peress, who was a member of the left-wing American Labor Party, had declined to answer questions about his political affiliations on a loyalty-review form.
And he did not snap back quickly.
William Bennett, former Reagan Administration Secretary of Education, summed up this perspective in his 2007 book ''America: The Last Best Hope'':
He declared that "coexistence with Communists is neither possible nor honorable nor desirable.
He entered Little Wolf High School, in Manawa, Wisconsin, when he was 20 and graduated in one year.
But he was not always drunk.
In a November 1953 speech that was carried on national television, McCarthy began by praising the Eisenhower Administration for removing "1,456 Truman holdovers who were&nbsp;... gotten rid of because of Communist connections and activities or perversion".
A more serious fictional portrayal of McCarthy played a central role in the 1959 novel ''The Manchurian Candidate'' by Richard Condon.
We must not confuse dissent with disloyalty.
The major journalistic media refused to print the story, and no notable McCarthy biographer has accepted the rumor as probable.
McCarthy, who admitted the assault, claimed he merely "slapped" Pearson.
On August 27, Proxmire won the election, serving in the seat for 32 years until the end of his fifth full term at the start of 1989.
McCarthy was critical of the convictions because of allegations of torture during the interrogations that led to the German soldiers' confessions.
In response to McCarthy's charges, the Senate voted unanimously to investigate, and the Tydings Committee hearings were called.
However, it was revealed that McCarthy had written this letter himself, in his capacity as intelligence officer.
The two counts on which the Senate ultimately voted were:
HUAC was active for 29 years.
McCarthy responded by sending a message to Secretary of the Army, Robert T. Stevens, demanding that Peress be court-martialed.
Similarly, the Subversive Activities Control Board (SACB) was a five-member committee established by the McCarran Internal Security Act, which had a mandate, similar to HUAC and inspired by McCarthy, to locate and investigate so-called "subversives", or those sympathetic to the Communists.
The explanation was that Malarkey was hiding from a Rhode Island Red hen, a clear reference to the controversy over the Malarkey character.
However, Kennan made his assessment before the revelation of the Venona decrypts.
With the beginning of his second term as senator in 1953, McCarthy was made chairman of the Senate Committee on Government Operations.
McCarthy established a bond with the powerful Kennedy family, which had high visibility among Catholics.
With little support from organized labor or the state Democratic Party, the roughly organized recall effort attracted national attention, particularly during the concurrent Army-McCarthy hearings.
McCarthy's biographers agree that he was a changed man after the censure; declining both physically and emotionally, he became a "pale ghost of his former self" in the words of Fred J. Cook.
The only senator not on record was John F. Kennedy, who was hospitalized for back surgery; Kennedy never indicated how he would have voted.
In 1953, the popular daily comic strip ''Pogo'' introduced the character Simple J. Malarkey, a pugnacious and conniving wildcat with an unmistakable physical resemblance to McCarthy.
When McCarthy seemed hesitant, Van Susteren asked, "You got shit in your blood?"
He was active in labor-management issues, with a reputation as a moderate Republican.
The subcommittee then turned to the overseas library program of the International Information Agency.
I am certain that if Josef Stalin or a member of the Politburo or a high satellite official were known to be a homosexual, no member of this committee or of the Congress would balk against our use of any technique to penetrate their operations... after all, intelligence and espionage is, at best, an extremely dirty business."
Asked by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. why he avoided criticism of McCarthy, Kennedy said, "Hell, half my voters in Massachusetts look on McCarthy as a hero."
In the general election against Democratic opponent Howard J. McMurray, McCarthy won 61.2% to Democrat McMurray's 37.3%, and thus joined Senator Wiley, whom he had challenged unsuccessfully two years earlier, in the Senate.
Also in 1954, the radio comedy team Bob and Ray parodied McCarthy with the character "Commissioner Carstairs" in their soap opera spoof "Mary Backstayge, Noble Wife".
We will not be driven by fear into an age of unreason, if we dig deep in our history and our doctrine, and remember that we are not descended from fearful men—not from men who feared to write, to speak, to associate and to defend causes that were, for the moment, unpopular.
He was now regarded as one of the most powerful men in the Senate and was treated with new-found deference by his colleagues.
The Murrow shows, together with the televised Army–McCarthy hearings of the same year, were the major causes of a nationwide popular opinion backlash against McCarthy, in part because for the first time his statements were being publicly challenged by noteworthy figures.
He said, "The use of homosexuals as a control mechanism over individuals recruited for espionage is a generally accepted technique which has been used at least on a limited basis for many years."
Since the late 1940s, the government had been dismissing about five homosexuals a month from civilian posts; by 1954, the number had grown twelve-fold.
He served as an intelligence briefing officer for a dive bomber squadron in the Solomon Islands and Bougainville.
With his victory in the 1952 presidential race, Dwight Eisenhower became the first Republican president in 20 years.
A group of senators denounced this "shocking and unwarranted attack against the American clergy" and demanded that McCarthy dismiss Matthews.
At that point, the gallery erupted in applause and a recess was called.
McCarthy himself said, "I wouldn't exactly call it a vote of confidence."
And whose fault is that?
Because of McCarthy's various lies about his military heroism, his "Tail-Gunner Joe" nickname was sarcastically used as a term of mockery by his critics.
It was reported that McCarthy suffered from cirrhosis of the liver and was frequently hospitalized for alcoholism.
The subcommittee first investigated allegations of Communist influence in the Voice of America, at that time administered by the State Department's United States Information Agency.
McCarthy then recited the list of supposedly pro-communist authors before his subcommittee and the press.
The official cause of his death was listed as acute hepatitis, an inflammation of the liver.
This was a subcommittee of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations set up in February 1950 to conduct "a full and complete study and investigation as to whether persons who are disloyal to the United States are, or have been, employed by the Department of State".
You've done enough.
He had been reversed often by the Wisconsin Supreme Court, and he was so inefficient that he had piled up a huge backlog of cases."
Wisconsin had strict divorce laws, but when McCarthy heard divorce cases, he would expedite them whenever possible, and he made the needs of children involved in contested divorces a priority.
We proclaim ourselves, as indeed we are, the defenders of freedom, wherever it continues to exist in the world, but we cannot defend freedom abroad by deserting it at home.
Senator McCarthy's zeal to uncover subversion and espionage led to disturbing excesses.
The suggestion that La Follette had been guilty of war profiteering was deeply damaging, and McCarthy won the primary nomination 207,935 votes to 202,557.
Some libraries went as far as burning the newly forbidden books.
Not a few “but hundreds of American Communists abetted Soviet espionage in the United States” in the 1930s and 1940s.
McCarthy referred to Smith and her fellow Senators as "Snow White and the six dwarfs".
Its final report, written by the Democratic majority, concluded that the individuals on McCarthy's list were neither Communists nor pro-communist, and said the State Department had an effective security program.
McCarthy is usually quoted to have said: "The State Department is infested with communists.
This response did not go over well with viewers, and the result was a further decline in McCarthy's popularity.
In an impassioned defense of Fisher, Welch responded, "Until this moment, Senator, I think I never really gauged your cruelty or your recklessness&nbsp;..." When McCarthy resumed his attack, Welch interrupted him: "Let us not assassinate this lad further, Senator.
One of the nation's foremost anti-communists, Matthews had formerly been staff director for the House Un-American Activities Committee.
Numerous eyewitnesses, including Senate aide George Reedy and journalist Tom Wicker, reported finding him alarmingly drunk in the Senate.
In the campaign, McCarthy exaggerated Werner's age of 66, claiming that he was 73, and so allegedly too old and infirm to handle the duties of his office.
Oshinsky disputes this, stating that "Eisenhower was known as a harmonizer, a man who could get diverse factions to work toward a common goal.&nbsp;...
Chicago newspapermen later tallied 335,000 names while another 50,000 were said to be hidden in Minneapolis, with other lists buried on Sauk County farms.
Of far greater importance to McCarthy than the committee's inconclusive final report was the negative effect that the extensive exposure had on his popularity.
Outside of a small circle of colleagues, he was soon an isolated figure in the Senate.
In the same polls, those with a negative opinion of McCarthy increased from 29% to 45%.
Dirksen, and indeed all the candidates McCarthy supported, won their elections, and those he opposed lost.
Marshall was a highly respected General and statesman, remembered today as the architect of victory and peace, the latter based on the Marshall Plan for post-war reconstruction of Europe, for which he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1953.
SACB was active for 22 years.
All anyone can know for sure is that the Soviet penetration into the United States government was massive.
In a speech delivered in Green Bay, Eisenhower declared that while he agreed with McCarthy's goals, he disagreed with his methods.
Diplomat George Kennan drew on his State Department experience to provide his view that "The penetration of the American governmental services by members or agents (conscious or otherwise) of the American Communist Party in the late 1930s was not a figment of the imagination ... it really existed; and it assumed proportions which, while never overwhelming, were also not trivial."
Journalist Richard Rovere (1959) wrote:
The Wisconsin Supreme Court reversed a low percentage of the cases he heard, but he was also censured in 1941 for having lost evidence in a price fixing case.
and that Murrow used "partial truth and innuendo".
McCarthy also began investigations into the numerous homosexuals working in the foreign policy bureaucracy, who were considered prime candidates for blackmail by the Soviets.
However, it is generally agreed that he produced a piece of paper that he claimed contained a list of known Communists working for the State Department.
After hearing 32 witnesses and two million words of testimony, the committee concluded that McCarthy himself had not exercised any improper influence on Schine's behalf, but that Cohn had engaged in "unduly persistent or aggressive efforts".
"Mixed in with the hysterics were some logic, though: homosexuals faced condemnation and discrimination, and most of them—wishing to conceal their orientation--were vulnerable to blackmail."
McCarthy reportedly chose the Marines with the hope that being a veteran of this branch of the military would serve him best in his future political career.
McCarthy, newly married to Jean Kerr, cut short his honeymoon to open the investigation.
The Kennedy patriarch hoped that one of his sons would be president.
Congressman George H. Bender noted, "There is a growing impatience with the Republican Party.
The resolution was initially written without any reference to particular actions or misdeeds on McCarthy's part.
In fact, by the time of McCarthy's speech only about 65 of the employees mentioned in the Byrnes letter were still with the State Department, and all of these had undergone further security checks.
Truman vetoed the act, sending Congress a lengthy veto message in which he criticized specific provisions as "the greatest danger to freedom of speech, press, and assembly since the Alien and Sedition Laws of 1798," and called it a "mockery of the Bill of Rights" and a "long step toward totalitarianism".
Challenging efforts aimed at the "rehabilitation" of McCarthy, Haynes argues that McCarthy's attempts to "make anti-communism a partisan weapon" actually "threatened the post-War anti-Communist consensus", thereby ultimately harming anti-Communist efforts more than helping.
From 1950 onward, McCarthy continued to exploit the fear of Communism and to press his accusations that the government was failing to deal with Communism within its ranks.
In reciting the information from the Lee list cases, McCarthy consistently exaggerated, representing the hearsay of witnesses as facts and converting phrases such as "inclined towards Communism" to "a Communist".
As McCarthy became increasingly combative towards the Eisenhower Administration, Eisenhower faced repeated calls that he confront McCarthy directly.
It is widely accepted that most of McCarthy's cases were selected from the so-called "Lee list", a report that had been compiled three years earlier for the House Appropriations Committee.
In the same speech, he criticized Eisenhower for not doing enough to secure the release of missing American pilots shot down over China during the Korean War.
Robert Kennedy was chosen by McCarthy as a counsel for his investigatory committee, but resigned after six months due to disagreements with McCarthy and committee Counsel Roy Marcus Cohn.
There is no way for a citizen of a republic to abdicate his responsibilities.
He charged that the U.S. Army was engaged in a coverup of judicial misconduct, but never presented any evidence to support the accusation.
Have you left no sense of decency?"
Based on his recommendation, it decided not to pursue McCarthy on the issue of communists in government:  "The attorney feels it is almost impossible to counter McCarthy effectively on the issue of kicking Communists out of Government, because he generally has some basis, no matter how slight, for his claim of Communist connection."
He was admitted to the bar in 1935.
Herblock's cartoon that coined the term ''McCarthyism'' appeared less than two months after the senator's now famous February 1950 speech in Wheeling, West Virginia.
This committee opened hearings on August 31.
Many other scholars, including some generally regarded as conservative, have opposed these views.
in the hearings, one of the most prominent attacks on McCarthy's methods was an episode of the television documentary series ''See It Now'', hosted by journalist Edward R. Murrow, which was broadcast on March 9, 1954.
In Salt Lake City, Utah, a few days later, he cited a figure of 57, and in the Senate on February 20, he claimed 81.
McCarthy claimed that the accusation was made in bad faith, in retaliation for his questioning of Zwicker the previous year.
He was far less well liked among fellow senators, however, who found him quick-tempered and prone to impatience and even rage.
In 1952, using rumors collected by Pearson, Nevada publisher Hank Greenspun wrote that McCarthy was a homosexual.
We will not walk in fear, one of another.
McCarthy hid the source of his list, stating that he had penetrated the "iron curtain" of State Department secrecy with the aid of "some good, loyal Americans in the State Department".
The pamphlet was clearly labeled a composite.
McCarthy has been accused of attempting to discredit his critics and political opponents by accusing them of being Communists or communist sympathizers.
Ultimately, the controversy he generated led him to be censured by the United States Senate.
The Army consulted with an attorney familiar with McCarthy to determine the best approach to attacking him.
Several members of the U.S. Senate had opposed McCarthy well before 1953.
In the primaries, voters in both parties turned away from McCarthy's legacy.
Soon after receiving the chair to the Subcommittee on Investigations, McCarthy appointed Joseph Brown Matthews (generally known as J.
Shortly after this, a poll of the Senate press corps voted McCarthy "the worst U.S. senator" currently in office.
Some of the resistance was due to concern about usurping the Senate's rules regarding committee chairs and seniority.
We must remember always that accusation is not proof and that conviction depends upon evidence and due process of law.
McCarthy stepped in and said that if Welch was so concerned about persons aiding the Communist Party, he should check on a man in his Boston law office named Fred Fisher, who had once belonged to the National Lawyers Guild, a progressive lawyers association.
Mindful of the anti-Catholic prejudice Al Smith faced during his 1928 campaign for that office, Joseph Kennedy supported McCarthy as a national Catholic politician who might pave the way for a younger Kennedy's presidential candidacy.
As soon as the DCI said these words, his aide signaled to take the remainder of the DCI's testimony off the record.
The Republican party also held a majority in the House of Representatives and the Senate.
