In Heidelberg, Gibbs was exposed to the work of physicists Gustav Kirchhoff and Hermann von Helmholtz, and chemist Robert Bunsen.
Little else is known of his religious or political views, which he mostly kept to himself.
Gibbs never married, living all his life in his childhood home with his sister Julia and her husband Addison Van Name, who was the Yale librarian.
His work on the applications of thermodynamics was instrumental in transforming physical chemistry into a rigorous deductive science.
British scientists, including Maxwell, had relied on Hamilton's quaternions in order to express the dynamics of physical quantities, like the electric and magnetic fields, having both a magnitude and a direction in three-dimensional space.
Gibbs returned to Yale in June 1869 and briefly taught French to engineering students.
Van Name had withheld the family papers from her and, after her book was published in 1942 to positive literary but mixed scientific reviews, he tried to encourage Gibbs's former students to produce a more technically oriented biography.
Onsager, who much like Gibbs focused on applying new mathematical ideas to problems in physical chemistry, won the 1968 Nobel Prize in chemistry.
In May, Yale organized a memorial meeting at the Sloane Laboratory.
Similar work was carried out independently, and at around the same time, by the British mathematical physicist and engineer Oliver Heaviside.
Samuelson later explained that in his understanding of prices his "debts were not primarily to Pareto or Slutsky, but to the great thermodynamicist, Willard Gibbs of Yale."
In response, Yale offered him an annual salary of $2,000, which he was content to accept.
He also introduced the concept of the chemical potential&nbsp; of a given chemical species, defined to be the rate of the increase in ''U'' associated with the increase in the number ''N'' of molecules of that species (at constant entropy and volume).
Having undertaken a punishing regime of study, Gibbs caught a serious cold and a doctor, fearing tuberculosis, advised him to rest on the Riviera, where he and his sisters spent several months and where he made a full recovery.
The Royal Society further honored Gibbs in 1901 with the Copley Medal, then regarded as the highest international award in the natural sciences, noting that he had been "the first to apply the second law of thermodynamics to the exhaustive discussion of the relation between chemical, electrical and thermal energy and capacity for external work."
Relatively few documents from the period survive and it is difficult to reconstruct the details of Gibbs's early career with precision.
An equilibrium constant is simply related to the free energy change when the reactants are in their standard states.
On his father's side, he was descended from Samuel Willard, who served as acting President of Harvard College from 1701 to 1707.
Rukeyser's approach to Gibbs was also sharply criticized by Gibbs's former student and protégé Edwin Wilson.
He used the concept to define the microcanonical, canonical, and grand canonical ensembles; all related to the Gibbs measure, thus obtaining a more general formulation of the statistical properties of many-particle systems than Maxwell and Boltzmann had achieved before him.
From 1882 to 1889, Gibbs wrote five papers on physical optics, in which he investigated birefringence and other optical phenomena and defended Maxwell's electromagnetic theory of light against the mechanical theories of Lord Kelvin and others.
In 1954, a year before his death, Albert Einstein was asked by an interviewer who were the greatest thinkers that he had known.
The essay remained unpublished until it appeared posthumously in 1919, in ''The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma'', edited by Henry Adams's younger brother Brooks.
His principal protégé was Edwin Bidwell Wilson, who nonetheless explained that "except in the classroom I saw very little of Gibbs.
Gibbs's early papers on the use of graphical methods in thermodynamics reflect a powerfully original understanding of what mathematicians would later call "convex analysis", including ideas that, according to Barry Simon, "lay dormant for about seventy-five years".
While he was working on vector analysis in the late 1870s, Gibbs discovered that his approach was similar to the one that Grassmann had taken in his "multiple algebra".
He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1879 and received the 1880 Rumford Prize from the American Academy of Arts and Sciences for his work on chemical thermodynamics.
Chemical potential is usually defined as partial molar Gibbs free energy.
In 1960, William Giauque and others suggested the name "gibbs" (abbreviated gbs.)
Though in later years he used glasses only for reading or other close work, Gibbs's delicate health and imperfect eyesight probably explain why he did not volunteer to fight in the Civil War of 1861–65.
After graduation, Gibbs was appointed as tutor at the College for a term of three years.
He was elected as corresponding member of the Prussian and French Academies of Science and received honorary doctorates from the universities of Dublin, Erlangen, and Christiania (now Oslo).
When the German physical chemist Walther Nernst visited Yale in 1906 to give the Silliman lecture, he was surprised to find no tangible memorial for Gibbs.
With this object in mind, Gibbs distinguished between the dot and cross products of two vectors and introduced the concept of dyadics.
For many years he served as trustee, secretary, and treasurer of his alma mater, the Hopkins School.
He was also largely responsible for the development of the vector calculus techniques still used today in electrodynamics and fluid mechanics.
This compares to the expression for Helmholtz free energy, ''A''.
Gibbs, however, noted that the product of quaternions always had to be separated into two parts: a one-dimensional (scalar) quantity and a three-dimensional vector, so that the use of quaternions introduced mathematical complications and redundancies that could be avoided in the interest of simplicity and to facilitate teaching.
Rutgers University endowed a J. Willard Gibbs Professorship of Thermomechanics, held as of 2014 by Bernard Coleman.
Though his work was almost entirely theoretical, the practical value of Gibbs's contributions became evident with the development of industrial chemistry during the first half of the 20th century.
This was finally unveiled in 1912, in the form of a bronze bas-relief by sculptor Lee Lawrie, installed in the Sloane Physics Laboratory.
In 1871, he was appointed Professor of Mathematical Physics at Yale, the first such professorship in the United States.
He then produced two plaster casts of his model and mailed one to Gibbs.
It solidly laid the foundation for physical Chemistry.
Gibbs's papers from the 1870s introduced the idea of expressing the internal energy&nbsp;''U'' of a system in terms of the entropy&nbsp;''S'', in addition to the usual state-variables of volume&nbsp;''V'', pressure&nbsp;''p'', and temperature&nbsp;''T''.
When Dutch physicist J. D. van der Waals received the 1910 Nobel Prize "for his work on the equation of state for gases and liquids" he acknowledged the great influence of Gibbs's work on that subject.
In the 1930s, feminist poet Muriel Rukeyser became fascinated by Willard Gibbs and wrote a long poem about his life and work ("Gibbs", included in the collection ''A Turning Wind'', published in 1939), as well as a book-length biography (''Willard Gibbs'', 1942).
From this, Rota concluded that Gibbs's work was better known among the scientific elite of his day than the published material suggests.
According to James Gerald Crowther,
The elder Gibbs was generally known to his family and colleagues as "Josiah", while the son was called "Willard".
In an obituary published in the ''American Journal of Science'', Gibbs's former student Henry A. Bumstead referred to Gibbs's personal character:
Gibbs crater, near the eastern limb of the Moon, was named in the scientist's honor in 1964.
Gibbs continued to work without pay until 1880, when the new Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland offered him a position paying $3,000 per year.
That was Maxwell, and now he is dead."
Einstein replied: "Lorentz", adding "I never met Willard Gibbs; perhaps, had I done so, I might have placed him beside Lorentz."
After the death of his father in 1861, Gibbs inherited enough money to make him financially independent.
Maxwell included a chapter on Gibbs's work in the next edition of his ''Theory of Heat'', published in 1875.
The first half of the 20th century saw the publication of two influential textbooks that soon came to be regarded as founding documents of chemical thermodynamics, both of which used and extended Gibbs's work in that field:  these were ''Thermodynamics and the Free Energy of Chemical Processes'' (1923), by Gilbert N. Lewis and Merle Randall, and ''Modern Thermodynamics by the Methods of Willard Gibbs'' (1933), by Edward A. Guggenheim.
Another student of Gibbs who played a significant role in the development of radio technology was Lynde Wheeler.
where T is the absolute temperature , p is the pressure, d''S'' is an infinitesimal change in entropy and d''V'' is an infinitesimal change of volume.
for the unit of entropy, calorie / Kelvin, but this usage did not become common and the corresponding SI unit, Joule / Kelvin, carries no special name.
In Edward Bidwell Wilson's view,
Commentators and biographers have remarked on the contrast between Gibbs's quiet, solitary life in turn of the century New England and the great international impact of his ideas.
To establish priority of Grassmann’s ideas, Gibbs convinced Grassmann's heirs to seek the publication in Germany of the essay "Theorie der Ebbe und Flut" on tides that Grassmann had submitted in 1840 to the faculty at the University of Berlin, in which he had first introduced the notion of what would later be called a vector space(linear space).
Gibbs was well aware that the application of the equipartition theorem to large systems of classical particles failed to explain the measurements of the specific heats of both solids and gases, and he argued that this was evidence of the danger of basing thermodynamics on "hypotheses about the constitution of matter".
The work has been described as "the ''Principia'' of thermodynamics" and as a work of "practically unlimited scope".
His seminal work on thermodynamics was published mostly in the ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy'', a journal edited by his librarian brother-in-law, which was little read in the USA and even less so in Europe.
His research was not easily understandable to his students or his colleagues and he made no effort to popularize his ideas or to simplify their exposition to make them more accessible.
He also suffered from astigmatism, whose treatment was then still largely unfamiliar to oculists, so that Gibbs had to diagnose himself and grind his own lenses.
According to Henri Poincaré, writing in 1904, even though Maxwell and Boltzmann had previously explained the irreversibility of macroscopic physical processes in probabilistic terms, "the one who has seen it most clearly, in a book too little read because it is a little difficult to read, is Gibbs, in his ''Elementary Principles of Statistical Mechanics''."
In August 1867, Gibbs's sister Julia was married in Berlin to Addison Van Name, who had been Gibbs's classmate at Yale.
Several Yale faculty members, as well as business and professional men in New Haven, contributed funds for that purpose.
In 1910, the American Chemical Society established the Willard Gibbs Award for eminent work in pure or applied chemistry.
These papers introduced the use of different type phase diagrams, which were his favorite aids to the imagination process when doing research, rather than the mechanical models, such as the ones that Maxwell used in constructing his electromagnetic theory, which might not completely represent their corresponding phenomena.
Planck declared that Gibbs's name "not only in America but in the whole world will ever be reckoned among the most renowned theoretical physicists of all times."
Moving to Berlin, Gibbs attended the lectures taught by mathematicians Karl Weierstrass and Leopold Kronecker, as well as by chemist Heinrich Gustav Magnus.
This led him, in the early 1890s, to a controversy with Peter Guthrie Tait and others in the pages of ''Nature''.
According to Lynde Wheeler, who had been Gibbs's student at Yale, in his later years Gibbs
The stamp identifies Gibbs as a "thermodynamicist" and features a diagram from the 4th edition of Maxwell's ''Theory of Heat'', published in 1875, which illustrates Gibbs's thermodynamic surface for water.
After Gibbs's death, Fisher financed the publication of his ''Collected Works''.
From 1880 to 1884, Gibbs worked on developing the exterior algebra of Hermann Grassmann into a vector calculus well-suited to the needs of physicists.
In 1901, Gibbs received what was then considered the highest honor awarded by the international scientific community, the Copley Medal of the Royal Society of London, "for his contributions to mathematical physics".
Edward Guggenheim introduced the symbol ''G'' for the Gibbs free energy in 1933, and this was used also by Dirk ter Haar in 1966.
In his autobiography, mathematician Gian-Carlo Rota tells of casually browsing the mathematical stacks of Sterling Library and stumbling on a handwritten mailing list, attached to some of Gibbs's course notes, which listed over two hundred notable scientists of his day, including Poincaré, Boltzmann, David Hilbert, and Ernst Mach.
Rukeyser had called this surface a "statue of water" and the magazine saw in it "the abstract creation of a great American scientist that lends itself to the symbolism of contemporary art forms."
That cast is on display at the Yale physics department.
Gibbs's monograph rigorously and ingeniously applied his thermodynamic techniques to the interpretation of physico-chemical phenomena, explaining and relating what had previously been a mass of isolated facts and observations.
A keen and skilled horseman, Gibbs was seen habitually in New Haven driving his sister's carriage.
Gibbs then sought to publicize Grassmann's work, stressing that it was both more general and historically prior to Hamilton's quaternionic algebra.
In Europe, Gibbs was inducted as honorary member of the London Mathematical Society in 1892 and elected Foreign Member of the Royal Society in 1897.
Gibbs's most immediate and obvious influence was on physical chemistry and statistical mechanics, two disciplines which he greatly helped to found.
Gibbs was born in New Haven, Connecticut.
He was not conscripted and he remained at Yale for the duration of the war.
Jonathan Dickinson, the first president of the College of New Jersey (later Princeton University).
William James, Henry Bumstead, and others criticized both Adams's tenuous grasp of the scientific concepts that he invoked, as well as the arbitrariness of his application of those concepts as metaphors for the evolution of human thought and society.
Kenneth R. Jolls, a professor of chemical engineering at Iowa State University and an expert on graphical methods in thermodynamics, consulted on the design of the stamp honoring Gibbs.
He therefore proposed defining distinct dot and cross products for pairs of vectors and introduced the now common notation for them.
Gibbs did supervise the doctoral thesis on mathematical economics written by Irving Fisher in 1891.
When a chemical system is at equilibrium the change in Gibbs free enery is zero.
After his term as tutor ended, Gibbs traveled to Europe with his sisters.
He introduced the concept of "phase of a mechanical system".
In it, Gibbs developed a rigorous mathematical theory for various transport phenomena, including adsorption, electrochemistry, and the Marangoni effect in fluid mixtures.
In 1923, the American Mathematical Society endowed the Josiah Willard Gibbs Lectureship, "to show the public some idea of the aspects of mathematics and its applications".
He described that research in a monograph titled "On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances", published by the Connecticut Academy in two parts that appeared respectively in 1875 and 1878.
Together with James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann, Gibbs founded "statistical mechanics", a term that he coined to identify the branch of theoretical physics that accounts for the observed thermodynamic properties of systems in terms of the statistics of ensembles of all possible physical states of a system composed of many particles.
In fiction, Gibbs appears as the mentor to character Kit Traverse in Thomas Pynchon's novel ''Against the Day'' (2006).
Gibbs published his first work in 1873, at the unusually advanced age of 34.
At the time, German academics were the leading authorities in the natural sciences, especially chemistry and thermodynamics.
In 1861, Yale had become the first US university to offer a Ph.D. degree and Gibbs's was only the fifth Ph.D. granted in the US in any subject.
He joined Yale's College Church (a Congregational church) at the end of his freshman year and remained a regular attendant for the rest of his life.
Recurrent pulmonary trouble ailed the young Gibbs and his physicians were concerned that he might be susceptible to tuberculosis, which had killed his mother.
Gibbs applied his vector methods to the determination of planetary and comet orbits.
Gibbs's protegé Edwin Bidwell Wilson became, in turn, a mentor to leading American economist and Nobel Laureate Paul Samuelson.
Mathematician Norbert Wiener cited Gibbs's use of probability in the formulation of statistical mechanics as "the first great revolution of twentieth century physics" and as a major influence on his conception of cybernetics.
After a three-year sojourn in Europe, Gibbs spent the rest of his career at Yale, where he was professor of mathematical physics from 1871 until his death.
Together with James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann, he created statistical mechanics (a term that he coined), explaining the laws of thermodynamics as consequences of the statistical properties of ensembles of the possible states of a physical system composed of many particles.
He also formulated the phase rule
He remained at Yale as a graduate student at the Sheffield Scientific School.
Gibbs also obtained what later came to be known as the "Gibbs–Duhem equation".
In the opinion of biographers, Gibbs's principal mentor and champion, both at Yale and in the Connecticut Academy, was probably the astronomer and mathematician Hubert Anson Newton, a leading authority on meteors, who remained Gibbs's lifelong friend and confidant.
The oceanographic research ship USNS ''Josiah Willard Gibbs'' (T-AGOR-1) was in service with the United States Navy from 1958 to 1971.
Gibbs's nephew, Ralph Gibbs Van Name, a professor of physical chemistry at Yale, was unhappy with Rukeyser's biography, in part because of her lack of scientific training.
Gibbs's given name, which he shared with his father and several other members of his extended family, derived from his ancestor Josiah Willard, who had been Secretary of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in the 18th century.
Working in relative isolation, he became the earliest theoretical scientist in the United States to earn an international reputation and was praised by Albert Einstein as "the greatest mind in American history".
When the Gibbs free energy for a chemical reaction is negative the reaction will proceed spontaneously.
Thus, it was Gibbs who first combined the first and second laws of thermodynamics by expressing the infinitesimal change in the internal energy, d''U'',  of a closed system in the form:
Phase rule is very useful in diverse areas, such as metallurgy, mineralogy, and petrology.
As a mathematician, he invented modern vector calculus (independently of the British scientist Oliver Heaviside, who carried out similar work during the same period).
After reading Gibbs's textbook (which was translated into German by Ernst Zermelo in 1905), Einstein declared that Gibbs's treatment was superior to his own and explained that he would not have written those papers if he had known Gibbs's work.
Gibbs, who had independent means and had yet to publish anything, was assigned to teach graduate students exclusively and was hired without salary.
Gibbs also worked on the application of Maxwell's equations to problems in physical optics.
Gibbs also had an indirect influence on mathematical economics.
'''Josiah Willard Gibbs''' (February 11, 1839 &ndash; April 28, 1903) was an American scientist who made important theoretical contributions to physics, chemistry, and mathematics.
Another distinguished student was Lee De Forest, later a pioneer of radio technology.
In 1946, ''Fortune'' magazine illustrated a cover story on "Fundamental Science" with a representation of the thermodynamic surface that Maxwell had built based on Gibbs's proposal.
Prospects of collaboration between him and Gibbs were cut short by Maxwell's early death in 1879, aged 48.
The artwork by Arthur Lidov also included Gibbs's mathematical expression of the phase rule for heterogeneous mixtures, as well as a radar screen, an oscilloscope waveform, Newton's apple, and a small rendition of a three-dimensional phase diagram.
According to Robert A. Millikan, in pure science Gibbs "did for statistical mechanics and for thermodynamics what Laplace did for celestial mechanics and Maxwell did for electrodynamics, namely, made his field a well-nigh finished theoretical structure."
In his last paper on physical optics, Gibbs concluded that
In addition to establishing the Josiah Willard Gibbs Laboratories and the J. Willard Gibbs Assistant Professorship in Mathematics, Yale has hosted two symposia dedicated to Gibbs's life and work, one in 1989 and another on the centenary of his death, in 2003.
Microprinting on the collar of Gibbs's portrait depicts his original mathematical equation for the change in the energy of a substance in terms of its entropy and the other state variables.
Josiah Gibbs was a linguist and theologian who served as professor of sacred literature at Yale Divinity School from 1824 until his death in 1861.
That novel also prominently discusses the birefringence of Iceland spar, an optical phenomenon that Gibbs investigated.
He supervised the thesis of Irving Fisher, who received the first Ph.D. in economics from Yale in 1891.
They spent the winter of 1866–67 in Paris, where Gibbs attended lectures at the Sorbonne and the Collège de France, given by such distinguished mathematical scientists as Joseph Liouville and Michel Chasles.
During Gibbs's lifetime, his phase rule was experimentally validated by Dutch chemist H. W. Bakhuis Roozeboom, who showed how to apply it in a variety of situations, thereby assuring it of widespread use.
In that work, published in 1892 as ''Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of Value and Prices'', Fisher drew a direct analogy between Gibbsian equilibrium in physical and chemical systems, and the general equilibrium of markets, and he used Gibbs's vectorial notation.
He was a careful investor and financial manager, and at his death in 1903 his estate was valued at $100,000 (roughly $ today).
De Forest credited Gibbs's influence for the realization "that the leaders in electrical development would be those who pursued the higher theory of waves and oscillations and the transmission by these means of intelligence and power."
US President Chester A. Arthur appointed him as one of the commissioners to the National Conference of Electricians, which convened in Philadelphia in September 1884, and Gibbs presided over one of its sessions.
He had a way, toward the end of the afternoon, of taking a stroll about the streets between his study in the old Sloane Laboratory and his home&mdash;a little exercise between work and dinner&mdash;and one might occasionally come across him at that time."
Though Gibbs's research on physical optics is less well known today than his other work, it made a significant contribution to classical electromagnetism by applying Maxwell's equations to the theory of optical processes such as birefringence, dispersion, and optical activity.
He also developed the concept of mutually reciprocal triads of vectors that later proved to be of importance in crystallography.
That work, which covers about three hundred pages and contains exactly seven hundred numbered mathematical equations, begins with a quotation from Rudolf Clausius that expresses what would later be called the first and second laws of thermodynamics: "The energy of the world is constant.
Maxwell even made, with his own hands, a clay model illustrating Gibbs's construct.
Gibbs, who remained in New Haven, was represented at the award ceremony by Commander Richardson Clover, the US naval attaché in London.
His resolution of the so-called "Gibbs paradox", about the entropy of the mixing of gases, is now often cited as a prefiguration of the indistinguishability of particles required by quantum physics.
This notation is now universal and is recommended by the IUPAC.
Wilhelm Ostwald, who translated Gibbs's monograph into German, referred to Gibbs as the "founder of chemical energetics".
The last term is the sum, over all the chemical species in a chemical reaction, of the chemical potential, μi, of the ith species, multiplied by the infinitesimal change in the number of moles, d''N''i of that species.
He was the fourth of five children and the only son of Josiah Willard Gibbs and his wife Mary Anna, ''née'' Van Cleve.
In industrial chemistry, Gibbs's thermodynamics found many applications during the early 20th century, from electrochemistry to the development of the Haber process for the synthesis of ammonia.
That book helped to popularize the "del" notation that is widely used today in electrodynamics and fluid mechanics.
Gibbs generally voted for the Republican candidate in presidential elections but, like other "Mugwumps", his concern over the growing corruption associated with machine politics led him to support Grover Cleveland, a conservative Democrat, in the election of 1884.
The development of vector calculus was Gibbs's other great contribution to mathematics.
At Yale, Gibbs was also mentor to Lee De Forest, who went on to invent the triode amplifier and has been called the "father of radio".
Gibbs was elected in 1950 to the Hall of Fame for Great Americans.
The newly married couple returned to New Haven, leaving Gibbs and his sister Anna in Germany.
In 1909, the American historian and novelist Henry Adams finished an essay entitled "The Rule of Phase Applied to History", in which he sought to apply Gibbs's phase rule and other thermodynamic concepts to a general theory of human history.
Gibbs coined the term ''statistical mechanics'' and introduced key concepts in the corresponding mathematical description of physical systems, including the notions of chemical potential (1876), statistical ensemble (1902).
Gibbs's own framework for statistical mechanics, based on ensembles of macroscopically indistinguishable microstates, could be carried over almost intact after the discovery that the microscopic laws of nature obey quantum rules, rather than the classical laws known to Gibbs and to his contemporaries.
Willard Gibbs was educated at the Hopkins School and entered Yale College in 1854, aged 15.
At Yale, Gibbs received prizes for excellence in mathematics and Latin, and he graduated in 1858, near the top of his class.
In 1866, he patented a design for a railway brake and read a paper before the Connecticut Academy, entitled "The Proper Magnitude of the Units of Length", in which he proposed a scheme for rationalizing the system of units of measurement used in mechanics.
The entropy of the world tends towards a maximum."
In that work, Gibbs showed that those processes could be accounted for by Maxwell's equations without any special assumptions about the microscopic structure of matter or about the nature of the medium in which electromagnetic waves were supposed to propagate (the so-called luminiferous ether).
His papers on the geometric representation of thermodynamic quantities appeared in the ''Transactions of the Connecticut Academy''.
Gibbs then extended his thermodynamic analysis to multi-phase chemical systems (i.e., to systems composed of more than one form of matter) and considered a variety of concrete applications.
Lynde Wheeler reproduces that mailing list in an appendix to his biography of Gibbs.
He therefore donated his $500 lecture fee to the university to help pay for a suitable monument.
Gibbs's work on statistical ensembles, as presented in his 1902 textbook, has had a great impact in both theoretical physics and in pure mathematics.
Even though it had been immediately embraced by Maxwell, Gibbs's graphical formulation of the laws of thermodynamics only came into widespread use in the mid 20th century, with the work of László Tisza and Herbert Callen.
It was probably also around this time that he worked on a new design for a steam-engine governor, his last significant investigation in mechanical engineering.
In 1863, Yale awarded Gibbs the first American doctorate in engineering.
Although the journal had few readers capable of understanding Gibbs's work, he shared reprints with correspondents in Europe and received an enthusiastic response from James Clerk Maxwell at Cambridge.
Both Gibbs and Rukeyser's biography of him figure prominently in the poetry collection ''True North'' (1997) by Stephanie Strickland.
According to modern commentators,
The publication of the paper "On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances" (1874–78) is now regarded as a landmark in the development of chemistry.
A funeral was conducted two days later at his home on 121&nbsp;High Street, and his body was buried in the nearby Grove Street Cemetery.
Gibbs's analysis of irreversibility, and his formulation of Boltzmann's H-theorem and of the ergodic hypothesis, were major influences on the mathematical physics of the 20th century.
The eminent British physicist J. J. Thomson was in attendance and delivered a brief address.
Important mathematical concepts based on Gibbs's work on thermodynamics and statistical mechanics include the Gibbs lemma in game theory, the Gibbs inequality in information theory, as well as Gibbs sampling in computational statistics.
That Gibbs succeeded in interesting his European correspondents in his work is demonstrated by the fact that his monograph "On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances" was translated into German (then the leading language for chemistry) by Wilhelm Ostwald in 1892 and into French by Henri Louis Le Châtelier in 1899.
On the other hand, Gibbs did receive the major honors then possible for an academic scientist in the US.
According to mathematical physicist Arthur Wightman,
In 1863, Gibbs received the first Doctorate of Philosophy (Ph.D.) in engineering granted in the US, for a thesis entitled "On the Form of the Teeth of Wheels in Spur Gearing", in which he used geometrical techniques to investigate the optimum design for gears.
The joke later circulated in New Haven that "only one man lived who could understand Gibbs's papers.
Except for his customary summer vacations in the Adirondacks (at Keene Valley, New York) and later at the White Mountains (in Intervale, New Hampshire), his sojourn in Europe in 1866–69 was almost the only time that Gibbs spent outside New Haven.
for the number ''F'' of variables that may be independently controlled in an equilibrium mixture of ''C'' components existing in ''P'' phases.
The publication in 1901 of E. B. Wilson's textbook ''Vector Analysis'', based on Gibbs's lectures at Yale, did much to propagate the use of vectorial methods and notation in both mathematics and theoretical physics, definitively displacing the quaternions that had until then been dominant in the scientific literature.
