Converts are called "ben Abraham" or "bat Abraham", (son or daughter of Abraham).
Emancipation of the Jews in the United Kingdom was achieved in 1858 after an almost 30-year struggle championed by Isaac Lyon Goldsmid with the ability of Jews to sit in parliament with the passing of the Jews Relief Act 1858.
In Orthodox communities, only men wear kippot; in non-Orthodox communities, some women also wear kippot.
Over a long time, Jews formed distinct ethnic groups in several different geographic areas — amongst others, the Ashkenazi Jews (of central and Eastern Europe), the Sephardi Jews (of Spain, Portugal, and North Africa), the Beta Israel of Ethiopia, and the Yemenite Jews from the southern tip of the Arabian Peninsula.
The most well-known of these is Messianic Judaism, a religious movement, which arose in the 1960s, that incorporates elements of Judaism with the tenets of Christianity.
The Halakha has developed slowly, through a precedent-based system.
Synagogues are Jewish houses of prayer and study.
Although a minority of modern Karaites believe that Jewish identity requires that both parents be Jewish, and not only the father.
In addition to the requirement that the species be considered kosher, meat and poultry (but not fish) must come from a healthy animal slaughtered in a process known as ''shechitah''.
Christian rhetoric and antipathy towards Jews developed in the early years of Christianity and was reinforced by ever increasing anti-Jewish measures over the ensuing centuries.
European Jews who rejected the Hasidic movement were dubbed by the Hasidim as Misnagdim, (lit.
* Rabbi of a congregation – Jewish scholar who is charged with answering the legal questions of a congregation.
Today, the largest Jewish religious movements are Orthodox Judaism (Haredi Judaism and Modern Orthodox Judaism), Conservative Judaism and Reform Judaism.
Jews around the world eat in ''sukkot'' for seven days and nights.
Concerning birds, a list of non-kosher species is given in the Torah.
The most popular formulation is Maimonides' thirteen principles of faith, developed in the 12th century.
* Torah databases (electronic versions of the Traditional Jewish Bookshelf)
Any adult capable of reciting the prayers clearly may act as ''shatz''.
This was different in quality to any repressions of Jews in ancient times.
The Kabbalah describes sparks of holiness that are released by the act of eating kosher foods, but are too tightly bound in non-kosher foods to be released by eating.
An underlying source of prejudice against Jews in Europe was religious.
According to the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible), God promised Abraham to make of his offspring a great nation.
It plays a pivotal role in Jewish practice and is governed by a large corpus of religious law.
* Levi (Levite) – Patrilineal descendant of Levi the son of Jacob.
The Sadducees rejected the divine inspiration of the Prophets and the Writings, relying only on the Torah as divinely inspired.
The exact translations of many of the species have not survived, and some non-kosher birds' identities are no longer certain.
Some of these circumstances are contact with human corpses or graves, seminal flux, vaginal flux, menstruation, and contact with people who have become impure from any of these.
Some traditional features of a synagogue are:
The Torah does not give specific reasons for most of the laws of ''kashrut''.
A ''tallit katan'' (small tallit) is a fringed garment worn under the clothing throughout the day.
Many of the laws regarding dhimmis were highly symbolic.
Purim (Hebrew:  ''Pûrîm'' "lots") is a joyous Jewish holiday that commemorates the deliverance of the Persian Jews from the plot of the evil Haman, who sought to exterminate them, as recorded in the biblical Book of Esther.
The Baal teshuva movement is a movement of Jews who have "returned" to religion or become more observant.
For example, both chickens and turkeys are permitted in most communities.
It originated in a time of persecution of the Jewish people, when European Jews had turned inward to Talmud study; many felt that most expressions of Jewish life had become too "academic", and that they no longer had any emphasis on spirituality or joy.
The waiting period between eating meat and eating dairy varies by the order in which they are consumed and by community, and can extend for up to six hours.
The modern holidays of Yom Ha-shoah (Holocaust Remembrance Day) and Yom Ha'atzmaut (Israeli Independence Day) commemorate the horrors of the Holocaust and the achievement of Israel independence, respectively.
In turn, Solomon Schechter's Conservative Judaism was identical with the tradition understood as the interpretation of Torah, in itself being the history of the constant updates and adjustment of the Law performed by means of the creative interpretation.
However, the Reform movement has indicated that this is not so cut and dried, and different situations call for consideration and differing actions.
A congregation does not necessarily require a rabbi.
Karaites exist in small numbers today, mostly living in Israel.
This portion of the population largely ignores organized religious life, be it of the official Israeli rabbinate (Orthodox) or of the liberal movements common to diaspora Judaism (Reform, Conservative).
For example, dhimmis in some countries were required to wear distinctive clothing, a practice not found in either the Qur'an or hadiths but invented in early medieval Baghdad and inconsistently enforced.
Even if to restrict the problem to the most influential intellectual trends of the nineteenth and twentieth century, the matter remains complicated.
Emigration to Israel and the influence of other Jewish denominations have led to Ethiopian Jews adopting more normative Jewish practices.
It is traditional for the head of the household to wear a kittel at the Passover seder in some communities, and some grooms wear one under the wedding canopy.
After Solomon's reign the nation split into two kingdoms, the Kingdom of Israel (in the north) and the Kingdom of Judah (in the south).
Judaism is considered one of the oldest monotheistic religions.
Jewish scholars have held points of view diverging in various ways from Maimonides' principles.
In modern times, some liberal Jewish movements do not accept the existence of a personified deity active in history.
This is indicative of the general population trends among the Jewish community in the Diaspora, but a focus on total population obscures growth trends in some denominations and communities, such as Haredi Judaism.
In addition, many Reform temples use musical accompaniment such as organs and mixed choirs.
:The ordinary, familiar, everyday things and occurrences, we have constitute occasions for the experience of God.
The ''Birkat Ha-Mitzwot'' evokes the consciousness of holiness at a rabbinic rite, but the objects employed in the majority of these rites are non-holy and of general character, while the several holy objects are non-theurgic.
Later many of them returned to their homeland after the subsequent conquest of Babylonia by the Persians seventy years later, a period known as the Babylonian Captivity.
It coincides with the fruit harvest, and marks the end of the agricultural cycle.
Jewish philosophy refers to the conjunction between serious study of philosophy and Jewish theology.
These have been expounded by commentaries of various Torah scholars during the ages.
As time went on, the spiritual level of the nation declined to the point that God allowed the Philistines to capture the tabernacle.
When different rabbis forwarded conflicting interpretations, they sometimes appealed to hermeneutic principles to legitimize their arguments; some rabbis claim that these principles were themselves revealed by God to Moses at Sinai.
Modern Jewish philosophy consists of both Orthodox and non-Orthodox oriented philosophy.
Specific Jewish ethical practices include practices of charity (tzedakah) and refraining from negative speech (lashon hara).
The earliest instance in Europe where the term was used to mean "the profession or practice of the Jewish religion; the religious system or polity of the Jews"{cn} is Robert Fabyan's ''The newe cronycles of Englande and of Fraunce a 1513''.
With roughly 14.5 million adherents worldwide, Judaism is the tenth-largest religion in the world.
Major sources of difference between these groups are their approaches to Jewish law, the authority of the Rabbinic tradition, and the significance of the State of Israel.
The Jewish Year Calendar cites 14.6 million.
In Judaism, "the study of Torah can be a means of experiencing God".
However, as the persecutions of the Jews increased and the details were in danger of being forgotten, these oral laws were recorded by Rabbi Judah HaNasi (Judah the Prince) in the Mishnah, redacted ''circa'' 200 CE.
* The ark (called ''aron ha-kodesh'' by Ashkenazim and ''hekhal'' by Sephardim) where the Torah scrolls are kept (the ark is often closed with an ornate curtain (''parochet'') outside or inside the ark doors);
''Tzitzit'' (Hebrew: צִיציִת) (Ashkenazi pronunciation: ''tzitzis'') are special knotted "fringes" or "tassels" found on the four corners of the ''tallit'' (Hebrew: טַלִּית) (Ashkenazi pronunciation: ''tallis''), or prayer shawl.
Hence, although the experience of God is like none other, the ''occasions'' for experiencing Him, for having a consciousness of Him, are manifold, even if we consider only those that call for Berakot.
The differences between Christianity and Judaism originally centered on whether Jesus was the Jewish Messiah, but eventually became irreconcilable.
These two principles make possible a great variety of interpretations.
It is celebrated through the construction of temporary booths called ''sukkot'' (sing.
Because of this, many different variations on the basic beliefs are considered within the scope of Judaism.
Often there are several people capable of filling these roles and different services (or parts of services) will be led by each.
Here is the mystery of Talmudic Judaism: the alien and remote conviction that the intellect is an instrument not of unbelief and desacralization but of sanctification."
Some of these laws are directed only to men or to women, some only to the ancient priestly groups, the Kohanim and Leviyim (members of the tribe of Levi), some only to farmers within the Land of Israel.
They soon developed oral traditions of their own, which differed from the rabbinic traditions, and eventually formed the Karaite sect.
During the early years of the Second Temple, the highest religious authority was a council known as the Great Assembly, led by Ezra of the Book of Ezra.
Although it has split hooves, it does not chew its cud.
Proper ethical practices regarding sexuality and many other issues are subjects of dispute among Jews.
:The rabbi's logical and rational inquiry is not mere logic-chopping.
Following the destruction of Jerusalem and the expulsion of the Jews, Jewish worship stopped being centrally organized around the Temple, prayer took the place of sacrifice, and worship was rebuilt around the community (represented by a minimum of ten adult men) and the establishment of the authority of rabbis who acted as teachers and leaders of individual communities (see Jewish diaspora).
Thus ''Ioudaïsmos'' should be translated not as "Judaism" but as Judaeanness.
The Judean elite were exiled to Babylonia and this is regarded as the first Jewish Diaspora.
However, monotheism has not always been followed in practice.
Hanukkah is not mentioned in the Bible and was never considered a major holiday in Judaism, but it has become much more visible and widely celebrated in modern times, mainly because it falls around the same time as Christmas and has national Jewish overtones that have been emphasized since the establishment of the State of Israel.
Moreover, some have argued that Judaism is a non-creedal religion that does not require one to believe in God.
For seafood to be kosher, the animal must have fins and scales.
Until their emancipation in the late 18th and the 19th century, Jews in Christian lands were subject to humiliating legal restrictions and limitations.
And not only do ordinary things and occurrences bring with them the experience of God.
A congregation does not need to have a dedicated hazzan.
Ancient repression was politically motivated and Jews were treated the same way as any other ethnic group would have been.
Rabbinical and Karaite Jews each hold that the others are Jews, but that the other faith is erroneous.
The three preceding positions are usually voluntary and considered an honor.
(Some people, in Yiddish, also refer to observant Orthodox Jews as ''frum'', as opposed to ''frei'' (more liberal Jews)).
Shavuot customs include all-night study marathons known as Tikkun Leil Shavuot, eating dairy foods (cheesecake and blintzes are special favorites), reading the Book of Ruth, decorating homes and synagogues with greenery, and wearing white clothing, symbolizing purity.
Consequently, a number of other core tenets of the Pharisees' belief system (which became the basis for modern Judaism), were also dismissed by the Sadducees.
It holds that the Torah is a divine document written by prophets inspired by God and reflecting his will, but rejects the Orthodox position that it was dictated by God to Moses.
People who observe these laws are colloquially said to be "keeping kosher".
:* Orthodoxy is often divided into Modern Orthodox Judaism and Haredi Judaism.
The Talmud was a compilation of both the Mishnah and the Gemara, rabbinic commentaries redacted over the next three centuries.
While both religions are monotheistic and share many commonalities, they differ in that Jews do not consider Jesus or Muhammad to be prophets.
The term ''Ἰουδαϊσμός'' first appears in the Hellenistic Greek book of 2 Maccabees in the 2nd century BCE.
Many generations later, he commanded the nation of Israel to love and worship only one God; that is, the Jewish nation is to reciprocate God's concern for the world.
The term Judaism derives from ''Iudaismus'', a Latinized form of the Ancient Greek Ἰουδαϊσμός or ''Ioudaïsmos'' (from the verb , "to side with or imitate the Judeans"), and it was ultimately inspired by the Hebrew יהודה, ''Yehudah'', "Judah"; in Hebrew: יַהֲדוּת, ''Yahadut''.
The conflict between ''iudaismos'' and ''hellenismos'' lay behind the Maccabean revolt and hence the invention of the term ''iudaismos''.
After the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE, these sects vanished.
Many laws were only applicable when the Temple in Jerusalem existed, and fewer than 300 of these commandments are still applicable today.
''Kedushah'', holiness, which is nothing else than the imitation of God, is concerned with daily conduct, with being gracious and merciful, with keeping oneself from defilement by idolatry, adultery, and the shedding of blood.
Halakha, the rabbinic Jewish way of life, then, is based on a combined reading of the Torah, and the oral tradition—the Mishnah, the halakhic Midrash, the Talmud and its commentaries.
However, traditions exist about the ''kashrut'' status of a few birds.
The study of Torah (in its widest sense, to include both poetry, narrative, and law, and both the Hebrew Bible and the Talmud) is in Judaism itself a sacred act of central importance.
The Jewish Bible (Tanakh) records and repeatedly condemns the widespread worship of other gods in ancient Israel.
A Jew can fulfill most requirements for prayer by himself.
Most have chosen to live in Israel.
Disabilities also included special taxes levied on Jews, exclusion from public life, restraints on the performance of religious ceremonies, and linguistic censorship.
In the mid-20th century, Jews were expelled from nearly all of the Arab countries.
(Replacement rate is 2.1.)
Judaism thus begins with ethical monotheism: the belief that God is one and is concerned with the actions of humankind.
Shemini Atzeret and Simchat Torah are technically considered to be a separate holiday and not a part of Sukkot.
Reform Judaism has developed an egalitarian prayer service in the vernacular (along with Hebrew in many cases) and emphasizes personal connection to Jewish tradition.
The newly united German Empire in 1871 abolished Jewish disabilities in Germany, which were reinstated in the Nuremberg Laws in 1935.
Karaite Judaism defines itself as the remnants of the non-Rabbinic Jewish sects of the Second Temple period, such as the Sadducees.
Over the next four centuries this law underwent discussion and debate in both of the world's major Jewish communities (in Israel and Babylonia), and the commentaries on the Mishnah from each of these communities eventually came to be edited together into compilations known as the two Talmuds.
Rabbinic tradition holds that the details and interpretation of the law, which are called the ''Oral Torah'' or ''oral law'', were originally an unwritten tradition based upon what God told Moses on Mount Sinai.
The core of festival and Shabbat prayer services is the public reading of the Torah, along with connected readings from the other books of the Tanakh, called Haftarah.
Subsets of Haredi Judaism include: Hasidic Judaism, which is rooted in the Kabbalah and distinguished by reliance on a Rebbe or religious teacher; and Sephardic Haredi Judaism, which emerged among Sephardic (Asian and North African) Jews in Israel.
Without the proper slaughtering practices even an otherwise kosher animal will be rendered ''treif''.
Other types of animals, such as amphibians, reptiles, and most insects, are prohibited altogether.
At its core, the Tanakh is an account of the Israelites' relationship with God from their earliest history until the building of the Second Temple (c. 535 BCE).
Authority on theological and legal matters is not vested in any one person or organization, but in the sacred texts and rabbis and scholars who interpret them.
Christianity was originally a sect of Second Temple Judaism, but the two religions diverged in the first century.
:first, the belief in the omnisignificance of Scripture, in the meaningfulness of its every word, letter, even (according to one famous report) scribal flourish; second, the claim of the essential unity of Scripture as the expression of the single divine will.
Many of these groups have developed differences in their prayers, traditions and accepted canons; however these distinctions are mainly the result of their being formed at some cultural distance from normative (rabbinic) Judaism, rather than based on any doctrinal dispute.
Many aspects of Judaism have also directly or indirectly influenced secular Western ethics and civil law.
There are some movements that combine elements of Judaism with those of other religions.
Major Jewish philosophers include Solomon ibn Gabirol, Saadia Gaon, Judah Halevi, Maimonides, and Gersonides.
In Rabbinic Judaism, Kohanim, members of the hereditary caste that served as priests in the time of the Temple, are mostly restricted from entering grave sites and touching dead bodies.
* Humanistic Judaism is a small non-theistic movement centered in North America and Israel that emphasizes Jewish culture and history as the sources of Jewish identity.
The movement itself claims to be nothing new, but a ''refreshment'' of original Judaism.
Furthermore, all Orthodox and some Conservative authorities forbid the consumption of processed grape products made by non-Jews, due to ancient pagan practices of using wine in rituals.
:A single verse has several meanings, but no two verses hold the same meaning.
Due to these differences, Judaism traditionally regards Christianity as Shituf, or worship of the God of Israel which is not monotheistic.
Many suggest that during the First Temple period, the people of Israel believed that each nation had its own god, but that their god was superior to other gods.
Jews are an ethnoreligious group and include those born Jewish and converts to Judaism.
Boyarin suggests that this in part reflects the fact that much of Judaism's more than 3,000-year history predates the rise of Western culture and occurred outside the West (that is, Europe, particularly medieval and modern Europe).
In contrast, the Torah forbids Israelites from eating non-kosher species because "they are unclean".
The term "secular" is more popular as a self-description among Israeli families of western (European) origin, whose Jewish identity may be a very powerful force in their lives, but who see it as largely independent of traditional religious belief and practice.
Thus, Boyarin has argued that "Jewishness disrupts the very categories of identity, because it is not national, not genealogical, not religious, but all of these, in dialectical tension."
The slaughtering process is intended to be quick and relatively painless to the animal.
A new Second Temple was constructed, and old religious practices were resumed.
According to David Stern, all Rabbinic hermeneutics rest on two basic axioms:
Today R. Ishmael's 13 principles are incorporated into the Jewish prayer book to be read by observant Jews on a daily basis.
When the people pressured Saul into going against a command conveyed to him by Samuel, God told Samuel to appoint David in his stead.
In Orthodox congregations and some Conservative congregations, only men can be prayer leaders, but all Progressive communities now allow women to serve in this function.
Ethical monotheism is central in all sacred or normative texts of Judaism.
The Samaritans, a very small community located entirely around Mount Gerizim in the Nablus/Shechem region of the West Bank and in Holon, near Tel Aviv in Israel, regard themselves as the descendants of the Israelites of the Iron Age kingdom of Israel.
Correspondingly, two bodies of analysis developed, and two works of Talmud were created.
Dhimmis were allowed to practice their religion and to administer their internal affairs, but they were subject to certain restrictions that were not imposed on Muslims.
Around the 1st century CE there were several small Jewish sects: the Pharisees, Sadducees, Zealots, Essenes, and Christians.
About 43% of all Jews reside in Israel and another 43% reside in  the United States and Canada, with most of the remainder living in Europe, and other minority groups spread throughout South America, Asia, Africa, and Australia.
Utensils that have been used to prepare non-kosher food, or dishes that have held meat and are now used for dairy products, render the food ''treif'' under certain conditions.
According to Maimonides, any Jew who rejects even one of these principles would be considered an apostate and a heretic.
A ''kittel'' (Yiddish: קיטל), a white knee-length overgarment, is worn by prayer leaders and some observant traditional Jews on the High Holidays.
Along these lines, the ancient historian Josephus emphasized practices and observances rather than religious beliefs, associating apostasy with a failure to observe Jewish law and maintaining that the requirements for conversion to Judaism included circumcision and adherence to traditional customs.
Men and women participate equally in prayer.
The priesthood is an inherited position, and although priests no longer have any but ceremonial duties, they are still honored in many Jewish communities.
These attitudes were reinforced in Christian preaching, art and popular teaching for two millennia, containing contempt for Jews, as well as statutes which were designed to humiliate and stigmatise Jews.
Modern Orthodox Judaism developed in reaction to Reform Judaism, by leaders who argued that Jews could participate in public life as citizens equal to Christians, while maintaining the observance of Jewish law.
From the time of the Mishnah and Talmud to the present, Judaism has required specialists or authorities for the practice of very few rituals or ceremonies.
Major differences between the two faiths include the nature of the Messiah, of atonement and sin, the status of God's commandments to Israel, and perhaps most significantly of the nature of God himself.
Orthodox Judaism maintains that the Torah and Jewish law are divine in origin, eternal and unalterable, and that they should be strictly followed.
Other examples of syncretism include Semitic neopaganism, a loosely organized sect which incorporates pagan or Wiccan beliefs with some Jewish religious practices; Jewish Buddhists, another loosely organized group that incorporates elements of Asian spirituality in their faith; and some Renewal Jews who borrow freely and openly from Buddhism, Sufism, Native American religion, and other faiths.
Reflecting on the contribution of the Amoraim and Tanaim to contemporary Judaism, Professor Jacob Neusner observed:
The role of the priesthood in Judaism has significantly diminished since the destruction of the Second Temple in 70 CE, when priests attended to the Temple and sacrifices.
** Hassidic ''Rebbe'' – rabbi who is the head of a Hasidic dynasty.
'''Related Topics'''
In Central Europe, followed by Great Britain and the United States, Reform (or Liberal) Judaism developed, relaxing legal obligations (especially those that limited Jewish relations with non-Jews), emulating Protestant decorum in prayer, and emphasizing the ethical values of Judaism's Prophetic tradition.
The older compilation is called the Jerusalem Talmud.
Many of these scholars accept the general principles of the documentary hypothesis and suggest that the Torah consists of inconsistent texts edited together in a way that calls attention to divergent accounts.
In the Greco-Roman era, many different interpretations of monotheism existed in Judaism, including the interpretations that gave rise to Christianity.
* The pulpit, or ''amud'', a lectern facing the Ark where the hazzan or prayer leader stands while praying.
Also, in most Conservative synagogues, and all Reform and Reconstructionist congregations, women participate in prayer services on an equal basis with men, including roles traditionally filled only by men, such as reading from the Torah.
Since the Enlightenment large synagogues have often adopted the practice of hiring rabbis and hazzans to act as ''shatz'' and ''baal kriyah'', and this is still typically the case in many Conservative and Reform congregations.
* Sukkot ("Tabernacles" or "The Festival of Booths") commemorates the Israelites' forty years of wandering through the desert on their way to the Promised Land.
In some Ashkenazi communities it is customary to wear one only after marriage.
Just as this hammer produces many sparks (when it strikes the rock), so a single verse has several meanings."
* Shaliach tzibur or ''Shatz'' (leader—literally "agent" or "representative"—of the congregation) leads those assembled in prayer, and sometimes prays on behalf of the community.
Some Conservative authorities permit wine and grape juice made without rabbinic supervision.
Waves of Jewish immigration in the 1880s carried it to the United States.
Over time, as practices develop, codes of Jewish law are written that are based on the responsa; the most important code, the Shulchan Aruch, largely determines Orthodox religious practice today.
In addition to synagogues, other buildings of significance in Judaism include yeshivas, or institutions of Jewish learning, and mikvahs, which are ritual baths.
The holiday was called Hanukkah (meaning "dedication") because it marks the re-dedication of the Temple after its desecration by Antiochus IV Epiphanes.
The Reform movement mostly refer to their synagogues as temples.
Certain types of seafood, such as shellfish, crustaceans, and eels, are therefore considered non-kosher.
In the context of the age and period it meant "seeking or forming part of a cultural entity" and resembled its antonym ''hellenismos'', a word that signified a people's submission unto Hellenic (Greek) cultural norms.
Conservative Judaism holds that the Oral Law is divine and normative, but holds that both the Written and Oral Law may be interpreted by the rabbis to reflect modern sensibilities and suit modern conditions.
Christianity has traditionally regarded Judaism as obsolete with the invention of Christianity and Jews as a people replaced by the Church, though a Christian belief in dual-covenant theology emerged as a phenomenon following Christian reflection on how their theology influenced the Nazi Holocaust.
