The duo first appeared together as supporting characters in the 1937 B movie ''Thoroughbreds Don't Cry''.
Her daughter Liza Minnelli made her film debut at the age of two and a half at the end of the film.
A later explanation surfaced when Jessel was a guest on Garland's television show in 1963.
Garland's other films of the 1940s include ''The Harvey Girls'' (1946), in which she introduced the Academy Award-winning song "On the Atchison, Topeka, and the Santa Fe", and ''Till the Clouds Roll By'' (1946).
It was completed on July 29.
The first was with bandleader Artie Shaw.
Garland was then cast in the film adaptation of ''Annie Get Your Gun'' in the title role of Annie Oakley.
''The Judy Garland Show'' was critically praised, but for a variety of reasons (including being placed in the time slot opposite ''Bonanza'' on NBC) the show lasted only one season and was canceled in 1964 after 26 episodes.
Later that year, she returned to the Palace Theatre, site of her two-a-day triumph.
Garland won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Musical for the role.
She was deeply devoted to him and was devastated in early 1940 when he eloped with Lana Turner.
She was interred in a crypt in the community mausoleum at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York, a small town 24 miles north of Midtown Manhattan.
Following this recognition, she became one of MGM's most bankable stars.
The first, entitled ''The Judy Garland Show'', aired in 1962 and featured guests Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin.
Directed by George Cukor and co-starring James Mason, it was a large undertaking to which she initially fully dedicated herself.
MGM hit on a winning formula when it paired Garland with Mickey Rooney in a string of what were known as "backyard musicals".
The group broke up by August 1935, when Suzanne Garland flew to Reno, Nevada and married musician Lee Kahn, a member of the Jimmy Davis orchestra playing at Cal-Neva Lodge, Lake Tahoe.
Some of that bad press was deflected by the announcement of a near fatal episode of pleurisy.
Her song for the ''Shell Chateau Hour'' was her first professional rendition of "Zing!
"The pressure was off me for the first time in my life."
It won four Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year and Best Female Vocal of the Year, and has never been out of print.
She has been the subject of over two dozen biographies since her death, including the well-received ''Me and My Shadows: A Family Memoir'' by her daughter, Lorna Luft, whose memoir was later adapted into the television miniseries ''Life with Judy Garland: Me and My Shadows'', which won Emmy Awards for the two actresses portraying her (Tammy Blanchard and Judy Davis).
They even went so far as to serve her only a bowl of soup and a plate of lettuce when she ordered a regular meal.
Her self-image was strongly influenced by film executives, who said she was unattractive and constantly manipulated her on-screen physical appearance.
Garland next came to the attention of studio executives by singing a special arrangement of "You Made Me Love You (I Didn't Want to Do It)" to Clark Gable at a birthday party held by the studio for the actor.
Though the film was critically praised and earned a profit, most movie fans expected her to sing.
Frances changed her name to "Judy" soon after, inspired by a popular Hoagy Carmichael song.
Often referred to as the greatest entertainer who ever lived, Garland's legacy as a performer and a personality has endured long after her death.
Production delays led to cost overruns and angry confrontations with Warner Bros. head Jack L. Warner.
Through the Meglin Kiddies, they made their film debut in a 1929 short subject called ''The Big Revue,'' where they performed a song-and-dance number called "That's the good old sunny south".
She agreed to do it provided the song should be "Get Happy".
The affair ended in early 1945, although they remained on good terms afterward.
Frank Gumm died the following morning, leaving her devastated.
They appeared with the troupe at its annual Christmas show.
There, she made more than two dozen films, including nine with Mickey Rooney and her most iconic role as Dorothy in ''The Wizard of Oz'' (1939).
After being advised by her doctor that she would only be able to work in four- to five-day increments with extended rest periods between, MGM executive Arthur Freed made the decision to suspend her on July 18, 1948.
Her insecurity was exacerbated by the attitude of studio chief Louis B. Mayer, who referred to her as his "little hunchback".
She was top-billed in the credits for the first time and effectively made the transition from teenaged star to adult actress.
In November 1959, Garland was diagnosed with acute hepatitis and hospitalized.
She was suspended from the picture on May 10, 1949, and was replaced by Betty Hutton, who stepped in performing all the musical routines as staged by Berkeley.
In September 1950, after 15 years with the studio, Garland and MGM parted company.
Following a third special, ''Judy Garland and Her Guests Phil Silvers and Robert Goulet'', Garland's weekly series debuted September 29, 1963.
It went well and received positive reviews.
A 1964 tour of Australia was largely disastrous.
About 30 minutes of footage were cut, sparking outrage among critics and filmgoers.
Garland began a relationship with musician David Rose, and on her 18th birthday, he gave her an engagement ring.
Not that it would have made any difference – you couldn't have hidden that great talent if you'd called her 'Tel Aviv Windsor Shell', you know, but her name when I first met her was Frances Gumm and it wasn't the kind of a name that so sensitive a great actress like that should have; ... and so we called her Judy Garland, and I think she's a combination of Helen Hayes and Al Jolson, and maybe Jenny Lind and Sarah Bernhardt."
Garland, who had aborted her pregnancy by him in 1942, agreed to a trial separation in January 1943 and divorced in 1944.
She was made to wear removable caps on her teeth and rubberized disks to reshape her nose.
Four more Garland songs are featured on the list: "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas" (#76), "Get Happy" (#61), "The Trolley Song" (#26), and "The Man That Got Away" (#11).
''End of the Rainbow'' (2005) featured Caroline O'Connor as Garland and Paul Goddard as Garland's pianist.
After her body had been embalmed by Desmond Henley, Deans took Garland's remains to New York City on June 26, where an estimated 20,000 people lined up to pay their respects at the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel in Manhattan, which remained open all night to accommodate the overflow crowd.
Despite the all-star cast, ''Words and Music'' barely broke even at the box office.
In the last, she played her first adult role, a dual role of both mother and daughter.
She has twice been honored on U.S. postage stamps, in 1989 (as Dorothy) and again in 2006 (as Vicki Lester from ''A Star Is Born'').
By that time, Garland had lost 15 pounds and looked more slender.
She was replaced by Jane Powell.
She was able to complete filming, but in July she made her first suicide attempt, making minor cuts to her wrist with a broken glass.
''TIME'' labeled her performance as "just about the greatest one-woman show in modern movie history".
The concert was also shown on the British television network ITV, and was one of her final appearances at the venue.
(However, Garland asks Jessel just moments later if this story is true, and he blithely replies "No".)
Only one additional special was broadcast in 1956, a live concert-edition of ''General Electric Theater'', before the relationship between the Lufts and CBS broke down in a dispute over the planned format of upcoming specials.
Upon its world premiere on September 29, 1954, the film was met with tremendous critical and popular acclaim.
Although she was sometimes late arriving at the studio during the making of this picture, she managed to complete it five days ahead of schedule.
Garland said after the Palladium show: "I suddenly knew that this was the beginning of a new life... Hollywood thought I was through; then came the wonderful opportunity to appear at the London Palladium, where I can truthfully say Judy Garland was reborn."
During the filming of ''Meet Me in St. Louis'', after some initial conflict between them, Garland and Minnelli entered into a relationship.
Garland performed complete shows as tributes to Jolson in her concerts at the London Palladium in April and at New York's Palace Theater later that year.
Around this time, she also developed a serious problem with alcohol.
Returning to the stage, Garland made her last appearances at New York's Palace Theatre in July, a 27-show stand, performing with her children Lorna and Joey Luft.
Her ''Wizard of Oz'' co-star Ray Bolger commented at her funeral, "She just plain wore out."
In 1951, Garland began a four-month concert tour of Britain and Ireland, where she played to sold-out audiences throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland.
She was told by doctors that she likely had five years or less to live and that, even if she did survive, she would be a semi-invalid and would never sing again.
"Judy was the big money-maker at the time, a big success, but she was the ugly duckling&nbsp;...I think it had a very damaging effect on her emotionally for a long time.
The studio did not know what to do with her as, at age 13, she was older than the traditional child star but too young for adult roles.
In 1999, the American Film Institute placed her among the ten greatest female stars of classic American cinema.
The American Film Institute named her eighth among the Greatest female stars of Golden Age Hollywood cinema.
One of Garland's most successful films for MGM was ''Meet Me in St. Louis'' (1944), in which she introduced three standards: "The Trolley Song", "The Boy Next Door", and "Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas".
She began showing up late or not at all.
''The Clock'' (1945) was Garland's first straight dramatic film, opposite Robert Walker.
With the conclusion of filming, MGM kept Garland busy with promotional tours and the shooting of ''Babes in Arms'', directed by Busby Berkeley.
As a result, the secure financial position Garland had expected from the profits did not materialize.
In September 1935, songwriter Burton Lane was asked by Louis B. Mayer to go to the Orpheum Theater in downtown Los Angeles to watch the Garland Sisters' vaudeville act and to report back to him.
With the demise of her television series, Garland returned to the stage.
During filming for ''The Pirate'' in April 1947, Garland suffered a nervous breakdown and was placed in a private sanitarium.
Her death certificate stated that her death had been "accidental".
A British specialist who had attended her autopsy said she had nevertheless been living on borrowed time owing to cirrhosis.
Went the Strings of My Heart", a song which became a standard in many of her concerts.
Despite its short run, the series was nominated for four Emmy Awards, including Best Variety Series.
Garland was forced into a strict diet during filming to the point she was given tobacco at 16 to suppress her appetite.
Several of her recordings have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.
Garland's films after ''A Star Is Born'' included ''Judgment at Nuremberg'' (1961) (for which she was Oscar- and Golden Globe-nominated for Best Supporting Actress), the animated feature ''Gay Purr-ee'' (1962), and ''A Child Is Waiting'' (1963) with Burt Lancaster.
On November 16, 1935, Garland learned that her father had been hospitalized with meningitis and had taken a turn for the worse, while she was in the midst of preparing for a radio performance on the ''Shell Chateau Hour''.
The trio had been touring the vaudeville circuit as "The Gumm Sisters" for many years when they performed in Chicago at the Oriental Theater with George Jessel in 1934.
Groucho Marx sent her a telegram after the awards ceremony, declaring her loss "the biggest robbery since Brinks."
Garland and Sidney Luft, her then-husband, produced the film through their production company, Transcona Enterprises, while Warner Bros. supplied the funds, production facilities, and crew.
Respected for her versatility, she received a Golden Globe Award, a Juvenile Academy Award, and a Special Tony Award, and at 39 she became the youngest, and first female, recipient of the Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement in the motion picture industry.
Following her work on ''The Pirate'', she co-starred for the first and only time with Fred Astaire (who replaced Gene Kelly after Kelly had broken his ankle) in ''Easter Parade'', which became her top-grossing film at MGM and quickly re-established her as one of MGM's primary assets.
Garland gave birth to Lorna Luft, herself a future actress and singer, on November 21, 1952, and to Joey Luft on March 29, 1955.
She was self-conscious and anxious about her appearance.
She was invited back for a second episode in 1966 with Van Johnson as her guest.
"I wanted to black out the future as well as the past.
She was several hundred thousand dollars in debt to the Internal Revenue Service, having failed to pay taxes in 1951 and 1952, and the failure of ''A Star is Born'' meant that she received nothing from that investment.
These include "Over the Rainbow", which was ranked as the number one movie song of all time in the American Film Institute's "100 Years...100 Songs" list.
She was of English, Scottish, and Irish ancestry, named after both her parents and baptized at a local Episcopal church.
Several of her recordings have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame.
Garland guest-hosted an episode of ''The Hollywood Palace'' with Vic Damone.
She later resented the hectic schedule and felt that her youth had been stolen by MGM.
The Gumm Sisters performed there for the next few years, accompanied by their mother on piano.
Despite her professional triumphs, Garland struggled immensely in her personal life, starting when she was a child.
"Judy went to school at Metro with Ava Gardner, Lana Turner, Elizabeth Taylor, real beauties", said Charles Walters, who directed her in a number of films.
Garland was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress and in the run-up to the 27th Academy Awards, was generally expected to win.
He claimed that he had sent actress Judith Anderson a telegram containing the word "garland" and it stuck in his mind.
A second concert in Sydney was uneventful, but the Melbourne appearance garnered her significant bad press.
He said it felt like "a hillbilly with a child bride."
Garland's daughter Lorna Luft stated that her mother selected the name when Jessel announced that the trio "looked prettier than a garland of flowers".
They were married June 15, 1945, and on March 12, 1946, daughter Liza was born.
Garland was honored for her contribution to the revival of vaudeville with a Special Tony Award.
The public and press were barred.
The Oscar was won, however, by Grace Kelly for ''The Country Girl'' (1954).
They teamed as lead characters for the first time in ''Babes in Arms'', ultimately appearing in five additional films including Hardy films ''Andy Hardy Meets Debutante'' and ''Life Begins for Andy Hardy''.
Principal photography wrapped on March 17, 1954.
Supporting the accidental cause, her doctor noted that a prescription of 25 barbiturate pills was found by her bedside half empty and another bottle of 100 was still unopened.
She was only , and her "cute" or "girl-next-door" looks did not exemplify the most glamorous persona required of leading ladies of the time.
She complained to Mayer, trying to have Berkeley fired from the feature.
The film contrasted her vocal range and swing style with Durbin's operatic soprano and served as an extended screen test for the pair, as studio executives were questioning the wisdom of having two girl singers on the roster.
Ponedel refined her appearance in several ways, including extending and reshaping her eyebrows, changing her hairline, modifying her lip line and removing her nose discs and dental caps.
Although it was still popular, drawing huge crowds and grossing over $6,000,000 in its first release, ''A Star is Born'' did not make back its cost and ended up losing money.
She also asserted that he had repeatedly struck her while he was drinking and that he had attempted to take their children from her by force.
Garland was next cast in the film ''Royal Wedding'' with Fred Astaire after June Allyson became pregnant in 1950.
She also had a long battle with drugs and alcohol, which ultimately led to her death from a barbiturate overdose at the age of 47.
That same year, she divorced Minnelli, and in 1952, she married Sid Luft, her tour manager and producer, on June 8, 1952, in Hollister, California.
Shooting commenced on October 13, 1938, and was completed on March 16, 1939, with a final cost of more than US$2&nbsp;million.
Her first appearance came at the age of two-and-a-half when she joined her older sisters Mary Jane "Suzy/Suzanne" Gumm (1915–1964) and Dorothy Virginia "Jimmie" Gumm (1917–1977) on the stage of her father's movie theater during a Christmas show and sang a chorus of "Jingle Bells".
In 1956, Garland performed for four weeks at the New Frontier Hotel on the Las Vegas Strip for a salary of $55,000 per week, making her the highest-paid entertainer to work in Las Vegas.
Garland was born '''Frances Ethel Gumm''' in Grand Rapids, Minnesota on June 10, 1922, the youngest child of Ethel Marion ( Milne, November 17, 1893 – January 5, 1953) and Francis Avent "Frank" Gumm (March 20, 1886 – November 17, 1935).
In 1928, the Gumm Sisters enrolled in a dance school run by Ethel Meglin, proprietress of the Meglin Kiddies dance troupe.
The role was a challenge for her, requiring the use of an accent, her first adult kiss, and the only death scene of her career.
She had filed for divorce from Luft more than once previously, even as early as 1956, but they had reconciled each time.
During her early years at the studio, she was photographed and dressed in plain garments or frilly juvenile gowns and costumes to match the "girl-next-door" image created for her.
Following this success, CBS made a $24&nbsp;million offer to her for a weekly television series of her own, also to be called ''The Judy Garland Show'', which was deemed at the time in the press to be "the biggest talent deal in TV history".
A successful run on television was intended to secure her financial future.
''Little Nellie Kelly'' was purchased from George M. Cohan as a vehicle for her to display both her audience appeal and her physical appearance.
Although she had said as early as 1955 that she would never do a weekly television series, in the early 1960s, she was in a financially precarious situation.
She married her fifth and final husband, nightclub manager Mickey Deans, at Chelsea Register Office, London, on March 15, 1969, her divorce from Herron having been finalized on February 11.
After 15 years, she was released from the studio and then gained new success through record-breaking concert appearances, a successful recording career, and her own Emmy nominated television series.
Garland returned to Los Angeles heavier, and in the fall of 1949, was cast opposite Gene Kelly in ''Summer Stock''.
On stage, Garland is a character in the musical ''The Boy from Oz'' (1998), portrayed by Chrissy Amphlett in the original Australian production and by Isabel Keating on Broadway in 2003.
According to theater legend, their act was once erroneously billed at a Chicago theater as "The Glum Sisters".
Several stories persist regarding the origin of the name "Garland".
The main reasons for its failure was not only its expense, but also the increasing cost of the shooting delays while Garland was ill, as well as the fact that the general public was not yet willing to accept her in a sophisticated vehicle.
''The Pirate'' was released in 1948 and was the first film in which Garland had starred since ''The Wizard of Oz'' to not be profitable.
Garland attended Hollywood High School and later graduated from University High School.
The first was the 1955 debut episode of ''Ford Star Jubilee''; this was the first full-scale color broadcast ever on CBS and was a ratings triumph, scoring a 34.8 Nielsen rating.
Her concert appearance at Carnegie Hall on April 23, 1961 was a considerable highlight, called by many "the greatest night in show business history".
In this film, she sang the song with which she would forever be identified, "Over the Rainbow".
Unfortunately, Judy chose that path".
''In The Good Old Summertime'' was enormously successful at the box office.
Mayer finally decided to keep both actresses but, by that time, Durbin's option had lapsed and she was signed by Universal Studios.
Garland began performing in vaudeville with her two older sisters and was signed to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer as a teenager.
Thrilled by the huge box-office receipts of ''Easter Parade'', MGM immediately teamed Garland and Astaire in ''The Barkleys of Broadway''.
They next appeared together in ''Bubbles''.
Berkeley was staging all the musical numbers, and was severe with Garland's lack of effort, attitude, and enthusiasm.
She later characterized the Melbourne crowd as "brutish".
She wore a sequined pantsuit on stage for this tour, which was part of the original wardrobe for her character in ''Valley of the Dolls''.
In 1938, she was cast in her most remembered role, the young Dorothy Gale in ''The Wizard of Oz'' (1939), a film based on the children's book by L. Frank Baum.
Transcona made no more films with Warner.
She initially felt "greatly relieved" at the diagnosis.
She was the first woman to win a Grammy for Album of the Year for her live recording of ''Judy at Carnegie Hall''.
I wanted to hurt myself and everyone who had hurt me."
She was plagued with self-doubt throughout her life, despite successful film and recording careers, awards, critical praise, and her ability to fill concert halls worldwide, and she required constant reassurance that she was talented and attractive.
They agreed to wait a year to allow for his divorce to become final, and were wed on July 27, 1941.
She was noticeably thinner in her next film, ''For Me and My Gal'', alongside Gene Kelly in his first screen appearance.
Went the Strings of My Heart" and "Eli, Eli", a Yiddish song written in 1896 and very popular in vaudeville.
In 1940, she starred in three films: ''Andy Hardy Meets Debutante'', ''Strike Up the Band'', and ''Little Nellie Kelly''.
During this time, Garland experienced her first serious adult romances.
Their final on-screen appearance came in 1935, in another short entitled ''La Fiesta de Santa Barbara''.
When principal photography on ''Summer Stock'' was completed in spring 1950, it was decided that Garland needed an additional musical number.
''The Wizard of Oz'' was a tremendous critical success, though its high budget and promotions costs of an estimated $4&nbsp;million (equivalent to $ million in ), coupled with the lower revenue generated by children's tickets, meant that the film did not make a profit until it was rereleased in the 1940s and in subsequent rereleases.
Most notably, she performed at the London Palladium with her 18-year-old daughter Liza Minnelli in November 1964.
One is that it was originated by Jessel after Carole Lombard's character Lily Garland in the film ''Twentieth Century'', which was then playing at the Oriental; another is that the girls chose the surname after drama critic Robert Garland.
In the 1960s, a reporter asked how she felt about having a large gay following.
The family relocated to Lancaster, California, in June 1926, following rumors that Frank Gumm had made sexual advances towards male ushers.
Garland's autopsy showed no inflammation of her stomach lining and no drug residue in her stomach, which indicated that the drug had been ingested over a long period of time, rather than in one dose.
Rooney and she were sent on a cross-country promotional tour, culminating in the August 17 New York City premiere at the Capitol Theater, which included a five-show-a-day appearance schedule for the two stars.
Her blue gingham dress was chosen for its blurring effect on her figure, which made her look younger.
Garland performed "Zing!
It would be many years before she acted again in a nonsinging dramatic role.
Garland had a large fan base in the gay community and became a gay icon.
Her second performance, in Melbourne, started an hour late.
She had turned 47 just 12 days before her death.
The film took six months to complete.
Despite a brief bout of laryngitis, her performances there were so successful that her run was extended an extra week.
At Luft's suggestion, the "Born in a Trunk" medley was filmed as a showcase for her and inserted over director Cukor's objections, who feared the additional length would lead to cuts in other areas.
This regular dose of drugs, she said, led to addiction and a lifelong struggle, and contributed to her eventual demise.
In addition, she insisted that director Charles Walters choreograph and stage the number.
However, she recovered over the next several months and, in August of that year, returned to the stage of the Palladium.
Garland was of a healthy weight, but the studio demanded that she diet constantly.
Garland was initially outfitted in a blonde wig for the part, but Freed and LeRoy decided against it shortly into filming.
Her final film was ''I Could Go on Singing'' (1963), co-starring Dirk Bogarde.
The studio intervened because he was still married at the time to actress and singer Martha Raye.
