As a sign of leniency, he first had their throats cut.
He was elected ''quaestor'' for 69 BC, and during that year he delivered the funeral oration for his aunt Julia, and included images of her husband Marius in the funeral procession, unseen since the days of Sulla.
"); this derives from Shakespeare's ''Julius Caesar'', where it actually forms the first half of a macaronic line: "''Et tu, Brute?''
His successors did attempt the conquests of Parthia and Germania, but without lasting results.
Shortly before his assassination, the Senate named him censor for life and Father of the Fatherland, and the month of Quintilis was renamed July in his honor.
Caesar refused the order, and instead marked his defiance in 49&nbsp;BC by crossing the Rubicon with a legion, leaving his province and illegally entering Roman Italy under arms.
Francesco M. Galassi and Hutan Ashrafian suggest that Caesar's behavioral manifestations; headaches, vertigo, falls (possibly caused by muscle weakness due to nerve damage), sensory deficit, giddiness and insensibility; and syncopal episodes resulting from cerebrovascular episodes, not epilepsy.
Caesar was still deeply in debt, but there was money to be made as a governor, whether by extortion or by military adventurism.
Crassus paid some of Caesar's debts and acted as guarantor for others, in return for political support in his opposition to the interests of Pompey.
Pompey managed to escape before Caesar could capture him.
Octavian, aged only 18 when Caesar died, proved to have considerable political skills, and while Antony dealt with Decimus Brutus in the first round of the new civil wars, Octavian consolidated his tenuous position.
There, Caesar was presented with Pompey's severed head and seal-ring, receiving these with tears.
After this, he passed a law that rewarded families for having many children, to speed up the repopulation of Italy.
The title became Kaiser in German and Tsar or Czar in the Slavic languages.
At the same time, Casca produced his dagger and made a glancing thrust at the dictator's neck.
However, he also wanted to stand for consul, the most senior magistracy in the republic.
To combat Brutus and Cassius, who were massing an enormous army in Greece, Antony needed soldiers, the cash from Caesar's war chests, and the legitimacy that Caesar's name would provide for any action he took against them.
After this victory, he was appointed dictator for 10 years.
After spending the first months of 47&nbsp;BC in Egypt, Caesar went to the Middle East, where he annihilated the king of Pontus; his victory was so swift and complete that he mocked Pompey's previous victories over such poor enemies.
The dictator's last words are not known with certainty, and are a contested subject among scholars and historians alike.
("''Ista quidem vis est!
Then fall, Caesar."
The pirates demanded a ransom of 20 talents of silver, but he insisted that they ask for 50.
The first goal was accomplished when Caesar defeated Pompey and his supporters.
The term of his governorship, and thus his immunity from prosecution, was set at five years, rather than the usual one.
He was first appointed dictator in 49&nbsp;BC, possibly to preside over elections, but resigned his dictatorship within 11 days.
These attempts proved ineffective in obstructing Caesar's legislation.
Despite scattered outbreaks of warfare the following year, Gaul was effectively conquered.
Cleopatra visited Rome on more than one occasion, residing in Caesar's villa just outside Rome across the Tiber.
Second, he wanted to create a strong central government in Rome.
The conquest of the north was soon completed, while a few pockets of resistance remained.
He was granted further honors, which were later used to justify his assassination as a would-be divine monarch: coins were issued bearing his image and his statue was placed next to those of the kings.
He also wanted to convert Ostia to a major port, and cut a canal through the Isthmus of Corinth.
The threat against him was lifted by the intervention of his mother's family, which included supporters of Sulla, and the Vestal Virgins.
A favorite tactic used by the opposition was to accuse a popular political rival as living a Hellenistic lifestyle based on Greek and Eastern culture, where homosexuality and a lavish lifestyle were more acceptable than in Roman tradition.
Coins bore his likeness, and he was given the right to speak first during Senate meetings.
Caesar and Cleopatra were not married.
The Lucca Conference renewed the First Triumvirate and extended Caesar's governorship for another five years.
In 85 BC, Caesar's father died suddenly, so Caesar was the head of the family at 16.
Casca, frightened, shouted, "Help, brother!"
Little is recorded of Caesar's childhood.
This means that for two thousand years after Julius Caesar's assassination, there was at least one head of state bearing his name.
When Arsinoe IV, Egypt's former queen, was paraded in chains, the spectators admired her dignified bearing and were moved to pity.
Because Caesar's clemency had resulted in his murder, the Second Triumvirate reinstated the practice of proscription, abandoned since Sulla.
This, in effect, transformed the magistrates from being representatives of the people to being representatives of the dictator.
The word is also used in a pejorative manner by critics of this type of political rule.
In 46 BC, Caesar gave himself the title of "Prefect of the Morals", which was an office that was new only in name, as its powers were identical to those of the ''censors''.
Not everything went Caesar's way.
He was soon called back into military action in Asia, raising a band of auxiliaries to repel an incursion from the east.
Though the Gallic tribes were just as strong as the Romans militarily, the internal division among the Gauls guaranteed an easy victory for Caesar.
Antony and Octavian defeated them at Philippi.
In the Roman Republic, this was an honorary title assumed by certain military commanders.
", commonly rendered as "You too, Brutus?
Mark Antony, having vaguely learned of the plot the night before from a terrified ''liberator'' named Servilius Casca, and fearing the worst, went to head Caesar off.
He turned to Marcus Licinius Crassus, one of Rome's richest men.
Much of Caesar's life is known from his own accounts of his military campaigns, and from other contemporary sources, mainly the letters and speeches of Cicero and the historical writings of Sallust.
The contemporary Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent catalogued the surviving editions of the ''Commentaries'', and translated them to Turkish language.
The crowd at the funeral boiled over, throwing dry branches, furniture, and even clothing on to Caesar's funeral pyre, causing the flames to spin out of control, seriously damaging the Forum.
Caesar's father, also called Gaius Julius Caesar, governed the province of Asia, and his sister Julia, Caesar's aunt, married Gaius Marius, one of the most prominent figures in the Republic.
Caesar then increased the number of magistrates who were elected each year, which created a large pool of experienced magistrates, and allowed Caesar to reward his supporters.
Caesar won, along with conservative Marcus Bibulus.
Sulla gave in reluctantly, and is said to have declared that he saw many a Marius in Caesar.
A few sentences from other works are quoted by other authors.
In February 44 BC, one month before his assassination, he was appointed dictator for life.
The second volume listed previous rulers interested in the topic.
Caesar even took steps to transform Italy into a province, and to link more tightly the other provinces of the empire into a single cohesive unit.
Caesar held both the dictatorship and the tribunate, but alternated between the consulship and the proconsulship.
The Romans feared these tribes were preparing to migrate south, closer to Italy, and that they had warlike intent.
The tales were repeated, referring to Caesar as the Queen of Bithynia, by some Roman politicians as a way to humiliate him.
Perhaps as a result of the pharaoh's role in Pompey's murder, Caesar sided with Cleopatra.
This final civil war, culminating in the latter's defeat at Actium, resulted in the permanent ascendancy of Octavian, who became the first Roman emperor, under the name Caesar Augustus, a name that raised him to the status of a deity.
Caesar's cognomen itself became a title; it was promulgated by the Bible, which contains the famous verse "Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's".
In 60 BC, Caesar sought election as consul for 59&nbsp;BC, along with two other candidates.
Great games and celebrations were held in April to honor Caesar’s victory at Munda.
The earliest accounts of these seizures were made by the biographer Suetonius, who was born after Caesar died.
It formally deified Caesar as Divus Iulius in 42 BC, and Caesar Octavian henceforth became ''Divi filius'' ("Son of a god").
When Caesar returned to Rome, the Senate granted him triumphs for his victories, ostensibly those over Gaul, Egypt, Pharnaces, and Juba, rather than over his Roman opponents.
He lacked means since his inheritance was confiscated, but he acquired a modest house in Subura, a lower-class neighborhood of Rome.
Among his lost works are his funeral oration for his paternal aunt Julia and his ''Anticato'', a document written to defame Cato in response to Cicero's published praise.
Only its altar now remains.
In 53 BC Crassus was killed leading a failed invasion of the east.
From 47 to 44&nbsp;BC, he made plans for the distribution of land to about 15,000 of his veterans.
Caesar turned around quickly and caught Casca by the arm.
The election was sordid – even Cato, with his reputation for incorruptibility, is said to have resorted to bribery in favor of one of Caesar's opponents.
But the underlying political conflicts had not been resolved, and on the Ides of March (15&nbsp;March) 44&nbsp;BC, Caesar was assassinated by a group of rebellious senators led by Marcus Junius Brutus.
However, poor harvests led to widespread revolt in Gaul, which forced Caesar to leave Britain for the last time.
In fear of his life, he retired to his house for the rest of the year, issuing occasional proclamations of bad omens.
Despite greatly outnumbering Caesar, who only had his Thirteenth Legion with him, Pompey did not intend to fight.
He had them crucified on his own authority, as he had promised while in captivity—a promise that the pirates had taken as a joke.
Again, some bystanders complained, this time at Caesar's wasteful extravagance.
Finally, he enacted a series of reforms that were meant to address several long-neglected issues, the most important of which was his reform of the calendar.
Caesar and Cleopatra celebrated their victory with a triumphal procession on the Nile in the spring of 47&nbsp;BC.
At the Circus Maximus, two armies of war captives, each of 2,000 people, 200 horses, and 20 elephants, fought to the death.
No classical source mentions hearing impairment in connection with Caesar.
Mark Antony charged that Octavian had earned his adoption by Caesar through sexual favors.
His bodyguards had their ceremonial axes broken, two high magistrates accompanying him were wounded, and he had a bucket of excrement thrown over him.
This form of slander was popular during this time in the Roman Republic to demean and discredit political opponents.
With the evolution of the Romance languages, the affricate ts became a fricative s (thus, ) in many regional pronunciations, including the French one, from which the modern English pronunciation is derived.
However, Caesar wrote those texts with his political career in mind, so historians must struggle to filter the exaggerations and bias contained in it.
), where he met enthusiastic support, but where, according to Cicero, Cassius was planning to kill him at this point.
He set the length of the year to 365.25 days by adding an intercalary/leap day at the end of February every fourth year.
They were important in shaping Caesar's public image and enhancing his reputation when he was away from Rome for long periods.
in Greek ("", "''adelphe, boethei''").
The playwright may have been making metaphorical use of a passage in Plutarch that does not refer to deafness at all, but rather to a gesture Alexander of Macedon customarily made.
Caesar treated this as an aggressive move and, after an inconclusive engagement against the united tribes, he conquered the tribes piecemeal.
(The letterform ''Æ'' is a ligature of the letters ''A'' and ''E'', and is often used in Latin inscriptions to save space.)
On Caesar's return to Italy in September 45 BC, he filed his will, naming his grandnephew Gaius Octavius (Octavian, later known as Augustus Caesar) as his principal heir, leaving his vast estate and property including his name.
Poems by Julius Caesar are also mentioned in ancient sources.
In 63 BC, he ran for election to the post of ''Pontifex Maximus'', chief priest of the Roman state religion.
While he was still campaigning in Spain, the Senate began bestowing honors on Caesar.
Brutus and his companions then marched to the Capitol while crying out to their beloved city: "People of Rome, we are once again free!"
He also set the precedent, which his imperial successors followed, of requiring the Senate to bestow various titles and honors upon him.
He was stabbed 23 times.
After the impeachment of the two obstructive tribunes, Caesar, perhaps unsurprisingly, faced no further opposition from other members of the Tribunician College.
He ordered a census be taken, which forced a reduction in the grain dole, and decreed that jurors could only come from the Senate or the equestrian ranks.
(Plutarch, however, assigns this action to delay Antony to Brutus Albinus.)
Caesar also tightly regulated the purchase of state-subsidized grain and reduced the number of recipients to a fixed number, all of whom were entered into a special register.
He could not do both in the time available.
He ran against two powerful senators.
Octavian eventually became the first Roman Emperor as Augustus.
Near the end of his life, Caesar began to prepare for a war against the Parthian Empire.
He returned the following year, better prepared and with a larger force, and achieved more.
Erasmus, however, notes that the more accurate Latin translation of the Greek imperative mood would be "''alea iacta esto''", '''let''' the die be cast.
'''Gaius Julius Caesar''' (; 13 July 100&nbsp;BC – 15 March 44&nbsp;BC), known as '''Julius Caesar''', was a Roman politician, general, and notable author of Latin prose.
Caesar possibly had a genetic predisposition for cardiovascular disease.
While there, he is said to have encountered a statue of Alexander the Great, and realized with dissatisfaction that he was now at an age when Alexander had the world at his feet, while he had achieved comparatively little.
During his early career, Caesar had seen how chaotic and dysfunctional the Roman Republic had become.
Upon crossing the Rubicon, Caesar, according to Plutarch and Suetonius, is supposed to have quoted the Athenian playwright Menander, in Greek, "the die is cast".
When he heard the commotion from the Senate chamber, Antony fled.
He served with distinction, winning the Civic Crown for his part in the Siege of Mytilene.
Antony, who had been drifting apart from Caesar, capitalized on the grief of the Roman mob and threatened to unleash them on the ''Optimates'', perhaps with the intent of taking control of Rome himself.
Catullus wrote two poems suggesting that Caesar and his engineer Mamurra were lovers, but later apologised.
Plutarch also reports that Caesar said nothing, pulling his toga over his head when he saw Brutus among the conspirators.
According to Plutarch, he said in Latin, "Casca, you villain, what are you doing?"
Modern scholarship is "sharply divided" on the subject, and some scholars believe that he was plagued by malaria, particularly during the Sullan proscriptions of the 80s.
The later biographies of Caesar by Suetonius and Plutarch are also major sources.
After the triumph, Caesar set out to pass an ambitious legislative agenda.
In the ensuing chaos, Mark Antony, Octavian (later Augustus Caesar), and others fought a series of five civil wars, which would end in the formation of the Roman Empire.
Caesar then became involved with an Egyptian civil war between the child pharaoh and his sister, wife, and co-regent queen, Cleopatra.
He then passed a term-limit law applicable to governors.
Late in 48 BC, Caesar was again appointed dictator, with a term of one year.
He established a police force, appointed officials to carry out his land reforms, and ordered the rebuilding of Carthage and Corinth.
Hearing of Sulla's death in 78 BC, Caesar felt safe enough to return to Rome.
The republican machinery had broken down under the weight of imperialism, the central government had become powerless, the provinces had been transformed into independent principalities under the absolute control of their governors, and the army had replaced the constitution as the means of accomplishing political goals.
To accomplish the other two goals, he needed to ensure that his control over the government was undisputed, so he assumed these powers by increasing his own authority, and by decreasing the authority of Rome's other political institutions.
This addressed the underlying problem that had caused the Social War decades earlier, where individuals outside Rome and Italy were not considered "Roman",  thus were not given full citizenship rights.
The result unforeseen by the assassins was that Caesar's death precipitated the end of the Roman Republic.
Julius Caesar was the first historical Roman to be officially deified.
Militarily, he wanted to conquer the Dacians and Parthians, and avenge the loss at Carrhae.
Shortly before his assassination, he passed a few more reforms.
Caesar continued his relationship with Cleopatra throughout his last marriage – in Roman eyes, this did not constitute adultery – and probably fathered a son called Caesarion.
Henry IV and Louis XIII of France translated the first two commentaries and the last two respectively; Louis XIV retranslated the first one afterwards.
He withstood the Siege of Alexandria and later he defeated the pharaoh's forces at the Battle of the Nile in 47&nbsp;BC and installed Cleopatra as ruler.
Accusations of bribery were made by all sides.
The three of them had enough money and political influence to control public business.
In his will, he also left a substantial gift to the citizens of Rome.
These plans were thwarted by his assassination.
Caesar proposed a law for redistributing public lands to the poor—by force of arms, if need be—a proposal supported by Pompey and by Crassus, making the triumvirate public.
Caesar's victories in the Gallic Wars, completed by 51&nbsp;BC, extended Rome's territory to the English Channel and the Rhine.
In 50 BC, the Senate, led by Pompey, ordered Caesar to disband his army and return to Rome because his term as governor had finished.
He also extended Latin rights throughout the Roman world, and then abolished the tax system and reverted to the earlier version that allowed cities to collect tribute however they wanted, rather than needing Roman intermediaries.
In 48 BC, Caesar was given permanent tribunician powers, which made his person sacrosanct and allowed him to veto the Senate, although on at least one occasion, tribunes did attempt to obstruct him.
He centralized the bureaucracy of the Republic and was eventually proclaimed "dictator in perpetuity", giving him additional authority.
A lifesize wax statue of Caesar was later erected in the forum displaying the 23 stab wounds.
Thence, he proceeded to Africa to deal with the remnants of Pompey's senatorial supporters.
Plutarch claimed that during the Gallic Wars the army had fought against three million men (of whom one&nbsp;million died, and another million were enslaved), subjugated 300 tribes, and destroyed 800 cities.
Caesar also married again, this time Calpurnia, who was the daughter of another powerful senator.
He may additionally have had absence seizures in his youth.
While Caesar was in Britain his daughter Julia, Pompey's wife, had died in childbirth.
This process, of fusing the entire Roman Empire into a single unit, rather than maintaining it as a network of unequal principalities, would ultimately be completed by Caesar's successor, the emperor Augustus.
His assassination prevented further and larger schemes, which included the construction of an unprecedented temple to Mars, a huge theater, and a library on the scale of the Library of Alexandria.
Octavian set about solidifying his power, and the era of the Roman Empire began.
The last Tsar in nominal power was Simeon&nbsp;II of Bulgaria, whose reign ended in 1946.
In October 45&nbsp;BC, Caesar resigned his position as sole consul, and facilitated the election of two successors for the remainder of the year, which theoretically restored the ordinary consulship, since the constitution did not recognize a single consul without a colleague.
He passed a debt-restructuring law, which ultimately eliminated about a fourth of all debts owed.
Napoleon III wrote the scholary work ''Histoire de Jules César'', which was not finished.
Under Caesar, a significant amount of authority was vested in his lieutenants, mostly because Caesar was frequently out of Italy.
In Vulgar Latin, the plosive /k/ before front vowels began, due to palatalization, to be pronounced as an affricate, hence renderings like  in Italian and  in German regional pronunciations of Latin, as well as the title of Tsar.
Caesar was born into a patrician family, the ''gens Julia'', which claimed descent from Iulus, son of the legendary Trojan prince Aeneas, supposedly the son of the goddess Venus.
Caesar then pursued Pompey to Egypt, arriving soon after the murder of the general.
If he were to celebrate a triumph, he would have to remain a soldier and stay outside the city until the ceremony, but to stand for election he would need to lay down his command and enter Rome as a private citizen.
Both Plutarch and Suetonius say that Caesar waved him away, but Cimber grabbed his shoulders and pulled down Caesar's tunic.
These events can be more readily associated with cardiovascular complications from a stroke episode or lethal heart attack.
Pompey accused Caesar of insubordination and treason.
Suetonius reports that others have said Caesar's last words were the Greek phrase "" (transliterated as "''Kai su, teknon?
After assuming control of government, Caesar began a programme of social and governmental reforms, including the creation of the Julian calendar.
Caesar's adopted heir Octavian, later known as Augustus, rose to sole power after defeating his opponents in the civil war.
He turned to legal advocacy and became known for his exceptional oratory accompanied by impassioned gestures and a high-pitched voice, and ruthless prosecution of former governors notorious for extortion and corruption.
He quickly gained a significant victory in 46&nbsp;BC over Cato, who then committed suicide.
He was stripped of his inheritance, his wife's dowry, and his priesthood, but he refused to divorce Cornelia and was forced to go into hiding.
In Classical Latin, it was pronounced .
The version best known in the English-speaking world is the Latin phrase "''Et tu, Brute?''"
In Greek, during Caesar's time, his family name was written Καίσαρ (''Kaísar''), reflecting its contemporary pronunciation.
To his surprise and chagrin, Caesar had named his grandnephew Gaius Octavius his sole heir (hence the name Octavian), bequeathing him the immensely potent Caesar name and making him one of the wealthiest citizens in the Republic.
Based on remarks by Plutarch, Caesar is sometimes thought to have suffered from epilepsy.
In an exceedingly short engagement later that year, he decisively defeated Pompey at Pharsalus, in Greece.
With the help of political allies, Caesar later overturned this, and was instead appointed to govern Cisalpine Gaul (northern Italy) and Illyricum (southeastern Europe), with Transalpine Gaul (southern France) later added, giving him command of four legions.
They were met with silence, as the citizens of Rome had locked themselves inside their houses as soon as the rumor of what had taken place had begun to spread.
A third civil war broke out between Octavian on one hand and Antony and Cleopatra on the other.
The original /k/ is preserved in Norse mythology, where he is manifested as the legendary king Kjárr.
