Southern Netherlands
As a result, the year gained about three days every four centuries compared to observed equinox times and the seasons.
These names were used until the 15th century, over 700 years after his rule, and continued, with some modifications, to see some use as "traditional" month names until the late 18th century.
The Rumi calendar used in the Ottoman Empire began the civil year on 1 March until 1918.
The emperor Tacitus is said to have ordered that September, the month of his birth and accession, be renamed after him, but the story is doubtful since he did not become emperor before November 275.
During the changeover between calendars and for some time afterwards, dual dating was used in documents and gave both old style and new style dates.
This notation is used to clarify dates from countries which continued to use the Julian calendar after the Gregorian reform, such as Great Britain, which did not switch to the reformed calendar until 1752, or Russia, which did not switch until 1918.
Antoninus Pius rejected a senatorial decree renaming September as "Antoninus" and November as "Faustina", after his empress.
He landed in the Nile delta in October 48&nbsp;BC and soon became embroiled in the Ptolemaic dynastic war, especially after Cleopatra managed to be "introduced" to him in Alexandria.
In leap year, however, it contained an extra "Sebaste day", the Roman leap day, and thus had 32 days.
The first step of the reform was to realign the start of the calendar year (1 January) to the tropical year by making 46&nbsp;BC (708 AUC) 445 days long, compensating for the intercalations which had been missed during Caesar's pontificate.
But since the corresponding Roman date in the inscription is 24 January, this must be according to the incorrect calendar which in 8&nbsp;BC Augustus had ordered to be corrected by the omission of leap days.
The octaeteris, a cycle of 8 lunar years popularised by Cleostratus (and also commonly attributed to Eudoxus) which was used in some early Greek calendars, notably in Athens, is 1.53 days longer than eight Julian years.
Starting in the 16th century, European settlements in the Americas and elsewhere likewise inherited the Julian calendar of the mother country, until they adopted the Gregorian reform.
Pliny says that Caesar was aided in his reform by the astronomer Sosigenes of Alexandria who is generally considered the principal designer of the reform.
The length of nineteen years in the cycle of Meton was 6,940 days, six hours longer than the mean Julian year.
Some Old Calendarist groups which stand in opposition to the state churches of their homelands will use the Great Feast of the Theophany (6 January Julian/19 January Gregorian) as a day for religious processions and the Great Blessing of Waters, to publicise their cause.
The leap day was a second Sebaste day in the month of Xandikos, i.e., 24 February.
The solar part of the Revised Julian calendar was accepted by only some Orthodox churches.
Some people have had different ideas as to how the leap years went.
The 19th century chronologist Ideler argued that Celsus used the term "posterior" in a technical fashion to refer to the earlier of the two days, which requires the inscription to refer to the whole 48-hour day as the bissextile.
Although most Eastern Orthodox countries (most of them in eastern or southeastern Europe) had adopted the Gregorian calendar by 1924, their national churches had not.
Hence he regarded the bissextum as the first half of the doubled day.
Consequently, the Julian calendar is currently (since 14 March 1900 Gregorian/1 March Julian and until 28 February 2100 Gregorian/15 February Julian) 13 days behind the Gregorian calendar.
Unreformed calendars continued to be used in Gaul, Greece, Macedon, the Balkans and parts of Palestine, most notably in Judea.
However, it accumulated significantly over time: the Julian calendar gained a day about every 134 years.
Augustus kept his on 23 September, but both the old date (a.d. VIII Kal.
Caesar imposed a peace, and a banquet was held to celebrate the event.
Oct.   Every month begins on the ninth day before the kalends.
A leap day is added to February every four years.
The Alexandrian calendar adapted the Egyptian calendar by adding a 6th epagomenal day as the last day of the year in every fourth year, falling on 29 August preceding a Julian bissextile day.
The "Revised Julian calendar"  was endorsed by a synod in Constantinople in May 1923, consisting of a solar part which was and will be identical to the Gregorian calendar until the year 2800, and a lunar part which calculated Pascha (Easter) astronomically at Jerusalem.
The '''Julian calendar''', introduced by Julius Caesar in 46&nbsp;BC (708 AUC), was a reform of the Roman calendar.
Others, following Mommsen, take the view that Celsus was using the ordinary Latin (and English) meaning of "posterior".
Eastern European countries, with populations showing allegiance to the Orthodox Church, began the year on 1 September from about 988.
The calendar year is the order that the months were listed in calendars or ''fasti'' displayed on painted walls or on stone tablets, and has been January to December since about 450&nbsp;BC according to Ovid or since about 713&nbsp;BC according to Macrobius and Plutarch (see Roman calendar).
Several local provincial calendars were aligned to start on the birthday of Augustus, 23 September.
Several of the reformed calendars are only known through surviving hemerologia.
Turkey switched (for fiscal purposes) on 16 February/1 March 1917.
For 12 years from 1700 Sweden used a modified Julian calendar, and adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1753.
), which either represents the Julian date with the start of the year as 1 January or a full mapping onto the Gregorian calendar.
When the Julian calendar was adopted in AD 988 by Vladimir I of Kiev, the year was numbered Anno Mundi 6496, beginning on 1 March, six months after the start of the Byzantine Anno Mundi year with the same number.
''; hence it is called in English the bissextile day.
Thus, Christian Nubia and Ethiopia adopted the Alexandrian calendar, while Christian Europe adopted the Julian calendar, in either the Catholic or Orthodox variant.
The Armenian Apostolic Orthodox Church celebrates the Nativity as part of the Feast of Theophany according to its traditional calendar.
Greece made the change for civil purposes on 16 February/1 March 1923 - the national day (25 March), which was a religious holiday, was to remain on the old calendar.
(See Sacrobosco's theory on month lengths below for stories purporting otherwise).
In the form of the Alexandrian calendar, it is the basis for the Ethiopian calendar, which is the civil calendar of Ethiopia.
The notation "Old Style" (O.S.)
It was intended to approximate the tropical (solar) year.
45, 42, 39, 36, 33, 30, 27, 24, 21, 18, 15, 12
Other name changes were proposed but were never implemented.
Most reformed calendars were adopted under Augustus, though the calendar of Nabatea was reformed after the kingdom became the Roman province of Arabia in AD 106.
After 541, only the reigning emperor held the consulate, typically for only one year in his reign, and so post-consular dating became the norm.
British Empire excluding Scotland
Dionysius Exiguus proposed the system of Anno Domini in 525.
Russia changed on 1/14 February 1918.
Further, Sacrobosco's theory is explicitly contradicted by the 3rd and 5th century authors Censorinus and Macrobius, and it is inconsistent with seasonal lengths given by Varro, writing in 37&nbsp;BC, before Sextilis was renamed for Augustus in 8&nbsp;BC, with the 31-day Sextilis given by an Egyptian papyrus from 24&nbsp;BC, and with the 28-day February shown in the ''Fasti Caeretani'', which is dated before 12&nbsp;BC.
The earliest direct evidence is a statement of the 2nd century jurist Celsus, who states that there were two halves of a 48-hour day, and that the intercalated day was the "posterior" half.
The Asian calendar was an adaptation of the Macedonian calendar used in the province of Asia and, with minor variations, in nearby cities and provinces.
It renamed the first month Dios as ''Kaisar'', and arranged the months such that each month started on the ninth day before the kalends of the corresponding Roman month; thus the year began on 23 September, Augustus' birthday.
The ordinary year in the previous Roman calendar consisted of 12 months, for a total of 355 days.
The new leap day was dated as ''ante diem bis sextum Kalendas Martias'' ('the sixth doubled before the Kalends of March'), usually abbreviated as ''a.d.
According to a ''senatus consultum'' quoted by Macrobius, Sextilis was renamed to honour Augustus because several of the most significant events in his rise to power, culminating in the fall of Alexandria, occurred in that month.
Quintilis was renamed to honour Caesar because it was the month of his birth.
This would move the starting date back three years to 8&nbsp;BC, and from the lunar synchronism back to 26 January (Julian).
instead of a.d. XVII Kal., while in April, June, September and November it became a.d. XVIII Kal.
However, in the following decades many of the local civic and provincial calendars of the empire and neighbouring client kingdoms were aligned to the Julian calendar by transforming them into calendars with years of 365 days with an extra day intercalated every four years.
In the British Empire (including the American colonies), Wednesday  was followed by Thursday .
February was not changed in ordinary years, and so continued to be the traditional 28 days.
According to the later writers Censorinus and Macrobius, the ideal intercalary cycle consisted of ordinary years of 355 days alternating with intercalary years, alternately 377 and 378 days long.
The following table shows the years in which various countries adopted 1 January as the start of the year.
These months are called ''Intercalaris Prior'' and ''Intercalaris Posterior'' in letters of Cicero written at the time; there is no basis for the statement sometimes seen that they were called "Undecimber" and "Duodecimber".
Thus these churches celebrate the Nativity on the same day that western Christians do, 25 December Gregorian until 2799.
According to Dio Cassius, a leap day was inserted in 41&nbsp;BC to ensure that the first market day of 40&nbsp;BC did not fall on 1 January, which implies that the old 8-day cycle was not immediately affected by the Julian reform.
However, most branches of the Eastern Orthodox Church still use the Julian calendar for calculating the dates of moveable feasts, including Easter (Pascha).
In addition to consular years, the Romans sometimes used the regnal year of the emperor, and by the late 4th century documents were also being dated according to the 15-year cycle of the indiction.
On average, the astronomical solstices and the equinoxes advance by about 11 minutes per year against the Julian year.
Triennial leap years (BC)
The first leap day was in 22&nbsp;BC, and they occurred every four years from the beginning, even though Roman leap days occurred every three years at this time (see Leap year error).
Dutch Republic except Holland and Zeeland
This was to explain to the reader that the year was 1661 counting from March and 1662 counting from January as the start of the year.
It was decreed by the proconsul that the first day of the year in the new calendar shall be Augustus' birthday, a.d. IX Kal.
There is no doubt that the bissextile day eventually became the earlier of the two days for most purposes.
They usually occurred every second or third year, but were sometimes omitted for much longer, and occasionally occurred in two consecutive years.
The month after that was Xanthicus.
Throughout the long transition period, the Julian calendar has continued to diverge from the Gregorian.
Indeed, Renaissance editors often added it to the manuscripts that they published, giving the false impression that the Romans numbered their years.
He established that the Augustan reform was instituted in 8&nbsp;BC.
During the Middle Ages 1 January retained the name ''New Year's Day'' (or an equivalent name) in all western European countries (affiliated with the Roman Catholic Church), since the medieval calendar continued to display the months from January to December (in twelve columns containing 28 to 31 days each), just as the Romans had.
43, 40, 37, 34, 31, 28, 25, 22, 19, 16, 13, 10
The calendar month names used in western and northern Europe, in Byzantium, and by the Berbers, were derived from the Latin names.
The Julian year is, therefore, on average 365.25 days long.
Other reformed calendars are known from Cappadocia, Cyprus and the cities of Syria and Palestine.
According to one translation
The net effect was to add 22 or 23 days to the year, forming an intercalary year of 377 or 378 days.
Since 153&nbsp;BC, they had taken office on 1 January, the start of the calendar year.
In 309 and 310, and from time to time thereafter, no consuls were appointed.
The Julian calendar is still used by the Berber people of North Africa, and on Mount Athos.
This proved useful very soon after the new calendar came into effect.
The date of introduction, the day after 14 Peritius, was 1 Dystrus, the next month.
While Hipparchus and presumably Sosigenes were aware of the discrepancy, although not of its correct value, it was evidently felt to be of little importance at the time of the Julian reform.
Protestant countries followed later, and some countries of eastern Europe even later.
Ottoman Empire (Turkey)
45, 41, 38, 35, 32, 29, 26, 23, 20, 17, 14, 11
The three most important of these calendars are the Alexandrian calendar, the Asian calendar and the Syro-Macedonian calendar.
If managed correctly this system could have allowed the Roman year to stay roughly aligned to a tropical year.
This necessitates fourteen leap days up to and including AD&nbsp;8 if 45&nbsp;BC was a leap year and thirteen if it was not.
Other months were renamed by other emperors, but apparently none of the later changes survived their deaths.
However, this practice was discontinued around the reign of Claudius, and the practice of characterising days fell into disuse around the end of the first century AD: the Antonine jurist Gaius speaks of ''dies nefasti'' as a thing of the past.
Oct.) were celebrated in some places.
Caesar probably experienced this "wandering" or "vague" calendar in that country.
This intercalary month was formed by inserting 22 or 23 days after the first 23 days of February; the last five days of February, which counted down toward the start of March, became the last five days of Intercalaris.
In many cases, the New Year was not on 1 January, the leap day was not on the bissextile day, the old month names were retained, the lengths of the reformed months did not match the lengths of Julian months, and, even if they did, their first days did not match the first day of the corresponding Julian month.
An unsuccessful attempt to add an extra day every fourth year was made in 238&nbsp;BC (Decree of Canopus).
Xanthicus shall have 32 days in this intercalary year."
Feb, which would have been 15 Peritius as it is currently constituted in the third year following promulgation of the decree.
According to his biographer, Charlemagne renamed all of the months agriculturally into German.
The Alexandrian calendar in Egypt started on 29 August (30 August after an Alexandrian leap year).
In AD 37, Caligula renamed September as "Germanicus" after his father; in AD 65, Nero renamed April as "Neroneus", May as "Claudius" and June as "Germanicus"; and in AD 84 Domitian renamed September as "Germanicus" and October as "Domitianus".
Many local eras, such as the Era of Actium and the Spanish Era, were adopted for the Julian calendar or its local equivalent in the provinces and cities of the Roman Empire.
However, since the pontifices were often politicians, and because a Roman magistrate's term of office corresponded with a calendar year, this power was prone to abuse: a pontifex could lengthen a year in which he or one of his political allies was in office, or refuse to lengthen one in which his opponents were in power.
It took effect in 45&nbsp;BC (AUC 709), shortly after the Roman conquest of Egypt.
Moreover, because intercalations were often determined quite late, the average Roman citizen often did not know the date, particularly if he were some distance from the city.
Likewise in Egypt, a fixed year of 365 days was in use, drifting by one day against the sun in four years.
The reformed calendars typically retained many features of the unreformed calendars.
The system of consular dating, long obsolete, was formally abolished in the law code of Leo VI, issued in 888.
These reformed calendars generally remained in use until the fifth or sixth century.
Feb., which moved it from  28 to 30 January, a day that had previously not existed.
43, 40, 37, 34, 31, 28, 25, 22, 19, 16, 13, 10
However, since Roman dates after the Ides of the month counted down toward the start of the next month, the extra days had the effect of raising the initial value of the count of the day following the Ides in the lengthened months.
It was otherwise identical to the Egyptian calendar.
Another translation of this inscription is
The Orthodox Churches of Jerusalem, Russia, Serbia, Montenegro, Poland (from 15 June 2014), Macedonia, Georgia, Ukraine, and the Greek Old Calendarists and other groups continue to use the Julian calendar, thus they celebrate the Nativity on 25 December Julian (which is 7 January Gregorian until 2100).
Egypt converted on 20 December 1874/1 January 1875.
The table shows for each reconstruction the implied proleptic Julian date for the first day of Caesar's reformed calendar (Kal.
and the Finnish Orthodox Church).
The Julian calendar gains against the mean tropical year at the rate of one day in 128 years.
If too many intercalations were omitted, as happened after the Second Punic War and during the Civil Wars, the calendar would drift out of alignment with the tropical year.
All later writers, including Macrobius about 430, Bede in 725, and other medieval computists (calculators of Easter) followed this rule, as does the liturgical calendar of the Roman Catholic Church.
In 1999 a papyrus was discovered which gives the dates of astronomical phenomena in 24&nbsp;BC in both the Egyptian and Roman calendars.
The original proposal in Russia had been to drop 24 hours every year, spreading the change over thirteen years, and to drop the leap day in years exactly divisible by 128 (e.g.
It was incorporated into Justinian's Digest, and in the English statute  ''De anno et die bissextili'' of 1236, which was not formally repealed until 1879.
The Julian calendar was also used in some Muslim countries.
The Julian calendar was in general use in Europe and northern Africa until 1582, when Pope Gregory XIII promulgated the Gregorian calendar.
45, 42, 39, 36, 33, 30, 27, 24, 21, 18, 15, 12, 9
Only rarely did the Romans number the year from the founding of the city (of Rome), ''ab urbe condita'' (AUC).
The Gregorian calendar has the same months and month lengths as the Julian calendar, but, in the Gregorian calendar, years evenly divisible by 100 are not leap years, except that years evenly divisible by 400 remain leap years.
Commodus was unique in renaming all twelve months after his own adopted names (January to December): "Amazonius", "Invictus", "Felix", "Pius", "Lucius", "Aelius", "Aurelius", "Commodus", "Augustus", "Herculeus", "Romanus", and "Exsuperatorius".
By 1582, it was ten days out of alignment from where it supposedly had been in 325 during the Council of Nicaea.
There is debate about the exact position of the bissextile day in the early Julian calendar.
Prussia, Denmark–Norway
The indiction caused the Byzantine year, which used the Julian calendar, to begin on 1 September; this date is still used in the Eastern Orthodox Church for the beginning of the liturgical year.
This difference will persist until the last day of February 2100 (Gregorian), since 2100 is ''not'' a Gregorian leap year, but ''is'' a Julian leap year.
He then enjoyed a long cruise on the Nile with Cleopatra before leaving the country in June 47&nbsp;BC.
Thus, the ordinary (i.e., non leap year) lengths of all of the months were set by the Julian calendar to the same values they still hold today.
Romans of the time born after the Ides of a month responded differently to the effect of this change on their birthdays.
It is known in detail through the survival of decrees promulgating it issued in 8 BC by the proconsul Paullus Fabius Maximus.
When a people or a country was converted to Christianity, they generally also adopted the Christian calendar of the church responsible for conversion.
Since Greek months typically had 29 or 30 days, the extra day of 31 day months was named ''Sebaste''—the emperor's day—and was the first day of these months.
This calendar remained in use at least until the middle of the fifth century AD.
AUC 709) and the first Julian date on which the Roman calendar date matches the Julian calendar after the completion of Augustus' reform.
This era gradually spread through the western Christian world, once the system was adopted by Bede.
In recent years, some users of the Berber calendar have adopted an era starting in 950&nbsp;BC, the approximate date that the Libyan pharaoh Sheshonq I came to power in Egypt.
The Julian months were formed by adding ten days to a regular pre-Julian Roman year of 355 days, creating a regular Julian year of 365 days.
44, 41, 38, 35, 32, 29, 26, 23, 20, 17, 14, 11, 8
"Intercalation  shall commence on the day after 14 Peritius a.d. IX Kal.
When Caesar decreed the reform, probably shortly after his return from the African campaign in late Quintilis (July), he added 67 more days by inserting two extraordinary intercalary months between November and December.
In 1492 (AM 7000), Ivan III, according to church tradition, realigned the start of the year to 1 September, so that AM 7000 only lasted for six months in Russia, from 1 March to 31 August 1492.
Lucan depicted Caesar talking to a wise man called Acoreus during the feast, stating his intention to create a calendar more perfect than that of Eudoxus (Eudoxus was popularly credited with having determined the length of the year to be  days).
Up to  the date in both calendars was the same.
From a comparison of the astronomical data with the Egyptian and Roman dates Alexander Jones concluded that the Egyptian astronomers (as opposed to travellers from Rome) used the correct Julian calendar.
Since 2000 was a leap year according to both the Julian and Gregorian calendars, the difference of 13 days did not change in that year:  (Gregorian) fell on  (Julian).
The Julian calendar spread beyond the borders of the Roman Empire through its use as the Christian liturgical calendar.
During the late Middle Ages days in the month came to be numbered in consecutive day order.
The Julian calendar has been replaced as the civil calendar by the Gregorian calendar in almost all countries which formerly used it, although it continued to be the civil calendar of some countries into the 20th century.
As the authors of the previous paper point out, with the correct four-year cycle being used in Egypt and the three-year cycle abolished in Rome it is unlikely that Augustus would have ordered the three-year cycle to be introduced in Asia.
All Orthodox churches refused to accept the lunar part, so almost all Orthodox churches continue to celebrate Pascha according to the Julian calendar (with the exception of the Estonian Orthodox Church
However, even after local calendars were aligned to the Julian calendar, they started the new year on different dates.
For these reasons, the last years of the pre-Julian calendar were later known as "years of confusion".
The problems became particularly acute during the years of Julius Caesar's pontificate before the reform, 63–46&nbsp;BC, when there were only five intercalary months (instead of eight), none of which were during the five Roman years before 46&nbsp;BC.
The Julian reform did not change the method used to account days of the month in the pre-Julian calendar, based on the Kalends, Nones and Ides, nor did it change the positions of these three dates within the months.
However, this created confusion and on 10/23 March 1924 the church began using this "new" or "political" calendar for fixed religious feasts.
However, Celsus' definition continued to be used for legal purposes.
As a result, the calculated date of Easter gradually moved out of alignment with the March equinox.
Xanthicus shall have 32 days in this intercalary year."
This refinement averages the length of the year to 365.25 days over 24 years.
The chronicler Prosper of Aquitaine, in the fifth century, used an era dated from the Passion of Christ, but this era was not widely adopted.
This discrepancy was corrected by the Gregorian reform of 1582.
These practices changed after the Norman conquest.
The approximation of  days for the tropical year had been known for a long time but was not used directly since ancient calendars were not solar although the Egyptian calendar and Iranian calendar did come very close with unadjusted years of 365 days.
An inscription from AD 168 states that ''a.d.
Because 46&nbsp;BC was the last of a series of irregular years, this extra-long year was, and is, referred to as the "last year of confusion".
Tiberius rejected a senatorial proposal to rename September as "Tiberius" and October as "Livius", after his mother Livia.
When this happened, the consular date was given a count of years since the last consul (so-called "post-consular" dating).
According to Macrobius, Caesar was assisted in this by a certain Marcus Flavius.
43, 40, 37, 34, 31, 28, 25, 22, 19, 16, 13, 10
In the early Julio-Claudian period a large number of festivals were decreed to celebrate events of dynastic importance, which caused the character of the associated dates to be changed to '''NP'''.
Similar post-consular dates were also known in the west in the early 6th century.
The difference in the average length of the year between Julian (365.25 days) and Gregorian (365.2425 days) is 0.002%.
