Often jurisdictions pay token amounts for jury duty and many issue stipends to cover transportation expenses for jurors.
In most continental European jurisdictions, judges have more power in a trial and the role and powers of a jury are often restricted.
The resulting Wantage Code formally recognized legal customs that were part of the Danelaw.
Sweden has no tradition of using juries in most types of criminal or civil trial.
Detailed interviews with jurors after they rendered verdicts in trials involving complex expert testimony have demonstrated careful and critical analysis.
Once the list of prospective jurors has assembled in the courtroom the court clerk assigns them seats in the order their names were originally drawn.
Selection of jurors from a jury pool occurs when a trial is announced and juror names are randomly selected and called out by the jury pool clerk.
In the United States, confidentiality is usually only required until a verdict has been reached, and jurors have sometimes made remarks that called into question whether a verdict was properly reached.
In the United States blue-ribbon juries were provided for by statutes, the terms varying by jurisdiction.
In the most serious offences, found in  section 469 of the Criminal Code (such as murder or treason), a judge and a jury are always used, unless both the accused and the prosecutor agree that the trial should not be in front of a jury.
Prior to the Act, the main means of ensuring impartiality was by allowing legal challenges to the sheriff's choices.
Juries are composed of fifteen residents.
The word ''jury'' derives from Anglo-Norman ''juré'' ("sworn").
A '''jury''' is a sworn body of people convened to render an impartial verdict (a finding of fact on a question) officially submitted to them by a court, or to set a penalty or judgment.
In the United States jurors for grand juries are selected from jury pools.
Outside government, a jury or panel of judges may make determinations in competition, such as at a wine tasting, art exhibition, talent contest, or reality game show.
For example, it would be possible for one jury to find that particular conduct is negligent, and another jury to find that the conduct is not negligent, without either verdict being legally invalid, on precisely the same factual evidence.
John A. Makdisi argues that many concepts of English common law, including juries at least partly, derive from Islamic law.
One, the onus of proving that it was an accident and not premeditated murder was on Nanavati.
The new provisions did not specifically aim at establishing impartiality, but had the effect of reinforcing the authority of the jury by guaranteeing impartiality at the point of selection.
The prosecution argued that the jury had been misled by the presiding judge on four crucial points.
However, it remained controversial; and, early in the 20th century, there were moves to abolish it.
Three professional judges sit alongside six jurors in first instance proceedings or nine in appeal proceedings.
Juries are also used in some civil law trials, such as for defamation; they are sometimes used at coroner's inquests.
According to Kalven and Zeisel (1966), it is not uncommon to find that the verdicts passed down by juries following a trial match the verdicts held by the appointed judges.
In practice, coroner's juries are most often convened in order to avoid the appearance of impropriety by one governmental official in the criminal justice system toward another if no charges are filed against the person causing the death, when a governmental party such as a law enforcement officer is involved in the death.
The majority required for a verdict varies.
The jury is given guidance on points of law and then sent out to consider its verdict.
The Assize of Clarendon in 1166 caused these juries to be adopted systematically throughout the country.
Juries are most common in common law adversarial-system jurisdictions.
Depending on the type of trial—whether a 6-person or 12 person jury is needed, in the United States—anywhere from 15 to 30 prospective jurors are sent to the courtroom to participate in voir dire, pronounced  in French, and defined as the oath to speak the truth in the examination testing competence of a juror, or in another application, a witness.
Only about 2% of civil cases go to trial, with only about half of those trials being conducted before juries.
In the ''Nanavati'' case, Kawas Manekshaw Nanavati was tried for the murder of his wife Sylvia's paramour, Prem Ahuja.
In the 17th and 18th centuries there was a series of such cases, starting in 1670 with the trial of the Quaker William Penn which asserted the (de facto) right, or at least power, of a jury to render a verdict contrary to the facts or law.
Pottle successfully appealed to the jury to disregard the judge's instruction that they consider only whether the defendants were guilty in law, and assert a jury's ancient right to throw out a politically motivated prosecution, in this case compounded by its cynical untimeliness.
It is not necessary that a jury be unanimous in its verdict.
Traditionally the removal of jurors based on a peremptory challenge required no justification or explanation, but the tradition has been changed by the Supreme Court where the reason for the peremptory challenge was the race of the potential juror.
In civil cases juries are usually only used in cases of defamation.
However, the Seventh Amendment right to a civil jury trial does not apply in state courts, where the right to a jury is strictly a matter of state law.
Any Italian citizen, with no distinction of sex or religion, between 30 and 65 years of age, can be appointed as a lay judge; in order to be eligible as a lay judge for the ''Corte d'Assise'', however, there is a minimum educational requirement, as the lay judge must have completed his/her education at the ''Scuola Media'' (junior high school) level, while said level is raised for the ''Corte d'Assise d'Appello'' (appeal level of the Corte d'Assise) to the ''Scuola Superiore'' (senior high school) degree.
In addition to their primary role in screening criminal prosecutions and assisting in the investigation of crimes, grand juries in California, Florida, and some other U.S. states are sometimes utilized to perform an investigative and policy audit function similar to that filled by the Government Accountability Office in the United States federal government and legislative state auditors in many U.S. states.
This is so because a grand jury cannot convict a defendant.
The jury's verdict on the ultimate disposition of guilt or innocence must be unanimous, but can disagree on the evidentiary route that leads to that disposition.
Scholarly research on jury behavior in American non-capital criminal felony trials reveals that juror outcomes appear to track the opinions of the median juror, rather than the opinions of the extreme juror on the panel, although juries were required to render unanimous verdicts in the jurisdictions studied.
On 18 June 2009 the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Judge, sitting in the Court of Appeal, made English legal history by ruling that a criminal trial in the Crown Court could take place without a jury, under the provisions of the Criminal Justice Act 2003.
The list is usually written up and clearly visible to assist nervous prospective jurors and may include several questions uniquely pertinent to the particular trial.
In a sense, the concept of being judged by one's peers exists on both the first and second tier of the Norwegian court system: In Tingretten, one judge and two lay judges preside, and in Lagmannsretten three judges and four lay judges preside (if a jury is not used).
During the Troubles in Northern Ireland, jury trials were suspended and trials took place before Diplock Courts.
Juries are not paid, nor do they receive travel expenses; however they do receive lunch for the days that they are serving.
The Fully Informed Jury Association is a non-profit educational organization dedicated to informing jurors of their rights and seeking the passage of laws to require judges to inform jurors that they can and should judge the law.
In the Supreme Court, only trained lawyers are seated.
Three, the judge wrongly told the jury that the provocation can also come from a third person.
The modern criminal court jury arrangement has evolved out of the medieval juries in England.
In a later case, however, the court rejected the use of five-person juries in criminal cases.
Their function was therefore closer to that of a grand jury than that of a jury in a trial.
Jury selection is in accordance with specific criteria.
Jury trials are also available for some few areas of civil law (for example defamation cases and those involving police conduct), these also require 12 jurors (9 in the County Court), but less than one percent of civil trials involve juries.
Its aim was to prevent middle-class citizens from evading their responsibilities by financially putting into question the neutrality of the under-sheriff, the official entrusted with impanelling juries.
Perhaps the best example of modern-day jury equity in England and Wales was the acquittal of Clive Ponting, on a charge of revealing secret information, under section 2 of the Official Secrets Act 1911 in 1985.
There is no jury in the District Court.
assisted suicide), while it generally has no jurisdiction over cases whose evaluation requires knowledge of Law which the "Lay Judges" generally don't have.
Since there is always the possibility of jurors not completing a trial for health or other reasons, often one or more alternate jurors are selected.
As a safeguard against libel cases, press crimes can also only be tried by jury.
When selected, being a member of a jury pool is, in principle, compulsory.
51-243(e) provides that alternate jurors "shall be dismissed."
In addition, from time to time, the Coroner's Court may summon a jury to decide the cause of death in an inquest.
In criminal law in federal courts and a minority of state court systems of the United States, a grand jury is convened to hear only testimony and evidence to determine whether there is a sufficient basis for deciding to indict the defendant and proceed toward trial.
Groups tend to exert buffering effects that allow jurors to disregard their initial personal biases when forming a credible group decision.
For most indictable offences, the accused person can elect to be tried by either a judge alone or a judge and jury.
In Connecticut, alternate jurors are dismissed before the panel of sworn jurors begin deliberation.
The ''Corte d'Assise'' has jurisdiction to try crimes carrying a maximum penalty of 24 years in prison or life imprisonment, and other serious crimes; felonies that fall under its jurisdiction include terrorism, murder, manslaughter, severe attempts against State personalities, as well as some matters of law requiring ethical and professional evaluations (ex.
They employed sensible techniques to evaluate the experts’ testimony, such as assessing the completeness and consistency of the testimony, comparing it with other evidence at the trial, and evaluating it against their own knowledge and life experience.
In Scotland (with a separate legal system from that of England and Wales) although technically the "not guilty" verdict was originally a form of jury nullification, over time the interpretation has changed so that now the "not guilty" verdict has become the normal one when a jury is not persuaded of guilt and the "not proven" verdict is only used when the jury is not certain of innocence or guilt.
Upon surveying judges and jurors of approximately 8000 criminal and civil trials, it was discovered that the verdicts handed down by both parties were in agreement 80% of the time.
If there remains a case to answer, the defence leads evidence from witnesses in an attempt to refute previous evidence led by the prosecution, with cross examination being permitted after each witness.
However, jurors can be released from the pool for several reasons including illness, prior commitments that can't be abandoned without hardship, change of address to outside the court's jurisdiction, travel or employment outside the jurisdiction at the time of duty, and others.
Scottish trials are based on an adversarial approach.
Racism is excluded from this safeguard.
For most other cases in the first and second tier courts lay judges sit alongside professional judges.
When the required number of jurors cannot agree on a verdict (a situation sometimes referred to as a ''hung jury''), a mistrial is declared, and the case may be retried with a newly constituted jury.
In 1898 the Supreme Court held that the jury must be composed of at least twelve persons, although this was not necessarily extended to state civil jury trials.
After hearing the evidence and often jury instructions from the judge, the group retires for deliberation, to consider a verdict.
In ''Sparf v. United States'', , the Supreme Court, in a 5-4 decision, held that a trial judge has no responsibility to inform the jury of the right to nullify laws.
The foreperson may be selected by the judge or by vote of the jurors, depending on the jurisdiction.
The finality of trial court findings of fact in legal systems based on the English tradition has major impact on court procedure in these systems.
There is a specific criminal offence for disclosing anything that takes place during jury deliberations.
Blue ribbon juries attend to civic matters as an ad-hoc body in the executive branch of a government.
Since the jury was alleged to have been influenced by media and public support for Nanavati, the Indian government abolished jury trials after the case even though no comparative study was done on media influence on judges and on Jury.
The "petit jury" (or "trial jury", sometimes "petty jury") hears the evidence in a trial as presented by both the plaintiff (petitioner) and the defendant (respondent).
A jury trial verdict in a case is binding only in that case, and is not a legally binding precedent in other cases.
The testimonial concept can also be traced to Normandy before 1066, when a jury of nobles was established to decide land disputes.
The Law Reform Commission examined jury service, producing a consultation paper in 2010 and then a report in 2013.
However, this is not the practice in most other legal systems based on the English tradition, in which judges retain sole responsibility for deciding sentences according to law.
The appointed jurymen are divided into two groups, in most counties the first with sixteen members and the second with eight.
The same custom evolved into the vehmic court system in medieval Germany.
Nanavati surrendered himself to the police after killing Ahuja.
Members were supposed to inform themselves of crimes and then of the details of the crimes.
One of the first cases was that of Mikel Otegi who was tried in 1997 for the murder of two police officers.
Points often arise that were not specifically discussed during the trial.
In 1215 the Catholic Church removed its sanction from all forms of ordeal—procedures by which suspects up to that time were 'tested' as to guilt (e.g., in the ordeal of hot metal, molten metal was sometimes poured into a suspected thief's hand.
In other legal systems, it is generally possible for an appellate court to reconsider both findings of fact and conclusions of law made in the trial court, and in those systems evidence may be presented to appellate courts in what amounts to a trial de novo (new trial) of appealed findings of fact.
This differs from the power given to the court in criminal trials under C.G.S.
The trial judge directed the jury that "the public interest is what the government of the day says it is" &ndash; effectively a direction to the jury to convict.
In ''United States v. Moylan'', , Fourth Circuit Court of Appeal unanimously ruled: "If the jury feels that the law under which the defendant is accused is unjust, or exigent circumstances justified the actions of the accused, or for any reason which appeals to their logic or passion, the jury has the right to acquit, and the courts must abide that decision."
It is the county council that have the responsibility to appoints juries for a tenure of four years under which they may serve in multiple cases.
Since a clear archetype for determining guilt does not exist, the criminal justice system must rely on rulings handed down by juries.
Before 2012, there were nine or twelve jurors, but this was reduced to cut spending.
The sentence is delivered by a majority of the 12 jurors and the 3 professional judges.
The right to a jury trial has been enshrined in English law since Magna Carta in 1215, and is most common in the serious cases, although the defendant can insist on a jury trial for most criminal matters.
When used alone the term ''jury'' usually refers to a petit jury, rather than a grand jury.
The interviewed jurors clearly recognized that the experts were selected within an adversary process.
In legal systems based on English tradition, findings of fact by a jury, and jury conclusions that could be supported by jury findings of fact even if the specific factual basis for the verdict is not known, are entitled to great deference on appeal.
Unlike States, an accused person cannot elect a Judge-only trial.
In Scotland, a jury in a criminal trial consists of 15 jurors, which is thought to be the largest in the world.
Juries do not make a recommendation as to the length of sentence, except for parole ineligibility for second-degree murder (but the judge is not bound by the jury's recommendation, and the jury is not required to make a recommendation).
Rarely, such as in very high-profile cases, the court may order a jury sequestered for the deliberation phase or for the entire trial.
The jury was reintroduced in 1887, and is solely used in criminal cases on the second tier of the three-tier Norwegian court system ("Lagmannsretten").
Doing these things may constitute reversible error.
Moreover, the research shows that in deliberations jurors combine their individual perspectives on the evidence and debate its relative merits before arriving at a verdict.
However, the Fourteenth Amendment extended this mandate to the states.
The Emminger Reform of January 4, 1924, during an Article 48 state of emergency, abolished the jury system and replaced it with a mixed system including bench trials and lay judges.
The second metaphor emphasises that, just as members of parliament are generally dominated by government but can occasionally assert their independence, juries are usually dominated by judges but can, in extraordinary circumstances, throw off this control.
The judge can impose the death penalty even if the jury recommends life without parole.
Nevertheless, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty.
54-82h, permitting the court not to dismiss the alternate jurors, and to have the regular jury panel begin deliberations.
These types of contests are juried competitions.
Modern American jurisprudence is generally intolerant of the practice, and a juror can be removed from a case if the judge believes that the juror is aware of the power of nullification.
In the latter, he would be charged with murder, with the sentence being death or life imprisonment.
Prospective jurors are sent a  summons and are obligated to appear in a specified jury pool room on a specified date.
Lay judges participate in deciding both the facts of the case and sentencing.
A two-thirds majority is needed in order to convict the defendant.
The procedural codification has been altered to meet the demands formulated by the European Court of Human Rights.
Any prospective jurors not thus impaneled return to the jury pool room.
Jurors are selected from a jury pool formed for a specified period of time—usually from one day to two weeks—from lists of citizens living in the jurisdiction of the court.
Grand juries vote to indict in the overwhelming majority of cases, and prosecutors are not prohibited from presenting the same case to a new grand jury if a "no bill" was returned by a previous grand jury.
Nanavati was finally pardoned by Vijayalakshmi Pandit, newly appointed Governor of Bombay and sister of Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
His defence team argued it was a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, while the prosecution argued it was premeditated murder.
The need for a leader/organizer in a jury is very important, in order to get a proper and agreed verdict.
Besides petit juries for jury trials and grand juries for issuing indictments, juries are sometimes used in non-legal or quasi-legal contexts.
Because of the importance of preventing undue influence on a jury, jury tampering (like witness tampering) is a serious crime, whether attempted through bribery, threat of violence, or other means.
The suggestions of the jury are presented before the judge by the Crown prosecutor(s) before the sentence is handed down.
In a criminal case, a verdict need not be unanimous where there are not fewer than eleven jurors if ten of them agree on a verdict after considering the case for a "reasonable time".
A jury in a criminal trial is initially composed of 12 jurors.
There are no civil juries in the courts of the Province of Quebec, nor in the Federal Court.
Any other questions must be approved by the judge.
Evidence has shown that jurors typically take their roles very seriously.
Article 38 of the 1937 Constitution of Ireland mandates trial by jury for criminal offences, with exceptions for minor offences, military tribunals, and where "the ordinary courts are inadequate to secure the effective administration of justice, and the preservation of public peace and order".
Thus, Makdisi claims, English law became influenced by the Islamic law used in Sicily under the Fatimids, including the use of the twelve man jury.
This practice was confirmed by rulings of the U.S. Supreme Court such as in ''Ring v. Arizona'', which found Arizona's practice of having the judge decide whether aggravating factors exist to make a defendant eligible for the death penalty, to be unconstitutional, and reserving the determination of whether the aggravating factors exist to be decided by the jury.
It established the impartiality and neutrality of juries as well as reiterating the dual nature of the citizen-state relationship.
Normally consisting of twelve persons, juries are selected from a jury panel which is picked at random by the county registrar from the electoral register.
The ''Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms'' guarantees that anyone tried for an offence that has a maximum sentence of five or more years has the right to be tried by a jury (except for an offence under military law).
Jurors are generally required to keep their deliberations in strict confidence during the trial and deliberations, and in some jurisdictions even after a verdict is rendered.
Jurors 'found' a verdict by witnessing as to fact, even assessing and applying information from their own and community memory—little was written at this time and what was, such as deeds and writs, were subject to fraud.
The jury never gives a reason for its verdict, rather it simply gives a "guilty" or "non-guilty" verdict.
In the case ''Chiang Lily v. Secretary for Justice'' (2010), the Court of Final Appeal agreed that ‘there is no right to trial by jury in Hong Kong.’
This enables a jury to reach a decision in direct contradiction with the law if they feel the law is unjust.
As a result of the ''Taxquet'' ruling the juries give nowadays the most important motives that lead them to their verdict.
The practice generally was that the jury rules only on questions of fact and guilt; setting the penalty was reserved for the judge.
Parties, lawyers, and witnesses are not allowed to speak with a member of the jury.
A grand jury is traditionally larger than and distinguishable from the petit jury used during a trial, usually with 12 jurors.
A study by the University of Glasgow suggested that a civil jury of 12 people was ineffective because a few jurors ended up dominating the discussion, and that seven was a better number because more people feel comfortable speaking, and they have an easier time reaching a unanimous decision.
In some civil cases, such as commercial law or patent law, there are also lay judges, who have to meet certain criteria (e.g., being a merchant).
Evidence supporting jury effectiveness has also been illustrated in studies that investigate the parallels between judge and jury decision-making.
These were essentially trials before judges only.
Juries are infrequently used in civil trials in Canada.
The Commonwealth can determine which offences are 'on indictment'.
However, in practice, all states except Louisiana preserve the right to a jury trial in almost all civil cases where the sole remedy sought is money damages to the same extent as jury trials are permitted by the Seventh Amendment.
The jury in this period was "self-informing," meaning it heard very little evidence or testimony in court.
In Italy, a Civil law jurisdiction, untrained judges are present only in the Corte d'Assise, where two career magistrates are supported by six so-called ''Lay Judges'', who are raffled from the registrar of voters.
A jury is intended to be an impartial panel capable of reaching a verdict.
Errors of law or inconsistencies in the explanation of a decision can and usually will lead to the annulment of the decision.
For example, a judge might seat an advisory jury to guide the judge in awarding non-economic damages (such as "pain and suffering" damages) in a case where there is no right to a jury trial, such as (depending on state law) a case involving "equitable" rather than "legal" claims.
However, occasionally jurors find the law to be invalid or unfair, and on that basis acquit the defendant, regardless of the evidence presented that the defendant violated the law.
Justices were by then accustomed to asking jurors of presentment about points of fact in assessing indictments; it was a short step to ask jurors if they concluded the accused was guilty as charged.
After the Norman Conquest, some parts of the country preserved juries as the means of investigating crimes.
The jury in press freedom cases rules only on the facts of the case and the question of guilt or innocence.
In the United States, juries are sometimes called on, when asked to do so by a judge in the jury instructions, to make factual findings on particular issues.
Sheriffs executed the decision of the court.
This requirement stems from the (historical) meaning of 'jury' at the time that the Constitution was written and is (in principle) thus an integral element of trial by jury.
Grand juries carry out this duty by examining evidence presented to them by a prosecutor and issuing indictments, or by investigating alleged crimes and issuing presentments.
The old institution of grand juries still exists in some places, particularly the United States, to investigate whether enough evidence of a crime exists to bring someone to trial.
Some States provide exceptions such as majority (11-to-1 or 10-to-2) verdicts where a jury cannot otherwise reach a verdict.
The sole exception, since 1815, is in cases involving freedom of the press, prosecuted under Chapter 7 of the Freedom of the Press Act, part of Sweden's constitution.
A grand jury, a type of jury now confined almost exclusively to federal courts and some state jurisdictions in the United States, determines whether there is enough evidence for a criminal trial to go forward.
Instead the jury asserted what it believed to be their "ancient right" to judge the whole case and not just the facts and brought in the verdict of "not guilty".
In juries of the Justices in Eyre, the bailiff of the hundred would choose 4 electors who in turn chose 12 others from their hundred, and from these were selected 12 jurors.
In this manner, the Duke, being the largest land owner, could not act as a judge in his own case.
Alternates are present for the entire trial but do not take part in deliberating the case and deciding the verdict unless one or more of the impaneled jurors are removed from the jury.
There is a fine of €500 for failing to report for jury service, though this was poorly enforced until a change of policy at the Courts Service in 2016.
Of course, no two witnesses are exactly the same, and even the same witness will not express testimony in exactly the same way twice, so this would be difficult to prove.
Called juries of presentment, these men testified under oath to crimes committed in their neighbourhood.
The Constitution of Australia provides in section 80 that 'the trial on indictment of any offence against any law of the Commonwealth shall be by jury'.
The jury determines the truth or falsity of factual allegations and renders a verdict on whether a criminal defendant is guilty, or a civil defendant is civilly liable.
Grand jury proceedings are ''ex parte'': only the prosecutor and witnesses who the prosecutor calls may present evidence to the grand jury and defendants are not allowed to present mitigating evidence or even to know the testimony that was presented to the grand jury, and hearsay evidence is permitted.
The sessions judge considered the acquittal as perverse and referred the case to the high court.
If a juror is discharged during the course of the trial, the trial will continue with an alternate juror, unless the number of jurors goes below 10.
Today, most misdemeanors are tried by a ''Strafrichter'', meaning a single judge at an ''Amtsgericht''; felonies and more severe misdemeanors are tried by a ''Schöffengericht'', also located at the ''Amtsgericht'', composed of 1 judge and 2 lay judges; some felonies are heard by ''Erweitertes Schöffengericht'', or extended ''Schöffengericht'', composed of 2 judges and 2 lay judges; severe felonies and other "special" crimes are tried by the ''große Strafkammer'', composed of 3 judges and 2 lay judges at the ''Landgericht'', with specially assigned courts for some crimes called ''Sonderstrafkammer'';  felonies resulting in the death of a human being are tried by the ''Schwurgericht'', composed of 3 judges and 2 lay judges, located at the ''Landgericht''; and serious crimes against the state are tried by the ''Strafsenat'', composed of 5 judges, at an ''Oberlandesgericht''.
In Australia, academics are permitted to scrutinize the jury process only after obtaining a certificate or approval from the Attorney-General.
The lay judges do not hold any legal qualification, and represent the peers of the person on trial, as members of the general public.
