Chronicler John Malalas, who lived during the reign of Justinian, tells of his appearance that he was short, fair skinned, curly haired, round faced and handsome.
Justin reversed this trend and confirmed the Chalcedonian doctrine, openly condemning the Monophysites.
Then, in the early 550s, two monks succeeded in smuggling eggs of silk worms from Central Asia back to Constantinople, and silk became an indigenous product.
Theodora would become very influential in the politics of the Empire, and later emperors would follow Justinian's precedent in marrying outside the aristocratic class.
The worship of Amun at Augila in the Libyan desert was abolished; and so were the remnants of the worship of Isis on the island of Philae, at the first cataract of the Nile.
He made the Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan creed the sole symbol of the Church, and accorded legal force to the canons of the four ecumenical councils.
Such an approach was supported by the Empress Theodora, who favoured the Monophysites unreservedly.
Justinian's body was entombed in a specially built mausoleum in the Church of the Holy Apostles until it was desecrated and robbed during the pillage of the city in 1204 by the Latin States of the Fourth Crusade.
Justinian also rebuilt the Church of Hagia Sophia (which cost 20,000 pounds of gold), the original site having been destroyed during the Nika riots.
The consistency of Justinian's policy meant that the Manicheans too suffered persecution, experiencing both exile and threat of capital punishment.
Justinian's religious policy reflected the Imperial conviction that the unity of the Empire presupposed unity of faith, and it appeared to him obvious that this faith could only be the orthodox (Nicaean).
Further, by his policies: women charged with major crimes should be guarded by other women to prevent sexual abuse; if a woman was widowed, her dowry should be returned; and a husband could not take on a major debt without his wife giving her consent twice.
His legacy is elaborated on, and he is portrayed as a defender of the Christian faith and the restorer of Rome to the Empire.
Justinian, who had always had a keen interest in theological matters and actively participated in debates on Christian doctrine, became even more devoted to religion during the later years of his life.
Subsequently Belisarius, Narses, and other generals conquered the Ostrogothic kingdom, restoring Dalmatia, Sicily, Italy, and Rome to the empire after more than half a century of rule by the Ostrogoths.
Justinian's habit of choosing efficient, but unpopular advisers nearly cost him his throne early in his reign.
The recovery of Africa cost the empire about 100,000 pounds of gold.
This caused famine unlike anything those of the time had seen before, weakening the people of Europe and the Middle East.
By that time Theodahad had been deposed by the Ostrogothic army, who had elected Vitigis as their new king.
Most notably, he had the Hagia Sophia, originally a basilica-style church that had been burnt down during the Nika riots, splendidly rebuilt according to a completely different ground plan, under the architectural supervision of Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles.
In January 532, partisans of the chariot racing factions in Constantinople, normally divided among themselves, united against Justinian in a revolt that has become known as the Nika riots.
It has been estimated that before Justinian I's reconquests the state had an annual revenue of 5,000,000 ''solidi'' in AD 530, but after his reconquests, the annual revenue was increased to 6,000,000 ''solidi'' in AD 550.
Justinian made the traffic more efficient by building a large granary on the island of Tenedos for storage and further transport to Constantinople.
He passed laws to protect prostitutes from exploitation and women from being forced into prostitution.
The ''Codex'' contained two statutes that decreed the total destruction of paganism, even in private life; these provisions were zealously enforced.
In order to protect the manufacture of silk products, Justinian granted a monopoly to the imperial factories in 541.
During his reign the large Sangarius Bridge was built in Bithynia, securing a major military supply route to the east.
While military efforts were directed to the East, the situation in Italy took a turn for the worse.
After this, Justinian also felt entitled to settle disputes in papal elections, as he did when he favoured Vigilius and had his rival Silverius deported.
As a result, Justinian was well educated in jurisprudence, theology and Roman history.
The overall trend was towards a simplification of administrative infrastructure.
Another contemporary chronicler, Procopius, compares Justinian's appearance to that of tyrannical Emperor Domitian, although this is probably slander.
Justinian's policies switched between attempts to force Monophysites to accept the Chalcedonian creed by persecuting their bishops and monks - thereby embittering their sympathizers in Egypt and other provinces - and attempts at a compromise that would win over the Monophysites without surrendering the Chalcedonian faith.
However, the Imperial Court did prove susceptible to plague, with Justinian himself contracting, but surviving, the pestilence.
This new-found unity between East and West did not, however, not solve the ongoing disputes in the east.
The ''Novellae'', a collection of new laws issued during Justinian's reign, supplements the ''Corpus''.
An African prefecture, centered in Carthage, was established in April 534, but it would teeter on the brink of collapse during the next 15 years, amidst warfare with the Moors and military mutinies.
One of the most spectacular features of Justinian's reign was the recovery of large stretches of land around the Western Mediterranean basin that had slipped out of Imperial control in the 5th century.
During his reign, Justinian sought to revive the empire's greatness and reconquer the lost western half of the historical Roman Empire.
During his reign, he founded Justiniana Prima not far from his birthplace, which today is  in South East Serbia.
As ruler of the Empire, Justinian, and members of his court, were physically unaffected by famine.
At Constantinople, on one occasion, not a few Manicheans, after strict inquisition, were executed in the emperor's very presence: some by burning, others by drowning.
Contemporary sources (John Malalas, Theophanes, John of Ephesus) tell of severe persecutions, even of men in high position.
In his efforts to renew the Roman Empire, Justinian dangerously stretched its resources while failing to take into account the changed realities of 6th-century Europe.
Justinian's rule constitutes a distinct epoch in the history of the Later Roman empire, and his reign is marked by the ambitious but only partly realized ''renovatio imperii'', or "restoration of the Empire".
Both parties made little headway, and in 545 a truce was agreed upon for the southern part of the Roman-Persian frontier.
It was followed by the ''Digesta'' (or ''Pandectae''), a compilation of older legal texts, in 533, and by the ''Institutiones'', a textbook explaining the principles of law.
However, Justinian confesses that he was partially motivated by fame rather than duty to God, which tainted the justice of his rule in spite of his proud accomplishments.
Justinian showed much ambition, and it has been thought that he was functioning as virtual regent long before Justin made him associate emperor on 1 April 527, although there is no conclusive evidence for this.
Scientists have spent decades on the mystery.
Belisarius arrived in the East in 541, but, after some success, was again recalled to Constantinople in 542.
Despite all these measures, the Empire suffered several major setbacks in the course of the 6th century.
In addition to the other conquests, the Empire established a presence in Visigothic Hispania, when the usurper Athanagild requested assistance in his rebellion against King Agila I.
In July 551, the eastern Mediterranean was rocked by the 551 Beirut earthquake, which triggered a tsunami.
The following year Khosrau defeated a Byzantine army of 30,000 men, but unsuccessfully besieged the major city of Edessa.
In the course of his reign, Justinian, who had a genuine interest in matters of theology, authored a small number of theological treatises.
The reasons for his withdrawal are not known, but it may have been instigated by rumours of disloyalty on behalf of the general reaching the court.
The Emperor faced significant opposition from the Samaritans, who resisted conversion to Christianity and were repeatedly in insurrection.
Totila also plundered Sicily and attacked the Greek coastlines.
Procopius relates that 30,000 unarmed civilians were killed in the Hippodrome.
He was known as "the emperor who never sleeps" on account of his work habits.
During the decade of the 530s, it seemed to many that God had abandoned the Christian Roman Empire.
In the condemnation of the ''Three Chapters'', three theologians that had opposed Monophysitism before and after the Council of Chalcedon, Justinian tried to win over the opposition.
Belisarius feigned to accept the offer, entered the city in May 540, and reclaimed it for the Empire.
The bishops in attendance at the Second Council of Constantinople in 553 recognized that nothing could be done in the Church contrary to the emperor's will and command; while, on his side, the emperor, in the case of the Patriarch Anthimus, reinforced the ban of the Church with temporal proscription.
Greater administrative power was given to both the leaders of the prefectures and of the provinces, while power was taken away from the vicariates of the dioceses, of which a number were abolished.
The new Hagia Sophia, with its numerous chapels and shrines, gilded octagonal dome, and mosaics, became the centre and most visible monument of Eastern Orthodoxy in Constantinople.
(The final version appeared in 534.)
The Presbyter Julian and the Bishop Longinus conducted a mission among the Nabataeans, and Justinian attempted to strengthen Christianity in Yemen by despatching a bishop from Egypt.
Another prominent church in the capital, the Church of the Holy Apostles, which had been in a very poor state near the end of the 5th century, was likewise rebuilt.
In earlier times, Justinian could not have married her because of her class, but his uncle, Emperor Justin I, had passed a law allowing intermarriage between social classes.
Justinian's ambition to restore the Roman Empire to its former glory was only partly realized.
He forced Justinian I to pay him 5,000 pounds of gold, plus 500 pounds of gold more each year.
King Hilderic, who had maintained good relations with Justinian and the North African Catholic clergy, had been overthrown by his cousin Gelimer in 530.
According to Procopius, Justinian stated at the completion of this edifice, "Solomon I have outdone thee" (in reference to the 1st Jewish temple).
Belisarius was sent back to Italy late in 544, but lacked sufficient troops.
Belisarius had been recalled in the face of renewed hostilities by the Persians.
He was succeeded by Justin II, who was the son of his sister Vigilantia and married to Sophia, the niece of Empress Theodora.
His mother was Vigilantia, the sister of Justin.
Under its terms, the Persians agreed to abandon Lazica in exchange for an annual tribute of 400 or 500 pounds of gold (30,000 ''solidi'') to be paid by the Romans.
In his introduction, "Cesare fui e son Iustinïano" ("Caesar I was, and am Justinian"), his mortal title is contrasted with his immortal soul, to emphasize that glory in life is ephemeral, while contributing to God's glory is eternal, according to Dorothy L. Sayers.
These campaigns re-established Roman control over the western Mediterranean, increasing the Empire's annual revenue by over a million solidi.
Justinian saw the orthodoxy of his empire threatened by diverging religious currents, especially Monophysitism, which had many adherents in the eastern provinces of Syria and Egypt.
Following a revolt against the Empire in Armenia in the late 530s and possibly motivated by the pleas of Ostrogothic ambassadors, King Khosrau I broke the "Eternal Peace" and invaded Roman territory in the spring of 540.
Justinian had the city rebuilt, but on a slightly smaller scale.
They forced him to dismiss Tribonian and two of his other ministers, and then attempted to overthrow Justinian himself and replace him with the senator Hypatius, who was a nephew of the late emperor Anastasius.
Works of embellishment were not confined to churches alone: excavations at the site of the Great Palace of Constantinople have yielded several high-quality mosaics dating from Justinian's reign, and a column topped by a bronze statue of Justinian on horseback and dressed in a military costume was erected in the Augustaeum in Constantinople in 543.
One important luxury product was silk, which was imported and then processed in the Empire.
When he died on 14 November 565, he left no children, though his wife Theodora had given birth to a stillborn son several years into his reign.
The empress Theodora sympathized with the Monophysites and is said to have been a constant source of pro-Monophysite intrigues at the court in Constantinople in the earlier years.
The cause of these disasters aren't precisely known, but the Rabaul caldera, Lake Ilopango and Krakatoa volcanoes or a collision with a swarm of meteors are all suspected.
In order to bypass the Persian landroute, Justinian established friendly relations with the Abyssinians, whom he wanted to act as trade mediators by transporting Indian silk to the Empire; the Abyssinians, however, were unable to compete with the Persian merchants in India.
Milan was taken, but was soon recaptured and razed by the Ostrogoths.
At the start of Justinian I's reign he had inherited a surplus 28,800,000 ''solidi'' (400,000 pounds of gold) in the imperial treasury from Anastasius I and Justin I.
Other peoples also accepted Christianity: the Heruli, the Huns dwelling near the Don, the Abasgi, and the Tzanni in Caucasia.
Procopius provides the primary source for the history of Justinian's reign.
Previous Emperors had tried to alleviate theological conflicts by declarations that deemphasized the Council of Chalcedon, which had condemned Monophysitism, which had strongholds in Egypt and Syria, and by tolerating the appointment of Monophysites to church offices.
While the final victory in Italy and the conquest of the coast of southern Hispania significantly enlarged the area over which the Empire could project its power and influence, and while they must have contributed to the Empire's prestige, most of the conquests proved ephemeral.
Justinian protected the purity of the church by suppressing heretics.
A devastating outbreak of bubonic plague in the early 540s marked the end of an age of splendour.
Near the end of his life, Justinian became ever more inclined towards the Monophysite doctrine, especially in the form of Aphthartodocetism, but he died before being able to issue any legislation.
Those of a different belief were subjected to persecution, which imperial legislation had effected from the time of Constantius II and which would now vigorously continue.
Despite Justinian's passion for the glorious Roman past, the practice of choosing Roman consul was allowed to lapse after 541.
In Justinian's reign, and partly under his patronage, Byzantine culture produced noteworthy historians, including Procopius and Agathias, and poets such as Paul the Silentiary and Romanus the Melodist flourished.
He first sacked Beroea and then Antioch (allowing the garrison of 6,000 men to leave the city), besieged Daras, and then went on to attack the small but strategically significant satellite kingdom of Lazica near the Black Sea, exacting tribute from the towns he passed along his way.
At the end of the war, Italy was garrisoned with an army of 16,000 men.
After that the Lazic War in the North continued for several years, until a second truce in 557, followed by a Fifty Years' Peace in 562.
The area was not completely pacified until 548, but remained peaceful thereafter and enjoyed a measure of prosperity.
In 533, Belisarius with a fleet of 92 dromons escorting 500 transports, landed at Caput Vada (modern Ras Kaboudia) in modern Tunisia with an army of about 15,000 men, as well as a number of barbarian troops.
Within the Empire, convoys sailing from Alexandria provided Constantinople with wheat and grains.
In Asia Minor alone, John of Ephesus reported to have converted 70,000 pagans.
The first one was the plague, which lasted from 541 to 543 and, by decimating the Empire's population, probably created a scarcity of labor and a rising of wages.
Early in his reign, Justinian appointed the ''quaestor'' Tribonian to oversee this task.
In 554, a large-scale Frankish invasion was defeated at Casilinum, and Italy was secured for the Empire, though it would take Narses several years to reduce the remaining Gothic strongholds.
His general, Belisarius, swiftly conquered the Vandal kingdom in North Africa.
He was taken to Constantinople, where he was paraded in a triumph.
As a Christian Roman emperor, Justinian considered it his divine duty to restore the Roman Empire to its ancient boundaries.
Rapists were treated severely.
His reign also marked a blossoming of Byzantine culture, and his building program yielded such masterpieces as the church of Hagia Sophia.
The civil rights of Jews were restricted and their religious privileges threatened.
He gathered a large army and besieged Rome from February 537 to March 538 without being able to retake the city.
The dragging war with the Goths was a disaster for Italy, even though its long-lasting effects may have been less severe than is sometimes thought.
Around 525, he married his mistress, Theodora, in Constantinople.
Both historians became very bitter towards Justinian and his empress, Theodora.
The ''Corpus'' forms the basis of Latin jurisprudence (including ecclesiastical Canon Law) and, for historians, provides a valuable insight into the concerns and activities of the later Roman Empire.
As was the case under Justinian's predecessors, the Empire's economic health rested primarily on agriculture.
In the West, the brilliant early military successes of the 530s were followed by years of stagnation.
The total of Justinian's legislature is known today as the ''Corpus juris civilis''.
The Popes reacted by severing ties with the Patriarch of Constantinople who supported these policies.
In 559 a particularly dangerous invasion of Sklavinoi and Kutrigurs under their khan Zabergan threatened Constantinople, but they were repulsed by the aged general Belisarius.
When king Kavadh I of Persia died (September 531), Justinian concluded an "Eternal Peace" (which cost him 11,000 pounds of gold) with his successor Khosrau I (532).
On the other hand, centres of learning as the Platonic Academy in Athens and the famous Law School of Beirut lost their importance during his reign.
Other talented individuals included Tribonian, his legal adviser; Peter the Patrician, the diplomat and longtime head of the palace bureaucracy; Justinian's finance ministers John the Cappadocian and Peter Barsymes, who managed to collect taxes more efficiently than any before, thereby funding Justinian's wars; and finally, his prodigiously talented generals, Belisarius and Narses.
The re-conquests were in large part carried out by his general Belisarius.
As a ruler, Justinian showed great energy.
Justinian, who continued this policy, tried to impose religious unity on his subjects by forcing them to accept doctrinal compromises that might appeal to all parties, a policy that proved unsuccessful as he satisfied none of them.
She was by profession a courtesan and some twenty years his junior.
Although the despotic character of his measures is contrary to modern sensibilities, he was indeed a "nursing father" of the Church.
Although he never personally took part in military campaigns, he boasted of his successes in the prefaces to his laws and had them commemorated in art.
Thereupon Belisarius with 7,500 men invaded Sicily (535) and advanced into Italy, sacking Naples and capturing Rome on 9 December 536.
The Syriac chronicle of John of Ephesus, which does not survive, was used as a source for later chronicles, contributing many additional details of value.
Upon Justin's death on 1 August 527, Justinian became the sole sovereign.
The heavy taxes that the administration imposed upon its population were deeply resented.
It eventually passed to Eastern Europe where it appeared in Slavic editions, and it also passed on to Russia.
Throughout Justinian's reign, the cities and villages of the East prospered, although Antioch was struck by two earthquakes (526, 528) and sacked and evacuated by the Persians (540).
Justin, who was in the imperial guard (the Excubitors) before he became emperor, adopted Justinian, brought him to Constantinople, and ensured the boy's education.
Justinian's rule was not universally popular; early in his reign he nearly lost his throne during the Nika riots, and a conspiracy against the emperor's life by dissatisfied businessmen was discovered as late as 562.
From his uncle, Justinian inherited ongoing hostilities with the Sassanid Empire.
Belisarius succeeded in defeating a Gothic fleet with 200 ships.
The first draft of the ''Codex Iustinianus'', a codification of imperial constitutions from the 2nd century onward, was issued on 7 April 529.
The only western province where the Justinianic code was introduced was Italy (after the conquest by the so-called Pragmatic Sanction of 554), from where it was to pass to Western Europe in the 12th century and become the basis of much European law code.
Justinian recalled Narses in 539.
Justinian achieved lasting fame through his judicial reforms, particularly through the complete revision of all Roman law, something that had not previously been attempted.
Under Justinian's rule, measures were taken to counter corruption in the provinces and to make tax collection more efficient.
As Justin became senile near the end of his reign, Justinian became the ''de facto'' ruler.
Justinian entered the arena of ecclesiastical statecraft shortly after his uncle's accession in 518, and put an end to the Acacian schism.
Sardinia and Corsica, the Balearic Islands, and the stronghold Septem Fratres near Gibraltar were recovered in the same campaign.
Justinian was a prolific builder; the historian Procopius bears witness to his activities in this area.
At the Fifth Ecumenical Council, most of the Eastern church yielded to the Emperor's demands and Pope Vigilius, who was forcibly brought to Constantinople and besieged at a champel, finally also gave his assent.
They defeated the Vandals, who were caught completely off guard, at Ad Decimum on 14 September 533 and Tricamarum in December; Belisarius took Carthage.
The combined fatalities of both events probably exceeded 30,000, with tremors being felt from Antioch to Alexandria.
Gold and silver were mined in the Balkans, Anatolia, Armenia, Cyprus, Egypt and Nubia.
Both the ''Codex'' and the ''Novellae'' contain many enactments regarding donations, foundations, and the administration of ecclesiastical property; election and rights of bishops, priests and abbots; monastic life, residential obligations of the clergy, conduct of divine service, episcopal jurisdiction, et cetera.
The army reached Ravenna in June 552, and defeated the Ostrogoths decisively within a month at the battle of Busta Gallorum in the Apennines, where Totila was slain.
At the very beginning of his reign, he deemed it proper to promulgate by law the Church's belief in the Trinity and the Incarnation; and to threaten all heretics with the appropriate penalties; whereas he subsequently declared that he intended to deprive all disturbers of orthodoxy of the opportunity for such offense by due process of law.
Justinian was struck by the plague in the early 540s but recovered.
In 552, Justinian dispatched a force of 2,000 men; according to the historian Jordanes, this army was led by the octogenarian Liberius.
After a victory at Faenza in 542, they reconquered the major cities of Southern Italy and soon held almost the entire peninsula.
Emperors Justin I (and later Justinian himself) rescinded these policies and reestablished the union between Constantinople and Rome.
Justinian was appointed consul in 521 and later commander of the army of the east.
The recovery of Italy cost the empire about 300,000 pounds of gold.
As a collection it gathers together the many sources in which the ''leges'' (laws) and the other rules were expressed or published: proper laws, senatorial consults (''senatusconsulta''), imperial decrees, case law, and jurists' opinions and interpretations (''responsa prudentum'').
Making no headway, he was relieved of his command in 548.
It remains influential to this day.
Finally, Justinian dispatched a force of approximately 35,000 men (2,000 men were detached and sent to invade southern Visigothic Hispania) under the command of Narses.
However, the condemnation was received unfavourably in the west, where it led to new (albeit temporal) schism, and failed to reach its goal in the east, as the Monophysites, remained unsatisfied; all the more bitter for him because during his last years he took an even greater interest in theological matters.
According to Brown (1971), the increased professionalization of tax collection did much to destroy the traditional structures of provincial life, as it weakened the autonomy of the town councils in the Greek towns.
Events of the later years of the reign showed that Constantinople itself was not safe from barbarian incursions from the north, and even the relatively benevolent historian Menander Protector felt the need to attribute the Emperor's failure to protect the capital to the weakness of his body in his old age.
Tribonian's code ensured the survival of Roman law.
In the ''Paradiso'' section of the ''Divine Comedy'' by Dante Alighieri, Justinian I is prominently featured as a spirit residing on the sphere of Mercury, which holds the ambitious souls of Heaven.
When Emperor Anastasius died in 518, Justin was proclaimed the new emperor, with significant help from Justinian.
It consists of the ''Codex Iustinianus'', the ''Digesta'' or ''Pandectae'', the ''Institutiones'', and the ''Novellae''.
The cognomen ''Iustinianus'', which he took later, is indicative of adoption by his uncle Justin.
In 529, the Neoplatonic Academy of Athens was placed under state control as paganism, strangling this training school for this branch of Hellenistic philosophy..
Imprisoned, the deposed king appealed to Justinian.
King Gelimer fled to Mount Pappua in Numidia, but surrendered the next spring.
The first of the western kingdoms Justinian attacked was that of the Vandals in North Africa.
On Theodora's insistence, and apparently against his own judgment, Justinian had Anastasius' nephews executed.
This campaign marked the apogee of Byzantine expansion.
The greater part of Italy would be lost to the invading Lombards three years after Justinian's death (568), the newly founded province of Spania was completely recovered by the Hispanian Visigoths in 624 under the leadership of Suintila, and within a century and a half Africa would be forever lost for the empire to the Rashidun and Umayyad Caliphates during the Muslim conquests.
The marriage caused a scandal, but Theodora would prove to be shrewd judge of character and Justinian's greatest supporter.
He neglected no opportunity for securing the rights of the Church and clergy, for protecting and extending monasticism.
The prefect Liberius reclaimed the south of the Iberian peninsula, establishing the province of Spania.
During Justin's reign (518–527), Justinian was the emperor's close confidant.
In the next two days, he ordered the brutal suppression of the riots by his generals Belisarius and Mundus.
The outbreak of the plague caused a lull in the fighting during the year 543.
Under their respective kings Ildibad and Eraric (both murdered in 541) and especially Totila, the Ostrogoths made quick gains.
The lack of manpower also led to a significant increase in the number of "barbarians" in the Byzantine armies after the early 540s.
Dante also uses Justinian to criticize the factious politics of his 14th Century Italy, in contrast to the unified Italy of the Roman Empire.
Because of his restoration activities, Justinian has sometimes been called the "last Roman" in modern historiography.
