Names of God in Judaism have further prominence, though fluidity of meaning turns the whole Torah into a Divine name.
Among leading figures were the Yemenite Shalom Sharabi (1720–1777) of the Beit El Synagogue, the Jerusalemite Hida (1724–1806), the Baghdad leader Ben Ish Chai (1832–1909), and the Abuhatzeira dynasty.
Jewish mysticism, in contrast to Divine transcendence rationalist human-centred reasons for Jewish observance, gave Divine-immanent providential cosmic significance to the daily events in the worldly life of man in general, and the spiritual role of Jewish observance in particular.
The lines concerning the year 1490 are also missing from the Hebrew edition of ''Hesed L'Avraham'', the source work that both of these quote from.
From the 8th to 11th centuries, the Hekhalot texts, and the proto-Kabbalistic early ''Sefer Yetzirah'' ("Book of Creation") made their way into European Jewish circles.
In recent times, many Orthodox Jewish outreach organisations for secular Jews teach Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts.
This changed the first creative act into one of withdrawal/exile, the antithesis of the ultimate Divine Will.
''Encyclopaedia Judaica'', Volume 6, "Dualism", p.&nbsp;244.
These extra souls, or extra states of the soul, play no part in any afterlife scheme, but are mentioned for completeness:
While God may seem to exhibit dual natures (masculine-feminine, compassionate-judgmental, creator-creation), all adherents of Kabbalah have consistently stressed the ultimate unity of God.
Talmudic doctrine forbade the public teaching of esoteric doctrines and warned of their dangers.
Moshe Idel has opened up research on the Ecstatic Kabbalah alongside the theosophical, and has called for new multi-disciplinary approaches, beyond the philological and historical that have dominated until now, to include phenomenology, psychology, anthropology and comparative studies.
Moshe Isserles understood there to be only a minor restriction, in his words, "One's belly must be full of meat and wine, discerning between the prohibited and the permitted."
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem has been a centre of this research, including Scholem and Isaiah Tishby, and more recently Joseph Dan, Yehuda Liebes, Rachel Elior, and Moshe Idel.
Many kabbalists were also leading legal figures in Judaism, such as Nachmanides and Joseph Karo.
While a portion of Modern Orthodox Rabbis, Dor Daim and many students of the Rambam, completely reject Arizal's Kabbalistic teachings, as well as deny that the ''Zohar'' is authoritative, or from Shimon bar Yohai, all three of these groups completely accept the existence and validity of ''Ma'aseh Merkavah'' and ''Ma'aseh B'resheet'' mysticism.
The Habad-Lubavitch intellectual school of Hasidism broke away from General-Hasidism's emotional faith orientation, by making the mind central as the route to the internal heart.
These levels of creation must not be understood as ten different "gods" but as ten different ways of revealing God, one per level.
These terms are also mentioned in the second chapter of the Talmudic tractate ''Hagigah''.
It is not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes.
There are two primary models of Gnostic-dualistic cosmology: the first, which goes back to Zoroastrianism, believes creation is ontologically divided between good and evil forces; the second, found largely in Greco-Roman metaphysics like Neo-Platonism, argues that the universe knew a primordial harmony, but that a cosmic disruption yielded a second, evil, dimension to reality.
The ''sephirot'' are considered revelations of the Creator's will (''ratzon''), and they should not be understood as ten different "gods" but as ten different ways the one God reveals his will through the Emanations.
The Kabbalistic 12th-century prayer ''Anim Zemirot'' was restored to the new Conservative ''Sim Shalom'' ''siddur'', as was the ''B'rikh Shmeh'' passage from the Zohar, and the mystical ''Ushpizin'' service welcoming to the ''Sukkah'' the spirits of Jewish forbearers.
Instead, academic and traditional publications now translate and study Judaic Kabbalah for wide readership.
The writings of Abraham Isaac Kook (1864–1935), first chief rabbi of Mandate Palestine and visionary, incorporate kabbalistic themes through his own poetic language and concern with human and divine unity.
In the 20th century, Yehuda Ashlag (1885—1954) in Mandate Palestine became a leading esoteric kabbalist in the traditional mode, who translated the Zohar into Hebrew with a new approach in Lurianic Kabbalah.
This changed in the 20th century, through conscious reform and the secular openness of knowledge.
Moreover, the prohibition is not halakhic in nature.
He staunchly opposed the new Hasidic movement and warned against their public displays of religious fervour inspired by the mystical teachings of their rabbis.
He is supported by the Bier Hetiv, the Pithei Teshuva as well as the Vilna Gaon.
Another was Isaac the Blind (1160–1235), the teacher of Nahmanides, who is widely argued to have written the first work of classic Kabbalah, the ''Bahir'' (Book of "Brightness").
Late medieval and Renaissance Italian Kabbalists, such as Yohanan Alemanno, David Messer Leon and Abraham Yagel, adhered to humanistic ideals and incorporated teachings of various Christian and pagan mystics.
Another famous work, the early ''Sefer Yetzirah'', supposedly dates back to the patriarch Abraham.
Kabbalah originally developed within the realm of Jewish tradition, and kabbalists often use classical Jewish sources to explain and demonstrate its esoteric teachings.
From the early 20th century, Neo-Hasidism expressed a non-Orthodox Jewish interest in Jewish mysticism, becoming organisational among Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionalist Jewish denominations from the 1960s, through Jewish Renewal and the Chavurah movement.
The Chayyah and the Yechidah do not enter into the body like the other three—thus they received less attention in other sections of the ''Zohar''.
Both rabbinic and kabbalistic works posit that there are a few additional, non-permanent states of the soul that people can develop on certain occasions.
Rabbi Pinchas Elijah Hurwitz, a prominent Lithuanian-Galician Kabbalist of the 18th century and a moderate proponent of the Haskalah, called for brotherly love and solidarity between all nations, and believed that Kabbalah can empower everyone, Jews and Gentiles alike, with prophetic abilities.
The metaphorical anthropomorphism of the partzufim accentuates the sexual unifications of the redemption process, while Gilgul reincarnation emerges from the scheme.
In his writings, Benamozegh interprets the New Testament, Hadith, Vedas, Avesta and pagan mysteries according to the Kabbalistic theosophy.
Gematria is one method for discovering its hidden meanings.
Rabbi Elijah of Vilna (Vilna Gaon) (1720–1797), based in Lithuania, had his teachings encoded and publicised by his disciples, such as Rabbi Chaim Volozhin, who (poshumously) published the mystical-ethical work ''Nefesh HaChaim''.
In Scholem's opinion, the mythical and mystical components of Judaism were at least as important as the rational ones, and he thought that they, rather than the exoteric Halakha, were the living current in historical Jewish development.
The concept became central to the later Kabbalah of Isaac Luria, who systemised it as the personal parallel to the cosmic process of rectification.
Hiddenness makes creation possible because God can become "revealed" in a diversity of limited ways, which then form the building blocks of creation.
''Tomer Devorah'' has become also a foundational Musar text.
His works offer in-depth of various concepts.
Cordovero's comprehensive works achieved the systemisation of preceding Kabbalah.
As a result, virtually all early foundational works pseudepigraphically claim, or are ascribed, ancient authorship.
While the kabbalistic scheme gave a radically innovative, though conceptually continuous, development of mainstream Midrashic and Talmudic Rabbinic notions, kabbalistic thought underscored and invigorated conservative Jewish observance.
A common way of explaining the three parts of the soul is as follows:
However, his thought influenced Hasidism, for example being studied in the introspective Przysucha school.
These derive from syncretic combinations of Jewish kabbalah with Christian, occultist or contemporary New Age spirituality.
Arthur Green's translations from the religious writings of Hillel Zeitlin conceive the latter to be a precursor of contemporary neo-Hasidism.
At the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College, the only accredited seminary that has curricular requirements in Kabbalah, Joel Hecker is the full-time instructor teaching courses in Kabbalah and Hasidut.
Kabbalah seeks to define the nature of the universe and the human being, the nature and purpose of existence, and various other ontological questions.
This "selfish" enjoyment of God's blessings but only in order to empower oneself to assist others is an important aspect of "Restriction", and is considered a kind of golden mean in kabbalah, corresponding to the ''sefirah'' of Adornment (Tiferet) being part of the "Middle Column".
According to this view, early kabbalah was, in around the 10th century BC, an open knowledge practiced by over a million people in ancient Israel.
Kabbalah in various forms was widely studied, commented upon, and expanded by North African, Turkish, Yemenite, and Asian scholars from the 16th century onward.
His rabbinical opponents forced him to close his school, hand over and destroy many of his most precious unpublished kabbalistic writings, and go into exile in the Netherlands.
Hasidic thought extends the Divine immanence of Kabbalah by holding that God is all that really exists, all else being completely undifferentiated from God's perspective.
Jewish mysticism has influenced the thought of some major Jewish theologians in the 20th century, outside of Kabbalistic or Hasidic traditions.
Many Jews are familiar with this ruling, but are not aware of its origins.
In Lurianic expression, each of the 600,000 souls of Israel find their own interpretation in Torah.
Menahem Azariah da Fano (1548–1620), in his book ''Reincarnations of souls'', provides many examples of non-Jewish Biblical figures being reincarnated into Jews and vice versa; the contemporary Habad Rabbi and mystic Dov Ber Pinson teaches that distinctions between Jews and non-Jews in works such as the Tanya are not to be understood as literally referring to the external properties of a person (what religious community they are born into), but rather as referring to the properties of souls as they can be re-incarnated in any religious community.
Nonetheless, mystical studies were undertaken and resulted in mystical literature, the first being the Apocalyptic literature of the second and first pre-Christian centuries and which contained elements that carried over to later kabbalah.
It flourished among Sefardic Jews in Tzfat (Safed), Israel even before the arrival of Isaac Luria.
According to Artson:
* A third way are non-Jewish organisations, mystery schools, initiation bodies, fraternities and secret societies, the most popular of which are Freemasonry, Rosicrucianism and the Golden Dawn, although hundreds of similar societies claim a kabbalistic lineage.
It is related to the intellect and allows man to enjoy and benefit from the afterlife.
Two metaphors are used to describe the ''sephirot'', their theocentric manifestation as the Trees of Life and Knowledge, and their anthropocentric correspondence in man, exemplified as Adam Kadmon.
Rather, there is God as revealed to humans (corresponding to Zeir Anpin), and the rest of the infinity of God as remaining hidden from human experience (corresponding to Arich Anpin).
B'reshit mysticism referred to the first chapter of Genesis () in the Torah that is believed to contain secrets of the creation of the universe and forces of nature.
Subsequent interpretation of Lurianic Kabbalah was made in the writings of Shalom Sharabi, in ''Nefesh HaChaim'' and the 20th-century ''Sulam''.
The infinite potential of meaning in the Torah, as in the Ein Sof, is reflected in the symbol of the two trees of the Garden of Eden; the Torah of the Tree of Knowledge is the external, Halachic Torah, through which mystics can perceive the unlimited Torah of the Tree of Life.
As the Hebrew name of things is the channel of their lifeforce, parallel to the sephirot, so concepts such as "holiness" and "mitzvot" embody ontological Divine immanence, as God can be known in manifestation as well as transcendence.
This new approach turned formerly esoteric elite kabbalistic theory into a popular social mysticism movement for the first time, with its own doctrines, classic texts, teachings and customs.
Hasidism instituted a new concept of Tzadik leadership in Jewish mysticism, where the elite scholars of mystical texts now took on a social role as embodiments and intercessors of Divinity for the masses.
It is linked to instincts and bodily cravings.
It allows one to have some awareness of the existence and presence of God.
In early rabbinic Judaism (the early centuries of the 1st millennium CE), the terms ''Ma'aseh Bereshit'' ("Works of Creation") and ''Ma'aseh Merkabah'' ("Works of the Divine Throne/Chariot") clearly indicate the Midrashic nature of these speculations; they are really based upon Genesis 1 and Book of Ezekiel 1:4–28, while the names ''Sitrei Torah'' (Hidden aspects of the Torah) (Talmud ''Hag.''
Both adapted the Jewish concepts freely from their Judaic understanding, to merge with other theologies, religious traditions and magical associations.
These symbols are used to describe various parts and aspects of the model.
They argued that the term "Jew" was to be interpreted metaphorically, as referring to the spiritual development of the soul, rather than the superficial denomination of the individual, and they added a chain of intermediary states between "Jews" and idol worshippers, or spiritualised the very definition of "Jews" and "non-Jews" and argued that a soul can be re-incarnated in different communities (whether Jewish or not) as much as within a single one.
It contains the moral virtues and the ability to distinguish between good and evil.
"Rav G Gedaliah Nadel told me that he was still unsure as to the origin and status of the Zohar, but told me it was my absolute right to draw any conclusions I saw fit regarding both the Zohar and the Ari."
Since the 18th century, Jewish mystical development has continued in Hasidic Judaism, turning kabbalah into a social revival with texts that internalise mystical thought.
Scholem termed this element of the Spanish Kabbalah a "Jewish gnostic" motif, in the sense of dual powers in the divine realm of manifestation.
He provides numerous examples from the 17th to the 20th centuries, which would challenge the view of Halperin cited above as well as the notion that "modern Judaism" has rejected or dismissed this "outdated aspect" of the religion and, he argues, there are still Kabbalists today who harbor this view.
Kabbalah tended to be rejected by most Jews in the Conservative and Reform movements, though its influences were not completely eliminated.
Rabbi Israel ben Eliezer Baal Shem Tov (1698–1760), founder of Hasidism in the area of the Ukraine, spread teachings based on Lurianic Kabbalah, but adapted to a different aim of immediate psychological perception of Divine Omnipresence amidst the mundane.
But one point of view is represented by the Hasidic work ''Tanya'' (1797), in order to argue that Jews have a different character of soul: while a non-Jew, according to the author Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi (born 1745), can achieve a high level of spirituality, similar to an angel, his soul is still fundamentally different in character, but not value, from a Jewish one.
This age requirement came about during this period and is not Talmudic in origin but Rabbinic.
Many famous kabbalists, including the ARI, Rabbi Nachman of Breslov, Yehuda Ashlag, were younger than twenty when they began.
Of the impersonal Ein Sof nothing can be grasped.
The ''nefesh'' is found in all humans, and enters the physical body at birth.
The first Chief Rabbi of Mandate Palestine, Abraham Isaac Kook was a mystical thinker who drew heavily on Kabbalistic notions through his own poetic terminology.
Traditional practitioners believe its earliest origins pre-date world religions, forming the primordial blueprint for Creation's philosophies, religions, sciences, arts, and political systems.
The creation of Adam would have redeemed existence, but his sin caused new shevirah of Divine vitality, requiring the Giving of the Torah to begin Messianic rectification.
There is dispute among modern Haredim as to the status of Isaac Luria's, the Arizal's Kabbalistic teachings.
Around the 1230s, Rabbi Meir ben Simon of Narbonne wrote an epistle (included in his ''Milḥemet Mitzvah'') against his contemporaries, the early Kabbalists, characterizing them as blasphemers who even approach heresy.
However, a number of renowned Kabbalists claimed the exact opposite, stressing universality of all human souls and providing universal interpretations of the Kabbalistic tradition, including its Lurianic version.
David Halperin argues that the collapse of Kabbalah's influence among Western European Jews over the course of the 17th and 18th century was a result of the cognitive dissonance they experienced between the negative perception of Gentiles found in some exponents of Kabbalah, and their own positive dealings with non-Jews, which were rapidly expanding and improving during this period due to the influence of the Enlightenment.
In the Reform movement Sharon Koren teaches at the Hebrew Union College.
While some interpretations of prayer see its role as manipulating heavenly forces, Practical Kabbalah properly involved white-magical acts, and was censored by kabbalists for only those completely pure of intent.
The ''Sephirot'' (also spelled "sephiroth") (singular ''sefirah'') are the ten emanations and attributes of God with which he continually sustains the universe in existence.
In contemporary times kabbalah is studied in four very different, though sometimes overlapping, ways:
*''Neshamah Yeseira'': The "supplemental soul" that a Jew can experience on Shabbat.
*''Ruach HaKodesh'' (רוח הקודש) ("spirit of holiness"): a state of the soul that makes prophecy possible.
An additional term also expanded Jewish esoteric knowledge, namely ''Chochmah Nistara'' (Hidden wisdom).
This separates man from all other life-forms.
Both transcribed Luria's teachings (in variant forms) gaining them widespread popularity, Sarug taking Lurianic Kabbalah to Europe, Vital authoring the latterly canonical version.
Rabbi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon, in the spirit of his father Maimonides, Rabbi Saadiah Gaon, and other predecessors, explains at length in his ''Milḥamot HaShem'' that God is in no way literally within time or space nor physically outside time or space, since time and space simply do not apply to his being whatsoever.
Kabbalists speak of the first as ''Ein/Ayn Sof'' (אין סוף "the infinite/endless", literally "that which has no limits").
In this view it is conceived that the Absolute needs evil to 'be what it is', i.e., to exist.
Moses' encounters with the Burning bush and God on Mount Sinai are evidence of mystical events in the Torah that form the origin of Jewish mystical beliefs.
Gershom Scholem writes:
On the other hand, Rabbi Louis Ginzberg, writes in the ''Jewish Encyclopedia'' (1901–1906) that the journey to paradise "is to be taken literally and not allegorically".
Historians have noted that most claims for the authority of kabbalah involve an argument of the antiquity of authority (see, e.g., Joseph Dan's discussion in his ''Circle of the Unique Cherub'').
The Safed mystics responded to the Spanish expulsion by turning Kabbalistic doctrine and practice towards a messianic focus.
Although Kabbalah propounds the Unity of God, one of the most serious and sustained criticisms is that it may lead away from monotheism, and instead promote dualism, the belief that there is a supernatural counterpart to God.
Reform Rabbis like Herbert Weiner and Lawrence Kushner have renewed interest in Kabbalah among Reform Jews.
"Righteous" humans (''tzadikim'') ascend these ethical qualities of the ten ''sephirot'' by doing righteous actions.
Where the first academic historians of Judaism in the 19th century opposed and marginalised kabbalah, Gershom Scholem and his successors repositioned the historiography of Jewish mysticism as a central, vital component of Judaic renewal through history.
These groups highlight or interpret kabbalah through non-particularist, universalist aspects.
Medieval kabbalah elaborates particular reasons for each Biblical mitzvah, and their role in harmonising the supernal divine flow, uniting masculine and feminine forces on High.
Nachmanides (13th century) provides background to many kabbalistic ideas.
Through Lurianic Kabbalah and Hasidic Judaism, reincarnation entered popular Jewish culture as a literary motif.
In the mid-20th century, it was left to Gershom Scholem to overturn their stance, establishing the flourishing present-day academic investigation of Jewish mysticism, and making Heichalot, Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts the objects of scholarly critical-historical study.
Historians generally date the start of Kabbalah as a major influence in Jewish thought and practice with the publication of the Zohar and climaxing with the spread of the Arizal's teachings.
He wrote copious manuscripts in an appealing clear Hebrew style, all of which gained the attention of both admirers and rabbinical critics, who feared another "Shabbetai Zevi (false messiah) in the making".
Contemporary scholarship suggests that various schools of Jewish esotericism arose at different periods of Jewish history, each reflecting not only prior forms of mysticism, but also the intellectual and cultural milieu of that historical period.
During the 5th century BCE, when the works of the Tanakh were edited and canonised and the secret knowledge encrypted within the various writings and scrolls ("Megilot"), the knowledge was referred to as ''Ma'aseh Merkavah'' () and ''Ma'aseh B'reshit'' (), respectively "the act of the Chariot" and "the act of Creation".
This paradox is dealt with at length in Chabad texts.
The Sabbatian movement was followed by that of the Frankists who were disciples of Jacob Frank (1726–1791) who eventually became an apostate to Judaism by apparently converting to Catholicism.
Cross-disciplinary academic revisions of Scholem's and others' theories are regularly published for wide readership.
However, the Kabbalists explained a number of scriptural passages in reference to Gilgulim.
It came down from a remote past as a revelation to elect Tzadikim (righteous people), and, for the most part, was preserved only by a privileged few.
Jewish forms of esotericism existed over 2,000 years ago.
For example, ''Sefer Raziel HaMalach'', an astro-magical text partly based on a magical manual of late antiquity, ''Sefer ha-Razim'', was, according to the kabbalists, transmitted by the angel Raziel to Adam after he was evicted from Eden.
From the Baal Shem Tov sprang the wide ongoing schools of Hasidic Judaism, each with different approaches and thought.
* The Theosophical tradition of ''Theoretical Kabbalah'' (the main focus of the Zohar and Luria) seeks to understand and describe the divine realm.
The dualistic system holds that there is a good power versus an evil power.
Jacob's vision of the ladder to heaven provided another example of esoteric experience.
This dual-directional perspective embodies the cyclical, inclusive nature of the divine flow, where alternative divine and human perspectives have validity.
According to Kabbalists, humans cannot yet understand the infinity of God.
According to Kabbalistic cosmology, the Ten Sephirot correspond to ten levels of creation.
Abraham Abulafia's "Prophetic Kabbalah" was the supreme example of this, though marginal in Kabbalistic development, and his alternative to the program of theosophical Kabbalah
Uniquely, Lurianism gave formerly private mysticism the urgency of Messianic social involvement.
The Bible provides ample additional material for mythic and mystical speculation.
Others hold that non-divine spiritual entities were indeed created by God as a means for exacting his will.
The author of the ''Shulkhan Arukh'' (the normative Jewish "Code of Law"), Rabbi Yosef Karo (1488–1575), was also a scholar of Kabbalah who kept a personal mystical diary.
This is in contrast to certain popular understandings of modern Kabbalah which teach a form of panentheism, that his 'essence' is within everything.
Moshe Alshich wrote a mystical commentary on the Torah, and Shlomo Alkabetz wrote Kabbalistic commentaries and poems.
On the other hand, many prominent Kabbalists rejected this idea and believed in essential equality of all human souls.
The central metaphor of man allows human understanding of the sephirot, as they correspond to the psychological faculties of the soul, and incorporate masculine and feminine aspects after Genesis 1:27 ("God created man in His own image, in the image of God He created him, male and female He created them").
The Oriental Kabbalist tradition continues until today among Sephardi and Mizrachi Hakham sages and study circles.
The esoteric teachings of kabbalah gave the traditional mitzvot observances the central role in spiritual creation, whether the practitioner was learned in this knowledge or not.
Reincarnation, the transmigration of the soul after death, was introduced into Judaism as a central esoteric tenet of Kabbalah from the Medieval period onwards, called Gilgul neshamot ("Cycles of the soul").
The ''Tosafot'', medieval commentaries on the Talmud, say that the four sages "did not go up literally, but it appeared to them as if they went up".
*''Neshamah'' (נשמה): the higher soul, or "super-soul".
The Hasidic development of kabbalah incorporates a successive stage of Jewish mysticism from historical kabbalistic metaphysics.
Another, separate influential mystical movement, shortly before the arrival there of Kabbalistic theory, was the "Chassidei Ashkenaz" (חסידי אשכנז) or Medieval German Pietists from 1150 to 1250.
Rectification Above corresponds to the reorganization of the independent sephirot into relating ''Partzufim'' (Divine Personas), previously referred to obliquely in the Zohar.
Answers to questions of transmission, lineage, influence, and innovation vary greatly and cannot be easily summarised.
Many Orthodox Jews reject the idea that Kabbalah underwent significant historical development or change such as has been proposed above.
It makes possible an enhanced spiritual enjoyment of the day.
According to interpretations of Luria, the catastrophe stemmed from the "unwillingness" of the residue imprint after the Tzimtzum to relate to the new vitality that began creation.
Students of Joseph B. Soloveitchik, figurehead of American Modern Orthodox Judaism have read the influence of Kabbalistic symbols in his philosophical works.
Modern academic-historical study of Jewish mysticism reserves the term "kabbalah" to designate the particular, distinctive doctrines that textually emerged fully expressed in the Middle Ages, as distinct from the earlier Merkabah mystical concepts and methods.
A prime representative of this humanist stream in Kabbalah was Rabbi Elijah Benamozegh, who explicitly praised Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, as well as a whole range of ancient pagan mystical systems.
With the decline of Christian Cabala in the Age of Reason, Hermetic Qabalah continued as a central underground tradition in Western esotericism.
When Loving-Kindness becomes extreme it can lead to sexual depravity and lack of Justice to the wicked.
Moses ben Jacob Cordovero, wrote ''Tomer Devorah'' (''Palm Tree of Deborah''), in which he presents an ethical teaching of Judaism in the kabbalistic context of the ten ''sephirot''.
Rabbi Yiḥyeh Qafeḥ, a 20th-century Yemenite Jewish leader and Chief Rabbi of Yemen, spearheaded the Dor Deah ("generation of knowledge") movement to counteract the influence of the Zohar and modern Kabbalah.
Also the Taamay Hamikrah - the trop - are referred to in the Zohar - only by their Sefardi Names.
Its texts combine what they view as rational investigation with explanation of Kabbalah through articulating unity in a common Divine essence.
At an even later time, the term began to generally be applied to Zoharic teachings as elaborated upon by Isaac Luria Arizal.
*''Yehidah'' (יחידה): The highest plane of the soul, in which one can achieve as full a union with God as is possible.
The mystical methods and doctrines of Hekhalot (Heavenly "Chambers") and Merkabah (Divine "Chariot") texts, named by modern scholars from these repeated motifs, lasted from the 1st century BCE through to the 10th century, before giving way to the documented manuscript emergence of Kabbalah.
Loving-Kindness is a possible moral justification found in Chessed, and Gevurah is the Moral Justification of Justice and both are mediated by Mercy which is Rachamim.
These teachings are held by followers in Judaism to define the inner meaning of both the Hebrew Bible and traditional Rabbinic literature and their formerly concealed transmitted dimension, as well as to explain the significance of Jewish religious observances.
Among problems considered in the Hebrew Kabbalah is the theological issue of the nature and origin of evil.
Exile and enclothement of higher divinity within lower realms throughout existence requires man to complete the ''Tikkun olam'' (Rectification) process.
The acts of man unite or divide the Heavenly masculine and feminine aspects of the sephirot, their anthropomorphic harmony completing Creation.
Any who says there is has never studied Kabbalah, has never seen PaRDeS, and speaks as an ignoramus."
Historical and individual history becomes the narrative of reclaiming exiled Divine sparks.
Such approach was particularly common among the Renaissance and post-Renaissance Italian Jews.
One reading of this theology is monotheistic, similar to panentheism; another reading of the same theology is that it is dualistic.
It also presents methods to aid understanding of the concepts and thereby attain spiritual realisation.
With this, the feminine Divine presence in this world is drawn from exile to the Holy One Above.
His teachings also differed from the way other Hasidic groups were developing, as he rejected the idea of hereditary Hasidic dynasties and taught that each Hasid must "search for the ''tzaddik'' ('saintly/righteous person')" for himself and within himself.
According to Lurianic cosmology, the ''sephirot'' correspond to various levels of creation (ten ''sephirot'' in each of the Four Worlds, and four worlds within each of the larger four worlds, each containing ten ''sephirot'', which themselves contain ten ''sephirot'', to an infinite number of possibilities), and are emanated from the Creator for the purpose of creating the universe.
1) indicate their character as secret lore.
By converting letters to numbers, Kabbalists were able to find a hidden meaning in each word.
According to Moses Cordovero, halakhically, one must be of age twenty to engage in the Kabbalah.
In a unique amalgam of Hasidic and ''Mitnagid'' approaches, Rebbe Nachman emphasised study of both Kabbalah and serious Torah scholarship to his disciples.
Yeshayahu Leibowitz (1903–1994), an ultra-rationalist Modern Orthodox philosopher and brother of Nechama Leibowitz, publicly shared  views expressed in Rabbi Yiḥyeh Qafeḥ's book ''Milḥamoth HaShem'' against mysticism.
One of the conditions allowing a man to study and engage himself in the Kabbalah was to be at least forty years old.
A number of prominent Kabbalists, e.g., Rabbi Pinchas Eliyahu of Vilna, the author of ''Sefer ha-Brit'', held that only some marginal elements in the humanity represent these demonic forces.
