The old part of Kabul is filled with bazaars nestled along its narrow, crooked streets.
There is also an express bus that runs from downtown to Kabul International Airport for Safi Airways passengers.
In 1826, the kingdom was claimed by Dost Mohammad Khan but in 1839 Shujah Shah Durrani was re-installed with the help of British India during the First Anglo-Afghan War.
The city's population increased from around 500,000 in 1978 to 2&nbsp;million in 1988, mainly due to the return of Afghan refugees from neighboring Pakistan and Iran under President Najibullah.
The city's public bus service (Milli Bus / "National Bus") was established in the 1960s to take commuters on daily routes to many destinations.
In neighboring Pakistan, President Zulfiqar Bhutto was executed in April 1979.
Boys and girls are strongly encouraged to attend school under the Karzai administration but many more schools are needed not only in Kabul but throughout the country.
Later, after Massoud and Hekmatyar had a terrible falling-out over Massoud's opposition to terrorist tactics and methods, Massoud overthrew from Jawanan-e Musulman.
* DK-German Medical Diagnostic Center
Winters are cold, with a January daily average of .
The Police Chief is selected by the Interior Minister and is responsible for all law enforcement activities throughout the Kabul province.
It also plans to build a metro rail in the future.
The Greco-Bactrians captured Kabul from the Mauryans in the early 2nd century BC, then lost the city to their subordinates in the Indo-Greek Kingdom around the mid-2nd century BC.
In 1969 a religious uprising at the Pul-e Khishti Mosque protested the Soviet Union's increasing influence over Afghan politics and religion.
Kabul University opened in 1932 and by the 1960s western educated Afghans made up the majority of teachers.
Massoud's mission to Bhutto was to create unrest in northern Afghanistan.
Some of them have been developed recently, while others have existed since the early 20th century.
The world bank authorized US$25&nbsp;million for the Kabul Urban Reconstruction Project which closed in 2011.
The Inter-Continental is also in the process of being redeveloped.
On April 28, 1978, President Daoud and his family along with many of his supporters were assassinated in Kabul.
The park has professional management for the daily maintenance of public roads, internal streets, common areas, parking areas, 24 hours perimeter security, access control for vehicles and persons.
In 1983, a report from ''Izvestia'' said that most public places such as hospitals and state banks had "people with guns in their hands", which was not the case before 1979.
Gas stations are mainly private-owned.
Since the Taliban's fall from power in November 2001, the Afghan government and other countries have attempted to rebuild the city, although the Taliban insurgents have slowed the re-construction efforts and staged major attacks against the government, the NATO-led forces, foreign diplomats and Afghan civilians.
* Indira Gandhi Childrens Hospital
** Safi Landmark Hotel
During the Soviet war in Afghanistan the city continued to be an economic center and was relatively safe.
Kabul's main products include fresh and dried fruit, nuts, beverages, Afghan rugs, leather and sheep skin products, furniture, antique replicas, and domestic clothes.
He joined Rabani's newly created Afghan political party, Jamiat-i-Islami, in exile in Pakistan."
The Kabul rulers built a long defensive wall around the city to protect it from enemy raids.
In July 1973, while King Zahir Shah was visiting Europe, his cousin Daoud Khan who served as Prime Minister launched a coup d'état and took over power.
** National Archives of Afghanistan
In 1504, the city fell to Babur from the north and made into his headquarters, which became one of the principal cities of his later Mughal Empire.
The British-led Indian forces invaded in 1879 when Kabul was under Sher Ali Khan's rule, as the Afghan king initially refused to accept British diplomatic mission and later the British residents were again massacred.
Additionally to the bombardment campaign conducted by Hekmatyar and Dostum, tension between the Shi'a Hazara forces of Abdul Ali Mazari and the Wahabi Ittihad-i Islami of Abdul Rasul Sayyaf soon escalated into a second violent conflict.
Around 230&nbsp;AD, the Kushans were defeated by the Sassanid Empire and replaced by Sassanid vassals known as the Indo-Sassanids.
It was briefly held by Tibetan Empire between 801 and 815.
* Ghulam Haider Khan High School, a school for boys
The Afghan Ministry of Education has plans to build more schools in the coming years so that education is provided to all citizens of the country.
According to Transparency International, the government of Afghanistan is the third most-corrupt in the world.
The area in which the Kabul valley sits was ruled by the Medes before falling to the Achaemenids.
These forces took steps to restore law and order.
Zahir turned to the Japanese, Germans and Italians for help developing a modern transportation and communication network.
Kabul has no train service but the government plans to build rail lines to connect the city with Mazar-i-Sharif in the north and Jalalabad-Torkham in the east.
The Ministry of Education led by Ghulam Farooq Wardak is responsible for the education system in Afghanistan.
However, Zia-ul-Haq, fearing that the Soviets may be advancing into Pakistan, particularly Balochistan, made no secret about his intentions of aiding the mujahideen rebel groups.
Tappe-i-Maranjan is a nearby hill where Buddhist statues and Graeco-Bactrian coins from the 2nd century BC have been found.
The British partially destroyed Bala Hissar fortress before retreating to British India.
In 1841 a local uprising resulted in the killing of the British resident and loss of mission in Kabul and the 1842 retreat from Kabul to Jalalabad.
Timur Shah died in 1793 and was succeeded by his son Zaman Shah Durrani.
The Taliban started shelling Kabul in early 1995 but were repelled at first by Massoud's forces.
This also prevents foreign investment in Afghanistan, especially by Western countries.
The word "''Kubhā''" is mentioned in the Rigveda (circa 1500-1200 BCE), one of the four canonical sacred texts (śruti) of Hinduism, and the Avesta, the primary collection of sacred texts of Zoroastrianism, refers to the Kabul River.
The region became part of the Seleucid Empire but was later given to the Indian Maurya Empire.
Since 2014 the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) have been in charge of security in and around the city.
This was supported by the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), a pro-Soviet political party.
This historical wall has survived until today.
** Mausoleum of Timur Shah Durrani
** National Museum of Afghanistan
It is claimed that Bhutto paved the way for the April 1978 Saur Revolution in Kabul by making Daoud spread his armed forces to the countryside.
By 1975, the young Ahmad Shah Massoud and his followers initiated an uprising in Panjshir but were forced to flee to neighboring Pakistan where they received recruitment from Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto to create unrest in Afghanistan with the help of Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence.
The Soviets turned the city of Kabul into their command center during the Soviet war in Afghanistan.
The Kabul bus system has recently discovered a new source of revenue in whole-bus advertising from MTN similar to "bus wrap" advertising on public transit in more developed nations.
He drove a Rolls-Royce, and lived in the famous Darul Aman Palace.
Soviet men and women were very common in the city's shopping roads, with the large availability of Western products.
The inscription on his tomb contains the famous Persian couplet, which states: اگرفردوس روی زمین است همین است و همین است و همین است (If there is a paradise on earth, it is this, it is this, it is this!)
During this meeting, Director-General of the ISI Akhtar Abdur Rahman advocated for the idea of covert operation in Afghanistan by arming the Islamic extremists.
GSM/GPRS mobile phone services in the city are provided by Afghan Wireless, Etisalat, Roshan, MTN and Salaam Network.
During the inter-war period France and Germany worked to help develop the country and maintained high schools and lycees in the capital, providing education for the children of the city's elite families.
Kabul's Chief of Police is Lt. Gen. Abdul Rahman Rahimi.
Kabul is periodically the scene of deadly suicide bombings carried out by the Haqqani network, the Taliban's Quetta Shura, Hezbi Islami, al-Qaeda, and other anti-government groups.
** Negaristani Milli
The annual mean temperature is .
Experts believe that the poor decisions of Afghan politicians contribute to the unrest in the region.
The city suffered heavily under a bombardment campaign between rival militias.
A month later the new government under President Hamid Karzai was established.
In December 1992, the last of the 86 city trolley buses in Kabul came to a halt because of the conflict.
Foreign-backed rebel groups and army deserters took up arms in the name of Islam.
* Lycée Esteqlal, a Franco-Afghan school founded in 1922
Life for PDPA politicians and their families were also insecure.
Cultural sites include: the National Museum of Afghanistan, notably displaying an impressive statue of Surya excavated at Khair Khana, the ruined Darul Aman Palace, the tomb of Mughal Emperor Babur at Bagh-e Babur, and Chehlstoon Park, the Minar-i-Istiqlal (Column of Independence) built in 1919 after the Third Afghan War, the tomb of Timur Shah Durrani, and the imposing Id Gah Mosque (founded 1893).
Political crime, such as assassinations of PDPA party members and guerilla attacks on military and government targets were quite common.
Since late 2001, local economic development has included a number of indoor shopping centers.
It has been ruled by the Achaemenids, Seleucids, Mauryans, Kushans, Kabul Shahis, Saffarids, Ghaznavids, and Ghurids.
Their hit-squads from the infamous "Ministry for Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice" watched the streets conducting public beatings of people.
** Shah-Do Shamshira Mosque
Kabul has a cold semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification ''BSk'') with precipitation concentrated in the winter (almost exclusively falling as snow) and spring months.
* KIA ISAF Role 3 Hospital
The war-torn city began to see some positive development as many expatriate Afghans returned to the city.
* American Medical Center Afghanistan
Bala Hissar is a fort destroyed by the British in 1879, in retaliation for the death of their envoy, now restored as a military college.
The al-Qaeda of Osama Bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri became a state within the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, with bin Laden controlling Kabul and the eastern city of Jalalabad.
During the Sassanian period, the city was referred to as "Kapul" in Pahlavi scripts.
The wealthy Afghans usually go abroad when seeking treatment.
In 1842 the British returned to Kabul, plundering Bala Hissar in revenge before fleeing back to British India (now Pakistan).
* Nazo Ana High School, a school for girls
Alexander the Great explored the Kabul valley after his conquest of the Achaemenid Empire in 330&nbsp;BC but no record has been made of Kabul, which may have been only a small town and not worth writing about.
In November 2001, the Northern Alliance captured Kabul after the Taliban had abandoned it.
Rapid urbanization had made Kabul the world's 64th largest city and the fifth fastest-growing city in the world.
The most well known high schools in Kabul include:
Many foreigners began flocking to Kabul and the nation's tourism industry was starting to pick up speed.
It was conquered by Kushan Emperor Kujula Kadphises in about 45&nbsp;AD and remained Kushan territory until at least the 3rd century AD.
* Sardar Mohammad Daud Khan Hospital
After the fall of Najibullah's Democratic Republic of Afghanistan in April 1992, leaders of the different mujahideen factions were unable to form a government.
It was also ruled by Chagatai Khanate and Kartids, were vassals of Ilkhanate till dissolution of latter in 1335.
Ahmad Shah Durrani, commander of 4,000 Abdali Afghans, asserted Pashtun rule in 1747 and further expanded his new Afghan Empire.
Following this invasion, Pakistani President Zia-ul-Haq chaired a meeting in Islamabad and was told by several cabinet members to refrain from interfering in Afghanistan, owing to the vastly superior military power of the Soviet Union.
In the meantime, a NATO-led International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was deployed in the city.
Socialist, Maoist and liberal factions demonstrated daily in Kabul while more traditional Islamic leaders spoke out against the failure to aid the Afghan countryside.
** There are local travel agencies developing their activity in the country.
* Malalai High School, a Franco-Afghan school for girls
A new international terminal was built by the government of Japan and began operation in 2008.
* French Medical Institute for Children
Pro-Soviet PDPA under Hafizullah Amin seized power and slowly began to institute reforms.
** Mausoleum of Jamal-al-Din al-Afghani
According to ''Táríkhu-l Hind'' by Al-Biruni, Kabul was governed by princes of Turkic lineage whose rule lasted for about 60 generations.
* Atatürk Children's Hospital
In February 1979, U.S.
'''Kabul''' (;  '''', ;  '''', ), also spelled '''Cabool''', '''Caubul''', '''Kabol''', or '''Cabul'''.
Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, a poet from Hindustan who visited at the time wrote: ''"Dine and drink in Kabul: it is mountain, desert, city, river and all else."''
Private businesses were nationalized in the Soviet manner.
** Bagh-e Babur (Gardens of Babur)
The Soviet Embassy, for example, was attacked 4 times with arms fire in the first five years of the war.
During the hardline Taliban regime, Kabul became a barren ruined city, with most of the city already having been destroyed, many residents had long left, poverty levels were high, there was little to no education or public services, and its strict laws meant there were no entertainment or media.
*'''Sports complexes'''
** National Gallery of Afghanistan
It is a hub to Ariana Afghan Airlines, the national carrier of Afghanistan, as well as private airlines such as Afghan Jet International, East Horizon Airlines, Kam Air, Pamir Airways, and Safi Airways.
Nine years after Nader Shah and his forces invaded and occupied the city as part of the more easternmost parts of his Empire, he was assassinated by his own officers, causing the rapid disintegration of it.
When Zahir Shah took power in 1933 Kabul had the only  of rail in the country and the country had few internal telegraphs, phone lines or roads.
Later it was controlled by the Mughal Empire until finally becoming part of the Durrani Empire with help from the Afsharid dynasty.
The service currently has about 800 buses, but it is gradually expanding and upgrading the fleet.
Over the last decade, the United States has invested approximately $9.1&nbsp;billion into urban infrastructure in Afghanistan.
In late 1994, bombardment of the capital came to a temporary halt.
The police are part of the Afghan National Police (ANP) under the Ministry of Interior and are arranged by city districts.
In 1919, after the Third Anglo-Afghan War, Amanullah announced Afghanistan's independence from foreign affairs at Eidgah Mosque.
For Example :  '''Lets's be friends - Afghanistan'''.
Internet cafes were introduced in 2002 and has been expanding throughout the country.
* Aisha-i-Durani School, a German-Afghan school for girls
, 3G services are also available.
Kabul experimented with liberalization, dropping laws requiring women to wear burkas, restrictions on speech and assembly were loosened which led to student politics in the capital.
General Rahman was heard loudly saying: "''Kabul must burn!
Some historians ascribe Kabul the Sanskrit name of Kamboja (''Kamboj'').
The city's colleges and universities were renovated after 2002.
In the early 1970s Radio Kabul began to broadcast in other languages besides Pashto which helped to unify those minorities that often felt marginalized.
The residents were often unsafe when walking through the streets, receiving verbal abuse, rude gestures and even kidnappings from anti-PDPA/anti-Soviet Afghan civilians.
Dari and Pashto language are widely used in the region although Dari (Afghan Persian) serves as the lingua franca.
** Mausoleum of Zahir Shah and Nadir Shah
In September 1979 Afghan President Nur Muhammad Taraki was assassinated by a team of Soviet Spetsnaz inside the Tajbeg Palace in Kabul.
Education was modified into the Soviet model, with lessons focusing on teaching Russian, Leninism-Marxism and learning of other countries belonging to the Soviet bloc.
The Minaret of Chakari, destroyed in 1998, had Buddhist swastika and both Mahayana and Theravada qualities.
The wars since 1978 have limited the city's economic productivity but after the establishment of the Karzai administration.
American diplomat Charles Dunbar said that the Soviet troops' presence was "surprisingly modest".
They also conducted amputations against common thieves.
During the Mongol invasion, many natives of Afghanistan fled to India where some established dynasties in Delhi.
This marked the start of a dark period of the city, in which over 50,000 civilians were killed.
Initially the factions in the city aligned to fight off Hekmatyar's forces, but diplomacy inside the capital quickly broke down.
Long distance road journeys are made by private Mercedes-Benz coach buses or various types of vans, trucks and cars.
In the 14th century, Kabul became a major trading center under the kingdom of Timur (''Tamerlane'').
In 2012, there were reportedly $3.9&nbsp;billion paid to public officials in bribes which contributed to these issues.
The World Factbook estimates that Kabul's population is little over 4.6&nbsp;million, which possibly includes the people of the province as well.
Package delivery services like FedEx, TNT N.V., and DHL are also available.
** Abdul Rahman Mosque
About  from downtown Kabul, in Bagrami, a  wide industrial complex has completed with modern facilities, which will allow companies to operate businesses there.
For the following two years in particular, much of Kabul would be laid to waste, the majority of infrastructure destroyed, and a massive exodus of the population leaving to the countryside or abroad.
It was surrounded by barbed-wire and armed tanks, for their safety.
In 420&nbsp;AD the Indo-Sassanids were driven out of Afghanistan by the Xionite tribe known as the Kidarites, who were then replaced in the 460s by the Hephthalites.
According to Afghan government statistics, it was estimated at 3,678,034 in the year 2015.
President Zia-ul-Haq authorised this operation under General Rahman, and it was later merged with Operation Cyclone, a programme funded by the United States.
* Amani High School, a German-Afghan school for boys founded in 1924
It was from here that Babur began his 1526 conquest of Hindustan, which was ruled by the Afghan Lodi dynasty and began east of the Indus River in what is present-day Pakistan.
Other places of interest include Kabul City Center, which is Kabul's first shopping mall, the shops around Flower Street and Chicken Street, Wazir Akbar Khan district, Kabul Golf Club, Kabul Zoo, Abdul Rahman Mosque, Shah-Do Shamshira and other famous mosques, the National Gallery of Afghanistan, the National Archives of Afghanistan, Afghan Royal Family Mausoleum, the OMAR Mine Museum, Bibi Mahro Hill, Kabul Cemetery, and Paghman Gardens.
Government employees, soldiers and civilians have all been targets of attacks.
They imposed a strict form of Sharia (Islamic law), restricting women from work and education.
Although a nationwide bus service is available from Kabul, flying is safer, especially for foreigners.
An December 1983 article from ''Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists'', where the author stayed two weeks in the city, said that the Soviet soldiers had a friendly atmosphere in which they would greet friends and have a chat with the population.
Daoud named himself President and planned to institute reforms.
There is a reference to a settlement called ''Kabura'' by the rulers of the Achaemenid Empire, which may be the basis for the future use of the name ''Kabura'' (Κάβουρα) by Ptolemy.
Ambassador Adolph Dubs was murdered after Afghan security forces burst in on his kidnappers.
** Mausoleum of Abdur Rahman Khan
A number of factories operate there, including the $25&nbsp;million Coca-Cola bottling plant and the Omaid Bahar juice factory.
His wish to be buried in Kabul was finally granted.
The city's population includes Tajiks, Pashtuns, Hazaras, Uzbeks and smaller numbers of Afghans belonging to other ethnic groups.
* Wazir Akbar Khan Hospital
, all of them provide 3G services as well.
One such example was the Afshar Operation in 1993, in which many ethnic Hazara and Pashtun civilians were murdered.
Presently, there are several hospitals in Kabul which include;
He said in a July 1983 article that whilst Soviet troops are a common sight, they "do not give the impression of invaders who are enforcing their occupation at the point of a bayonet".
Among these young men were Massoud, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, and other members of Jawanan-e Musulman.
Most Soviet civilians (numbering between 8,000 and 10,000) lived in the north eastern Makroyan suburb, in an apartment housing complex.
Kabul serves as the nation's cultural and learning center, situated  above sea level in a narrow valley, wedged between the Hindu Kush mountains along the Kabul River.
It became part of the surviving Turk Shahi Kingdom of Kapisa, also known as ''Kabul-Shahan''.
Multilingualism is common throughout the area, particularly among the Pashtun people.
About 80 percent of the city was devastated and destroyed by 1996.
A system of 800 public buses continued to provide transportation services to the city.
Regional airlines such as Air India, SpiceJet, flydubai, Emirates, Gulf Air, Mahan Air, Pakistan International Airlines, Turkish Airlines and others also have regularly scheduled flights to the airport.
But the city's image wasn't negative in everybody's view.
Kabul Zoo was inaugurated in 1967, which was maintained with the help of visiting German zoologists.
The BBC has described the period before the April 1978 Revolution as an era when different ethnic groups of Afghanistan lived together harmoniously, intermarried and mixed socially.
Spring is the wettest time of the year, though temperatures are generally amiable.
Private vehicles are on the rise in Kabul, with several dealerships in the city.
