* three escort carriers: , , and
Its capture provided adequate forward bases which enabled U.S. air forces using the Boeing B-29 Superfortress to strike at the Japanese home islands.
The only surface losses were destroyers and smaller ships that lacked the capability to sustain heavy damage.
However, the 1st Air Fleet at that time only had 40 aircraft: 34 Mitsubishi A6M Zero carrier-based fighters, three Nakajima B6N ''Tenzan'' ("Jill") torpedo bombers, one Mitsubishi G4M ("Betty") and two Yokosuka P1Y ''Ginga'' ("Frances") land-based bombers, and one additional reconnaissance aircraft.
Firsthand interviews with surviving Kamikaze pilots and escort pilots has revealed that they were motivated by a desire to protect their families from perceived atrocities and possible extinction at the hands of the Allies.
This was because if a pilot closed his eyes he would lower the chances of hitting his target.
Okamura is credited with being the first to propose the ''kamikaze'' attacks.
Before the formation of ''kamikaze'' units, pilots had made deliberate crashes as a last resort when their planes had suffered severe damage and they did not want to risk being captured, or wanted to do as much damage to the enemy as possible, since they were crashing anyway; such situations occurred in both the Axis and Allied air forces.
Many Army officer Kamikaze took their swords with them, while the Navy pilots (as a general rule) did not carry swords in their planes.
The Japanese lost over 400 carrier-based planes and pilots in the Battle of the Philippine Sea, effectively putting an end to their carriers' potency.
The U.S. Fast Carrier Task Force alone could bring over 1,000 fighter aircraft into play.
The tradition of death instead of defeat, capture, and perceived shame was deeply entrenched in Japanese military culture.
''Kamikaze'' pilots who were unable to complete their mission (due to mechanical failure, interception, etc.)
Britain's post-war economic situation played a role in the decision to not repair damaged carriers, while even seriously damaged American carriers such as USS ''Bunker Hill'' were repaired, although they were then mothballed or sold off as surplus after World War II without re-entering service.
On 11 March, the U.S. carrier  was hit and moderately damaged at Ulithi Atoll, in the Caroline Islands, by a ''kamikaze'' that had flown almost  from Japan, in a mission called Operation Tan No.
The kamikaze, like all Japanese aviators flying over unfriendly territory, were issued (or purchased, if they were officers) a Nambu pistol with which to end their lives if they risked being captured.
It is said that young pilots on ''kamikaze'' missions often flew southwest from Japan over the  Mount Kaimon.
We were automatons who obeyed without thinking'.
A Foreign Office official named Toshikazu Kase said: "It was customary for GHQ in Tokyo to make false announcements of victory in utter disregard of facts, and for the elated and complacent public to believe them".
Some Japanese military personnel were critical of the policy.
Tetsuzo Iwamoto refused to engage in a kamikaze attack because he thought the task of fighter pilots was to shoot down aircraft.
The Seafires' best day was 15 August 1945, shooting down eight attacking aircraft for a single loss.
Light rapid fire anti-aircraft weapons such as the 40 mm Bofors and 20 mm Oerlikon autocannons were highly effective, but heavy anti-aircraft guns such as the 5"/38 caliber gun (127&nbsp;mm) had the punch to blow ''kamikazes'' out of the air, which was preferable since even a heavily damaged ''kamikaze'' could complete its mission.
This stigma began to diminish some 50 years after the war as scholars and publishers have distributed the survivors' stories.
In early 1945 U.S. Navy aviator Commander John Thach, already famous for developing effective aerial tactics against the Japanese such as the Thach Weave, developed a defensive strategy against ''kamikazes'' called the "big blue blanket" to establish Allied air supremacy well away from the carrier force.
''Shinpū'' is the on-reading (''on'yomi'' or Chinese-derived pronunciation) of the same characters that form the word ''kamikaze'' in Japanese.
First Lieutenant Fusata Iida's plane had taken a hit and had started leaking fuel when he apparently used it to make a suicide attack on Kaneohe Naval Air Station.
However, the fires were gradually brought under control, and the crater in the deck was repaired with concrete and steel plate.
In total, seven carriers were hit, as well as 40 other ships (five sunk, 23 heavily damaged, and 12 moderately damaged).
Residents on Kikaishima Island, east of Amami Ōshima, say that pilots from suicide mission units dropped flowers from the air as they departed on their final missions.
Later, Tamai asked Lieutenant Yukio Seki to command the special attack force.
Provide me with 300 planes and I will turn the tide of war.”
The Imperial Japanese Navy's 1st Air Fleet, based at Manila, was assigned the task of assisting the Japanese ships which would attempt to destroy Allied forces in Leyte Gulf.
Following the commencement of the ''kamikaze'' tactic, newspapers and books ran advertisements, articles, and stories regarding the suicide bombers, to aid in recruiting and support.
Axell and Kase pointed out: "The fact is that innumerable soldiers, sailors and pilots were determined to die, to become eirei, that is ‘guardian spirits’ of the country.
Australian journalists Denis and Peggy Warner, in a 1982 book with Japanese naval historian Sadao Seno (''The Sacred Warriors: Japan’s Suicide Legions''), arrived at a total of 57 ships sunk by ''kamikazes''.
These names were taken from a patriotic death poem, ''Shikishima no Yamato-gokoro wo hito towaba, asahi ni niou yamazakura bana'' by the Japanese classical scholar, Motoori Norinaga.
They never returned, but there is no record of an enemy plane hitting an Allied ship that day.
Before taking off, he had told his men that if his plane were to become badly damaged he would crash it into a "worthy enemy target".
The sergeant major was posthumously promoted to second lieutenant by the emperor and was enshrined at Yasukuni.
Stories like these, which showed the kind of praise and honour death produced, encouraged young Japanese to volunteer for the Special Attack Corps and instilled a desire in the youth to die as a ''kamikaze''.
Suicide attacks by planes or boats at Okinawa sank or put out of action at least 30 U.S. warships, and at least three U.S. merchant ships, along with some from other Allied forces.
While many stories were falsified, some were true, such as the story of Kiyu Ishikawa who saved a Japanese ship when he crashed his plane into a torpedo that an American submarine had launched.
''Kamikaze'' aircraft were essentially pilot-guided explosive missiles, purpose-built or converted from conventional aircraft.
The attacks expended 1,465 planes.
At least one of these pilots was a conscripted Korean with a Japanese name, adopted under the pre-war ''Soshi-kaimei'' ordinance that compelled Koreans to take Japanese personal names.
* one submarine chaser
Two  bombs were attached to two fighters, and the pilots took off before dawn, planning to crash into carriers.
These things, among others, were meant to put the pilot into the mindset in which he would be mentally ready to die.
Eleven of the 1,036 IJA ''kamikaze'' pilots who died in sorties from Chiran and other Japanese air bases during the Battle of Okinawa were Koreans.
By 1945, large numbers of anti-aircraft shells with radio frequency proximity fuzes, on average seven times more effective than regular shells, became available, and the USN recommended their use against ''kamikaze'' attacks.
Late in 1944 the British Pacific Fleet (BPF) used the good high-altitude performance of their Supermarine Seafires (naval version of the Spitfire) on combat air patrol duties.
* two high-speed minesweepers
The B-29 also had formidable defensive weaponry, so suicide attacks against the plane demanded considerable piloting skill to be successful, which worked against the very purpose of using expendable pilots.
The destructive potential of the ''kamikaze'' sustained postwar funding of Operation Bumblebee until the RIM-8 Talos guided missile became operational in 1959.
* three Canadian Victory ships
The ''tokkōtai'' pilot's manual also explained how a pilot may turn back if the pilot could not locate a target and that "a pilot should not waste his life lightly."
I am going because I was ordered to."
The goal of crippling or destroying large numbers of Allied ships, particularly aircraft carriers, was considered by the Empire of Japan to be a just reason for sacrificing pilots and aircraft.
According to a wartime Japanese propaganda announcement, the missions sank 81 ships and damaged 195, and according to a Japanese tally, ''kamikaze'' attacks accounted for up to 80% of the U.S. losses in the final phase of the war in the Pacific.
However, by 1945, the US Navy was large enough that damaged ships could be detached back home for repair without significantly hampering the fleet's operational capability.
However, this proved much less successful and practical since an airplane is a much faster, more maneuverable, and smaller target than a warship.
In 2006, Tsuneo Watanabe, Editor-in-Chief of the ''Yomiuri Shimbun'', criticized Japanese nationalists' glorification of ''kamikaze'' attacks:
Overall, the ''kamikazes'' were unable to turn the tide of the war and stop the Allied invasion.
The ultimate offering was to give up one’s life.
* one auxiliary tanker
Five A6M Zeros, led by Seki, and escorted to the target by leading Japanese ace Hiroyoshi Nishizawa, attacked several escort carriers.
According to some sources, on 14 October 1944,  was hit by a deliberately crashed Japanese plane.
Even encouraging capable pilots to bail out before impact was ineffective because vital personnel were often lost when they mistimed their exits and were killed as a result.
The peak in ''kamikaze'' attacks came during the period of April–June 1945, at the Battle of Okinawa.
A pilot would dive towards his target and "aim for a point between the bridge tower and the smoke stacks".
This plan also called for around-the-clock fighter patrols over Allied fleets, though the U.S. Navy had cut back training of fighter pilots so there were not enough Navy pilots available to counter the ''kamikaze'' threat.
Ōnishi, addressing this unit, told them that their nobility of spirit would keep the homeland from ruin even in defeat.
The carrier battles in 1942, particularly Midway, inflicted irreparable damage on the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service (IJNAS), such that they could no longer put together a large number of fleet carriers with well-trained aircrews.
It's all a lie that they left filled with braveness and joy, crying, 'Long live the emperor!'
On 20 March, the submarine  survived a hit from an aircraft, just off Japan.
The exact number of ships sunk is a matter of debate.
A group of pilots from the army's 31st Fighter Squadron on Negros Island decided to launch a suicide attack the following morning.
Seki became the 24th ''kamikaze'' pilot to be chosen.
Sometimes twin-engined aircraft were used in planned ''kamikaze'' attacks.
By the Battle of the Philippine Sea (June 1944) the Japanese had to make do with obsolete aircraft and inexperienced aviators in the fight against better-trained and more experienced US Navy airmen who flew radar-directed combat air patrols.
They also composed and read a death poem, a tradition stemming from the samurai, who did it before committing ''seppuku''.
The manual was very detailed in how a pilot should attack.
Every Japanese is capable of becoming a member of the Special Attack Corps".
Gordon says that the Warners and Seno included ten ships that did not sink.
A final element included intensive fighter sweeps over Japanese airfields, and bombing of Japanese runways, using delayed action bombs to make repairs more difficult.
The Nakajima Ki-115 ''Tsurugi'' was a simple, easily built propeller aircraft with a wooden airframe which used engines from existing stocks.
The invasion never happened, and few were ever used.
The names of four sub-units within the ''Kamikaze'' Special Attack Force were ''Unit Shikishima'', ''Unit Yamato'', ''Unit Asahi'', and ''Unit Yamazakura''.
The ''tokkōtai'' pilot's manual told pilots never to close their eyes.
"After the war, some commanders would express regret for allowing superfluous crews to accompany sorties, sometimes squeezing themselves aboard bombers and fighters so as to encourage the suicide pilots and, it seems, join in the exultation of sinking a large enemy vessel."
Some persons who obeyed the policy, Kiyokuma Okajima, Saburo Shindo, and Iyozo Fujita, were also critical of the policy.
They said that the commander of a kamikaze attack should engage in the task first.
The ''Ohkas'' with their high speed presented a very difficult problem for anti-aircraft fire, since their velocity made fire control extremely difficult.
The last two ran at .
The following Solomon Islands campaign (1942-1945) and the New Guinea campaign (1942-1945), notably the Battles of Eastern Solomons (August 1942) and Santa Cruz (October 1942), further decimated the IJNAS veteran aircrews, and replacing their combat experience proved impossible.
They viewed themselves as the last defense.
Allied gunners had begun to develop techniques to negate ''kamikaze'' attacks.
Although causing some of the heaviest casualties on US carriers in 1945, the IJN had sacrificed 2,525 ''kamikaze'' pilots and the IJAAF 1,387—far more than they had lost in 1942 when they sank or crippled three carriers (albeit without inflicting significant casualties).
Some officers, Minoru Genda, Tadashi Minobe and Yoshio Shiga, refused to obey the policy.
Their motivations in "volunteering" were complex and not simply about patriotism or bringing honour to their families.
Purpose-built ''kamikaze'' planes, as opposed to converted fighters and dive-bombers, were also being constructed.
This brutal "training" was justified by the idea that it would instill a "soldier's fighting spirit."
More specifically, air suicide attack units from the Imperial Japanese Navy were officially called ''shinpū tokubetsu kōgeki tai'' (神風特別攻撃隊, "divine wind special attack units").
According to a U.S Air Force webpage:
In Japanese, the formal term used for units carrying out suicide attacks during 1944–1945 is ''tokubetsu kōgeki tai'' (特別攻撃隊), which literally means "special attack unit".
By 17:00, Corsairs were able to land.
In the immediate aftermath of ''kamikaze'' strikes, British carriers with their armoured flight decks recovered more quickly compared to their US counterparts.
The destroyer  earned the nickname "The Ship That Would Not Die" after surviving six ''kamikaze'' attacks and four bomb hits during this battle.
Axell and Kase see these suicides as "individual, impromptu decisions by men who were mentally prepared to die".
On June 19, 1944 planes from the carrier  approached a US task group.
At Okinawa, ''kamikaze'' attacks focused at first on Allied destroyers on picket duty, and then on the carriers in the middle of the fleet.
* one Auk class minesweeper
One, under heavy fire and trailing smoke, aborted the attempt on ''White Plains'' and instead banked toward , plowing into the flight deck.
They had long since lost aerial dominance due to outdated aircraft and the loss of experienced pilots.
One Japanese plane made a steep dive from "a great height" at the carrier  and was engaged by AA guns.
One Zero attempted to hit the bridge of  but instead exploded on the port catwalk and cartwheeled into the sea.
During World War II, the pronunciation ''kamikaze'' was used in Japan only informally in relation to suicide attacks, but after the war this usage gained acceptance worldwide and was re-imported into Japan.
Most of the ships lost were destroyers or smaller vessels, especially those on picket duty.
However, it is not clear that this was a planned suicide attack, and official Japanese accounts of Arima's attack bore little resemblance to the actual events.
On a macroeconomic scale, Japan suffered from a diminishing capacity for war, and a rapidly declining industrial capacity relative to the Allies.
During 1945, the Japanese military began stockpiling hundreds of ''Tsurugi'', other aircraft, ''Ohkas'', and suicide boats, for use against Allied forces expected to invade Japan.
In 1890, the Imperial Rescript on Education was passed, under which students were required to ritually recite its oath to offer themselves "courageously to the State" as well as protect the Imperial family.
The important Japanese base of Saipan fell to the Allied forces on 15 July 1944.
The case of Nikolai Gastello's taran on 26 June 1941 passed into Soviet air-warfare lore.
As time wore on, however, modern critics questioning the nationalist portrayal of ''kamikaze'' pilots as noble soldiers willing to sacrifice their lives for the country have emerged.
* 14 destroyers, including the last ship to be sunk,  on 29 July 1945, off Okinawa
Some of these escort pilots, such as Zero pilot Toshimitsu Imaizumi, were themselves later sent out on their own Kamikaze missions.
However, daily beatings and corporal punishment eliminated patriotism among many pilots.
These attacks, which began in October 1944, followed several critical military defeats for the Japanese.
Ensign Mitsuo Ohta had suggested that piloted glider bombs, carried within range of targets by a mother plane, should be developed.
A less literal translation is:
Yokosuka MXY7 ''Ohka'' rocket planes, launched from bombers, were first deployed in ''kamikaze'' attacks from March 1945.
One Corsair and 10 Grumman Avengers were destroyed.
Eight ''kamikaze'' hits on five British carriers resulted in only 20 deaths while a combined total of 15 bomb hits, most of 500&nbsp;kg weight or greater, and one torpedo hit on four carriers caused 193 fatal casualties earlier in the war – striking proof of the protective value of the armoured flight deck.
In most cases, little evidence exists that such hits represented more than accidental collisions of the kind that sometimes happen in intense sea or air battles.
Eight personnel were killed and 47 were wounded.
Entering a smoke stack was also said to be "effective".
For horizontal attacks, the pilot was to "aim at the middle of the vessel, slightly higher than the waterline" or to "aim at the entrance to the aircraft hangar, or the bottom of the stack" if the former was too difficult.
It was an honour to die for Japan and the Emperor.
There is no other way.
It was one of the primary traditions in the samurai life and the ''Bushido'' code: loyalty and honour until death, as the Japanese perceived it.
Many of the ''kamikaze'' pilots believed their death would pay the debt they owed and show the love they had for their families, friends, and emperor.
Allied pilots became adept at destroying enemy aircraft before they struck ships.
Rear Admiral Matome Ugaki, the second in command of the Combined Pacific Fleet, directed the last official ''kamikaze'' attack, sending Yokosuka D4Y ''Suisei '' or "Judys" from the 701st Air Group against the Allied fleet at Okinawa on 15 August 1945.
The sinking of the ocean tug  on 24 October is listed in some sources as the first ship lost to a ''kamikaze'' strike, but the attack occurred before 25 October, and the aircraft used, a Mitsubishi G4M, was not flown by the original four Special Attack Squadrons.
One source claims that the first ''kamikaze'' mission occurred on 13 September 1944.
The Kamikaze shared ceremonial cups of sake or water known as "mizu no sakazuki".
The mountain is also called "''Satsuma Fuji''" (meaning a mountain like Mount Fuji but located in the Satsuma Province region).
"So eager were many minimally trained pilots to take part in suicide missions that when their sorties were delayed or aborted, the pilots became deeply despondent.
Seafires were heavily involved in countering the ''kamikaze'' attacks during the Iwo Jima landings and beyond.
Daikichi Irokawa, who trained at Tsuchiura Naval Air Base, recalled that he "was struck on the face so hard and frequently that his face was no longer recognizable."
Although it was hit by gunfire, a bomb from the ''kamikaze'' detonated on the flight deck, making a crater  long,  wide and  deep.
In October 1944, the ''Nippon Times'' quoted Lieutenant Sekio Nishina: "The spirit of the Special Attack Corps is the great spirit that runs in the blood of every Japanese….
US carriers also suffered considerably heavier casualties from ''kamikaze'' strikes; for instance, 389 men were killed in one attack on , greater than the combined number of fatalities suffered on all six Royal Navy armoured carriers from all forms of attack during the entire war (''Bunker Hill'' and ''Franklin'' were both hit while conducting operations with fully fueled and armed aircraft spotted on deck for takeoff, an extremely vulnerable state for any carrier).
First Lieutenant Takeshi Kosai and a sergeant were selected.
A ''kamikaze'' could sustain damage which would disable a conventional attacker and still achieve its objective.
Pilots would attempt to crash their aircraft into enemy ships in what was called a "body attack" (体当たり; 体当り, ''taiatari'') in planes laden with some combination of explosives, bombs, torpedoes and full fuel tanks; accuracy was much better than a conventional attack, the payload and explosion larger.
He also wrote: "I was hit so hard that I could no longer see and fell on the floor.
In a 2004 book, ''World War II'', the historians Wilmott, Cross and Messenger stated that more than 70 U.S. vessels were "sunk or damaged beyond repair" by ''kamikazes''.
''Tokkōtai'' pilot training, as described by Takeo Kasuga, generally "consisted of incredibly strenuous training, coupled with cruel and torturous corporal punishment as a daily routine."
While it is commonly perceived that volunteers signed up in droves for ''kamikaze'' missions, it has also been contended that there was extensive coercion and peer pressure involved in recruiting soldiers for the sacrifice.
by a ''kamikaze'' at 08:04 forward of its aft elevator on 25 October, , and the smaller escorts USS ''White Plains'', , and ''Kitkun Bay''.
During 1943–1944, U.S. forces steadily advanced toward Japan.
Two others dived at  but were destroyed by anti-aircraft fire.
In 1944–45, American propagandists invented the term "State Shinto" to characterize Japanese beliefs.
This recommended combat air patrols (CAP) which were larger and operated further from the carriers than before, a line of picket destroyers and destroyer escorts at least  from the main body of the fleet to provide earlier radar interception, and improved coordination between fighter direction officers on carriers.
Publishers also played up the idea that the ''kamikaze'' were enshrined at Yasukuni and ran exaggerated stories of ''kamikaze'' bravery – there were even fairy tales for little children that promoted the ''kamikaze''.
In a meeting at Mabalacat Airfield (known to the U.S. military as Clark Air Base) near Manila, on 19 October, Onishi told officers of the 201st Flying Group headquarters: "I don't think there would be any other certain way to carry out the operation to hold the Philippines, than to put a 250&nbsp;kg bomb on a Zero and let it crash into a U.S. carrier, in order to disable her for a week."
The unit was equipped with Nakajima Ki-44 ''Shoki'' ("Tojo") fighters, with which they were to ram United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) B-29s in their attacks on Japan.
The Kamikaze were escorted by other pilots whose function was to protect the Kamikaze to their destination and report on the results.
While Vice Admiral Shigeru Fukudome, commander of the second air fleet, was inspecting the 341st Air Group, Captain Okamura took the chance to express his ideas on crash-dive tactics.
Despite these problems, the Japanese government expressed its reluctance to surrender.
The task facing the Japanese air forces seemed impossible.
However, it soon became apparent that Japan was losing pilots faster than it could train their replacements.
“In our present situation I firmly believe that the only way to swing the war in our favor is to resort to crash-dive attacks with our planes.
When the volunteers arrived for duty in the corps, there were twice as many persons as aircraft available.
From this manual, pilots were told to "attain a high level of spiritual training," and to "keep their health in the very best condition."
On 17 October 1944, Allied forces assaulted Suluan Island, beginning the Battle of Leyte Gulf.
All of the pilots raised both of their hands, volunteering to join the operation.
Japanese planners had assumed a quick war and lacked comprehensive programmes to replace the losses of ships, pilots, and sailors; at Midway in June 1942 the Japanese lost as many aircrewmen in a single day as their pre-war training program had produced in a year.
:''Approximately 2,800 ''Kamikaze'' attackers sank 34 Navy ships'', damaged 368 others, killed 4,900 sailors, and wounded over 4,800.
Despite radar detection and cuing, airborne interception, attrition, and massive anti-aircraft barrages, 14 percent of ''Kamikazes'' survived to score a hit on a ship; nearly 8.5 percent of all ships hit by ''Kamikazes'' sank.
The Australian official history of the war claimed that this was the first ''kamikaze'' attack on an Allied ship, although other sources disagree because it was not a planned attack by a member of the Special Attack Force, but was most likely to have been undertaken on the pilot's own initiative.
Rear Admiral Masafumi Arima, the commander of the 26th Air Flotilla (part of the 11th Air Fleet), is sometimes credited with inventing the ''kamikaze'' tactic.
However, post-war analysis showed that some British carriers such as HMS ''Formidable'' suffered structural damage that led to them being scrapped, as being beyond economic repair.
Captain Motoharu Okamura commented that "there were so many volunteers for suicide missions that he referred to them as a swarm of bees," explaining: "Bees die after they have stung."
The First Naval Air Technical Bureau (''Kugisho''), in Yokosuka, refined Ohta's idea.
There will be more than enough volunteers for this chance to save our country, and I would like to command such an operation.
In combination, these factors led to the use of ''kamikaze'' tactics as Allied forces advanced towards the Japanese home islands.
He had expressed his desire to lead a volunteer group of suicide attacks some four months before Admiral Takijiro Ohnishi, commander of the Japanese naval air forces in the Philippines, presented the idea to his staff.
Its non-retractable landing gear was jettisoned shortly after take-off for a suicide mission, and re-used.
Many Japanese felt that to be enshrined at Yasukuni was a special honour because the Emperor visited the shrine to pay homage twice a year.
In the final moments before the crash, the pilot was to yell "''Hissatsu''" (必殺) at the top of his lungs which translates to "Certain Kill".
During the northern hemisphere winter of 1944–45, the IJAAF formed the 47th Air Regiment, also known as the ''Shinten'' Special Unit (''Shinten Seiku Tai'') at Narimasu Airfield, Nerima, Tokyo, to defend the Tokyo Metropolitan Area.
The attack killed 30 personnel, including the cruiser's captain, Emile Dechaineux, and wounded 64, including the Australian force commander, Commodore John Collins.
One example of this occurred on 7 December 1941 during the attack on Pearl Harbor.
* three Landing Ship Medium (Rocket)
The British were able to clear the flight deck and resume flight operations in just hours, while their American counterparts took a few days or even months, as observed by a USN liaison officer on  who commented: "When a ''kamikaze'' hits a U.S. carrier it means 6 months of repair at Pearl Harbor|Pearl Harbor.
As the end of the war approached, the Allies did not suffer more serious significant losses, despite having far more ships and facing a greater intensity of ''kamikaze'' attacks.
