Sunny weather dominates year-round, especially in summer, when rainfall is extremely rare.
In 1709, Mirwais Hotak made the region an independent kingdom and turned Kandahar into the capital of the Hotak dynasty.
The area is believed to be the birthplace of ''cannabis indica''.
The tomb of Ahmad Shah Durrani is located in the city center, which also houses Durrani's brass helmet and other personal items.
During the 1980s Soviet war in Afghanistan, Kandahar was tightly under pro-Communist government control and witnessed heavy fighting.
In 1738, Nader Shah invaded Afghanistan and destroyed the now ''Old Kandahar'', which was held by Hussain Hotak and his Ghilji tribes.
The Sri Lankan Pali work the Mahavamsa (Chap.
Persian is also understood by fair number of the city dwellers, especially those serving in the government and the educated Afghans.
Nobody was allowed to enter or leave from within the city's tall defensive walls, and as a result of this many people suffered after running out of food supplies.
During the 120 years of the Mauryans in southern Afghanistan, Buddhism was introduced and eventually become a major religion alongside Zoroastrianism and local pagan beliefs.
They emerged from the city in July 1880 to confront the forces of Ayub Khan, but were defeated at the Battle of Maiwand.
On 27 July 2011, the mayor of the city, Ghulam Haider Hamidi, was assassinated by another Taliban militant who had hidden explosives in his turban.
Tamerlane's descendant, Babur, the founder of the Mughal Empire, annexed Kandahar in the early 16th century.
It recently won 2 awards, the ''Residential Project'' and ''Sustainable Project'' of the Year at the Middle East Architect Awards.
Besides foreign channels, Afghanistan's local television channels include:
* Ariana Afghanistan TV
It is mentioned by Strabo that a treaty of friendship was established eventually between these two empires.
NATO forces expanded the Afghan police force for the prevention of a Taliban comeback in Kandahar, the militants' ''"spiritual birthplace"'' and a strategic key to ward off the Taliban insurgency, as a part of a larger effort that also aimed to deliver services such as electricity and clean drinking water that the Taliban could not provide – encouraging support for the government in a city that was once the Taliban's headquarters.
The U.S. also completed several other major projects in Kandahar and in other parts of southern Afghanistan.
In December 1999, a hijacked Indian Airlines Flight 814 plane by Pakistani militants loyal to Harkat-ul-Mujahideen landed at Kandahar International Airport and kept the passengers hostage as part of a demand to release 3 Pakistani militants from prison in India.
The city has been a frequent target for conquest because of its strategic location in Southern Asia, controlling the main trade route linking the Indian subcontinent with the Middle East, Central Asia and the Persian Gulf.
The Pashtun culture is dominant in this region.
In the meantime, Soviet engineers were busy building major infrastructures in other parts of the country, such as Bagram Airfield and Kabul International Airport.
Pashto serves as the main language in the city and the region.
Private vehicle use is increasing, partially due to road and highway improvements.
XXIX) to have sent "a Greek ("Yona") Buddhist head monk" named Mahadharmaraksita (literally translated as 'Great Teacher/Preserver of the Dharma') with 30,000 Buddhist monks from "the Greek city of Alasandra" (possibly Alexandria in Arachosia, as Kandhar was known under the Greeks) to Sri Lanka for the dedication of Great Stupa Buddhist temple in Anuradhapura.
Commerce, art, and architecture (seen especially in the construction of stupas) developed during this period.
The annual mean temperature is .
Previously, Ahmad Shah served as a military commander of Nader Shah Afshar.
His empire included present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Khorasan and Kohistan provinces of Iran, along with Punjab in India.
The region around Kandahar is one of the oldest known human settlements.
It reached its high point under Emperor Ashoka whose edicts, roads, and rest stops were found throughout the subcontinent.
The Arghandab River runs along the west of the city.
Close to Baba Wali's shrine is a military base established by the United States armed forces in about 2007.
The total number of dwellings in Kandahar is 61,902.
In June 2008, it was reported that over 1,000 inmates had escaped from Sarposa prison.
The territory became part of the Greek Seleucid Empire after the death of Alexander resulted in his empire being divided amongst his generals.
About  north of the city is the Dahla Dam, the second largest dam in Afghanistan.
This probably has to do with the location being fertile and historically known for producing fine grapes, pomegranates, apricots, melons and other sweet fruits.
The population of Kandahar numbers approximately 491,500 .
His rule ended in June 1747 after being murdered by his Persian guards.
A temple to the deified Alexander as well as an inscription in Greek and Aramaic by Emperor Ashoka, who lived a few decades later, have been discovered in Kandahar.
Before leaving southern Afghanistan for Delhi in India, Nader Shah laid out the foundation for a new town to be built next to the destroyed ancient city, naming it "Naderabad".
Work on the next $100&nbsp;million scheme was initiated in 2011.
Ernst Herzfeld claimed Kandahar perpetuated the name of the Indo-Parthian king Gondophares, who re-founded the city under the name Gundopharron.
Winter begins in December and sees most of its precipitation in the form of rain.
Non-built up land use accounts for 59% of the total land area.
The British and Indian forces returned in 1878 during the Second Anglo-Afghan War.
The most significant battle between NATO troops and the Taliban lasted throughout the summer of 2006, culminating in Operation Medusa.
In 1722, Mahmud led an army of Afghans to the Safavid capital Isfahan and proclaimed himself King of Persia.
Kandahar is also connected by road to Quetta in neighboring Pakistan.
Kandahar was founded in 330 BC by Alexander the Great, near the site of the ancient city of Mundigak (established around 3000 BC).
One hypothesis of the name suggests that ''"Kandahar"'' has evolved from ''"Iskandar"'', the local dialect version of the name Alexander, after Alexander the Great who founded the city in 330 BC and named it Alexandria in Arachosia.John E. Hill, ''Through the Jade Gate to Rome: A Study of the Silk Routes during the Later Han Dynasty, 1st to 2nd centuries CE''.
The Taliban introduced a strict form of sharia law, banning formal education for boys and girls, including watching TV, films, music, and playing sports.
Kandahar remained peaceful for the next 100 years, except during 1929 when loyalists of Habibullah Kalakani (Bache Saqqaw) placed the fortified city on lock-down and began torturing its population.
Led by Ranjit Singh, the Sikhs had captured several of Afghanistan's territories in the east, including what is now Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Kashmir.
After establishing the Hotak dynasty in Kandahar, Mirwais and his army successfully defeated subsequent expeditions by Kay Khusraw and Rustam Khán.
He was appointed by President Hamid Karzai in December 2008 after Rahmatullah Raufi's four-month rule.
According to a 2003 National Geographic suggested figures, Pashtuns were put at ca.
The city of Kandahar has a population of 557,118.
The last ruler in the region was probably Subhagasena (Sophagasenus of Polybius), who, in all probability, belonged to the Ashvaka (q.v.)
The region produces fine fruits, especially pomegranates and grapes, and the city has plants for canning, drying, and packing fruit, and is a major source of marijuana and hashish.
The two oldest known schools are Ahmad Shah Baba High School and Zarghona Ana High School.
The founder of the empire, Chandragupta Maurya, confronted a Macedonian invasion force led by Seleucus I in 305 BC and following a brief conflict, an agreement was reached as Seleucus ceded Gandhara and Arachosia (centered around ancient Kandahar) and areas south of Bagram (corresponding to the extreme south-east of modern Afghanistan) to the Mauryans.
The overwhelming majority of the victims in the attacks are ordinary Afghan civilians.
In this Edict, Ashoka uses the word Eusebeia ("Piety") as the Greek translation for the ubiquitous "Dharma" of his other Edicts written in Prakrit:
A folk etymology offered is that the word "kand" or "qand" in Persian and Pashto (the local languages) means "candy".
Including new roads, schools, commercial markets, clinics, canals and other facilities.
Afghan Turk High Schools is one of the top private schools in the city.
(See also Milinda Panha.)
Soviet-backed government troops surrounded the city and subjected it to heavy bombardment in which many civilians lost lives.
A railroad track from the Pakistani town of Chaman to Kandahar is under way, which will connect Afghan Railways with Pakistan Railways.
Kandahar was named ''Alexandria'', a popular name given to many cities that Alexander founded during his conquests.
Ahmad Shah Durrani, chief of the Durrani tribe, gained control of Kandahar and made it the capital of his new Afghan Empire in October 1747.
In August 1994 the Taliban movement captured Kandahar and turned the city to its capital.
Commuters of the city use the public bus system (Milli Bus), and taxicabs and rickshaws are common.
Since the 1978 Marxist revolution, the city has been a magnet for groups such as the Pakistan-based Haqqani network, Quetta Shura, Hezbi Islami, al-Qaida and other terrorist groups, many of which are believed to receive support from Pakistan's ISI spy network.
Temperatures peak in July with a 24-hour daily average of around .
From late 1994 to 2001, it served as the capital of the Taliban government until they were toppled by US-led NATO forces during Operation Enduring Freedom in late 2001 and replaced by the government of President Hamid Karzai.
The Mughals regained the city in 1595 by diplomacy and resisted a Persian siege in 1605–1606, only to be losing it to the Persian Safavids permanently during the 1649-53 Mughal–Safavid War.
About  east of Kandahar, a huge industrial park is under construction with modern facilities.
In 1747, Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the last Afghan empire, made it the capital of modern Afghanistan.
The park will have professional management for the daily maintenance of public roads, internal streets, common areas, parking areas, 24 hours perimeter security, access control for vehicles and persons.
Mirwais Hotak, chief of the Ghilji tribe, revolted in 1709 by killing Gurgin Khan, an ethnic Georgian subject and governor of the Shia Safavid Persians.
Summers start in mid-May, last until late-September, and are extremely dry.
Kandahar has an international airport and extensive road links with Lashkar Gah and Herat to the west, Ghazni and Kabul to the northeast, Tarinkot to the north, and Quetta in neighboring Balochistan to the south.
A 2006 provincial data prepared by the Afghan Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development and United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) states:
Kandahar has a subtropical arid climate (Köppen ''BWh''), characterised by little precipitation and high variation between summer and winter temperatures.
The ''Chilzina'' is a rock-cut chamber above the plain at the end of the rugged chain of mountains forming the western defence of Kandahar’s ''Old City''.
Following his death, the city was ruled by other Timurid governors.
The ancient Grand Trunk Road was built linking what is now Kabul to various cities in the Punjab and the Gangetic Plain.
After the Soviet withdrawal and the collapse of Najibullah's government in 1992, Kandahar fell to local mujahideen commander, Gul Agha Sherzai.
XXIX) refers to the city as "the Greek city of  Alasanda" when relating how its Indo-Greek King Menander I (165 BC - 135 BC), who practiced Greco-Buddhism, sent "a Greek (yona) Buddhist head monk" named Mahadharmaraksita (literally translated 'Great Teacher, Preserver of the Dharma') with 30,000 Buddhist monks to Sri Lanka for the dedication of the Great Stupa in Anuradhapura.
The grave of ''Hazratji Baba'',  long to signify his greatness, but otherwise covered solely by rock chips, is undecorated save for tall pennants at its head.
The village of ''Sher Surkh'' is located southeast of the city, in the suburbs of the old city of Nadirabad.
They were again forced to withdraw a few years later, despite winning the Battle of Kandahar.
It has 15 districts and a total land area of 27,337 hectares.
These targets were the airport and buildings that were occupied by the Taliban, including Arab families who had arrived several years earlier and were residing in the area.
Kandahar once again fell into the hands of Sherzai, who had control over the area before the rise of the Taliban.
This lasted until October 1929 when Nadir Khan and his Afghan army came to eliminate Kalakani, known as the Tajik bandit from the village of Kalakan in northern Kabul Province.
The 205th Corps of the Afghan National Army is based at Kandahar and provides military assistance to the south of the country.
Forty steps, about, lead to the chamber, which is guarded by two chained lions, defaced, and inscribed with an account of Moghul conquest.
He was Muslim pir who had a strange encounter with Guru Nanak at Hasan Abdal in what is now Attock District of Pakistan.
In July Ahmed Wali Karzai, brother of President Hamid Karzai, was shot by his longtime head of security.
Alexander the Great had laid-out the foundation of what is now ''Old Kandahar'' in the 4th century BC and gave it the Ancient Greek name Αλεξάνδρεια Aραχωσίας ().
It has been then mentioned extensively by Mughal Emperor Babur and others.
They are followed by dry autumns from early-October to late-November, with days still averaging in the 20s °C (above 68&nbsp;°F) into November, though nights are sharply cooler.
There are a number of new schools that opened in the last decade, with more being built in the future as the city's population grows with the large returning Afghans from neighboring countries.
Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, is believed to have visited the town (c. 1521 AD) during his important journey between Hindustan and Mecca in Arabia.
In June 2010, a shura was held by Afghan President Hamid Karzai with tribal and religious leaders of the Kandahar region.
In Spring 2010, the province and the city of Kandahar became a target of American operations following ''Operation Moshtarak'' in the neighboring Helmand province.
Referring to them as the "agents of Punjab", ANA provincial police chief, Brig.
The military of Afghanistan, backed by NATO forces, has gradually expanded its authority and presence throughout most of the country.
More than 400 local Kandahar warriors assembled themselves for the jihad.
BookSurge, Charleston, South Carolina, 2009.
The region was invaded in the 13th century by Genghis Khan and his Mongol armies, who caused destruction but did not settle.
The Sacred Cloak is kept locked away, taken out only at times of great crisis.
A new city was laid out by Ahmad Shah and is dominated by his mausoleum, which is adjacent to the Mosque of the Cloak in the center of the city.
Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) spy network is often blamed as the masterminds behind the Taliban-led insurgency.
Formerly called Alexandria Arachosia, the city is named after Alexander the Great, who founded it in 329 BC around a small ancient Arachosian town.
A short distance from ''Chilzina'', going west on the main highway, a bright blue dome appears on the right.
The feasibility study was completed in 2006 but  no construction work had begun.
The Pashtuns make up the overwhelming majority population of the city and province but exact figures are not available.
In the meantime, Nader Shah freed Ahmad Khan (later Ahmad Shah Durrani) and his brother Zulfikar who were held prisoners by the Hotak ruler.
A monument to Islamic martyrs stands in the center of Kandahar's main square, called ''Da Shahidanu Chawk'', which was built in the 1940s.
Soon after the Quetta Shura of the Taliban claimed responsibility.
Situated along the Kandahar-Uruzgan Highway in the northeast of the city, the new township will have 2,000 residential and commercial plots.
In September 1826, Syed Ahmad Shaheed's followers arrived to Kandahar in search of volunteers to help them wage jihad against the Sikh invaders to what is now Pakistan.
The princess of Hastinapur, Gandhari was born in Gandhara.
The main university is Kandahar University.
There is a bus station located at the start of the Kabul-Kandahar Highway, where a number of privately owned older-model Mercedes-Benz coach buses are available to take passengers to most major cities of the country.
It is said to be written in excellent Classical Greek, using sophisticated philosophical terms.
The meeting highlighted the need for support of NATO-led forces in order to stabilize parts of the province.
In October 2001, as part of Operation Enduring Freedom, the United States Navy began hitting targets inside the city by precision-guided cruise missiles that were fired from the Persian Gulf.
During Zahir Shah's rule, the city slowly began expanding by adding modern style streets and housing schemes.
Mullah Omar took it out in November 1996 and displayed it to a crowd of ''ulema'' of religious scholars to have himself declared Amir al-Mu'minin (Commander of the Faithful).
Kandahar was taken by Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni in the 11th century followed by the Ghurids of Ghor.
Temperatures average  in January, although lows can drop well below freezing.
In March 2010, U.S. and NATO commanders released details of plans for the biggest offensive of the war against the Taliban insurgency.
It is named after Ghulam Haider Hamidi, the mayor of Kandahar who was assassinated by militants in late July 2011.
British-led Indian forces from neighboring British India invaded the city in 1839, during the First Anglo-Afghan War, but withdrew in 1842.
On 6 June 2012, at least 21 civilians were killed and 50 others injured when two Taliban suicide bombers on motorcycles blew themselves up in a market area near Kandahar International Airport.
Due to the ongoing war the route to Kabul has become increasingly dangerous as insurgent attacks on convoys and destruction of bridges make it an unreliable link between the two cities.
Kandahar is connected to Kabul by the Kabul-Kandahar Highway and to Herat by the Kandahar-Herat Highway.
A number of training centers have also opened in the last decade.
King Menander I (165 BC - 135 BC) of the Indo-Greek Kingdom practiced Greco-Buddhism and is recorded by the Mahavamsa (Chap.
This derivation, as that from Gondophares, was characterised as "philologiquement impossible" by P. Bernard, "Un probleme de toponymie antique dans l'Asie Centrale: les noms anciens de Qandahar", ''Studia Iranica,'' tome 3, 1974 and ''Afghanistan Quarterly,'' vol.33, no.1, June 1980/Spring 1359, pp.49-62, p59, n.10.
It was invaded by Chandragupta Maurya, and the Maurya emperor Ashoka erected a pillar in the city with a bilingual inscription in Greek and Aramaic.
70%, Tajiks 20%, Hazaras 6%, Baloch 2%, and Uzbeks 2%.
The ISI is using the insurgents in the name of Islamic jihad to counter the growing influence of its rival India in Afghanistan and the Afghan claim regarding the disputed Durand Line border.
Kandahar International Airport was used by the Soviet Army during their ten-year troop placement in the country.
Also, construction of Hamidi Township in the Morchi Kotal area of the city began in August 2011.
Gen. Abdul Razaq stated that the Taliban "have once again spilled the blood of innocent civilians."
The memory of the wars fought over Kandahar at this time is preserved in the epic poem ''Qandahār-nāma'' (“The Campaign Against Qandahār”), a major work of Saib Tabrizi which is a classic of Persian literature.
In October 1772, Ahmad Shah retired and died from a natural cause.
Babur's son, Humayun, lost it to the Shi'a Safavids of Persia, making part of their far easternmost territories.
The shrine of Baba Wali Kandhari (Baba Sahib), its terraces shaded by pomegranate groves beside the Arghandab River, is also very popular for picnics and afternoon outings.
Some residents of the city have access to clean drinking water and electricity, and the government is working to extend these services to every home.
The Greeks, now forming the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom (250 BC-125 BC), eventually reconquered Kandahar, which continued also to be an important Greek city for two hundred years under the later Indo-Greek Kingdom (180 BC - 10 CE).
Mirwais resisted attempts by the Persian government who were seeking to convert the Afghans from Sunni to the Shia sect of Islam.
The current Governor of the province is Toryalai Wesa.
Two deputy mayors had been killed in 2010, while many tribal elders and Islamic clerics have also been assassinated in the last several years.
An alternative etymology derives the name of the city from Gandhara, the name of an ancient Buddhist kingdom located along the Kabul and Swat rivers of Afghanistan and Pakistan; Kandahar is not in the former territory of Gandhara.
Kandahar was entrusted to the Arghuns in the late 15th century, who eventually achieved independence from the Timurids.
In front of Durrani's mausoleum is the Shrine of the Cloak, containing one of the most valued relics in the Islamic world, which was given by the Emir of Bokhara (Murad Beg) to Ahmad Shah Durrani.
It became part of the Timurids from the 14th century to the 15th century, a dynasty founded by Timur (Tamerlane) that began rebuilding cities and towns.
The ''Aino Mina'' is a new housing project for up to two million people on the northern edge of the city.
He is acknowledged among Afghanistan’s leading artists.
Inscriptions made by the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka, a fragment of Edict 13 in Greek, as well as a full Edict, written in both Greek and Aramaic has been discovered in Kandahar.
Originally called the ''Kandahar Valley'' and started by Mahmud Karzai, it was announced that the project would build up to 20,000 single-family homes and associated infrastructure such as roads, water and sewer systems, and community buildings, including schools.
Most international flights are with Dubai, Germany, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Pakistan.
Kandahar International Airport serves as southern Afghanistan's main airport for domestic and international flights.
Although this attack did not lead to many casualties on the side of NATO forces, it did show that the militants are still capable of launching multiple, coordinated operations in Afghanistan.
Prior to that it was taken out when the city was struck by a cholera epidemic in the 1930s.
It is believed that the Zunbil dynasty, who were related to the Shahi dynasty of Kabul, were probably the rulers of the Kandahar region from the 7th century until the late 9th century AD.
As of 2002, Kandahar International Airport is used by members of the United States armed forces and NATO's International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
NATO began training the newly formed Afghan National Police and are now given the security responsibility of the city.
The city also became a battle ground for the US and Pakistani-backed mujahideen forces who waged a strong guerrilla warfare against the pro-Communist government of Afghanistan.
The entire area in and around the airport is heavily guarded but a section is designated for civilian passengers.
This was intended to improve telephone, internet, television and radio broadcast services not just in Kandahar but throughout the country.
He was transferred in 2003 and replaced by Yousef Pashtun until Asadullah Khalid took the post in 2005.
Pir Muhammad, a grandson of Tamerlane, held the seat of government in Kandahar from about 1383 until his death in 1407.
The rugged cliffs from which the ''Chilzina'' was hewn form the natural western bastion of the ''Old City'' of Kandahar, which was destroyed in 1738 by Nadir Shah Afshar of Persia.
The Taliban failed to defeat the Western troops in open warfare, which marked a turn in their tactics towards IED emplacement.
Many empires have long fought over the city due to its strategic location along the trade routes of southern, central and western Asia.
Just to the north of the city, off its northeast corner at the end of ''buria'' (matting) bazaar, there is a shrine dedicated to a saint who lived in Kandahar more than 300 years ago.
By 2011, Kandahar became known as the assassination city of Afghanistan after witnessing many target killings.
An alternative story describes Khandahar as Gandhara in Mahabharata ruled by Suvala and later by Shakuni.
It is a major trading center for sheep, wool, cotton, silk, felt, food grains, fresh and dried fruit, and tobacco.
They end in early-March and are followed by a pleasant spring till late-April with temperatures generally in the upper 10s °C to lower 30s °C (65–88&nbsp;°F) range.
In May 2010 Kandahar International Airport became subject of a combined rocket and ground attack by insurgents, following similar attacks on Kabul and Bagram in the preceding weeks.
Large dealerships are importing cars from Dubai, UAE.
Ibn Batutta mentions Kandahar in the 14th century by describing it as a large and prosperous town three nights journey from Ghazni.
Kandahar is the Regional Hub in southern Afghanistan, close to the border with Pakistan.
The name "Candahar" or "Kandahar" in this form probably translates to candy area.
This is the mausoleum of Mirwais Hotak, the Ghiljai chieftain who declared Kandahar's independence from the Persians in 1709.
Mundigak served as the provincial capital of Arachosia and was ruled by the Medes followed by the Achaemenid Empire until the arrival of the Greeks from Macedonia.
Within the built-up area, vacant plots occupy a slightly higher percentage of land (36%) than residential land (34%).
The city relies on electricity from the Kajaki hydroelectricity plant in neighboring Helmand, which is being upgraded or expanded.
About a month later, the Taliban began surrendering in mass numbers to a private militia that had been formed by Gul Agha Sherzai and Hamid Karzai.
