In 1827, Fort Leavenworth became the first permanent settlement of white Americans in the future state.
The Gorillas, in 96 seasons of intercollegiate competition, have accumulated 579 victories – posting a 579–301–48 overall mark.
The state backed Republicans Wendell Willkie and Thomas E. Dewey in 1940 and 1944, respectively.
To the southeast of Wichita are the cities of Winfield and Arkansas City with historic architecture and the Cherokee Strip Museum (in Ark City).
As a percentage of personal income, it was at 3.8%—above the median value of 2.5% for all rated states and having risen from a value of less than 1% in 1992.
Some of these storms become supercell thunderstorms; these can spawn tornadoes, occasionally of EF3 strength or higher.
However, Topeka was unable to support the team, and it disbanded after one year.
In 1887, the Western League was dominated by a reorganized Topeka team called the Golden Giants – a high-priced collection of major leaguer players, including Bug Holliday, Jim Conway, Dan Stearns, Perry Werden and Jimmy Macullar, which won the league by 15½ games.
The first European to set foot in present-day Kansas was Francisco Vásquez de Coronado, who explored the area in 1541.
The first night game in the history of professional baseball was played in Independence on April 28, 1930 when the Muscogee (Oklahoma) Indians beat the Independence Producers 13 to 3 in a minor league game sanctioned by the Western League of the Western Baseball Association with 1,500 fans attending the game.
Until 1989, the Meades Ranch Triangulation Station in Osborne County was the geodetic center of North America: the central reference point for all maps of North America.
Dodge City was another wild cowboy town, and both Bat Masterson and Wyatt Earp worked as lawmen in the town.
The Kansas–Nebraska Act became law on May 30, 1854, establishing the U.S. territories of Nebraska and Kansas, and opening the area to broader settlement by whites.
Kansas' other rivers are the Saline and Solomon Rivers, tributaries of the Smoky Hill River; the Big Blue, Delaware, and Wakarusa, which flow into the Kansas River; and the Marais des Cygnes, a tributary of the Missouri River.
'''Legislative branch''': The bicameral Kansas Legislature consists of the Kansas House of Representatives, with 125 members serving two-year terms, and the Kansas Senate, with 40 members serving four-year terms.
Much of the architecture and decor of this town has a distinctly Swedish style.
The next year, the state passed a law setting a minimum age for marriage at 15 years.
FC Kansas City, a charter member of the National Women's Soccer League, played the 2013 season, the first for both the team and the league, on the Kansas side of the metropolitan area, but has played on the Missouri side ever since.
North of Wichita along Interstate 135 is the city of Newton, the former western terminal of the Santa Fe Railroad and trailhead for the famed Chisholm Trail.
Other smaller school conference that have some members in Kansas are the Heartland Conference, the Midlands Collegiate Athletic Conference, the Midwest Christian College Conference, and the Heart of America Athletic Conference.
After the Civil War, many veterans constructed homesteads in Kansas.
Thus, Kansas is the ninth or tenth sunniest state in the country, depending on the source.
Per capita personal income in 2008 was $35,013.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Kansas was 2,911,641 on July 1, 2015, a 2.05% increase since the 2010 United States Census and an increase of 58,523, or 2.05%, since the year 2010.
The Fort Hays State University men won the 1996 NCAA Division II title with a 34–0 record, and the Washburn women won the 2005 NCAA Division II crown.
As of November 2006, Kansas still has 29 dry counties and only 17 counties have passed liquor-by-the-drink with no food sales requirement.
Precipitation ranges from about  annually in the southeast corner of the state, to about  in the southwest.
High humidity added to the high temperatures sends the heat index into life-threatening territory, especially in Wichita, Hutchinson, Salina, Russell, Hays and Great Bend.
Pittsburg State University, a NCAA Division II participant, has claimed four national titles in football, two in the NAIA and most recently the 2011 NCAA Division II national title.
Wichita State University, which also fields teams (called the Shockers) in Division I of the NCAA, is best known for its baseball and basketball programs, winning the College World Series in 1989, and appearing at the Final Four in 1965 and 2013.
Alton and Lebanon are approximately  apart.
The western two-thirds of the state, lying in the great central plain of the United States, has a generally flat or undulating surface, while the eastern third has many hills and forests.
Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 44,847 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 65,589 people.
Olathe is the county seat and home to Johnson County Executive Airport.
Total sales tax collections for 2003 amounted to $1.63&nbsp;billion, compared to $805.3&nbsp;million in 1990.
Stops in Kansas include Lawrence and Dodge City.
West of Hays, population drops dramatically, even in areas along I-70, and only two towns containing populations of more than 4,000: Colby and Goodland, which are located 35 miles apart along I-70.
The rise of the Tea Party and the election of President Obama have prompted Republicans to embrace a purer brand of conservatism and purge what had long been a robust moderate wing from its ranks.
In January 2004, the Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT) announced the new Kansas 511 traveler information service.
The board consists of five Kansas lawyers elected by other Kansas lawyers and four members selected by the Governor.
The Jayhawks are a perennial national power, ranking second in all-time victories among NCAA programs, behind Kentucky.
The Chiefs and the Royals play at the Truman Sports Complex, located about  from the Kansas–Missouri state line.
South of the campus, Aggieville dates back to 1889 and is the state's oldest shopping district of its kind.
Production has experienced a steady, natural decline as it becomes increasingly difficult to extract oil over time.
Thus, the area was a hotbed of violence and chaos in its early days as these forces collided, and was known as Bleeding Kansas.
This has since been called into question, with most scientists ranking Kansas somewhere between 20th and 30th flattest state, depending on measurement method.
Its capital is Topeka and its largest city Wichita.
A sequence of Mississippian, Pennsylvanian and Permian rocks outcrop in the eastern and southern part of the state.
Kansas with its 213,000 km2 is the 15th most extensive and with its about 2.9 million people the 34th most populous of the 50 United States.
The Governor and Lt Governor are elected on the same slate, the Attorney General, Secretary of State, State Treasurer, and State Insurance Commissioner are elected separately.
Southwest Kansas, however, was still a part of Spain, Mexico and the Republic of Texas until the conclusion of the Mexican–American War in 1848.
Kansas also supported Dewey in 1948 despite the presence of incumbent president Harry S. Truman, who hailed from Independence, Missouri, approximately 15 miles east of the Kansas–Missouri state line.
Abilene was the boyhood home to Republican president Dwight D. Eisenhower, and he maintained lifelong ties to family and friends there.
Kansas is bordered by Nebraska on the north; Missouri on the east; Oklahoma on the south; and Colorado on the west.
The 1990s brought the defeat of prominent Democrats, including Dan Glickman, and the Kansas State Board of Education's 1999 decision to eliminate evolution from the state teaching standards, a decision that was later reversed.
Kansas has three income brackets for income tax calculation, ranging from 3.5% to 6.45%.
From 1812 to 1821, Kansas was part of the Missouri Territory.
The geographic center of Kansas is located in Barton County.
I-435 is a beltway around the Kansas City metropolitan area while I-635 bypasses through Kansas City.
Lawrence City Commission later voted to provide the funding needed to keep the branch open.
Wichita's population growth has grown by double digits and the surrounding suburbs are among the fastest growing cities in the state.
And when Bill Snyder arrived to coach at KSU in 1989, he turned the Wildcats from one of the worst college football programs in the nation into a national force for most of the 1990s and early 2000s.
Kansas's record high of  ties with North Dakota for the fifth-highest record high in an American state, behind California (), Arizona (), Nevada (), and New Mexico ().
For thousands of years, what is now Kansas was home to numerous and diverse Native American tribes.
Since oil prices bottomed in 1999, oil production in Kansas has remained fairly constant, with an average monthly rate of about  in 2004.
It was also the home of newspaper man William Allen White.
Its attractions include the Kansas Speedway, Sporting Kansas City, Kansas City T-Bones, Schlitterbahn, and The Legends at Village West retail and entertainment center.
Some increase in debt was expected as the state continues with its 10-year Comprehensive Transportation Program enacted in 1999.
The permanent lighting system was first used for an exhibition game on April 17, 1930 between the Independence Producers and House of David semi-professional baseball team of Benton Harbor, Michigan with the Independence team winning with a score of 9 to 1 before a crowd of 1,700 spectators.
Many African Americans also looked to Kansas as the land of "John Brown" and, led by freedmen like Benjamin "Pap" Singleton, began establishing black colonies in the state.
To the west is Lucas, the Grassroots Art Capital of Kansas.
The Jayhawks have won five national titles, including NCAA tournament championships in 1952, 1988, and 2008.
The far south-central and southeastern reaches of the state, including Wichita, have a humid subtropical climate with hot, humid summers, milder winters and more precipitation than elsewhere in Kansas.
Out of all the cities in these Midwestern states, 89% have fewer than 3,000 people, and hundreds of those have fewer than 1,000.
Kansas also permitted women's suffrage in 1912, almost a decade before the federal constitution was amended to require it.
The state has a statutory requirement to maintain cash reserves of at least 7.5% of expenses at the end of each fiscal year, however, lawmakers can vote to override the rule, and did so during the most recent budget agreement.
The population density of Kansas is 52.9 people per square mile.
In 2008, Governor Kathleen Sebelius vetoed permits for the construction of new coal-fired energy plants in Kansas, saying: "We know that greenhouse gases contribute to climate change.
Some Kansans, mostly from the westernmost parts of the state, support the professional sports teams of Denver, particularly the Denver Broncos of the NFL.
They also were retroactively awarded national championships by the Helms Foundation for 1922 and 1923.
Several large aircraft corporations have manufacturing facilities in Wichita and Kansas City, including Spirit AeroSystems, Cessna, Learjet, and Hawker Beechcraft (formerly Raytheon).
Weather and road condition information is updated every 15 minutes.
The western region receives an average of about  of precipitation per year.
In May 2011, much to the opposition of art leaders and enthusiasts in the state, Brownback eliminated the Kansas Arts Commission, making Kansas the first state without an arts agency.
Westward along the Interstate, the city of Russell, traditionally the beginning of sparsely-populated northwest Kansas, was the base of former U.S.
In Kansas alone, there are more than 6,000 ghost towns and dwindling communities, according to one Kansas historian, Daniel C. Fitzgerald.
To the southwest of Wichita is Freeport, the state's smallest incorporated city (population 5).
Kansas was also at the center of ''Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka'', a 1954 Supreme Court decision that banned racially segregated schools throughout the U.S.
Except during the 2001 recession (March–November 2001) when monthly sales tax collections were flat, collections have trended higher as the economy has grown and two rate increases have been enacted.
Most air travelers in northeastern Kansas fly out of Kansas City International Airport, located in Platte County, Missouri.
The industrial outputs are transportation equipment, commercial and private aircraft, food processing, publishing, chemical products, machinery, apparel, petroleum and mining.
Kansas is prone to severe weather, especially in the spring and early summer.
Suffrage in all states would not be guaranteed until ratification of the 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1920.
After the Civil War, the population of Kansas grew rapidly when waves of immigrants turned the prairie into farmland.
However, shortly after Mark Parkinson became governor in 2009 upon Sebelius's resignation to become Secretary of U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Parkinson announced a compromise plan to allow construction of a coal-fired plant.
It is also the home of Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center, Prairie Dunes Country Club and the Kansas State Fair.
KU is fifth all-time with 14 Final Four appearances, while K-State's four appearances are tied for 17th.
The only two counties to support Democrat John Kerry in that election were Wyandotte, which contains Kansas City, and Douglas, home to the University of Kansas, located in Lawrence.
This is because of the high number of counties and county seats (105) and the intertwining of them all.
"Big Brutus" is located a mile and a half outside the city of West Mineral.
St. Benedict's College (now Benedictine College), in Atchison, won the 1954 and 1967 Men's NAIA Basketball Championships.
In July 2011, Brownback announced plans to close the Lawrence branch of the Kansas Department of Social and Rehabilitation Services as a cost-saving measure.
Along with the restored fort, historic Fort Scott has a national cemetery designated by President Lincoln in 1862.
Washburn University, in Topeka, won the NAIA Men's Basketball Championship in 1987.
He was roundly condemned by both the conventional Confederate military and the partisan rangers commissioned by the Missouri legislature.
The Santa Fe Trail traversed Kansas from 1821 to 1880, transporting manufactured goods from Missouri and silver and furs from Santa Fe, New Mexico.
The western half of the state has exposures of Cretaceous through Tertiary sediments, the latter derived from the erosion of the uplifted Rocky Mountains to the west.
For those in the far western part of the state, Denver International Airport is a popular option.
Singers from Kansas include Leavenworth native Melissa Etheridge, Sharon native Martina McBride, Chanute native Jennifer Knapp (whose first album was titled ''Kansas''), Kansas City native Janelle Monáe, and Liberal native Jerrod Niemann.
Since Roosevelt carried Kansas in 1932 and 1936, only one Democrat has won Kansas' electoral votes, Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964.
The land gradually rises from east to west; its altitude ranges from  along the Verdigris River at Coffeyville in Montgomery County, to  at Mount Sunflower, one half mile from the Colorado border, in Wallace County.
A city of the third class has a population of less than 5,000, but cities reaching a population of more than 2,000 may be certified as a city of the second class.
Monthly Normal High and Low Temperatures For Various Kansas Cities
I-135, a north–south route, connects I-35 at Wichita to I-70 at Salina.
The state sales tax in Kansas is 6.15%.
These settlers attempted to sway votes in favor of slavery.
North of the city, Fort Leavenworth is the oldest active Army post west of the Mississippi River.
However, there have been recent breakthroughs for both schools football teams.
Although temperatures of 100 degrees or higher are not as common in areas east of US 81, higher humidity and the urban heat island effect lead most summer days to heat indices between  and  in Topeka, Lawrence and the Kansas City metropolitan area.
The Kansas Jayhawks team nickname is based on the Jayhawkers name.
The state is divided into 105 counties with 628 cities, and is located equidistant from the Pacific and Atlantic oceans.
PSU passed Hillsdale College at the top of the all-time victories list in the 1995 season on its march to the national runner-up finish.
Wichita is the largest city in the state in terms of both land area and population.
Wichita was one of the first cities to add the city commissioner and city manager in their form of government.
The court has seven judges.
Notable success has also been achieved by the state's smaller schools in football.
The following year the Legislature enacted the Liquor Control Act which created a system of regulating, licensing, and taxing, and the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) was created to enforce the act.
Wagon ruts from the trail are still visible in the prairie today.
Salina is the largest city in central and north-central Kansas.
This includes a natural increase since the last census of 93,899 people (that is 246,484 births minus 152,585 deaths) and a decrease due to net migration of 20,742 people out of the state.
Liquor-by-the-drink did not become legal until passage of an amendment to the state's constitution in 1986 and additional legislation the following year.
In 2005, voters accepted a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage.
He was sworn in as governor in 2011, Kansas' first Republican governor in eight years.
The Sports Car Club of America has its national headquarters in Topeka.
By that time the violence in Kansas had largely subsided, but during the Civil War, on August 21, 1863, William Quantrill led several hundred men on a raid into Lawrence, destroying much of the city and killing nearly 200 people.
The legal drinking age in Kansas is 21.
Bypasses include I-470 around Topeka, I-235 around Wichita, and I-670 in downtown Kansas City.
In 1803, most of modern Kansas was secured by the United States as part of the Louisiana Purchase.
By state statute, cities are divided into three classes as determined by the population obtained "by any census of enumeration."
Located midway between Kansas City, Topeka, and Wichita in the heart of the Bluestem Region of the Flint Hills, the city of Emporia has several nationally registered historic places and is the home of Emporia State University, well known for its Teachers College.
Spur routes serve as connections between the two major routes.
During the summer, nightly low temperatures in the northeastern part of the state, especially in the aforementioned large cities, struggle to fall below , and combined with humidity between 85 and 95 percent, dangerous heat indices can be experienced at every hour of the day.
The neighboring city of Frontenac in 1888 was the site of the worst mine disaster in the state in which an underground explosion killed 47 miners.
The northeastern portion of the state, extending from the eastern border to Junction City and from the Nebraska border to south of Johnson County is home to more than 1.5&nbsp;million people in the Kansas City (Kansas portion), Manhattan, Lawrence, and Topeka metropolitan areas.
Eastern Kansas is part of the Grain Belt, an area of major grain production in the central United States.
In the southeastern part of the state, people often use Tulsa International Airport in Tulsa, Oklahoma or Joplin Regional Airport in Joplin, Missouri.
As of April 2015, the state's unemployment rate is 4.3%.
Temperatures are often higher in Dodge City, Garden City and Liberal, but the heat index in those locations is usually lower than the actual air temperature.
Dodge City, famously known for the cattle drive days of the late 19th century, was built along the old Santa Fe Trail route.
The state's only major commercial (Class C) airport is Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport, located along US-54 on the western edge of the city.
The ''New York Times'' reported in September 2014 that as the Democratic candidate for Senator has tried to drop out of the race, independent Greg Orman has attracted enough bipartisan support to seriously challenge the reelection bid of Republican Pat Roberts:
Both KU and K-State have tradition-rich programs in men's basketball.
The council–manager government model was adopted by many larger Kansas cities in the years following World War I while many American cities were being run by political machines or organized crime, notably the Pendergast Machine in neighboring Kansas City, Missouri.
Major company headquarters in Kansas include the Sprint Corporation (with world headquarters in Overland Park), Embarq (with national headquarters in Overland Park), YRC Worldwide (Overland Park), Garmin (Olathe), Payless Shoes (national headquarters and major distribution facilities in Topeka), and Koch Industries (with national headquarters in Wichita).
Today, Kansas is one of the most productive agricultural states, producing high yields of wheat, corn, sorghum, and soybeans.
A vacancy is filled by the Governor picking one of three nominees selected by a 9-member judicial selection board.
Although the sale of cereal malt beverage (also known as 3.2 beer) was legalized in 1937, the first post-Prohibition legalization of alcoholic liquor did not occur until the state's constitution was amended in 1948.
The geographic center of the 48 contiguous states is located in Smith County near Lebanon.
Many African Americans in Kansas are descended from the Exodusters, newly freed blacks who fled the South for land in Kansas following the Civil War.
The eastern two-thirds of the state (especially the northeastern portion) has a humid continental climate, with cool to cold winters and unbearably hot, often humid summers.
Also, the National Hot Rod Association (NHRA) holds drag racing events at Heartland Park Topeka.
It is also the home of Reverend Charles Sheldon, author of ''In His Steps'', and was the site where the famous question "What would Jesus do?"
By dialing 511, callers will get access to information about road conditions, construction, closures, detours and weather conditions for the state highway system.
The Kansas economy is also heavily influenced by the aerospace industry.
The Kansas City Brigade play in the newly opened Sprint Center, which is even closer to the state line.
The cities of Overland Park, Lenexa, Olathe, and Gardner are also notable because they lie along the former route of the Santa Fe Trail.
In south-central Kansas, the Wichita metropolitan area is home to over 600,000 people.
From 1973 to 1997 the flagship radio station for the Royals was WIBW in Topeka.
However, success on the gridiron has been less frequent for both KSU and KU.
The city of Hays is home to Fort Hays State University and the Sternberg Museum of Natural History, and is the largest city in the northwest with a population of around 20,001.
When it was officially opened to settlement by the U.S. government in 1854, abolitionist Free-Staters from New England and pro-slavery settlers from neighboring Missouri rushed to the territory to determine whether Kansas would become a free state or a slave state.
The population of Goddard has grown by more than 11% per year since 2000.
Kansas was admitted to the United States as a free state on January 29, 1861, making it the 34th state to enter the Union.
Tribes in the western part of the state were semi-nomadic and hunted large herds of bison.
I-335, a southwest–northeast route, connects I-35 at Emporia to I-70 at Topeka.
Senator Bob Dole and the boyhood home of U.S.
Kansas also has the third largest state highway system in the country after Texas and California.
In 1992, a short-lived secessionist movement advocated the secession of several counties in southwest Kansas.
In 2010, Sam Brownback was elected governor with 63 percent of the state vote.
The church has garnered world-wide media attention for picketing the funerals of U.S. servicemen and women for what church members claim as "necessary to combat the fight for equality for gays and lesbians."
Pittsburg State became the winningest NCAA Division II football program in 1995.
In response to demands of Methodists and other evangelical Protestants, in 1881 Kansas became the first U.S. state to adopt a constitutional amendment prohibiting all alcoholic beverages, which was only repealed in 1948.
Boeing ended a decades-long history of manufacturing in Kansas in 2012-13.
The abolitionists eventually prevailed, and on January 29, 1861, Kansas entered the Union as a free state.
Temperatures in areas between US 83 and U.S. Route 81, as well as the southwestern portion of the state along and south of U.S. Route 50, reach  or above on most days of June, July and August.
The agricultural outputs of the state are cattle, sheep, wheat, sorghum, soybeans, cotton, hogs, corn, and salt.
Kansas was the adult home of two losing Republican candidates (Governor Alf Landon in 1936 and Senator Bob Dole in 1996).
Other fast-growing cities include Andover, Maize, Park City, Derby, and Haysville.
Brownback had established himself as a conservative member of the U.S. Senate in years prior, but since becoming governor has made several controversial decisions.
Kansas ranks 8th in U.S. oil production.
In 2004, George W. Bush won the state's six electoral votes by an overwhelming margin of 25 percentage points with 62% of the vote.
To the west, nearly a quarter million people reside in the Topeka metropolitan area.
Various cities and counties in Kansas have an additional local sales tax.
Historic Leavenworth, founded in 1854, was the first incorporated city in Kansas.
After a 12-year absence, the Wildcats returned to the NCAA tournament in 2008 and made it into the Elite Eight in 2010.
To the north, Kansas City, with the second largest land area in the state, contains a number of diverse ethnic neighborhoods.
Douglas, Wyandotte, and Crawford County were the only counties in support of President Barack Obama.
German descendants are especially present in the northwest, while those of descendants of English and of white Americans from other states are especially present in the southeast.
Performance Contracting
On April 10, 1887, the Golden Giants also won an exhibition game from the defending World Series champions, the St. Louis Browns (the present-day Cardinals), by a score of 12–9.
