Other early settlers included the Marwari Muslims, Parsis, Marathi Muslims and Konkani Muslims from Maharashtra (settled in Kokan Town), Goan Catholics and Anglo-Indians.
By 1899, Karachi had become the largest wheat exporting port in the East.
The city was, and still is home to a large community of Gujarati Muslims who were one of the earliest settlers in the city, and still form the majority in Saddar Town.
Karachi accounts for 75.14% of customs duty and 79% of sales tax on imports.
Neo-Renaissance architecture was popular in the 19th century and was the architectural style for St. Joseph's Convent (1870) and the Sind Club (1883).
The ancient names of Karachi included: Krokola, Barbarikon, Nawa Nar, Rambagh, Kurruck, Auranga Bandar, Minnagara, Kolachi, Morontobara, Kolachi-jo-Goth, Banbhore, Debal, Barbarice and Kurrachee.
However, he remains unpopular in areas of Karachi to this day.
There are talks of it being taken away from this custody and being renovated and the Lodge being preserved with its original woodwork and ornate wooden staircase.
The first One Day International at the National Stadium was against the West Indies on 21 November 1980, with the match going to the last ball.
Pakistan Super League
Textiles, cement, steel, heavy machinery, chemicals, food, banking and insurance are the major segments contributing to Karachi's GDP.
These Muhajirs include Urdu-speaking, Gujarati, Marathi, Konkani, Rajasthani, and Malabari Muslims from India.
There is a sizeable community of Kashmiri Muslims from the Kashmir Valley.
SITE Super Highway Phase-II
In 1878, the city was connected to the rest of British India by rail.
It confirmed Karachi's status as Pakistan's largest economy, well ahead of the next two biggest cities Lahore and Faisalabad, which had a reported GDP (PPP) in 2008 of $40&nbsp;billion and $14&nbsp;billion, respectively.
Korangi Industrial Area
Pakistan Textile City
The city has two other airstrips, used primarily by the armed forces.
The 1970s saw major labour struggles in Karachi's industrial estates.
Karachi's contribution to Pakistan's manufacturing sector amounts to approximately 30 percent.
It was administered in 1995 for a case of acute myeloid leukemia.
After the independence of Pakistan, a considerable number of Punjabi Muslims from Pakistani Punjab settle in Karachi.
From 1960s and onwards, Punjabis from Punjab and Pakhtuns from NWFP (now Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) continued migrating to Karachi due to its economical viability.
Therefore, Karachi collects 53.38% of the total collections of the Federal Board of Revenue, out of which 53.33% are customs duty and sales tax on imports.
Karachi's GDP is around 20% of the total GDP of Pakistan.
The board became a municipal commission in 1852, and a municipal committee the following year.
The Arabian Sea beach lines the southern coastline of Karachi.
The term "City of Lights" was first used during Ayub era when new buildings, residential and recreational areas were constructed.
File:Khi National Museum.jpg|National Museum of Pakistan
US Coalition forces used the old terminals for their logistic supply operations as well.
Punjabi and Pashtun are two out of three major ethnic groups in Karachi.
KPT Football Stadium
There are many art galleries in Karachi for the exhibition of art especially the visual art.
By the late 1720s, the village was trading across the Arabian Sea with Muscat and the Persian Gulf region.
Between 1958 and 1970, Karachi was neither the capital of Pakistan nor the capital of Sindh due to the One Unit program being enacted.
The city's old airport terminals are now used for Hajj flights, offices, cargo facilities, and ceremonial visits from heads of state.
Most of Pakistan's public and private banks are headquartered on Karachi's I. I. Chundrigar Road which is known as "Pakistan's Wall Street"; according to a 2001 report, nearly 60% of the cashflow of the Pakistani economy takes place on I. I. Chundrigar Road.
On Napier's departure, it was added along with the rest of Sindh to the Bombay Presidency, a move that caused resentment among the native Sindhis.
The Karachi Divisional Council had working committees for education, roads, and residential societies development and planning.
20&nbsp;billion,  high Port Tower Complex on the Clifton shoreline.
Karachi was reputedly founded as "Kolachi" by Baloch tribes from Balochistan and Makran, who established a small fishing community in the area.
The town was later annexed to British East India Company held territories in India when parts of Sindh were captured by Major General Charles James Napier after their victory in the Battle of Miani on 17 February 1843.
The city has examples of modern Islamic architecture, including the Aga Khan University hospital, Masjid e Tooba, Faran Mosque, Bait-ul Mukarram Mosque, Quaid's Mausoleum, and the Textile Institute of Pakistan.
Shifting of capital marked the start of a long period of decline in the city, especially causing the reduction in large-scale industry by 37.9%.
Today, The Jinnah International Airport in Karachi is the largest and busiest airport of Pakistan.
Public building projects, such as Frere Hall (1865) and the Empress Market (1890), were undertaken.
In 1864, the first telegraphic message was sent from South Asia to England, when a direct telegraph connection had been laid between Karachi and London.
The independence of Pakistan in 1947 saw the influx of Muslim Muhajirs from India fleeing from anti-Muslim pograms.
The Pashtuns, originally from the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Federally Administered Tribal Areas and northern Balochistan, are settled in Karachi post independence.
Karachi is linked by rail to the rest of the country by Pakistan Railways.
The first ever international cricket match in Karachi was held on 22 November 1935 between Sindh and Australian cricket teams.
The match was seen by 5,000 Karachiites.
Karachi has the largest number of Urdu speakers compared to any other city in Pakistan.
Lyari is the oldest settlement while Saddar Town is one of the oldest parts of the city but not as old as Lyari.
Architecturally distinctive, even eccentric, buildings have sprung up throughout Karachi.
Karachi is the location of the Port of Karachi and Port Bin Qasim, two of the region's largest and busiest ports.
The All Pakistan Music Conference, linked to the 45-year-old similar institution in Lahore, has been holding its annual music festival since its inception in 2004.
Lyari Expressway is a highway under construction along the Lyari River in Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan.
The 'native' town in the northwest, was enlarged to accommodate the burgeoning mercantile population.
Dubai International Cricket Stadium
Additionally several Afghan Pashtun refugees settled in Karachi during the 80's, including 50,000 registered Afghan refugees in the city.
Karachi Expo Centre hosts regional and international exhibitions.
During his rule the city was well fortified against Portuguese colonial incursions in Sindh.
The city is located on the Arabian Sea coastline.
The first form of government was a conservancy board established in 1846 to control the spread of cholera in the city.
Again in 2011, City District Government of Karachi has been de-merged into its five original constituent districts namely Karachi East, Karachi West, Karachi Central, Karachi South and Malir.
Many countries sought to emulate Pakistan's economic planning strategy and one of them, South Korea, copied the city's second "Five-Year Plan" and the World Financial Center in Seoul is designed and modeled after Karachi.
Karachi ethnic groups included: Muhajirs, Sindhis, Punjabis, Kashmiris, Seraikis, Pakhtuns, Balochis, Memons, Bohras, Ismailis, etc.
In 2005, the city hosted the SAFF Championship at this ground, as well as the Geo Super Football League 2007, which attracted capacity crowds during the games.
Most non-Muslims left the city to India in the 1950s, after independence, but there are still small communities of Parsis, Goan Catholics and Anglo-Indians in the city.
Karachi is known as ''City of Lights'' mainly due to the city's night life; it is famous for being a city that never sleeps.
Port Qasim is located 35&nbsp;km east of the Port of Karachi on the Indus River estuary.
The most prominent examples include the Habib Bank Plaza, PRC Towers and the MCB Tower which is the tallest skyscraper in Pakistan.
The majority of the Urdu-speaking and other non-Punjabi Muslim refugees that fled from various North Indian cities and towns settled in Karachi, which is why the culture of the city is a blend of South Asia.
Karachi was always considered a migrant city, Hindus and Muslims alike migrated from different parts of India to Karachi during British Raj.
Mirza Ghazi Beg, the Mughal administrator of Sindh, is among the first historical figures credited for the development of coastal Sindh (consisting of regions such as the Makran coast and the Indus delta), including the cities of Thatta, Bhambore and Karachi.
So there are now six administrative districts in Karachi.
SITE Super Highway Phase-I
In 1876, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, was born in the city according to some accounts, which by now had become a bustling city with mosques, temples, courthouses, paved streets and a harbour.
It then continues north for a few kilometres before turning west, where it forms an interchange with the N25.
Karachi is considered to be one of the hottest cities on the planet.
Expatriates from China have a history going back to the 1940s; today, many of the Chinese are second-generation children of immigrants who came to the city and worked as dentists, chefs and shoemakers.
Karachi's highest recorded temperature is  which was recorded on 9 May 1938, and the lowest is  recorded on 21 January 1934.
During World War II, about 3,000 Polish refugees from the Soviet Union were evacuated to Karachi by the British.
After the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, thousands of Biharis and Bengalis from Bangladesh arrived in the city, and today Karachi is home to 1 to 2 million ethnic Bengalis from Bangladesh (see Bangladeshis in Pakistan), many of whom migrated in the 1980s and 1990s.
The Karachi Expo Centre hosts regional and international exhibitions.
In 1948, the Federal Capital Territory of Pakistan was created, comprising approximately  of Karachi and surrounding areas, but this was merged into the province of West Pakistan in 1961.
Karachi Northern Bypass (M10) begins north of Karachi at the end of Mohammad Ali Jinnah Road, near the junction of the M9.
Two days later, the little fort surrendered.
It is Pakistan's centre of banking, industry, economic activity and trade and is home to Pakistan's largest corporations, including those involved in textiles, shipping, the automotive industry, entertainment, the arts, fashion, advertising, publishing, software development and medical research.
Pakistan Premier League
There are development projects proposed, approved and under construction in Karachi.
A substantial part of Sindh's gross domestic product (GDP) is attributed to Karachi (the GDP of Sindh as a percentage of Pakistan's total GDP has traditionally hovered around 28%–30%; for more information, see economy of Sindh).
Before 1880 the majority of the population of Karachi consisted of the indigenous Sindhis and Balochis (who also spoke Sindhi as a second language).
It is the capital of Sindh province of Pakistan.
These small ethno-linguistic groups are being assimilated in the Urdu-speaking community.
The city has facilities for field hockey (the Hockey Club of Pakistan, UBL Hockey Ground), boxing (KPT Sports Complex), squash (Jahangir Khan Squash Complex), and polo.
Karachi is home to some of Pakistan's important cultural institutions.
The inaugural first-class match at the National Stadium was played between Pakistan and India on 26 February 1955 and since then Pakistani national cricket team has won 20 of the 41 Test matches played at the National Stadium.
Crime and resentment grew during the Ayub era among mostly Mohajir and Balochi shanty towns due to economic disparities which turned into a growing movement against Ayub regime, contributing to a national movement resulting in the regime's fall in 1969.
The National Stadium is the city's only world-class cricket stadium, and is the second largest cricket stadium in Pakistan, after the Gaddafi Stadium in Lahore.
The Sindh Wildlife Conservation Building, located in Saddar, served as a Freemasonic Lodge until it was taken over by the government.
The city has hosted seven editions of the National Games of Pakistan, most recently in 2007.
The position of Commissioner of Karachi was created and Shoaib Ahmad Siddiqui was appointed as the Commissioner of Karachi.
After this interchange it eventually turns south back towards Karachi and merges onto the KPT Flyover at Karachi Port.
Many other refugees from Iran (who stayed till the late 1980s) and the Central Asian countries constituting the former Soviet Union have settled in the city as political or economic migrants.
However, the municipal corporation remained in existence and in 1976 became a metropolitan corporation, followed by the creation of zonal municipal committees, which lasted until 1994.
When the Indian Rebellion of 1857 broke out in South Asia, the 21st Native Infantry, then stationed in Karachi, declared allegiance to the rebels and joined their numbers on 10 September 1857.
National T20 League/National One-day Championship
In 1943, Karachi's first airport was the largest in the region.
These developments in Karachi resulted in an influx of economic migrants: Parsis, Hindus, Christians, Jews, Marathis, Goan Christian, Chinese, British, Arabs and Gujaratis.
According to PricewaterhouseCoopers, Karachi had a total GDP of $78&nbsp;billion in 2009 with conservative projections expecting it to rise to $193&nbsp;billion in 2025.
These ports handle 95% of Pakistan's trade cargo to and from foreign ports.
Most major foreign multinational corporations operating in Pakistan have their headquarters in Karachi.
Khasa Hills and Mulri Hills lie in the northwest and form the border between North Nazimabad Town and Orangi Town.
The 1980s and 1990s saw an influx of thousands of Afghan refugees from the Soviet war in Afghanistan into Karachi; they were followed in smaller numbers by refugees escaping from Iran.
As a result, the Army was deployed to restore peace in the city.
The city continued to be ruled by the Talpur Amir's of Sindh until it was occupied by Bombay Army under the command of John Keane on 2 February 1839.
December through February are dry and pleasant as compared to the warm summers that dominate through the late spring (March) to the pre-monsoon season (June).
It is the main seaport and financial center of Pakistan.
Football is especially popular in Lyari Town, which has a large Afro-Balochi community and has always been a football-mad locality in Karachi.
The economic stagnation caused by political anarchy, ethnic strife and resultant military operation during the late 1980s and 1990s led to an exit of industry from Karachi.
Karachi has seen an expansion of information and communications technology and electronic media and has become the software outsourcing hub of Pakistan.
In addition, Karachi has a cottage industry and there is a Free Zone with an annual growth rate of nearly 6.5%.
According to Forbes, Karachi is the fastest-growing megacity in the world with a remarkable 80% expansion over the past decade.
Today, the descendants of these Muslim refugees are known as Muhajirs and form a large, powerful group in Karachi.
The city is located on the Arabian Sea coastline.
Sports like badminton, volleyball, and basketball are popular in schools and colleges.
City administrator is Muhammad Hussain Syed and Municipal Commissioner of Karachi is Matanat Ali Khan.
The Late Palaeolithic and Mesolithic sites found by the Karachi University team on the Mulri Hills, in front of Karachi University Campus, constitute one of the most important archaeological discoveries made in Sindh during the last 50 years.
Toward the west and the north is Cape Monze, locally known as Ras Muari, an area marked by projecting sea cliffs and rocky sandstone promontories.
It handles 10 million passengers a year.
Karachi has been the pioneer in cable networking in Pakistan.
Landhi Industrial Area
New businesses opened up and the population of the town began rising.
It will comprise a hotel, a shopping center, an exhibition center and a revolving restaurant with a viewing gallery offering a panoramic view of the coastline and the city.
Plans have been announced for new passenger facilities at the Port of Karachi.
By 2015, 30,000 people were dying due to water-borne diseases annually.
A large numbers of Arabs, Filipinos and an economic elite of Sinhalese from Sri Lanka.
Karachi is ranked as a beta world city.
The arrival of the troops of the Company Bahadur in 1843 spawned the foundation of the new section, the military cantonment.
KPT Football Stadium
Karachi had both a municipal corporation and a Karachi Divisional Council in the 1960s, which developed schools, colleges, roads, municipal gardens, and parks.
The city's highest monthly rainfall, , occurred in July 1967.
It is the densest, most impoverished and violence-ridden part of the city which was ignored for infrastructure development by British and post-partition provincial governments at the cost of more development for Urdu-speaking areas of the city.
The foreign embassies in Karachi moved to the newly developed capital Islamabad, near Rawalpindi.
KPT Football Stadium
The city is a hub of higher education in South Asia and the Muslim world.
These seaports have modern facilities which include bulk handling, containers and oil terminals and not only handle trade for Pakistan, but serve as ports for Afghanistan and the landlocked Central Asian countries.
It is also known as the Uroos ul Bilaad, "The Bride of the Cities," the "City of Lights" and the "City of the Quaid," having been the birth and burial place of ''Quaid-e-Azam'', the Great Leader, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, who made the city his home after Pakistan's independence from the British Raj on 14 August 1947.
Karachi has museums that present exhibitions on a regular basis, including the Mohatta Palace and the National Museum of Pakistan.
The National Academy of Performing Arts, located in the newly renovated Hindu Gymkhana, offers a two-year diploma course in performing arts that includes classical music and contemporary theatre.
Zaibunnisa Street in the Saddar area (known as Elphinstone Street in British days) is an example where the mercantile groups adopted the Italianate and Indo-Saracenic style to demonstrate their familiarity with Western culture and their own.
Korangi Creek Industrial Park
Karachi has a collection of buildings and structures of varied architectural styles.
The cantonment formed the basis of the 'white' town, where the local population had limited access.
Indus Valley School of Art and Architecture is one of the prime examples of Architectural conservation and restoration where an entire Nusserwanjee building from Kharadar area of Karachi has been relocated to Clifton for adaptive reuse in an art school.
It was later known to the Arabs as Debal from where Muhammad bin Qasim led his conquering force into South Asia in AD 712.
At the end of the 19th century, the population of the city was about 105,000, with a gradual increase over the next few decades, reaching more than 400,000 on the eve of independence.
There are Consulates and honorary consulates as diplomatic missions in Karachi.
The procedure involved the careful removal of each piece of timber and stone, stacked temporarily, loaded on the trucks for transportation to the Clifton site, unloaded and re-arranged according to a given layout, stone by stone, piece by piece, and completed within three months.
New roads, parks, residential and recreational areas were developed as part of this project.
The city's population is estimated to be growing at about 5% per year (mainly as a result of internal rural-urban migration), including an estimated 45,000 migrant workers coming to the city every month from different parts of Pakistan.
By the time of Pakistan's independence in 1947, Karachi had become a bustling metropolis with slightly under half a million people, and classical and colonial European styled buildings lining the city's thoroughfares.
was elected as the City Naib Nazim.
Some of these Polish families settled permanently in the city.
After the 1970s Karachi has become home to about five to seven million Pashtuns, which is more than Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
The national team has been less successful in such limited-overs matches at the ground, including a five-year stint between 1996 and 2001, when they failed to win any matches.
The city has been host to a number of domestic cricket teams including Karachi, Karachi Blues, Karachi Greens, and Karachi Whites.
Karachi acquired its first neo-Gothic or Indo-Gothic buildings when Frere Hall, Empress Market and St. Patrick's Cathedral were completed.
The Peoples Football Stadium is perhaps the largest football stadium in Pakistan with respect to capacity, easily accommodating around 40,000 people.
The City of Karachi Municipal Act of 1933 transformed the city administration into a municipal corporation with a mayor, a deputy mayor and 57 councillors.
Most of the property vacated by non-Muslims, who left Karachi due to the new settlements made by these refugees, were granted to Muslim refugees through claims on behalf of the property they claimed leaving behind in India.
During the 1900s, Karachi saw its major beautification project under the mayoral administration of Harchandrai Vishandas.
Karachi is the nerve center of Pakistan's economy.
National T20 League/National One-day Championship
After some exploratory missions to the area, the British East India Company captured the town when HMS ''Wellesley'' anchored off Manora island on 1 February 1839.
The airport receives the largest number of foreign airlines in the country, a total of 35 airlines and cargo operators fly to Jinnah International predominantly from the Middle East and Southeast Asia.
Federal B Industrial Area
West Wharf Industrial Area
Major mafias active in the city included land mafia, water tanker mafia, transport mafia and ''reti bajri mafia'' (sand and gravel mafia); the last one being related to the construction business.
Some excellent beaches can be found in this area.
Bin Qasim Industrial Zone
It has the most sophisticated of the cable networks of any city of Pakistan.
Hindu community was around 250,000 residents according to 2013 data.
Pakistan Premier League
The Karachi City Station and Karachi Cantonment Railway Station are the city's two major railway stations.
Two years later the metropolitan area was divided into five districts, each with a municipal corporation.
The local Sindhi populace built a small fort, that was constructed for the protection of the city, armed with cannons imported by Sindhi sailors from Muscat, Oman.
While Italianate buildings remained popular, an eclectic blend termed Indo-Saracenic or Anglo-Mughal began to emerge in some locations.
Its primary areas of industry are textiles, pharmaceuticals, steel, and automobiles.
The local mercantile community began acquiring impressive structures.
All of Pakistan's airlines use Karachi as their primary transport hub including PIA&nbsp;– Pakistan International Airlines, Airblue and Shaheen Air International.
Mangroves and creeks of the Indus delta can be found toward the southeast side of the city.
The National Stadium hosted two group matches (Pakistan v. South Africa on 29 February and Pakistan v. England on 3 March), and a quarter-final match (South Africa v. West Indies on 11 March) during the 1996 Cricket World Cup.
Before the end of British colonial rule and the subsequent independence of Pakistan in 1947, the population of the city was 50% Hindu, 40% Muslim and the remaining was Christian (both British and local), Zoroastrian, Buddhist and Jewish.
Important Gujarati Muslim communities in the city include the Memon, Chhipa, Ghanchi, Khoja, Bohra and Tai.
Pakistan Premier League
Karachi has large industrial zones such as Karachi Export Processing Zone, SITE, Korangi, Northern Bypass Industrial Zone, Bin Qasim and North Karachi, located on the fringes of the main city.
