It was brought to the Japanese mainland in the early 20th century during a time of cultural exchanges between the Japanese and the Chinese.
The bout runs for a fixed time (2 to 3 minutes.)
The Japanese terminology for grades or ranks is commonly used.
Examples include aikido, judo, kyudo, and kendo.
Many Okinawan weapons such as the sai, tonfa, and nunchaku may have originated in and around Southeast Asia.
The first documented use of a homophone of the logogram pronounced ''kara'' by replacing the Chinese character meaning "Tang Dynasty"  with the character meaning "empty"  took place in ''Karate Kumite'' written in August 1905 by Chōmo Hanashiro (1869–1945).
Sport karate places emphasis on exercise and competition.
In 1957 Ohshima received his godan (fifth degree black belt), the highest rank awarded by Funakoshi.
He founded the first university karate club in the United States at Caltech in 1957.
The World Karate Federation (WKF) is the largest sport karate organization and is recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) as being responsible for karate competition in the Olympic Games.
In the mid-1950s, the martial arts schools were unified under President Rhee Syngman's order, and became taekwondo under the leadership of Choi Hong Hi and a committee of Korean masters.
On September 28, 2015, karate was featured on a shortlist along with baseball, softball, skateboarding, surfing, and sport climbing to be considered for inclusion in the 2020 Summer Olympics.
Karate began in Canada in the 1930s and 1940s as Japanese people immigrated to the country.
Itosu is sometimes referred to as "the Grandfather of Modern Karate."
Kata (型:かた) means literally "shape" or "model."
Sparring in armour, ''bogu kumite'', allows full power techniques with some safety.
Many other karate organizations and styles are descended from the Kyokushin curriculum.
Free sparring is performed in a marked or closed area.
Sparring in Karate is called kumite (組手:くみて).
In Japan he was influenced by kendo, incorporating some ideas about distancing and timing into his style.
These Masters maintained always a strong link between them, the JKA and the others JKA masters in the world, especially Hidetaka Nishiyama in the USA.
The JKA obliged, and without enforcing a grading on Bell, ratified his black belt on February 5, 1964, though he had to relinquish his Yoseikan grade.
Karate is now predominantly a striking art using punching, kicking, knee strikes, elbow strikes and open hand techniques such as knife-hands, spear-hands, and palm-heel strikes.
It was systematically taught in Japan after the Taisho era.
Funakoshi also gave Japanese names to many of the kata.
Levels of physical contact during sparring vary considerably.
Itosu adapted two forms he had learned from Matsumara.
The form ends with one devastating technique (''hito tsuki'').
Traditional karate places emphasis on self-development (budō).
The original use of the word "karate" in print is attributed to Ankō Itosu; he wrote it as "唐手".
Dan-grade karateka are referred to as ''yudansha'' (holders of dan/rank).
In 1959 Frederick Gille set up the Liverpool branch of the British Karate Federation, which was officially recognised in 1961.
Matsumura's style would later become the Shōrin-ryū style.
However, in 1965 Taiji Kase came from Japan along with Enoeda and Shirai, who went to England and Italy respectively, and karate came under the influence of the JKA.
This is done by listening and being receptive to criticism.
Shintani and Otsuka visited each other in Japan and Canada several times, the last time in 1980 two years prior to Otsuka's death.
Thus the word "karate" was originally a way of expressing  "martial art from China."
In the 1950s and 1960s, several Japanese karate masters began to teach the art in Europe, but it was not until 1965 that the Japan Karate Association (JKA) sent to Europe four well-trained young Karate instructors Taiji Kase, Keinosuke Enoeda, Hirokazu Kanazawa and Hiroshi Shirai.
In this era of escalating Japanese militarism, the name was changed from  ("Chinese hand" or "Tang hand") to  ("empty hand") – both of which are pronounced ''karate'' – to indicate that the Japanese wished to develop the combat form in Japanese style.
Each area and its teachers had particular kata, techniques, and principles that distinguished their local version of ''te'' from the others.
Sakukawa Kanga (1782–1838) had studied pugilism and staff (''bo'') fighting in China (according to one legend, under the guidance of Kosokun, originator of ''kusanku kata'').
Bunkai is a useful tool to understand a kata.
Like most martial arts practiced in Japan, karate made its transition from -''jutsu'' to -''dō'' around the beginning of the 20th century.
A karate practitioner is called a .
In 1966 he began (with Otsuka's endorsement) the Shintani Wado Kai Karate Federation.
In structured kumite (''yakusoku'', prearranged), two participants perform a choreographed series of techniques with one striking while the other blocks.
These postures are based on idealized combat applications.
It was during this time that many of the Korean martial arts masters of the 20th century were exposed to Japanese karate.
Japan was invading China at the time, and Funakoshi knew that the art of Tang/China hand would not be accepted; thus the change of the art's name to "way of the empty hand."
In 1979, Otsuka publicly promoted Shintani to hachidan (8th dan) and privately gave him a kudan certificate (9th dan), which was revealed by Shintani in 1995.
Testing consists of demonstration of techniques before a panel of examiners.
Typically this is performance in unison of a technique or a combination of techniques by a group of karateka.
Karate appeared in the Soviet Union in the mid-1960s, during Nikita Khrushchev's policy of improved international relations.
Kase sought to return the practice of Shotokan Karate to its martial roots, reintroducing amongst other things open hand and throwing techniques that had been side lined as the result of competition rules introduced by the JKA.
Both of these innovations were originated and popularized by Jigoro Kano, the founder of judo and one of the men Funakoshi consulted in his efforts to modernize karate.
Karate has grown in popularity in Africa, particularly in South Africa and Ghana.
It is "The Way of the Empty Hand".
In 1956 after 9 years of training with Kitigawa, Shintani travelled to Japan and met Hironori Otsuka (Wado Ryu).
These forms were taught to children at the elementary school level.
France Shotokan Karate was created in 1964 by Tsutomu Ohshima.
The political centralization of Okinawa by King Shō Hashi in 1429 and the policy of banning weapons by King Shō Shin in 1477, later enforced in Okinawa after the invasion by the Shimazu clan in 1609, are also factors that furthered the development of unarmed combat techniques in Okinawa.
Hiroshi Shirai, one of the original instructors sent by the JKA to Europe along with Kase, Enoeda and Kanazawa, moved to Italy in 1965 and quickly established a Shotokan enclave that spawned several instructors who in their turn soon spread the style all over the country.
After Enoeda’s death in 2003, the KUGB elected Andy Sherry as Chief Instructor.
He said that "Karate is properly applied only in those rare situations in which one really must either down another or be downed by him."
The Dan progression continues from 1st Dan (Shodan, or 'beginning dan') to the higher dan grades.
Hirokazu Kanazawa and Keinosuke Enoeda stayed and Murakami left (later re-emerging as a 5th Dan Shotokai under Harada).
The WKF has developed common rules governing all styles.
In the bushidō tradition ''dojo kun'' is a set of guidelines for karateka to follow.
He promoted the character trait of personal conviction.
Normally, the first five to six dans are given by examination by superior dan holders, while the subsequent (7 and up) are honorary, given for special merits and/or age reached.
Thus karatedō is more than just empty hand techniques.
He always referred to what he taught as simply karate, but in 1936 he built a dojo in Tokyo and the style he left behind is usually called Shotokan after this dojo.
In 1924 Keio University established the first university karate club in mainland Japan and by 1932, major Japanese universities had karate clubs.
The ''makiwara'' is a striking post.
At the age of 20 he went to Fuzhou in Fujian Province, China, to escape Japanese military conscription.
Karate is divided into style organizations.
In 1958 Otsuka invited Shintani to join his organization Wado Kai, and in 1969 he asked Shintani to officially call his style Wado.
Tsutomu Ohshima began studying karate under Shotokan's founder, Gichin Funakoshi, while a student at Waseda University, beginning in 1948.
Shoshin Nagamine said, "Karate may be considered as the conflict within oneself or as a life-long marathon which can be won only through self-discipline, hard training and one's own creative efforts."
WKF karate competition has two disciplines: sparring (''kumite'') and forms (''kata'').
The allowed techniques and contact level are primarily determined by sport or style organization policy, but might be modified according to the age, rank and sex of the participants.
Tournaments are designed to match members of opposing schools or styles against one another in kata, sparring and weapons demonstration.
The ''dō'' suffix implies that ''karatedō'' is a path to self-knowledge, not just a study of the technical aspects of fighting.
On 17 May 1984, the Soviet Karate Federation was disbanded and all karate became illegal again.
Around the 1820s Sakukawa's most significant student Matsumura Sōkon (1809–1899) taught a synthesis of ''te'' (Shuri-te and Tomari-te) and Shaolin (Chinese 少林) styles.
Within the United States, rules may be under the jurisdiction of state sports authorities, such as the boxing commission.
In the 1960s, Anthony Mirakian, Richard Kim, Teruyuki Okazaki, John Pachivas, Allen Steen, Gosei Yamaguchi (son of Gōgen Yamaguchi), Michael G. Foster and Pat Burleson began teaching martial arts around the country.
In addition many Okinawans were actively teaching, and are thus also responsible for the development of karate on the main islands.
Karate began as a common fighting system known as ''te'' (Okinawan: ti) among the Pechin class of the Ryukyuans.
Full contact karate rules used by Kyokushinkai, Seidokaikan and other organizations.
Karate developed on the Ryukyu Islands in what is now Okinawa, Japan.
Shigeru Egami relates that, in 1940, some karateka were ousted from their ''dojo'' because they adopted sparring after having learned it in Tokyo.
Matsumura taught his art to Itosu Ankō (1831–1915) among others.
The "''dō''" in "karate-dō" sets it apart from karate-''jutsu'', as aikido is distinguished from aikijutsu, judo from jujutsu, kendo from kenjutsu and iaido from iaijutsu.
Due to past conflict between Korea and Japan, most notably during the Japanese occupation of Korea in the early 20th century, the influence of karate in Korea is a contentious issue.
These are ''kusanku'' and ''chiang nan''.
Sparring matches are typically divided by weight, age, gender, and experience.
Members of the Okinawan upper classes were sent to China regularly to study various political and practical disciplines.
In the late 1950s Shintani moved to Ontario and began teaching karate and judo at the Japanese Cultural Centre in Hamilton.
The first Shotokan clubs were opened in Moscow's universities.
Funakoshi believed that one should be "inwardly humble and outwardly gentle."
In addition to the three early ''te'' styles of karate a fourth Okinawan influence is that of Kanbun Uechi (1877–1948).
In light contact or semi contact kumite, points are awarded based on the criteria: good form, sporting attitude, vigorous application, awareness/''zanshin'', good timing and correct distance.
Bogu kumite (full contact with protective shielding of targets) rules are used in the World Koshiki Karate-Do Federation organization.
He founded the International Traditional Karate Federation (ITKF).
On June 1, 2016, the International Olympic Committee's executive board announced they were supporting the inclusion of all five sports (counting baseball and softball as only one sport) for inclusion in the 2020 Games.
Kata is a formalized sequence of movements which represent various offensive and defensive postures.
In 1945 Robert Trias opened the first ''dojo'' in the United States in Phoenix, Arizona, a Shuri-ryū karate ''dojo''.
Competitors may enter either as individuals or as part of a team.
Evaluation for kata and kobudō is performed by a panel of judges, whereas sparring is judged by a head referee, usually with assistant referees at the side of the sparring area.
The applications when applied in a demonstration with real opponents is referred to as a Bunkai.
He interpreted the "kara" of Karate-dō to mean "to purge oneself of selfish and evil thoughts ... for only with a clear mind and conscience can the practitioner understand the knowledge which he receives."
He stated that Karate practitioners must "never be easily drawn into a fight."
After trade relationships were established with the Ming dynasty of China by King Satto of Chūzan in 1372, some forms of Chinese martial arts were introduced to the Ryukyu Islands by the visitors from China, particularly Fujian Province.
He later developed his own style of Uechi-ryū karate based on the Sanchin, Seisan, and Sanseiryu kata that he had studied in China.
Eventually, original Korean forms were developed by individual schools and associations.
Traditional karate ''kata'' bear a strong resemblance to the forms found in Fujian martial arts such as Fujian White Crane, Five Ancestors, and Gangrou-quan (Hard Soft Fist; pronounced "Gōjūken" in Japanese).
In Canada during this same time, karate was also introduced by Masami Tsuruoka who had studied in Japan in the 1940s under Tsuyoshi Chitose.
Shotokai Karate was introduced to England in 1963 by another of Gichin Funakoshi's students, Mitsusuke Harada.
It was later changed to a homophone meaning ''empty hand'' (空手).
An earlier significant split from the KUGB took place in 1991 when a group led by KUGB senior instructor Steve Cattle formed the English Shotokan Academy (ESA).
On July 19, 1957, Vietnamese Hoang Nam 3rd Dan, billed as "Karate champion of Indo China", was invited to teach by Bell at Maybush Road, but the first instructor from Japan was Tetsuji Murakami (1927-1987) a 3rd Dan Yoseikan under Minoru Mochizuki and 1st Dan of the JKA, who arrived in England in July 1959.
In pre–World War II Okinawa, kumite was not part of karate training.
In free sparring (Jiyu Kumite), the two participants have a free choice of scoring techniques.
By 1970 Shotokan karate was the most spread martial art in Italy apart from Judo.
It includes Japan's annexation of the Okinawan island group in 1872, the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905), the annexation of Korea, and the rise of Japanese militarism (1905–1945).
Chuck Liddell, Frank Mir and Stephen Thompson are known for American Kenpo.
In kickboxing variants (for example K-1), the preferred win is by knockout.
Gichin Funakoshi, founder of Shotokan karate, is generally credited with having introduced and popularized karate on the main islands of Japan.
After World War II, members of the US military learned karate in Okinawa or Japan and then opened schools in the USA.
One of the early members of this branch was Andy Sherry who had previously studied Jujutsu with Jack Britten.
Minimum age and time in rank are factors affecting promotion.
The WUKF accepts more than one federation or association per country.
Depending upon style, take-downs, sweeps and in some rare cases even time-limited grappling on the ground are also allowed.
Karate was practised quietly without a large amount of organization.
Although the World Taekwondo Federation and International Taekwon-Do Federation are the most prominent among Korean martial arts organizations, ''tang soo do'' schools that teach Japanese karate still exist as they were originally conveyed to Won Kuk Lee and his contemporaries from Funakoshi.
The original taekwondo ''hyung'' were identical to karate ''kata''.
Sport kumite in many international competition under the World Karate Federation is free or structured with light contact or semi contact and points are awarded by a referee.
While there he studied under Shushiwa.
Funakoshi changed the names of many kata and the name of the art itself (at least on mainland Japan), doing so to get karate accepted by the Japanese budō organization Dai Nippon Butoku Kai.
In 1806 he started teaching a fighting art in the city of Shuri that he called "Tudi Sakukawa," which meant "Sakukawa of China Hand."
Modern Japanese style training emphasizes the psychological elements incorporated into a proper ''kokoro'' (attitude) such as perseverance, fearlessness, virtue, and leadership skills.
Yudansha typically wear a black belt.
Kyokushin is largely a synthesis of Shotokan and Gōjū-ryū.
Shigeru Egami, Chief Instructor of Shotokan Dojo, opined that "the majority of followers of karate in overseas countries pursue karate only for its fighting techniques&nbsp;... Movies and television&nbsp;... depict karate as a mysterious way of fighting capable of causing death or injury with a single blow&nbsp;... the mass media present a pseudo art far from the real thing."
Bell began teaching in the tennis courts of his parents' back garden in Ilford, Essex and his group was to become the British Karate Federation.
In 1922 the Japanese Ministry of Education invited Gichin Funakoshi to Tokyo to give a karate demonstration.
Karate schools began appearing across the world, catering to those with casual interest as well as those seeking a deeper study of the art.
During this time period, prominent teachers who also influenced the spread of karate in Japan included Kenwa Mabuni, Chōjun Miyagi, Motobu Chōki, Kanken Tōyama, and Kanbun Uechi.
His students became some of the most well-known karate masters, including Gichin Funakoshi, Kenwa Mabuni, and Motobu Chōki.
Failing to suppress these uncontrolled groups, the USSR's Sport Committee formed the Karate Federation of USSR in December 1978.
Chōjun Miyagi taught such well-known karateka as Seko Higa (who also trained with Higaonna), Meitoku Yagi, Miyazato Ei'ichi, and Seikichi Toguchi, and for a very brief time near the end of his life, An'ichi Miyagi (a teacher claimed by Morio Higaonna).
All practices vary depending upon the school and the teacher.
The incorporation of empty-handed Chinese Kung Fu into Okinawan martial arts occurred partly because of these exchanges and partly because of growing legal restrictions on the use of weaponry.
In the Kyū/Dan system the beginner grades start with a higher numbered kyū (''e.g.
They are often separated by age, rank and sex with potentially different rules or standards based on these factors.
The tournament may be exclusively for members of a particular style (closed) or one in which any martial artist from any style may participate within the rules of the tournament (open).
In 1924 Gichin Funakoshi, founder of Shotokan Karate, adopted the Dan system from the judo founder Jigoro Kano using a rank scheme with a limited set of belt colors.
In "time of grave public crisis, one must have the courage&nbsp;... to face a million and one opponents."
One of his students was the founder of Gojū-ryū, Chōjun Miyagi.
This will vary by school, but testing may include everything learned at that point, or just new information.
Requirements of rank differ among styles, organizations, and schools.
The ''nigiri game'' is a large jar used for developing grip strength.
Because of its emphasis on physical, full-force sparring, Kyokushin is now often called "full contact karate", or "Knockdown karate" (after the name for its competition rules).
Outside of the Shotokan stable of karate styles, Wado Ryu Karate was also an early adopted style in the UK, introduced by Tatsuo Suzuki, a 6th Dan at the time in 1964.
The Bunkai shows how every stance and movement is used.
Kanazawa left the UK after 3 years and Enoeda took over.
Both the ESA and the WKSA (renamed the Kase-Ha Shotokan-Ryu Karate-do Academy (KSKA) after Kase’s death in 2004) continue following this path today.
The Tang Dynasty of China ended in AD 907, but the kanji representing it remains in use in Japanese language referring to China generally, in such words as "唐人街" meaning Chinatown.
Itosu's influence in karate is broad.
The demonstration is an application for new rank (shinsa) and may include kata, bunkai, self-defense, routines, tameshiwari (breaking), and kumite (sparring).
This utilizes simple equipment made of wood and stone.
Won Kuk Lee, a Korean student of Funakoshi, founded the first martial arts school after the Japanese occupation of Korea ended in 1945, called the Chung Do Kwan.
In 1964, Takayuki Kubota relocated the International Karate Association from Tokyo to California.
Organizations hold competitions (tournaments) from local to international level.
Examples of sport organizations include AAKF/ITKF, AOK, TKL, AKA, WKF, NWUKO, WUKF and WKC.
Funakoshi had trained in two of the popular branches of Okinawan karate of the time, Shorin-ryū and Shōrei-ryū.
In 1973, however, the government banned karate—together with all other foreign martial arts—endorsing only the Soviet martial art of sambo.
In 1901 Itosu helped to get karate introduced into Okinawa's public schools.
He created the ''ping'an'' forms ("''heian''" or "''pinan''" in Japanese) which are simplified kata for beginning students.
Sport Karate emphasizes aerobic exercise, anaerobic exercise, power, agility, flexibility, and stress management.
Kumite is practiced both as a sport and as self-defense training.
Karate, although not widely used in mixed martial arts, has been effective for some MMA practitioners.
''Dō'' is a suffix having numerous meanings including road, path, route, and way.
In 1961 Edward Ainsworth, another blackbelt Judoka, set up the first Karate study group in Ayrshire, Scotland having attended Bell's third 'Karate Summer School' in 1961.
Only by behaving humbly can one be open to Karate's many lessons.
Takayuki Mikami was sent to New Orleans by the JKA in 1963.
Another nominal development is the addition of ''dō'' (道:どう) to the end of the word karate.
WKF only allows membership through one national organization/federation per country to which clubs may join.
After regaining independence from Japan, many Korean martial arts schools that opened up in the 1940s and 50's were founded by masters who had trained in karate in Japan as part of their martial arts training.
Requirements for examinations vary among schools.
This was a turbulent period in the history of the region.
In 1966, members of the former British Karate Federation established the Karate Union of Great Britain (KUGB) under Hirokazu Kanazawa as chief instructor and affiliated to JKA.
It teaches a curriculum that emphasizes aliveness, physical toughness, and full contact sparring.
During the Second World War, many Japanese-Canadian families were moved to the interior of British Columbia.
Kihon may also be prearranged drills in smaller groups or in pairs.
Bas Rutten and Georges St-Pierre train in Kyokushin.
The World Union of Karate-do Federations (WUKF) offers different styles and federations a world body they may join, without having to compromise their style or size.
Karate styles place varying importance on kihon.
The forms he created are common across nearly all styles of karate.
