Like Tocqueville, who described a faceless and bureaucratic despotism with no identifiable despot, Marx also broke with classical thinkers who spoke of a single tyrant and with Montesquieu, who discussed the nature of the single despot.
His biographer Werner Blumenberg attributed it to liver and gall problems which Marx had in 1849 and from which he was never afterwards free, exacerbated by an unsuitable lifestyle.
societies, and, a fortiori, that of modern capitalist societies".
Marx was supportive of such activity, and having recently received a substantial inheritance from his father of either 6,000 or 5,000 francs, allegedly used a third of it to arm Belgian workers who were planning revolutionary action.
However, in the same letter to Vera Zasulich, Marx points out that "at the core of the capitalist system&nbsp;... lies the complete separation of the producer from the means of production."
Marx further argues that, by moulding nature in desired ways, the subject takes the object as its own, and thus permits the individual to be actualised as fully human.
According to Princeton historian J.E.
No longer a secret society, the Communist League wanted to make aims and intentions clear to the general public rather than hiding its beliefs as the League of the Just had been doing.
Isaiah Berlin considers Marx the true founder of modern sociology, "in so far as anyone can claim the title".
'', Marx refined his views on socialism based upon Hegelian and Feuerbachian ideas of dialectical materialism, at the same time criticising liberals and other socialists operating in Europe.
It would be a democratic society, enfranchising the entire population.
This became the inspiration for the body of works known as the conflict theory.
He theorised that between capitalism and the establishment of a socialist/communist system, a dictatorship of the proletariat—a period where the working class holds political power and forcibly socialises the means of production—would exist.
Throughout the twentieth century, revolutions in dozens of countries labelled themselves 'Marxist', most notably the Russian Revolution, which led to the founding of the USSR.
Marx returned to Paris, which was then under the grip of both a reactionary counter-revolution and a cholera epidemic, and was soon expelled by the city authorities, who considered him a political threat.
Before he died, Marx asked Engels to write up these ideas, which were published in 1884 under the title ''The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State''.
Born in Prussia to a middle-class family, he later studied political economy and Hegelian philosophy.
Beyond social science, he has also had a lasting legacy in philosophy, literature, the arts, and the humanities.William Roseberry (1997) ''Marx and Anthropology'' Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol.
In one of the drafts of this letter, Marx reveals his growing passion for anthropology, motivated by his belief that future communism would be a return on a higher level to the communism of our prehistoric past.
For some time after 1848, Marx and Engels wondered if the entire revolutionary upsurge had completely played out.
Changes in society, Marx argued, are not achieved overnight through the efforts and will power of "a handful of men".
Not only did Engels already know the English language, he had developed a close relationship with many Chartist leaders.
In a letter to Vera Zasulich dated 8 March 1881, Marx contemplated the possibility of Russia's bypassing the capitalist stage of development and building communism on the basis of the common ownership of land characteristic of the village ''mir''.
Working in the Hegelian tradition, Marx rejected Comtean sociological positivism in attempt to develop a ''science of society''.
Thanks to various processes overseen by capitalism, such as urbanisation, the working class, the proletariat, should grow in numbers and develop class consciousness, in time realising that they have to and can change the system.
The new editorial board supported an immediate peace between the Union and the Confederacy in the Civil War in the United States with slavery left intact in the Confederacy.
While residing in Brussels in 1846, Marx continued his association with the secret radical organisation League of the Just.
Engels' speech included the passage:
The headquarters of the Communist League also moved to London.
the illness emphasised certain traits in his character.
Marx also joined the Trier Tavern Club drinking society (''Landsmannschaft der Treveraner''), at one point serving as club co-president.
The Communist Party of Great Britain had the monument with a portrait bust by Laurence Bradshaw erected; Marx's original tomb had only humble adornment.
Marx moved to Cologne in 1842, where he became a journalist, writing for the radical newspaper ''Rheinische Zeitung'' ("''Rhineland News''"), expressing his early views on socialism and his developing interest in economics.
However, by the spring of 1845 his continued study of political economy, capital and capitalism had led Marx to the belief that the new political economic theory that he was espousing—scientific socialism—needed to be built on the base of a thoroughly developed materialistic view of the world.
It has also been a line of thinking pursued by thinkers and activists like Antonio Gramsci who have sought to understand the opportunities and the difficulties of transformative political practice, seen in the light of Marxist social theory.
A classical liberal, he took part in agitation for a constitution and reforms in Prussia, then governed by an absolute monarchy.
Marx observed that in practically every successful industry, input unit-costs are lower than output unit-prices.
Beginning in the United States, the Panic spread across the globe.
Here Marx elaborated his labour theory of value, which had been influenced by Thomas Hodgskin.
This abridged edition was translated into English and published in 1951 in London.
However, Marx famously asserted in the eleventh of his "Theses on Feuerbach" that "philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point however is to change it", and he clearly dedicated himself to trying to alter the world.
Humans recognise that they possess both actual and potential selves.
Considering the distribution of such material a seditious act, the authorities instituted reforms and replaced several staff during Marx's attendance.
Marx became interested in the recently deceased German philosopher G. W. F. Hegel, whose ideas were then widely debated among European philosophical circles.
In October 1836 Marx arrived in Berlin, matriculating in the university's faculty of law and renting a room in the Mittelstrasse.
Marx noted that this was not an intentional process; rather, no individual or even state can go against the forces of economy.
This work was published in 1845 as ''The Holy Family''.
Professor Shuster went on to ask himself whether the mental effects of the disease affected Marx's work, and even helped him to develop his theory of alienation.
The years of revolution from 1848 to 1849 had been a grand experience for both Marx and Engels.
Each labourer produces only some part of a whole, and each part having no value or utility of itself, there is nothing on which the labourer can seize, and say: 'This is my product, this will I keep to myself.'"
Lion Philips was a wealthy Dutch tobacco manufacturer and industrialist, upon whom Karl and Jenny Marx would later often come to rely for loans while they were exiled in London.
Later that year, Europe experienced a series of protests, rebellions, and often violent upheavals that became known as the Revolution of 1848.
Through his theories of alienation, value, commodity fetishism, and surplus value, Marx argued that capitalism facilitated social relations and ideology through commodification, inequality, and the exploitation of labour.
They both became sure that their economic view of the course of history was the only valid way that historic events like the revolutionary upsurge of 1848 could be adequately explained.
She was from a prosperous business family that later founded the company Philips Electronics: she was great-aunt to Anton and Gerard Philips, and great-great-aunt to Frits Philips.
In this first volume of ''Capital'', Marx outlined his conception of surplus value and exploitation, which he argued would ultimately lead to a falling rate of profit and the collapse of industrial capitalism.
''The Communist Manifesto'' laid out the beliefs of the new Communist League.
Marx frequently used pseudonyms, often when renting a house or flat, apparently to make it harder for the authorities to track him down.
On 1 June, Marx started publication of a daily newspaper, the ''Neue Rheinische Zeitung'', which he helped to finance through his recent inheritance from his father.
Although the veracity of these allegations is disputed, the Belgian Ministry of Justice accused him of it, subsequently arresting him, and he was forced to flee back to France, where, with a new republican government in power, he believed that he would be safe.
However, Hegel had thought in idealist terms, putting ideas in the forefront, whereas Marx sought to rewrite dialectics in materialist terms, arguing for the primacy of matter over idea.
Despite Marx's stress on critique of capitalism and discussion of the new communist society that should replace it, his explicit critique of capitalism is guarded, as he saw it as an improved society compared to the past ones (slavery and feudal).
In such a utopian world there would also be little if any need for a state, which goal was to enforce the alienation.
In 1845, after receiving a request from the Prussian king, the French government shut down ''Vorwärts!
Spending summer and autumn 1836 in Trier, Marx became more serious about his studies and his life.
Instead, Marx set out to analyse "the despotism of capital".
It was described as "a daring and original piece of work in which Marx set out to show that theology must yield to the superior wisdom of philosophy": The essay was controversial, particularly among the conservative professors at the University of Berlin.
''), the French socialists (especially Claude Henri St. Simon and Charles Fourier) and the history of France."
No longer was there any "natural reward of individual labour.
Non-relatives attending the funeral included three communist associates of Marx: Friedrich Lessner, imprisoned for three years after the Cologne communist trial of 1852; G. Lochner, whom Engels described as "an old member of the Communist League"; and Carl Schorlemmer, a professor of chemistry in Manchester, a member of the Royal Society, and a communist activist involved in the 1848 Baden revolution.
Marx continued to write articles for the ''New York Daily Tribune'' as long as he was sure that the ''Tribune's'' editorial policy was still progressive.
Subsequently, police raided the school in 1832, and discovered that literature espousing political liberalism was being distributed among the students.
Marx regarded this mismatch between (economic) base and (social) superstructure as a major source of social disruption and conflict.
Due to a condition referred to as a "weak chest", Karl was excused from military duty when he turned 18.
The successful sales of ''A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy'' stimulated Marx in the early 1860s to finish work on the three large volumes that would compose his major life's work—''Das Kapital'' and the ''Theories of Surplus Value'', which discussed the theoreticians of political economy, particularly Adam Smith and David Ricardo.
He predicted that, like previous socioeconomic systems, capitalism produced internal tensions which would lead to its self-destruction and replacement by a new system: socialism.
Although his grades in the first term were good, they soon deteriorated, leading his father to force a transfer to the more serious and academic University of Berlin.
An outline of "Marxism" had definitely formed in the mind of Karl Marx by late 1844.
Liebknecht, a founder and leader of the German Social-Democratic Party, gave a speech in German, and Longuet, a prominent figure in the French working-class movement, made a short statement in French.
While admitting that Russia's rural "commune is the fulcrum of social regeneration in Russia", Marx also warned that, in order for the mir to operate as a means for moving straight to the socialist stage without a preceding capitalist stage, it "would first be necessary to eliminate the deleterious influences which are assailing it (the rural commune) from all sides".
Willich and Schapper believed that once the Communist League had initiated the uprising, the entire working class from across Europe would rise "spontaneously" to join it, thus, creating revolution across Europe.
Marx's theories about society, economics and politics—collectively understood as Marxism—hold that human societies develop through class struggle: a conflict between ruling classes (known as the bourgeoisie) that control the means of production and working classes (known as the proletariat) that work on these means by selling their labour for wages.
Marx has been described as one of the most influential figures in human history, and his work has been both lauded and criticised.
Marx described this loss as commodity fetishism, in which the things that people produce, commodities, appear to have a life and movement of their own to which humans and their behaviour merely adapt.
Designed to put forward news from across Europe with his own Marxist interpretation of events, the newspaper featured Marx as a primary writer and the dominant editorial influence.
Later, Mary Burns, Engels' long-time companion, left Manchester, England, to join Engels in Brussels.
The 1850s and 1860s also mark the line between what some scholars see as the idealistic, Hegelian young Marx from the more scientifically minded mature Marx writings of the later period.
Karl Marx was born on 5 May 1818 to Heinrich Marx and Henrietta Pressburg (1788–1863).
Like so many other early writings of his, ''German Ideology'' would not be published in Marx's lifetime and would be published only in 1932.
At first Marx's English-language articles were translated from German by ; eventually, however, Marx learned English well enough to write without translation.
Members of the League eventually became persuaded in this regard.
This work is also notable for another famous Marx quote: "From each according to his ability, to each according to his need."
In late 1847, Marx and Engels began writing what was to become their most famous work — a programme of action for the Communist League.
Accordingly, in June 1847 the League of the Just was reorganised by its membership into a new open "above ground" political society that appealed directly to the working classes.
However, the United States' economy was too new to play host to a classical revolution.
Together with Engels's speech, this constituted the entire programme of the funeral.
Given the elimination of these pernicious influences, Marx allowed that "normal conditions of spontaneous development" of the rural commune could exist.
He wrote extensively about this in terms of the problem of alienation.
He was born at 664 Brückergasse in Trier, a town then part of the Kingdom of Prussia's Province of the Lower Rhine.
Demand for a Russian language edition of ''Capital'' soon led to the printing of 3,000 copies of the book in the Russian language, which was published on 27 March 1872.
In the present stage of development (circa 1850), following the defeat of the uprisings across Europe in 1848, Marx felt that the Communist League should encourage the working class to unite with progressive elements of the rising bourgeoisie to defeat the feudal aristocracy on issues involving demands for governmental reforms, such as a constitutional republic with freely elected assemblies and universal (male) suffrage.
He has been cited as one of the nineteenth century's three masters of the "school of suspicion", alongside Friedrich Nietzsche and Sigmund Freud, and as one of the three principal architects of modern social science along with Émile Durkheim and Max Weber.
Accordingly, it was popular with the broad masses of the working class of the United States.
The newspaper attracted the attention of the Prussian government censors, who checked every issue for seditious material before printing; Marx lamented that "Our newspaper has to be presented to the police to be sniffed at, and if the police nose smells anything un-Christian or un-Prussian, the newspaper is not allowed to appear."
Marx's ideas would also have a profound influence on subsequent artists and art history, with avant-garde movements across literature, visual art, music, film, and theater.
For Marx, then, human nature—''Gattungswesen'', or species-being—exists as a function of human labour.
He began co-operating with Bruno Bauer on editing Hegel's ''Philosophy of Religion'' in 1840.
Indeed, Engels was serving as a reporter for many Chartist and socialist English newspapers.
There they scandalised their class by getting drunk, laughing in church, and galloping through the streets on donkeys.
Another attendee of the funeral was Ray Lankester, a British zoologist who would later become a prominent academic.
Since Marx believed that surplus value appropriated from labour is the source of profits, he concluded that the rate of profit would fall even as the economy grew.
However, to get the manuscript past the government censors, Marx called the book ''The Poverty of Philosophy'' (1847) and offered it as a response to the "petty bourgeois philosophy" of the French anarchist socialist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon as expressed in his book ''The Philosophy of Poverty'' (1840).
But even this satirical form did not save the work from censorship.
This organisation was also racked by an internal struggle between its members, some of whom followed Marx while others followed the Schapper/Willich faction.
This was Marx's first trip to England and Engels was an ideal guide for the trip.
The other important contribution to Marx's revision of Hegelianism came from Engels's book, ''The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844'', which led Marx to conceive of the historical dialectic in terms of class conflict and to see the modern working class as the most progressive force for revolution.
Indeed, the Panic of 1857 was the first truly global economic crisis.
After the paper's collapse, Marx began writing for the only uncensored German-language radical newspaper left, ''Vorwärts!''
After completing ''German Ideology'', Marx turned to a work that was intended to clarify his own position regarding "the theory and tactics" of a truly "revolutionary proletarian movement" operating from the standpoint of a truly "scientific materialist" philosophy.
Both Marx and Auguste Comte set out to develop scientifically justified ideologies in the wake of European secularisation and new developments in the philosophies of history and science.
In mid-July 1845, Marx and Engels left Brussels for England to visit the leaders of the Chartists, a socialist movement in Britain.
It goes on to examine the antagonisms that Marx claimed were arising in the clashes of interest between the bourgeoisie (the wealthy capitalist class) and the proletariat (the industrial working class).
By "ideology", Marx and Engels meant ideas that reflect the interests of a particular class at a particular time in history, but which contemporaries see as universal and eternal.
As Marx and Bauer were both atheists, in March 1841 they began plans for a journal entitled ''Archiv des Atheismus'' (''Atheistic Archives''), but it never came to fruition.
Major world leaders including Vladimir Lenin, Mao Zedong, Fidel Castro, Salvador Allende, Josip Broz Tito, and Kwame Nkrumah  all cited Marx as an influence, and his ideas informed political parties worldwide beyond those where 'Marxist revolutions' took place.
Despite his dislike of mystical terms Marx used Gothic language in several of his works.
Though inspired by French socialist and sociological thought, Marx criticised utopian socialists, arguing that their favoured small-scale socialistic communities would be bound to marginalisation and poverty, and that only a large-scale change in the economic system can bring about real change.
Marx believed that if the proletariat were to seize the means of production, they would encourage social relations that would benefit everyone equally, abolishing exploiting class, and introduce a system of production less vulnerable to cyclical crises.
He became engaged to Jenny von Westphalen, an educated baroness of the Prussian ruling class who had known Marx since childhood.
Both Marx and Engels participated in drawing the programme and organisational principles of the new Communist League.
In earlier years, Marx had been able to communicate with the broad masses of the working class by editing his own newspaper or editing a newspaper financed by others sympathetic to his philosophy.
Marx was just one of the reporters in Europe that the ''New York Tribune'' employed.
Fundamental to Marx's idea of meaningful labour is the proposition that, in order for a subject to come to terms with its alienated object, it must first exert influence upon literal, material objects in the subject's world.
Marx was fond of highly seasoned dishes, smoked fish, caviare, pickled cucumbers, "none of which are good for liver patients"; he also liked wine and liqueurs, and smoked an enormous amount, "and since he had no money, it was usually bad-quality cigars".
Marx accused these other revolutionaries of being "adventurists" because of their belief that a revolutionary situation could be created out of thin air by the sheer "will power" of the revolutionaries without regard to the economic realities of the current situation.
Soon Marx and Engels were collaborating on a criticism of the philosophical ideas of Marx's former friend, Bruno Bauer.
He argued cuttingly, his biting satire did not shrink at insults, and his expressions could be rude and cruel.
As time passed, they began to think that a new revolutionary upsurge would not occur until there was another economic downturn.
Meanwhile, the democratic parliament in Prussia collapsed, and the king, Frederick William IV, introduced a new cabinet of his reactionary supporters, who implemented counter-revolutionary measures to expunge leftist and other revolutionary elements from the country.
As an adult, Marx became stateless and spent much of his life in London, England, where he continued to develop his thought in collaboration with German thinker Friedrich Engels and published various works, the most well-known being the 1848 pamphlet ''The Communist Manifesto''.
Literally those things, like land, natural resources, and technology, necessary for the production of material goods and the relations of production, in other words, the social relationships people enter into as they acquire and use the means of production.
Marx attended some of their meetings, but did not join.
To arrive at his retrodiagnosis Shuster considered the primary material: the Marx correspondence published in the 50 volumes of the ''Marx/Engels Collected works''.
His ''Critique of the Gotha Programme'' opposed the tendency of his followers Wilhelm Liebknecht and August Bebel to compromise with the state socialism of Ferdinand Lassalle in the interests of a united socialist party.
Editorially, the ''Tribune'' reflected Greeley's anti-slavery opinions.
By returning to his study of economics, he felt he would be able to understand more thoroughly what was occurring in the world.
Instead, they are brought about through a scientific analysis of economic conditions of society and by moving toward revolution through different stages of social development.
On one hand, Marx, in the 19th century's deepest critique of the dehumanising aspects of this system, noted that defining features of capitalism include alienation, exploitation, and recurring, cyclical depressions leading to mass unemployment; on the other hand capitalism is also characterised by "revolutionising, industrialising and universalising qualities of development, growth and progressivity" (by which Marx meant industrialisation, urbanisation, technological progress, increased productivity and growth, rationality and scientific revolution), that are responsible for progress.
The question of whether a recession would be necessary to create a new revolutionary situation in society became a point of contention between Marx and certain other revolutionaries.
The Panic of 1857 broke the mould of all prior thinking on the world economy.
Fundamentally, Marx assumed that human history involves transforming human nature, which encompasses both human beings and material objects.
The most important political event during the existence of the International was the Paris Commune of 1871, when the citizens of Paris rebelled against their government and held the city for two months.
In his evolutionary model of history, he argued that human history began with free, productive and creative work that was over time coerced and dehumanised, a trend most apparent under capitalism.
In 1970 there was an unsuccessful attempt to destroy the monument using a homemade bomb.
While at the University at Bonn, Marx joined the Poets' Club, a group containing political radicals that were monitored by the police.
The opening lines of the pamphlet set forth the principal basis of Marxism, that "The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles."
In 2007 a retrodiagnosis of Marx's skin disease was made by dermatologist Sam Shuster of Newcastle University.
Marx's dual view of capitalism can be seen in his description of the capitalists: he refers to them as vampires sucking worker's blood, but at the same time, he notes that drawing profit is "by no means an injustice" and that capitalists simply cannot go against the system.
Marx's view of capitalism was two-sided.
For the first few years, he and his family lived in extreme poverty.
He added that "the vitality of primitive communities was incomparably greater than that of Semitic, Greek, Roman, etc.
Marx actively fought for its implementation, arguing that the working class should carry out organised revolutionary action to topple capitalism and bring about socio-economic emancipation.
His work has since influenced subsequent intellectual, economic, and political history.
Two telegrams from workers' parties in France and Spain were also read out.
''German Ideology'' is written in a humorously satirical form.
Marx and Engels's point was not only that such beliefs are at best half-truths; they serve an important political function.
His main source of income was his colleague, Engels, who derived much of his income from his family's business.
There must have been few whom he did not criticize like this… not even Engels was an exception.
Consequently, the ''Neue Rheinische Zeitung'' was soon suppressed and Marx was ordered to leave the country on 16 May.
Employing a critical approach known as historical materialism, Marx propounded the theory of base and superstructure, asserting that the cultural and political conditions of society, as well as its notions of human nature, are largely determined by obscured economic foundations.
Consequently, Marx revises Hegelian "work" into material "labour", and in the context of human capacity to transform nature the term "labour power".
In social theory, twentieth- and twenty-first-century thinkers have pursued two main strategies in response to Marx.
Marx's father died in May 1838, resulting in a diminished income for the family.
Marx's first article for the ''New York Tribune'' was on the British elections to Parliament and was published in the ''Tribune'' on 21 August 1852.
Soon, though, Marx recognised that the ''Manuscripts'' had been influenced by some inconsistent ideas of Ludwig Feuerbach.
In this work, Marx broke with Ludwig Feuerbach, Bruno Bauer, Max Stirner and the rest of the Young Hegelians, and also broke with Karl Grun and other "true socialists" whose philosophies were still based in part on "idealism".
Marx and his family were reburied on a new site nearby in November 1954.
Finally in 1859 Marx published ''A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy'', his first serious economic work.
The late Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm remarked that "One cannot say Marx died a failure" because, although he had not achieved a large following of disciples in Britain, his writings had already begun to make an impact on the leftist movements in Germany and Russia.
With a run of about 50,000 issues, the ''Tribune'' was the most widely circulated journal in the United States.
Marx's polemic with other thinkers often occurred through critique, and thus he has been called "the first great user of critical method in social sciences".
It thus introduced the first glimpse at Marx's historical materialism, an argument that the world is changed not by ideas but by actual, physical, material activity and practice.
In July, Marx and Bauer took a trip to Bonn from Berlin.
Such has been, for example, the neo-marxist theorising adopted by historians inspired by Marx's social theory, such as E. P. Thompson and Eric Hobsbawm.
Having broken off her engagement with a young aristocrat to be with Marx, their relationship was socially controversial due to the differences between their religious and class origins, but Marx befriended her father, a liberal aristocrat, Ludwig von Westphalen, and later dedicated his doctoral thesis to him.
He criticised speculative philosophy, equating metaphysics with ideology.
Marx called the difference "surplus value" and argued that this surplus value had its source in surplus labour, the difference between what it costs to keep workers alive and what they can produce.
Accumulation of capital shapes the social system.
Both volumes were published by Engels after Marx's death.
Within 25 years of his death, the continental European socialist parties that acknowledged Marx's influence on their politics were each gaining between 15 and 47 per cent in those countries with representative democratic elections.
Unable either to stay in France or to move to Germany, Marx decided to emigrate to Brussels in Belgium in February 1845.
Marx's view of history, which came to be called historical materialism (controversially adapted as the philosophy of dialectical materialism by Engels and Lenin) certainly shows the influence of Hegel's claim that one should view reality (and history) dialectically.
For Marx, class antagonisms under capitalism, owing in part to its instability and crisis-prone nature, would eventuate the working class' development of class consciousness, leading to their conquest of political power and eventually the establishment of a classless, communist society governed by a free association of producers.
Karl's father, as a child known as Herschel, was the first in the line to receive a secular education; he became a lawyer and lived a relatively wealthy and middle-class existence, with his family owning a number of Moselle vineyards.
The issues in this internal split were the same issues raised in the internal split within the Communist League.
By 1837, Marx was writing both fiction and non-fiction, having completed a short novel, ''Scorpion and Felix'', a drama, ''Oulanem'', and a number of love poems dedicated to Jenny von Westphalen, though none of this early work was published during his lifetime.
Since its founding, the ''Tribune'' had been an inexpensive newspaper—two cents per copy.
On 28 August 1844, Marx met the German socialist Friedrich Engels at the Café de la Régence, beginning a lifelong friendship.
Inflammation of the eyes was induced by too much work at night.
Later, in 1868, Charles Dana would leave the ''Tribune'' to become the owner and editor-in-chief of the ''New York Sun'', a competing newspaper in New York City.
