At the turn of the first millennium, the Hoysalas gained power in the region.
Mysore Dasara is celebrated as the ''Nada habba'' (state festival) and this is marked by major festivities at Mysore.
The capital and largest city is Bangalore (Bengaluru).
Karnataka has 25 wildlife sanctuaries and five national parks.
Cycling talent of Karnataka needs a special mention.
Kuvempu, the renowned Kannada poet and writer who wrote Jaya Bharata Jananiya Tanujate, the state anthem of Karnataka
The waterfalls of Karnataka and Kudremukh are listed as must-see places and among the "1001 Natural Wonders of the World".
However, some schools follows NIOS syllabus.
Major airlines such as Kingfisher Airlines and Kingfisher Red were based in Bangalore.
Many of them, including two of India's biggest software firms, Infosys and Wipro, are also headquartered in the state.
Gopalaswamy in Mysore.
This was the basis of the Lingayat faith which today counts millions among its followers.
According to the 2011 census of India, the total population of Karnataka was 61,095,297 of which 30,966,657 (50.7%) were male and 30,128,640 (49.3%) were female, or 1000 males for every 973 females.
The Royal Challengers Bangalore, an Indian Premier League franchise, The Bengaluru Football Club, an Indian Football League : I-League franchise, The Bengaluru Yodhas, a Pro Wrestling League franchise, The Bengaluru Top Guns, a Premier Badminton League franchise and The Bengaluru Bulls, a Pro Kabaddi League franchise are based in Bangalore.
Air transport in Karnataka, as in the rest of the country, is still a fledgling but fast expanding sector.
It is the seventh largest Indian state by area.
The syllabus taught in the schools is either of the CBSE, the ICSE or the state syllabus (SSLC) defined by the Department of Public Instruction of the Government of Karnataka.
In the twelfth century, Lingayatism emerged in northern Karnataka as a protest against the rigidity of the prevailing social and caste system.
By virtue of its varied geography and long history, Karnataka hosts numerous spots of interest for tourists.
This represents a 15.60% increase over the population in 2001.
Karnataka has been referred to as the cradle of Indian swimming because of its high standards in comparison to other states.
Among sweets, Mysore Pak, Karadantu of Gokak and Amingad, Belgaavi Kunda and Dharwad pedha are popular.
Noted Carnatic musicians include Violin T. Chowdiah, Veena Sheshanna, Mysore Vasudevachar, Doreswamy Iyengar and Thitte Krishna Iyengar.
This port handled 32.04 million tonnes of traffic in the fiscal year 2006-07 with 17.92 million tonnes of imports and 14.12 million tonnes of exports.
The Kodavas who mainly reside in the Kodagu district, speak Kodava Takk.
During the sixteenth century, Konkani Hindus migrated to Karnataka, mostly from Salcette, Goa, while during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, Goan Catholics migrated to South Canara, especially from Bardes, Goa, as a result of food shortages, epidemics and heavy taxation imposed by the Portuguese.
Lingayatism preached women equality by letting women wear ''Ishtalinga'' i.e.
The Nandi Hills area in the outskirts of Devanahalli is the site of the upcoming $22 billion, 50 square kilometre BIAL IT Investment Region, one of the largest infrastructure projects in the history of Karnataka.
Shirt, Trousers and Salwar kameez are widely worn in Urban areas.
Wildlife in Karnataka is threatened by poaching, habitat destruction, human-wildlife conflict and pollution.
There are 186 engineering, 39 medical and 41 dental colleges in the state.
Karnataka also leads the nation in biotechnology.
It was formed on 1 November 1956, with the passage of the States Reorganisation Act.
Prominent Kannada channels include Janasri News, Colors Kannada, Zee Kannada, Udaya TV, TV 9, Asianet Suvarna and Kasturi TV.
Other uprisings followed, such as the ones at Supa, Bagalkot, Shorapur, Nargund and Dandeli.
Originally known as the State of Mysore, it was renamed ''Karnataka'' in 1973.
These three social reformers did so by the literary means of 'Vachana Sahitya' which is very famous for its simple, straight forward and easily understandable Kannada language.
The government of Karnataka is headed by the Chief Minister who is chosen by the ruling party members of the Legislative Assembly.
Karnataka's pre-history goes back to a paleolithic hand-axe culture evidenced by discoveries of, among other things, hand axes and cleavers in the region.
The percentage of forested area is slightly less than the all-India average of about 23%, and significantly less than the 33% prescribed in the National Forest Policy.
The districts of the Western Ghats and the southern districts of the state have popular eco-tourism locations including Kudremukh, Madikeri and Agumbe.
In the field of speciality health care, Karnataka's private sector competes with the best in the world.
It has a recorded forest area of  which constitutes 20.19% of the total geographical area of the state.
A vast number of weekly, biweekly and monthly magazines are under publication in both Kannada and English.
References made in the ''Kavirajamarga'', however, prove that Kannada literature flourished in the native composition meters such as ''Chattana'', ''Beddande'' and ''Melvadu'' during earlier centuries.
Adi Shankaracharya (788–820) chose Sringeri in Karnataka to establish the first of his four ''mathas'' (monastery).
In 2007, there were nearly 2,000 firms operating in Karnataka.
Eleven groups of soil orders are found in Karnataka, viz.
Karnataka consists of four main types of geological formations&nbsp;— the ''Archean complex'' made up of Dharwad schists and granitic gneisses, the ''Proterozoic'' non-fossiliferous sedimentary formations of the Kaladgi and Bhima series, the ''Deccan trappean and intertrappean deposits'' and the tertiary and recent laterites and alluvial deposits.
Talacauvery and Kudremukh, both in Karnataka, are on the tentative list of World Heritage Sites of UNESCO.
The Haridasa (Kannada: ಹರಿದಾಸ) devotional movement is considered as one of the turning points in the cultural history of India.
The philosophers and musical bards patronised by these empires launched socio-religious and literary movements which have endured to the present day.
Wild animals that are found in Karnataka include the elephant, the tiger, the leopard, the gaur, the sambar deer, the chital or spotted deer, the muntjac, the bonnet macaque, the slender loris, the common palm civet, the small Indian civet, the sloth bear, the dhole, the striped hyena and the golden jackal.
Udayavani, Kannadaprabha, Samyukta Karnataka, VarthaBharathi, Sanjevani, Eesanje, Hosa digantha, Karavali Ale are also some popular dailies published from Karnataka.
The use of the Kannada script for writing Tulu and non-availability of print in Tigalari script contributed to the marginalisation of Tigalari script.
The winter in January and February is followed by summer between March and May, the monsoon season between June and September and the post-monsoon season from October till December.
Meteorologically, Karnataka is divided into three zones&nbsp;— coastal, north interior and south interior.
To contain European expansion in South India, Haidar Ali and later Tippu Sultan fought four significant Anglo-Mysore Wars, the last of which resulted in Tippu Sultan's death and the incorporation of Mysore into the British Raj in 1799.
Sports like kho kho, kabaddi, chinni daandu and goli (marbles) are played mostly in Karnataka's rural areas.
Chinnaswamy Stadium in Bangalore regularly hosts international matches and is also the home of the National Cricket Academy, which was opened in 2000 to nurture potential international players.
Karnataka has five national parks: Anshi, Bandipur, Bannerghatta, Kudremukh and Nagarhole.
English is the medium of education in many schools and widely used for business communication in most private companies.
Other linguistic minorities in the state were Urdu (10.54%), Telugu (7.03%), Tamil (3.57%), Marathi (3.6%), Tulu (3.0%), Hindi (2.56%), Konkani (1.46%), Malayalam (1.33%) and Kodava Takk (0.3%).
The diverse linguistic and religious ethnicities that are native to Karnataka, combined with their long histories, have contributed immensely to the varied cultural heritage of the state.
The Bandipur and Nagarahole National Parks, which fall outside these subclusters, were included in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve in 1986, a UNESCO designation.
Tulu is spoken mainly in the coastal districts of Udupi and Dakshina Kannada.
Literature flourished during this time, which led to the emergence of distinctive Kannada literary metres, and the construction of temples and sculptures adhering to the Vesara style of architecture.
The state cricket team has won the Ranji Trophy seven times, second only to Mumbai in terms of success.
In addition, Karnataka is home to several places of religious importance.
The Kannada language serves as the official language of the state of Karnataka, as the native language of approximately 65% of its population and as one of the classical languages of India.
The inland water transport within the state is not well developed.
Over a span of nearly six centuries, several saints and mystics helped shape the culture, philosophy and art of South India and Karnataka in particular by exerting considerable spiritual influence over the masses and kingdoms that ruled South India.
Most of the holy sites of Lingayatism, like Kudalasangama and Basavana Bagewadi, are found in northern parts of the state.
Karnataka has the second highest number of nationally protected monuments in India, second only to Uttar Pradesh, in addition to 752 monuments protected by the State Directorate of Archaeology and Museums.
The highest recorded temperature was  at Raichur and the lowest recorded temperature was  at Bidar.
These were also the first kingdoms to use Kannada in administration, as evidenced by the Halmidi inscription and a fifth-century copper coin discovered at Banavasi.
The Legislative Assembly consists of 224 members who are elected for five-year terms.
The Bijapur Sultanate, which had risen after the demise of the Bahmani Sultanate of Bidar, soon took control of the Deccan; it was defeated by the Moghuls in the late 17th century.
Exports from these firms exceeded 50,000 crores ($12.5 billion) in 2006-07, accounting for nearly 38% of all IT exports from India.
Off late Bijapur district has produced some of the best known Road Cyclists in the national circuit.
Karnataka has 11 ports, including the New Mangalore Port, a major port and ten minor ports, of which three were operational in 2012.
He came to Karnataka in 1098 AD and lived here until 1122 AD.
The Hoysala temples at Belur and Halebidu, which were built with Chloritic schist (soapstone) are proposed UNESCO World Heritage sites.
Ramanujacharya, the leading expounder of , spent many years in Melkote.
Leading figures of this movement were Basava, Akka Mahadevi and Allama Prabhu, who established the Anubhava Mantapa which was the centre of all religious and philosophical thoughts and discussions pertaining to Ligayats.
Parts of modern-day Southern Karnataka (Gangavadi) were occupied by the Chola Empire at the turn of 11th century.
Christianity reached Karnataka in the sixteenth century with the arrival of the Portuguese and St. Francis Xavier in 1545.
It is home to India's largest biocluster, with 158 of the country's 320 biotechnology firms being based here.
Konkani is mostly spoken in the Uttara Kannada and Dakshina Kannada districts and in parts of Udupi.
The Karnataka Premier League is an inter-regional Twenty20 cricket tournament played in the state.
A chance discovery of edicts and several Mauryan relics at Sannati in Gulbarga district in 1986 has proven that the Krishna River basin was once home to both Mahayana and Hinayana Buddhism.
The thus expanded state was renamed Karnataka, seventeen years later, in 1973.
In 1565, Karnataka and the rest of South India experienced a major geopolitical shift when the Vijayanagara empire fell to a confederation of Islamic sultanates in the Battle of Talikota.
A total of 12.31 million hectares of land, or 64.6% of the state's total area, is cultivated.
For administrative purposes, Karnataka has been divided into four revenue divisions, 49 sub-divisions, 30 districts, 175 taluks and 745 hoblies/revenue circles.
Celebrated Hindustani musicians like Gangubai Hangal, Mallikarjun Mansur, Bhimsen Joshi, Basavaraja Rajaguru, Sawai Gandharva and several others hail from Karnataka, and some of them have been recipients of the Kalidas Samman, Padma Bhushan and Padma Vibhushan awards.
Women in Kodagu have a distinct style of wearing the saree, different from the rest of Karnataka.
Karnataka is the manufacturing hub for some of the largest public sector industries in India, including Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, National Aerospace Laboratories, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Bharat Earth Movers Limited and HMT (formerly Hindustan Machine Tools), which are based in Bangalore.
Border disputes involving Karnataka's claim on the Kasaragod and Solapur districts and Maharashtra's claim on Belgaum are ongoing since the states reorganisation.
Prior to the third century BCE, most of Karnataka formed part of the Nanda Empire before coming under the Mauryan empire of Emperor Ashoka.
Karnataka had an estimated GSDP (Gross State Domestic Product) of about US$58.23 billion in the 2008-09 fiscal year.
He also supported inter-caste marriages and Kaayaka Tatva of Basavanna.
The British used the word Carnatic, sometimes ''Karnatak'', to describe both sides of peninsular India, south of the Krishna.
84.00% of the population were Hindu, 12.92% were Muslim, 1.87% were Christian, 0.72% were Jains, 0.16% were Buddhist, 0.05% were Sikh and 0.02% were belonging to other religions and 0.27% of the population did not state their religion.
Until the creation of the South Western Zone headquartered at Hubli in 2003, the railway network in the state was in the Southern and Western railway zones.
Several parts of the state now come under the South Western Zone, with the remainder under the Southern Railways.
Most of these rivers flow out of Karnataka eastward into the Bay of Bengal.
About  of Karnataka (i.e.
Significantly, about 60% of the state is composed of the ''Archean complex'' which consist of gneisses, granites and charnockite rocks.
Minor populations of Tibetan Buddhists and tribes like the Soligas, Yeravas, Todas and Siddhis also live in Karnataka.
Karnataka has contributed significantly to both forms of Indian classical music, the Carnatic and Hindustani traditions.
The Chief Minister, along with the council of ministers, drives the legislative agenda and exercises most of the executive powers.
The classic refers to several earlier greats (''purvacharyar'') of Kannada poetry and prose.
Gold discovered in Harappa was found to be imported from mines in Karnataka, prompting scholars to hypothesise about contacts between ancient Karnataka and the Indus Valley Civilisation ca.
20% of the state's geographic area) is covered by forests.
In the late nineties, KSRTC was split into four corporations, viz., The Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation, The North-East Karnataka Road Transport Corporation and The North-West Karnataka Road Transport Corporation with their headquarters in Bangalore, Gulbarga and Hubli respectively, and with the remnant of the KSRTC maintaining operations in the rest of the state from its headquarters in Bangalore.
Since the 1980s, Karnataka has emerged as the pan-Indian leader in the field of IT (information technology).
The Western Ghats, a biodiversity hotspot, includes the western region of Karnataka.
These forests support 25% of the elephant and 10% of the tiger population of India.
This movement was ushered in by the Haridasas (literally "servants of Lord Hari") and took shape in the 13th century – 14th century CE, period, prior to and during the early rule of the Vijayanagara empire.
Kannada features a rich and ancient body of literature including religious and secular genre, covering topics as diverse as Jainism (such as ''Puranas''), Veerashaivism (such as Vachanas), Vaishnavism (such as ''Haridasa Sahitya'') and modern literature.
The cave temples at Badami and the rock-cut temples at Aihole representing the Badami Chalukyan style of architecture are also popular tourist destinations.
Basava shunned the sharp hierarchical divisions that existed and sought to remove all distinctions between the hierarchically superior master class and the subordinate, servile class.
Ugadi (Kannada New Year), Makara Sankranti (the harvest festival), Ganesh Chaturthi, Nagapanchami, Basava Jayanthi, Deepavali, and Ramzan are the other major festivals of Karnataka.
He was a pioneer in many ways, going against standard conventions and norms.
Chitrakala Parishat is an organisation in Karnataka dedicated to promoting painting, mainly in the Mysore painting style.
Karnataka is bordered by the Arabian Sea and the Laccadive Sea to the west, Goa to the northwest, Maharashtra to the north, Telangana to the northeast, Andhra Pradesh to the east, Tamil Nadu to the southeast, and Kerala to the southwest.
Though several etymologies have been suggested for the name Karnataka, the generally accepted one is that ''Karnataka'' is derived from the Kannada words ''karu'' and ''nādu'', meaning "elevated land".
In 1950, Mysore became an Indian state of the same name; the former Maharaja served as its ''Rajpramukh'' (head of state) until 1975.
The literacy rate was 75.36% with 82.47% of males and 68.08% of females being literate.
Karnataka has a railway network with a total length of approximately .
Politicians from Karnataka have played prominent roles in federal government of India with some of them having held the high positions of Prime Minister and Vice-President.
Popular among them are Bandipur National Park, Bannerghatta National Park and Nagarhole National Park.
''Tulu Mahabharato'', written by Arunabja in the Tigalari script, is the oldest surviving Tulu text.
Karnataka's contribution to India's GDP in the year 2004-05 was 5.2%.
red, lateritic, black, alluvio-colluvial, forest and coastal soils.
These dynasties were followed by imperial Kannada empires such as the Badami Chalukyas, the Rashtrakuta Empire of Manyakheta and the Western Chalukya Empire, which ruled over large parts of the Deccan and had their capitals in what is now Karnataka.
There are 481 degree colleges affiliated with one of the universities in the state, viz.
The forests are classified as reserved, protected, unclosed, village and private forests.
Laterite cappings that are found in many districts over the Deccan Traps were formed after the cessation of volcanic activity in the early tertiary period.
The KSRTC, the state public transport corporation, transports an average of 2.2 million passengers daily and employs about 25,000 people.
The official emblem of Karnataka has a ''Ganda Berunda'' in the centre.
Several Hindu temples including the famous Udupi Sri Krishna Matha, the Marikamba Temple at Sirsi, the Sri Manjunatha Temple at Dharmasthala, Kukke Subramanya Temple and Sharadamba Temple at Shringeri attract pilgrims from all over India.
Contemporary theatre culture in Karnataka remains vibrant with organisations like Ninasam, Ranga Shankara, Rangayana and Prabhat Kalavidaru continuing to build on the foundations laid by Gubbi Veeranna, T. P. Kailasam, B. V. Karanth, K V Subbanna, Prasanna and others.
Madhva was one of the important philosophers during the Bhakti movement.
The population density was 319 per km2 and 38.67% of the people lived in urban areas.
The era of Kannada newspapers started in the year 1843 when Hermann Mögling, a missionary from Basel Mission, published the first Kannada newspaper called ''Mangalooru Samachara'' in Mangalore.
The ruins of the Vijayanagara Empire at Hampi and the monuments of Pattadakal are on the list of UNESCO's World Heritage Sites.
The Halmidi inscription, the earliest attested full-length inscription in the Kannada language and script, dates from 450 CE, while the earliest available literary work, the ''Kavirajamarga'', has been dated to 850 CE.
Entisols, Inceptisols, Mollisols, Spodosols, Alfisols, Ultisols, Oxisols, Aridisols, Vertisols, Andisols and Histosols.
In March 2002, Karnataka had 4767 branches of different banks with each branch serving 11,000 persons, which is lower than the national average of 16,000.
Gamaka is another classical music genre based on Carnatic music that is practised in Karnataka.
Udupi, Sringeri, Gokarna and Melkote are well-known places of Sanskrit and Vedic learning.
The highest point in Karnataka is the Mullayanagiri hills in Chickmagalur district which has an altitude of .
For the fiscal year 2006-07, the inflation rate in Karnataka was 4.4%, compared to the national average of 4.7%.
Karnataka has been ranked as the fourth most popular destination for tourism among the states of India.
With 61,130,704 inhabitants at the 2011 census, Karnataka is the eighth largest state by population, comprising 30 districts.
The total lengths of National Highways and state highways in Karnataka are , respectively.
Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Limited is an oil refinery located in Mangalore.
Purandara Dasa, one of the most revered Haridasas, is known as the ''Karnataka Sangeeta Pitamaha'' ('Father of Karnataka a.k.a.
A majority of the silk industry in India is headquartered in Karnataka State, much of it in Doddaballapura, and the state government intends to invest 70 crore in a "Silk City" at Muddenahalli, near Bangalore International Airport.
Karnataka has the highest number of approved health systems and alternative therapies in India.
The Mysore style of Bharatanatya, nurtured and popularised by the likes of the legendary Jatti Tayamma, continues to hold sway in Karnataka, and Bangalore also enjoys an eminent place as one of the foremost centres of Bharatanatya.
Along with some ISO certified government-owned hospitals, private institutions which provide international-quality services have caused the health care industry to grow by 30% during 2004-05.
To maximise attendance in schools, the Karnataka Government has launched a midday meal scheme in government and aided schools in which free lunch is provided to the students.
Karnataka occupies a special place in the history of Indian radio.
Many of India's premier science and technology research centres, such as Indian Space Research Organisation, Central Power Research Institute, Bharat Electronics Limited and the Central Food Technological Research Institute, are also headquartered in Karnataka.
The Gol Gumbaz and Ibrahim Rauza are famous examples of the Deccan Sultanate style of architecture.
After his death, the kingdom was inherited by his son Tippu Sultan.
Seven of India's banks, Canara Bank, Syndicate Bank, Corporation Bank, Vijaya Bank, Karnataka Bank, Vysya Bank and the State Bank of Mysore originated in this state.
Chandrasekhar, Ravi Shastri, Sanjay Manjrekar, Anil Kumble, Javagal Srinath, Rahul Dravid, Venkatesh Prasad, Robin Uthappa, Vinay Kumar, Gundappa Vishwanath, Syed Kirmani, Stuart Binny, Ashwini Ponnappa, Mahesh Bhupathi, Rohan Bopanna, Prakash Padukone who won the All England Badminton Championships in 1980 and Pankaj Advani who has won three world titles in cue sports by the age of 20 including the amateur World Snooker Championship in 2003 and the World Billiards Championship in 2005.
Doordarshan is the broadcaster of the Government of India and its channel DD Chandana is dedicated to Kannada.
The two main river systems of the state are the Krishna and its tributaries, the Bhima, Ghataprabha, Vedavathi, Malaprabha, and Tungabhadra, in the north, and the Kaveri and its tributaries, the Hemavati, Shimsha, Arkavati, Lakshmana Thirtha and Kabini, in the south.
The emblem also carries two Sharabhas with the head of an elephant and the body of a lion.
In the early 14th century, Harihara and Bukka Raya established the Vijayanagara empire with its capital, ''Hosapattana'' (later named Vijayanagara), on the banks of the Tungabhadra River in the modern Bellary district.
Premalata Sureban was part of the Indian contingent at the Perlis Open '99 in Malaysia.
The Cholas and the Hoysalas fought over the region in the early 12th century before it eventually came under Hoysala rule.
Some of these baccalaureate colleges are accredited with the status of a deemed university.
By the late 19th century, the independence movement had gained momentum; Karnad Sadashiva Rao, Aluru Venkata Raya, S. Nijalingappa, Kengal Hanumanthaiah, Nittoor Srinivasa Rau and others carried on the struggle into the early 20th century.
Following the long-standing demand of the Ekikarana Movement, Kodagu- and Kannada-speaking regions from the adjoining states of Madras, Hyderabad and Bombay were incorporated into the Mysore state, under the States Reorganisation Act of 1956.
''Karu nadu'' may also be read as ''karu'', meaning "black", and ''nadu'', meaning "region", as a reference to the black cotton soil found in the Bayalu Seeme region of the state.
In 2007 the state had a birth rate of 2.2%, a death rate of 0.7%, an infant mortality rate of 5.5% and a maternal mortality rate of 0.2%.
Much of the agricultural output is dependent on the southwest monsoon as only 26.5% of the sown area is irrigated.
Madhvacharya (1238–1317) was the chief proponent of Tattvavāda (Philosophy of Reality), popularly known as Dvaita or Dualistic school of Hindu philosophy&nbsp;— one of the three most influential Vedānta philosophies.
The Bahamani and Bijapur rulers encouraged Urdu and Persian literature and Indo-Saracenic architecture, the Gol Gumbaz being one of the high points of this style.
In 1998, the engineering colleges in the state were brought under the newly formed Visvesvaraya Technological University headquartered at Belgaum, whereas the medical colleges are run under the jurisdiction of the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences.
With the death of Krishnaraja Wodeyar II, Haidar Ali, the commander-in-chief of the Mysore army, gained control of the region.
The Western Chalukyas patronised a unique style of architecture and Kannada literature which became a precursor to the Hoysala art of 12th century.
The Kadamba Dynasty, founded by Mayurasharma, had its capital at Banavasi; the Western Ganga Dynasty was formed with Talakad as its capital.
There are Tibetan refugee camps in Karnataka.
The Sports Authority of India, the premier sports institute in the country, and the Nike Tennis Academy are also situated in Bangalore.
Karnataka experiences four seasons.
As the "doctrine of lapse" gave way to dissent and resistance from princely states across the country, Kittur Chennamma, Sangolli Rayanna and others spearheaded rebellions in Karnataka in 1830, nearly three decades before the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
In recognition of the talent of cyclists in the district, the State Government has already laid a cycling track at the B.R.
The Legislative Council is a permanent body of 75 members with one-third (25 members) retiring every two years.
The main objective of this movement was to propagate the Dvaita philosophy of Madhvacharya (Madhva Siddhanta) to the masses through a literary medium known as Dasa Sahitya literature of the servants of the Lord.
The decline of Satavahana power led to the rise of the earliest native kingdoms, the Kadambas and the Western Gangas, marking the region's emergence as an independent political entity.
The Kingdom of Mysore was restored to the Wodeyars and Mysore remained a princely state under the British Raj.
The Jain philosophy and literature have contributed immensely to the religious and cultural landscape of Karnataka.
With GDP growth of 56.2% and per capita GDP growth of 43.9%, Karnataka is now on the 15th position among all states.
