Women stay away from this temple in Pehowa town of Haryana because this shrine celebrates the ''Brahmachari'' form of Kartikeya.
Murugan is often referred to as "Tamil Kadavul" "God of the Tamils" and is worshiped primarily in areas with Tamil influences.
Given that legends related to Murugan are recounted separately in several Hindu epics, some differences between the various versions are observed.
The ''Ramayana'' version is closer to the stories told in the Puranas below.
Kartikeya Swami or locally called the Devta "Kelang Wazir" is worshipped near parts of Bharmour as their main deity at Chamba district of Himachal Pradesh.
Other important shrines like Mayilam, Sikkal, Marudamalai, Kundrathur, Vadapalani, Kandakottam, Thiruporur, Vallakottai, Viralimalai, Vayalur, Thirumalaikoil, Chennimalai, Sivanmalai, Pachaimalai, Thindal malai (Near Erode) and Pavalamalai near Gobichettipalayam.
The lance called ''Vel'' in Tamil is a weapon closely associated with him.
The main temples of Murugan are located in Tamil Nadu and other parts of south India.
He is the Lord of male-fertility and good harvest.
The ''Aru Padaiveedu'' (six abodes) (Tamil: ''Āṟupaṭai vīṭu'') are six temples situated in the state of Tamil Nadu.
Thiruthani Murugan Temple
He is known as Subrahmanya, Muruga or Palani Andava in Kerala.
The Chitravelayutha temple in Verukal on the border between Trincomalee and Batticaloa is also noteworthy as is the Mandur Kandaswamy temple in Batticaloa.
The key temples in Sri Lanka include the sylvan shrine in Kataragama / (Kadirgamam) or Kathirkamam in the deep south, the temple in Tirukovil in the east, the shrine in Embekke in the Kandyan region and the famed Nallur Kandaswamy temple in Jaffna.
This has led to more elaborate accounts of his mythology in the Tamil language, culminating in the Tamil version of Skanda Purana, called ''Kandha Purānam'', written by Kacchiappa Sivachariyar (1350–1420 AD.)
The deity was venerated also by the Ikshvakus, an Andhra dynasty, and the Gupta Empire.
This event is taken to signify that Murugan is accessible to all who worship and love him, regardless of their birth or heritage.
It is believed that unmarried girls worship Kartikeya on this day to get grooms handsome as Kartikeya.
The ''Taittiriya Aranyaka'' contains the Gayatri Mantra for Shanmukha.
The birth of Karthikeya can be traced in the "''Tirumurukā -truuppaṭai''" (in Tamil) which narrates that an asura named Suraabaathman a sincere devotee of Shiva.
But,Lord Muruga refuses in anger he settles in a mount known as Palani.
the third eye of Lord Shiva's power was so intense that all other deities could not stand before.
In the deeply Sinhalese south of Sri Lanka, he is worshipped at the Kataragama temple, where he is known as Kathiravel or Kataragama deviyo.
After winning it, he offers to give the fruit to his upset brother.
Ajaamughi along with her servant finally found Indraani praying to Lord Shiva.
He thus gets named Kartikeya.
There is a six-day period of fast and prayer in the Tamil month of Aippasi known as the Skanda Shasti.
The six most sacred abodes of Murugan was mentioned in Tamil sangam literature, "Thirumurugatrupadai", written by Nakkeerar and in "Thirupugal", written by Arunagirinathar.
Other Sangam period works in Tamil that refer to Murugan in detail include the ''Paripāṭal'', the ''Akanaṉūṟu'' and the ''Purananuru''.
She ordered Indraani to accompany along with her as a slave.
The 3 others in Malaysia are
The late medieval-era temple of the tooth in Kandy, dedicated to the tooth relic of the Buddha, has a Kataragama deiyo shrine adjacent to it dedicated to the veneration of Skanda in the Sinhalese tradition.
Malai Mandir, a prominent and popular temple complex in Delhi, is one of the few dedicated to Murugan in all of North India apart from the Pehowa temple in Haryana.
When Ajaamughi forced Indraani to come with her, one of Lord Shiva's Gurdian appeared before them and warned Ajaamughi to leave Indraani.
Kumara Purnima, which is celebrated on the full moon day after Vijayadashami, is one of the popular festival dedicated to Kartikeya in Odisha.
Lord Murga then killed Suraabaathman and turned two halves of his body to cock flag and a peacock.
*'''Arulmigu Balathandayuthapani Temple, Penang''' in Penang
The festival starts on 17 November every year and on 16 November in case of Leap year.
Pazhamudircholai Murugan Temple
Thaipusam walk for Shiva Murugan Temple in Concord, USA is very popular and attracting many devotees from all over America.
The Yagna was destroyed by Shiva's avatar Virabhadra.
* '''Sannasimalai Temple''' in Malacca
Batu Caves is a very famous temple of Lord Murugan in Kuala Lumpur
In New Zealand, there is a Thirumurugan Temple in Auckland and a Kurinji Kumaran Temple in Wellington, both dedicated to Murugan.
Bramaha didn't knew the correct answer hence,he made Bramha as captive.The rishis and Goddess parvathi complained to Lord Shiva about Murugaa's act.
Then Goddess Parvati, took the form of this water body as she alone is capable of taming the Tejas of Shiva, her consort.
There is also a Murugan temple on the Palani hill top where 'Dhandayuthapani' is the main deity, in a meditating state, carrying a staff ('danda') as weapon ('ayutha') in his hands ('pani').
This symbolizes his purification of human ills.
Thiruparankunram, Madurai district
The Shanmata system propagated by him included this sect.
This kind of posture can be seen in temples in Tamilnadu especially in Swamimalai Murugan temple (kumbakonam district).
This is suggested by the legend connected to his birth; the wedding of Shiva and Parvati being necessary for the birth of a child who would vanquish the asura named Taraka.
He is portrayed as a handsome with bow and arrow in hand.Kartikeya is primarily worshipped among those who intend to have a son.
After succeeding in his penance Suraabaathman begin to torture the humans as well as the devas.
The Kushan Empire, which governed from what is today Peshawar, and the Yaudheyas, a confederation in the Punjab region, struck coins bearing the image of Skanda.
Thirupparamkunram Murugan Temple
Also, in some parts of West Bengal, Kartik is traditionally worshipped by the descendants of the past royal families too, as in the district of Malda.
The story is similar to that explained in puranas.
He is worshipped at Thaipusam, celebrated by Tamil communities worldwide near the full moon of the Tamil month Thai.
He is a favourite deity of the common folk everywhere and it is said he never hesitates to come to the aid of a devotee when called upon.
A Puranic story has Ganesha obtain a divine fruit of knowledge from Narada winning a contest with Murugan.
The ''Tolkāppiyam'', possibly the most ancient of the Tamil literature, mentions ''Cheyyavaṉ'' "the red one", who is identified with Murugan, whose name is literally ''Murukaṉ'' "the youth"; the three other gods referred in the ''Tolkāppiyam'' are ''Māyavaṉ'' "the dark one" (identified with Vishnu), ''Vēntaṉ'' "the sovereign" (identified with Indra) and ''Koṟṟavai'' "the victorious" (identified with Kali).
There is a temple in Skandagiri, Secunderabad, one in Bikkavolu, East Godavari district and one in Mopidevi,Krishna district in the state of Andhra Pradesh.
Situated at Kugti Village, which is 10–14&nbsp;km from Bharmour is the major deity of the tribe Gaddi.
The ''Atharvaveda'' calls Kumāra ''Agnibhū'' because he is form of Agni, who held him in his hands when Kumāra was born.
His javelin is used to symbolize his far reaching protection, his discus symbolizes his knowledge of the truth, his mace represents his strength and his bow shows his ability to defeat all ills.
Hence they believe the area was of Vedda veneration that was taken over by the Buddhist and Hindus in the medieval period.
In reply he asked that no power in the whole universe should destroy him except, than the lord's power itself.
Located in Dindigul District, on the Palani hill bottom ( Malai Adivaram ) called 'Thiruaavinankudi', where the deity is known as 'Kuzhanthai Velayuthaswami' and was worshipped by Goddess Lakshmi ('Thiru' in Tamil), the sacred cow Kamadhenu ('Aa' in Tamil), the sun god Surya ('Inan' in both Tamil & Sanskrit), the earth goddess ('ku' in Tamil), and the fire god Agni ('Di' in Tamil), and has idols of all of them.
Historically, Kartikeya was immensely popular in the Indian subcontinent.
Pati (husband) of Devsena and/or Senapati (commander in chief) of Dev (gods).
The halves, thus turned into the peacock (his mount) and the rooster his flag, which also "refers to the sun".
In Tamil Nadu, Murugan has continued to be popular with all classes of society right since the Sangam age.
'''Batu Caves''' in short also referred as 10th Caves or Hill for Lord Muruga as there are 6 important holy shrines in India and 4 more in Malaysia.
Lord Shiva accompanied by others approached Muruga.
In Tamil month of vaikasi the festival (VAIKASI-VISAKAM) VISHAKA Nakashtra of Muruga is celebrated as his birth day in a grand manner.
As the commander of the divine armies, he became the patron of the ruling classes.
The temple commemorates the incident where Muruga explained the essence of the pranava mantra "Om" to his father Shiva.
In ancient India, Kartikeya was also regarded as the patron deity of thieves, as may be inferred from the ''Mrichchakatikam,'' a Sanskrit play by Shudraka, and in the ''Vetala-panchvimshati,'' a medieval collection of tales.
With this weapon he slained the asura tarakasura, sighnamugasura (lion faced asura) who are the brothers of Suraabaathman.
Daksha was a Vishnu devotee and never liked Shiva, who symbolized destruction of evil, detachment, and who lived a simple life .
Baudhāyana's ''Dharmasūtra'' calls Skanda ''Mahāsena'' "Having a Great Army" and ''Subrahmaṇya'' "beloved of Brahmins".
It can mean either lord of Devasena or Lord of the army (sena) of Devas.
Located on the outskirts of Madurai on a hillock where Kartikeyan married Indra's daughter Deivanai.
He is sometimes depicted with many weapons including: a sword, a javelin, a mace, a discus and a bow although more usually he is depicted wielding a ''sakti'' or spear.
Nakkeerar worshipped Murugan in this shrine and is said to have worshiped Lord Shiva here as Parangirinathar.
In Maharashtra too, women don't visit Kartik swami temple.
Murugan ('''Tamil''': '''முருகன்''') is often referred to as '''Tamilḻ kadavulḷ''' (meant "Lord of the Tamils") and is worshiped primarily in areas especially in Tamilnadu , Kerala, Puducherry, Sri Lanka, Mauritius, Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Réunion.
Thiruthani, Thiruvallur district
After he grow into a young boy, the Kaarthigaas handed him over to Goddess Parvati.
One day upon losing her husband as a prisoner, Indraani (queen of Indra deva) prayed to Lord Shiva in earth to help her.
The Devas manage to get Shiva married to Parvati (who was Dakshayani, reborn), by making Manmatha (also known as Kama), the God of love awaken him from his penance, but Manmatha incurred the Lord's wrath indicated by the opening his third eye – "Netri Kann", and being destroyed and resurrected.
The story and reason behind the birth of Murugan was explained by Sage Vishvamitra to Rama while they were crossing river Ganga on the way to reach king Janaka.
In the Bhagavad-Gita (Ch.10, Verse 24), Krishna, while explaining his omnipresence, names the most perfect being, mortal or divine, in each of several categories.
The origin of this marriage lies probably in the punning of 'Deva-sena-pati'.
Shiva hands over his effulgence of the third eye used to destroy Manmatha to Agni, as he alone is capable of handling it until it becomes the desired offspring.
Then the Lord Muruga made a play and challenged that even Lord Shiva does not know the right answer for the Pranavaa -Manthra "OM" (which is based on skeptical philosophy and had unrevealed secrets only known to Gods).
On his way to worship Lord Shiva, Bramha didn't pay attention to Muruga or greeted him.
(Covered with snow in the winters)
Thirukarthigai or the full moon of the Tamil month of Karthigai signifies his birth.
In the ''Tirumurukā-ṟtruuppaṭai'', he is described as a god of eternal youth: "His face shines a myriad rays light and removes the darkness from this world".
Later during his teenage, Goddess Parvathi granted him his unique weapon sakthi Vel.
Palani temple is considered as the most holy abode of Muruga by Tamils and Malayalis of South India.
Sri Subramanyar Temple at Batu Caves temple complex in Malaysia is dedicated to Murugan.
Kartik puja is celebrated in Cuttack along with various other parts of the state during the last phases of Hindu month of Kartik.
This led to a very interesting name : Devasenapati viz.
Although Lord Shiva knew the answer, to make a play to test his child's knowledge, Lord Shiva bowed to Muruga.
During his childhood Lord Muruga made several corrections in the form of worship and rules among sages and even Bramha (God of creation).
In London, Sri Murugan Temple in Manor park is a well-known temple.
The town was popular as a place of pilgrimage for Hindus from India and Sri Lanka by the 15th century.
There is a very famous temple dedicated to Him in the town of Pehowa in Haryana and this temple is very well known in the adjoining areas, especially because women are not allowed anywhere close to it.
The Sri Sivasubramaniar Temple, located in the Sihl Valley in Adliswil, is the most famous and largest Hindu temple in Switzerland.
Kartikeya's presence in the religious and cultural sphere can be seen at least from the Gupta age.
The child is finally born in this forest (vana) with six faces: '''eesanam''', '''Tathpurusham''', '''vamadevam''', '''agoram''', '''sathyojatham''' and '''adhomugam'''.
Rituals like nagaradhane are unique to Uttara Kannada region of Karnataka.
Amongst them are Atiyambur Sri Subramanya Temple in Kanhangad Kasaragod, Payyannur Subramanya Swamy temple in Payyanur, Panmana Subramanya Swamy temple in Panmana and the Subramanya temple in Haripad.
In Midlands, Leicester Shri Siva Murugan Temple is gaining popularity recently.
The temple of Kartikeya Swami is visited every year by thousands of devotees when the trek is opened in the month of March–April.
The Sangam poetry divided space and Tamil land into five allegorical areas (''tinai'') and, according to the ''Tirumurukāṟtruuppaṭai'' ( c. 400–450), attributed to the great Sangam poet Nakkirar, Murugan was the presiding deity of the ''kuṟiñci'' (hilly tracts).
The ''āraṇyaparvan'' (first section of the third book) of the ''Mahabharata'' relates the legend of Kartikeya Skanda in considerable detail.
As an accolade, Indra gave his daughter Devasena in marriage to Muruga.
The Chandogya Upanishad refers to Skanda as the "way that leads to wisdom".
The first elaborate account of Kartikeya's origin occurs in the ''Mahabharata''.
Daksha publicly insulted Shiva in a Yagna ceremony, and Dakshayani immolated herself.
Thiruchendur Murugan Temple
narrates that Shiva first wed Dakshayani (also named Sati), the first incarnation of Adi Shakthi the granddaughter of Brahma, and the daughter of Daksha.
Located near Chennai, Murugan reclaimed his inner peace after waging a war with Asuras and married Valli here.
Lord Shiva granted the boon to him.
He is seen in the Gupta sculptures and in the temples of Ellora and Elephants.
During His bachelorhood, Lord Murugan is also regarded as '''Kumaraswami''' (or Bachelor God), ''Kumara'' meaning a bachelor and ''Swami'' meaning God.
In Bansberia (Hooghly district) Kartik Puja festival is celebrated like Durga puja for consecutive four days.
Skanda Vale in West Wales was founded by Guruji, a Tamil devotee of Subramaniam, and its primary deity is Murugan.
The ''Skanda Purana'' is devoted to the narrative of Kartikeya.
Murugan is seen with both his consorts Deivanai and Valli.
There is also a popular temple of Kartikeya called Kartik Swami Mandir in the Panchavati region of Nashik, Maharashtra.
The Upanishads also constantly make a reference to a Supreme Being called ''Guha'', the indweller.
The ''Vel'' was given to him by his mother, Parvati, and embodies her energy and power.
After her refusal, the Guardian cut one of her arms.
He is the Commander-in-Chief of the army of the devas.
The name Kaarthigeya of Lord Muruga was kept after these Kaarthigaas to honour them by Shiva.
The worship of Kumāra was one of the six principal sects of Hinduism at the time of Adi Shankara.
In Toronto, Canada, Canada Kanthasamy Temple is known amongst many Hindus in Canada.
Numerous temples exist throughout the island.
After a courtship, they were married.
He is also the primary deity of the Kaumaram sect of Hinduism.
Where Muruga is now the teacher (guru) and Lord Shiva his student.
Local legend holds that Murugan alighted in Kataragama and was smitten by Valli, one of the local girls.
Muruga rides a peacock and wields a bow in battle.
Kartik is also associated to the Babu Culture prevailed in historic Kolkata, and hence, many traditional old Bengali paintings still show Kartik dressed in traditional Bengali style.
One of the major Puranas, the Skanda Purana is dedicated to him.
While Murugan speeds around the world thrice to win the contest for the fruit, Ganesha circumambulates Shiva and Parvati thrice as an equivalent and is given the fruit.
Kartikeya symbols are based on the weapons – '''Vel''', the Divine Spear or Lance that he carries and his mount the peacock.
His six heads represent the six ''siddhis'' bestowed upon yogis over the course of their spiritual development.
* '''Kallumalai Temple''' in Ipoh
She reunited the six children as one and produced him before the Lord Shiva.
then the divine spark appeared and settled in six lotuses in Saravana lake nearby Ganges river.
He was also known as Mahasena and the Kadamba dynasty worshiped him by this name.
He is also called Kumara (Tamil and Sanskrit for "youth").
Lord Skanda become furious and stopped bramha and questioned him on the Pranavaa-manthra "OM" (Universal creational hymn).
This corresponds to his role as the ''bestower of siddhis''.
The Nallur Kandaswamy temple, the Maviddapuram Kandaswamy Temple and the Sella Channithy Temple near Valvettiturai are the three foremost Murugan temples in Jaffna.
Later the six children in six lotuses was taken care and nurtured by the Kaarthigaas (angels of stars) by the order of Lord Shiva.
Here, the main deity is made out of an amalgam of nine minerals popularly called Navabashanam and was established by Saint Bhogar.
Thiruchendur, Toothukudi district
Suraabaathman got furious and vowed to kill devas as a revenge.
Meanwhile, Ajaamughi (sister of Suraabaathman) was in search of Indraani to produce her as a "prize" for her brother Suraabaathman as a result of victory of their war against the devas.
Subramanya is also a major deity among the Hindus of Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
His peacock mount symbolizes his destruction of the ego.
'''Karthikeya''' (''''; , Tamil: ''Kārttikēyaṉ'' கார்த்திகேயன்) also known as '''Murugan''', '''Skanda''' and '''Subramaniyam''' is the Hindu god of war.
In the USA, Shiva Murugan Temple in Concord, Northern California and Murugan Temple of North America in Maryland, Washington DC region are popular.
Lord Shiva listened to his philosophical teachings related to "OM".
As Muruga is worshipped predominantly in Tamil Nadu, many of his names are of Tamil origin.
The rishis and other deities requested Lord Shiva's help.Then the Lord accepted their request and opened his third eye .
Some Sanskrit epics and puranas indicate that he was the elder son of Shiva.
Thaipusam is one of the important festivals celebrated.
His army's standard depicts a rooster.
Sri Thandayuthapani Temple in Tank Road, Singapore is a major Hindu temple where each year the Thaipusam festival takes place with devotees of Lord Muruga carrying Kavadis seeking penance and blessings of the Lord.
This commemorates the day he was given a ''Vel'' or lance by his mother in order to vanquish the asuras.
The actual wives then become the Pleiades.
Located at 5&nbsp;km from Kumbakonam, the temple is built on an artificial hill.
The details are given in Balakanda sargas 35,36 and 37.
The god is known by different names such as Karthikeya, Skanda, Vadivela and Muruga at various temples.
Murugan is one of the most important deities worshipped by the Tamil Hindus in Malaysia and other South-East Asian countries such as Singapore and Indonesia.
Kalidasa made the birth of Kumara the subject of a lyrical epic, the Kumaarasambhavam.
Kartikeya is worshiped during Durga Puja in Odisha as well as in various Shiva temples throughout the year.
Scholars such as Paul Younger and Heinz Bechert speculate that rituals practiced by the native priests of Kataragama temple betray Vedda ideals of propitiation.
While doing so, he says: "Among generals, I am Skanda, the lord of war."
of Kumara Kottam in the city of Kanchipuram.
Later he married valli  in "thiru -tanaigai-malai"(tirutani)in Tamil Nadu.
The temple commemorates the place where Murugan worshiped Shiva and won a decisive victory over demon Soorapadman.
He performed severe penance to an extent that Lord Shiva pleased by his austerity and appeared before him.
In the United Kingdom, Highgate Hill Murugan temple is one of the oldest and most famous.
There is a 42.7-m-high statue of Murugan at the entrance to the Batu Caves, which is the largest Lord Murugan statue in the world.
There are many temples dedicated to Subramanya in Kerala.
In Bengal, traditionally, many people drop images of Kartik inside the boundaries of different households, who all are either newly married, or else, intend to get a son to carry on with their ancestry.
His six most important shrines in India are the Six Abodes of Murugan also known  ''Arupadaiveedu'' '''அறுபடை வீடு''' literally meaning ''six warhouses'', temples located in Tamil Nadu.
Located on the outskirts of Madurai on a hillock with a holy stream nearby called "Nupura Gangai".
Ajaamughi then with tears approached her brother Suraabaathmaan and narrated the incident that happened.
Kartik purnima is celebrated with much joy and in a grand fashion in Cuttack, Jamadhar, Rekabibajar of Jajpur District and other parts in the state.
In South India, it is believed that he is the younger brother of the Ganesha.
