It is the largest stadium in Nepal with a capacity of 25,000 spectators, built in 1956.
The city was designed in the shape of ''Chandrahrasa'', the sword of Manjushri.
Believers in Pashupatinath (mainly Hindus) are allowed to enter the temple premises, but non-Hindu visitors are allowed to view the temple only from the across the Bagmati River.
The early years of the Malla era were turbulent, with raids and attacks from Khas and Turk Muslims.
Other prominent clubs include MMC, Machhindra FC, Tribhuwan Army Club (TAC) and MPC.
*  The Taragaon Museum
It seeks to document 50 years of research and cultural heritage conservation of the Kathmandu Valley, documenting what artists photographers architects anthropologists from abroad had contributed in the second half of the 20th century.
Narayanhity was a new palace, in front of the old palace built in 1915, and was built in 1970 in the form of a contemporary Pagoda.
The influx of many Tibetan refugees from China has seen the construction of over 50 Tibetan gompas (monasteries) around Boudhanath.
* The Natural History Museum
The largest ethnic groups are Newar (29.6%), Mongoloid (25.1% Kirat, Gurung, Magars, Tamang, Sherpa etc.
The Taragaon Museum presents the modern history of the Kathmandu Valley.
Trichandra College (the first college of Nepal), Durbar School (the first modern school of Nepal), and Bir Hospital (the first hospital of Nepal) were built in Kathmandu during this era.
Manufacturing is also important and accounts for 19% of the revenue that Kathmandu generates.
The artistic edifices have now become places of worship in the everyday life of the people, therefore a roster is maintained to observe annual festivals.
During medieval times, the city was sometimes called Kāntipur (कान्तिपुर).
The structure collapsed during the major earthquake on 25 April 2015.
Following the end of the Maoist insurgency, there was a significant rise of 509,956 tourist arrivals in 2009.
KMC's constant endeavor is to enhance its interaction with SAARC countries, other International agencies and many other major cities of the world to achieve better urban management and developmental programs for Kathmandu.
Amarkosh, a Sanskrit-Nepal Bhasa dictionary from 1381 AD, was also found.
The major religions are Hinduism and Buddhism.
Consumption of beef is very uncommon and considered taboo in many places.
The city contains several theaters, including the National Dance Theatre in Kanti Path, the Ganga Theatre, the Himalayan Theatre and the Aarohan Theater Group founded in 1982.
Newar artists travelled extensively throughout Asia, creating religious art for their neighbors.
The ancient history of Kathmandu is described in its traditional myths and legends.
The museums display unique artifacts and paintings from the 5th century CE to the present day, including archeological exportation.
Many other restaurants have opened to accommodate locals, expatriates, and tourists.
The BBC also has an FM broadcasting station in Kathmandu.
Ropeways are another important transportation means in hilly terrain.
An international stadium for swimming events is located in Satdobato, Lalitpur, near Kathmandu.
Stone inscriptions are an ubiquitous element at heritage sites and are key sources for the history of Nepal
According to the National Population Census of 2011, the total population of Kathmandu city was 975,543 with an annual growth rate of 6.12% with respect to the population figure of 2001.
Tea is widely served but is extremely weak by western standards.
Sanskrit schools were specially set up in Kathmandu and in the Terai region to inculcate traditional Hindu culture and practices originated from Nepal.
Sikhism is practiced primarily in Gurudwara at Kupundole.
A recent extension to the international terminal has made the distance to the airplanes shorter and in October 2009 it became possible to fly directly to Kathmandu from Amsterdam with Arkefly.
The Bagmati River which flows through Kathmandu is considered a holy river both by Hindus and Buddhists, and many Hindu temples are located on the banks of this river.
A large number of restaurants in Kathmandu have since opened, catering Nepali cuisine, Tibetan cuisine, Chinese cuisine and Indian cuisine in particular.
It is a very popular tourist site.
There are three preserved Durbar Squares in Kathmandu valley and one unpreserved in Kirtipur.
The current Royal Kumari, Matina Shakya, age four, was installed in October 2008 by the Maoist government that replaced the monarchy.
It pioneered the production of low cost intraocular lenses (IOLs), which are used in cataract surgery.
Chhyaang, tongba (fermented millet or barley) and rakshi are alcoholic beverages from other parts of Nepal which are found in Kathmandu.
Regionally, several Nepali airlines operate from the city, including Agni Air, Buddha Air, Cosmic Air, Nepal Airlines and Yeti Airlines, to other major towns across Nepal.
- 102.4&nbsp;MHz, Radio Upatyaka - 87.6&nbsp;MHz etc.
Hindu and Buddhist pilgrims from all over the world visit Kathmandu's religious sites such as Pashupatinath, Swayambhunath, Boudhanath and Budhanilkantha.
It is spread over five acres.
The stadium was renovated with Chinese help before the 8th South Asian Games were held in Kathmandu and had floodlights installed.
The actual structure of the Museum showcases restoration and rehabilitation efforts to preserve the built heritage of Kathmandu.
Continental cuisine can be found in selected places.
The Licchavi era was followed by the Malla era.
As a precautionary measure, firemen were sent to the areas which were designated as accident-prone areas.
From centuries past, Lhasa Newar merchants of Kathmandu have conducted trade across the Himalaya and contributed to spreading art styles and Buddhism across Central Asia.
It also runs morning and evening classes in the schools of art.
Located about  from the center and northeastern outskirts of Kathmandu, the stupa's massive mandala makes it one of the largest spherical stupas in Nepal.
Kathmandu is also known informally as "KTM" or the "tri-city".
The National Library of Nepal is located in Patan.
It is surrounded with a brick wall with 147 niches, each with four or five prayer wheels engraved with the mantra, ''om mani padme hum''.
Today, Kathmandu is not only the capital of the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal, but also the headquarters of the Bagmati Zone.
In the Kathmandu Valley, which is representative of its valley's climate, the average summer temperature varies from .
* Hanumandhoka Palace Complex
There are pentagonal Toran above each of the four sides, with statues engraved on them.
"Yen" is the shorter form of ''Yambu'' (यम्बु), which originally referred to the northern half of Kathmandu.
One of these barracks is still in use at Bhadrakali (in front of Singha Durbar).
Kathmandu is connected by the Tribhuvan Highway to the south, Prithvi Highway to the west and Araniko Highway to the north.
There are over 108 traditional monasteries (Bahals and Bahis) in Kathmandu based on Newar Buddhism.
The seven monuments zones cover an area of , with the buffer zone extending to .
Kathmandu has a larger proportion of tea drinkers than coffee drinkers.
During the Rana period, a ropeway was constructed between Kathmandu (then Mathathirtha) to Dhorsing (Makawanpur) of over  in length, which carried cargo of 8 tonnes per hour.
There are several four-star hotels such as Hotel Vaishali, Hotel Narayani, The Blue Star and Grand Hotel.
In 1661, they passed through Nepal on their way from Tibet to India, and reported that they reached "Cadmendu", the capital of Nepal kingdom.''''''
It was built under the reign of King Laxmi Narsingha Malla.
The squares were severely damaged in the April 2015 Nepal earthquake.
The kings of this period directly influenced or involved themselves in the construction of public buildings, squares, and temples, as well as the development of water spouts, the institutionalization of trusts (called guthis), the codification of laws, the writing of dramas, and the performance of plays in city squares.
The religious art of Nepal and Kathmandu in particular consists of an iconic symbolism of the Mother Goddesses such as: Bhavani, Durga, Gaja-Lakshmi, Hariti-Sitala, Mahsishamardini, Saptamatrika (seven mother goddesses), and Sri-Lakshmi(wealth-goddess).
Most of the cuisines found in Kathmandu are non-vegetarian.
From the 3rd century BC, apart from the Hindu gods and goddesses, Buddhist monuments from the Ashokan period (it is said that Ashoka visited Nepal in 250&nbsp;BC) have embellished Nepal in general and the valley in particular.
Kasthamandap stands at the intersection of two ancient trade routes linking India and Tibet at Maru square.
The Tribhuvan Museum contains artifacts related to the King Tribhuvan (1906–1955).
Descriptions of buildings such as Managriha, Kailaskut Bhawan, and Bhadradiwas Bhawan have been found in the surviving journals of travelers and monks who lived during this era.
For example, Araniko led a group of his compatriot artists through Tibet and China.
Football and Cricket are the most popular sports among the younger generation in Nepal and there are several stadiums in the city.
A Jain temple is present in Gyaneshwar, where Jains practice their faith.
The largest (according to number of students and colleges), oldest and most distinguished university in Nepal is located in Kirtipur and is called Tribhuvan University.
Books have been found from this era that describe their tantric tradition (e.g.
The literal meaning of Durbar Square is a "place of palaces".
Hanuman Dhoka is a complex of structures with the Royal Palace of the Malla kings and of the Shah dynasty.
They have contributed to the spread of Christianity and the building of churches in Nepal and in Kathmandu, in particular.
The lake was cut drained by Bodhisatwa Manjusri  with his sword and the water was evacuated out from there and he established a city called Manjupattan and made Dharmakar the ruler of the valley land.
Sanskrit language therefore was preferred and people were encouraged to learn it even by attending Sanskrit learning centers in Terai.
They started a forest monastery in Sankhu.
Then lord Krishna came to Nepal, killed Banasur and again drained out water.
Among the indigenous Newar people, Kathmandu is known as ''Yeṃ Deśa'' (येँ देश), and Patan and Bhaktapur are known as ''Yala Deśa'' (यल देश) and ''Khwopa Deśa'' (ख्वप देश).
The outer quadrangle has the Kasthamandap, Kumari Ghar, and Shiva-Parvati Temple; the inner quadrangle has the Hanuman Dhoka palace.
Institute of Medicine, the central college of Tribhuwan University is the first medical college of Nepal and is located in Maharajgunj, Kathmandu.
Kathmandu is headquarters of the surrounding Kathmandu District.
The temple is built in the pagoda style of architecture, with cubic constructions, carved wooden rafters (tundal) on which they rest, and two-level roofs made of copper and gold.
The name of Kathmandu is a derivative of the word ''Kasthamandap''.
* Narayanhity Palace Museum
There is a strong tradition of ''buff'' consumption in Kathmandu, especially among Newars, which is not found in other parts of Nepal.
Ailaa and thwon (alcohol made from rice) are the alcoholic beverages of Kathmandu, found in all the local bhattis (alcohol serving eateries).
However, shops and bars in Kathmandu widely sell western and Nepali beers.
To the north the urban area extends into several Village Development Committees.
This, combined with its location between India and China, helped establish Kathmandu as an important trading center over the centuries.
The name Nepal probably originates from this city Nayapala.
The Council administers the Metropolitan area of Kathmandu city through its 177 elected representatives and 20 nominated members.
Kathmandu is the core of Nepal's largest urban agglomeration located in the Kathmandu Valley consisting of Lalitpur, Kirtipur, Madhyapur Thimi, Bhaktapur and a number of smaller communities.
There is a severe shortage of water for household purposes such as drinking, bathing, cooking and washing.
The city has a rich history, spanning nearly 2000 years, as inferred from inscriptions found in the valley.
According to the records of the Spiritual Assembly of the Baha'is of Nepal, there are approximately 300 Baha'is in Kathmandu valley.
The Muslims forbid eating ''buff'' as from Quran while Hindus eat all varieties except Cow's meat as they consider Cow to be a goddess and symbol of purity.
The Gorkha Kingdom ended the Malla confederation after the Battle of Kathmandu in 1768.
They intermarried with Nepali royalty, and this led to the Malla era.
Rainfall has been recorded at about  for the Kathmandu valley, and averages  for the city of Kathmandu.
The earliest Western reference to Kathmandu appears in an account of Jesuit Fathers Johann Grueber and Albert d'Orville.
The high level of tourism is attributed to the natural grandeur of the Himalayas and the rich cultural heritage of the country.
Boudhanath became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1979.
There are 133 festivals held in the year.
These museums include the Birendra museum, which contains items related to the second-last monarch, Birendra of Nepal.
Nepali is the most commonly spoken language in the city.
The oldest of these findings is a statue, found in Maligaon, that was dated at 185 AD.
Kathmandu contains many notable art galleries.
The city is called "Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap" in a vow that Buddhist priests still recite to this day.
It covers a wide range of subjects including history, law, art, religion, and philosophy, as well as a Sanskrit manual of Tantra, which is believed to be over 1,000 years old.
The staple food of most people in Kathmandu is dal bhat.
In 1944, the fire service was extended to the neighboring cities of Lalitpur and Bhaktapur.
The city is directly bounded by several other municipalities of the Kathmandu valley: south of the Bagmati by Lalitpur Sub-Metropolitan City (Patan) with which it today forms one urban area surrounded by a ring road, to the southwest by Kirtipur Municipality and to the east by Madyapur Thimi Municipality.
It is surrounded by four major hills: Shivapuri, Phulchoki, Nagarjun, and Chandragiri.
It has the most advanced infrastructure of any urban area in Nepal, and its economy is focused on tourism, which accounted for 3.8% of Nepal's GDP in 1995/96.
Restoration works began in 2010 to rehabilitate the Taragaon hostel into the Taragaon Museum.
Thus, Kathmandu is also known as Kāṣṭhamaṇḍap.
Despite the initial hardships, Kathmandu rose to prominence again and, during most of the Malla era, dominated the trade between India and Tibet.
Since then, tourism has improved as the country turned into a Democratic Republic.
This building was constructed in the early 19th century by General Bhimsen Thapa.
Nepal's art and architecture is an amalgamation of two ancient religions, Hinduism and Buddhhism.
The eastern wing, with ten courtyards, is the oldest part, dating to the mid-16th century.
The Hanumandhoka Palace, a lavish medieval palace complex in the Durbar, contains three separate museums of historic importance.
This amalgamation is also reflected in the planning and exhibitions in museums and art galleries throughout Kathmandu and its sister cities of Patan and Bhaktapur.
Archaeologists believe it is two thousand years old.
An iron tower was erected to monitor the city and watch for fire.
Nepali currency became the standard currency in trans-Himalayan trade.
The Mahendra Museum is dedicated to king Mahendra of Nepal (1920–1972).
The team of Dr. Sanduk Ruit in the same hospital pioneered sutureless small-incision cataract surgery (SICS), a technique which has been used to treat 4 million of the world's 20 million people with cataract blindness.
Kathmandu valley is described as "an enormous treasure house of art and sculptures", which are made of wood, stone, metal, and terracotta, and found in profusion in temples, shrines, stupas, gompas, chaityasm and palaces.
Kathmandu's trade is an ancient profession that flourished along an offshoot of the Silk Road which linked India and Tibet.
This procedure is followed in other temples around India, which were sanctified by Adi Shankaracharya.
Kathmandu has the only recognised international cricket ground in the country, at a university site in Kirtipur.
The two-story structure was made entirely of wood, and used no iron nails nor supports.
The city was surrounded by eight barracks guarded by Ajimas.
It holds biannual meetings to review, process and approve the annual budget and make major policy decisions.
"Kānti" is one of the names of the Goddess Lakshmi, and "pur" means place.
This zone is followed by the ''Cool Temperate Zone'' with elevation varying between .
During the Hindu Lichchavi era (c. 400 to 750), various monasteries and orders were created which successively led to the formation of Newar Buddhism, which is still practiced in the primary liturgical language of Hinduism, Sanskrit.
In 1966, a fire service was established in Kathmandu airport.
Another smaller settlement called Yengal was present in the southern half of old Kathmandu, near Manjupattan.
It is headed by a commissioner of police.
It is also the hub of the country's economy.
There was also a devastating earthquake which claimed the lives of a third of Kathmandu's population, including the king Abhaya Malla.
The nine-storey tower Dharahara was originally built during this era.
During a 2013 cold front, the winter temperatures of Kathmandu dropped to , and the lowest temperature was recorded on January 10, 2013, at .
The Nepal Art Council Gallery, located in the Babar Mahal, on the way to Tribhuvan International Airport contains artwork of both national and international artists and extensive halls regularly used for art exhibitions.
The chief mourner (usually the first son) who lights the funeral pyre must take a holy riverwater bath immediately after cremation.
Kathmandu exports handicrafts, artworks, garments, carpets, pashmina, paper; trade accounts for 21% of its finances.
Islam is practised in Kathmandu but Muslims are a minority, accounting for about 4.2% of the population of Nepal.
The Seven Monument Zones (Mzs) inscribed originally in 1979 and with a minor modification in 2006 are Durbar squares of Hanuman Dhoka, Patan and Bhaktapur, Hindu temples of Pashupatinath and Changunarayan, the Buddhist stupas of Swayambhu and Boudhanath.
* The National Art Gallery
'''Kathmandu'''(; Nepali pronunciation: ) is the capital and largest municipality of Nepal.
Kathmandu also houses some international standard cinema theatres and multiplexes, such as QFX Cinemas, Cine De Chef, Fcube Cinemas, Q's Cinemas and Big Movies.
The Baha'is also have classes for children at the National Centre and other localities in Kathmandu.
This created the basis of Newar Buddhism, which is the only surviving Sanskrit-based Buddhist tradition in the world.
Metropolitan Kathmandu is divided into five sectors: the Central Sector, the East Sector, the North Sector, the City Core and the West Sector.
The priests who perform the services at this temple have been Brahmins from Karnataka, South India since the time of Malla king Yaksha Malla.
Kumari, or Kumari Devi, is the tradition of worshipping young pre-pubescent girls as manifestations of the divine female energy or ''devi'' in South Asian countries.
Hotels like Hyatt Regency, De L'Annapurna and Hotel Yak & Yeti are among the five-star hotels providing casinos as well.
Cultural continuity has been maintained for centuries in the exclusive worship of goddesses and deities in Kathmandu and the rest of the country.
Religious and cultural festivities form a major part of the lives of people residing in Kathmandu.
This temple, also known as ''Maru Satal'' in the Newar language, was built in 1596 by King Laxmi Narsingh Malla.
Architecturally notable buildings from this era include Kathmandu Durbar Square, Patan Durbar Square, Bhaktapur Durbar Square, the former durbar of Kirtipur, Nyatapola, Kumbheshwar, the Krishna temple, and others.
However, trade declined because of continual war with neighboring nations.
Notable hospitals include Bir Hospital, Tribhuwan University Institute of Medicine (Teaching Hospital), Patan Hospital, Kathmandu Model Hospital, Scheer Memorial Hospital, Om Hospital,  Norvic Hospital, Grande International Hospital, Nobel Hospital.
It is the second oldest university in Nepal, established in November 1991.
In 1956, air transportation was established and the Tribhuvan Highway, between Kathmandu and Raxaul (at India's border), was started.
Kathmandu is a center for art in Nepal, displaying the work of contemporary artists in the country and also collections of historical artists.
''Buff'' (meat of water buffalo) is very common.
Kathmandu is the gateway to tourism in Nepal.
The museum was established in 1928 as a collection house of war trophies and weapons, and the initial name of this museum was ''Chhauni Silkhana'', meaning "the stone house of arms and ammunition".
The trade route also led to cultural exchange as well.
The ward's profile documents for the 35 wards prepared by the Kathmandu Metropolitan Council is detailed and provides information for each ward on population, the structure and condition of houses, the type of roads, educational, health and financial institutions, entertainment facilities, parking space, security provisions, etc.
Asan is a bazaar and ceremonial square on the old trade route to Tibet, and provides a fine example of a traditional neighbourhood.
People have been using mineral water bottle and mineral water tanks for all the purposes related to water.
Kathmandu is famous for lokta paper and pashmina shawls.
In 2013, Kathmandu was ranked third among the top 10 travel destinations on the rise in the world by TripAdvisor, and ranked first in Asia.
Musical performances are organized in cultural venues.
They have a National Office located in Shantinagar, Baneshwor.
A mini theater is also located at the Hanumandhoka Durbar Square, established by the Durbar Conservation and Promotion Committee.
This marked the beginning of the modern era in Kathmandu.
Jhochhen Tol, also known as ''Freak Street'', is Kathmandu's original traveler's haunt, made popular by the hippies of the 1960s and 1970s; it remains a popular alternative to Thamel.
From a mere 6,179 tourists in 1961/62, the number increased to 491,504 in 1999/2000.
Kumari is believed to be the bodily incarnation of the goddess Taleju (the Nepali name for Durga) until she menstruates, after which it is believed that the goddess vacates her body.
During the Rana regime, Kathmandu's alliance shifted from anti-British to pro-British; this led to the construction of the first buildings in the style of Western European architecture.
