It was first performed in 2002 at the Hartford Stage.
The Hepburn children were raised to exercise freedom of speech and encouraged to think and debate on any topic they wished.
At her own insistence, Hepburn performed a fall into a canal and developed a chronic eye infection as a result.
She felt she had partially experienced parenthood through her much younger siblings, which fulfilled any need to have children of her own.
The actress led an active private life, reportedly swimming and playing tennis every morning.
She saw herself as having a happy nature, reasoning "I like life and I've been so lucky, why shouldn't I be happy?"
In 1991, Hepburn told a journalist, "I'm an atheist, and that's it.
Howard Hughes, Hepburn's partner at the time, sensed that the play could be her ticket back to Hollywood stardom and bought her the film rights before it even debuted on stage.
Hepburn filmed one final role in the television movie ''One Christmas'' (1994), for which she received a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination at 87 years old.
She was known to learn not only her own lines but also those of her costars.
She remained active into old age, making her final screen appearance in 1994 at the age of 87.
Both parents fought for social change in the US: Thomas Hepburn helped establish the New England Social Hygiene Association, which educated the public about venereal disease, while the elder Katharine headed the Connecticut Woman Suffrage Association and later campaigned for birth control with Margaret Sanger.
Hepburn challenged herself in the latter half of her life, as she regularly appeared in Shakespearean stage productions and tackled a range of literary roles.
She left halfway through the summer season, and continued studying with a drama tutor.
She received an Emmy nomination for 1986's ''Mrs.
She liked to study the text and character carefully beforehand, making sure she knew them thoroughly, and then to rehearse as much as possible and film multiple takes of a scene.
The movie won her a second BAFTA and a record fourth Academy Award.
''Variety'' observed that the role was "an obvious and entirely acceptable version of Hepburn's own public image."
In the winter of 1996, she was hospitalized with pneumonia.
Jane Fonda had purchased the screen rights for her father, actor Henry Fonda, and Hepburn sought to play opposite him in the role of quirky Ethel Thayer.
They were careful not to be seen in public together, and maintained separate residences.
The production then went on tour.
In 1991 she told a journalist, "I think I'm always the same.
Hepburn's final appearance in a theatrically released film, and her first since ''Grace Quigley'' ten years earlier, was ''Love Affair'' (1994).
The protective attitude thawed as she aged; beginning with a two-hour-long interview on ''The Dick Cavett Show'' in 1973, Hepburn became increasingly open with the public.
Hepburn was enthusiastic about the film, but it met with a tepid response and she was described as miscast.
The idea for the film was proposed to her by Garson Kanin in 1941, who recalled how Hepburn contributed to the script.
The actress took vocal lessons six times a week in preparation for the show.
Although she struggled to adapt to the nature of film acting, Hepburn was fascinated by the industry from the start.
Hepburn also holds the record for the longest time span between first and last Oscar nominations, at 48 years.
Her Broadway debut came on November 12, 1928, at the Cort Theatre, but reviews for the show were poor and it closed after eight nights.
* 28th Academy Awards (1956): Best Actress, nomination, for ''Summertime''
By the time of its release in October, Hepburn's career had been significantly affected by her public opposition to the growing anti-communist movement in Hollywood.
Undeterred, Hepburn joined forces with the producer Arthur Hopkins and accepted the role of a schoolgirl in ''These Days''.
With her unconventional lifestyle and the independent characters she brought to the screen, Hepburn epitomized the "modern woman" in the 20th-century United States and is remembered as an important cultural figure.
* 32nd Academy Awards (1960): Best Actress, nomination, for ''Suddenly, Last Summer''
Off screen, Hepburn lived in a manner ahead of her time; she thus came to symbolize the "modern woman" and played a part in changing attitudes towards the gender.
She remained close to her family throughout her life.
It was a critical and commercial failure, and Hepburn considered it the worst film on her resume.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences library and the New York Public Library hold collections of Hepburn's personal papers.
It wasn't difficult for me to play those women, because I'm the maiden aunt."
Hepburn's second film was ''Christopher Strong'' (1933), the story of an aviator and her affair with a married man.
* 13th Academy Awards (1941): Best Actress, nomination, for ''The Philadelphia Story''
She would not give interviews and denied requests for autographs, which earned her the nickname "Katharine of Arrogance".
Less success that year came from ''The Iron Petticoat'' (1956), a reworking of the classic comedy ''Ninotchka'', with Bob Hope.
It went on to be a small success.
Following the completion of ''Long Day's Journey Into Night'', Hepburn took a break in her career to care for ailing Spencer Tracy.
She did not work again until 1967's ''Guess Who's Coming to Dinner'', her ninth film with Tracy.
Hepburn said she realized from a young age that she was the product of "two very remarkable parents", and credited her "enormously lucky" upbringing with providing the foundation for her success.
She was not universally revered by feminists, however, who were angered by her public declarations that women "cannot have it all," meaning a family and a career.
Two years of intense work had left her exhausted, however, and her friend Constance Collier wrote that Hepburn was "on the verge of a nervous breakdown".
The first deals with her relationship with Spencer Tracy, and the second covers her early years in Hollywood (based on William Mann's account).
As a child, Hepburn joined her mother on several "Votes For Women" demonstrations.
Before she was given leave, RKO asked that she film ''Spitfire'' (1934).
In Martin Scorsese's 2004 biopic of Howard Hughes, ''The Aviator'', Hepburn was portrayed by Cate Blanchett, who won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance.
Her work earned a Tony Award nomination for Best Actress in a Musical.
The play opened March 11, 1932, at the Morosco Theatre on Broadway.
On the strength of ''A Bill of Divorcement'', RKO signed the actress to a long-term contract.
She found a niche playing middle-aged spinsters, such as in ''The African Queen'' (1951), a persona the public embraced.
Hepburn's next film was ''Undercurrent'' (1946), a film noir with Robert Taylor and Robert Mitchum that was poorly received.
In October 1952 it opened at the Shubert Theatre, where despite a lukewarm critical response it sold out its ten-week run.
In 2004, in accordance with Hepburn's wishes, her belongings were put up for auction with Sotheby's in New York City.
''Guess Who's Coming to Dinner'' was a triumphant return for Hepburn and her most commercially successful picture to that point.
The television movie ''The Corn Is Green'' (1979), which was filmed in Wales, followed.
The pair remained friends until his death in 1979.
Hepburn is the subject of a one-woman play, ''Tea at Five'', written by Matthew Lombardo.
In 1976, Hepburn returned to Broadway for a three-month run of Enid Bagnold's play ''A Matter of Gravity''.
The adventure comedy was one of the biggest failures of her career—the screenwriter James Prideaux, who worked with Hepburn, later wrote that it "died at the moment of release" and referred to it as her "lost film".
Hepburn was under pressure to perform several sports to a high standard, many of which did not end up in the film.
Despite this, Harris moved the play to New York without further rehearsal.
Berg describes how the character was crafted to have audiences "laugh at her enough that they would ultimately sympathize with her", which Hepburn felt was crucial in "recreating" her public image.
With Tracy determined to conceal the relationship with Hepburn from his wife, it had to remain private.
Before filming began, Hepburn shrewdly noted, "I don't want to make a grand entrance in this picture.
She had been introduced to him a year earlier by their mutual friend Cary Grant.
Three years later Bryn Mawr College, Hepburn's alma mater, launched the Katharine Houghton Hepburn Center.
It received poor notices but was a financial success, confirming the popularity of the Tracy–Hepburn pairing.
A. Scott Berg knew Hepburn well in her later years, and said that while she was demanding, she retained a sense of humility and humanity.
Her reputation at a low, the next film RKO offered her was ''Mother Carey's Chickens'', a B movie with poor prospects.
Hepburn often expressed her gratitude toward Smith for his financial and moral support in the early days of her career, and in her autobiography called herself "a terrible pig" for exploiting his love.
''On Golden Pond'' was a success, the second-highest grossing film of 1981.
In 1929, Hepburn turned down a role with the Theatre Guild to play the lead in ''Death Takes a Holiday''.
That year, she was voted "Favorite Motion Picture Actress" by the People's Choice Awards.
It was tailored to showcase the actress, with the character of socialite Tracy Lord incorporating a mixture of humor, aggression, nervousness, and vulnerability.
The role of eccentric Mrs.
The picture was a failure critically and financially, and reviews targeted Hepburn for giving a misguided performance.
She rarely appeared in public, even avoiding restaurants, and once wrestled a camera out of a photographer's hand when he took a picture without asking.
It was not until her 1991 autobiography, ''Me: Stories of My Life,'' that Hepburn revealed her true birth date.
It later went on a successful nationwide tour.
Hopkins promptly hired Hepburn as the lead understudy in Philip Barry's play ''Holiday''.
After four years in the theatre, favorable reviews of her work on Broadway brought her to the attention of Hollywood.
She was given a part in the following week's show, but her second performance was less well received.
Hepburn appeared in a number of plays with a summer stock company in Ivoryton, Connecticut, and she proved to be a hit.
In 1984, Hepburn starred in the dark-comedy ''Grace Quigley'', the story of an elderly woman who enlists a hitman (Nick Nolte) to kill her.
The picture was a financial success, and her work as creepy aunt Violet Venable gave Hepburn her eighth Oscar nomination.
The picture was a success and Hepburn received positive reviews.
When asked why she had taken the role, she responded that she wanted to broaden her range and try everything while she still had time.
Harris's poor direction had eroded Hepburn's confidence, and she struggled with the performance.
This unsettled the self-assured Hepburn, but she continued to look for work.
Hepburn won four Academy Awards, the record number for a performer, and a total of 12 Oscar nominations for Best Actress—a number surpassed only by Meryl Streep.
According to reports, Hepburn was not an instinctive actor.
She approached the physical comedy of the film with confidence, and took tips on comedic timing from her costar Walter Catlett.
Hepburn was nominated for her third Academy Award for Best Actress, and won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress.
Filming took place in Montmajour Abbey in the south of France, an experience she loved despite being—according to director Anthony Harvey—"enormously vulnerable" throughout.
In early 1931, she was cast in the Broadway production of ''Art and Mrs.
With a genuine passion for the industry she committed heavily to each role and insisted on learning any necessary skills and performing stunts herself.
Her health began to deteriorate not long after her final screen appearance.
She would put on plays and perform for her neighbors with friends and siblings for 50 cents a ticket to raise money for the Navajo people.
Following this decline in her career, Hepburn took action to create her own comeback vehicle.
Due to this repeated character arc, Britton sees Hepburn as embodying the "contradictions" of the "nature and status of women", as the strong females she depicts are eventually "restored to a safe position within the status quo".
A week before opening, the lead was fired and replaced with Hepburn, which gave her a starring role only four weeks into her theatre career.
''Pat and Mike'' was the last film Hepburn completed on her MGM contract, making her free to select her own projects.
There was no such recurrence, and the picture was a commercial failure.
''Without Love'' received poor reviews, but a new Tracy–Hepburn picture was a big event and it was popular on release, selling a record number of tickets over Easter-weekend 1945.
Hepburn's legacy extends to fashion, where she was a pioneer for wearing trousers at a time when it was radical for a woman to do so.
He asked Hepburn to appear in the play ''The Lake'', which she agreed to do for a low salary.
She went back to the Guild and took an understudy role for minimum pay in ''A Month in the Country''.
Herb Golden of ''Variety'' stated, "It's Katharine Hepburn's picture&nbsp;...
In 1999, Hepburn was named by the American Film Institute as the greatest female star of Classic Hollywood Cinema.
She appeared in a range of genres, from screwball comedy to literary drama, and she received four Academy Awards for Best Actress—a record for any performer.
The day after graduating, she traveled to Baltimore to meet Edwin H. Knopf, who ran a successful stock theatre company.
She has a vital something that sets her apart from the picture galaxy."
Richard Garland of the ''New York World-Telegram'' wrote, "It's been many a night since so glowing a performance has brightened the Broadway scene."
Hepburn received an Emmy Award nomination for playing wistful Southern mother Amanda Wingfield, which opened her mind to future work on the small screen.
Moviegoers&nbsp;... think I'm too la-di-da or something.
Her repertoire was further improved when she appeared in Sidney Lumet's film version of Eugene O'Neill's ''Long Day's Journey Into Night'' (1962).
Hepburn claimed the main reason she had done it was the opportunity to ride in a hot-air balloon.
I believe there's nothing we can know except that we should be kind to each other and do what we can for other people."
Known for her fierce independence and spirited personality, Hepburn was a leading lady in Hollywood for more than 60 years.
These later roles have been described as "a fictional version of the typically feisty Kate Hepburn character" and critics have remarked that Hepburn was essentially playing herself.
Director George Cukor was impressed by what he saw: "There was this odd creature," he recalled, "she was unlike anybody I'd ever heard."
She is also named in ''Encyclopædia Britannica's'' list of "300 Women Who Changed the World", ''Ladies Home Journal'''s book ''100 Most Important Women of the 20th century'', ''Variety'' magazine's "100 Icons of the Century", and she is number 84 on VH1's list of the "200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time".
The event garnered $5.8 million, which Hepburn willed to her family.
In her eighties she was still playing tennis regularly, as indicated in her 1993 documentary ''All About Me''.
Film academic Andrew Britton wrote a monograph studying Hepburn's "key presence within classical Hollywood, a consistent, potentially radical disturbance", and pinpoints her "central" influence in bringing feminist issues to the screen.
Hepburn's next feature, ''Stage Door'' (1937), paired her with Ginger Rogers in a role which mirrored her own life—that of a wealthy society girl trying to make it as an actress.
In response to the question of why she stayed with Tracy for so long, despite the nature of their relationship, she said, "I honestly don't know.
* 29th Academy Awards (1957): Best Actress, nomination, for ''The Rainmaker''
* 54th Academy Awards (1982): Best Actress, '''win''', for ''On Golden Pond''
Roger Ebert noted that it was the first time she had looked frail, but that the "magnificent spirit" was still there and said her scenes "steal the show".
The couple married on December 12, 1928, when she was 21 and he was 29.
''Little Women'' was one of Hepburn's personal favorites and she was proud of her performance, later saying, "I defy anyone to be as good as Jo as I was".
Her early years in the film industry were marked with success, including an Academy Award for her third picture, ''Morning Glory'' (1933), but this was followed by a series of commercial failures which led her to be labeled "box office poison" in 1938.
The most significant relationship of Hepburn's life was with Spencer Tracy, her co-star in nine films.
* 15th Academy Awards (1943): Best Actress, nomination, for ''Woman of the Year''
Golf became a passion of Katharine's; she took daily lessons and became very adept, reaching the semi-final of the Connecticut Young Women's Golf Championship.
"I would have been a terrible mother," she told Berg, "because I'm basically a very selfish human being."
The same year, Hepburn portrayed Clara Wieck Schumann in ''Song of Love''.
Hepburn herself was proud of the role.
Williams was pleased with the performance, writing, "Kate is a playwright's dream-actress.
It received positive reviews and high ratings, and earned Hepburn her only Emmy Award.
She was released from the role after the playwright took a dislike to her, saying "She looks a fright, her manner is objectionable, and she has no talent", but then rehired when no other actress could be found.
The movie was nominated in all the major categories at the Academy Awards, and for the second year running Hepburn won the Oscar for Best Actress (shared with Barbra Streisand for ''Funny Girl'').
The public was also baffled by her boyish behavior and fashion choices, and she became a largely unpopular figure.
Her hair was cut short for the part, as her character masquerades as a boy for much of the film.
Meeting when she was 34 and he was 41, Tracy was initially wary of Hepburn, unimpressed by her dirty fingernails and suspecting that she was a lesbian, but Hepburn said she "knew right away that I found him irresistible."
She had a difficult relationship with the press, with whom she could be rude and provocative.
Later in life, she openly promoted birth control and supported abortion.
The majority of Hepburn's roles from this point were in television movies, which did not receive the critical praise of her earlier work in the medium but remained popular with audiences.
* 8th Academy Awards (1936): Best Actress, nomination, for ''Alice Adams''
Hepburn's next appearance was in ''The Madwoman of Chaillot'' (1969), which she filmed in Nice immediately after completing ''The Lion in Winter''.
As part of the deal she also received the director of her choice, George Cukor, and picked James Stewart and Cary Grant (to whom she ceded top-billing) as co-stars.
Hepburn was born in Hartford, Connecticut, on May 12, 1907, the second of six children.
In the 1970s, she began appearing in television films, which became the focus of her career in later life.
Hepburn has been honored with several memorials.
Hepburn left university determined to become an actress.
''The Lake'' previewed in Washington, D.C., where there was a large advance sale.
They separated in 1938, when Hepburn left Hollywood after being labeled "box office poison".
She played Rose Sayer, a prim spinster missionary living in German East Africa at the outbreak of World War I. Costarring Humphrey Bogart, ''The African Queen'' was shot mostly on location in the Belgian Congo, an opportunity Hepburn embraced.
By 1997, she had become very weak, was speaking and eating very little, and it was feared she would die.
She read extensively in preparation for the role, in which she starred opposite Peter O'Toole.
Again she played a lonely woman empowered by a love affair, and it became apparent that Hepburn had found a niche in playing "love-starved spinsters" that critics and audiences enjoyed.
She received a standing ovation, and joked with the audience, "I'm very happy I didn't hear anyone call out 'It's about time'."
She can work till everyone drops."
Her name was mentioned at the hearings of the House Un-American Activities Committee but Hepburn denied being a communist sympathizer.
Offered the role, Hepburn demanded $1,500 a week, a large amount for an unknown actress.
The anti-communist attitude in 1940s Hollywood prompted her to political activity, as she joined the Committee for the First Amendment.
The film was nominated for Best Picture at the Academy Awards, but it was not the box-office hit RKO had hoped for.
She was criticized for her shrill voice, and so left Baltimore to study with a voice tutor in New York City.
Critics praised the chemistry between the stars, and, says Higham, noted Hepburn's "increasing maturity and polish".
No other star, either, has become so unpopular so quickly for so long a time."
* 41st Academy Awards (1969): Best Actress, '''win''', for ''The Lion in Winter'' (shared with Barbra Streisand for ''Funny Girl'')
After a period of inactivity and ill health, Hepburn died in 2003 at the age of 96.
She kept a picture of Hicks in her bedroom throughout her life to "keep me humble."
Hepburn famously shunned the Hollywood publicity machine and refused to conform to society's expectations of women.
During its Los Angeles run, Hepburn fractured her hip, but she chose to continue the tour performing in a wheelchair.
Hepburn refused, and paid Harris $14,000 to close the production instead.
In 1986 she received a lifetime achievement award from the Council of Fashion Designers of America in recognition of the influence she played in women's fashion.
Regarding Hepburn's film legacy, broadcaster Sheridan Morley said she "broke the mold" for women in Hollywood, where she brought a new breed of strong-willed females to the screen.
Lauren Bacall, a close friend, later wrote of how "blindingly" in love Hepburn was with the actor.
The romantic drama ''Break of Hearts'' (1935) with Charles Boyer was poorly reviewed and also lost money.
Towards the end of 1936, Hepburn vied for the role of Scarlett O'Hara in ''Gone with the Wind''.
She spent two years resting and traveling, before committing to David Lean's romantic drama ''Summertime'' (1955).
Horton and Simmons write, "Confident, intelligent and witty, four-time Oscar winner Katharine Hepburn defied convention throughout her professional and personal life ... Hepburn provided an image of an assertive woman whom females could watch and learn from."
''A Woman Rebels'' (1936) followed, a Victorian era drama where Hepburn's character defied convention by having a child out of wedlock.
Raised in Connecticut by wealthy, progressive parents, Hepburn began to act while studying at Bryn Mawr College.
The studio disliked her changes, so Hepburn abandoned the project and was replaced with Maggie Smith.
The building includes a performance space and a Katharine Hepburn museum.
The movie dealt with the subject of interracial marriage, with Hepburn's niece, Katharine Houghton, playing her daughter.
* 35th Academy Awards (1963): Best Actress, nomination, for ''Long Day's Journey into Night''
She had been wary of the medium but it proved to be one of the main television events of the year, scoring high in the Nielsen ratings.
