Kaunas, along with Vilnius, became the scene of nearly constant demonstrations as the Lithuanians, embarked on a process of self-discovery.
*Aleksandras Stulginskis University
During it, the ultimatum presented by the Soviet Union, was debated.
A minor planet 73059 Kaunas, discovered by Lithuanian astronomers Kazimieras Černis and Justas Zdanavičius, in 2002, is named after the city of Kaunas.
The "Margasmiltė" company currently has been working on a project that concerns exploitation of Pagiriai anhydrite deposit.
There is an old circus tradition in Kaunas.
Kaunas natives Vytautas Landsbergis and Valdas Adamkus became the Head of state in 1990, and, respectively, in 1998 and 2004.
The first golf club "Elnias" in Lithuania was opened in Kaunas in 2000.
Following Hitler's invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, Soviet forces fled from Kaunas.
During the inter-war period Kaunas had a Jewish population of 35,000–40,000, about one quarter of the city's total population.
Kaunas hosted finals of the widely appreciated EuroBasket 2011.
The open-air concerts of the historical 49-bell Carillon of Kaunas are held on weekends.
They were defended by the citizenry of Kaunas.
After Vilnius was occupied by the Russian Bolsheviks in 1919, the government of the Republic of Lithuania established its main base here.
The oldest part of Kaunas city is the Old Town located to the east of the confluence of the Nemunas and Neris rivers.
The coat of arms features a white aurochs with a golden cross between his horns, set against a deep red background.
In the Russian Empire it was the capital of the Kaunas Governorate from 1843 to 1915.
Lithuania's premiere last resting place formally designated for graves of people influential in national history, politics, and arts is Petrašiūnai Cemetery in Kaunas.
The "UBIG group" (a branch of commercial Ūkio bank) is a management company of diversified holdings that operates in the property development, banking, aluminium, mining, logistics, textiles, sports, financial intermediary, and other sectors.
After Palemon's death, his sons divided his land.
The first parochial school in Kaunas was mentioned in 1473.
Kaunas again became the major centre of resistance against the Soviet regime.
* The Santaka Valley - Integrated Science, Studies and Business Centre (Valley)
The city and its elderates also have names in other languages (see Names of Kaunas in other languages and names of Kaunas elderates in other languages).
Later, when the capital of Vilnius was forcibly annexed by Poland, Kaunas became the temporary capital of Lithuania, a position it held until 28 October 1939, when the Red Army handed Vilnius back to Lithuania.
The resources of thoroughly explored anhydrite in the Pagiriai deposit amount to 81.5 million tons.
", immolated himself in the garden of the Musical Theatre, after making a speech denouncing the Soviet suppression of national and religious rights.
Kaunas is notable for the diverse culture life.
In June 1940, the Soviet Union occupied and annexed Lithuania in accordance with the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.
The continuous oppression of the Catholic Church and its resistance caused the appearance of ''The Chronicle of the Catholic Church in Lithuania''.
The commander of the Kaunas castle garrison Vaidotas with 36 men tried to break through, but was taken prisoner.
The Black Death struck the area in 1657 and 1708, and fires destroyed parts of the city in 1731 and 1732.
The Kazlų Rūda Forest, west of Kaunas, create a microclimate around the city, regulating humidity and temperature of the air, and protecting it from strong western winds.
It is known as the Via Baltica between Warsaw and Tallinn, a distance of .
Jewish community organizations disappeared almost overnight.
Winters are relatively cold, and sometimes snowy with average temperatures ranging from , and rarely drop below .
There are four old Jewish cemeteries within city limits.
*Day of Kaunas city (middle of May)
The project includes mining of anhydrite, a mine with underground warehouses, building the overground transport terminal, as well as an administrative building.
It is also the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Kaunas.
Prior to the construction of a museum on the site, archaeologists unearthed a mass grave and personal belongings of the Jewish victims.
Nazi Germany established the Reichskommissariat Ostland in the Baltic States and much of Belarus, and the administrative centre for Lithuania (Generalbezirk Litauen) was in Kaunas ruled by Generalkommissar Adrian von Renteln.
It is also the burial site of some signatories of the 1918 Act of Independence.
An earlier Russian name was Ковно ''Kovno'', although Каунас ''Kaunas'' has been used since 1940.
The first phase of the Standard gauge Rail Baltica railway section from Šeštokai to Kaunas is under construction, and it is expected to be completed by 2013.
Between the World Wars industry prospered in Kaunas; it was then the largest city in Lithuania.
The Lithuanian provisional government established a concentration camp at the Seventh Fortress, one of the city's ten historic forts, and 4,000 Jews were rounded up and murdered there.
*Vytautas Magnus University founded in 1922 as the University of Lithuania and renamed Vytautas Magnus in 1930.
The city is home to a few historic clubs such as: LFLS Kaunas football club (est.1920), LFLS Kaunas baseball club (est.1922), Žalgiris basketball club (est.1944).
The occupation was accompanied by arrests, confiscations, and the elimination of all free institutions.
The population was also 25.8% Russian, 22.7% Polish, 6.6% Lithuanian.
Recently information technology and electronics have become an important area of business activities in Kaunas.
J. Vileišis maintained many contacts in other European cities, and as a result Kaunas was an active participant in European urban life.
Kaunas has also a large number of public and private basic and secondary schools, as well as kindergartens and nurseries.
The Constituent Assembly of Lithuania first met in Kaunas on 15 May 1920.
Kaunas had a rich and varied Jewish culture.
The city also has large construction industry, including commercial, housing and road construction.
The smaller S. Darius and S. Girėnas Airport, established in 1915, is located about three kilometres () south of the city centre.
Žalgiris basketball club, one of Europe's strongest basketball clubs, now plays in the Euroleague.
Kaunas is an important railway hub in Lithuania.
S.Dariaus and S.Girėno Stadium is also used as the only large athletics stadium in Lithuania.
Granitas Kaunas is the strongest and most prominent men team handball club in Lithuania.
The oldest part of Kaunas was connected with Žaliakalnis neighbourhood in 1889.
Both before and after the German occupation on 25 June, the anti-Communists began to attack Jews, blaming them for the Soviet repressions, especially along Jurbarko and Kriščiukaičio streets.
Of these deaths, over 30,000 were Jews.
The power of the self-governing Kaunas was shared by three interrelated major institutions: ''vaitas'' (the Mayor), the Magistrate (12 lay judges and 4 burgomasters) and the so-called Benchers' Court (12 persons).
Kaunas also has greater coat of arms, which is mainly used for Kaunas city representation purposes.
Prior to the Second World War, Kaunas, like many other cities in eastern Europe, had a significant Jewish population.
According to the archeological excavations, the most affluent collections of ceramics and other artifacts found at the confluence of the Nemunas and the Neris rivers are from the second and first millennium BC.
The monthly E-ticket cards may be bought once and might be credited with an appropriate amount of money in various ways including the Internet.
It was also an important Zionist centre.
There is also a suburban region in the vicinity named "Palemonas".
All the city's streets were paved, horse-drawn transportation was replaced with modern bus lines, new suburbs were planned and built (Žaliakalnis neighbourhood in particular), and new parks and squares were established.
In 2007 new electronic monthly tickets began to be introduced for public transport in Kaunas.
There are 16 trolleybus routes, 37 bus routes.
* Vilnius Academy of Art Kaunas Faculty of Art
At present the Lithuanian Central Credit Union has 61 members.
Currently discussions are underway about the further development of the Vilijampolė district on the right bank of the Neris river and the Nemunas River, near their confluence.
Kaunas is often referred to as a city of students; there are about 50,000 students enrolled in its universities.
*Lithuanian Sports University
The company still exists and have its boats in working condition.
Although guerrilla warfare ended at the time of 1953, Lithuanian opposition to Soviet rule did not.
Kaunas has also hosted the knockout stage of the European Basketball Championship of 2011.
Currently, the feasibility study for Kaunas Public Logistics Centre is being prepared by the national state-owned railway company Lithuanian Railways.
The city of Kaunas has a number of parks and public open spaces.
The bodies of Lithuanians who died in Siberian exile were brought back to their homeland for reburial, and the anniversaries of deportations as well as the important dates in Lithuanian history began to be noted with speeches and demonstrations.
On All Souls' Day in 1956, the first public anti-Soviet protest rally took place in Kaunas: citizens burned candles in the Kaunas military cemetery and sang national songs, resulting in clashes with the Militsiya.
The council is composed of 41 member elected for four-year terms.
Nemuno žiedas is the only in Lithuania motor racing circuit, situated in Kačerginė, a small town near Kaunas.
On 16 February 1989 Cardinal Vincentas Sladkevičius, for the first time, called for the independence of Lithuania in his sermon at the Kaunas Cathedral.
It became the only temporary capital city in Europe during the interwar period.
Since the restoration of independence, improving substantially air and land transport links with Western Europe have made Kaunas easily accessible to foreign tourists.
Before its disestablishment, Air Lithuania had its head office in Kaunas.
The formation of the new rectangular structure of the New Town started in Kaunas since 1847.
It is one of the oldest still functioning airports in Europe used for tourism and air sports purposes and now hosts the Lithuanian Aviation Museum.
The last meeting of the Lithuanian government was held just before midnight in Kaunas on 14 June 1940.
Now it is the capital of Kaunas County, the seat of the Kaunas city municipality and the Kaunas District Municipality.
In 1408, the town was granted Magdeburg Rights by Vytautas the Great and became a centre of Kaunas Powiat in Trakai Voivodeship in 1413.
The Ninth Fortress has been renovated into a memorial for the wars and is the site where nearly 50,000 Lithuanians were killed during Nazi occupation.
Kovno Governorate, with a centre in Kovno (Kaunas), was formed in 1843.
Ąžuolynas (literally, "Oak Grove") park is a main public park in the heart of Kaunas.
The largest wholesale, distribution and logistics company in Lithuania and Latvia JSC "Sanitex", as well as a subsidiary of material handling and logistics company Dematic in the Baltics have been operated in Kaunas.
Kaunas is home to some historic venues such as: the main stadium of the city – S.Dariaus ir S.Girėno Sporto Centras (total capacity 9,000), which is also the Lithuanian soccer club FBK Kaunas's and Lithuanian national football team home stadium established in 1923, and Kaunas Sports Hall, completed in 1939 for the Third European Basketball Championship.
The aurochs is the original heraldic symbol of the city since 1400.
It was one of the largest and important military victories of the Teutonic Knights in the 14th century against Lithuania.
Primary foreign investors in Kaunas are companies from the United States, Finland, Estonia, Denmark, and Russia.
*Traditional folk music competition "Play, Jurgelis" (November)
Some notable changes are under construction and in the stage of disputes.
*Lithuanian University of Health Sciences
Soviet authorities confiscated the property of many Jews, while hundreds were exiled to Siberia.
*Vilnius University Kaunas Faculty of Humanities
The most important is the Kaunas County Public Library.
Kaunas also is linked to Vilnius to its east and Klaipėda, on the Baltic Sea, via the A1 motorway and Daugavpils (Latvia), via E262(A6) highway.
*Kaunas Chamber Theatre
Despite its northern location, the climate in Kaunas is relatively mild compared to other locations in similar latitudes, mainly because of the Baltic Sea.
It consisted of Kaunas Railway Tunnel and the Railway bridge across the Nemunas river.
The university status Lithuanian Academy of Physical Education, founded during the Interwar period, is the only state-supported institution of tertiary physical education in Lithuania.
Probably the longest established festival is the International Modern Dance Festival, which first ran in 1989.
Some of the best examples of culture life in Kaunas are theatres of various styles:
The government's powers were taken over by the new occupants.
Kaunas is first mentioned in written sources in 1361 when brick Kaunas Castle was constructed.
Previous paper monthly tickets were in use until August 2009.
The heraldic seal of Kaunas, introduced in the early 15th century during the reign of Grand Duke Vytautas, is the oldest city heraldic seal known in the territory of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
* Kaunas Business College
In 2010 it handled 809,732 passengers and 4,449 tonnes of cargo.
It devotes 7.3% of its total land acreage to parkland.
He built a fortress near the confluence of the Nemunas and Neris rivers, and the city that grew up there was named after him.
Some trains run from Vilnius to Šeštokai, and, Poland, through Kaunas.
'''Kaunas''' (; ; also see Kaunas' other names) is the second-largest city in Lithuania and has historically been a leading centre of Lithuanian economic, academic, and cultural life.
A four-form Jesuit school was opened in Kaunas in 1649.
There were almost 100 Jewish organizations, 40 synagogues, many Yiddish schools, 4 Hebrew high schools, a Jewish hospital, and scores of Jewish-owned businesses.
The only professional circus organisation in Lithuania – Baltic Circus was founded in Kaunas in 1995.
*Christmas tree lighting (end of November)
The Kronika started a new phase of resistance in the life of Lithuania's Catholic Church and of all Lithuania fighting against the occupation by making known to the world the violation of the human rights and freedoms in Lithuania for almost two decades.
By the 16th century, Kaunas also had a public school and a hospital and was one of the best-formed towns in the whole country.
In strict conspiracy, Catholic priest Sigitas Tamkevičius (now the Archbishop Metropolitan of Kaunas) implemented this idea and its first issue was published in the Alytus district on 19 March 1972.
Sailer, three golden balls and Latin text "Diligite justitiam qui judicatis terram" (English: Cherish justice, you who judge the earth) in the greater coat of arms is a reference to merchants and seafarers patron Saint Nicholas, who was regarded as a heavenly guardian of Kaunas by Queen Bona Sforza.
Spring and autumn are generally cool to mild.
A part of its collection was transferred to Martynas Mažvydas National Library of Lithuania in 1963.
On 30 June 1993, the historical coat of arms of Kaunas city was established by a special presidential decree.
The city is also the birthplace or childhood home of many of the country's top basketball stars, among them Arvydas Sabonis, Šarūnas Marčiulionis, Žydrūnas Ilgauskas, Linas Kleiza, Donatas Motiejūnas and Šarūnas Jasikevičius.
A yacht club operates in the Kaunas Reservoir Regional Park.
It also specialises in development of new telemetry, data base creation, mobile payment projects.
A water and waste water system, costing more than 15 million Lithuanian litas, was put in place, the city expanded from , more than 2,500 buildings were built, plus three modern bridges over the Neris and Nemunas rivers.
Kaunas is famous for its legendary basketball club Žalgiris, which was founded in 1944 and was one of the most popular nonviolent resistance ways during its struggle with the CSKA Moscow.
Kaunas is a large centre of industry, trade and services in Lithuania.
The council is the member of The Association of Local Authorities in Lithuania.
*ISM University of Management and Economics – one of the few private institutions of higher education in Lithuania
*Kaunas Pantomime Theatre
There are at least 7 professional theatres, lots of amateur theatres, ensembles, abundant groups of art and sports.
Head offices of several major International and Lithuanian companies are located in Kaunas, including "Kraft Foods Lietuva", largest Generic Pharmaceuticals producer in Lithuania "Sanitas", producer of sportswear AB "Audimas", one of the largest construction companies "YIT Kausta", JSC "Senukai", largest producer in Lithuania of strong alcoholic drinks JSC "Stumbras", Finnish capital brewery JSC "Ragutis", JSC "Fazer Gardesis", JSC "Stora Enso Packaging", producer of pharmaceuticals, and the only producer of homoeopathic medicines in Lithuania JSC "Aconitum".
Other institutes of higher education are:
It has been repeatedly discontinued and reopened, so the most current status is unclear.
It was reorganized into a college in 1653.
Kaunas Railway Station is an important hub serving direct passenger connections to Vilnius and Warsaw as well as being a transit point of Pan-European corridors I and IX.
It was largely organized by the military and resulted in the replacement of the democratically elected government with a conservative authoritarian government led by Antanas Smetona.
Meanwhile, the Lithuanian Activist Front, founded by Lithuanian nationalist émigrés in Berlin, disseminated anti-semitic literature in Lithuania.
According to the Russian census of 1897, Jews numbered 25,500, 35.3% of the total of 73,500.
Blazon: ''Gules, an aurochs passant guardant argent ensigned with a cross Or between his horns.''
On 1 November 1987, a non-sanctioned rally took place near the Kaunas Cathedral Basilica, where people gathered to mark famous Lithuanian poet Maironis' 125th birthday anniversary.
Under direction of the mayor Jonas Vileišis (1921–1931) Kaunas grew rapidly and was extensively modernised.
An Irish low-cost airline Ryanair announced Kaunas Airport as their 40th base and first in the Central Europe in February 2010.
Jews made up much of the city's commercial, artisan, and professional sectors.
*International open-air "Kaunas Jazz Festival" (April–May)
*Kaunas State Musical Theatre
They believe that the airport will handle up to one million passengers in 2011.
On 14 May 1972, 19-year-old Romas Kalanta, having exclaimed "Freedom for Lithuania!
First railway connection passing through Kaunas was constructed in 1859–1861 and opened in 1862.
In 1898 the first power plant in Lithuania started operating.
It was established as the Central Library of Lithuania in 1919.
Jewish life in Kaunas was first disrupted when the Soviet Union occupied Lithuania in June 1940.
Kaunas was a centre of Jewish learning, and the yeshiva in Slobodka (Vilijampolė) was one of Europe's most prestigious institutes of higher Jewish learning.
In 1862, a railway connecting the Russian Empire and Imperial Germany was built, making Kaunas a significant railway hub with one of the first railway tunnels in the Empire, completed in 1861.
Due to its geographic location, Kaunas is considered one of the biggest logistics centres in Lithuania.
By the initiative of a prominent Lithuanian zoologist Tadas Ivanauskas and biologist Konstantinas Regelis the Kaunas Botanical Garden was founded in 1923.
*Pažaislis music festival (June–August)
Jews began settling in Kaunas in the second half of the 17th century.
On 9 October 1988, the Flag of Lithuania was raised above the tower of the Military Museum.
*Kaunas State Puppet Theatre
The Nazi Germans did not recognize the new provisional government, but they did not take any actions to dissolve it until the establishment of a German civil administration on 17 July.
These are the longest buses used in the Baltic states.
International route connecting Kaliningrad, Russia and Kharkiv, Ukraine, also crosses Kaunas.
Kaunas is located at the confluence of the two largest Lithuanian rivers, the Nemunas and the Neris, and near the Kaunas Reservoir, the largest body of water entirely in Lithuania.
An aurochs has replaced a wisent, depicted in the Soviet era emblem, used since 1969.
The construction of a new landmark of Kaunas – the Žalgiris Arena – began in the autumn of 2008.
The most developed industries in Kaunas are: food and beverage industry, textile and light industry, chemical industry, publishing and processing, pharmaceuticals, metal industry, wood processing and furniture industry.
The Yiddish name is ''Kovne'' (קאָװנע), while its names in German include ''Kaunas'' and ''Kauen''.
There are also some innovative companies located in Kaunas, such as leading wholesaler of computer components, data storage media "ACME group", internet and TV provider, communications JSC "Mikrovisata group", developer and producer original products for TV and embedded technologies JSC "Selteka".
It is responsible for municipality laws.
*Kaunas Dance Theatre Aura
These Romans were supposedly led by a patrician named Palemon, who had three sons: Barcus, Kunas and Sperus.
The military coup d'état took place in Kaunas on 17 December 1926.
In 1956 people in the Kaunas region supported the uprising in Hungary by rioting.
The event broke into a politically charged riot, which was forcibly dispersed by the KGB and Militsiya.
To protect the unique lower landscape of Kaunas Reservoir, its natural ecosystem, and cultural heritage Kaunas Reservoir Regional Park was established in the eastern edge of Kaunas in 1992.
During that time people settled in some territories of the present Kaunas: the confluence of the two longest rivers of Lithuania area, Eiguliai, Lampėdžiai, Linkuva, Kaniūkai, Marvelė, Pajiesys, Romainiai, Petrašiūnai, Sargėnai, and Veršvai sites.
A settlement had been established on the site of the current Kaunas old town at the confluence of two large rivers, at least by the 10th century AD.
The oldest still functioning institution of higher education is Kaunas Priest Seminary, established in 1864.
It passed some important laws, particularly on land reform, on the national currency, and adopted a new constitution.
There was established static circus in the Vytautas park of Kaunas in the beginning of the 19th century.
