On 10 June 2014, the German Administrative Court overturned the 2002 ban making selling kava as a medicine legal (personal possession of kava has never been illegal), albeit strictly regulated.
Relative concentrations of 15%, 10% and 5% have been observed in the root, stump, and basal stems, respectively.
After reaching about 2 m height, plants grow a wider stalk and additional stalks, but not much taller.
Kava has been the key plant of the traditional medicine of the islands of the South Pacific for centuries.
Its cultivation is entirely by propagation from stem cuttings.
Tudei varieties have traditionally not been grown in Hawaii and Fiji, but in recent years there have been reports of farmers attempting to grow "isa" or "palisi" non-noble cultivars in Hawaii and of imports of dried tudei kava into Fiji for further re-exporting.
In Vanuatu, Tudei ("two days") kava is reserved for special ceremonial occasions and exporting it is not allowed.
The nature of effects will largely depend on the strain of the kava plant and the form of its consumption.
Too much sunlight is harmful, especially in early growth, so kava is an understory crop.
Such cultivars mainly grow in Vanuatu which outlawed their exports in 2004.
Kava is used for medicinal, religious, political, cultural and social purposes throughout the Pacific.
and preparative method to be used."
Starting in the early 2000s, kava bars first opened within the beach communities of Florida, Hawaii, and California.
This practice remained unknown to the rest of the world until James Cook, an English naval captain and explorer, discovered the plant's use in 1777 during one of his voyages in the Pacific Islands.
The importation and licensing of kava is prohibited in Western Australia.
The roots can reach a depth of 60&nbsp;cm.
Their most popular noble strains are "Boroguu" or "Boronggoru" from Pentecost Island, "Melomelo" from Aoba Island (called ''sese'' in north Pentecost Island), and "Palarasul" kava from Espiritu Santo.
Kawakawa doesn't have any of kava's relaxing psychoactive properties.
Most of the concerns were related to a small number of reports indicating potential cases of hepatotoxicity caused by consumption of various commercial products derived from kava.
In Vanuatu, exportation of kava is strictly regulated.
Winter explains that ʻawa, especially of the Hiwa variety, was offered to hula deities in return for knowledge and inspiration.
The mature roots of the kava plant are harvested after a minimum of four years (at least five years ideally) for peak kavalactone content.
Kava today is primarily known for its anxiolytic properties.
Grog is very popular in Fiji, especially among young men, and often brings people together for storytelling and socializing.
Moderate to high kava beverage consumption also produces a reversible increase in the liver enzyme gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT), which may be an early indicator of cholestasis.
No information is available on the potential for kava beverage consumption to impact on the incidence of chronic disease.
It is most likely not a coincidence that this plant has a similar name to kava (piper methysticum).
Legislation has been proposed to require that kava products be derived only from noble cultivars, which may be less toxic.
It is however commonly used in Maori medicine for the treatment of skin infections, wounds and cuts, and (when prepared as a tea) for stomach upsets and other conditions.
Only the most desirable strains for everyday drinking are selected to be noble varieties to maintain quality control.
A total of 18 different kavalactones (or kavapyrones) have been identified to date, at least 15 of which are active.
Some of the most popular strains are the ''Mahakea'', ''Moʻi'', ''Hiwa'' and ''Nene'' varieties.
Scholars make a distinction between the so-called "noble" and non-noble kava.
The product is then added to cold water and consumed as quickly as possible.
Kava consists of sterile cultivars cloned from its wild ancestor, ''Piper wichmanii''.
As noted by the Kava Society of New Zealand "in all likelihood the kava plant was known to the first settlers of Aotearoa New Zealand.
Recent publications also confirm that kava appears to be safe and that the previously reported extremely rare cases of hepatotoxicity were in most cases likely related to rare idiosyncratic allergic reactions.
The principal urinary metabolite, conjugated 4'-OH-kavain, is generally detectable for up to 48 hours.
Only strains they deem as "noble" varieties that are not too weak or too potent are allowed to be exported.
While some bars have been committed to only serving the traditional forms and types of kava, other establishments have been accused of serving non-traditionally consumed non-noble kava varieties (cheaper to obtain, but with a much higher potential for producing unpleasant effects and adverse reactions than noble kava varieties) or serving kava with other substances, including alcohol.
It is legal to possess kava for personal use, or to import it for purposes other than human consumption (e.g.
Recent usage of kava has been documented in forensic investigations by quantitation of kavain in blood specimens.
More recently, it has been suggested that the widespread use of tudei cultivars in the manufacturing of several kava products might have been the key factor contributing to the rare reports of adverse reactions to kava observed among the consumers of kava-based pharmaceutical products in Europe.
Traditionally, no flavoring is added.
In light of the research findings, on 10 June 2014, the German Administrative Court overturned the 2002 ban reinstating the regulatory requirements of 2001.
Furthermore, patient and professional information brochures have been redesigned to warn about potential side effects.
It is also possible that (just like the Polynesian migrants that settled in Hawaii) the Maori explorers brought some kava with them.
Long term and heavy kava consumption is associated with a fully reversible skin condition known as "kava dermopathy" or ''kani kani'' (in Fiji) characterised by dry and scaly skin covering the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, and back.
According to Lebot et al.
There is little documented evidence of adverse health effects associated with traditional moderate levels of consumption of kava beverage, with only anecdotal reports of general symptoms of lethargy and headaches.
These cultures have a great respect for the plant and place a high importance on it.
A 2012 analysis of cases worldwide proposed that mold could have also contributed to the very rare cases hepatotoxicity induced by kava-based pharmaceutical products.
Tonga, Samoa and French Polynesia).
Despite numerous studies, the mechanism that causes kava dermopathy is poorly understood "but may relate to interference with cholesterol metabolism".
While other ("noble") cultivars also contain these compounds "toxicity seems to be triggered only at relatively high concentrations, too high to be of relevance with the use of noble kava or its corresponding extract preparations".
Some is grown in the Solomon Islands since World War II, but most is imported.
(1997) "In New Zealand, where the climate is too cold for kava, the Maori gave the name kawa-kawa to another Piperaceae, M. excelsum, in memory of the kava plants they undoubtedly brought with them and unsuccessfully attempted to cultivate.
The strength also depends on the species and techniques of cultivation.
In line with these findings, consumption of "two day" varieties is not recommended.
The key reason why many farmers and distributors are interested in growing and selling tudei varieties is the fact that they appear to be significantly easier and cheaper to grow (while it takes up to 5 years for noble kava to mature, non-noble varieties can often be harvested just one year after being planted).
While the former group of effects, most notably kava's potential for treating or managing anxiety, stress and depression, have received the most scientific and popular attention, much of the broad list of traditional medicinal uses is related to its peripheral effects.
Clinical surveys in Aboriginal communities in northern Australia with a history of heavy kava use have not revealed any evidence of long-term liver damage associated with consumption of kava beverage.''
The colour is grey to tan to opaque greenish.
Whether this reflects genuine low incidence or an under-reporting of adverse health effects is unclear.
Most kava plants produce around  of root when they are harvested.
Kava is also known for having a sleep inducing and potential sleep quality-enhancement effects and might be an effective remedy for common restlessness and more serious insomnia.
However, this additive effect has not been studied in humans.
water extractions of dried or fresh noble roots).
Kava continue to be used on most Pacific Islands for various ceremonies and gatherings.
In recent times, it has become more widely consumed as a recreational beverage in both the South Pacific islander community as well as in the wider international community.
Kava remains legal and regulated as food or dietary supplement in most countries.
Traditionally, only noble kavas have been used for regular consumption due to their more favourable composition of kavalactones and other compounds that produces significantly more pleasant effects and has much lower potential for causing such negative side-effects as nausea or "kava hangover".
The sale of kava plant became regulated in Switzerland, France, and the Netherlands.
In the Northern Territory, the police say that "the sale and, in majority of circumstances, possession of kava ... is illegal".
The pressure prompted Germany to reconsider the evidence base for banning kava-based pharmaceutical products.
*'''Anxiolytics (CNS depressants such as benzodiazepines and barbiturates)''' Kava may have potential additive CNS depressant effects (such as sedation and anxiolytic effects) with benzodiazepines and barbiturates.
The meal traditionally follows some time after the drink so the psychoactives are absorbed into the bloodstream quicker.
"This refers to the cup of sacramental ʻawa brewed from the strong, black ʻawa root (ʻawa hiwa) which was drunk sacramentally by the kumu hula":
A systematic review of its evidence by Cochrane concluded it was likely to be more effective than placebo at treating short-term social anxiety.
"Palisi" is a popular Tudei variety.
Many experts warn against using such extracts due to the unknown quantities and compositions of compounds extracted using these methods, as well as the difficulty of determining the quality of the plant material used in their manufacturing and instead recommend using traditional kava products (i.e.
It grows naturally where rainfall is plentiful (over 2,000&nbsp;mm/yr).
Several adverse interactions with drugs have been documented, both prescription and nonprescription&nbsp;&ndash; including, but not limited to, anticonvulsants, alcohol, anxiolytics (CNS depressants such as benzodiazepines), antipsychotics, levodopa, diuretics, and drugs metabolized by CYP450 in the liver.
Recent findings suggest that the consumption of kava might have potential benefits for preventing or treating various forms of cancer, most notably bladder, colon and lung cancer.
Lateral roots are smaller-diameter roots that look more like a typical root.
However, six of them, including kavain, dihydrokavain, methysticin, dihydromethysticin, yangonin, and desmethoxyyangonin, have been determined to be responsible for about 96% of the plant's pharmacological activity.
The court stated that risk from kava exposure had not been clearly demonstrated, nor does it appear unusually high, an opinion presumably driven by the very small number of cases of reported toxicity (n ~ 3) with even a certain degree of causality linked to kava in a global kava-consuming community that may number in the millions of doses consumed daily.
:A vision like that of a sacred god!
The largest number are grown in the Republic of Vanuatu, and so it is recognised as the "home" of kava.
Most kava plants consist of approximately 80% crown root upon harvesting.
Today it comprises hundreds of different cultivars grown across the Pacific.
In Fiji, for example, a formal ''yaqona'' (kava) ceremony will often accompany important social, political, religious, etc.
The latter category comprises the so-called "tudei" (or "two-day") kavas, medicinal kavas and wild kava (''Piper wichmanii'', the ancestor of domesticated ''Piper methysticum'').
While the two plants look similar and have similar names, they are different, albeit related, species.
Fresh kava root contains on average 80% water.
The ''Aliʻi'' (kings) of precolonial Hawaii coveted the ''Moʻi'' variety, which had a strong cerebral effect due to a predominant amount of the kavalactone kavain.
Pounding is done in a large stone with a small log.
In these studies, heavy kava use in an Aboriginal community in Arnhem Land was associated with overall poor health, a puffy face, scaly rash, and a slight increase in patellar reflexes.
The kava shrub thrives in loose, well-drained soils where plenty of air reaches the roots.
They then strain it through a quantity of fibers of coconuts, squeezing the chips, till all their juices mix with the coconut-milk; and the whole liquor is decanted into another bowl.
The Maori word kawa also means "ceremonial protocol", recalling the stylized consumption of the drug typical of Polynesian societies".
No effect on cognition, which might be associated with the pharmacological activity of kava, has been identified.
Drinking grog for a few hours brings a numbing and relaxing effect to the drinker; grog also numbs the tongue and grog drinking typically is followed by a "chaser" or sweet or spicy snack to follow a ''bilo''.
Kava was historically grown only in the Pacific islands of Hawaii, Federated States of Micronesia, Vanuatu, Fiji, the Samoas and Tonga.
The Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration has recommended no more than 250&nbsp;mg of kavalactones be taken in a 24‑hour period.
In Hawaii, there are many other strains of kava ().
Clinical trials examining the efficacy of aqueous extracts of kava in treating anxiety, although limited, have also not identified adverse health effects.
"Waka" grade kava is made of lateral roots only.
Winter describes a hula prayer for inspiration which contains the line, ''He ʻike pū ʻawa hiwa.''
*'''Alcohol''' It has been reported that combined use of alcohol and kava extract can have additive sedative effects in mice.
Crown roots are the large-diameter pieces that look like ( diameter) wooden poker chips.
That means that the incident rate of liver toxicity due to kava is one in 60-125 million patients."
These strict measures have been opposed by some of the leading kava scientists.
With kava's increasing popularity, bars serving the plant in its liquid state are beginning to open up outside of the South Pacific.
Regarding cognitive function, kava has been shown to have additive cognitive impairments while taken with alcohol when compared to taking placebo and alcohol alone.
Since then, locations have spread to other regions.
According to Dr Vincent Lebot, the far more pleasant and beneficial effects of noble cultivars explain the fact that only these cultivars were spread around the Pacific by Polynesian and Melanesian migrants with presence of non-noble cultivars limited to the islands of Vanuatu from which they originate.
The extract is an emulsion of kavalactone droplets in starch and buttermilk.
Another factor that has allowed the spread of non-noble varieties is the fact that while traditional drinkers would immediately be able to detect the unpleasant characteristics of tudei, many new consumers from outside of the South Pacific lack any knowledge about kava and hence can be persuaded that tudei-based products offer a normal kava experience.
Fijians commonly share a drink called ''grog'' made by pounding sun-dried kava root into a fine powder, straining and mixing it with cold water.
Dried root contains approximately 43% starch, 20% dietary fiber, 15% kavalactones, 12% water, 3.2% sugars, 3.6% protein, and 3.2% minerals.
The Australian studies from the late 1990s that contributed towards the rise of concerns about kava focused on populations with heavy concomitant consumption of alcohol and overall poor health.
Only a fraction of the handful of cases reviewed for liver toxicity could be, with any certainty, linked to kava consumption and most of those involved the co-ingestion of other medications/supplements.
''"Kava is made in the most disgustful manner that can be imagined, from the juice contained in  the roots of a species of pepper-tree.
Kava root is classified into two categories: crown root (or chips) and lateral root.
On the other hand, there is strong evidence that high levels of consumption of kava beverage can result in scaly skin rash, weight loss, nausea, loss of appetite and indigestion.
A few notable potential drug interactions are, but are not limited to:
In the United Kingdom it is a criminal offence to sell, supply or import any medicinal product containing kava for human consumption.
Kava prepared as described above is much more potent than processed kava.
(2014): "Despite the link to kava and liver toxicity demonstrated in vivo and in vitro, in the history of Western kava use, toxicity is still considered relatively rare.
This root is cut small, and the pieces chewed by several people, who spit the macerated mass into a bowl, where some water (milk) of  coconuts is poured upon it.
The several cultivars of kava vary in concentrations of primary and secondary psychoactive alkaloids.
Grinding is done by hand against a cone-shaped block of dead coral; the hand forms a mortar and the coral a pestle.
In recent years, government institutions and non-profit NGOs (such as the US-based True Kava Group Labs) have been set up with the aim of monitoring kava quality, producing regular reports, certifying vendors selling proper, noble kava and warning customers against products that may contain tudei varieties.
The use of kava is strongly linked with the cultures of numerous Pacific Islands.
According to a comprehensive review of the relevant literature by Showman et al.
They swallow this nauseous stuff as fast as possible; and some old topers value themselves on being able to empty a great number of bowls."''
:An insight won by the black sacred ʻawa,
Kavalactone content is greatest in the roots and decreases higher up the plant.
Female flowers are especially rare and do not produce fruit even when hand-pollinated.
However, it can be stated that in general noble kava produces a state of calmness, relaxation and well-being without diminishing cognitive performance or influencing drinker's capacity to think clearly; with an initial talkative period, followed by muscle relaxation and eventual sleepiness.
The roots of the plant are used to produce a drink with sedative, anesthetic, euphoriant, and entheogenic properties.
The condition is easily treatable with abstinence or lowering of kava intake as the skin appears to be returning to its normal state within a couple of weeks of reduced or no kava use.
The concerns about the adverse effects of non-noble varieties produced by their undesirable composition of kavalactones and high concentrations of potentially harmful compounds not present in any significant concentration in the noble varieties, have led to the creation of legislation that prohibits their exports from such countries as Vanuatu.
:The day of revealing shall see what it sees:
George Forster, a naturalist on Cook's voyage, wrote a description of the process in which the islanders prepared the kava.
In Australia, the supply of kava is regulated through the National Code of Kava Management.
Many find mixing powdered kava with hot water makes the drink stronger.
In Vanuatu, a strong kava drink is normally followed by a hot meal or tea.
In 2001, concerns were raised about the safety of kava, which led to restrictions and regulations in several countries, as well as reports by the United States CDC  and FDA.
Heavy, long-term use of kava has been found to not reduce ability in saccade and cognitive tests, but has been associated with elevated liver enzymes.
Its active ingredients are called kavalactones.
While the restrictions on kava were lifted in 2012, Health Canada has not licensed any kava products for sale in Canada.
Other possible effects include sore red eyes, laziness, loss of sex drive and general poor health.
Exclusion of certain aerial parts of the plant are also often required by law or convention, which contain less pipermethystine and other toxic compounds.
containing the above-the ground parts of the plant) and non-water based kava extracts (due to the inability of determining the quality of the plant material used in their manufacturing).
In Papua New Guinea, the locals in Madang province refer to their kava as ''waild koniak'' ("wild cognac" in English).
The taste is slightly pungent, while the distinctive aroma depends on whether it was prepared from dry or fresh plant, and on the variety.
Hawaii) or actually incorporated it into Christian practices (most notably in Samoa and Tonga).
Several Pacific island-states have created specific legislation aimed at regulating the quality of their kava exports or preventing the exports or consumption of non-noble kava varieties or the parts of the plant that are unsuitable for consumption (leaves, stems).
(See canoe plants.)
In 2002 Health Canada issued an order prohibiting the sale of any product containing kava.
Kawakawa (''Piper excelsum'') plant, known also as "Maori kava" is often confused with kava.
Some minor constituents, including three chalcones, flavokavain A, flavokavain B, and flavokavain C, have also been identified, as well as a toxic alkaloid (not present in the consumable parts of the plant), pipermethystine.
Fresh, undried kava produces a stronger beverage than dry kava.
In addition, their laws mandate that exported kava must be at least five years old and farmed organically.
Traditionally, it is prepared by either chewing, grinding or pounding the roots of the kava plant.
This could explain why no significant adverse health effects are observed among kava drinkers in the South Pacific who very rarely, if ever, consume non-noble varieties, especially in countries that generally do not grow any tudei cultivars (i.e.
Despite its psychoactive effects, kava is not considered to be physically addictive and its use does not lead to dependency.
Traditionally, plants are harvested around four years of age, as older plants have higher concentrations of kavalactones.
Some countries (such as New Zealand) have issued regulations prohibiting the sale of impure kava products (i.e.
In early 2016 a court case has been filed against the Bundesinstitut für Arzneimittel und Medizinprodukte (BfArM/German Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices) arguing that the new regulatory regime is too strict and not justified.
Traditionally, grog is drunk from the shorn half-shell of a coconut, called a ''bilo''.
Other strains are found in Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa.
According to an in-depth human health risk assessment commissioned by the New Zealand and Australian governments, while consumption of kava may result in such minor and reversible side effects as kava dermopathy (see below), "there is no evidence that occasional use of kava beverage is associated with any long-term adverse effects, including effects on the liver."
Poland is the only EU country with an "outright ban on kava" and where the mere possession of kava is prohibited and may result in a prison sentence.
It has been used for a wide range of both Central Nervous System (CNS)-centered and peripheral effects.
As noted in one literature review: "Peripherally, kava is indicated in traditional Pacific medicine for urogenital conditions (gonorrhea infections, chronic cystitis, difficulty urinating), reproductive and women's health (...), gastrointestinal upsets, respiratory ailments (asthma, coughs, and tuberculosis), skin diseases and topical wounds, and as an analgesic, with significant subtlety and nuance attending the precise strain, plant component (leaf, stem, root, etc.)
Ideal growing conditions are  and 70–100% relative humidity.
functions, usually involving a ritual presentation of the bundled roots as a ''sevusevu'' (gift), and drinking of the ''yaqona'' itself.
Kava is sedating and is primarily consumed to relax without disrupting mental clarity.
The only remaining area of potential concern is the use of the so-called "two-day" (known also as "tudei", "isa", "palisi") and wild (piper wichmanii) cultivars (traditionally not consumed) in the manufacturing of kava-based pharmaceutical products due to their very different phytochemistry and relatively high concentrations of potentially harmful compounds (flavokavains).
Pukui and Elbert translated this as "a knowledge from kava offerings".
A number of scientists and medical practitioners criticized the poor quality of the reports by pointing out that most of the reported rare cases of hepatotoxicity involved patients with a history of alcohol or prescription drugs abuse or concomitant use of medicines known as potentially hepatotoxic.
The noble cultivars are in fact a result of centuries of conscious selection of mutations with the most desirable properties: growers have selected cultivars to improve the chemical composition responsible for the physiological effects.
This sacred variety was so important to them that no one but royalty could ever experience it, "lest they suffer an untimely death".
Likewise, efforts have been made to educate the non-traditional customers about the difference between noble and non-noble varieties and  that non-noble varieties do not offer the same benefits as noble ones and can potentially cause adverse reactions.
Following the discussions on the safety of certain pharmaceutical products derived from kava and sold in Germany, in 2002 the EU imposed a temporary ban on imports of kava-based pharmaceutical products.
Kawakawa is a small tree endemic to New Zealand, which is of crucial importance to traditional, indigenous Māori culture and medicine.
Traditionally only noble kava cultivars have been consumed as they are widely known not only as safe but also for their very pleasant physiological effects, potential medicinal properties and low risk of any adverse reactions  The specific effects of various noble kava depend on a number of factor such as the cultivar used (and the related specific composition of kavalactones), age of the plant and the form of its consumption.
In Germany,  Kava-based pharmaceutical preparations are currently prescription drugs.
Hillary Clinton, Pope John Paul II, Queen Elizabeth II and numerous other leaders have participated in a Kava ceremony while visiting communities who continue this practice.
Some Pacific Island States who had been benefiting from the export of kava to the pharmaceutical companies have attempted to overturn the EU ban on kava-based pharmaceutical products by invoking international trade agreements at the WTO: Fiji, Samoa, Tonga and Vanuatu argued that the ban was imposed with insufficient evidence.
Today, kava is a staple cash crop in the Pacific Islands and it is extracted by machinery which is later manufactured into various forms.
A mature kava plant is about 20% lateral roots.
The reverence for Hiwa in old Hawaiʻi is evident in this portion of a chant recorded by Nathaniel Bright Emerson and quoted by E. S. Craighill and Elizabeth Green Handy.
Kava is consumed throughout the Pacific Ocean cultures of Polynesia, including Hawaii, Vanuatu, Melanesia and some parts of Micronesia.
Each cultivar has not only different requirements for successful cultivation, but also displays unique characteristics both in terms of its appearance, and in terms of its medicinal and psychoactive properties.
Within these communities, kava is considered to be a safe and enjoyable beverage, based on a long tradition of use and little evidence of harm.
Chewing produces the strongest effect because it produces the finest particles.
