Foreign direct investment (FDI) plays a more significant role in the national economy than in most other former Soviet republics.
In January 2015, to help the humanitarian crisis, Kazakhstan sent $400,000 of aid to Ukraine's southeastern regions.
Throughout this period, traditional nomadic life and a livestock-based economy continued to dominate the steppe.
The Kazakh language is the state language, and Russian has equal official status for all levels of administrative and institutional purposes.
Kazakhstan's terrain extends west to east from the Caspian Sea to the Altay Mountains and north to south from the plains of Western Siberia to the oases and deserts of Central Asia.
Russia currently leases approximately  of territory enclosing the Baikonur Cosmodrome space launch site in south central Kazakhstan, where the first man was launched into space as well as Soviet space shuttle Buran and the well-known space station Mir.
The "Nurly Zhol" policy is accepted as preventive measures needed to help steer the economy towards sustainable growth in the context of the modern global economic and geopolitical challenges, such as the 25%-reduction in the oil price, reciprocal sanctions between the West and Russia over Ukraine, etc.
Government revenues grew from 19.8% of GDP in 1999 to 22.6% of GDP in 2001, but decreased to 16.2% of GDP in 2003.
Banks in Kazakhstan have experienced a lengthy period of political stability and economic growth.
During the first half of 2013, Kazakhstan's fixed investment increased 7.1% compared to the same period in 2012 totaling 2.8 trillion tenge ($18 billion US dollars).
This tree is still found wild in the mountains of Central Asia, in southern Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Xinjiang in China.
The 2012 Championship was hosted by Kazakhstan.
Major cities include Astana, Almaty, Karagandy, Shymkent, Atyrau and Oskemen.
Kazakhstan's film industry is run through the state-owned Kazakhfilm studios based in Almaty.
In 2013, ''Aftenposten'' quoted the human-rights activist and lawyer Denis Jivaga as saying that there is an "oil fund in Kazakhstan, but nobody knows how the income is spent".
Kazakhstan’s Supreme Court has taken recent steps to modernize and to increase transparency and oversight over the country’s legal system.
Deportees were interned in some of the biggest Soviet labor camps of the Gulag system, including ALZhIR camp outside Astana, which was reserved for the wives of men considered "enemies of the people."
Kazakhstan's most famous cyclist is Alexander Vinokourov.
According to EY's 2014 Kazakhstan Attractiveness Survey, "Investor confidence in Kazakhstan’s potential is also at an all-time high with 47.3% of respondents expecting Kazakhstan to become increasingly attractive over the next three years."
Kazakhstan actively supports UN peacekeeping missions in Haiti, the Western Sahara, and Côte d'Ivoire.
Daan Everts, OSCE mission chief at the time, said: 'It has not been a competitive race.'
Kazakhstan is also a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Economic Cooperation Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
Kazakhstan has worked to develop its economy, especially its dominant hydrocarbon industry.
At present, there are universities, academies and institutes, conservatories, higher schools and higher colleges.
Corruption was evident at every stage of the judicial process.
Kazakhstan's human rights situation is described as poor by independent observers.
During the Steppe Eagle exercises, the Kazbat peacekeeping battalion operates within a multinational force under a unified command within multidisciplinary peacekeeping operations, with NATO and the U.S. Military.
The 2009 population estimate is 6.8% higher than the population reported in the last census from January 1999.
One quarter of the population is Russian Orthodox, including ethnic Russians, Ukrainians and Belorussians.
Since then, the industry has shrunk and been restructured, with system-wide loans dropping to 39% of GDP in 2011 from 59% in 2007.
The country experienced a slowdown in economic growth from 2014 sparked by falling oil prices and the effects of the Ukrainian crisis The country devalued its currency by 19% in February 2014.
Human Rights Watch said: "this absurd case displays the lengths to which Kazakh authorities are willing to go to bully critical media into silence."
From January to September 2014 Kazakhstan's GDP grew at 4%.
According to the 2009 Census data, there are very few Christians outside the Slavic and Germanic ethnic groups:
In 2000, Kazakhstan adopted a new tax code in an effort to consolidate these gains.
The banking system of Kazakhstan is developing rapidly and the system's capitalization now exceeds $1 billion.
The order was evaded by printing under other titles, such as ''Not That Respublika''.
The banking industry of the Republic of Kazakhstan experienced a pronounced boom and bust cycle over 2000s decade.
Education consists of three main phases: primary education (forms 1–4), basic general education (forms 5–9) and senior level education (forms 10–11 or 12) divided into continued general education and vocational education.
Though traditionally referring only to ethnic Kazakhs, including those living in China, Russia, Turkey, Uzbekistan and other neighboring countries, the term "Kazakh" is increasingly being used to refer to any inhabitant of Kazakhstan, including non-Kazakhs.
One year later, the Global Competitiveness Report ranked Kazakhstan 50th in most competitive markets.
: World IBF, WBO and IBO heavyweight champion Vladimir Klitschko was born in Kazakhstan in 1976.
Kazakhstan is the world's largest landlocked country, and the ninth largest in the world, with an area of .
Estimates suggest that the population of Kazakhstan would be closer to 28–35 million if there had been no starvation or emigration of the Kazakh.
According to the 2010–11 World Economic Forum in Global Competitiveness Report, Kazakhstan was ranked 72nd in the world in economic competitiveness.
Islam is the largest religion in Kazakhstan, followed by Orthodox Christianity.
After decades of religious suppression by the Soviet Union, the coming of independence witnessed a surge in expression of ethnic identity, partly through religion.
The ABA Rule of Law Initiative of the American Bar Association has programs to train justice sector professionals in Kazakhstan.
At the 2011 Asian Winter Games, the team won the gold medal.
Despite the lingering uncertainty of the global economy, Kazakhstan’s economy has been stable.
The Kazakh national movement, which began in the late 19th century, sought to preserve the native language and identity by resisting the attempts of the Russian Empire to assimilate and stifle them.
Another 22% devaluation occurred in August 2015.
Recently, several secondary schools, specialized schools, magnet schools, gymnasiums, lyceums and linguistic and technical gymnasiums have been founded.
Proceedings eventually involved $84 million in the US and another $60 million US in Switzerland
Development of petroleum, natural gas, and mineral extractions, has attracted most of the over $40 billion in foreign investment in Kazakhstan since 1993 and accounts for some 57% of the nation's industrial output (or approximately 13% of gross domestic product).
; Judo : Askhat Zhitkeyev won silver at the 2008 Olympics and Yeldos Smetov won the 2010 Junior World Championships in the  category.
In October 2014, Kazakhstan introduced its first overseas dollar bonds in 14 years.
Kazakhstan is home to a large number of prominent contributors to literature, science and philosophy: Abay Qunanbayuli, Mukhtar Auezov, Gabit Musirepov, Kanysh Satpayev, Mukhtar Shakhanov, Saken Seyfullin, Jambyl Jabayev, among many others.
Hollywood director Timur Bekmambetov is from Kazakhstan and has become active in bridging Hollywood to the Kazakhstan film industry.
Some Kazakh wine is produced in the mountains to the east of Almaty.
Some figures show that non-denominational Muslims form the majority, while others indicate that most Muslims in the country are Sunnis following the Hanafi school.
The competition for land and water that ensued between the Kazakh and the newcomers caused great resentment against colonial rule during the final years of Tsarist Russia.
It is said that 3.5 billion tons of oil and 2.5 trillion cubic meters of gas could be found in that area.
Education is universal and mandatory through to the secondary level and the adult literacy rate is 99.5%.
None of the opposition parties has reached the benchmark 7% level of the seats.
Kazakhstan’s fiscal situation is stable.
Precipitation varies between arid and semi-arid conditions.
The name "Kazakh" comes from the ancient Turkic word ''qaz'', "to wander", reflecting the Kazakhs' nomadic culture.
It is believed that Nazarbayev’s mediation is positively received by both Russia and Ukraine.
The steep canyon slopes, columns and arches rise to heights of between 150 and 300 metres.
They also drink their national beverage, which consists of fermented mare's milk.
The Russians began advancing into the Kazakh steppe in the 18th century, and by the mid-19th century, they nominally ruled all of Kazakhstan as part of the Russian Empire.
The total value of the stimulus programs amounted to $21 billion, or 20 per cent of the country’s GDP, with $4 billion going to stabilize the financial sector.
In December 1986 mass demonstrations by young ethnic Kazakhs, later called the Jeltoqsan riot, took place in Almaty to protest the replacement of the First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Kazakh SSR Dinmukhamed Konayev with Gennady Kolbin from the Russian SFSR.
For example, after the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, the Soviets transported approximately 400,000 Volga Germans from Western Russia to Kazakhstan in September 1941.
Kazakh agriculture still has many environmental problems from mismanagement during its years in the Soviet Union.
Hundreds of mosques, churches, and other religious structures were built in the span of a few years, with the number of religious associations rising from 670 in 1990 to 4,170 today.
are appointed by region ''akim''s.
Together with a rational approach to banking and finance policy, this has helped push Kazakhstan’s banking system to a higher level of development.
Bigach crater, at , is a Pliocene or Miocene asteroid impact crater,  in diameter and estimated to be 5±3-million years old.
Other minority languages spoken in Kazakhstan include Uzbek, Ukrainian, Uyghur, Kyrgyz, and Tatar.
Kazakhstan will be able to reach the UN standards by 2019 or 2020, if in the medium term the housing growth rate remains within 7 percent.
Serik Aprymov’s ''Little Brother'' (''Bauyr'') won at the Central and Eastern Europe Film Festival goEast from the German Federal Foreign Office.
Soviet rule took hold, and a Communist apparatus steadily worked to fully integrate Kazakhstan into the Soviet system.
English, as well as Turkish, have gained popularity among younger people since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
On 1 December 2007, it was announced that Kazakhstan had been chosen to chair the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe for the year 2010.
Ablai Khan participated in the most significant battles against the Dzungar from the 1720s to the 1750s, for which he was declared a "''batyr''" ("hero") by the people.
Millions of political prisoners and undesired ethnic groups were internally exiled to Kazakhstan from other parts of the Soviet Union during the 1930s and 1940s; many of the deportation victims were deported to Siberia or Kazakhstan merely due to their ethnic heritage or beliefs.
Islam is the religion of about 70% of the population, with Christianity practiced by 26%; Kazakhstan officially allows freedom of religion, but religious leaders who oppose the government are suppressed.
Article 39 states: "Human rights and freedoms shall not be restricted in any way."
The Kazakh suffered from the frequent raids against them by the Volga Kalmyk.
The President may veto legislation that has been passed by the Parliament and is also the commander in chief of the armed forces.
; Bandy : The Kazakhstan national bandy team is among the best in the world and has won the bronze medal at the Bandy World Championship many times, including the last time in 2015.
; Football : The most popular sport in Kazakhstan.
As of May 2014, Kazakhstan attracted $190 billion in gross foreign investments since its independence in 1991 and it leads the CIS countries in terms of FDI attracted per capita.
Many moved due to the policy of population transfer in the Soviet Union and others were forced into involuntary settlements in the Soviet Union.
After several years of rapid expansion in the mid-2000s, the banking industry collapsed in 2008.
Kazakhstan is the dominant nation of Central Asia economically, generating 60% of the region's GDP, primarily through its oil/gas industry.
Kazakhstan has vast mineral resources.
Additionally, undefeated middleweight Gennady Golovkin holds the WBA and IBO titles, as well as the WBC interim title.
"Steppe Eagle" focuses on building coalitions and gives participating nations the opportunity to work together.
In 2011 Switzerland confiscated $48 million US in Kazakh assets from Swiss bank accounts, as a result of a bribery investigation in the United States.
On 17 October 2013, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) accepted Kazakhstan as "EITI Compliant", meaning that the country has a basic and functional process to ensure the regular disclosure of natural resource revenues.
Kazakhstan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs released a statement on 26 January 2015: "We are firmly convinced that there is no alternative to peace negotiations as a way to resolve the crisis in the south-eastern Ukraine."
Experts believe that no matter how the Ukraine crisis develops, Kazakhstan’s relations with the European Union will remain normal.
It shares borders with Russia, China, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan, and also adjoins a large part of the Caspian Sea.
Its first and, to date (2016), only President is Nursultan Nazarbayev.
The UN’s recommended standard for housing stands at 30 square meters per person.
Kazakhstan furthered its reforms by adopting a new land code on 20 June 2003, and a new customs code on 5 April 2003.
President Nazarbayev said of the war in Ukraine, "The fratricidal war has brought true devastation to eastern Ukraine, and it is a common task to stop the war there, strengthen Ukraine’s independence and secure territorial integrity of Ukraine."
Vocational Education usually lasts 3 or 4 years.
The tsars effectively ruled over most of the territory belonging to what is now the Republic of Kazakhstan.
In 1999, Kazakhstan had applied for observer status at the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly.
Total governmental debt was $4.2 billion, 14% of GDP.
Sir Suma Chakrabarti, the President of the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), co-chaired the Kazakhstan Foreign Investors’ Council with President Nursultan Nazarbayev.
Kazakhstan's National Security Committee (UQK) was established on 13 June 1992.
The Golden Horde further propagated Islam amongst the tribes in the region during the 14th century.
The Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic contributed five national divisions to the Soviet Union's World War II effort.
Following the August 1991 aborted coup attempt in Moscow and the subsequent dissolution of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan declared independence on 16 December 1991.
In early 2014, a court also issued a cease publication order to the small-circulation Assandi-Times newspaper, saying it was a part of the Respublika group.
Overall the estimate of Kazakhstan's oil deposits is 6.1 billion tons.
A factor that contributed strongly to this was Lavrentii Beria's decision to test a nuclear bomb on the territory of Kazakh SSR in Semey in 1949.
On 17 August 2007, elections to the lower house of parliament were held and a coalition led by the ruling Nur-Otan Party, which included the Asar Party, the Civil Party of Kazakhstan, and the Agrarian Party, won every seat with 88% of the vote.
While ancient cities Taraz (Aulie-Ata) and Hazrat-e Turkestan had long served as important way-stations along the Silk Road connecting Asia and Europe, true political consolidation began only with the Mongol invasion of the early 13th century.
"The law does not adequately provide for an independent judiciary.
It has no common name in English, but is known in its native Kazakhstan as ''alma''.
The Kokand Khanate used the weakness of Kazakh jüzs after Dzungar and Kalmyk raids and conquered present Southeastern Kazakhstan, including Almaty, the formal capital in the first quarter of the 19th century.
Although the Russian and Kazakh banking systems share several common features, there are also some fundamental differences.
The capital is Astana, where it was moved in 1997 from Almaty, the country's largest city.
A small naval force is maintained on the Caspian Sea.
Human rights observers alleged that law enforcement officials dissuaded detainees from seeing an attorney, gathered evidence through preliminary questioning before a detainee’s attorney arrived, and in some cases used corrupt defense attorneys to gather evidence.
The decline in population that began after 1989 has been arrested and possibly reversed.
In the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to expand its influence into Central Asia.
In 1936 Kazakhstan became a Soviet republic.
Major seas, lakes and rivers include the Aral Sea, Lake Balkhash and Lake Zaysan, the Charyn River and gorge and the Ili, Irtysh, Ishim, Ural and Syr Darya rivers.
Kazakhstan sent 49 military engineers to Iraq to assist the US post-invasion mission in Iraq.
The 2015 Human Rights Watch report on Kazakhstan said that the country "heavily restricts freedom of assembly, speech, and religion.
Although judges were among the most highly paid government employees, lawyers and human rights monitors alleged that judges, prosecutors, and other officials solicited bribes in exchange for favorable rulings in the majority of criminal cases."
The most serious uprising, the Central Asian Revolt, occurred in 1916.
Kazakhstan holds about 4 billion tons of proven recoverable oil reserves and 2,000 cubic kilometers (480&nbsp;cu&nbsp;mi) of gas.
Men and women make up 48.3% and 51.7% of the population, respectively.
It lies between latitudes 40° and 56° N, and longitudes 46° and 88° E. While located primarily in Asia, a small portion of Kazakhstan is also located west of the Urals in Eastern Europe.
It includes the Service of Internal Security, Military Counterintelligence, Border Guard, several Commando units, and Foreign Intelligence (Barlau).
The government of Kazakhstan has set prices for energy produced from renewable sources.
The latter is considered as the most important part of KNB.
The Constitutional Council recently affirmed these rights by ruling that a proposed law limiting the rights of certain individuals to practice their religion was declared unconstitutional.
The number of settlers rose still further once the Trans-Aral Railway from Orenburg to Tashkent was completed in 1906.
Pension fund capital is being invested almost exclusively in corporate and government bonds, including government of Kazakhstan Eurobonds.
During this period the Little Horde participated in the 1723–1730 war against the Dzungar, following their "Great Disaster" invasion of Kazakh territories.
Kookmin and UniCredit have both recently entered the Kazakhstan's financial services market through acquisitions and stake-building.
The partnership will boost investment and drive forward reforms in the country.
(Primary education is preceded by one year of pre-school education.)
These are not capable of processing the total crude output so much of it is exported to Russia.
The government has continued to follow a conservative fiscal policy by controlling budget spending and accumulating oil revenue savings in its Oil Fund – Samruk-Kazyna.
Kazakhstan's government relocated its capital from Almaty, established under the Soviet Union, to Astana on 10 December 1997.
On 4 December 2005, Nursultan Nazarbayev was reelected in an apparent landslide victory.
Kazakhstan is a unitary republic.
The executive branch sharply limited judicial independence.
The price for 1 kilowatt-hour produced by small hydro-power plants is 16.71 tenge ($0.09), and from biogas plants 32.23 tenge ($0.18).
The Kazakh attacked Russian and Cossack settlers and military garrisons.
In total, there are 160 deposits with over 2.7 billion tons of petroleum.
During the 1930s many renowned Kazakh writers, thinkers, poets, politicians and historians were killed on Stalin's orders, both as part of the Great Purge and as a methodical pattern of suppressing Kazakh identity and culture.
Kazakhstan achieved its goal of entering the top 50 most competitive countries in 2013, and has maintained its position in the 2014–2015 World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report that was published at the beginning of September 2014.
In 2002 the country became the first sovereign in the former Soviet Union to receive an investment-grade credit rating from an international credit rating agency.
The price of 1 kilowatt-hour for energy produced by wind power plants was set at 22.68 tenge ($0.12).
Nursultan Nazarbayev was re-elected with 97.7% of votes.
Gas production in Kazakhstan in 2003, amounted to 13.9 billion cubic meters (491 billion&nbsp;cu.&nbsp;ft), up 22.7% compared to 2002, including natural gas production of 7.3 billion cubic meters (258 billion&nbsp;cu.&nbsp;ft).
The beginning of the 18th century marked the zenith of the Kazakh Khanate.
Torture remains common in places of detention."
Postgraduate education leads to the ''Kandidat Nauk'' ("Candidate of Sciences") and the Doctor of Sciences (Ph.D.).
Inflation has not been under strict control, however, registering 6.6% in 2002, 6.8% in 2003, and 6.4% in 2004.
There are a total of 2,300 mosques, all of them are affiliated with the "Spiritual Association of Muslims of Kazakhstan", headed by a supreme mufti.
With the adoption of the Laws on Education and on Higher Education, a private sector has been established and several private institutions have been licensed.
President Nazarbayev signed into law tax concessions to promote foreign direct investment which include a 10-year exemption from corporation tax, an 8-year exemption from property tax, and a 10-year freeze on most other taxes.
Political disunion, tribal rivalries, and the diminishing importance of overland trade routes between East and West weakened the Kazakh Khanate.
He insisted on presidential elections for a five-year term.
Kazakhstan is thought to be one of the places that the apple originated, particularly the wild ancestor of ''Malus domestica'', ''Malus sieversii''.
The housing market of Kazakhstan has grown since 2010.
Major oil and gas fields and recoverable oil reserves are Tengiz with ; Karachaganak with  and 1,350&nbsp;km³ of natural gas; and Kashagan with 7 to .
Banking technology and personnel qualifications alike are stronger in Kazakhstan than in Russia.
The housing stock rose over the year to 32.7 million squares, which is nearly 11% increase.
According to the World Bank's report, Kazakhstan is among the top 40% of countries in the world that are considered the most politically stable and free of violence.
The Kazakhs nomads would raid people of Russian territory for slaves until the Russian conquest of Kazakhstan.
The free practice of religious beliefs and the establishment of full freedom of religion led to an increase of religious activity.
The US Census Bureau International Database lists the current population of Kazakhstan as 15,460,484, while United Nations sources such as the UN Population Division give an estimate of 15,753,460.
As of 1 January 2012, the pension assets were about $17 billion (KZT 2.5 trillion).
The State Accumulating Pension Fund, the only state-owned fund, was privatized in 2006.
It had disrupted the traditional nomadic lifestyle and livestock-based economy, and people were suffering from hunger and starvation, with some Kazakh tribes being decimated.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Kazakh Anti-Corruption Agency signed a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in February 2015.
Tourism is a rapidly growing industry in Kazakhstan and it is joining the international tourism networking.
Again there was a dramatic semifinal against Sweden, as Kazakhstan was leading 5–3 with a few minutes remaining and finally losing in a penalty shoot-out.
One of the factors that attract foreign direct investments is country's political stability.
Elections to the Majilis in September 2004, yielded a lower house dominated by the pro-government Otan Party, headed by President Nazarbayev.
In mid-2014, Kazakhstan adopted new criminal, criminal executive, criminal procedural, and administrative codes, and a new law on trade unions, which contain articles restricting fundamental freedoms and are incompatible with international standards.
The nations of Kazakhstan, Russia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan established the Eurasian Economic Community in 2000, to revive earlier efforts to harmonize trade tariffs and to create a free trade zone under a customs union.
On 11 November 2014, President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev delivered an unexpected state-of-the-nation address in Astana at an extended session of the Political Council of the Nur Otan party, introducing a "Nurly Zhol" (Bright Path), a new economic policy that implies massive state investment in infrastructure over the next several years.
Russia built its first outpost, Orsk, in 1735.
The inaccessibility of the canyon provided a safe haven for a rare ash tree Fraxinus sogdiana that survived the Ice Age and is now also grown in some other areas.
Both sides resisted the communist government until late 1919.
Since 2002, Kazakhstan has sought to manage strong inflows of foreign currency without sparking inflation.
