Kentucky Lake's 2,064 miles (3,322&nbsp;km) of shoreline, 160,300 acres (64,900 ha) of water surface, and 4,008,000 acre feet (4,944 Gl) of flood storage are the most of any lake in the TVA system.
The longest pedestrian-only bridge is also found in Kentucky—the Newport Southbank Bridge, popularly known as the "Purple People Bridge", connecting Newport to Cincinnati, Ohio.
Kentucky is the 37th most extensive and the 26th most populous of the 50 United States.
'''Kentucky colonel''' is the highest title of honor bestowed by the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
Heavy Rock band Black Stone Cherry hails from rural Edmonton, Indie rock band My Morning Jacket with lead singer and guitarist Jim James also originated out of Louisville, on the local independent music Scene.
The resulting "Unbridled Spirit" brand was the result of a $500,000 contract with New West, a Kentucky-based public relations advertising and marketing firm, to develop a viable brand and tag line.
Iron and petroleum production, as well as the transport of coal by rail and barge, have been historical pillars of the region's economy.
Bowling Green, the state's third-largest city and home to the only assembly plant in the world that manufactures the Chevrolet Corvette, opened the National Corvette Museum in 1994.
Kentucky is one of four U.S. states to officially use the term ''commonwealth''.
In light of this development, Congress thought that it would be "unadvisable" to admit Kentucky into the Union, as it could do so "under the Articles of Confederation" only, but not "under the Constitution", and so declined to take action.
Kentucky is more similar to the Upland South in terms of ancestry that is predominantly American.
The county and surrounding area is the most populated region in the state that is not part of a Micropolitan Statistical Area or a Metropolitan Statistical Area containing nearly 200,000 people in five counties: Floyd County, Martin County, Letcher County, and neighboring Mingo County, West Virginia.
The new complex employs nearly 4,300 soldiers and civilians.
Kentucky officially became the fifteenth state in the Union on June 1, 1792.
The population of the area has since stabilized, however, with the medical service industry taking a greater role in the local economy.
Kentucky's northern border is formed by the Ohio River and its western border by the Mississippi River.
Kentucky has been part of two of the most successful wildlife reintroduction projects in United States history.
Unlike federal judges, who are usually appointed, justices serving on Kentucky state courts are chosen by the state's populace in non-partisan elections.
This includes a natural increase since the last census of 77,156 people (that is 287,222 births minus 210,066 deaths) and an increase due to net migration of 59,604 people into the state.
The fourth-largest city, Owensboro, gives credence to its nickname of "Barbecue Capital of the World" by hosting the annual International Bar-B-Q Festival.
Rock bands Cage the Elephant, Sleeper Agent, and Morning Teleportation are also from Bowling Green.
Groups such as the Ridgetop Shawnee in the early 21st century organised as a non-profit to increase awareness of Native Americans in Kentucky.
Years later, Kentucky has shown progress, but most agree that further reform is needed.
Only Missouri and Tennessee, both of which border eight states, touch more.
London significantly grew in population in the 2000s, from 5,692 in 2000 to 7,993 in 2010.
There are two general tiers: major research institutions (the University of Kentucky and the University of Louisville) and regional universities, which encompasses the remaining 6 schools.
The R&B group Midnight Star and Hip-Hop group Nappy Roots were both formed in Kentucky, as were country acts The Kentucky Headhunters, Montgomery Gentry and Halfway to Hazard, The Judds, as well as Dove Award-winning Christian groups Audio Adrenaline (rock) and Bride (metal).
On several occasions the region's residents petitioned the General Assembly and the Confederation Congress for separation from Virginia and statehood.
The ''Cardinal'' (trains 50 and 51) is the line that offers Amtrak service to Ashland, South Shore, Maysville and South Portsmouth.
After a vowel, the /r/ may be weak or missing.
Other areas in Kentucky are reclaiming old railways in rail trail projects.
Due to a decline in the area's industrial base, Ashland has seen a sizable reduction in its population since 1990.
The Clarkson Honeyfest is held the last Thursday, Friday and Saturday in September, and is the "Official State Honey Festival of Kentucky".
Before the passage of House Bill 1, most of these colleges were under the control of the University of Kentucky.
The other two states officially called "commonwealths" are Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.
Though the series of quakes did change the area geologically and affect the (small number of) inhabitants of the area at the time, the Kentucky Bend was formed because of a surveying error, not the New Madrid Earthquake.
* The Baptist Denomination is associated with:
The Ashland area, including the counties of Boyd and Greenup, are part of the Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH, Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).
Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch'' and Fontaine Fox's comic strip, the "Toonerville Trolley.
Americans of Scots-Irish and English stock are present throughout the entire state.
Irregularities with the execution led to this becoming the last public execution in the United States.
Kentucky holds elections for these offices every 4 years in the years preceding Presidential election years.
* In Louisville, Bellarmine University and Spalding University are affiliated with the Roman Catholic Church.
Today Kentucky ranks 5th nationally in goat farming, 8th in beef cattle production, and 14th in corn production.
In addition, the top 28 wealthiest places in Kentucky are in Jefferson County and seven of the 15 wealthiest counties in the state are located in the Louisville CSA.
Those convicted of capital crimes after March 31, 1998 are always executed by lethal injection; those convicted on or before this date may opt for the electric chair.
In the winter of 1997, the Kentucky Department of Fish and Wildlife Resources began to re-stock elk in the state's eastern counties, which had been extinct from the area for over 150 years.
Republican Allison Ball is the current Treasurer.
Somewhat incongruously, when entering Lexington-Fayette the highway signs read "Fayette County" while most signs leading into Louisville-Jefferson simply read "Welcome to Louisville Metro".
For instance, ''Coop'' has the vowel of ''put'', but the root rhymes with ''boot''.
Contemporary Christian music star Steven Curtis Chapman is a Paducah native, and Rock and Roll Hall of Famers The Everly Brothers are closely connected with Muhlenberg County, where older brother Don was born.
On January 30, 1900, Governor William Goebel, flanked by two bodyguards, was mortally wounded by an assassin while walking to the State Capitol in downtown Frankfort.
Today Kentucky's economy has expanded to importance in non agricultural terms as well, especially in auto manufacturing, energy fuel production, and medical facilities.
Spanish is the second-most-spoken language in Kentucky, after English.
Kentucky's primary airports include Louisville International Airport (Standiford Field (SDF)) of Louisville, Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport (CVG) of Cincinnati/Covington, and Blue Grass Airport (LEX) in Lexington.
** University of the Cumberlands, in Williamsburg
The Metro Louisville government area has a 2010 population of 741,096.
(Before 1992 the lieutenant governor assumed power any time the governor was out of the state.)
Louisville is home to the headquarters of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) and their printing press.
Blues legend W. C. Handy and R&B singer Wilson Pickett also spent considerable time in Kentucky.
Old Louisville, the largest historic preservation district in the United States featuring Victorian architecture and the third largest overall, hosts the St. James Court Art Show, the largest outdoor art show in the United States.
In several places, the rivers have changed courses away from the original borders.
King Crimson guitarist Adrian Belew is from Covington.
This policy was successfully challenged in the United States Supreme Court in the case of ''Berea College v. Kentucky'' in 1908.
It was the site of the first commercial winery in the United States (started in present-day Jessamine County in 1799) and due to the high calcium content of the soil in the Bluegrass region quickly became a major horse breeding (and later racing) area.
Today, less than 9% of the state's total population is African American, and it is highly urbanized, concentrated near Louisville.
This decision effectively segregated Berea until the landmark ''Brown v. Board of Education'' in 1954.
Nevertheless, during the 19th century, Kentucky did receive a substantial number of German immigrants, who settled mostly in the Midwest, along the Ohio River primarily in Louisville, Covington and Newport.
This campaign was neither a failure nor a success.
The related toll booths have been demolished.
Appeals are heard in the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, based in Cincinnati, Ohio.
Kentucky was a slave state, and blacks once comprised over one-quarter of its population.
The Black Patch Tobacco Wars, a vigilante action, occurred in Western Kentucky in the early 20th century.
* In Owensboro, Kentucky Wesleyan College is associated with the United Methodist Church and Brescia University is associated with the Roman Catholic Church.
The NASCAR Nationwide Series and the Camping World Truck Series also race there, and previously the IndyCar Series.
Kentucky has been the site of much educational reform over the past two decades.
With less than 8% of its current population being black, Kentucky is rarely included in modern-day definitions of the Black Belt, despite a relatively significant rural African American population in the Central and Western areas of the state.
The ''City of New Orleans'' (trains 58 and 59) serve Fulton.
These authors include Wendell Berry, Silas House, Barbara Kingsolver, Maurice Manning, and Bobbie Ann Mason, among others.
Transylvania is a liberal arts university, consistently ranked in the top tier in the country.
As more settlers entered the area, warfare broke out because the Native Americans considered the settlers to be encroaching on their traditional hunting grounds.
Transylvania University, located in Lexington, is the oldest university west of the Allegheny Mountains, founded in 1780.
* In Lexington, Transylvania University is affiliated with the Disciples of Christ.
Kentucky's two U.S.
CVG is also the largest O&D airport and base for Allegiant Air, along with home to a maintenance for US Airways Express subsidiary PSA Airlines.
One of the major regions in Kentucky is the Bluegrass Region in central Kentucky, which houses two of its major cities, Louisville and Lexington.
Kentucky was one of the border states during the American Civil War.
Once nearly extinct here, wild turkeys thrive throughout today's Kentucky.
One such project is Louisville's Big Four Bridge.
In 1786, George Rogers Clark led a group of 1,200&nbsp;men in actions against Shawnee towns on the Wabash River to begin the Northwest Indian War.
Bardstown celebrates its heritage as a major bourbon-producing region with the Kentucky Bourbon Festival.
The Pendennis Club in Louisville is the birthplace of the ''Old Fashioned'' cocktail.
Kentucky's two most populous counties, Jefferson and Fayette, have their governments consolidated with the governments of their largest cities.
The state is divided into six Congressional Districts, represented by Republicans Ed Whitfield (1st), Brett Guthrie (2nd), Thomas Massie (4th), Hal Rogers (5th) and Andy Barr (6th) and Democrat John Yarmuth (3rd).
The latter figure is the population of the so-called "balance"—the parts of Jefferson County that were either unincorporated or within the City of Louisville before the formation of the merged government in 2003.
In northeast Kentucky, the greater Ashland area is an important transportation, manufacturing, and medical center.
In 1989, the Kentucky Supreme Court ruled that the state's education system was unconstitutional.
The sitting governor of the Commonwealth of Kentucky bestows the honor of a colonel's commission, by issuance of letters patent.
The Northern Kentucky area is served by the ''Cardinal'' at the Cincinnati Museum Center at Union Terminal.
However, by the time that European colonial explorers and settlers began entering Kentucky in greater numbers in the mid-18th century, there were no major Native American settlements in the region.
The Iroquois had controlled much of the Ohio River valley for hunting from their bases in what is now New York.
The Kentucky intangible tax was repealed under House Bill 272.
Goebel was contesting the Kentucky gubernatorial election of 1899, which William S. Taylor was initially believed to have won.
Speech patterns in the state generally reflect the first settlers' Virginia and Kentucky backgrounds.
Kentucky was also home to Mildred and Patty Hill, the Louisville sisters credited with composing the tune to the ditty Happy Birthday to You in 1893; Loretta Lynn (Johnson County), Brian Littrell and Kevin Richardson of the Backstreet Boys, and Billy Ray Cyrus (Flatwoods).
The Kentucky Railway Museum is located in nearby New Haven.
The largest county in Kentucky by area is Pike, which contains Pikeville and suburb Coal Run Village .
The Auditor of Public Accounts is Republican Mike Harmon.
They established a Confederate government of Kentucky with its capital in Bowling Green.
Hodgenville, the birthplace of Abraham Lincoln, hosts the annual Lincoln Days Celebration, and also hosted the kick-off for the National Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Celebration in February 2008.
African Americans, who made up 25% of Kentucky's population before the Civil War, primarily in the Bluegrass region, declined in number during the 20th century.
The term was used for Kentucky as it had also been used by Virginia, from which Kentucky was created.
In 2014, Kentucky was found to be the most affordable U.S. state in which to live.
After fleeing to Indiana, Taylor was indicted as a co-conspirator in Goebel's assassination.
Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 27,435 people, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 32,169 people.
From 1964 through 2004, Kentucky voted for the eventual winner of the election for President of the United States.
Today, most barge traffic on Kentucky waterways consists of coal that is shipped from both the Eastern and Western Coalfields, about half of which is used locally to power many power plants located directly off the Ohio River, with the rest being exported to other countries, most notably Japan.
In about the 10th century, the Kentucky's natives' variety of corn became highly productive, supplanting the Eastern Agricultural Complex, and replaced it with a maize-based agriculture in the Mississippian era.
* In Wilmore, Asbury University (a separate institution from the seminary), is associated with the Christian College Consortium.
Some mining communities in far Southeastern Kentucky have populations that are between five and 10 percent African American.
Where politics are concerned, Kentucky historically has been very hard-fought and leaned slightly toward the Democratic Party since 1860, when the Whig Party dissolved.
They are also home to the Frontier Leagues Florence Freedom and several teams in the MCFL.
The state was not included among the "Solid South" as the eastern section tended to support Republican candidates.
Other elected constitutional offices include the Secretary of State, Attorney General, Auditor of Public Accounts, State Treasurer and Commissioner of Agriculture.
Kentucky is home to several seminaries.
Only three people have been executed in Kentucky since the U.S. Supreme Court re-instituted the practice in 1976.
(Kentucky County was abolished on June 30, 1780, when it was divided into Fayette, Jefferson, and Lincoln counties.)
Run along a  stretch of rail purchased from CSX in 1987, guests are served a four-course meal as they make a two-and-a-half hour round-trip between Bardstown and Limestone Springs.
Though it has only three major natural lakes, Kentucky is home to many artificial lakes.
25,527), those being Augusta, Maine (pop.
Hunters officially reported a record 29,006 birds taken during the 23-day season in Spring 2009.
On December 18, 1789 Virginia again gave its consent to Kentucky statehood.
In November 2011, OVW became the primary developmental territory for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA).
This is especially true of the state's three Division I Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) programs, including the Kentucky Wildcats, the Western Kentucky Hilltoppers, and the Louisville Cardinals.
Goebel is the only governor of a U.S. state to have been assassinated while in office.
One petition, which had Virginia's assent, came before the Confederation Congress in early July 1788.
The statutes are enforced by local police, sheriffs and deputy sheriffs, and constables and deputy constables.
Of the classes that are subject to local taxation, three have special rates set by the General Assembly, one by the Kentucky Supreme Court and the remaining classes are subject to the full local rate, which includes the tax rate set by the local taxing bodies plus all voted levies.
Many of the largest ports in the United States are located in or adjacent to Kentucky, including:
As a result of the tobacco industry monopoly, tobacco farmers in the area were forced to sell their crops at prices that were too low.
Renfro Valley, Kentucky is home to Renfro Valley Entertainment Center and the Kentucky Music Hall of Fame and is known as "Kentucky's Country Music Capital", a designation given it by the Kentucky State Legislature in the late 1980s.
In the 2000 census, there were 20,000 people in the state who identified as Native American (0.49%).
Thus, Kentucky held gubernatorial elections in 2011 and 2015.
Southeastern Kentucky was populated by a large group of multi-racial settlers, sometimes called Melungeons, in the early 19th century.
In recent presidential elections, the state has become a Republican stronghold, supporting that party's presidential candidates by double-digit margins from 2000 through 2012.
Kentucky has historically been a major coal producer, but employment by "King Coal" has been in a 30-year decline there, and the number of people employed in the coal industry there dropped by more than half between 2011 and 2015.
Kentucky's cuisine is generally similar to traditional southern cooking, although in some areas of the state it can blend elements of both the South and Midwest.
As of the 2000 census, the MSA had a population of 288,649.
In the federal judiciary, Kentucky is served by two United States district courts: the Eastern District of Kentucky, with its primary seat in Lexington, and the Western District of Kentucky, with its primary seat in Louisville.
Pike County contains slightly over 68,000 people.
Though it was meant to embrace southern values, many Kentuckians rejected the slogan as cheesy and ineffective.
Only Maryland, Delaware and West Virginia have higher German ancestry percentages than Kentucky among Census-defined Southern states, although Kentucky's percentage is closer to Arkansas and Virginia's than the previously named state's percentages.
The bluegrass groups Driftwood and Kentucky Rain, along with Nick Lachey of the pop band 98 Degrees are also from Kentucky.
In 2008, the population density of the state was 101.7 people per square mile.
The International Bluegrass Music Museum is located in Owensboro, while the annual Festival of the Bluegrass is held in Lexington.
Waterworks Road is part of the only land border between Indiana and Kentucky.
The lone survivor was the flight's first officer, James Polehinke, who doctors determined to be brain damaged and unable to recall the crash at all.
Kentucky has a broadly based classified property tax system.
The Christian creationist apologetics group Answers in Genesis, along with its Creation Museum, is headquartered in Petersburg, Kentucky.
As of September 2016, 51.67% of the state's voters were officially registered as Democrats, 40.25% were registered Republican, and 8.09% were registered with some other political party or as independents.
* Cincinnati-Northern Kentucky, 5th largest inland port and 43rd overall
French explorers in the 17th century documented numerous tribes living in Kentucky until the Beaver Wars in the 1670s.
Kentucky's body of laws, known as the Kentucky Revised Statutes (KRS), were enacted in 1942 to better organize and clarify the whole of Kentucky law.
A female gray wolf shot in 2013 in Hart County, Kentucky by a hunter was the first verified sighting of the species in Kentucky in modern times.
In June 2007, a law went into effect raising the speed limit on rural portions of Kentucky Interstates from .
13,876), and Montpelier, Vermont (pop.
In addition to seminaries, there are several colleges affiliated with denominations:
Road tunnels include the interstate Cumberland Gap Tunnel and the rural Nada Tunnel.
The response of the General Assembly was passage of the Kentucky Education Reform Act (KERA) the following year.
The Kentucky Derby is a horse race held annually in Louisville on the first Saturday in May.
All classes of property, unless exempted by the Constitution, are taxed by the state, although at widely varying rates.
Many migrated to the industrial North and Midwest in the Great Migration for jobs.
The commonwealth's chief prosecutor, law enforcement officer, and law officer is the Attorney General, currently Democrat Andy Beshear.
Under the current Kentucky Constitution, the lieutenant governor assumes the duties of the governor only if the governor is incapacitated.
The county had a population that is 20% African American.
A 2008 study found that Kentucky's Supreme Court to be the least influential high court in the nation with its decisions rarely being followed by other states.
Ending the tolls some seven months ahead of schedule was generally agreed to have been a positive economic development for transportation in Kentucky.
Republican Ryan Quarles is the current Commissioner of Agriculture.
In June 2011, Jerry "2 Feather" Thornton, a Cherokee, led a team in the Voyage of Native American Awareness 2011 canoe journey, to begin on the Green River in Rochester, Kentucky and  travel through to the Ohio River at Henderson.
Senators are Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and Rand Paul, both Republicans.
The airport is the 9th busiest airport in the U.S. and 40th in the world based on passenger and cargo operations.
Kentucky adopted the Jim Crow system of racial segregation in most public spheres after the Civil War, but the state never disenfranchised African American citizens to the level of the Deep South states, and it peacefully integrated its schools after the 1954 ''Brown v. Board of Education'' verdict, later adopting the first state civil rights act in the South in 1966.
Bethea was publicly hanged in Owensboro for the rape and murder of Lischia Edwards.
In May 2010, the Army Human Resource Center of Excellence, the largest office building in the state at nearly 900,000-square-feet, opened at Fort Knox.
More than 21,000 of those people (as of 2010) reside within the city limits of Ashland.
The executive branch is headed by the governor who serves as both head of state and head of government.
Growth has been especially rapid in Laurel County, which outgrew areas such as Scott and Jessamine counties around Lexington or Shelby and Nelson Counties around Louisville.
Residents of Clarkson in Grayson County celebrate their city's ties to the honey industry by celebrating the Clarkson Honeyfest.
It was quickly seen that the slogan did not encourage tourism as much as initially hoped for.
Although only one town in the "Tri Cities", namely Somerset, currently has more than 12,000 people, the area has been experiencing heightened population and job growth since the 1990s.
There are 173 school districts and 1,233 public schools in Kentucky.
Hunter S. Thompson is also a native of the state.
In the 2005 case of ''McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky'', the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the decision of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals that a display of the Ten Commandments in the Whitley City courthouse of McCreary County was unconstitutional.
Some types of intangible property included: bonds, notes, retail repurchase agreements, accounts receivable, trusts, enforceable contracts sale of real estate (land contracts), money in hand, money in safe deposit boxes, annuities, interests in estates, loans to stockholders, and commercial paper.
For the 2010 to 2011 school year, there were approximately 647,827 students enrolled in public school.
The Northern Kentucky area (the seven Kentucky counties in the Cincinnati MSA) had a population of 425,483 in 2010.
Scottish Americans, English Americans and Scotch-Irish Americans have heavily influenced Kentucky culture, and are present in every part of the state.
Kentucky has both the largest artificial lake east of the Mississippi in water volume (Lake Cumberland) and surface area (Kentucky Lake).
The House of Representatives has 100 members, and is led by the Speaker of the House, currently Greg Stumbo (D).
As of 2010, 24% of electricity produced in the U.S. depended on either enriched uranium rods coming from the Paducah Gaseous Diffusion Plant (the only domestic site of low grade uranium enrichment), or from the 107,336 tons of coal extracted from the state's two coal fields (which combined produce 4% percent of the electricity in the United States).
