Among the cities that line the Kenyan coast is the City of Malindi.
In western Kenya: among the Luo, fish is a common dish; among the Kalenjin who dominate much of the Rift Valley Region, mursik—sour milk—is a major drink.
The country is known chiefly for its dominance in middle-distance and long-distance athletics, having consistently produced Olympic and Commonwealth Games champions in various distance events, especially in 800&nbsp;m, 1,500&nbsp;m, 3,000&nbsp;m steeplechase, 5,000&nbsp;m, 10,000&nbsp;m and the marathon.
The highlands are bisected by the Great Rift Valley, with a fertile plateau lying to the east.
Zilizopendwa is a genre of local urban music that was recorded in the 1960s, 70s and 80s by musicians such as Daudi Kabaka, Fadhili William and Sukuma Bin Ongaro, and is particularly revered and enjoyed by the older folks—having been popularised by the Kenya Broadcasting Corporation's Kiswahili service (formerly called Voice of Kenya or VOK).
Hundreds of thousands were forced off their land to relatives elsewhere in the country and some claim weapons are being bought in the region, perhaps in anticipation of the 2013 elections.
Roughly half of Kenya's 127 flower farms are concentrated around Lake Naivasha, 90 kilometers northwest of Nairobi.
The culture of Kenya consists of multiple traditions.
Decisions by the Kenyan government to tax athletes' earnings may also be a reason for defection.
By the first millennium AD, the Bantu expansion had reached the area from West-Central Africa.
The important agricultural sector is one of the least developed and largely inefficient, employing 75% of the workforce compared to less than 3% in the food secure developed countries.
Prehistoric volcanic eruptions of Mount Kenya (now extinct) may have resulted in its association with divinity and creation among the indigenous Bantu ethnic groups, who are the native inhabitants of the agricultural land surrounding Mount Kenya.
* MP's salary hikes
Kenyans generally have three meals in a day—breakfast in the morning (''kiamsha kinywa''), lunch in the afternoon (''chakula cha mchana'') and supper in the evening (''chakula cha jioni'' or known simply as "chajio").
Additionally, Kenya is a member of the East African Community trading bloc.
There is a cement production industry.
Most working children are active in agriculture.
38.5 percent of the Kenyan adult population is illiterate.
Complicated cases are referred to clinical officers, medical officers and medical practitioners.
The putsch was quickly suppressed by forces commanded by Chief of General Staff Mahamoud Mohamed, a veteran Somali military official.
At Kenyatta's death in 1978, Daniel arap Moi became President.
Kenya's armed forces, like many government institutions in the country, have been tainted by corruption allegations.
Controversy over the actual meaning of the word Kenya notwithstanding, it is clear that the mountain's name became widely accepted, pars pro toto, as the name of the country.
Kenya's ethnic groups are represented as follows: Kikuyu 22%, Luhya 14%, Luo 13%, Kalenjin 12%, Kamba 11%, Kisii 6%, Meru 6%, other African 15%, non-African (Asian, European, and Arab) 1%.
Some elite Kenyan runners who cannot qualify for their country's strong national team find it easier to qualify by running for other countries.
The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
Successive projects encouraged the commercialisation of legumes, by stimulating the growth of local seed production and agro-dealer networks for distribution and marketing.
Daniel arap Moi retained the Presidency, being unopposed in elections held in 1979, 1983 (snap elections) and 1988, all of which were held under the single party constitution.
Primary school is for students aged 6/7-13/14 years.
To become energy sufficient, Kenya aims to build a nuclear power plant by 2017.
The elections were seen to have been flawed with international observers saying that they were below international standards.
129 on labour inspection in agriculture.
Public universities in Kenya are highly commercialized institutions and only a small fraction of qualified high school graduates are admitted on limited government-sponsorship into programs of their choice.
The Bantu migration brought new developments in agriculture and iron working to the region.
Presently, there are also numerous shopping malls in Kenya.
Kenya has been a dominant force in women's volleyball within Africa, with both the clubs and the national team winning various continental championships in the past decade.
However, its dominance has been eroded by wrangles within the now defunct Kenya Football Federation, leading to a suspension by FIFA which was lifted in March 2007.
The highlands are the site of the highest point in Kenya and the second highest peak on the continent: Mount Kenya, which reaches  and is the site of glaciers.
Kenyan lawmakers unanimously approved a power-sharing deal 18 March 2008, aimed at salvaging a country usually seen as one of the most stable and prosperous in Africa.
Despite major achievements in the health sector, Kenya still faces many challenges.
Further, in the aftermath of the national elections of December 2007 and the violence that subsequently engulfed the country, a commission of inquiry, the Waki Commission, commended its readiness and adjudged it to "have performed its duty well."
Exploration is still continuing to determine if there are more reserves.
The two official languages, English and Kiswahili, are used in varying degrees of fluency for communication with other populations.
Kenya has proven deposits of oil in Turkana and the commercial viability was just discovered.
During the early Holocene, the regional climate shifted from dry to wetter climatic conditions, providing an opportunity for the development of cultural traditions, such as agriculture and herding, in a more favourable environment.
Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o is one of the best known writers of Kenya.
From the coast on the Indian Ocean, the low plains rise to central highlands.
Many historians had long believed that the city states were established by Arab or Persian traders, but scholars now recognize the city states were an indigenous development where the apex of their development was around the 8th Century CE.
Other initiatives to strengthen manufacturing have been the new government's favourable tax measures, including the removal of duty on capital equipment and other raw materials.
Kenya was also a regional powerhouse in football.
The 2002 elections marked an important turning point in Kenya's democratic evolution in that power was transferred peacefully from the Kenya African National Union (KANU), which had ruled the country since independence to the National Rainbow Coalition (NARC), a coalition of political parties.
It has been developing since colonisation and also contains certain elements of American English.
A significant population of other wild animals, reptiles and birds can be found in the national parks and game reserves in the country.
His novel, ''Weep Not, Child'', is an illustration of life in Kenya during the British occupation.
The President is both the head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system.
The British began counter-insurgency operations.
Ugali with vegetables, sour milk, meat, fish or any other stew is generally eaten by much of the population for lunch or supper.
The crisis was reportedly over by early 2012 because of coordinated relief efforts.
The capture of Warũhiũ Itote (aka General China) on 15 January 1954 and the subsequent interrogation led to a better understanding of the Mau Mau command structure.
Kenya's territory lies on the equator and overlies the East African Rift covering a diverse and expansive terrain that extends roughly from Lake Victoria to Lake Turkana (formerly called Lake Rudolf) and further south-east to the Indian Ocean.
An Interim Boundaries commission was formed in year 2010 to review the constituencies and in its report, it recommended creation of an additional 80 constituencies.
Agriculture is the second largest contributor to Kenya's gross domestic product (GDP), after the service sector.
Further inland, in the Nyanza region, there is a hot and dry climate which becomes humid around Lake Victoria, the largest tropical fresh-water lake in the world.
At the end of primary education, pupils sit the Kenya Certificate of Primary Education (KCPE), which determines those who proceed to secondary school or vocational training.
Many larger towns consist of several locations.
Mount Kilimanjaro () can be seen from Kenya to the south of the Tanzanian border.
Kenya has good relations with the United Kingdom.
The capital, Nairobi, is a regional commercial hub.
The Presbyterian Church of East Africa has 3 million followers in Kenya and the surrounding countries.
Later in the summer, Kenyatta visited China at the invitation of President Xi Jinping after a stop in Russia and not having visited the United States as president.
They also participated in the ICC Cricket World Cup 2011.
Peri-urban and rural dwellers are less multilingual, with many in rural areas speaking only their native languages.
From October 1952 to December 1959, Kenya was in a state of emergency arising from the Mau Mau rebellion against British rule.
This would create a direct and robust delivery framework for the Action Plan and ensure climate change is treated as an economy-wide issue.
It was a part of the World Rally Championship for many years until its exclusion after the 2002 event owing to financial difficulties.
This was resisted by some ethnic groups—notably the Nandi led by ''Orkoiyot'' Koitalel Arap Samoei for ten years from 1890 to 1900—however the British eventually built the railway.
This has changed recently.
The causes of child labour include poverty, the lack of access to education and weak government institutions.
Initially these traders came mainly from Oman, but later many came from Zanzibar (such as Tippu Tip).
In 1952, Princess Elizabeth and her husband Prince Philip were on holiday at the Treetops Hotel in Kenya when her father, King George VI, died in his sleep.
Popular Kenyan music usually involves the interplay of multiple parts, and more recently, showy guitar solos as well.
Lyrics are most often in Kiswahili or English.
This Serengeti Migration of the wildebeest is a curious spectacle listed among the Seven Natural Wonders of Africa.
They were remarkable for a number of changes.
The first inhabitants of present-day Kenya were hunter-gatherer groups, akin to the modern Khoisan speakers.
Most are admitted into the social sciences, which are cheap to run, or as self-sponsored students paying the full cost of their studies.
There are also many fish and chip shops.
They are renowned for their elaborate upper body adornment and jewellery.
81 on labour inspection in industries and Convention No.
$41.84&nbsp;billion (2012) at Market Price.
He eventually surrendered in Northern Rhodesia (today Zambia) fourteen days after the Armistice was signed in 1918.
There was growing concern especially during former president Daniel arap Moi's tenure that the executive was increasingly meddling with the affairs of the judiciary.
621,200 of Kenyans are Orthodox Christians.
Graduates from the polytechnics and colleges can then join the workforce and later obtain a specialized higher diploma qualification after a further one to two years of training, or join the university—usually in the second or third year of their respective course.
The Agikuyu, who inhabit the slopes of Mt.
Malindi has traditionally been a friendly port city for foreign powers.
During this period, substantial governmental changes to land tenure occurred.
Kenya has a warm and humid tropical climate on its Indian Ocean coastline.
The most important of these was the Swynnerton Plan, which was used to both reward loyalists and punish Mau Mau.
Later on in the 17th century, once the Swahili coast was conquered and came under direct rule of Omani Arabs, the slave trade was expanded by the Omani Arabs to meet the demands of plantations in Oman and Zanzibar.
The Republic of Kenya is named after Mount Kenya.
She was crowned Queen Elizabeth II at Westminster Abbey in 1953 and as British hunter and conservationist Jim Corbett (who accompanied the royal couple) put it, she went up a tree in Africa a princess and came down a queen.
Others say that this was—on the contrary—a very precise notation of a correct African pronunciation .
* 20 ministers defending their seats were defeated
In this way, Kenya became an independent country under the Kenya Independence Act 1963 of the United Kingdom.
Lately, there has been controversy in Kenyan athletics circles, with the defection of a number of Kenyan athletes to represent other countries, chiefly Bahrain and Qatar.
There are also a number of local hip hop artists, including Jua Cali.
Concurrently, the Kenyan army fought the Shifta War against ethnic Somali rebels inhabiting the Northern Frontier District, who wanted to join their kin in the Somali Republic to the north.
This gives way to temperate and forested hilly areas in the neighbouring western region.
The largest share of Kenya's electricity supply comes from hydroelectric stations at dams along the upper Tana River, as well as the Turkwel Gorge Dam in the west.
The economy of Kenya is the largest by GDP in East and Central Africa.
Remarkable prehistoric sites in the interior of Kenya include the archaeoastronomical site Namoratunga on the west side of Lake Turkana and the walled settlement of ThimLich Ohinga in Migori County.
Later work at the former site was undertaken by Glynn Isaac.
There were 80,000 white settlers living in Kenya in the 1950s.
Through the Jubilee Coalition, the Bill was later passed on 19 December in the National Assembly under acrimonious circumstances.
Its combination of themes—colonialism, education, and love—helped to make it one of the best-known novels in Africa.
Kenya is represented by Lucas Onyango as a professional rugby league player who plays with Oldham Roughyeds.
This led to the increase economic growth of the Swahili states, introduction of Islam, Arabic influences on the Swahili Bantu language, cultural diffusion, as well as the Swahili city-states becoming a member of a larger trade network.
Poor roads, an inadequate railway network, under-used water transport and expensive air transport have isolated mostly arid and semi-arid areas and farmers in other regions often leave food to rot in the fields because they cannot access markets.
Kenya is one of the most pro-American nations in Africa, and the wider world.
At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, the governors of British East Africa (as the protectorate was generally known) and German East Africa agreed a truce in an attempt to keep the young colonies out of direct hostilities.
The north-eastern regions along the border with Somalia and Ethiopia are arid and semi-arid areas with near-desert landscapes.
Among other things, the new constitution delegates more power to local governments and gives Kenyans a bill of rights.
Lye is a common ingredient in many traditional dishes in these regions.
Cricket is another popular sport, also ranking as the most successful team sport.
This was followed by the building of the Kenya–Uganda railway passing through the country.
In cities such as Nairobi, there are fast food restaurants, including Steers, KFC, and Subway.
This led to protests and open discrediting of the ECK for complicity and to Odinga declaring himself the "people's president" and calling for a recount.
Retired Olympic and Commonwealth Games champion Kipchoge Keino helped usher in Kenya's ongoing distance dynasty in the 1970s and was followed by Commonwealth Champion Henry Rono's spectacular string of world record performances.
Each location has a chief, appointed by the state.
Production downturns periodically necessitate food aid—for example, in 2004 aid for 1.8&nbsp;million people because of one of Kenya's intermittent droughts.
The service industry is also a major economic driver.
Kenya has ratified Convention No.
In the presidential elections, President Kibaki under the Party of National Unity ran for re-election against the main opposition party, the Orange Democratic Movement (ODM).
Benga music has been popular since the late 1960s, especially in the area around Lake Victoria.
Locations often coincide with electoral wards.
The protests escalated into ethnic violence and destruction of property; almost 1,000 people were killed and nearly 600,000 displaced.
'''Kenya''' (; ), officially the '''Republic of Kenya''', is a country in Africa and a founding member of the East African Community (EAC).
In 2006, UNICEF estimated that up to 30% of girls in the coastal areas of Malindi, Mombasa, Kilifi, and Diani were subject to prostitution.
The life expectancy estimate has dropped to approximately 55 years in 2009—five years below 1990 levels.
Additionally, a distinct local dialect, Kenyan English, is used by some communities and individuals in the country, and contains features unique to it that were derived from local Bantu languages, such as Kiswahili and Kikuyu.
The smallest administrative units in Kenya are called locations.
On 12 December 1964 the Republic of Kenya was proclaimed, and Jomo Kenyatta became Kenya's first president.
small-scale consumer goods (plastic, furniture, batteries, textiles, clothing, soap, cigarettes, flour), agricultural products, horticulture, oil refining; aluminium, steel, lead; cement, commercial ship repair, tourism
New athletes gained attention, such as Pamela Jelimo, the women's 800m gold medalist who went ahead to win the IAAF Golden League jackpot, and Samuel Wanjiru who won the men's marathon.
Campaign issues included:
The word ''benga'' is occasionally used to refer to any kind of pop music.
The central highlands were already home to over a million members of the Kikuyu people, most of whom had no land claims in European terms and lived as itinerant farmers.
Kenya is a presidential representative democratic republic.
* Appropriations of Constituency Development Fund (CDF) money
It is bordered by Tanzania to the south, Uganda to the west, South Sudan to the north-west, Ethiopia to the north and Somalia to the north-east.
Prominent local gospel musicians include the Kenyan Boys Choir.
The production of major food staples such as corn is subject to sharp weather-related fluctuations.
The current Kenya Defence Forces were established, and its composition laid out, in Article 241 of the 2010 Constitution of Kenya; the KDF is governed by the Kenya Defence Forces Act of 2012.
The Bantus originated in West Africa along the Benue River in what is now eastern Nigeria and western Cameroon.
In mid-2011, two consecutive missed rainy seasons precipitated the worst drought in East Africa seen in 60 years.
The women's team has competed at the Olympics and World Championships though without any notable success.
This work, which included linking producers to wholesalers, helped to increase local producer prices by 20–25% in Nairobi and Mombasa.
Kenya currently imports all crude petroleum requirements.
Vassanji's 2003 novel ''The In-Between World of Vikram Lall'' won the Giller Prize in 2003.
The principal cash crops are tea, horticultural produce, and coffee.
Kenya is known for its safaris, diverse climate and geography, and expansive wildlife reserves and national parks such as the East and West Tsavo National Park, the Maasai Mara, Lake Nakuru National Park, and Aberdares National Park.
Sixty percent of the Muslim population lives in Kenya's Coastal Region, comprising 50% of the total population there.
After debates, it was passed by parliament; the coalition would hold until the end of the current parliament or if either of the parties withdraws from the deal before then.
According to 2009 estimates, HIV prevalence is about 6.3% of the adult population.
Notably, Kenya has the highest number of Quakers in the world, with around 133,000 members.
The operation effectively placed Nairobi under military siege.
In 2005 agriculture, including forestry and fishing, accounted for 24% of GDP, as well as for 18% of wage employment and 50% of revenue from exports.
Privatisation of state corporations like the defunct Kenya Post and Telecommunications Company, which resulted in East Africa's most profitable company—Safaricom, has led to their revival because of massive private investment.
The ''Nandi'' were the first ethnic group to be put in a native reserve to stop them from disrupting the building of the railway.
Primarily consisting of a mixture of Kiswahili and English, it is an example of linguistic code-switching.
In 2016, the team beat Fiji at the Singapore Sevens finals, making Kenya the second African nation after South Africa to win a World Series championship.
Nilotic groups in Kenya include the Samburu, Luo, Turkana, Maasai.
Although Kenya is the biggest and most advanced economy in east and central Africa, and has an affluent urban minority, it has a Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.519, ranked 145 out of 186 in the world.
Following a referendum in August 2010 and adoption of a new constitution, Kenya is now divided into 47 semi-autonomous counties, governed by elected governors.
There exists an informal economy that is never counted as part of the official GDP figures.
Regional variations and dishes also exist.
Preventable diseases like malaria, HIV/AIDS, pneumonia, diarrhoea and malnutrition are the biggest burden, major child-killers, and responsible for much morbidity; weak policies, corruption, inadequate health workers, weak management and poor leadership in the public health sector are largely to blame.
There are very wide regional disparities; for example, Nairobi had the highest level of literacy, 87.1 per cent, compared to North Eastern Province, the lowest, at 8.0 per cent.
It is the fictional memoir of a Kenyan of Indian heritage and his family as they adjust to the changing political climates in colonial and post-colonial Kenya.
Bantu and Nilotic populations together constitute around 97% of the nation's residents.
Those who complete high school can join a polytechnic or other technical college and study for three years or proceed directly to the university and study for four years.
It instead consists of the various cultures of the country's different communities.
Most of these defections occur because of economic or financial factors.
Under the deal, the president would appoint cabinet ministers from both PNU and ODM camps depending on each party's strength in Parliament.
The event was attended by various African leaders and praised by the international community.
Under the presidency of Mwai Kibaki, the new ruling coalition promised to focus its efforts on generating economic growth, combating corruption, improving education, and rewriting its constitution.
With International Criminal Court trial dates scheduled in 2013 for both President Kenyatta and Deputy President William Ruto related to the 2007 election aftermath, US President Barack Obama  chose not to visit the country during his mid-2013 African trip.
Base Titanium, a subsidiary of Base resources of Australia, shipped its first major consignment of minerals to China.
Tourism in Kenya includes eco-tourism.
The WHO estimated in 2011 that only 42% of births were attended by a skilled health professional.
Tea, coffee, sisal, pyrethrum, corn, and wheat are grown in the fertile highlands, one of the most successful agricultural production regions in Africa.
Most qualified students who miss out opt for middle-level diploma programs in public or private universities, colleges, and polytechnics.
The President of Kenya is the commander-in-chief of all the armed forces.
They included the General Service Unit (GSU)—a paramilitary wing of the police—and later the regular police.
Ludwig Krapf recorded the name as both ''Kenia'' and ''Kegnia'' believed by most to be a corruption of the Kamba version.
There are smaller conservative Reformed churches, the Africa Evangelical Presbyterian Church, the Independent Presbyterian Church in Kenya, and the Reformed Church of East Africa.
The upper part of Kenya's Eastern Region is home to 10% of the country's Muslims, where they constitute the majority religious group.
* Legislation passed / not passed in the 9th Parliament
Horticultural produce and tea are the main growth sectors and the two most valuable of all of Kenya's exports.
