Although Pol Pot relinquished the Khmer Rouge leadership to Khieu Samphan in 1985, he continued to be the driving force behind the Khmer Rouge insurgency, giving speeches to his followers.
Demographic analysis by Patrick Heuveline suggests that between 1.17 and 3.42 million Cambodians were killed, while Marek Sliwinski estimates that 1.8 million is a conservative figure.
Many artists, including musicians, writers, and filmmakers were executed.
Many of the new recruits for the Khmer Rouge were apolitical peasants who fought in support of the King, not for communism, of which they had little understanding.
Banks were raided and all currency and records were destroyed by fire thus eliminating any claim to funds.
All personal utensils were banned, and people were given only one spoon to eat with.
Tou's allies, Nuon Chea and Keo Meas, were removed from the Central Committee and replaced by Son Sen and Vorn Vet.
Two members of the group, Khieu Samphan and Hou Yuon, earned doctorates from the University of Paris; Hu Nim obtained his degree from the University of Phnom Penh in 1965.
By December 1978, due to several years of border conflict and the flood of refugees fleeing Kampuchea, relations between Cambodia and Vietnam collapsed.
Most of the surviving Khmer Rouge leaders live in the Pailin area or are hiding in Phnom Penh.
Most KPRP leaders and rank-and-file seem to have been either Khmer Krom, or ethnic Vietnamese living in Cambodia.
The governments-in-exile (including the Khmer Rouge) held onto Cambodia's UN seat (with considerable international support) until 1993, when the monarchy was restored and the country underwent a name change to the Kingdom of Cambodia.
The name change is significant.
The organization is remembered especially for orchestrating the Cambodian genocide, which resulted from the enforcement of its social engineering policies.
ECCC also uses various social media to update the development of the tribunal.
The Choeng Ek killing fields are located about 15 kilometers outside of Phnom Penh.
Documents uncovered from the Soviet archives revealed that the invasion was launched at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge following negotiations with Nuon Chea.
The Khmer Rouge called the center "S-21".
An additional 300,000 Cambodians starved to death between 1979 and 1980, largely as a result of the after-effects of Khmer Rouge policy.
It was used to refer to a succession of communist parties in Cambodia which evolved into the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK) and later the Party of Democratic Kampuchea.
In addition, one of the seven survivors shares his story with visitors at the museum.
Following the conference, about 1,000 members of the KPRP, including Son Ngoc Minh, made a "Long March" into North Vietnam, where they remained in exile.
The publication was a part of their genocide education project that includes leading  the design of a national genocide studies curriculum with the Ministry of Education, training thousands of teachers and 1700 high schools on how to teach about genocide, and working with universities across Cambodia.
While the tribunal contributes to the memorialization process at national level, some civil society groups promote memorialization at community level.
An older sister of Pol Pot had been a concubine at the court of King Monivong.
They transformed the Khmer Students Association (KSA), to which most of the 200 or so Khmer students in Paris belonged, into an organization for nationalist and leftist ideas.
The International Center for Conciliation (ICfC) began working in Cambodia in 2004 as a branch of the ICfC in Boston.
Nonetheless, their generation is affected by the traumas of the past.
The court provides free transport for them to come to visit the court and meet with court officials to learn about its work, in addition to visits to the genocide museum and the killing fields.
The Khmer Rouge forced Muslims to eat pork, which they regard as forbidden (ḥarām).
The major argument in Khieu Samphan's 1959 thesis, ''Cambodia's Economy and Industrial Development'', was that the country had to become self-reliant and end its economic dependency on the developed world.
The central role of the peasants in national development was espoused by Hou Yuon in his 1955 thesis, ''The Cambodian Peasants and Their Prospects for Modernization'', which challenged the conventional view that urbanization and industrialization are necessary precursors of development.
The change in the name of the party was a closely guarded secret.
At first he went to join with forces allied to the Viet Minh operating in the rural areas of Kampong Cham Province (Kompong Cham).
The Khmer Rouge photographed the vast majority of the inmates and left a photographic archive, which enables visitors to see almost 6,000 S-21 portraits on the walls.
His Cambodian forces crossed the border and looted nearby villages, mostly in the border town of Ba Chúc.
Theary Seng responded: "We hoped this tribunal would strike hard at impunity, but if you can kill 14,000 people and serve only 19 years&nbsp;– 11 hours per life taken&nbsp;– what is that?
The other line, supported for the most part by rural cadres who were familiar with the harsh realities of the countryside, advocated an immediate struggle to overthrow the "feudalist" Sihanouk.
The movement gained strength and support in the northeastern jungles and established firm footing when Cambodia's leader Prince Sihanouk was removed from office during a military coup in 1970.
In 1992, however, the Khmer Rouge resumed fighting, boycotted the election and, in the following year, rejected its results.
By calling itself a workers' party, the Cambodian movement claimed equal status with the Vietnam Workers' Party.
By June, three months after the removal of Sihanouk, they had swept government forces from the entire northeastern third of the country.
People were encouraged to call each other "friend" or "comrade" (មិត្ត; ''mitt''), and to avoid traditional signs of deference such as bowing or folding the hands in salutation, known as ''samphea''.
Sihanouk's popular support in rural Cambodia allowed the Khmer Rouge to extend its power and influence to the point that by 1973 it exercised ''de facto'' control over the majority of Cambodian territory, although only a minority of its population.
The Tuol Sleng Museum of Genocide is a former high school building, which was transformed into a torture, interrogation and execution center between 1976 and 1979.
This experience is considered to have been a turning point in their ideological development.
On April 17, 1975 the Khmer Rouge captured Phnom Penh.
Pol Pot and Ieng Sary married Khieu Ponnary and Khieu Thirith (also known as Ieng Thirith), purportedly relatives of Khieu Samphan.
Many people in Cambodia who helped the Khmer Rouge against the Lon Nol government thought they were fighting for the restoration of Sihanouk.
And according to Kiernan, the "fiercest extermination campaign was directed against the ethnic Cham Muslim minority".
Some like Ros Serey Sothea, Pan Ron, and Sinn Sisamouth gained posthumous fame for their talents and are still popular with Khmers today.
In part, this is because the government does not require that educators teach children about Khmer Rouge atrocities in the schools.
Several thousand Buddhists, Muslims, and Christians were killed for exercising their beliefs.
For the next two years the insurgency grew as Sihanouk did very little to stop it.
A number turned to orthodox Marxism-Leninism.
Its attempts at agricultural reform led to widespread famine, while its insistence on absolute self-sufficiency, even in the supply of medicine, led to the death of thousands from treatable diseases such as malaria.
Pol Pot had shortly before been put on a list of 34 leftists who were summoned by Sihanouk to join the government and sign statements saying Sihanouk was the only possible leader for the country.
The UN sided with the CGDK, which included the Khmer Rouge, against the Vietnamese-backed People's Republic of Kampuchea.
However, some analysts argue that this change meant little in practice, because, as historian Kelvin Rowley puts it: "CPK propaganda had always relied on nationalist rather than revolutionary appeals."
The organization was also known as the Kampuchea or Khmer Communist Party and the National Army of Democratic Kampuchea.
Pol Pot and Hou Yuon may have been related to the royal family.
These Cambodian forces were repelled by the Vietnamese.
They forced many people out of their homes and ignored many basic human freedoms; they controlled how Cambodians acted, what they wore, to whom they could talk, and many other aspects of their lives.
Christian clergy and Muslim imams were executed.
On April 18, 1978, Pol Pot, fearing a Vietnamese attack, ordered a pre-emptive invasion of Vietnam.
These included Phnom Malai, the mountainous areas near Pailin in the Cardamom Mountains, and Anlong Veng in the Dângrêk Mountains.
The Khmer Rouge actively persecuted Buddhists during their reign from 1975 to 1979.
Those who were convicted of treason were taken to a top-secret prison called S-21.
The organization was composed of cells of three to six members with most members knowing nothing about the overall structure of the organization.
Pol Pot wanted to remove social institutions and to transform the society into an agrarian one.
If caught, offenders were taken quietly off to a distant forest or field after sunset and killed.
Despite its deposal, the Khmer Rouge retained its United Nations seat, which was occupied by Thiounn Prasith, an old compatriot of Pol Pot and Ieng Sary from their student days in Paris, and one of the 21 attendees at the 1960 KPRP Second Congress.
Rural dwellers were often unsympathetic or too frightened to assist them.
After a decade of inconclusive conflict, the pro-Vietnamese Cambodian government and the rebel coalition signed a treaty in 1991 calling for elections and disarmament.
Also, rural terms like ''Mae'' (ម៉ែ; mother) replaced urban terms like ''Mak'' (ម៉ាក់; mother).
Pol Pot, who rose to the leadership of the communist movement in the 1960s, was born in 1928 (some sources say 1925) in Kampong Thum Province, northeast of Phnom Penh.
In an attempt to broaden its support base, the Khmer Rouge formed the Patriotic and Democratic Front of the Great National Union of Kampuchea in 1979.
The entire population was forced to become farmers in labour camps.
As the insurgency grew stronger, the party finally openly declared itself to be the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK).
Over the next three years, the Khmer Rouge killed many intellectuals, city-dwellers, minority people, and many of their own party members and soldiers who were suspected of being traitors.
In 1952 Pol Pot, Hou Yuon, Ieng Sary, and other leftists gained notoriety by sending an open letter to Sihanouk calling him the "strangler of infant democracy."
A UN investigation reported 2–3 million dead, while UNICEF estimates that 3 million had been killed.
In 1997, a conflict between the two main participants in the ruling coalition caused Prince Rannaridh to seek support from some of the Khmer Rouge leaders, while refusing to have any dealings with Pol Pot.
In July 1994 a "Provisional Government of National Union and National Salvation of Cambodia" was established by Khmer Rouge authorities.
These two well-educated women also played a central role in the regime of Democratic Kampuchea.
All religion was banned by the Khmer Rouge.
Others died from the severe physical mutilation that was caused by torture.
Vietnamese support for the insurgency made it impossible for the Cambodian military to effectively counter it.
People were told to "forge" (''lot dam'') a new revolutionary character, that they were the "instruments" (ឧបករណ៍; ''opokar'') of the ruling body known as "Angkar" (អង្គការ, "The Organization"), and that nostalgia for pre-revolutionary times (''chheu satek arom'', or "memory sickness") could result in execution.
It has been handling four cases since 2007.
Premier Lon Nol, with the support of the National Assembly, deposed Sihanouk.
The prevalent "urban" line, endorsed by North Vietnam, recognized that Sihanouk, by virtue of his success in winning independence from the French, was a genuine national leader whose neutralism and deep distrust of the United States made him a valuable asset in Hanoi's struggle to "liberate" South Vietnam.
This resulted in bloody factional fighting among the Khmer Rouge leaders, ultimately leading to Pol Pot's trial and imprisonment by the Khmer Rouge.
These survivors are thought to have been kept alive due to their skills, judged by their captors to be useful.
Married couples were only allowed to visit each other on a limited basis.
This was his way of "creating a complete Communist society without wasting time on the intermediate steps," as the Khmer Rouge said to China in 1975.
The North Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, launched at the request of the Khmer Rouge, has also been cited as a major factor in their eventual victory, including by Shawcross.
On 29 March 1970, the North Vietnamese launched an offensive against the Cambodian army.
After four years of rule, the Khmer Rouge regime was removed from power in 1979 as a result of an invasion by the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and was replaced by moderate, pro-Vietnamese Communists.
Described by one source as a "determined, rather plodding organizer", he failed to obtain a degree, but, according to the Jesuit priest, Father François Ponchaud, he acquired a taste for the classics of French literature as well as an interest in the writings of Karl Marx.
The Khmer Rouge wanted to eliminate anyone suspected of "involvement in free-market activities".
While Vietnam proposed to withdraw from Cambodia in return for a political settlement that would exclude the Khmer Rouge from power, the rebel coalition government, as well as ASEAN, China, and the US, insisted that such a condition was unacceptable.
Of the thousands who entered the Tuol Sleng Centre (also known as S-21), only twelve are known to have survived.
Of the estimated 15,000 to 30,000 prisoners, only seven prisoners survived.
Almost all freedom to travel was abolished.
From there, they were transported to refugee camps such as Sa Kaeo or Khao-I-Dang, the only camp allowing resettlement in countries such as the United States, France, Canada, and Australia.
The Khmer language has a complex system of usages to define speakers' rank and social status.
In talent he was rivalled by Hou Yuon, born in 1930, who was described as being "of truly astounding physical and intellectual strength", and who studied economics and law.
Researcher Craig Etcheson of the Documentation Center of Cambodia suggests that the death toll was between 2 and 2.5 million, with a "most likely" figure of 2.2 million.
Pol Pot died in April 1998.
Khieu Samphan, considered "one of the most brilliant intellects of his generation", was born in 1931 and specialized in economics and politics during his time in Paris.
Eastern and central Cambodia were firmly under the control of Vietnam and its Cambodian allies by 1980, while the western part of the country continued to be a battlefield throughout the 1980s and millions of landmines were sown across the countryside.
The textbook is aiming at standardising and improving the information students receive about the Khmer Rouge years because the government-issued social studies textbook devotes eight or nine pages to the period.
This pivotal event remains shrouded in mystery because its outcome has become an object of contention (and considerable historical rewriting) between pro-Vietnamese and anti-Vietnamese Khmer communist factions.
Arbitrary executions and torture carried out by its cadres against perceived subversive elements, or during purges of its own ranks between 1975 and 1978, are considered to have constituted genocide.
People who refused to evacuate would have their homes burned to the ground and would be killed immediately.
Commercial fishing was banned by the Khmer Rouge in 1976, resulting in a loss of primary food sources for millions of Cambodians, 80% of whom rely on fish as their only source of animal protein.
It now fought the new Cambodian coalition government which included the former Vietnamese-backed Communists (headed by Hun Sen) as well as the Khmer Rouge's former non-Communist and monarchist allies (notably Prince Rannaridh).
Ironically, Pol Pot himself was an educated man with a taste for French literature and spoke fluent French.
Money was abolished, books were burned, teachers, merchants, and almost the entire intellectual elite of the country were murdered to make the agricultural communism, as Pol Pot envisioned it, a reality.
Through the process, some villagers are beginning to accept the possibility of an alternative viewpoint to the traditional notions of evil associated with anyone who worked for the Khmer Rouge regime.
The 74-page textbook was approved by the government as a supplementary text in 2007.
After defeating those forces, the North Vietnamese turned the newly won territories over to the local insurgents.
In 1996, a new political party, the Democratic National Union Movement, was formed by Ieng Sary, who was granted amnesty for his role as the deputy leader of the Khmer Rouge.
The following year, the government closed the paper, and Sihanouk's police publicly humiliated Khieu by beating, undressing and photographing him in public—as Shawcross notes, "not the sort of humiliation that men forgive or forget".
Of the 3,157 civilians who had lived in Ba Chúc, only two survived the massacre.
A year later, thousands of Khmer Rouge guerrillas surrendered themselves in a government amnesty.
The Roman Catholic cathedral of Phnom Penh was razed.
I share your utter horror that these terrible things went on in Kampuchea."
Journalists such as Nate Thayer who spent some time with the Khmer Rouge during that period commented that, despite the international community's near-universal condemnation of the Khmer Rouge's brutal rule, a considerable number of Cambodians in Khmer Rouge-controlled areas seemed genuinely to support Pol Pot.
Examples of the Khmer Rouge torture methods can be seen at the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu said, "The government of Democratic Kampuchea had a legal seat at the United Nations, and had established broad foreign relations with more than 70 countries".
The Khmer Rouge's social policy focused on working towards a purely agrarian society.
Any people seen taking part in religious rituals or services would be executed.
During the rule of the Khmer Rouge, these usages were abolished.
From then on, Pol Pot and loyal comrades from his Paris student days controlled the party centre, edging out older veterans whom they considered excessively pro-Vietnamese.
Western governments voted in favor of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea retaining Cambodia's seat in the organization over the newly installed Vietnamese-backed PRK, even though it included the Khmer Rouge.
Some 17,000 people passed through this centre before they were taken to sites (also known as The Killing Fields), outside Phnom Penh such as Choeung Ek where most were executed (mainly with pickaxes to save bullets) and buried in mass graves.
Since 1990 Cambodia has gradually recovered, demographically and economically, from the Khmer Rouge regime, although the psychological scars affect many Cambodian families and émigré communities.
In 1951, the ICP was reorganized into three national units&nbsp;— the Vietnam Workers' Party, the Lao Issara, and the Kampuchean (or Khmer) People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP).
According to the historian David P. Chandler, the leftist Issarak groups, aided by the Viet Minh, occupied a sixth of Cambodia's territory by 1952; and, on the eve of the Geneva Conference, they controlled as much as one half of the country.
In 1956, however, Hou Yuon and Khieu Samphan helped to establish a new group, the Khmer Students Union.
In February 1963, at the WPK's second congress, Pol Pot was chosen to succeed Tou Samouth as the party's general secretary.
The organization (Khmer Rouge) was largely dissolved by the mid-1990s, and finally surrendered completely in 1999.
He increased Duch's sentence to life imprisonment.
By the end of World War II, a handful of Cambodians had joined its ranks, but their influence on the Indochinese communist movement and on developments within Cambodia was negligible.
During the mid-1950s, KPRP factions, the "urban committee" (headed by Tou Samouth), and the "rural committee" (headed by Sieu Heng), emerged.
Lower ranking members of the party and even the Vietnamese were not told of it and neither was the membership until many years later.
On April 17, 1950 (25 years to the day before the Khmer Rouge captured Phnom Penh), the first nationwide congress of the Khmer Issarak groups convened, and the United Issarak Front was established.
To destroy you is no loss."
Sihanouk, in exile in Beijing, made an alliance with the Khmer Rouge and became the nominal head of a Khmer Rouge–dominated government-in-exile (known by its French acronym, GRUNK) backed by China.
People were not allowed to eat in privacy; instead, they were required to eat with everyone in the commune.
The Khmer Rouge, still led by Pol Pot, was the strongest of the three rebel groups in the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea which received extensive military aid from China, Britain,  and the United States and intelligence from the Thai military.
Despite a traditional Cambodian fear of Vietnamese domination, defecting Khmer Rouge activists assisted the Vietnamese, and, with Vietnam's approval, became the core of the new People's Republic of Kampuchea; the new government was quickly dismissed by the Khmer Rouge and China as a "puppet government".
Almost all privacy was eliminated during the Khmer Rouge era.
The Khmer Rouge forced around two million people from the cities to the countryside to take up work in agriculture.
Almost without exception, all the earliest party members were Vietnamese.
People would also be executed for attempting to escape from the communes or for breaching minor rules.
In the September 1955 election, it won about four percent of the vote but did not secure a seat in the legislature.
In 1967, several small-scale attempts at insurgency were made by the CPK but they had little success.
In order to assist people's will to participate in the public hearings, the court provides free bus transportation for groups of Cambodians who want to visit the court.
It combined an idealization of the Angkor Empire (802–1431), with an existential fear for the existence of the Cambodian state, which had historically been liquidated under Vietnamese and Siamese intervention.
These were not the first evacuations of civilian populations by the Khmer Rouge; similar evacuations of populations without possessions had been occurring on a smaller scale since the early 1970s.
In September 1966, the party changed its name to the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK).
Britain and the United States in particular gave aid to the two non-Khmer Rouge members of the coalition.
The Nixon administration, although thoroughly aware of the weakness of Lon Nol's forces and loath to commit American military force to the new conflict in any form other than air power, announced its support of the newly proclaimed Khmer Republic.
On July 20, 1962, Tou Samouth was murdered by the Cambodian government.
Inside the KSA and its successor organizations, there was a secret organization known as the ''Cercle Marxiste'' (Marxist circle).
After the end of the war, he moved to Phnom Penh under Tou Samouth's "urban committee" where he became an important point of contact between above-ground parties of the left and the underground secret communist movement.
The Khmer Rouge invented new terms.
Many of those who refused were killed.
The doctoral dissertations written by Hou Yuon and Khieu Samphan express basic themes that were later to become the cornerstones of the policy adopted by Democratic Kampuchea.
William Shawcross, however, wrote that the US bombing and ground incursion plunged Cambodia into the chaos that Sihanouk had worked for years to avoid.
The former prince then looked to the Khmer Rouge for backing,  and with the threat of civil war looming, the Khmer Rouge were able to supplant the Lon Nol led Khmer Republic in most of the Cambodian countryside.
Government attacks prevented it from participating in the 1962 election and drove it underground.
According to Democratic Kampuchea's version of party history, the Viet Minh's failure to negotiate a political role for the KPRP at the 1954 Geneva Conference represented a betrayal of the Cambodian movement, which still controlled large areas of the countryside and which commanded at least 5,000 armed men.
The party leadership endorsed armed struggle against the government, then led by Sihanouk.
ECCC also has visited village to village to provide video screenings and school lectures to promote their understanding of the trial proceedings.
On December 25, 1978, the Vietnamese armed forces, along with the Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation, an organization that included many dissatisfied former Khmer Rouge members, invaded Cambodia and captured Phnom Penh on January 7, 1979.
His Cambodian lawyer, Kar Savuth, stunned the tribunal further by issuing the trial's first call for an acquittal of his client, even after his French lawyer denied seeking such a verdict.
Its leader was Son Ngoc Minh, and a third of its leadership consisted of members of the ICP.
She also stated: "My gut feeling is this has made the situation far worse for Cambodia.
Pol Pot died on 15 April 1998, having never been put on trial.
In December 1999, Ta Mok and the remaining leaders surrendered, and the Khmer Rouge effectively ceased to exist.
At the same time, the Khmer Rouge retreated west, and it continued to control certain areas near the Thai border for the next decade.
The paper soon acquired a reputation in Phnom Penh's small academic circle.
The Khmer Rouge attempted to turn Cambodia into a classless society by depopulating cities and forcing the urban population ("New People") into agricultural communes.
At present, the Khmer Rouge Case trials are taking place, with the charges accusing the Khmer Rouge regime of genocide and crimes against humanity.
Advocates of this line hoped that the prince could be persuaded to distance himself from the right wing and to adopt leftist policies.
Language was also transformed in other ways.
*Ethnic Vietnamese, ethnic Chinese, ethnic Thai, and other minorities in the Eastern Highlands, Cambodian Christians (most of whom were Catholic, and the Catholic Church in general), Muslims, and the Buddhist monks.
The buildings of Tuol Sleng have been preserved as they were left when the Khmer Rouge were driven out in 1979.
Pol Pot and Chou Chet were the only people on the list who escaped.
They did not believe in Western medicine but turned to traditional medicine instead; because of the famine, forced labour, and the lack of access to appropriate services there was a high number of human losses.
By 1975, with the Lon Nol government running out of ammunition, it was clear that it was only a matter of time before the government would collapse.
The political appeal of the Khmer Rouge was increased as a result of the situation created by the removal of Sihanouk as head of state in 1970.
He attended the elite Lycée Sisowath in Phnom Penh before beginning courses in commerce and politics at the ''Institut d'Etudes Politiques de Paris'' (more widely known as ''Sciences Po'') in France.
'''Khmers rouges''' (French for "Red Khmers"; ;  ''Khmer Kraham''), more commonly known in English as '''Khmer Rouge''' () was the name given to the followers of the Communist Party of Kampuchea in Cambodia.
It is estimated that the graves contain the remains of over 20,000 victims.
The Khmer Rouge forced people to work for 12 hours non-stop, without adequate rest or food.
