And Khufu himself would have never allowed the display of such a comparatively sloppy work.
They point out that the ancient Arabs were guided by their strict religious belief that only one god exists, and therefore no other gods were allowed to be mentioned.
He also thinks that the pyramid was built with ramps, which were removed during the finishing of the lime stone shell.
They also call for caution against the credibility of the ancient traditions.
He is generally accepted as having commissioned the Great Pyramid of Giza, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, but many other aspects of his reign are rather poorly documented.
Herodotus closes the story of the evil kings in chapter 128 with the words: "These kings the Egyptians -because of their hate against them- are not very willing to say their names.
King Khufu then received a warning from his prophets about a devastating deluge, that would come and destroy Egypt.
During the New Kingdom the necropolis of Khufu and the local mortuary cults were newly organized and Giza became an important economic and cultic place to go again.
The used mortar was a mixture of gypsum, sand, pulverized limestone and water.
The king is seated on a throne with a short backrest, at the left side of his knees the Horus-name ''Medjedu'' is preserved, and, at the right side, the very scarce rest of the lower part of the cartouche name ''Khnum-Khuf'' is visible.
Khufu's name was dedicated to the earth deity Khnum, which might point to an increase of Khnum's popularity and religious importance.
It was left unfinished; a tight corridor heading south at the western end of the chamber and an unfinished shaft at the eastern middle might point out that the subterranean chamber was the eldest of the three chambers and that the original building plan contained a simple chamber complex with several rooms and corridors.
The papyri fragments show several storage lists naming the delivery goods.
A close-to-orbit asteroid bears Khufu's name: ''3362 Khufu''.
Thanks to these documents, an obscure and critical picture of Khufu's personality persists.
It is often said that the small figurine was the only preserved statue of Khufu.
Additionally the Egyptologists point out that the philosophies of the ancient Egyptians had completely changed since the Old Kingdom.
Excavations at Saqqara in 2001 and 2003 revealed a pair of terracotta statues depicting a lion goddess (possibly Bastet or Sakhmet).
Upon arriving at the Giza pyramids, they searched for explanations as who could have built these monuments.
The figurine was found headless; according to Petrie, it was caused by an accident while digging.
The same goes for the story about king Khafre.
In 1954, French scholars François Bissey and René Chabot-Morisseau re-excavated the harbour, but their works were stopped soon, too.
Wildung thinks that Dedi's refusal was an allusion to the respect Egyptians showed to human life.
And of these stones, they told me, the pyramid was built which stands in front of the great pyramid in the middle of the three, each side being 150&nbsp;feet in length."
In fact, several royal and religious titles introduced at his time may point out that Egyptian pharaohs sought to accentuate their divine origin and status by dedicating their official cartouche names to certain deities.
Though King Khufu himself is seldom mentioned, many Arab writers are convinced that the Great Pyramid (and the others, too) were built by the god Hermes (named ''Idris'' by the Arabs).
From this period of time several "priests of Isis" (''Hem-netjer-Iset''), which were also "priests of Khufu" (''Hem-netjer-Khufu''), worked here.
This kind of wood was essential for building large and stable funerary boats and indeed the boats discovered at the Great Pyramid were made of it.
Ten of them were already serving during the late 4th dynasty (seven of them were royal family members), 28 were serving during the 5th dynasty and 29 during the 6th dynasty.
The Palermo Stone reports on its fragment ''C-2'' the creation of two oversize standing statues for the king, one is said to have been made of copper, the other one made of pure gold.
Khufu chose the high end of a natural plateau, so that his future pyramid would be widely visible.
Within Egypt, Khufu is documented in several building inscriptions and statues.
Another inscription, found at the limestone walls of the harbor, mention the head of the royal scribes controlling the ware exchanges: ''Idu''.
The appearance of Khufu on the ivory statue instead looks like the artist did not care very much about professionalism or diligence.
As a consequence, the king connected Khnum's name with his own.
Using the diary, researchers were able to reconstruct three months of his life, providing new insight into everyday lives of people of the Fourth Dynasty.
The papyri and the fortress reveal together an explicit sailing route across the Red Sea for the very first time in history.
The Greek historian Herodotus instead depicts Khufu as a heretic and cruel tyrant.
In his literary work ''Historiae'', Book II, chapter 124–126, he writes: "As long as ''Rhámpsinîtos'' was king, as they told me, there was nothing but orderly rule in Egypt, and the land prospered greatly.
It is still unclear how long Khufu ruled over Egypt, because historically later documents contradict each other and contemporary sources are scarce.
The best known story about Khufu and his pyramid can be found in the book ''Hitat'' (completely: ''al-Mawāʿiẓ wa-’l-iʿtibār fī ḏikr al-ḫiṭaṭ wa-’l-ʾāṯār''), written in 1430 by Muhammad al-Maqrizi (1364-1442).
Furthermore, several alabaster and travertine fragments of seated statues, which were found by George Reisner during his excavations at Giza, were once inscribed with Khufu's full royal titulary.
Modern Egyptologists and Historians also call for caution about the credibility of the Arabian stories.
Both statue groups are worked out similarly to each other (both have the same size and scale), the only difference is that one lion goddess holds a scepter.
However, at the same time, Diodorus distances himself from Herodotus and argues that Herodotus "only tells fairy tales and entertaining fiction".
The Coptic reading derives from a later pronunciation of ''Khufu'' as "Shufu", which in turn led to the Greek reading "Suphis".
Furthermore, he points to the overwhelming amount of places where mortuary cults for Khufu were practiced, even outside Giza.
The excavators point out that the statues were restored during the Middle Kingdom, after they were broken apart.
This town was still held in high esteem during the Middle Kingdom period.
It's a 241 x 66.6&nbsp;ft (≙ 73.5 x 20.11&nbsp;m) large limestone statue in shape of a recumbent lion with the head of a human, decorated with a royal ''Nemes''-headdress.
Therefore, it seemed clear at first that Hetepheres was the wife of Sneferu, and that they were Khufu's parents.
It lists five cartouche names: ''Khufu, Djedefra, Khafra, Baufra'' and ''Djedefhor''.
It is possible that the lack of building space, the lack of local limestone quarries and the loosened ground at Dahshur forced Khufu to move north, away from the necropolis of his predecessor Sneferu.
From the mortuary temple a 0.43&nbsp;miles long causeway once headed to the valley temple.
The royal family of Khufu was quite large.
In chapter 127–128 Herodotus writes: "After Khéops was dead his brother ''Khéphrên'' succeeded to the royal throne.
The guiding inscription calls them "the surroundings of ''Tefef'' serve Khufu", "beautiful bulls of Khufu" and "bawling for Khufu".
This is remarkable, since reliefs of Sneferu and those of all kings from Menkaura onward show the king offering to a deity.
Furthermore, scholars point to several contradictions which can be found in Al-Maqrizi's book.
From the same dynasty a golden sealing ring with the name of a priest ''Neferibrê'' was found at Giza.
The reason for this was the Suez Crisis.
He argues that no building that surely dates to the 4th dynasty was ever excavated at Kom el-Sultan or Abydos.
Even if Khufu's name survived within the literary traditions for so long, different cultural circles surely fostered different views about Khufu's character and historical deeds.
This was a typical behaviour when an addressed king was still alive; when the ruler was already dead, he was addressed by his cartouche name or birth name.
But the ultimate proof that convinces Hawass about the statue being a reproduction of much later time is the ''Nehenekh''-flail in Khufu's left hand.
The Royal Canon of Turin from the 19th dynasty however, gives 23 years of rulership for Khufu.
The harbor was of strategic and economic importance to Khufu, because ships delivered precious materials, such as turquoise, copper and ore from the southern tip of the Sinai peninsula.
The artifact was found in 1903 by Flinders Petrie at Kom el-Sultan near Abydos.
The inner corridors and chambers have walls and ceilings made of polished granite, one of the hardest stone known at Khufu's time.
The Egyptian hieroglyphs forming the name "Khufu" are read in Coptic as "Shêfet", which actually would mean "bad luck" or "sinful" in their language.
Like other kings, such as Sekhemkhet, Sneferu and Sahure, which are also depicted in impressive reliefs there, he was looking for those two precious materials.
In June 2011, an archaeological team led by French egyptologist Pierre Tallet and Gregory Marouard, organized by the French Institute of Oriental Archeology (''IFAO''), restarted work at the same place.
With the beginning of the 7th dynasty no domain's name was handed down any more.
A similar object is on display at the state collection of Egyptian art in Munich.
During the 21st dynasty the temple got extended, and, during the 26th dynasty, the extensions continued.
This is inconsistent with a typical statue group of the Old Kingdom—normally all statue groups were built as an artistic unit.
Its foundation was made of black basalt, a great part of which is still preserved.
These figures are now considered an exaggeration or a misinterpretation of antiquated sources.
Khufu is depicted in several relief fragments found scattered in his necropolis and elsewhere.
It contained many precious grave goods, and several inscriptions give her the title ''Mut-nesut'' (meaning "mother of a king"), together with the name of king Sneferu.
One of them shows the head of a cat goddess (most possibly Bastet or Sakhmet).
His historical figure appears in movies, novels and documentaries.
Among other material, a collection of hundreds of papyrus fragments were found at the site.
Over time, Egyptologists examined possible motives and reasons as to how Khufu's reputation changed over time.
Depictions of a king with such a flail as a ceremonial insignia appear no earlier than during the Middle Kingdom.
Everything known about Khufu comes from inscriptions in his necropolis at Giza and later documents.
At Isis' temple a family tree of the Isis-priests is on display, which lists the names of priests from 670 to 488 BC.
For the making of the pyramid itself there passed a period of 20&nbsp;years; and the pyramid is square, each side measuring 800&nbsp;feet, and the height of it is the same.
These mortuary cults were still practiced even in Saitic and Persian periods.
This theory may be supported by the circumstance that Khufu's mother was buried close to her son and not in the necropolis of her husband, as it was to be expected.
While the right figurine can be identified as king Khufu by his Horus name, the left one depicts king Pepy I of 6th dynasty, called by his birth name.
Egyptologists clearly see politically and socially motivated intentions in these criticisms and it seems paradoxical that the use of these monuments was forgotten, but the names of their builders remained immortalized.
Verena Lepper and Miriam Lichtheim suspect that a difficult-to-assess depiction of Khufu was exactly what the author had planned.
The majority of these documents date to the 27th year of Khufu's reign and describe how the central administration sent food and supplies to the sailors and wharf workers.
A rare version of the name of Khufu, used by Josephus, is '''Sofe''' ( ; ).
In attempt to solve the riddle around Khufu's true length of rulership, modern Egyptologists point to Sneferu's reign, when the cattle count was held every second year of a king's rulership.
It might be that the sphinx -as an allegoric and mystified representation of the king- simply guarded the sacred cemetery of Giza.
So some were ordered to draw stones from the stone quarries in the Arabian mountains to the Nile, and others he forced to receive the stones after they had been carried over the river in boats, and to draw them to those called the Libyan mountains.
Furthermore, several Egyptologists point out that Roman historians such as Pliny the Elder and Frontinus (both around 70 A.D.) equally do not hesitate to ridicule the pyramids of Giza: Frontinus calls them "idle pyramids, containing the indispensable structures likewise to some of our abandoned aqueducts at Rome" and Pliny describes them as "the idle and foolish ostentation of royal wealth".
A possible part of the necropolis of Khufu is the famous Great Sphinx of Giza.
Khufu's name appears in inscriptions at Elkab and Elephantine and in local quarries at Hatnub and Wadi Hammamat.
Obviously, Manetho thought "Khéops" and "Sûphis" to be two different kings.
Today the little statue is restored and on display in the Egyptian Museum of Cairo in room 32 under its inventory number ''JE 36143''.
In 1997, French author Guy Brachet composed the novel series ''Le roman des pyramides'', including five volumes, of which the first two (''Le temple soleil'' and ''Rêve de pierre'') use Khufu and his tomb as a theme.
Pillars and portals were made of red granite, the ceiling stones made of white limestone.
He also mentions that Khufu built the Great Pyramid, then he claims that his contemporary Herodotus says that the pyramid was built by a king "Khéops".
Al-Maqrizi notes, that Khufu was named ''Saurid'', ''Salhuk'' and/or ''Sarjak'' by the biblical Amalekites.
However that may be, the highest parts of it were finished first, and afterwards they proceeded to finish that which came next to them, and lastly they finished the parts of it near the ground and the lowest ranges.
Several statue heads might have belonged to Khufu.
But some chapters later, Al-Maqrizi claims that the Copts call Saurid the builder of the pyramids.
The prisms for the casing were finely polished at their displaying site.
These views and resulting stories were avidly snapped up by the Greek historians and so they also made negative evaluations of Khufu, since scandalous stories were easier to sell than positive tales.
This is remarkable: Khufu's famous (step-)father Sneferu enjoyed "only" 18 mortuary priesthoods during the same period of time, even Djedefra enjoyed only 8 and Khaefra enjoyed 28.
At one side he is depicted as ruthless when deciding to have a condemned prisoner decapitated to test the alleged magical powers of Dedi.
It is obvious that the figurines of Pepy were added to the statue groups in later times, because they were placed separately and at a distance from the deity.
Closer examinations of and comparisons between contemporary documents, later documents and Greek and Coptic readings reveal that Khufu's reputation changed slowly, and that the positive views about the king still prevailed during the Greek and Ptolemaic era.
It is 54,3&nbsp;cm large and made of pink granite.
The fact that Diodorus credits the Giza pyramid to Greek kings, might be reasoned in legends of his lifetimes and that the pyramids were demonstrably reused in late periods by Greek and Roman kings and noblemen.
It is built of stone smoothed and fitted together in the most perfect manner, not one of the stones being less than 30&nbsp;feet in length.
The inscription describes the arrival of royal boats with precious ore and turquoise in the "year after the 13th cattle count under Hor-Medjedw".
The monument has its original entrance at the northern side and contains three chambers: at the top, the burial chamber of the king (''king's chamber''), in the middle, the statue chamber (erroneously called ''queen's chamber''), and an unfinished subterranean chamber (''underworld chamber'') under the foundation of the pyramid.
At the western site lies the ''West Cemetery'', where the highest officials and priests were interred.
The faces of Djedefre and Khaefra are both pretty similar to that of the sphinx, but they also do not perfectly fit.
They were deposited at Saqqara during the Middle Kingdom, but their creation can be dated back to Khufu's reign.
Another example is ''Duck Tales 2'' for the Game Boy.
The ancient historian Diodorus claims that Khufu was so much abhorred by his own people in later times that the mortuary priests secretly brought the royal sarcophagus, together with the corpse of Khufu, to another, hidden grave.
One document is of special interest: the diary of ''Mererer'', an official involved in the building of the Great Pyramid.
It is possible that the lack of this special depicting program influenced later ancient Greek historians in their assumptions that Khufu could have actually closed all temples and prohibited any sacrifice.
Khufu's attendance roll call in this list might indicate that he and his followers were worshipped as patron saints.
First traces of such a harbour were already excavated in 1823 by John Gardner Wilkinson and James Burton, but the site was quickly abandoned and then forgotten in time.
The complete freshly set casing made the pyramid shimmer in bright natural lime white.
The position of her right arm suggests that the bust once belonged to a statue group similar to the well known triad of Mycerinus.
Khufu and his pyramid are furthermore the objects of pseudoscientific theories which deal with the idea that Khufu's pyramid was built with the help of extraterrestrials and that Khufu simply seized and re-used the monument, ignoring archaeological evidence or even falsifying it.
By this time, no inhabitant of Egypt was able to tell and no one could translate the Egyptian hieroglyphs anymore.
Hawkman, the fictional superhero from DC Comics, in his Carter Hall incarnation, is the reincarnated Prince Khufu, who was murdered in ancient Egypt.
Well-known films which deal with Khufu or at least have the Great Pyramid as a theme, are Howard Hawks' ''Land of the Pharaohs'' from 1955, a fictional account of the building of the Great Pyramid of Khufu, and Roland Emmerich's ''Stargate'' from 1994, in which an extraterrestrial device is found near the pyramids.
One of the fragments, that of a small seated statue, shows feet of a sitting king from their knuckles downward.
On the pyramid it is declared in Egyptian writing how much was spent on radishes and onions and leeks for the workmen, and if I remember correctly what the interpreter said while reading this inscription for me, a sum of 1600 silver talents was spent.
During the Late Period huge numbers of scarabs with the name of Khufu were sold to the citizens, possibly as some kind of lucky charms.
Newer evidence from Wadi al-Jarf however, give a third clue about the true length of reign: Several papyrus fragments contain handwritten reports from a royal harbour at modern-day Wadi al-Jarf.
For example, Khufu is the main actor of the famous Papyrus Westcar from the 13th dynasty.
Furthermore, he points out that the face of Khufu is unusually squat and chubby and shows no emotional expression.
In this scene the god Wepwawet is present.
In 1939, Nagib Mahfuz wrote the novel ''Khufu's Wisdom'', which leans on the stories of Papyrus Westcar.
A literary masterpiece from the 13th dynasty talking about Khufu is the famous Papyrus Westcar, where king Khufu witnesses a magical wonder and receives a prophecy from a magician named Dedi.
And a fourth example shows the king with the double crown impaling a hippopotamus.
The casing was made of nearly white limestone.
Khufu is well known under his Hellenized name '''Khêops'''  or '''Cheops''' (, ; , by Diodorus and Herodotus) and less well known under another Hellenized name, '''Súphis''' ( ; , by Manetho).
At the end of 6th dynasty at least 67 mortuary priests and 6 independent high officials serving at the necropolis are archaeologically attested.
Much later it was called ''Heru-im-Akhet'' (''Hârmachís''; "horus at the horizon") by the Egyptians and ''Abu el-Hὀl'' ("father of terror") by the Arabians.
All other reliefs and statues were found in fragments and many buildings of Khufu are lost.
The ancient historian Herodotus gives 50 years and the ancient historian Manetho even credits him 63 years of reign.
Sources contemporary to Khufu's time give three key pieces of information: One of them was found at the Dakhla Oasis in the Libyan Desert.
Of this oppression there passed ten years while the causeway was made by which they drew the stones, which causeway they built, and it is a work not much less, as it appears to me, than the pyramid.
But for some unknown reasons the works were stopped and two further chambers had been built inside the pyramid.
The pyramidion could have been covered with electrum, but up to this day there is no archaeological proof for that.
The contradictory depiction of Khufu is the object of great dispute between Egyptologists and historians to this day.
Among the "simple folk", also, negative or critical views about the pyramids might have been handed down, and the mortuary cult of the priests was surely part of tradition.
These papyri are the earliest examples of imprinted papyri ever found in Egypt.
And finally, Hawass also argues that the sort of throne the figurine sits on does not match the artistic styles of any Old Kingdom artifact.
To the right of them the name ''...fu'' in a cartouche is visible, and it can easily be reconstructed as the cartouche name ''Khufu''.
At Wadi Hammamat a rock inscription dates back to the 12th dynasty.
Khufu's pyramid was surrounded by an enclosure wall, each wall 33&nbsp;ft (≙ 10.1&nbsp;m) in distance from the pyramid.
The story about the alleged "Sacred Book" is questioned by modern Egyptologists, for it would be highly unusual that a pharaoh wrote books and that such a precious document could be sold away so easily.
One of them is the so-called "Brooklyn head" of the Brooklyn Museum in New York City.
Khufu's obituary is presented there in a conflicting way: While the king enjoyed a long lasting cultural heritage preservation during the period of the Old Kingdom and the New Kingdom, the ancient historians Manetho, Diodorus and Herodotus hand down a very negative depiction of Khufu's character.
His son and throne follower Thutmose IV freed the sphinx from sand and placed a memorial stela – known as the "Dream Stele" – between her frontal paws.
Some of them originate from the ruined pyramid temple and the destroyed causeway, where they once covered the walls completely.
Zahi Hawass therefore concludes that the figurine was possibly made as an amulet or lucky charm to sell to pious citizens.
Another riddle is the original cultic and symbolic function of the sphinx.
In sum, all these documents would prove that Khufu ruled for at least 26 or 27 years, and possibly for over 34 years, if the inscription in the relieving chambers point to a biennial cattle count.
Most Egyptologists believe the statuette is contemporary, but some scholars, such as Zahi Hawass, think that it was an artistic reproduction of the 26th dynasty.
Another one shows a row of fat oxen decorated with flowers – they were obviously prepared as sacrifices during an offering procession.
Most documents that mention king Khufu were written by ancient Egyptian and Greek historians around 300&nbsp;BC.
Close behind the queen's pyramids G1-b and G1-c the cult pyramid of Khufu was found in 2005.
Only the mummy of Khufu can save them.
Diodorus states that the Khufu pyramid was beautifully covered in white, but the top was said to be capped.
According to Tallet, the harbor could also have been one of the legendary high sea harbours of Ancient Egypt, from where expeditions to the infamous goldland Punt had started.
Another hint to Khufu's bad reputation within the Greek and Roman folk might be hidden in the Coptic reading of Khufu's name.
However, they give no hint of a negative reputation of the kings themselves, and thus they do not judge Khufu in a negative way.
Therefore, Khufu's highest known and certain preserved date is the "Year after the 13th cattle count".
Hawass compared the facial stylistics with statues of contemporary kings, such as Sneferu, Khaefra and Menkaura.
Such mortuary cults were very important for the state's economy, because for the oblations special domains had to be established.
In one scene king Khufu wears the double-crown; nearby, the depiction of the god Thoth is visible.
Remarkable is the so-called ''Great Gallery'' leading to the king's chamber: It has a niched ceiling and measures 28.7&nbsp;ft in height and 151.3&nbsp;ft in length.
The famous Lamentation Texts from the First Intermediate Period reveal some interesting views about the monumental tombs from the past; they were at that time seen as proof of vanity.
At the Wadi Maghareh in Sinai a rock inscription depicts Khufu with the double crown.
Three weeks later the head was found after intense sifting in a deeper level of the room rubble.
Within the story, Khufu is characterised in a difficult-to-assess way.
When Petrie recognized the importance of the find, he stopped all other work and offered a reward to any workman who could find the head.
This is not quite correct.
This theory is promoted by findings such as alabaster vessels with Khufu's name found at Koptos, the pilgrimage destination of Wadi Hammamat travellers.
The pyramid necropolis of Khufu was erected at the north-east section of the plateau of Giza.
New evidence regarding political activities under Khufu's reign has recently been found at the site of the ancient port of Wadi al-Jarf on the Red Sea coast east of Egypt.
The gallery has an important static function, it diverts the weight of the stone masses above the king's chamber into the surrounding pyramid core.
Interestingly, the pharaoh officially used two versions of his birth name: ''Khnum-khuf'' and ''Khufu''.
The papyri also mention a certain harbour at the opposite coast of Wadi al-Jarf, on the western shore of the Sinai Peninsula, where the ancient fortress Tell Ras Budran was excavated in 1960 by Gregory Mumford.
Here they reckon altogether 106&nbsp;years, during which they say that there was nothing but evil for the Egyptians, and the temples were kept closed and not opened during all that time".
The lack of the casing allows a full view to the inner core of the pyramid.
The faces of these three kings are of even beauty, slender and with a kindly expression – the clear result of idealistic motivations; they are not based on reality.
