Among Kiev's best-known monuments are Mikhail Mikeshin's statue of Bohdan Khmelnytsky astride his horse located near St. Sophia Cathedral, the venerated Vladimir the Great (St. Vladimir), the baptizer of Rus', overlooking the river above Podil from Volodymyrska Hill, the monument to Kyi, Schek and Khoryv and Lybid, the legendary founders of the city located at the Dnieper embankment.
The current Mayor of Kiev is Vitali Klitschko who was sworn in on 5 June 2014; after he had won the 25 May 2014 Kiev mayoral elections with almost 57% of the votes.
Railways are Kiev’s main mode of intracity and suburban transportation.
But the trains are not reliable, as they may fall significantly behind schedule, may not be safe in terms of crime, and the ''elektrichka'' cars are poorly maintained and are overcrowded in rush hours.
Both of these teams play in the highest Ukrainian leagues for their respective sports and whilst BC Kyiv was founded just recently in 1999, Sokil was founded in 1963, during the existence of the Soviet Union.
Since 25 June 2014 Klitschko is also Head of Kiev City Administration.
Snow cover usually lies from mid-November to the end of March, with the frost-free period lasting 180 days on average, but surpassing 200 days in recent years.
In 1834, the Saint Vladimir University was established; it is now called the Taras Shevchenko National University of Kiev after the Ukrainian poet Taras Shevchenko.
The historic Kiev tram system was the first electric tramway in the former Russian Empire and the third one in Europe after the Berlin Straßenbahn and the Budapest tramway.
There are plans to build a full-size, fully grade-separated ring road around Kiev.
When the capital of the Ukrainian SSR was moved from Kharkiv to Kiev many new buildings were commissioned to give the city "the gloss and polish of a capital".
In 1934 Kiev became the capital of Soviet Ukraine.
There are about 530 general secondary schools and ca.
The early English spelling was derived from Old East Slavic form ''Kyjev'' (Cyrillic: Къıєвъ).
In 2011 the Kiev city administration established a new 'Urban Train' for Kiev.
For example, up until the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, the club won 13 USSR Championships, 9 USSR Cups, and 3 USSR Super Cups, thus making Dynamo the most successful club in the history of the Soviet Top League.
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union and Ukrainian independence in 1991, Kiev remained the capital of Ukraine and experienced a steady migration influx of ethnic Ukrainians from other regions of the country.
In the late 1840s, the historian, Mykola Kostomarov ''()'', founded a secret political society, the Brotherhood of Saint Cyril and Methodius, whose members put forward the idea of a federation of free Slavic people with Ukrainians as a distinct and separate group rather than a subordinate part of the Russian nation; the society was quickly suppressed by the authorities.
The Ukraine national football team, for example, will play matches at the re-constructed Olympic Stadium from 2011.
The Dnieper River naturally divides Kiev into the Right Bank and the Left Bank areas.
According to the official registration statistics, there were  residents within the city limits of Kiev in July 2013.
Their Collection of Jewish Musical Folklore (1912–1947) was inscribed on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register in 2005.
In World War II, the city again suffered significant damage, and was occupied by Nazi Germany from 19 September 1941 to 6 November 1943.
The most significant difference is that the city is considered as a region of Ukraine (see Regions of Ukraine).
None of the Polish-Russian treaties concerning Kiev have ever been ratified.
In the 1230s the city was besieged and ravaged by different Rus' princes several times.
Other notable sport stadiums/sport complexes in Kiev include the Lobanovsky Dynamo Stadium, the Palace of Sports, among many others.
On one of the oldest English maps of the region, ''Russiae, Moscoviae et Tartariae'' published by Ortelius (London, 1570) the name of the city is spelled ''Kiou''.
Each residential region has its own market, or ''rynok''.
The Kiev-Sviatoshyn Raion state administration is located near Kiltseva doroha (Ring Road) on prospekt Peremohy (Victory Parkway), while the Kiev-Svyatoshyn Raion local council is located on vulytsia Yantarna (Yantarnaya Street).
The city probably existed as a commercial centre as early as the 5th century.
Allegedly in response to the actions of the NKVD, the Germans rounded up all the local Jews they could find, nearly 34,000, and massacred them at Babi Yar over the course of 29–30 September 1941.
The city is adjoined by the mouth of the Desna River and the Kiev Reservoir in the north, and the Kaniv Reservoir in the south.
On the 1650 map by Guillaume de Beauplan, the name of the city is ''Kiiow'', and the region was named ''Kÿowia''.
More than 600,000 Soviet soldiers were killed or captured in the great encirclement Battle of Kiev in 1941.
Discount passes are available for grade school and higher education students.
Scientific research is conducted in many institutes of higher education and, additionally, in many research institutes affiliated with the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences.
According to the 2001 census data, more than 130 nationalities and ethnic groups reside within the territory of Kiev.
Kiev prospered during the late 19th century Industrial Revolution in the Russian Empire, when it became the third most important city of the Empire and the major centre of commerce of its southwest.
There are large industrial and green areas in both the Right Bank and the Left Bank.
Also since the Middle Ages an image of the Saint Michael represented the city as well as the duchy.
During the 8th and 9th centuries, Kiev was an outpost of the Khazar empire.
The English travelogue titled ''New Russia: Journey from Riga to the Crimea by way of Kiev'', by Mary Holderness was published in 1823.
At the United Nations Climate Change Conference 2009 Kiev was the only Commonwealth of Independent States city to have been inscribed into the TOP30 European Green City Index (placed 30th).
In 2011, the total number of trips exceeded 519 million.
The centre of Kiev (Independence Square and Khreschatyk Street) becomes a large outdoor party place at night during summer months, with thousands of people having a good time in nearby restaurants, clubs and outdoor cafes.
Completely destroyed during the Mongol invasion in 1240, the city lost most of its influence for the centuries to come.
The city's name is said to derive from the name of Kyi, one of its four legendary founders (see Name, below).
It is home to many high-tech industries, higher education institutions and world-famous historical landmarks.
The Victory Park (''Park Peremohy'') located near Darnytsia subway station is a popular destination for strollers, joggers, and cyclists.
In 1482, the Crimean Tatars sacked and burned much of Kiev.
Another legend states that Saint Andrew passed through the area and where he erected a cross, a church was built.
Modern Kiev is a mix of the old (Kiev preserved about 70 percent of more than 1,000 buildings built during 1907–1914) and the new, seen in everything from the architecture to the stores and to the people themselves.
The coldest temperature ever recorded in the city was  on 11 January 1951.
The city boomed again during the years of the Soviet industrialization as its population grew rapidly and many industrial giants were created, some of which exist to this day.
Since introducing a visa-free regime for EU-member states and Switzerland in 2005, Ukraine has seen a steady increase in the number of foreign tourists visiting the country.
These newer districts of the city, along with some older areas were then named in honour of prominent communists and socialist-revolutionary figures; however, due to the way in which many communist party members eventually, after a certain period of time, fell out of favour and so were replaced with new, fresher minds, so too did the names of Kiev's districts change accordingly.
A 2015 study by the International Republican Institute found that 94% of Kiev was ethnic Ukrainian, and 5% ethnic Russian.
Under Oleksandr Omelchenko (mayor from 1999 to 2006), there were further plans for the merger of some raions and revision of their boundaries, and the total number of raions had been planned to be decreased from 10 to 7.
In the early 1320s, a Lithuanian army led by Gediminas defeated a Slavic army led by Stanislav of Kiev at the Battle on the Irpen' River, and conquered the city.
Its sacred sites, which include the Kiev Pechersk Lavra (the Monastery of the Caves) and the Saint Sophia Cathedral are probably the most famous, attracted pilgrims for centuries and now recognized as a UNESCO World Heritage Site remain the primary religious centres as well as the major tourist attraction.
The Kiev public transport system, except for taxi, uses a simple flat rate tariff system regardless of distance traveled: tickets or tokens must be purchased each time a vehicle is boarded.
The name ''Zoloti Vorota'' is also used for a nearby theatre and a station of the Kiev Metro.
The Head of City State Administration — the city's governor, is appointed by the President of Ukraine, while the Head of the City Council — the Mayor of Kiev, is elected by a local popular vote.
The area lakes and rivers freeze over in the winter and ice fishermen are a frequent sight, as are children with their ice skates.
In February 2016 the Kiev city council terminated its twinned relations with the Russian cities Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Volgograd, Ulan-Ude, Makhachkala, and the Komi Republic due to the Russian military invasion of Ukraine.
Kiev is further informally divided into historical or territorial neighbourhoods, each housing from about 5,000 to 100,000 inhabitants.
The older right-bank (''western'') part of the city is represented by numerous woody hills, ravines and small rivers.
The eastern 'Left Bank' is predominantly residential.
Traffic jams and lack of parking space are growing problems for all road transport services in Kiev.
Both Ukrainian and Russian are commonly spoken in the city; approximately 75% of Kiev's population responded "Ukrainian" to the 2001 census question on their native language, roughly 25% responded "Russian".
Construction is underway for turning the large Darnytsia Railway Station on the left-bank part of Kiev into a long-distance passenger hub, which may ease traffic at the central station.
Ticket prices are regulated by the city government, and the cost of one ride is far lower than in Western Europe.
In 1917, there were 8 Raion Councils (''Duma''), which were reorganised by bolsheviks into 6 Party-Territory Raions.
The Tatars, who also claimed Kiev, retaliated in 1324–1325, so while Kiev was ruled by a Lithuanian prince, it had to pay a tribute to the Golden Horde.
More than a dozen of ''elektrichka'' stops are located within the city allowing residents of different neighborhoods to use the suburban trains.
The Rise of the Radically Right-Wing All-Ukrainian Association "Svoboda" by Andreas Umland, Centre for Geopolitical Studies (1 May 2011)
However, this system still fails to meet the demand for passenger service.
Kiev's theatres include, the Kiev Opera House, Ivan Franko National Academic Drama Theater, Lesya Ukrainka National Academic Theater of Russian Drama, the Kiev Puppet Theater, October Palace and National Philharmonic of Ukraine and others.
The coldest are December, January, and February, with mean temperatures of .
Most of Kiev's attractions as well as the majority of business and governmental institutions are located on the right bank.
The taxi market in Kiev is expansive but not regulated.
Kiev is served by two international passenger airports: the Boryspil Airport located  away, and the smaller, municipally owned Zhulyany Airport on the southern outskirts of the city.
This service runs at standard 4- to 10-minute intervals throughout the day and follows a circular route around the city centre, which allows it to serve many of Kiev's inner suburbs.
The June 2007 unofficial population estimate based on amount of bakery products sold in the city (thus including temporary visitors and commuters) gave a number of at least 3.5&nbsp;million people.
Kiev was greatly affected by all the major processes that took place in Soviet Ukraine during the interwar period: the 1920s Ukrainization as well as the migration of the rural Ukrainophone population made the Russophone city Ukrainian-speaking and propped up the development of the Ukrainian cultural life in the city; the Soviet Industrialization that started in the late 1920s turned the city, a former centre of commerce and religion, into a major industrial, technological and scientific centre, the 1932–1933 Great Famine devastated the part of the migrant population not registered for the ration cards, and Joseph Stalin's Great Purge of 1937–1938 almost eliminated the city's intelligentsia
According to the All-Ukrainian Census, the population of Kiev in 2001 was 2,611,300.
The total number of institutions of higher education in Kiev currently approaches 200, allowing young people to pursue almost any line of study.
Other historians suggest that the Magyar tribes ruled the city between 840 and 878, before migrating with some Khazar tribes to Hungary.
There is a fierce competition between private taxi companies.
The Metro is continuously expanding towards the city limits to meet growing demand, currently having three lines with a total length of  and 51 stations (some of which are renowned architectural landmarks).
The most popular songs are "Without Podil, Kiev is impossible" and "How not to love you, Kiev of mine?".
This has established the use of the spelling ''Kyiv'' in all official documents issued by the governmental authorities since October 1995.
The origin of the city is obscured by legends, one of which tells about a founding-family consisting of a Slavic tribe leader Kyi, the eldest, his brothers Shchek and Khoryv, and also their sister Lybid, who founded the city (The Primary Chronicle).
In the turbulent period following the 1917 Russian Revolution, Kiev became the capital of several short-lived Ukrainian states and was caught in the middle of several conflicts: World War I, during which it was occupied by German soldiers from 2 March 1918 to November 1918, the Russian Civil War, and the Polish–Soviet War.
The city prospered again during the Russian Empire's Industrial Revolution in the late 19th century.
The most expensive properties are located in the Pechersk, and Khreshchatyk areas.
Andriyivskyy Descent is one of the best known historic streets and a major tourist attraction in Kiev.
Ukrainians constitute the largest ethnic group in Kiev, and they account for 2,110,800 people, or 82.2% of the population.
Kiev hosts many universities, the major ones being Kiev National Taras Shevchenko University, the National Technical University "Kiev Polytechnic Institute", and the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy.
Particularly, the Kiev Passenger Railway Station is the city's only long-distance passenger terminal (''vokzal'').
Once a well maintained and widely used method of transport, the system is now gradually being phased out in favor of buses and trolleybuses.
There are monthly passes in all combinations of public transportation.
Most of the city's population of Muslims comprises Tatars, Caucasians and other people from the former Soviet Union.
During the Soviet era, as the city was expanding, the number of raions also gradually increased.
It is also prestigious to own a property in newly constructed buildings in the Kharkivskyi Raion or Obolon along the Dnieper.
Some claim to find reference to the city in Ptolemy’s work as the Metropolity (the 2nd century).
In a poll conducted by the Kiev International Institute of Sociology in the first half of February 2014, 5.3% of those polled in Kiev believed "Ukraine and Russia must unite into a single state", nationwide this percentage was 12.5.
Now some of the buildings are restored and turned into a museum called the ''Kiev Fortress'', while others are in use in various military and commercial installations.
16%) were foreigners.
During the Russian industrial revolution in the late 19th century, Kiev became an important trade and transportation centre of the Russian Empire, specialising in sugar and grain export by railway and on the Dnieper river.
Prior to the 2008–2009 recession the average annual growth in the number of foreign visits in Kiev was 23% over a three-year period.
Election results in Ukraine since 1998, Central Election Commission of Ukraine Nations and Nationalism: A Global Historical Overview, ABC-CLIO, 2008, ISBN 1851099077 (page 1629) Ukraine on its Meandering Path Between East and West by Andrej Lushnycky and Mykola Riabchuk, Peter Lang, 2009, ISBN 303911607X  (page 122) After the parliamentary elections in Ukraine: a tough victory for the Party of Regions, Centre for Eastern Studies (7 November 2012) Communist and Post-Communist Parties in Europe by Uwe Backes and Patrick Moreau, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 2008, ISBN 978-3-525-36912-8 (page 396) Party of Regions gets 185 seats in Ukrainian parliament, Batkivschyna 101 – CEC, Interfax-Ukraine (12 November 2012) UDAR submits to Rada resolution on Ukraine’s integration with EU, Interfax-Ukraine (8 January 2013)  Electronic Bulletin "Your Choice – 2012".
The Metro carries around 1.422 million passengers daily accounting for 38% of the Kiev's public transport load.
By 1900, the city had also become a significant industrial centre, having a population of 250,000.
Experiencing rapid population growth between the 1970s and the mid-1990s, the city has continued its consistent growth after the turn of the millennium.
At the time of the Mongol destruction, Kiev was reputed as one of the largest cities in the world, with a population exceeding 100,000 in the beginning of the early 12th century.
The most important of the city's many museums are the Kiev State Historical Museum, Museum of The History of Ukraine in World War II, the National Art Museum, the Museum of Western and Oriental Art, the Pinchuk Art Centre and the National Museum of Russian art.
Many are used for pleasure and recreation, although some of the bodies of water are not suitable for swimming.
Finally, as a result of the Battle of Blue Waters in 1362, Kiev and surrounding areas were incorporated into the Grand Duchy of Lithuania by Algirdas, Grand Duke of Lithuania.
'''Kiev fortress''' is the 19th-century fortification buildings situated in Ukrainian capital Kiev, that once belonged to western Russian fortresses.
The Dnieper River forms a branching system of tributaries, isles, and harbors within the city limits.
Pensioners use public transportation free.
The first electric tram line of the Russian Empire was established in Kiev (arguably, the first in the world).
*Hrebinka (south-eastern)
At the beginning of the 20th century, the city centre was dominated by the Russian-speaking part of the population, while the lower classes living on the outskirts retained Ukrainian folk culture to a significant extent.
The centre of Kiev has been cleaned up and buildings have been restored and redecorated, especially Khreshchatyk and Maidan Nezalezhnosti.
At some point during the late 9th or early 10th century Kiev fell under the rule of Varangians (see Askold and Dir, and Oleg of Novgorod) and became the nucleus of the Rus' polity.
Early English sources use various names, including ''Kiou'', ''Kiow'', ''Kiew'', ''Kiovia''.
Kiev is an important industrial, scientific, educational, and cultural centre of Eastern Europe.
Boating, fishing, and water sports are popular pastimes in Kiev.
The date given for Oleg's conquest of the town in the Primary Chronicle is 882, but some historians, such as Omeljan Pritsak and Constantine Zuckerman, dispute this and maintain that Khazar rule continued as late as the 920s (documentary evidence exists to support this assertion – see the Kievian Letter and Schechter Letter.)
According to a 2006 survey, Ukrainian is used at home by 23% of Kievans, 52% use Russian and 24% switch between both.
It is estimated that more than 100,000 people of various ethnic groups, mostly civilians, were murdered by the Germans there during World War II.
Russians comprise 337,300 (13.1%), Jews 17,900 (0.7%), Belarusians 16,500 (0.6%), Poles 6,900 (0.3%), Armenians 4,900 (0.2%), Azerbaijanis 2,600 (0.1%), Tatars 2,500 (0.1%), Georgians 2,400 (0.1%), Moldovans 1,900 (0.1%).
Significant areas of the left-bank Dnieper valley were artificially sand-deposited, and are protected by dams.
From November 2013 until February 2014, central Kiev was the primary location of Euromaidan.
The spelling is used by the United Nations, all English-speaking foreign diplomatic missions, several international organizations, Encarta encyclopedia, and by some media in Ukraine.
Landmarks of that period include the railway infrastructure, the foundation of numerous educational and cultural facilities as well as notable architectural monuments (mostly merchant-oriented).
Kiev has many professional and amateur football clubs, including Dynamo Kyiv, Arsenal Kyiv and FC Obolon Kyiv which play in the Ukrainian Premier League.
The above-mentioned sites are also part of the Seven Wonders of Ukraine collection.
According to it the name Kyiv/Kiev means to "belong to Kyi".
The British government has also started using Kyiv.
The '''National Art Museum of Ukraine''' is a museum dedicated to Ukrainian art.
The central streets are closed for auto traffic on weekends and holidays.
The '''Golden Gate''' is a historic gateway in the ancient city's walls.
However, the prevailing northward winds blew most of the radioactive debris away from the city.
A hill-fortress, called Sambat (Old Turkic for "High Place") was built to defend the area.
8th-century fortifications were built upon a Slavic settlement apparently abandoned some decades before.
Many historic areas of Kiev, such as Andriyivskyy Descent, have become popular street vendor locations, where one can find traditional Ukrainian art, religious items, books, game sets (most commonly chess) as well as jewellery for sale.
*Nizhyn (north-eastern)
Kiev's armament-dependent industrial output fell after the Soviet collapse, adversely affecting science and technology.
While the choice of these spellings has likely been influenced by the Polish name of the city () as until the mid-17th century the city was controlled by Poland, the name ''Kiev'' that started to take hold at later times, likely originates on the basis of Russian orthography and pronunciation , during a time when Kiev was in the Russian Empire (since 1708, a seat of a governorate).
It was a provincial capital of marginal importance in the outskirts of the territories controlled by its powerful neighbours; first the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, followed by Poland and Russia.
Kiev is located on both sides of the Dnieper River, which flows south through the city towards the Black Sea.
According to these the building of the fortress of Kiev was finished in 840 by the lead of Keő (Keve), Csák and Geréb, the three brothers, possibly members of the Tarján tribe (the three names are mentioned in the Kiev Chronicle as Kyi, Shchek and Khoryv, none of them are Slavic names and it has been always a hard problem to solve their meaning/origin by Russian historians.
In 1917, after the Ukrainian National Republic declared independence from the Russian Empire, Kiev became its capital.
The historic changes in population are shown in the side table.
Kiev also has numerous recreational attractions like bowling alleys, go-cart tracks, paintball venues, billiard halls and even shooting ranges.
If it was the Slavic peoples then it is also uncertain when Kiev fell under the rule of the Khazar empire or whether the city was, in fact, founded by the Khazars.
According to the UN 2011 evaluation, there were no risks of natural disasters in Kiev and its metropolitan area
In the book ''Travels'', by Joseph Marshall (London, 1772), the city is referred to as ''Kiovia''.
Most Ukrainian national teams play their home international matches in Kiev.
Most important buildings of the national government (Cabinet of Ukraine, Verkhovna Rada, others) are located along vulytsia Mykhaila Hrushevskoho (Mykhailo Hrushevsky Street) and vulytsia Instytutska (Institute Street).
Kiev emerged as the most pro-Western region of Ukraine where parties advocating tighter integration with the European Union dominate during elections.
Shortly after the city was occupied, a team of NKVD officers that had remained hidden dynamited most of the buildings on the Khreshchatyk, the main street of the city, most of whose buildings were being used by German military and civil authorities; the buildings burned for days and 25,000 people were left homeless.
Scattered Slavic settlements existed in the area from the 6th century, but it is unclear whether any of them later developed into the city.
Several new intersections are under construction.
These structures (once a united complex) were built in the Pechersk and neighbourhoods by the Russian army.
A Slavic settlement on the great trade route between Scandinavia and Constantinople, Kiev was a tributary of the Khazars, until seized by the Varangians (Vikings) in the mid-9th century.
Both the Dnieper and Desna rivers are navigable at Kiev, although regulated by the reservoir shipping locks and limited by winter freeze-over.
All public road transport (except for some minibuses) is operated by the united Kyivpastrans municipal company.
As a prominent city with a long history, its English name was subject to gradual evolution.
And most importantly, with the easing of the visa rules in 2005, Ukraine is positioning itself as a prime tourist attraction, with Kiev, among the other large cities, looking to profit from new opportunities.
Historically located on the western right bank of the river, the city expanded into the left bank only in the 20th century.
''Kiev'' is also based on the old Ukrainian language spelling of the city name and was used by Ukrainians and their ancestors from the time of Kievan Rus until only about the last century.
Other prominent non-football sport clubs in the city include: the Sokil Kiev ice hockey club and BC Kyiv basketball club.
While education traditionally remains largely in the hands of the state there are several accredited private institutions in the city.
The plans of building massive monuments (of Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin) were also abandoned; due to lack of money (in the 1930s–1950s) and because of Kiev's hilly landscape.
According to the rules, the Ukrainian Київ transliterates into ''Kyiv''.
It is believed that Kiev was founded in the late 9th century (some historians have wrongly referred to as 482 AD).
*Fastiv (south-western)
During the 18th and 19th centuries city life was dominated by the Russian military and ecclesiastical authorities; the Russian Orthodox Church formed a significant part of Kiev's infrastructure and business activity.
During World War II, the city again suffered significant damage, but quickly recovered in the post-war years, remaining the third largest city of the Soviet Union.
However, the city's unique landscape distinguishes it from the surrounding region.
It is still unclear whether these fortifications were built by the Slavs or the Khazars.
Other significant cultural centres include the Dovzhenko Film Studios, and the Kiev Circus.
The growing political and economic role of the city, combined with its international relations, as well as extensive internet and social network penetration, have made Kiev the most pro-Western and pro-democracy region of Ukraine; (so called) National Democratic parties advocating tighter integration with the European Union receive most votes during elections in Kiev.
That portion of the city is also unofficially known as the government quarter ().
The Ar-Rahma Mosque was built in 2000.
Kiev is completely surrounded by Kiev Oblast.
Kiev is home to Ukraine's ministry of education and science, and is also noted for its contributions to medical and computer science research.
Digital ticket system is already established in Kiev Metro, with plans for other transport modes.
In the 2003 sociological survey, when the question 'What language do you use in everyday life?'
In 2004–2005, the city played host to until then the largest post-Soviet public demonstrations, in support of the Orange Revolution.
Of these three, Dynamo Kyiv has had the most success over the course of its history.
In 1240 the Mongol invasion of Rus' led by Batu Khan completely destroyed Kiev, an event that had a profound effect on the future of the city and the East Slavic civilization.
A wide variety of farm produce is available in many of Kiev's farmer markets with the Besarabsky Market located in the very centre of the city being most famous.
In total, there are 448 bodies of open water within the boundaries of Kiev, which include Dnieper itself, its reservoirs, and several small rivers, dozens of lakes and artificially created ponds.
The catastrophic accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in 1986 occurred only  north of the city.
