In the Pacific Northwest, wild salmon stocks, a main resident food source, have declined dramatically in recent years.
In Nuu-chah-nulth and Kwakwaka'wakw mythology, killer whales may embody the souls of deceased chiefs.
One killer whale was also attacked by its companions after being shot.
All members of the North American west coast transient community express the same basic dialect, although minor regional variation in call types is evident.
*'''Offshore''': A third population of killer whales in the northeast Pacific was discovered in 1988, when a humpback whale researcher observed them in open water.
Killer whales can then release the animal near juvenile whales, allowing the younger whales to practice the difficult capture technique on the now-weakened prey.
Female killer whales begin to mature at around the age of 10 (reaching peak fertility around 20), which consists of periods of polyestrous cycling with noncycling periods of between three and 16 months.
The sound originated from a U.S. Navy frigate 12 miles (19 kilometers) distant, Balcomb said."
Since the 1960s, "orca" has steadily grown in popularity; both names are now used.
These deaths can be attributed to declines in Chinook salmon.
This meaning of "grampus" should not be confused with the genus ''Grampus'', whose only member is Risso's dolphin.
Adult killer whales are very distinctive and are not usually confused with any other sea creature.
Transients generally travel in small groups, usually of two to six animals, and have less persistent family bonds than residents.
The IUCN (International Union for the Conservation of Nature) currently assesses the orca's conservation status as data deficient because of the likelihood that two or more killer whale types are separate species.
Females are smaller, generally ranging from  and weighing about .
In one incident filmed near the Farallon Islands in October 1997, a  female killed a  great white shark, apparently after swimming with it upside-down in her mouth and inducing tonic immobility in it.
Wild males who survive infancy live 31 years on average, and up to 50–60 years.
Northeast Pacific resident groups tend to be much more vocal than transient groups in the same waters.
The gray or white area around the dorsal fin, known as the "saddle patch", often contains some black colouring in residents.
Many scientists involved in this lawsuit, including Bill Wareham, a marine scientist with the David Suzuki Foundation, noted increased boat traffic, water toxic wastes, and low salmon population as major threats, putting approximately 87 killer whales on the British Columbia Coast in danger.
Migration patterns are poorly understood.
Small sacrifices such as tobacco are strewn into the sea for them.
Orcas are not the only animals to go through menopause and live for decades after they have finished breeding.
Such cases include a semi-resident male-female pair in Akashi Strait and Harimanada being killed in the Seto Inland Sea in 1957, the killing of five whales from a pod of 11 members that swam into Tokyo Bay in 1970, and a catch record in southern Taiwan in the 1990s.
Killer whales are unique among cetaceans, as their heads become relatively shorter as they age, i.e., the orca's caudal section enlongates more-so relative to its head.
Clicks are believed to be used primarily for navigation and discriminating prey and other objects in the surrounding environment, but are also commonly heard during social interactions.
Like other animals at the highest trophic levels, the killer whale is particularly at risk of poisoning from bioaccumulation of toxins, including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
Killer whales are apex predators, meaning that they themselves have no natural predators.
Most of the dark parts of its body are medium gray instead of black, although it has a dark gray patch called a "dorsal cape" stretching back from its forehead to just behind its dorsal fin.
Prior to the advent of industrial whaling, great whales may have been the major food source for killer whales.
Like all cetaceans, killer whales depend heavily on underwater sound for orientation, feeding, and communication.
Except for northeastern basins from Black Sea, records have been among almost entire basin including Aegean and Levantine basins such as off Israel.
Two dwarf species, named ''Orcinus nanus'' and ''Orcinus glacialis'', were described during the 1980s by Soviet researchers, but most cetacean researchers are skeptical about their status, and linking these directly to the types described below is difficult.
Dialects are probably an important means of maintaining group identity and cohesiveness.
*'''Type C''' is the smallest type and lives in larger groups than the others.
A 2015 study coauthored by staff at SeaWorld and the Minnesota Zoo indicates that there is no significant difference in survivorship between free-ranging and captive killer whales.
The whales seemed "agitated and were moving haphazardly, attempting to lift their heads free of the water" to escape the sound of the sonars.
Although resident killer whales have never been observed to eat other marine mammals, they occasionally harass and kill porpoises and seals for no apparent reason.
Transient pods have been sighted from southern Alaska to central California.
The lifespans of wild females average 50 years, with a maximum of 90 years.
Competition with fishermen also led to killer whales being regarded as pests.
orca'' will be split into a number of different species or at least subspecies over the next few years."
The director of the International Marine Mammal Project for the Earth Island Institute, David Phillips, led the efforts to return Keiko to the Iceland waters.
Killer whales feature strongly in the mythologies of indigenous cultures, with their reputation ranging from being the souls of humans to merciless killers.
Three years prior to Balcomb's discovery, research in the Bahamas showed 14 beaked whales washed up on the shore.
Killer whales have a diverse diet, although individual populations often specialize in particular types of prey.
To avoid inbreeding, males mate with females from other pods.
Of three orca ecotypes in the Antarctic, one preys on minke whales, the second on seals and penguins and the third on fish.
Three types have been documented in the Antarctic.
The first video record of this type in life happened between the Kerguelen and Crozet Islands in 2014.
Like most marine mammals, orcas have a layer of insulating blubber ranging from  thick beneath its skin.
The spill damaged salmon and other prey populations, which in turn damaged local killer whales.
Systematic surveys indicate the highest densities of killer whales (>0.40 individuals per 100&nbsp;km²) in the northeast Atlantic around the Norwegian coast, in the north Pacific along the Aleutian Islands, the Gulf of Alaska and in the Southern Ocean off much of the coast of Antarctica.
They visit the same areas consistently.
Residents feed primarily on Chinook and chum salmon, species that are insensitive to killer whale calls (inferred from the audiogram of Atlantic salmon).
In 2002 the orphan Springer was discovered in Puget Sound, Washington.
Japan's Fisheries Agency estimated 2,321 killer whales were in the seas around Japan.
Dialects are composed of specific numbers and types of discrete, repetitive calls.
It has a large white eye patch.
Wild killer whales may travel up to  in a day, and critics say the animals are too big and intelligent to be suitable for captivity.
Dialects of killer whales not only distinguish them between pods, but also between types.
While salmon are usually hunted by an individual or a small group of individuals, herring are often caught using carousel feeding; the killer whales force the herring into a tight ball by releasing bursts of bubbles or flashing their white undersides.
Wild killer whales are not considered a threat to humans, but there have been cases of captive orcas killing or injuring their handlers at marine theme parks.
Because females can reach age 90, as many as four generations travel together.
Hunting large whales usually takes several hours.
Local estimates include roughly 25,000 in the Antarctic, 8,500 in the tropical Pacific, 2,250–2,700 off the cooler northeast Pacific and 500–1,500 off Norway.
Weaning begins at about 12 months and completes by the age of two.
Transient pods are smaller than resident pods, typically consisting of an adult female and one or two of her offspring.
In February 2015, a pod of orcas was recorded to have killed a white shark off South Australia.
Researchers have identified and named over 300 killer whales over the past 30 years.
Residents are only silent when resting.
Individuals separate for only a few hours at a time, to mate or forage.
This community comprises three pods which live mostly in the Georgia and Haro Straits and Puget Sound in British Columbia and Washington.
They are sometimes referred to as "blackfish", a name also used for other whale species.
However, the toll on great whale populations by unfettered whaling had possibly reduced their availability as prey for killer whales, and caused them to expand their consumption of smaller marine mammals, thus contributing to their decline as well.
Some populations, such as in Alaska's Prince William Sound, may have been reduced significantly by whalers shooting them in retaliation.
Like type B, it is primarily white and medium gray, with a dark gray dorsal cape and yellow-tinged patches.
Over 3,000 killer whales were taken by Soviet whalers, including an Antarctic catch of 916 in 1979–80 alone, prompting the International Whaling Commission to recommend a ban on commercial hunting of the species pending further research.
In late 2005, the Southern Resident Killer Whales, the population that inhabits British Columbia and Washington state waters, were placed on the U.S.
As their name suggests, they travel far from shore and feed primarily on schooling fish.
Resident killer whales in the eastern North Pacific have a particularly complex and stable social grouping system.
The identified seven ''ecotypes'' in isolated ecological niches.
Norwegian and Icelandic herring-eating orcas appear to have different vocalizations for activities like hunting and traveling.
Killer whales were believed to have helped the hunters even when in wolf guise, by forcing reindeer to allow themselves to be killed.
In recent years, the extent of the public's interest in killer whales has manifested itself in several high-profile efforts surrounding individuals.
The research supported a proposal to reclassify the Antarctic seal- and fish-eating populations and the North Pacific transients as a distinct species, leaving the remaining ecotypes as subspecies.
Their sophisticated hunting techniques and vocal behaviours, which are often specific to a particular group and passed across generations, have been described as manifestations of animal culture.
Whalers more often considered them a nuisance, however, as orcas would gather to scavenge meat from the whalers' catch.
The herring are then eaten one at a time.
She became the first whale to be successfully reintegrated into a wild pod after human intervention, crystallizing decades of research into the vocal behaviour and social structure of the region's killer whales.
Groups even attack larger cetaceans such as minke whales, gray whales, and rarely sperm whales or blue whales.
Males sexually mature at the age of 15, but do not typically reproduce until age 21.
The term "orca" is euphemistically  preferred by some to avoid the negative connotations of "killer", and because, being part of the family Delphinidae, the species is more closely related to other dolphins than to whales.
The Maritime Archaic people of Newfoundland also had great respect for killer whales, as evidenced by stone carvings found in a 4,000-year-old burial at the Port au Choix Archaeological Site.
Large concentrations are known to occur north of the Northern Mariana Islands and in the Gulf of Sendai, and repeated sightings are reported off Bali, the east coast of Taiwan, Ryukyu Islands, Izu Islands, in Tsushima Strait, and Izu Peninsula.
Killer whales have helped humans hunting other whales.
The IUCN reported in 2008, "The taxonomy of this genus is clearly in need of review, and it is likely that ''O.
The public's growing appreciation also led to growing opposition to whale–keeping in aquaria.
Calves are born with a yellowish or orange tint, which fades to white.
Reverence is expressed in several forms: the boat represents the animal, and a wooden carving hung from the hunter's belt.
It feeds mostly on seals.
This specialization in diet and hunting is another reason to suggest that the orca is in fact several species, as discussed above.
In one instance, killer whales tried to tip ice floes on which a dog team and photographer of the Terra Nova Expedition was standing.
Some feed exclusively on fish, while others hunt marine mammals such as seals and dolphins.
Information for offshore regions and tropical waters is more scarce, but widespread, if not frequent, sightings indicate the killer whale can survive in most water temperatures.
Chum salmon are also eaten, but smaller sockeye and pink salmon are not a significant food item.
Transients vocalize in less variable and less complex dialects.
Female residents characteristically have rounded dorsal fin tips that terminate in a sharp corner.
The decline of sea otters followed a decline in harbour seal and Steller sea lion populations, the killer whale's preferred prey, which in turn may be substitutes for their original prey, now decimated by industrial whaling.
Spyhopping, a behaviour in which a whale holds its head above water, helps the animal view its surroundings.
They have mostly been encountered off the west coast of Vancouver Island and near Haida Gwaii.
Killer whales in many areas may prey on cormorants and gulls.
Alaskan killer whales have not only learned how to steal fish from longlines, but have also overcome a variety of techniques designed to stop them, such as the use of unbaited lines as decoys.
They are reported as seasonally common in the Canadian Arctic, including Baffin Bay between Greenland and Nunavut, and around Tasmania and Macquarie Island.
The name "transient" originated from the belief that these killer whales were outcasts from larger resident pods.
High-intensity sonar used by the Navy disturbs killer whales along with other marine mammals.
For instance, family-specific calls have been observed more frequently in the days following a calf's birth, which may help the calf learn them.
Males typically range from  long and weigh in excess of .
Indeed, the genus name ''Orcinus'' means "of the kingdom of the dead", or "belonging to Orcus".
One well-known example was the killer whales of Eden, Australia, including the male known as Old Tom.
Killer whales are highly social; some populations are composed of matrilineal family groups (pods) which are the most stable of any animal species.
These bonds can extend well into adulthood.
Such a designation would mean that each new species becomes subject to separate conservation assessments.
This would have made him up to 90 years old.
Another ecotype lives in the eastern North Atlantic, while the three Northeast Pacific ecotypes are labeled the transient, resident and offshore populations, as discussed above.
Clans within a community do not share vocal patterns.
They sometimes use a single click (called a cryptic click) rather than the long train of clicks observed in other populations.
Killer whales also avoided the surrounding waters.
Thirty-two cetacean species have been recorded as prey, from observing orcas' feeding activity, examining the stomach contents of dead orcas, and seeing scars on the bodies of surviving prey animals.
Day-to-day killer whale behaviour generally consists of foraging, travelling, resting and socializing.
The introduction of modern whaling techniques may have aided killer whales by the sound of exploding harpoons indicating availability of prey to scavenge, and compressed air inflation of whale carcasses causing them to float, thus exposing them to scavenging.
The killer whale's intelligence, trainability, striking appearance, playfulness in captivity and sheer size have made it a popular exhibit at aquaria and aquatic theme parks.
Antarctic killer whales may have pale grey to nearly white backs.
Pods of female sperm whales sometimes protect themselves by forming a protective circle around their calves with their flukes facing outwards, using them to repel the attackers.
"Grampus" is a former name for the species, but is now seldom used.
The killer whale is one of 35 species in the oceanic dolphin family, which first appeared about 11 million years ago.
When hunting a young whale, a group chases it and its mother until they wear out.
Transients and residents live in the same areas, but avoid each other.
These matrilineal groups are highly stable.
Mammal-eating killer whales were long thought likely to be closely related to other mammal-eating killer whales from different regions, but genetic testing refuted this hypothesis.
Residents' diets consist primarily of fish and sometimes squid, and they live in complex and cohesive family groups called pods.
However, his case was marked by controversy about whether and how to intervene, and in 2006, Luna was killed by a boat propeller.
Resident dialects contain seven to 17 (mean = 11) distinctive call types.
These six dead whales were studied, and CAT scans of the two of the whale heads showed hemorrhaging around the brain and the ears, which is consistent with decompression sickness.
However, the saddle patches of transients are solid and uniformly gray.
In contrast, the marine mammal prey of transients hear well underwater at the frequencies used in killer whale calls.
Killer whales are notable for their complex societies.
Unlike residents, extended or permanent separation of transient offspring from natal matrilines is common, with juveniles and adults of both sexes participating.
Occasionally a killer whale is white; they have been spotted in the northern Bering Sea and around St. Lawrence Island, and near the Russian coast.
They have been sighted, for example, in the Mediterranean, the Arabian Sea, the Gulf of Mexico and the Indian Ocean around the Seychelles.
The average size of a matriline is 5.5 animals.
Killer whales are popular with whale watchers, which may stress the whales and alter their behaviour, particularly if boats approach too closely or block their lines of travel.
Unlike wild killer whales, captive killer whales are reported to have made nearly two dozen attacks on humans since the 1970s, some of which have been fatal.
Males typically maintain stronger relationships with their mothers than other females.
Killer whales engage in frequent behaviour at the surface such as breaching (jumping completely out of the water) and tail-slapping.
In July 1992, two killer whales attacked, killed and fed on an  long whale shark, ''Rhincodon typus'', in the waters off Bahia de los Angeles in Baja California.
In response to this decision, six environmental groups sued the federal government, claiming killer whales were facing many threats on the British Columbia Coast and the federal government did nothing to protect them from these threats.
As of March 2016, SeaWorld has announced that they will be ending their orca breeding program and their theatrical shows.
Mortality is extremely high during the first seven months of life, when 37–50% of all calves die.
They previously announced, in November of 2015, that the shows would be coming to an end in San Diego but it is now to happen in both Orlando and San Antonio as well.
The mean body temperature of the orca is .
In addition, separate populations of "generalist" (fish- and mammal-eating) and "specialist" (mammal-eating) killer whales have been identified off northwestern Europe.
So little was known at the time, it was nearly two months before the whale's keepers discovered what food (fish) it was willing to eat.
The sled dogs' barking is speculated to have sounded enough like seal calls to trigger the killer whale's hunting curiosity.
(Two species or populations are considered sympatric when they exist in the same geographic area and thus regularly encounter one another.)
In 2010, the Far East Russia Orca Project (FEROP), co-founded and co-directed by Alexander M. Burdin and Erich Hoyt, filmed an adult male nicknamed Iceberg
Sexual dimorphism is also apparent in the skull; adult males have longer lower jaws than females, and have larger occipital crests.
Other populations have not been as well studied, although specialized fish and mammal eating killer whales have been distinguished elsewhere.
Calves at birth weigh about  and are about  long.
They are complex and stable over time.
Mitochondrial DNA sequences support the theory that these are recently diverged separate species.
They have been known to attack baleen whale calves, and even adult whales.
*'''Resident''': These are the most commonly sighted of the three populations in the coastal waters of the northeast Pacific.
Of the very few confirmed attacks on humans by wild killer whales, none have been fatal.
This population is expected to die out.
Killer whale pectoral fins, analogous to forelimbs, are large and rounded, resembling paddles.
"Balcomb confirmed at the time that strange underwater pinging noises detected with underwater microphones were sonar.
In the mid-1960s and early 1970s, killer whales came to much greater public and scientific awareness, starting with the first live-capture and display of a killer whale known as Moby Doll, a resident harpooned off Saturna Island in 1964.
The earlier of known records of commercial hunting of killer whales date to the 18th century in Japan.
These family groups are based on matrilines consisting of the eldest female (matriarch) and her sons and daughters, and the descendants of her daughters, etc.
In New Zealand, sharks and rays appear to be important prey; species taken include eagle rays, long-tail and short-tail stingrays, common threshers, smooth hammerheads, blue sharks and shortfin mako sharks.
And although nothing is known about the type D diet, it is suspected to include fish because groups have been photographed around longline vessels, where they reportedly prey on Patagonian toothfish (''Dissostichus eleginoides'').
Once, fishermen placed their boats several miles apart, taking turns retrieving small amounts of their catch, in the hope that the whales would not have enough time to move between boats to steal the catch as it was being retrieved.
The study has been criticised by Dr Trevor Willis, senior lecture in marine biology at the University of Portsmouth, who stated that the study is misleading, "clearly wrong" and indicative of "poor practice".
*'''Type B''' is smaller than type A.
Blubber samples in the Norwegian Arctic show higher levels of PCBs, pesticides and brominated flame-retardants than in polar bears.
The heart beats at a rate of about 60 beats/min when the orca is at the surface, dropping to 30 beats/min when submerged.
Eleven members (about half) of one resident pod disappeared in the following year.
They are sometimes called the wolves of the sea, because they hunt in groups like wolf packs.
Critics claim captive life is stressful due to these factors and the requirement to perform circus tricks that are not part of wild killer whale behaviour, see above.
The use of both call types is called biphonation.
Killer whales can induce tonic immobility in sharks and rays by holding them upside down, rendering them helpless and incapable of injuring the whale.
He said that this is the case because it compares swimming pools to the wild ocean and the extrapolates the survival rates of calves to life expectancy in adulthood.
The killer whale's use of dialects and the passing of other learned behaviours from generation to generation have been described as a form of animal culture.
Killer whale cannibalism has also been reported based on analysis of stomach contents, but this is likely to be the result of scavenging remains dumped by whalers.
The modern status of the species along coastal mainland China and its vicinity is unknown.
In February 2008, a white killer whale was photographed  off Kanaga Volcano in the Aleutian Islands.
Gestation varies from 15 to 18 months.
Killer whales are believed to assist their hunters in driving walrus.
The evolutionary split between the two groups is believed to have begun two million years ago.
