The NIST's practice before then was to soak and rinse its two prototypes first in benzene, then in ethanol, and to then clean them with a jet of bi-distilled water steam.
The decision was originally deferred until 2014; in 2014 it was deferred again until the next meeting.
Because the first forty official copies are made of the same alloy as the IPK and are stored under similar conditions, periodic verifications using a large number of replicas—especially the national primary standards, which are rarely used—can convincingly demonstrate the stability of the IPK.
After the International Prototype Kilogram had been found to vary in mass over time relative to its reproductions, the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) recommended in 2005 that the kilogram be redefined in terms of a fundamental constant of nature.
Ultimately, ionaccumulation approaches proved to be unsuitable.
The increasing divergence in the masses of the world's prototypes and the short-term instability in the IPK has prompted research into improved methods to obtain a smooth surface finish using diamond turning on newly manufactured replicas and has intensified the search for a new definition of the kilogram.
In 1984, the K4 and K20 prototypes were hand-carried in the passenger section of separate commercial airliners.
Balances can only compare the mass of a silicon sphere to that of a reference mass.
Another Avogadro constant-based approach, known as the International Avogadro Coordination's ''Avogadro project'', would define and delineate the kilogram as a softball-size (93.6mm diameter) sphere of silicon atoms.
All silicon-based approaches would fix the Avogadro constant but vary in the details of the definition of the kilogram.
The electric potential in the watt balance is delineated by a Josephson voltage standard, which allows voltage to be linked to an invariant constant of nature with extremely high precision and stability.
For instance, the NIST compensates for Earth's gravity gradient of 309µGal per meter when the elevation of the center of the gravimeter differs from that of the nearby test mass in the watt balance; a change in the weight of a one-kilogram test mass that equates to about 316µg/m.
For instance, the NIST's watt balance used four resistance standards in 2007, each of which was rotated through the watt balance every two to six weeks after being calibrated in a different part of NIST headquarters facility in Gaithersburg, Maryland.
An alternative method for creating a silicon sphere-based kilogram proposes to use isotopic separation techniques to enrich the silicon until it is nearly pure 28Si, which has a relative atomic mass of .
A variation on a 12C-based definition proposes to define the Avogadro constant as being precisely 84,446,8893 (≈ ) atoms.
Three other base units (cd, A, mol) and 17 derived units (N, Pa, J, W, C, V, F, Ω, S, Wb, T, H, kat, Gy, Sv, lm, lx) in the SI system are defined relative to the kilogram, so its stability is important.
However, since objects in microgravity still retain their mass and inertia, an astronaut must exert ten times as much force to accelerate a 10kilogram object at the same rate as a 1kilogram object.
With the size of the sphere, its average atomic mass, and its atomic spacing known, the required sphere diameter can be calculated with sufficient precision and low uncertainty to enable it to be finish-polished to a target mass of one kilogram.
As with a definition based upon carbon12, the Avogadro constant would also have been fixed.
The addition of 10% iridium improved upon the all-platinum Kilogram of the Archives by greatly increasing hardness while still retaining platinum's many virtues: extreme resistance to oxidation, extremely high density (almost twice as dense as lead and more than 21 times as dense as water), satisfactory electrical and thermal conductivities, and low magnetic susceptibility.
This ''relative'' nature of the changes amongst the world's kilogram prototypes is often misreported in the popular press, and even some notable scientific magazines, which often state that the IPK simply "lost 50µg" and omit the very important caveat of "''in comparison to its official copies''".Even well respected organizations incorrectly represent the relative nature of the mass divergence as being one of mass loss, as exemplified by  this site at Science Daily, and  this site at PhysOrg.com, and  this site at Sandia National Laboratories.
Measurements required months and the data proved too erratic for the technique to be considered a viable future replacement to the IPK.
All approaches depend on converting a weight measurement to a mass, and therefore require the precise measurement of the strength of gravity in laboratories.
This led to the launch of SI in 1960 and the subsequent publication of the "SI Brochure", which stated that "It is not permissible to use abbreviations for unit symbols or unit names ...".
This chain of dependency follows to many other SI units of measure.
In the project to replace the last artifact that underpins much of the International System of Units (SI), a variety of other very different technologies and approaches were considered and explored over many years.
That watt balance was disassembled and shipped in 2009 to Canada's Institute for National Measurement Standards (part of the National Research Council), where research and development with the device could continue.
Others were based on devices that measured either the acceleration or weight of hand-tuned kilogram test masses and which expressed their magnitudes in electrical terms via special components that permit traceability to fundamental constants.
The International Prototype Kilogram was commissioned by the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) under the authority of the Metre Convention (1875), and in the custody of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) who hold it on behalf of the CGPM.
Yet, despite the best stewardship, the average mass of the worldwide ensemble of prototypes and the mass of the IPK have likely diverged another µg since the third periodic verification years ago.
During the 19th century, the standard system of metric units was the centimetre–gram–second system of units, treating the gram as the fundamental unit of mass and the ''kilogram'' simply as a derived unit.
Physicists could elect to define the kilogram in terms of 28Si even when kilogram prototypes are made of natural silicon (all three isotopes present).
(See "FG‑5 absolute gravimeter" in ''External images'', below).
By definition, the error in the measured value of the IPK's mass is exactly zero; the IPK ''is'' the kilogram.
This permits its atomic spacing to be determined with an uncertainty of only three parts per billion.
It was found that simply moving the resistance standards down the hall to the watt balance after calibration altered their values 10ppb (equivalent to 10µg) or more.
However, , the US's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) had an implementation of the Watt balance that was approaching this goal, with a demonstrated uncertainty of 36µg.
Under this proposal, the magnitude of the kilogram would be subject to future refinement as improved measurements of the value of the Planck constant become available; electronic realizations of the kilogram would be recalibrated as required.
Note that none of the replicas has a mass precisely equal to that of the IPK; their masses are calibrated and documented as offset values.
For instance, the US owns four  10%iridium (Pt10Ir) kilogram standards, two of which, K4 and K20, are from the original batch of 40 replicas delivered in 1884.
Experiments with gold showed the ions had to be decelerated to very low energies to avoid sputtering effects—a phenomenon whereby ions that had already been counted ricochet off the target electrode or even dislodged atoms that had already been deposited.
At the 94th Meeting of the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) (2005) it was recommended that the same be done with the kilogram.
The IPK and its six sister copies are stored at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (known by its French-language initials BIPM) in an environmentally monitored safe in the lower vault located in the basement of the BIPM's Pavillon de Breteuil in Sèvres on the outskirts of Paris (see ''External images'', below, for photographs).
The tonne and its symbol, "t", were adopted by the CIPM in 1879.
The presence of the thin oxide layer on a silicon-sphere mass prototype places additional restrictions on the procedures that might be suitable to clean it to avoid changing the layer's thickness or oxide stoichiometry.
That relative standard uncertainty has been 50parts per billion (ppb) since 2006.
Oxidation is not an issue with platinum and iridium, both of which are noble metals that are roughly as cathodic as oxygen and therefore don't oxidize unless coaxed to do so in the laboratory.
After cleaning—even when they are stored under their bell jars—the IPK and its replicas immediately begin gaining mass again.
As of 2014 the kilogram was the only SI unit still defined by an artifact.
Its isotopic composition would be measured with a mass spectrometer to determine its average relative atomic mass.
This resolution was accepted by the 24th conference of the CGPM in October 2011 and in addition the date of the 25th conference was moved forward from 2014 to 2015.
Other traditional units of weight and mass around the world are also defined in terms of the kilogram, making the IPK the primary standard for virtually all units of mass on Earth.
Thus, the current definition of the mole requires that  (83⅓) moles of 12C has a mass of precisely one kilogram.
As such, the definition of the kilogram would be decoupled from 12C and the kilogram would instead be defined as '''·''' atoms of 28Si (≈ fixed moles of 28Si atoms).
The deposited mass fraction in the 2003 German experiments only approached very close to 100% at ion energies of less than around 1eV (
Present-day technology is insufficient to permit stable operation of watt balances between even biannual calibrations.
Moreover, there are no technical means available to determine whether or not the entire worldwide ensemble of prototypes suffers from even greater long-term trends upwards or downwards because their mass "relative to an invariant of nature is unknown at a level below 1000µg over a period of 100 or even 50 years".
With this proposal, the kilogram would be defined as "the mass equal to 84,446,8893× 83⅓ atoms of 12C."
If the IPK's value were definitively proven to have changed, one solution would be to simply redefine the kilogram as being equal to the mass of the IPK plus an offset value, similarly to what is currently done with its replicas; e.g., "the kilogram is equal to the mass of the  (equivalent to 42µg).
The Planck constant defines the kilogram in terms of the second and the meter.
All approaches would have precisely fixed one or more constants of nature at a defined value.
About 7.78% of silicon comprises the two heavier isotopes: 29Si and 30Si.
In 1960 the meter, having previously also been defined by reference to an artifact (a single platinum-iridium bar with two marks on it) was redefined in terms of invariant, fundamental physical constants (the wavelength of a particular emission of light emitted by krypton, and later the speed of light) so that the standard can be reproduced in different laboratories by following a written specification.
All the remaining units in the International System of Units (the SI) that today have dependencies upon the kilogram and the joule would also fall in place, their magnitudes ultimately defined, in part, in terms of photon oscillations rather than the IPK.
making one kilogram approximately equal to 2.2046 avoirdupois pounds.
The 118-year-old cylinder that is the international prototype for the metric mass, kept tightly under lock and key outside Paris, is mysteriously losing weight&nbsp;— if ever so slightly''".
The boule would be cut, ground, and polished into spheres.
Before the BIPM's published report in 1994 detailing the relative change in mass of the prototypes, different standard bodies used different techniques to clean their prototypes.
If the mass of the IPK were to change slightly, so too must the newton by a proportional degree.
With this approach, the Avogadro constant would not only be fixed, but so too would the atomic mass of 28Si.
That same year, 1799, an all-platinum kilogram prototype was fabricated with the objective that it would equal, as close as was scientifically feasible for the day, the mass of one cubic decimeter of water at 4°C.
If the kilogram is defined in terms of the Planck constant, it is likely there will only be a few—at most—watt balances initially operating in the world.
What ''is'' known specifically about the IPK is that it exhibits a short-term instability of about 30µg over a period of about a month in its after-cleaned mass.
It would free physicists from the need to rely on assumptions about the stability of those prototypes.
The K20 prototype was designated as the primary national standard of mass for the US.
The mole is currently defined as "the quantity of entities (elementary particles like atoms or molecules) equal to the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon12".
Given the lack of data identifying which of the world's kilogram prototypes has been most stable in absolute terms, it is equally valid to state that the first batch of replicas has, as a group, gained an average of about 25µg over one hundred years in comparison to the IPK.
However, '''''g''''' varies significantly—by nearly 1%—depending on where on the Earth's surface the measurement is made (see ''Earth's gravity'').
Even with a kilogram definition based on theoretically pure 28Si, a silicon-sphere prototype made of only nearly pure 28Si would necessarily deviate slightly from the defined number of moles of silicon to compensate for various chemical and isotopic impurities as well as the effect of surface oxides.
Given the latest understanding of the lack of long-term mass stability with the IPK and its replicas, there is no known, perfectly stable mass artifact to compare against.
By fixing the Planck constant, the ''definition'' of the kilogram would depend only on the ''definitions'' of the second and the meter.
The precise reason for this short-term instability is not understood but is thought to entail surface effects: microscopic differences between the prototypes' polished surfaces, possibly aggravated by hydrogen absorption due to catalysis of the volatile organic compounds that slowly deposit onto the prototypes as well as the hydrocarbon-based solvents used to clean them.
No plausible mechanism has been proposed to explain either a steady decrease in the mass of the IPK, or an increase in that of its replicas dispersed throughout the world.
In 2003, German experiments with gold at a current of only 10µA demonstrated a relative uncertainty of 1.5%.
The IPK has been stored within centimeters of a mercury thermometer since at least as far back as the late 1980s.
Accordingly, for astronauts in microgravity, no effort is required to hold objects off the cabin floor; they are "weightless".
This layer slightly increases the mass of the sphere, an effect which must be accounted for when polishing the sphere to its finished dimension.
Alternatively, entirely different materials and constructions could be explored with the objective of producing mass standards with greater stability.
The reason for this drift has eluded physicists who have dedicated their careers to the SI unit of mass.
Follow-on experiments using bismuth ions and a current of 30mA were expected to accumulate a mass of 30g in six days and to have a relative uncertainty of better than 1&nbsp;ppm.
Another Avogadro-based approach, ion accumulation, since abandoned, would have defined and delineated the kilogram by precisely creating new metal prototypes on demand.
This approach could accurately delineate the magnitude of the kilogram because the masses of the three silicon nuclides relative to 12C are known with great precision (relative uncertainties of 1ppb or better).
For instance, K20, the US's primary standard, originally had an official mass of  micrograms (μg) in 1889; that is to say, K20 was 39µg less than the IPK.
* The microgram is typically abbreviated "mcg" in pharmaceutical and nutritional supplement labelling, to avoid confusion, since the "µ" prefix is not always well recognized outside of technical disciplines.
Modern measurements of Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water, which is pure distilled water with an isotopic composition representative of the average of the world's oceans, show it has a density of  at its point of maximum density (3.984&nbsp;°C) under one standard atmosphere (101 325 Pa or 760&nbsp;torr) of pressure.
* The unit name "megagram" is rarely used, and even then typically only in technical fields in contexts where especially rigorous consistency with the SI standard is desired.
For instance, the joule, the SI unit of energy, is defined as that expended when a force of one newton acts through one meter.
Nearly every aspect of watt balances and their support equipment requires such extraordinarily precise and accurate, state-of-the-art technology that—unlike a device like an atomic clock—few countries would currently choose to fund their operation.
In October 2010, the CIPM voted to submit a resolution for consideration at the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM), to "take note of an intention" that the kilogram be defined in terms of the Planck constant, ''h'' (which has dimensions of energy times time) together with other fundamental units.
It is a non-SI unit accepted by the BIPM for use with the SI.
Then the AP summarized the nature of issue with this lead-in to the story: "''A kilogram just isn't what it used to be.
While ''kilo'' is acceptable in many generalist texts, for example ''The Economist'', its use is typically considered inappropriate in certain applications including scientific, technical and legal writing, where authors should adhere strictly to SI nomenclature.
In 1901, however, following the discoveries by James Clerk Maxwell to the effect that electric measurements could not be explained in terms of the three fundamental units of length, mass and time, Giovanni Giorgi proposed a new standard system which would include a fourth fundamental unit to measure quantities in electromagnetism.
The same is true with regard to the real-world dependency on the kilogram: if the mass of the IPK was found to have changed slightly, there would be no automatic effect upon the other units of measure because their practical realizations provide an insulating layer of abstraction.
For instance, osmium-iridium alloys could be investigated if platinum's propensity to absorb hydrogen (due to catalysis of VOCs and hydrocarbon-based cleaning solvents) and atmospheric mercury proved to be sources of instability.
To make a practical realization of the kilogram, a silicon boule (a rod-like, single-crystal ingot) would be produced.
See ''Proposed future definitions'', below.
Mass is an ''inertial'' property; that is, it is related to the tendency of an object at rest to remain at rest, or if in motion to remain in motion at a constant velocity, unless acted upon by a force.
Since this type of dropping-mass gravimeter derives its accuracy and stability from the constancy of the speed of light as well as the innate properties of helium, neon, and rubidium atoms, the 'gravity' term in the delineation of an all-electronic kilogram is also measured in terms of invariants of nature—and with very high precision.
The watt balance (discussed below) may be able to do this.
What has become clear after the third periodic verification performed between 1988 and 1992 is that masses of the entire worldwide ensemble of prototypes have been slowly but inexorably diverging from each other.
For instance, Pt10Ir could continue to be used so that the specific gravity of newly produced mass standards would be the same as existing national primary and check standards (≈21.55g/ml).
The units of measure in such a practical realization would have their magnitudes precisely defined and expressed in terms of fundamental physical constants.
There would be no automatic effect on the meter because the second—and thus the meter's length—is abstracted via the laser comprising the meter's practical realization.
For instance, the meter is ''defined'' as the distance light travels in a vacuum during a time interval of  of a second.
However, the meter's ''practical realization'' typically takes the form of a helium–neon laser, and the meter's length is ''delineated''—not defined—as  wavelengths of light from this laser.
The latest verification performed in 1989 shows a mass precisely identical to its original 1889 value.
Reports published in 2013 by Peter Cumpson of Newcastle University based on the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of samples that were stored alongside various prototype kilograms suggested that one source of the divergence between the various prototypes could be traced to mercury that had been absorbed by the prototypes being in the proximity of mercury-based  instruments.
If the CGPM adopts the new proposal and the new definition of the kilogram becomes part of the SI, the value in SI units of the Planck constant (''h''), which is a measure that relates the energy of photons to their frequency, would be precisely fixed (the currently accepted value of  has an uncertainty of ± about 1 in 23 million).
For the most precise work in mass metrology, '''''g''''' is measured using dropping-mass absolute gravimeters that contain an iodine-stabilized helium–neon laser interferometer.
If the kilogram is redefined in this manner, mass artifacts—physical objects calibrated in a watt balance, including the IPK—would no longer be part of the definition, but would instead become ''transfer standards''.
The long-term solution to this problem, however, is to liberate the SI system's dependency on the IPK by developing a practical realization of the kilogram that can be reproduced in different laboratories by following a written specification.
* The decagram (dag in SI) is in much of Europe often abbreviated "dkg" (from the local spelling "dekagram") and is used for typical retail quantities of food (such as cheese and meat).
The root of the problem is often the reporters' failure to correctly interpret or paraphrase nuanced scientific concepts, as exemplified by  this 12September 2007 story by the Associated Press published on PhysOrg.com.
They concluded that one cubic decimeter of water at its maximum density was equal to 99.9265% of the target mass of the provisional kilogram standard made four years earlier.
Since 1889 the magnitude of the kilogram has been defined as the mass of an object called the ''international prototype kilogram'', often referred to in the professional metrology world as the "IPK".
While major portions of the SI system would still be based on the kilogram, the kilogram would in turn be based on invariant, universal constants of nature.
Further, a second cleaning can remove up to 10µg more.
The size of a select sphere would be measured using optical interferometry to an uncertainty of about 0.3nm on the radius—roughly a single atomic layer.
The precise lattice spacing between the atoms in its crystal structure (≈192pm) would be measured using a scanning X-ray interferometer.
In 1935 this was adopted by the IEC as the ''Giorgi system'', now also known as MKS system,
At its 2011 meeting, the CGPM agreed in principle that the kilogram should be redefined in terms of the Planck constant.
The number of atoms in a mole, a quantity known as the Avogadro constant, is experimentally determined, and the current best estimate of its value is  This new definition of the kilogram proposed to fix the Avogadro constant at precisely  with the kilogram being defined as "the mass equal to that of  atoms of 12C".
The IPK is made of a platinum alloy known as "Pt10Ir", which is 90% platinum and 10% iridium (by mass) and is machined into a right-circular cylinder (height = diameter) of 39.17millimeters to minimize its surface area.
The challenge with watt balances is not only in reducing their uncertainty, but also in making them truly ''practical'' realizations of the kilogram.
When the United States Congress gave the metric system legal status in 1866, it permitted the use of the word ''kilo'' as an alternative to the word ''kilogram'', but in 1990 revoked the status of the word ''kilo''.
The BIPM's FAQ explains, for example, that the divergence is dependent on the amount of time elapsed between measurements and not dependent on the number of times the artifacts have been cleaned or possible changes in gravity or environment.
It is also the only SI unit that is still directly defined by an artifact rather than a fundamental physical property that can be reproduced in different laboratories.
The ampere too is defined relative to the newton, and ultimately, the kilogram.
With the watt balance, while the kilogram would be ''delineated'' in electrical and gravity terms, all of which are traceable to invariants of nature; it would be ''defined'' in a manner that is directly traceable to just three fundamental constants of nature.
UK law regulating the units to be used when trading by weight or measure does not prevent the use of either spelling.
While the ''weight'' of an object is dependent upon the strength of the local gravitational field, the ''mass'' of an object is independent of gravity, as mass is a measure of how much matter an object contains.
Gold (197Au) and bismuth (209Bi) were chosen because they can be safely handled and have the two highest atomic masses among the mononuclidic elements that is effectively non-radioactive (bismuth) or is perfectly stable (gold).
Check standards are used much more often than primary standards and are prone to scratches and other wear.
In this Newcastle University work six platinum weights made in the nineteenth century were all found to have mercury at the surface, the most contaminated of which had the equivalent of 250µg of mercury when scaled to the surface area of a kilogram prototype.
This standard stood for the next 90 years.
Some of these now-abandoned approaches were based on equipment and procedures that would have enabled the reproducible production of new, kilogram-mass prototypes on demand (albeit with extraordinary effort) using measurement techniques and material properties that are ultimately based on, or traceable to, fundamental constants.
In the 19th century the French word ''kilo'', a shortening of ''kilogramme'', was imported into the English language where it has been used to mean both kilogram and kilometer.
The French spelling was adopted in the United Kingdom when the word was used for the first time in English in 1797, with the spelling ''kilogram'' being adopted in the United States.
Single-pan scales, which measure weight relative to an invariant of nature, are not precise to the necessary long-term uncertainty of  parts per billion.
There are currently several different proposals for the redefinition (some of which have been abandoned); these are described in the Proposed Future Definitions section below.
They too are covered below.
Gravity and the nature of the watt balance, which oscillates test masses up and down against the local gravitational acceleration '''''g''''', are exploited so that mechanical power is compared against electrical power, which is the square of voltage divided by electrical resistance.
Alternative approaches to redefining the kilogram that were fundamentally different from the watt balance were explored to varying degrees with some abandoned, as follows:
An imaginary realization of a 12-gram mass prototype would be a cube of 12C atoms measuring precisely 84,446,889 atoms across on a side.
Also, vapor-deposited, protective ceramic coatings like nitrides could be investigated for their suitability to isolate these new alloys.
The BIPM even developed a model of this gain and concluded that it averaged 1.11µg per month for the first 3 months after cleaning and then decreased to an average of about 1µg per year thereafter.
Instead, hand-tuned, close-approximation mass standards would simply be weighed and documented as being equal to one kilogram plus an offset value.
Another issue to be overcome is that silicon oxidizes and forms a thin layer (equivalent to  silicon atoms) of silicon dioxide (quartz) and silicon monoxide.
(The expression "mcg" is also the symbol for an obsolete CGS unit of measure known as the "millicentigram", which is equal to 10µg.)
In that AP story, Richard Davis—who used to be the NIST's kilogram specialist and now works for the BIPM in France—was correctly quoted by the AP when he stated that the mass change is a relative issue.
The ratio of the force of gravity on the two objects, measured by the scale, is equal to the ratio of their masses.
For instance, the newton is defined as the force necessary to accelerate one kilogram at one meter per second squared.
According to "Newton's laws of motion" and the equation , (second law of motion) when acted upon by a force ''F'' of one newton, an object with mass ''m'' of one kilogram will accelerate ''a'' at the rate of one meter per second per second (1&nbsp;m/s2)—about one-tenth the acceleration due to Earth's gravity
Any discrepancy would eventually have to be reconciled though, because the virtue of the SI system is its precise mathematical and logical harmony amongst its units.
It is also clear that the mass of the IPK lost perhaps 50µg over the last century, and possibly significantly more, in comparison to its official copies.
This would reduce the relative uncertainty when making mass comparisons in air.
The kilogram would then have been defined as "the mass equal to that of precisely '''&middot;''' atoms of gold" (precisely 3,057,443,620,887,933,963,384,315 atoms of gold or about  fixed moles).
The only three verifications occurred in 1889, 1948, and 1989.
The accuracy of the measured value of the Avogadro constant is currently limited by the uncertainty in the value of the Planck constant—a measure relating the energy of photons to their frequency.
The fringe-signal, frequency-sweep output from the interferometer is measured with a rubidium atomic clock.
Experiments are being performed on the Avogadro Project's silicon spheres to determine whether their masses are most stable when stored in a vacuum, a partial vacuum, or ambient pressure.
Both of these, as well as those from other nations, are periodically returned to the BIPM for verification.
For instance, in the basement of the NIST's Gaithersburg facility in 2009, when measuring the gravity acting upon Pt10Ir test masses (which are denser, smaller, and have a slightly lower center of gravity inside the watt balance than stainless steel masses), the measured value was typically within 8&nbsp;ppb of .
Since the IPK and its replicas are stored in air (albeit under two or more nested bell jars), they gain mass through adsorption of atmospheric contamination onto their surfaces.
Silicon was chosen because a commercial infrastructure with mature processes for creating defect-free, ultra-pure monocrystalline silicon already exists to service the semiconductor industry.
Scientists performing meter calibrations would simply continue to measure out the same number of laser wavelengths until an agreement was reached to do otherwise.
Now suppose that the official measurement of the second was found to have drifted by a few parts per billion (it is actually extremely stable with a reproducibility of a few parts in 1015).
The watt balance is essentially a single-pan weighing scale that measures the electric power necessary to oppose the weight of a kilogram test mass as it is pulled by Earth's gravity.
Quite unlike transient variations such as this, the US's check standard, K4, has persistently declined in mass relative to the IPK—and for an identifiable reason.
The kilogram is a unit of mass, a property which corresponds to the common perception of how "heavy" an object is.
Extraordinary care is exercised when transporting prototypes.
The meter depends on the second and on an additional defined physical constant: the speed of light ''c''.
The virtue of electronic realizations like the watt balance is that the definition and dissemination of the kilogram would no longer be dependent upon the stability of kilogram prototypes, which must be very carefully handled and stored.
According to the BIPM, "In English speaking countries this unit is usually called 'metric ton'."
In the United Kingdom both spellings are used, with "kilogram" having become by far the more common.
These are compared to the IPK roughly every 40 years, thereby providing traceability of local measurements back to the IPK.
See also ''Table of nuclides''.
Such a definition would theoretically permit any apparatus that was capable of delineating the kilogram in terms of the Planck constant to be used as long as it possessed sufficient precision, accuracy and stability.
and in 1946 the CIPM approved a proposal to adopt the ampere as the electromagnetic unit of the "MKSA system".
In 1948 the CGPM commissioned the CIPM "to make recommendations for a single practical system of units of measurement, suitable for adoption by all countries adhering to the Metre Convention".
Scales like the watt balance also permit more flexibility in choosing materials with especially desirable properties for mass standards.
For most purposes, the name "tonne" is instead used.
Because the magnitude of many of the units comprising the SI system of measurement is ultimately defined by the mass of a -year-old, golf-ball-sized piece of metal, the quality of the IPK must be diligently protected to preserve the integrity of the SI system.
Accordingly, '''''g''''' must be measured with at least as much precision and accuracy as are the other terms, so measurements of '''''g''''' must also be traceable to fundamental constants of nature.
Though not offering a practical realization, this definition would precisely define the magnitude of the kilogram in terms of a certain number of carbon12 atoms.
Official copies of the IPK were made available to other nations to serve as their national standards.
K4 was originally delivered with an official mass of  in 1889, but as of 1989 was officially calibrated at  and ten years later was  Over a period of 110 years, K4 lost 41µg relative to the IPK.
With a gold-based definition of the kilogram for instance, the relative atomic mass of gold could have been fixed as precisely , from the current value of .
Only 8 other units do not require the kilogram in their definition: temperature (K, °C), time and frequency (s, Hz, Bq), length (m), and angle (rad, sr).
