Geneva) as being in 1674.
The committees started work towards the end of 1604.
In the Book of Common Prayer (1662), the text of the ''Authorized Version'' replaced the text of the ''Great Bible'' for Epistle and Gospel readings (but not for the Psalter, which substantially retained Coverdale's Great Bible version) and as such was authorized by Act of Parliament.
It was a large folio volume meant for public use, not private devotion; the weight of the type mirrored the weight of establishment authority behind it.
After the English Restoration, the ''Geneva Bible'' was held to be politically suspect and a reminder of the repudiated Puritan era.
The new translation would reflect the episcopal structure of the Church of England and traditional beliefs about ordained clergy.
Cambridge University Press introduced a change at  in 1985, reversing its longstanding tradition of printing the word "spirit" in lower case by using a capital letter "S".
This did not, however, impede the commercial rivalries of the London printers, especially as the Barker family refused to allow any other printers access to the authoritative manuscript of the ''Authorized Version''.
The second preface was called ''Translators to the Reader'', a long and learned essay that defends the undertaking of the new version.
John Bois prepared a note of their deliberations (in Latin)&nbsp;– which has partly survived in two later transcripts.
For some time before this, descriptive phrases such as "our present, and only publicly authorized version" (1783), "our Authorized version" (1792), and "the authorized version" (1801, uncapitalized) are found.
"The King James Version" is found, unequivocally used as a name, in a letter from 1855.
In Tyndale, ''Geneva'' and the ''Bishops' Bibles'', both instances are translated "rejoice".
The ''Geneva Bible'' continued to be popular, and large numbers were imported from Amsterdam, where printing continued up to 1644 in editions carrying a false London imprint.
On the contrary, on a few occasions, they appear to have inserted these words when they thought a line needed to be padded.
The inclusion of illustrations in the edition raised accusations of Popery from opponents of the religious policies of Charles and William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury.
By the early twentieth century, editing had been completed in Cambridge's text, with at least 6 new changes since 1769, and the reversing of at least 30 of the standard Oxford readings.
It is only in 1613 that an edition is found, all of whose surviving representatives have substantially the same text.
For example, the Septuagint reading "They pierced my hands and my feet" was used in  (vs. the Masoretes' reading of the Hebrew "like lions my hands and feet").
The original printing contained two prefatory texts; the first was a formal ''Epistle Dedicatory'' to "the most high and mighty Prince" King James.
Robert Barker's father, Christopher, had, in 1589, been granted by Elizabeth I the title of royal Printer, with the perpetual Royal Privilege to print Bibles in England.
Despite some controversial translation choices, and in spite of Tyndale's execution on charges of heresy for having made the translated bible, the merits of Tyndale's work and prose style made his translation the ultimate basis for all subsequent renditions into Early Modern English.
King James cited two passages in the Geneva translation where he found the marginal notes offensive: Exodus 1:19, where the ''Geneva Bible'' had commended the example of civil disobedience showed by the Hebrew midwives, and also II Chronicles 15:16, where the ''Geneva Bible'' had criticized King Asa for not having executed his idolatrous grandmother, Queen Maachah.
Two editions of the whole Bible are recognized as having been produced in 1611, which may be distinguished by their rendering of ; the first edition reading "he went into the city", where the second reads "she went into the city.
The scholars were not paid directly for their translation work, instead a circular letter was sent to bishops encouraging them to consider the translators for appointment to well paid livings as these fell vacant.
The followers of John Wycliffe undertook the first complete English translations of the Christian scriptures in the 14th century.
As early as 1814, we find '''King James' version''', evidently a descriptive phrase, being used.
So as to make it easier to locate a particular passage, each chapter was headed by a brief precis of its contents with verse numbers.
Three examples of problems the Puritans perceived with the ''Bishops'' and ''Great Bibles'' were:
In 1568, the Church of England responded with the ''Bishops' Bible'', a revision of the ''Great Bible'' in the light of the Geneva version.
The original printing was made before English spelling was standardized, and when printers, as a matter of course, expanded and contracted the spelling of the same words in different places, so as to achieve an even column of text.
For the other half, Scrivener was usually able to find corresponding Greek readings in the editions of Erasmus, or in the Complutensian Polyglot.
In 1629 the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge successfully managed to assert separate and prior royal licences for Bible printing, for their own university presses – and Cambridge University took the opportunity to print revised editions of the ''Authorized Version'' in 1629, and 1638.
King James I of England, on 22 July 1604, sent a letter to Archbishop Bancroft asking him to contact all English churchmen requesting that they make donations to his project.
They used long '''ſ''' for non-final '''s'''.
In effect the Cambridge was considered the current text in comparison to the Oxford.
From the early nineteenth century the Authorized Version has remained almost completely unchanged – and since, due to advances in printing technology, it could now be produced in very large editions for mass sale, it established complete dominance in public and ecclesiastical use in the English-speaking Protestant world.
Both of these versions were extensively referred to, as the translators conducted all discussions amongst themselves in Latin.
That gathering proposed a new English version in response to the perceived problems of earlier translations as detected by the Puritan faction of the Church of England.
The English terms "rejoice" and "glory" stand for the same word in the Greek original.
The Oxford English Dictionary records a usage in 1824.
Bruce reports that the last recorded instance of a Scots parish continuing to use the "Old Translation" (i.e.
The translators record references to the Sixtine Septuagint of 1587, which is substantially a printing of the Old Testament text from the Codex Vaticanus Graecus 1209, and also to the 1518 Greek Septuagint edition of Aldus Manutius.
In January 1604, James I convened the Hampton Court Conference, where a new English version was conceived in response to the problems of the earlier translations perceived by the Puritans, a faction of the Church of England.
For most of the 17th century the assumption remained that, while it had been of vital importance to provide the scriptures in the vernacular for ordinary people, nevertheless for those with sufficient education to do so, Biblical study was best undertaken within the international common medium of Latin.
Hobbes advances detailed critical arguments why the Vulgate rendering is to be preferred.
The original printing of the Authorized Version used roman type to distinguish text supplied by translators, or thought needful for English grammar but not present in the Greek or Hebrew.
More commonly, though, they indicate a difference between the original language reading and that in the translators' preferred recent Latin versions: Tremellius for the Old Testament, Junius for the Apocrypha, and Beza for the New Testament.
In the United States, the "1611 translation" (actually editions following the standard text of 1769, see below) is generally known as the King James Version today.
With these translations lightly edited and adapted by Myles Coverdale, in 1539, Tyndale's New Testament and his incomplete work on the Old Testament became the basis for the ''Great Bible.''
All were members of the Church of England and all except Sir Henry Savile were clergy.
Much of this material became obsolete with the adoption of the Gregorian Calendar by Britain and its colonies in 1752, and thus modern editions invariably omit it.
Distinctly identified Cambridge readings included "or Sheba" (), "sin" (), "clifts" (), "vapour" (), "flieth" (), "further" () and a number of other references.
Norton also innovated with the introduction of quotation marks, while returning to a hypothetical 1611 text, so far as possible, to the wording used by its translators, especially in the light of the re-emphasis on some of their draft documents.
Also surviving is a bound-together set of marked-up corrections to one of the forty ''Bishops' Bibles'' – covering the Old Testament and Gospels, and also a manuscript translation of the text of the Epistles, excepting those verses where no change was being recommended to the readings in the ''Bishops' Bible''.
Following the example of the ''Geneva Bible'', words implied but not actually in the original source were distinguished by being printed in distinct type (albeit inconsistently), but otherwise the translators explicitly rejected word-for-word equivalence.
Furthermore, disputes over the lucrative rights to print the Authorized Version dragged on through the 17th century, so none of the printers involved saw any commercial advantage in marketing a rival translation.
The Bishop of London added a qualification that the translators would add no marginal notes (which had been an issue in the ''Geneva Bible'').
When space needed to be saved, the printers sometimes used ''ye'' for ''the'', (replacing the Middle English thorn with the continental '''y'''), set '''ã''' for ''an'' or ''am'' (in the style of scribe's shorthand), and set '''&''' for ''and''.
It appears that it was initially intended that each printer would print a portion of the text, share printed sheets with the others, and split the proceeds.
Otherwise, however, the Authorized Version is closer to the Hebrew tradition than any previous English translation – especially in making use of the rabbinic commentaries, such as Kimhi, in elucidating obscure passages in the Masoretic Text; earlier versions had been more likely to adopt LXX or Vulgate readings in such places.
The text of the ''Bishops' Bible'' would serve as the primary guide for the translators, and the familiar proper names of the biblical characters would all be retained.
Several were supported by the various colleges at Oxford and Cambridge, while others were promoted to bishoprics, deaneries and prebends through royal patronage.
A small minority of critical scholars were slow to accept the latest translation.
While officially approved, this new version failed to displace the Geneva translation as the most popular English Bible of the age – in part because the full Bible was only printed in lectern editions of prodigious size and at a cost of several pounds.
It is for this reason that the flyleaf of most printings of the ''Authorized Version'' observes that the text had been "translated out of the original tongues, and with the former translations diligently compared and revised, by His Majesty's special commandment."
They also give their opinion of previous English Bible translations, stating, "We do not deny, nay, we affirm and avow, that the very meanest translation of the Bible in English, set forth by men of our profession, (for we have seen none of theirs Roman Catholics of the whole Bible as yet) containeth the word of God, nay, is the word of God."
'''King James's Bible''' is used as the name for the 1611 translation (on a par with the "Genevan Bible" or the "Rhemish Testament") in Charles Butler's ''Horae Biblicae'' (first published 1797).
Archbishop Bancroft insisted on having a final say, making fourteen changes, of which one was the term "bishopricke" at Acts 1:20.
The Wycliffe Bible pre-dated the printing press but was circulated very widely in manuscript form, often inscribed with a date earlier than 1409 to avoid the legal ban.
The Authorized Version maintained its effective dominance throughout the first half of the 20th century.
Tyndale's translation was the first ''printed'' Bible in English.
Walton's London Polyglot of 1657 disregards the Authorized Version (and indeed the English language) entirely.
As the text translated in the various versions of the Wycliffe Bible was the Latin Vulgate, and as it contained no heterodox readings, there was in practice no way by which the ecclesiastical authorities could distinguish the banned version; consequently many Catholic commentators of the 15th and 16th centuries (such as Thomas More) took these manuscript English Bibles to represent an anonymous earlier orthodox translation.
Instructions were given to the translators that were intended to limit the Puritan influence on this new translation.
in the numbering of the Psalms.
In 1525, William Tyndale, an English contemporary of Martin Luther, undertook a translation of the New Testament.
In common with most other translations of the period, the New Testament was translated from Greek, the Old Testament from Hebrew and Aramaic, and the Apocrypha from Greek and Latin.
No record of its authorization exists; it was probably effected by an order of the Privy Council but the records for the years 1600 to 1613 were destroyed by fire in January 1618/19 and it is commonly known as the Authorized Version in the United Kingdom.
However, few if any genuine Geneva editions appear to have been printed in London after 1616, and in 1637 Archbishop Laud prohibited their printing or importation.
These are instances where both Oxford and Cambridge have now diverged from Blayney's 1769 Edition.
Unlike the rest of the Bible, the translators of the Apocrypha identified their source texts in their marginal notes.
However, in several dozen readings he notes that no printed Greek text corresponds to the English of the Authorized Version, which in these places derives directly from the Vulgate.
By the mid-19th century, almost all printings of the Authorized Version were derived from the 1769 Oxford text – increasingly without Blayney's variant notes and cross references, and commonly excluding the Apocrypha.
Like the Great Bible and the Bishops' Bible, the Authorized Version was "appointed to be read in churches".
The first had been the ''Great Bible'', commissioned in the reign of King Henry VIII (1535), and the second had been the ''Bishops' Bible'' of 1568.
The glyph '''j''' occurs only after '''i''', as in the final letter in a Roman numeral.
In about half of these instances, the Authorized Version translators appear to follow the earlier 1550 Greek Textus Receptus of Stephanus.
It was first printed by the King's Printer Robert Barker and was the third translation into English, approved by the English Church authorities.
In contrast to the ''Geneva Bible'' and the ''Bishops' Bible'', which had both been extensively illustrated, there were no illustrations at all in the 1611 edition of the Authorized Version, the main form of decoration being the historiated initial letters provided for books and chapters – together with the decorative title pages to the Bible itself, and to the New Testament.
The resulting revision was issued as the Revised Version in 1881 (New Testament), 1885 (Old Testament) and 1894 (Apocrypha); but, although it sold widely, the revision did not find popular favour, and it was only reluctantly in 1899 that Convocation approved it for reading in churches.
record that a verse is absent from most Greek manuscripts.
In the 19th century, there were effectively three main guardians of the text.
For their Old Testament, the translators used a text originating in the editions of the Hebrew Rabbinic Bible by Daniel Bomberg (1524/5), but adjusted this to conform to the Greek LXX or Latin Vulgate in passages to which Christian tradition had attached a Christological interpretation.
These English expatriates undertook a translation that became known as the ''Geneva Bible.''
One exception to this was a scrupulous original-spelling, page-for-page, and line-for-line reprint of the 1611 edition (including all chapter headings, marginalia, and original italicization, but with Roman type substituted for the black letter of the original), published by Oxford in 1833.
It was only in 1700 that modern bilingual Bibles appeared in which the Authorized Version was compared with counterpart Dutch and French Protestant vernacular Bibles.
In the 1662 ''Book of Common Prayer'', the text of the Authorized Version finally supplanted that of the ''Great Bible'' in the Epistle and Gospel readings – though the Prayer Book Psalter nevertheless continues in the Great Bible version.
The two Cambridge editions of 1629 and 1638 attempted to restore the proper text – while introducing over 200 revisions of the original translators' work, chiefly by incorporating into the main text a more literal reading originally presented as a marginal note.
In the first half of the 17th century the Authorized Version is most commonly referred to as "The Bible without notes", thereby distinguishing it from the Geneva "Bible with notes".
(, , ) However, if the Tetragrammaton occurs with the Hebrew word adonai (Lord) then it is rendered not as the "Lord LORD" but as the "Lord God".
From January 1609, a General Committee of Review met at Stationers' Hall, London to review the completed marked texts from each of the six committees.
"; these are known colloquially as the "He" and "She" Bibles.
In the ''Douay – Rheims'' New Testament, both are translated "glory".
The Cambridge edition is preferred by scholars.
Almost every printing that includes the second preface also includes the first.
It observes the translators' stated goal, that they, "never thought from the beginning that they should need to make a new translation, nor yet to make of a bad one a good one, ... but to make a good one better, or out of many good ones, one principal good one, not justly to be excepted against; that hath been our endeavour, that our mark."
Like Tyndale's translation and the Geneva Bible, the Authorized Version was translated primarily from Greek, Hebrew and Aramaic texts, although with secondary reference both to the Latin Vulgate, and to more recent scholarly Latin versions; two books of the Apocrypha were translated from a Latin source.
James' instructions included several requirements that kept the new translation familiar to its listeners and readers.
Hardin of Bedford, Pennsylvania, wrote a letter to Cambridge inquiring about this verse, and subsequently received a reply from Dr. Cooper on June 3, 1985, admitting that it was a "matter of some embarrassment regarding the lower case 's' in Spirit".
Later printings regularized these spellings; the punctuation has also been standardized, but still varies from current usage norms.
The Authorized Version was meant to replace the ''Bishops' Bible'' as the official version for readings in the Church of England.
Later editors freely substituted their own chapter summaries, or omitted such material entirely.
In the first printing, the device of having different type faces to show supplied words was used sparsely and inconsistently.
The original printing of the ''Authorized Version'' was published by Robert Barker, the King's Printer, in 1611 as a complete folio Bible.
Further, the King gave the translators instructions designed to guarantee that the new version would conform to the ecclesiology of the Church of England.
This is perhaps the most significant difference between the original text and the current text.
From these it can be determined that the books of the Apocrypha were translated from the Septuagint – primarily, from the Greek Old Testament column in the Antwerp Polyglot – but with extensive reference to the counterpart Latin Vulgate text, and to Junius's Latin translation.
Certain Greek and Hebrew words were to be translated in a manner that reflected the traditional usage of the church.
However, smaller editions and roman-type editions followed rapidly, e.g.
The Authorized Version New Testament owes much more to the Vulgate than does the Old Testament; still, at least 80% of the text is unaltered from Tyndale's translation.
The translation is widely considered to be both beautiful and scholarly and thus a towering achievement in English literature.
In obedience to their instructions, the translators provided no marginal interpretation of the text, but in some 8,500 places a marginal note offers an alternative English wording.
Two years later, he ascended to the throne of England as King James I of England.
The distinctions between the Oxford and Cambridge editions have been a major point in the Bible version debate, and a potential theological issue, particularly in regard to the identification of the Pure Cambridge Edition.
A more thoroughly corrected edition was proposed following the Restoration, in conjunction with the revised 1662 Book of Common Prayer, but Parliament then decided against it.
Robert Barker invested very large sums in printing the new edition, and consequently ran into serious debt, such that he was compelled to sub-lease the privilege to two rival London printers, Bonham Norton and John Bill.
As with the first preface, some British printings reproduce this, while most non-British printings do not.
For many years it was common not to give the translation any specific name.
In his ''Leviathan'' of 1651, Thomas Hobbes referred to it as ''the English Translation made in the beginning of the Reign of King James''.
Today the unqualified title "King James Version" usually indicates that this Oxford standard text is meant.
The translation was done by 47 scholars, all of whom were members of the Church of England.
Scrivener identifies 190 readings where the Authorized Version translators depart from Beza's Greek text, generally in maintaining the wording of the ''Bishop's Bible'' and other earlier English translations.
In Chapter 35: '' 'The Signification in Scripture of Kingdom of God' '', Hobbes discusses Exodus 19:5, first in his own translation of the'' 'Vulgar Latin' '', and then subsequently as found in the versions he terms ''"...the English translation made in the beginning of the reign of King James"'', and ''"The Geneva French"'' (i.e.
The distinct Cambridge text was printed in the millions, and after the Second World War "the unchanging steadiness of the KJB was a huge asset."
They had, however, no Greek texts for 2 Esdras, or for the Prayer of Manasses, and Scrivener found that they here used an unidentified Latin manuscript.
This name was also found as '''King James' Bible''' (without the final "s"): for example in a book review from 1811.
In the Old Testament the translators render the Tetragrammaton YHWH by "the LORD" (in later editions in small capitals as ), or "the LORD God" (for ''YHWH Elohim'', יהוה אלהים), except in four places by "IEHOVAH" (, ,  and ) and three times in a combination form.
In consequence of the continual disputes over printing privileges, successive printings of the Authorized Version were notably less careful than the 1611 edition had been – compositors freely varying spelling, capitalization and punctuation – and also, over the years, introducing about 1,500 misprints (some of which, like the omission of "not" from the commandment "Thou shalt not commit adultery" in the "Wicked Bible", became notorious).
The editors of these editions included John Bois and John Ward from the original translators.
Norton identified five variations among the Oxford, Cambridge and London (Eyre and Spottiswoode) texts of 1857, such as the spelling of "farther" or "further" at Matthew 26:39.
In Britain, the 1611 translation is generally known as the "Authorized Version" today.
The first printing used a black letter typeface instead of a roman typeface, which itself made a political and a religious statement.
quarto roman-type editions of the Bible in 1612.
In 2005, Cambridge University Press released its New Cambridge Paragraph Bible with Apocrypha, edited by David Norton, which followed in the spirit of Scrivener's work, attempting to bring spelling to present-day standards.
The newly crowned King James convened the Hampton Court Conference in 1604.
Responding to these concerns, the Convocation of Canterbury resolved in 1870 to undertake a revision of the text of the Authorized Version, intending to retain the original text "except where in the judgement of competent scholars such a change is necessary".
Over the course of the 18th century, the ''Authorized Version'' supplanted the Latin Vulgate as the standard version of scripture for English-speaking scholars.
At the head of each chapter, the translators provided a short précis of its contents, with verse numbers; these are rarely included in complete form in modern editions.
Many British printings reproduce this, while most non-British printings do not.
A few more extensive notes clarify Biblical names, units of measurement or currency, and in a very few places (e.g. )
When, from the later 17th century onwards, the Authorized Version began to be printed in roman type, the typeface for supplied words was changed to italics.
James gave the translators instructions intended to ensure that the new version would conform to the ecclesiology and reflect the episcopal structure of the Church of England and its belief in an ordained clergy.
Under the leadership of John Calvin, Geneva became the chief international centre of Reformed Protestantism and Latin biblical scholarship.
Scrivener, like Blayney, opted to revise the translation where he considered the judgement of the 1611 translators had been faulty.
:: John Duport, William Branthwaite, Jeremiah Radcliffe, Samuel Ward, Andrew Downes, John Bois, Robert Ward, Thomas Bilson, Richard Bancroft.
Forty unbound copies of the 1602 edition of the ''Bishops' Bible'' were specially printed so that the agreed changes of each committee could be recorded in the margins.
They set '''v''' for initial '''u''' and '''v''', and '''u''' for '''u''' and '''v''' everywhere else.
The King's Printer issued no further editions of the ''Bishops' Bible'', so necessarily the Authorized Version replaced it as the standard lectern Bible in parish church use in England.
Walton's reference text throughout is the Vulgate.
This has been contemptuously labelled "AVolatry", a play on the name "Authorized Version" (AV) and idolatry.
These translations were banned in 1409 due to their association with the Lollards.
Similarly, a "History of England", whose fifth edition was published in 1775, writes merely that ''a new translation of the Bible, ''viz.
Academic debate through that century, however, increasingly reflected concerns about the Authorized Version shared by some scholars: (a) that subsequent study in oriental languages suggested a need to revise the translation of the Hebrew Bible – both in terms of specific vocabulary, and also in distinguishing descriptive terms from proper names; (b) that the Authorized Version was unsatisfactory in translating the same Greek words and phrases into different English, especially where parallel passages are found in the synoptic gospels; and (c) in the light of subsequent ancient manuscript discoveries, the New Testament translation base of the Greek Textus Receptus could no longer be considered to be the best representation of the original text.
It was not until 1633 that a Scottish edition of the Authorized Version was printed – in conjunction with the Scots coronation in that year of Charles I.
During the Commonwealth a commission was established by Parliament to recommend a revision of the Authorized Version with acceptably Protestant explanatory notes, but the project was abandoned when it became clear that these would be nearly double the bulk of the Bible text.
'', that now in Use, was begun in 1607, and published in 1611''.
With the development of stereotype printing at the beginning of the 19th century, this version of the Bible became the most widely printed book in history, almost all such printings presenting the standard text of 1769 extensively re-edited by Benjamin Blayney at Oxford, and nearly always omitting the books of the Apocrypha.
This translation, though still derived from Tyndale, claimed to represent the text of the Latin Vulgate.
New translations in the second half of the 20th century displaced its 250 years of dominance (roughly 1700 to 1950), but groups do exist – sometimes termed the King James Only movement – that distrust anything not in agreement with ("that changes") the Authorized Version.
The use of '''Authorized Version''' or '''Authorised Version''', capitalized and used as a name, is found as early as 1814.
Another important exception was the 1873 Cambridge Paragraph Bible, thoroughly revised, modernized and re-edited by F. H. A. Scrivener, who for the first time consistently identified the source texts underlying the 1611 translation and its marginal notes.
Some of the annotated variants derive from alternative editions in the original languages, or from variant forms quoted in the fathers.
A 1761 "Brief Account of the various Translations of the Bible into English" refers to the 1611 version merely as ''a new, compleat, and more accurate Translation'', despite referring to the Great Bible by that name, and despite using the name "Rhemish Testament" for the Douay-Rheims Bible version.
The scholars worked in six committees, two based in each of the University of Oxford, the University of Cambridge, and Westminster.
Over the next ten years, Tyndale revised his New Testament in the light of rapidly advancing biblical scholarship, and embarked on a translation of the Old Testament.
Over the course of the 18th century, the Authorized Version supplanted the Hebrew, Greek and the Latin Vulgate as the standard version of scripture for English speaking scholars and divines, and indeed came to be regarded by some as an inspired text in itself – so much so that any challenge to its readings or textual base came to be regarded by many as an assault on Holy Scripture.
Punctuation was relatively heavy, and differed from current practice.
The case was different in Scotland, where the Geneva Bible had long been the standard church bible.
Bitter financial disputes broke out, as Barker accused Norton and Bill of concealing their profits, while Norton and Bill accused Barker of selling sheets properly due to them as partial Bibles for ready money.
In May 1601, King James VI of Scotland attended the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland at St Columba's Church in Burntisland, Fife, at which proposals were put forward for a new translation of the Bible into English.
F.F Bruce gives an example from Romans Chapter 5:
The next year '''King James Bible''', with no possessive, appears as a name in a Scottish source.
For example, old ecclesiastical words such as the word "church" were to be retained and not to be translated as "congregation".
This was the first "authorized version" issued by the Church of England during the reign of King Henry VIII.
If the ''Bishops' Bible'' was deemed problematic in any situation, the translators were permitted to consult other translations from a pre-approved list: the ''Tyndale Bible,'' the ''Coverdale Bible,'' ''Matthew's Bible,'' the ''Great Bible,'' and the ''Geneva Bible.''
For example, at , the Authorized Version reads "one fold" (as did the ''Bishops' Bible'', and the 16th century vernacular versions produced in Geneva), following the Latin Vulgate "unum ovile", whereas Tyndale had agreed more closely with the Greek, "one flocke" (μία ποίμνη).
There were several printings of the Authorized Version in Amsterdam – one as late as 1715  which combined the Authorized Version translation text with the Geneva marginal notes; one such edition was printed in London in 1649.
However, official policy favoured the Authorized Version, and this favour returned during the Commonwealth – as London printers succeeded in re-asserting their monopoly on Bible printing with support from Oliver Cromwell – and the "New Translation" was the only edition on the market.
In addition, later scholars have detected an influence on the ''Authorized Version'' from the translations of ''Taverner's Bible'' and the New Testament of the ''Douay–Rheims Bible.''
The ''Authorized Version''s acceptance by the general public took longer.
This translation, dated to 1560, was a revision of Tyndale's Bible and the ''Great Bible'' on the basis of the original languages.
Pilcrow marks are used to indicate the beginnings of paragraphs except after the book of Acts.
Modern reprintings rarely reproduce these annotated variants – although they are to be found in the New Cambridge Paragraph Bible.
F. H. A. Scrivener and D. Norton have both written in detail on editorial variations which have occurred through the history of the publishing of the Authorized Version from 1611 to 1769.
The committees worked on certain parts separately and the drafts produced by each committee were then compared and revised for harmony with each other.
Consequently the early editions of the KJV retain many Vulgate verse references – e.g.
In the period of the English Civil War, soldiers of the New Model Army were issued a book of Geneva selections called ''"The Soldiers' Bible"'' .
Accordingly, Elizabethan lay people overwhelmingly read the Bible in the Geneva Version – small editions were available at a relatively low cost.
Other works from the early 19th century confirm the widespread use of this name on both sides of the Atlantic: it is found both in a "Historical sketch of the English translations of the Bible" published in Massachusetts in 1815, and in an English publication from 1818, which explicitly states that the 1611 version is "generally known by the name of King James's Bible".
