after the end of the panchayat rule they were seen as undeclared martyers.
Groups are the Brahman-Hill 12.5%, Magar 7%, Tharu 6.6%, Tamang 5.5%, Newar 5.4%, Kami 3.9%, Yadav 3.9%, other 32.7%, Nepali White 2.8%.
During this protest a lot of people were killed.
The House of Representatives consists of 205 members directly elected by the people.
Nepal's import partners include India (47.5%), the United Arab Emirates (11.2%), China (10.7%), Saudi Arabia (4.9%), and Singapore (4%).
The left-wing alliance known as the United Left Front (ULF) extended its support to the NC in its campaign for a party system.
In 2005, after King Gyanendra took over, Nepalese relations with India, the US, and the UK worsened.
There are certain musical instruments such as Dhimay and Bhusya which are played as instrumental only and are not accompanied with songs.
The tropical and subtropical zones lie below 1,200 metres (3,940&nbsp;ft), the temperate zone 1,200 to 2,400 metres (3,900&ndash;7,875&nbsp;ft), the cold zone 2,400 to 3,600 metres (7,875&ndash;11,800&nbsp;ft), the subarctic zone 3,600 to 4,400 metres (11,800&ndash;14,400&nbsp;ft), and the Arctic zone above 4,400 metres (14,400&nbsp;ft).
It is performed by the Ranjitkars of Kathmandu.
Nepal has a total population of 27,676,547 as of July 2005, with a growth rate of 2.2%.
During the early-nineteenth century, however, the expansion of the East India Company's rule in India led to the Anglo-Nepalese War (1814–1816), which resulted in Nepal's defeat.
Nepal's workforce of about 10 million suffers from a severe shortage of skilled labour.
A deadlock ensued and the Treaties of Trade and Transit expired on 23 March 1989.
Nepal has close ties with both of its neighbours, India and China.
Deforestation is a major problem in all regions, with resulting erosion and degradation of ecosystems.
However, a comprehensive defeat of the Gorkhali army could not be achieved.
Almost all of these Lakhey dances are held in the Goonlaa month.
We may guess that these developments took place in the early part of the second millennium of the Common Era following the rise of the Nath sect.
The Madhesi Plains bordering India are part of the northern rim of the Indo-Gangetic plains.
In November of the same year, India played an important role in supporting King Tribhuhvan, whom the Rana leader Mohan Shamsher Jang Bahadur Rana had attempted to depose and replace with his infant grandson King Gyanendra.
The country receives foreign aid from India, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States, the European Union, China, Switzerland, and Scandinavian countries.
The House of Representatives formed a government which had successful peace talks with the Maoist Rebels.
The 1990s saw the beginning of the Nepalese Civil War (1996–2006), a conflict between government forces and the insurgent forces of the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist).
Rivalry between Nepal and the East India Company—over the princely states bordering Nepal and India—eventually led to the Anglo-Nepalese War (1814–16), in which Nepal was defeated.
In 1923, Britain formally recognised Nepalese sovereignty and ended its protectorate, but continued to exercise political influence through the Rana rulers and its rule in India, which ended in 1947.
Its landlocked location and technological backwardness and the long-running civil war have also prevented Nepal from fully developing its economy.
The Mountain Region contains the highest region in the world.
Wind instruments such as flutes and similar instruments are also used.
Also the souring of the India-Nepal trade relations affected the popularity of the Singh government.
Most of the equipment and arms are supplied by India.
The Hill Region (''Pahad'') abuts the mountains and varies from 1,000 to 4,000 metres (3,300&ndash;13,125&nbsp;ft) in altitude.
Taking advantage of the uneasiness amongst some people against the government and the strained India-Nepal relations, the Nepali Congress (NC) and the left-wing parties blamed the government for perpetuating the crisis and not taking any serious measures to solve it.
However, the most famous Lakhey dance is the Majipa Lakhey dance.
In April 2006 strikes and street protests in Kathmandu forced the king to reinstate the parliament.
There are songs pertaining to particular seasons and festivals.
After years of power wrangling between the kings (Tribhuvan and Mahendra) and the government, Mahendra dissolved the democratic experiment in 1960.
The only practical seaport of entry for goods bound for Kathmandu is Kolkata in India.
In 1992, in a situation of economic crisis and chaos, with spiralling prices as a result of implementation of changes in policy of the new Congress government, the radical left stepped up their political agitation.
The dhimay music are the loudest ones.
Leaders from India attended the conference; Germany, Japan, Spain, Finland supported the movement; and the Embassies of the USA and West Germany were present on the occasion.6 Inspired by the international support and the democratic movements occurring throughout the world after the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1989, the NC and the ULF launched a mass movement on 18 February to end the Panchayat regime, and the installation of an interim government represented by various parties and people.
During tihar, the Newar community celebrates its New Year as per local calendar (Nepal Sambat).
Nepali is the national language with 47.8% of the population speaking it as their first language.
Despite a humiliating defeat to China after a failed invasion of Tibet in the 1790s, which led to Nepal becoming a tributary state of the Chinese Empire, Nepal successfully consolidated its territories in the ensuing years.
The movement in April 2006 brought about a change in the nation.
Among the prominent martyrs to die for the cause, executed at the hands of the Ranas, were ''Dharma Bhakta Mathema, Shukraraj Shastri, Gangalal Shrestha and Dasharath Chand''.
After the death of Prithvi Narayan Shah, the Shah dynasty began to expand their kingdom into what is present day North India.
Until the abolition of the monarchy, Nepal was the world's only country to have Hinduism as its state religion; the country is now formally a secular state.
There was widespread feeling of the Palace being non-representative of the masses, especially when the Marich Man Singh government faced political scandals on charges of misappropriation of funds allotted for the victims of the earthquake in August 1991 or when it reshuffled the Cabinet instead of investigating the deaths of the people in a stampede in the national sports complex in a hailstorm.
The Himalaya blocks cold winds from Central Asia in winter, and forms the northern limit of the monsoon wind patterns.
The Treaty of Sugauli was signed in 1816, ceding large parts of the Nepali territories of Terrai and Sikkim, (nearly one third of the country), to the British, in exchange for Nepalese autonomy.
The Ranas were staunchly pro-British and assisted the British during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and later in both World Wars.
The Government of Nepal tried to deal with the situation by depending on foreign aid from the US, UK, Australia and China.
The cuisine served in the festivals is considered as the best diet cuisine.
Since the loosening of exchange rate controls in the early 1990s, the black market for foreign exchange has all but disappeared.
The Nepali geographical encyclopedia 'Mechi-dekhi Mahakali' ('From Mechi to Mahakali') published in 2031 Bikram Era (1974-75 AD) by the authoritarian Panchayat government to mark the coronation of King Birendra Shah agrees with the association of the name of the place with the saint but does not add any further detail.
A period of quasi-constitutional rule followed, during which the monarch, assisted by the leaders of fledgling political parties, governed the country.
Governments in Nepal have tended to be highly unstable; no government has survived for more than two years since 1991, either through internal collapse or parliamentary dissolution by the monarch on the recommendation of prime minister according to the constitution.
Later in the day, a mass rally of the Agitation Committee at Tundikhel in the capital Kathmandu was attacked by police forces.
After a series of successful battles, the Chinese army suffered a major setback when they tried to cross a monsoon-flooded Betrawati, close to the Gorkhali palace in Nuwakot.
The legislature had a five-year term, but was dissolvable by the king before its term could end.
In July 1950, the newly independent republic of India signed a friendship treaty in which both nations agreed to respect the other's sovereignty.
A typical Nepalese meal is ''dal-bhat'', a kind of a lentil soup served with rice and vegetables.
The spectacular landscape and deep, exotic culture of Nepal represents considerable potential for tourism, but growth in this export industry has been stifled by recent political events.
In accordance with a long-standing treaty, Indian and Nepalese citizens may travel to each other's countries without a passport or visa.
Service is voluntary and the minimum age for enlistment is 18 years.
Heavy damages were inflicted on both sides and the Chinese army pushed the Gurkhas back to the inner hills close to the Nepali capital.
This came to be known as the Kot Massacre.
In the village of Gorkha is situated a temple dedicated to Gorakhnath as well as another dedicated to Gorakhkali, a corresponding female deity.
The number of seats were also increased to 330.
The Newars are also well known for their music and dance.
The Annapurna mountain range also lies in Nepal.
However, the Newar community has its own unique cuisine.
There were around 175,000 Internet connections in 2005, but after the imposition of the "state of emergency", intermittent losses of service were reported.
Meanwhile, the Maoist rebellion escalated, and in October 2001 the king temporarily deposed the government and took complete control of it.
A Joint People's Agitation Committee was set up by the various groups.
Uninterrupted Internet connections have resumed after the brief period of confusion as Nepal's second major people's revolution took place to overthrow the King's absolute power.
Aviation is in a better state, with 48 airports, ten of them with paved runways.
The Newar Dance can be broadly classified as masked dance and dance without the use of masks.
The most representative of Newari dance is Lakhey dance.
This turmoil culminated in King Tribhuvan, a direct descendant of Prithvi Narayan Shah, fleeing from his "palace prison" in 1950, to newly independent India, touching off an armed revolt against the Rana administration.
A stalemate ensued, and with their resources low and a looming uncertainty regarding how long they would be able to hold on in addition to the need to continue their expansion drive on the western frontier, the Gorkhalis signed a treaty in Chinese terms that required, among other obligations, Nepal to send tributes to the Chinese emperor every five years.
Although Nepal shares no boundary with Bangladesh, the two countries are separated by a narrow strip of land about 21 kilometre (13&nbsp;mi) wide, called the Chicken's Neck.
Chauhan (1996) claims that it is a misconception that the Gorkhali took their name from the Gorkha region of Nepal and that the region was given its name after the Gorkhali had established their control of these areas.
The Lakhey are considered as the saviors of children.
Most of the festivals observed in the Kthmandu valley are in the Newar community.
Likewise, in hills people enjoy their own kind of music, playing saarangi (string instrument), madal and flute.
India refused to renew two separate Treaties of Trade and Transit and insisted on a single treaty dealing with the two issues, which was not acceptable to Nepal.
Kathmandu, with a population of around 800,000 (Metropolitan area: 1,5 million) is the largest city in the country.
The actual historical process however by which this migration took place and the history of the Gorkhalis' ultimate conquest of Nepal span a couple of centuries and are drastically different from what Chauhan proposes.
The Newars of Medieval Nepal have a couple of important temples and festivals dedicated to the major Nath teachers.
Prithvi Narayan Shah belonged to the ninth generation of the Shahs in Gorkha.
Violent incidents began to occur on the evening before of the strike.
The mid-twentieth century began an era of moves towards the democratisation of Nepal.
In Nepal the warrior people are not referred to as 'Gurkhas', they are called 'Gorkhalis', meaning the 'inhabitants of Gorkha.'
Thus many Nepali citizens move to India in search of work, the Gulf countries and Malaysia being new sources of work.
The brunt of the closure of the trade and transit points was mainly faced by the lower classes in Nepal due to the restricted supply of consumer goods and petroleum products such as petrol, aviation fuel and kerosene.
The National Council had sixty members, ten nominated by the king, thirty-five elected by the House of Representatives and the remaining fifteen elected by an electoral college made up of chairs of villages and towns.
Most houses in rural Nepal are made up of a tight bamboo framework with mud and cow-dung walls.
Nepal spends $99.2 million (2004) on its military—1.5% of its GDP.
Slavery was abolished in Nepal in 1924.
The Parbate Brahmins and the ruling dynasty among the Gorkhali people trace their ancestry to the Hindu Rajputs and Brahmins of Northern India who entered modern Nepal from the West following Muslim advances.
The country was frequently called the Gorkha Kingdom.
The Nepali Congress Party, a moderate socialist group, gained a substantial victory in the election.
These dwellings remain cool in summers and retain warmth in winters.
Between 1788 and 1791, Nepal invaded Tibet and robbed Tashilhunpo Monastery of Shigatse.
In early 1959, Tribhuvan's son King Mahendra issued a new constitution, and the first democratic elections for a national assembly were held.
The Rana regime, a tightly centralized autocracy, pursued a policy of isolating Nepal from external influences.
The Nepali Rupee has been tied to the Indian Rupee at an exchange rate of 1.6 for many years.
On 16 April the Chand government was also dismissed and a Royal Proclamation was issued the next day which dissolved the National Panchayat, the Panchayat policy and the evaluation committee and the class organizations.
There was resentment against the authoritarian regime and the curbs on the freedom of the political parties.
Following an election held the next year, the Nepalese Constituent Assembly formally abolished the kingdom in its first session on 28 May 2008, declaring the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal in its place.
Import commodities of mainly gold, machinery and equipment, petroleum products and fertilizer total US$2 bn.
Gurkhas are from Nepal.
A more detailed description of Chauhan's thesis is available under the first three sections in the entry on the Gorkha Kingdom.
Nepalese citizens may work in India without legal restriction.
More importantly, Chauhan's overall thesis claiming the existence of a Gurkha identity way before the Shahs came to the Nepali hills is not supported by historical evidence available in Nepal.
Dwellings in higher latitudes are mostly timber based.
Buddhism was relatively more common among the Newar.
However, Bahadur emerged victorious eventually and founded the Rana dynasty; the monarch was made a titular figure, and the post of Prime Minister was made powerful and hereditary, held by a Ranas.
Beginning with Jung Bahadur, the first Rana ruler, the Rana dynasty reduced the Shah monarch to a figurehead role.
A period of internal turmoil followed until Jung Bahadur Rana, a scion of Kunwar nobility, consolidated power following the Kot massacre of 1846.
There were just over 8,500&nbsp;km of paved roads, and one 59&nbsp;km railway line in the south in 2003.
Some Indians consider Nepal to be part of a greater pan-Indian state, an attitude that has caused Nepalese antagonism towards India.
Dravya Shah defeated the Khadkas in 1559 AD and commenced Shah rule over the principality.
Agriculture sustains 76% of the population and accounts for about 39% of the GDP; services comprise 41%, and industry 22%.
In fact, the pilgrimage circuit of the sect across the northern Indian sub-continent also spans a major part of present-day Nepal including Kathmandu Valley.
Nepal remains isolated from the world’s major land, air and sea transport routes though air traffic is frequent.
These ecological belts run east-west and are bisected by Nepal's major river systems.
Their famed battle cry is 'Ayo Gorkhali', meaning 'the Gorkhali has come.'
As of 15 January 2007 a unicameral legislature under an interim constitution governed Nepal.
This led to the souring of relations which were already strained over the purchase of Chinese arms by Nepal in 1988.
Efforts are underway to make this area a free-trade zone.
A seven-party coalition resumed control of the government and stripped the king of most of his powers.
Factionalism among the royal family led to a period of instability after the war.
Hindu influence is less prominent among the Gurung, Bhutia, and Thakali groups, who employ Buddhist monks for their religious ceremonies.
Agricultural produce—mostly grown in the Terai region bordering India—includes rice, corn, wheat, sugarcane, root crops, milk, and water buffalo meat.
The new constitution established a "partyless" system of panchayats (councils) which King Mahendra considered to be a democratic form of government, closer to Nepalese traditions.
As a result, riots broke out and the Nepal Telecommunications building was set on fire; police opened fire at the crowd, killing several persons.
Differences between Hindus and Buddhists have been in general very subtle and academic in nature due to the intermingling of Hindu and Buddhist beliefs.
In May 1991, Nepal held its first parliamentary elections in nearly 50 years.
India (53.7%), the US (17.4%), and Germany (7.1%) are its main export partners.
Main holidays include the National Day (birthday of the king) 28 December, Prithvi Jayanti, (11 January), and Martyr's Day (18 February) and a mix of Hindu and Buddhist festivals such as dashai in autumn, and ''tihar'' late autumn.
A general strike was called for 6 April.
On 1 February 2005, Gyanendra dismissed the entire government and took to exercising his executive powers without ministerial advice, declaring a "state of emergency" to quash the Maoist movement.
The '''Kingdom of Nepal''' (), also known as the '''Kingdom of Gorkha''' (), was a kingdom formed in 1768 by the unification of Nepal.
Nepal has five climatic zones, broadly corresponding to altitude.
Per-capita income is less than US$300.
However, the agitating mob was not satisfied with the change of government as they were not against the Singh government per se but against the party-less system.
There is only one reliable road route from India to the Kathmandu Valley.
Due to his survival he temporarily became king before dying of his wounds, after which Prince Gyanendra (Birendra's brother) inherited the throne, according to tradition.
As a result of the massacre, King Gyanendra returned to the throne.
As the territories were not restored to Nepal by the British when freedom was granted to the people of British India, these have become a part of the Republic of India, although the people of Sikkim decided in a public referendum in 1975 to merge the kingdom in India and become a state in the Republic of India.
Political instability following the war resulted in the ascendancy of the Rana dynasty, which made the office of Prime Ministers of Nepal hereditary in their family for the next century, from 1843 to 1951.
Traditional stories are rooted in the reality of day-to-day life—tales of love, affection, battles, and demons and ghosts; they reflect and explain local lifestyles, cultures and belief systems.
Total literacy rate is 53.74% (68.51% for males and 42.49% for females).
There is less than one telephone per 19 people; landline telephone services are not adequate nationwide but concentrated in cities and district headquarters; mobile telephony is in a reasonable state in most parts of the country with increased accessibility and affordability.
Saturday is the official weekly holiday.
The industries suffered because of their dependence on India for resources, trade and transit.
They were formed and are fed by three major rivers: the Kosi, the Narayani (India's Gandak River), and the Karnali.
Other languages include Maithili 12.1%, Bhojpuri 7.4%, Tharu (Dagaura/Rana) 5.8%, Tamang 5.1%, Nepal Bhasa 3.6%, Magar 3.3%, Awadhi 2.4%, other 10%, unspecified 2.5%.
On 18–19 January 1990, the NC held a conference in which leaders from various countries and members of the foreign Press were invited.
Koirala's anniversary by launching a people's awareness program.
After decades of rivalry between the medieval kingdoms, the Kingdom of Nepal was re-unified in the latter half of the 18th century, when Prithvi Narayan Shah, the ruler of the small principality of Gorkha, formed a unified country from a number of independent hill states.
The plot was uncovered and the queen had several hundred princes and chieftains executed after an armed clash between military personnel and administrators loyal to the queen.
The executive comprised the King and the Council of Ministers (the Cabinet).
Nepal's exports of mainly carpets, clothing, leather goods, jute goods and grain total $822 million.
The people became violent and a few people were killed in an encounter with the Army.
He was eventually forced to restore Nepal's House of Representatives, which in 2007 adopted an interim constitution greatly restricting the powers of the Nepalese monarchy.
It consists of non-vegetarian and vegetarian items as well as alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages.
During the 1950s, efforts were made to frame a constitution for Nepal that would establish a representative form of government, based on a British model.
The Kingdom of Nepal was of roughly trapezoidal shape, 800&nbsp;kilometres (500&nbsp;mi) long and 200&nbsp;kilometres (125&nbsp;mi) wide, with an area of 147,181&nbsp;square kilometres (56,827&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi).
The political parties such as ''The Prajaparishad'' and ''Nepali Congress'' were already formed in exile by leaders such as B.P.
Industry mainly involves the processing of agricultural produce, including jute, sugarcane, tobacco, and grain.
Nepal was divided into 14 zones and 75 districts, grouped into 5 development regions.
In December 1923, Britain and Nepal formally signed a "treaty of perpetual peace and friendship" superseding the Sugauli Treaty of 1816 and upgrading the British resident in Kathmandu to an envoy.
The government's budget is about US$1.153 billion, with expenditures of $1.789bn (FY05/06).
Technically, the south-east ridge on the Nepali side of the mountain is easier to climb, so most climbers travel to Everest through Nepal.
Founded by King Prithvi Narayan Shah, a Gorkhali monarch, it existed for 240 years until the abolition of the Nepalese monarchy in 2008.
As a result, many witnesses to this repression became radicalised.
Amid student demonstrations and anti-regime activities in 1979, King Birendra called for a national referendum to decide on the nature of Nepal's government: either the continuation of the panchayat system with democratic reforms or the establishment of a multiparty system.
String instruments are very rare.
Koirala, Ganesh Man Singh,  Subarna Sumsher Rana, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, Girija Prasad Koirala and many other patriotic-minded Nepalis who urged the military and popular political movement in Nepal to overthrow the autocratic Rana Regime.
The Nepali Congress won 110 of the 205 seats and formed the first elected government in 32 years.
The northern mountains are sparsely populated.
Hilly and mountainous terrain in the northern two-thirds of the country has made the building of roads and other infrastructure difficult and expensive.
With Indian support for a new government consisting largely of the Nepali Congress, King Tribhuvan ended the rule of the Rana dynasty in 1951.
Nepal experiences five seasons: summer, monsoon, autumn, winter and spring.
All Nepali citizens 18 years and older became eligible to vote.
The hilly belt includes the Kathmandu Valley, the country's most fertile and urbanised area.
The situation for the Nepalese monarchy was further destabilised by the 2001 Nepalese royal massacre, in which Crown Prince Dipendra reportedly shot and killed ten people, including his father King Birendra, and was himself mortally wounded by what was allegedly a self-inflicted gunshot.
The Nepali Congress with support of "Alliance of leftist parties" decided to launch a decisive agitational movement, Jana Andolan, which forced the monarchy to accept constitutional reforms and to establish a multiparty parliament.
After 1800, and particularly following the defeat of the Gorkhalis by the British in the war of 1814-16, the heirs of Prithvi Narayan Shah proved incapable of maintaining firm political control over Nepal.
The Newar Music consists mainly of percussion instruments.
39% of the population is up to 14 years old, 57.3% are aged between 15 and 64, and 3.7% above 65.
Agriculture employs 81% of the workforce, services 16% and manufacturing/craft-based industry 3%.
However, the government's strategy to manage the crisis could not satisfy those people who desired negotiations with India rather than dependence on foreign aid as a solution.
Both share common temples and worship common deities and many of Nepal's Hindus could also be regarded as Buddhists and vice versa.
During this period, Nepal was formally under the rule of the Shah dynasty, which exercised varying degrees of power during the kingdom's existence.
Mustard oil and a host of spices, such as cumin, sesame seeds, turmeric, garlic, ginger, methi (fenugreek), bay leaves, cloves, cinnamon, pepper, chili, mustard seeds, vinegar, etc.
