*Treasurer: June Artichoker
Kiowa cultural identity and pride is apparent in their expressive culture and strong influence on the Gourd Dance and southern plains art.
Kiowas also reside in urban and suburban communities throughout the United States.
As the pressure on Kiowa lands increased in the 1850s the regional divisions changed and a new regional grouping emerged:
The mountain pass they came through was populated heavily by grizzly bear ''Kgyi-yo'' and Blackfoot people.
The enemies of the Kiowa were usually the enemies of the Comanche.
The Kiowa emerged as a distinct people in their original homeland of the northern Missouri River Basin.
Longhorn cattle and horses from American and Mexican ranches were also eaten during hard times.
The Kiowa's horses, mules, and camp dogs were eaten during desperate situations when no other sources of food were available.
Dohasan, who is also known as Touhason, is considered by many to be the greatest Kiowa Chief (1805–1866), who unified and ruled the Kiowa for 30 years.
In the south of the Kiowa and Comanche were Caddoan speakers, but the Kiowa and Comanche were friendly toward these bands.
Ledger art emerges from the Plains hide painting tradition.
The first part of the name is the element ''Kae-, Cáui-'' or ''Gai-'' which means the Kiowa themselves – it may derive from the word ''ka''' (mother) or from ''ka-a''' (a type of spear with feathers along its length).
Before the introduction of the horse to North America the Kiowa and other plains peoples used domestic dogs to carry and pull their belongings.
The Comanche were at war with the Apache of the Rio Grande region.
Traditional craft skills are not lost among the Kiowa people today and the talented fine arts and crafts produced by Kiowa Indians helped the Oklahoma Indian Arts and Crafts Cooperative flourish over its 20-year existence.
Kiowa ranged north of the Wichita Mountains.
Early Kiowa ledger artists were those held in captivity by the U.S. Army at Fort Marion in St. Augustine, Florida (1875–1878) at the conclusion of the Red River War, which also is known as the Southern Plains Indian War.
George Catlin painted Kiowa warriors with this hairstyle.
In 1877, the first homes were constructed for the Indian chiefs and a plan was initiated to employ Indians at the Agency.
, there are 12,000 members.
*Committeeman: Alva D. Tsoodle
Parker McKenzie, born 1897, was a noted authority on the Kiowa language, learning English only when he began school.
Other Plains tribes kept pictorial records, known as "winter counts", however the Kiowa calendar system is unique recording two events for each year, offering a finer-grained record of the passage of time and twice as many entries for any given period.
Before the introduction of horses bison were hunted on foot and required the hunter to get as close a possible to their target before rushing quickly in and shooting it with arrows or lancing it.
Following in Silver Horn's footsteps are the Kiowa Five, or, as they increasingly are known, the Kiowa Six.
Kiowa men lived in the families of their wives extended families in residence local groups (''jōfàujōgáu'' or ''jōdáu'') led by the ''jōfàujōqì'', which merged to become a band (''topadoga'').
The horse allowed them to pull larger loads, hunt more game, hunt game easier, and travel longer and further.
The new Kiowa and Plains Apache homeland lay in the southwestern plains adjacent to the Arkansas River in southeastern Colorado and western Kansas and the Red River drainage of the Texas Panhandle and western Oklahoma.
After his release from Fort Marion, Paul Zom-tiam (Zonetime, Koba) studied theology from 1878 until 1881, when he was ordained as a deacon in the Episcopal church.
Pressure from the Ojibwe in the north woods and edge of the great plains in Minnesota forced the Cheyenne, Arapaho, and later the Sioux westward into Kiowa territory around the Black Hills.
Chief Lone Wolf (the Younger) immediately file proceedings against the act in the Supreme Court, but the Court decided against him on June 26, 1901.
They gathered and prepared food for winter months and participated in events.
Typical of all plains Indian people the Kiowa were a warrior people that fought frequently with enemies both neighboring and far beyond their territory.
Lodge poles are harvested from red juniper and the lodgepole pine.
This corresponded to the ancient Kiowa hairstyle cut horizontally from the lower outside edge of the eyes to the back of their ears.
The Indian signers wanted their names stricken but it was too late.
Therefore, they were very respected by the other groups and enjoyed a special prestige.
Kiowa call themselves '''Ka'igwu''', '''Cáuigù''' or '''Gaigwu''', most given with the meaning "Principal People".
*Chairman: Amber Toppah
Because of these factors, the Kiowa was of utmost importance in the history of the Southern Plains.
Wooden poles called lodge poles from  in length are used as support for the lodge.
Noted Kiowa beadwork artists include Donna Jean Tsatoke, Alice Littleman, Nettie Standing, Marilyn Yeahquo, Edna Hokeah Pauahty, Leona Geimasaddle, Barry D. Belindo, Kathy Littlechief, Katherine Dickerson, Charlie Silverhorn, Paul McDaniels, Jr., Kiowa J. Taryole, Grace Tsontekoy, Richard Aitson, Judy Beaver, Vanessa Paukeigope Jennings, Leatrice Geimasaddle, and Teri Greeves.
Nonetheless, the relationship between the 'Puebloan' and 'Plains' branches of this linguistic family has faded from the memory of both branches, and the earliest memories of the Kiowa remember them as living, not near the Arizona/New Mexico homeland of their linguistic 'brethren', but far to the north near the Missouri river, and the Black Hills, whence they were driven south by pressure from the Sioux.
The poles of the tipi were used to construct a travois during times of travel.
In 1871 Satank, Satanta and Big Tree were accused, arrested, transported, and confined at Fort Richardson, Texas, after being convicted by a "cowboy jury" in the Trial of Satanta and Big Tree in Jacksboro, Texas, for participating in the Warren Wagon Train Raid; Satank was killed during the transfer to Huntsville: along the way to Fort Richardson, with a knife, he killed a soldier and was shot in an escape attempt by accompanying cavalry troops near Fort Sill, Indian Territory.
To the east there was warfare with the Osage and Pawnee.
*'''Semat / Sémhát''' (‘Stealers’ or ′Thieves′, Kiowa name for their allies, the Kiowa Apache, during the Sun Dance also called '''Taugûi''' – ′Sitting (at the) Outside′)
Heated rocks kept under a fire were added and removed to the boiling hole until the water came to a boil.
* the '''Gwa-kelega''' or '''Gúhàlēcáuigú''' (‘Wild Mustang Kiowa’ or ′Gúhàlē Kiowa′, they were named for the large mustang herds in the territory of the ''Kwahadi (Quohada) Band'' of the Comanche, this Comanche Band was known to them as ''Gúhàlēgáu'' – ′Wild Mustang People′′, with which they were living in close proximity during the last resistance to white settlement on the Southern Plains).
The ten members of the Koitsenko were democratically elected by members of all four adult warrior societies.
Guipago, Satanta, Set-imkia, Zepko-ete, Manyi-ten, Mamanti, Tsen-tainte and Ado-ete led Kiowa warriors during the "Buffalo war" along the Red River, together with the Comanche allies, in the summer (June–September) 1874, and surrendered after Palo Duro Canyon fight.
The Kiowa people told James Mooney that the first calendar keeper in their tribe was Little Bluff, or Tohausan, who was the principal chief of the tribe from 1833 to 1866.
The ''Kogui'' were responsible for conducting the war ceremonies during the Sun Dance.
He went on to discuss the etymology of words and insights of how the Kiowa language changed to incorporate new items of material culture.
The "Kiowa Five" were some of the earliest Native Americans to receive international recognition for their work in the fine art world.
They influenced generations of Indian artists among the Kiowa, and other Plains tribes.
This led to a later meeting between Guikate and the head chief of the Nokoni Comanche.
The true origin is lost.
Many famous families and leaders because of their military exploits and bravery, like Ad-da-te (‘Islandman’), Satanta, Kicking Bird and the war chiefs Big Bow and Stumbling Bear (Set-imkia), and others belonged to this band.
The Kiowa were patrilineal with a chiefdom living in semi-sedentary structures.
The main form of shelter used by the Kiowa was the tipi or skin lodge.
His legacy is continued today by his grandson, Thomas Poolaw, a prominent Kiowa photographer and digital artist.
In addition to horses, mules and donkeys were also used as means of transportation and wealth however they were not as esteemed.
A'piatan, as the leader, went to Washington to protest.
Enemies of the Kiowa include the Cheyenne, Arapaho, Navajo, Ute, and occasionally Lakota to the north and west of Kiowa territory.
Other tribes who encountered the Kiowa used sign language to describe them by holding two straight fingers near the lower outside edge of the eye and moving these fingers back past the ear.
All young Kiowa boys were enrolled in the Rabbit Society which served mostly for social and education purposes involving no violence or combat.
Geionty, Huzo Paddelty, Keri Ataumbi, David E. Williams, Micah Wesley, Thomas Poolaw, Tennyson Reid, Sherman Chaddlesone (1947–2013), Cruz McDaniels, Robert Redbird (b.
McKenzie's letters are in the National Anthropological Archives on pronunciation and grammar of the Kiowa language.
Dried meat was prepared into pemmican which was eaten while the people were on the move.
These Fort Marion artists include Kiowas Etadleuh Doanmoe and Zotom, who was a prolific artist who chronicled his experiences before and after becoming a captive at the fort.
In the Black Hills region the Kiowa lived peacefully alongside the Crow Indians, with whom they long maintained a close friendship, organized themselves into 10 bands, and numbered around 3000.
Kiowa women tanned, skin-sewed, quilled, painted geometric designs on parfleche and later beaded hides.
After the death of the high chief Dohäsan in 1866 the Kiowa split politically in a peace fraction and a war fraction, the distinction between war-bands and peace-bands depended on their proximity to Fort Sill (''Xóqáudáuhága'' – ′At Medicine Bluff′, lit.
The '''Kiowas''' () are a tribe of Native Americans.
Documentation of the history and development of contemporary Kiowa art formulates one of the most unusual records in Native American culture.
Kiowa warriors used a combination of traditional and nontraditional weapons including long lances, bows and arrows, tomahawks, knives, and war-clubs as well as rifles, shotguns, revolvers, and cavalry swords.
30 Indians were hired to form the first police force on the reservation.
, over 4,000 of 12,500 Kiowa lived near the towns of Anadarko, Fort Cobb, and Carnegie, in Caddo and Kiowa counties, Oklahoma.
The ''Kâtá'' had the traditional right (duty or task) to supply the Kiowa during the Sun Dance with enough bison meat and other means.
Besides the Kiowa Five and Silver Horn, Kiowa painters active in the 20th and 21st centuries include Sharron Ahtone Harjo, Homer Buffalo, Charley Oheltoint, Michael C. Satoe Brown, T. C. Cannon, Wilson Daingkau, George Geionty, Bobby Hill (1933–1984), Harding Bigbow (1921–1997), Jim Tartsah, Mirac Creepingbear (1947–1990), Herman Toppah, Ernie Keahbone, C.E.
Before the use of metal pots acquired through trade and raid meat and vegetables were boiled in a hole dug in the ground, filed with water, and lined with a thick layer of animal hides.
The relationship was first proposed by Smithsonian linguist John P. Harrington in 1910, and was definitively established in 1967.
′Rock Cliff Medicine At Soldiers Collective They Are′) and their degree of interaction.
*'''Sálqáhyóp''' or '''Sálqáhyói''' (″Southerners″, lit.
In their early history the Kiowa traveled with dogs pulling their belongings until horses were obtained through trade and raid with the Spanish and other Indian nations in the southwest.
Occasionally the skins of wolves or coyotes were worn to hide their approach towards the bison herds.
*'''Kâtá''' or '''Qáutjáu''' (‘Biters’, lit.
Kiowa music often is noted for its hymns that traditionally were accompanied by dance or played on the flute.
The ''Kinep'' or ''Khe-ate'' were often called ‘Sun Dance Shields’ because during the dance they observed police duties and ensured security.
The 1890 Census showed 1,598 Comanche at the Fort Sill reservation, which they shared with 1,140 Kiowa and 326 Kiowa Apache.
''Arikara'', because they had a strong trading history with the Arikara people and some families have had Arikara kins, most powerful and largest Kiowa band)
The ''Soy-hay-talpupé'' were often called ''Montalyui'' or ''Kó̱tályop / Kṓtályóp / Kṓtályôi'' (‘Black Boys’, Black Boy Band), they were also named after the Kiowa cultural hero ''Séndè / Sindi'' and therefore called ''Séndèiyòi'' (Séndè / Sainday's Children).
The Kiowa Five gained international recognition as fine artists by exhibiting their work in the 1928 International Art Congress in Czechoslovakia and then participated in the Venice Biennale in 1932.
Their tribal jurisdictional area includes Caddo, Comanche, Cotton, Grady, Kiowa, Tillman, and Washita Counties.
Searching for more lands of their own the Kiowa traveled southeast to the Black Hills in present-day South Dakota and Wyoming around 1650.
Guipago and Satanta, along with old Satank, led the warring faction of the Kiowa nation, while Tene-angopte led the peaceful party.
Horses were adorned with body paint from the medicine man for ritual and spiritual purposes such as good fortune and protection during battle.
With the introduction of the horse the Kiowa revolutionized their economy and when they arrived on the Plains they were a fully mounted warrior nation.
Eastern tribes found that Indian Territory, the place they were sent, was already occupied by plains Indians, most notably the Kiowa and Comanche.
Rowell, Dixon Palmer, Roland Whitehorse, Blackbear Bosin, Woody Big Bow (1914–1988), Parker Boyiddle, Jr. (1947–2007), Dennis Belindo (1938–2009), Clifford Doyeto (1942–2010), Al Momaday, George Keahbone, Joe Lucero (Hobay), Ladonna Tsatoke Silverhorn, R.G.
Women were responsible for gathering wild edibles such as berries, tubers, seeds, nuts, vegetables, and wild fruit but could choose to hunt if they wanted to.
The Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma is headquartered in Carnegie, Oklahoma.
The entire tribe was structured around this individual.
The agreement provided for an allotment of  to every individual in the tribes and for the sale of the reservation lands () to the United States – was to go into effect immediately upon ratification by Congress, even though the Medicine Lodge treaty of 1867 had guaranteed Indian possession of the reservation until 1898.
′Hot People′, ‘southern Kiowa’, lived in the Llano Estacado (Staked Plains), Oklahoma Panhandle and Texas Panhandle, allies of the Comanche).
Shields and weapons were adorned with feathers, furs, and animal parts such as eagle claws for ceremonial purposes.
In closing years of the 18th century and in the first quarter of the 19th century, the Kiowa feared little from European neighbors.
In 1873, the first school among the Kiowa was established by Quaker Thomas C. Battey.
The Kiowa women took care of the camp while the men were away.
The horses were acquired from Spanish rancherias south of the Rio Grande.
*'''Kaigwa''' or '''Cáuigú''' (‘Kiowa Proper’)
Shields were made from tough bison hide stretched over a wooden frame or made from the skull of bison which made a small but strong shield.
The Kiowa were considered among the finest horsemen in history along with other plains Indians such as the Comanche and Cheyenne.
In 1867, the Kiowa were moved to a reservation in southwestern Oklahoma.
The Kiowa were pushed south by the invading Cheyenne who were then pushed westward out of the Black Hills by the Sioux.
Most of the hunting was done by men in Kiowa society.
Horses were acquired by raiding rancheros south of the Rio Grande into Mexico as well as from raiding other Indian peoples who already had horses such as the Navajo and the various Pueblo people.
They migrated from western Montana southward into the Rocky Mountains in Colorado in the 17th and 18th centuries, and finally into the Southern Plains by the early 19th century.
Important specific food gathered by the Kiowa included pecans, prickly pear, mulberries, persimmons, acorns, plums, and wild onions.
The two groups made an alliance to share the same hunting grounds and entered into a mutual defense pact and became the dominant inhabitants of the Southern Plains.
This was a functional practice to keep their hair from getting tangled as an arrow was let loose from a bow string.
Guipago became the head chief of the Kiowa when Dohosan (Little Bluff) named him as his successor to become the Principal Chief of the Kiowa people.
However, the traditional lifestyle of these peoples – agricultural, settled in permanent villages ('pueblos') – was radically unlike that of the hunter-gatherer economy of the Kiowa in historic times, though the Kiowa did retain certain 'advanced' characteristics – their complex ceremonial life and probably the nearest approach to writing among any Plains tribe in their 'Winter counts'.
In September 1872 Guipago met Satanta and Ado-ete as a condition to accept to go to Washington and meet President Grant to talk about peace, and, after many difficulties, he got the two captives' release in September 1873.
The strong alliance of southern plains nations kept the invading Spanish from gaining a strong colonial hold on the southern plains and eventually forced them completely out of the area, pushing them eastward and south past the Rio Grande into present day Mexico.
The Kiowas migrated with the American bison because it was their main food source along with an abundant supply of antelope, deer, wild berries, wild fruit, turkeys and other wild game.
Other Kiowa authors include playwright Hanay Geiogamah, poet and filmmaker Gus Palmer, Jr., Alyce Sadongei, Marian Kaulaity Hansson, Tocakut and Tristan Ahtone.
The chief Woman's Heart (Manyi-ten) belonged to this band.
*Committeeman: Ricky Horse
In 1879, the agency was moved from Ft. Sill to Anadarko.
Enrollment in the tribe requires a minimum blood quantum of ¼ Kiowa descent.
The Kiowa Tribe issues its own vehicle tags.
Additionally, Kiowa were one of the numerous nations across the US, Canada and Mexico that spoke Plains Sign Talk.
The floor of the tipi is lined with animal pelts and skins for warmth and comfort.
In addition to warfare the societies worked to keep peace within the camps and tribe as a whole.
The ''Kaigwu'' were the guardians of the Sacred or Medicine bundle (Tai-mé, Taimay) and the holy lance.
Thirty Indians were hired to form the first police force on the Reservation.
The women gain prestige through the achievements of their husbands, sons, and fathers or through their own achievements in the arts.
After A'date famous Kiowa leaders were Dohäsan (Tauhawsin, Over-Hanging Butte, alias Little Mountain, alias Little Bluff); Satank (Set-ankea, Sitting Bear), Guipago (Gui-pah-gho, Lone Wolf The Elder, alias Guibayhawgu, Rescued From Wolves), Satanta (Set-tainte, White Bear), Tene-angopte (Kicking Bird), Zepko-ete (Big Bow), Set-imkia (Stumbling Bear), Manyi-ten (Woman's Heart), Napawat (No Mocassin), Mamanti (Walking-above), Tsen-tainte (White Horse), Ado-ete (Big Tree).
1939), Gus Hawziptaw, Gerald Darby, Lee Tsatoke Jr., N. Scott Momaday, and Barthell Little Chief.
Mooney also worked with two other calendar keepers, Settan, or Little Bear, and Ankopaingyadete, In the Middle of Many Tracks, commonly known as Anko.
The horse also transformed the Kiowa into powerful and skilled mounted warriors who performed long distance raids on their enemies.
They had a yearly Sun Dance gathering and an elected head-chief who was considered to be a symbolic leader of the entire nation.
The introduction of the horse to Kiowa society revolutionized their way of life.
Later, they called themselves ''Kom-pa-bianta'' for "people with large tipi flaps", before they met Southern Plains tribes or before they met white men.
Silver Horn (1860–1940), or Haungooah, was the most highly esteemed artist of the Kiowa tribe in the 19th and 20th century and a respected religious leader in his later years.
In some documents Big Tree is translated as Addo-etta (Big Tree).
Bison were hunted on horseback with bows and arrows, as well as long lances used to pierce the heart of the animals.
Some of the Lipan Apache and Mescalero Apache bands with some Comanche in their company held out in northern Mexico until the early 1880s, when Mexican and U.S. Army forces drove them onto reservations or into extinction.
They traded with the Wichita south along Red River and with Mescalero Apache and New Mexicans to the southwest.
The ideal personality of the Kiowas was that of the young fearless warrior.
Bison meat was eaten roasted, boiled, and dried.
The ''Semat'' were allowed to participate equally, but had no specific duties and obligations during the Sun Dance.
An agreement made with the Cherokee Commission signed by 456 adult male Kiowa, Comanche, and Kiowa-Apache on Sept. 28, 1892, cleared the way for the opening of the country to white settlers.
Kiowa government was democratic with the election of chiefs based on bravery and courage in battle as well as intelligence, generosity, experience, communication skills, and kindness to others.
Like the Semat, they had no specific duties or responsibilities.
Kiowa-Cherokee author N. Scott Momaday won the 1969 Pulitzer Prize for his novel ''House Made of Dawn''.
There were warrior societies and religious societies that made up the Kiowa society.
Hunting bison became far easier after the Kiowa acquired horses.
For the earliest recorded – and remembered – history of the Kiowas, see further below
The Kiowa language is a member of the Kiowa-Tanoan language family.
The years from 1873 to 1878 marked a drastic change in Kiowa lifestyle.
Another explanation of their name "Kiowa" originated after their migration through what the Kiowa refer to as "The Mountains of the Kiowa" (Kaui-kope) in the present eastern edge of Glacier National Park, Montana, just south of the border with Canada.
They are Spencer Asah, James Auchiah, Jack Hokeah, Stephen Mopope, Lois Bougetah Smoky, and Monroe Tsatoke Coming from the area around Anadarko, Oklahoma, these artists studied at the University of Oklahoma.
Kiowa bands within the tipi ring during the annual Sun Dance (called ''Kc-to''):
‘Men of the Cold’ or ′Cold People′, ‘northern Kiowa’, lived along the Arkansas River and the Kansas border, comprising the more numerous northern bands)
Tene-angopte, damned by the "medicine-man" Mamanti, died in May 1875; Satanta committed suicide at Huntsville in October 1878; Guipago, having fallen sick because of malaria, was jailed in Fort Sill, where he died in 1879.
Lois Smoky left the group in 1927, but James Auchiah took her place in the group.
The Kiowa and Comanche controlled a vast expanse of territory from the Arkansas River to the Brazos River.
, the tribe owns one smoke shop, two casinos, the Kiowa Red River Casino, Morningstar Steakhouse and Grill, Morningstar Buffet, The Winner's Circle restaurant in Devol, Oklahoma, and Kiowa Bingo near Carnegie, Oklahoma.
In total, there are six warrior societies among the Kiowa, one for children and five for adult warriors.
Horses became a vital part of the Kiowa economy and a man's wealth was measured primarily by size of his horse herd with particularly wealthy individuals having herds numbering in the hundreds.
As members of the Kiowa-Tanoan language family, the Kiowa must clearly, at some time in their prehistory, have had a close relationship with – and probably shared an ethnic origin with – the other Amerindian nations of this small language family (Tiwa, Tewa, Towa and others).
Pemmican is made by grinding dried lean meat into a powder then mixing a near equal weight of melted fat or tallow and sometimes berries, the pemmican was then shaped into bars and kept in pouches until ready to eat.
The Kiowas had a well structured tribal government like most tribes on the Northern Plains.
*'''To-kinah-yup''' or '''Thóqàhyòp /Thóqàhyòi''' (″Northerners″, lit.
Tipis are easily collapsed and can be raised in only minutes, making it an optimal structure for a nomadic people like the Kiowa and other great plains Indian nations.
Today they are federally recognized as '''Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma''' with headquarters in Carnegie, Oklahoma.
Hide paintings often adorn the outside and inside of the tipis with special meanings attached to certain designs.
''Kae-kia'' means a Kiowa man; ''Kae-ma'' is a Kiowa woman.
Tipis were made from bison hides shaped and sewn together in a conical shape.
To the south they fought with the Lipan Apache, Mescalero Apache, and Tonkawa.
In 1877, the federal government built the first homes for the Indian chiefs and initiated a plan to employ Indians.
Some bands of Kiowas remained at large until 1875.
The Kiowa language (Cáuijògà) is still spoken today and is part of the Tanoan language family.
Like other plains Indians, the Kiowa had specific warrior societies.
World War II rekindled the Kiowa warrior spirit and urbanization and modernization occurred in the war's aftermath.
*'''Kinep / Kí̱bi̱dau / Kíbìdàu''' (′Big Shields′) or '''Khe-ate / Kí̱ːet / Kíèt''' (‘Big Shield’), also known as '''Káugyabî̱dau / Kāugàbîdāu''' (′Big Hides / Robes′)
Tene-angopte had to choose 26 Kiowa chiefs and warriors to be deported to Fort Marion, Florida; Satanta was sent back to Huntsville, while Guipago, Manyi-ten, Mamanti and Tsen-tainte were chosen to be deported to Fort Marion.
Eventually the Kiowa obtained a vast territory on the central and southern great plains in western Kansas, eastern Colorado, most of Oklahoma including the panhandle, and the Llano Estacado in the Texas Panhandle and eastern New Mexico.
Longhorn Mountain near Carnegie, Oklahoma, a sacred site and source of cedar for the Kiowa, was leased to rock-crushing company.
Richard Aitson (Kiowa-Kiowa Apache) is a published poet.
*Vice-chairman: Luke Marth
*Committeeman: Steven Smith
The reservation period lasted from 1868 to 1906.
Young men who proved their bravery, skill, or displayed their worth in battle were often invited to one of the warrior societies.
An Arapaho name for the Kiowa is "creek people", and the Arapaho word for "creek" is ''koh'owu','' which when pronounced carefully has some resemblance to the current name "Kiowa".
To this band belonged the medicine man Maman-ti.
