Frequent droughts and infertile soil hinder reliable large-scale agriculture, so the islanders have largely turned to the sea for livelihood and subsistence.
The vast majority (>90%) of people inhabit the Gilbert Islands, with more than 33% populating an area of about  on South Tarawa.
The program aims to take place over six years, supporting measures that reduce Kiribati's vulnerability to the effects of climate change and sea level rise by raising awareness of climate change, assessing and protecting available water resources, and managing inundation.
In early 2012, the government of Kiribati purchased the 2,200-hectare Natoavatu Estate on the second largest island of Fiji, Vanua Levu.
In English, the archipelago was often referred to as the Kingsmills in the 19th century, although the name Gilbert Islands was used increasingly, including in the
Further military incursions into the colony occurred in the late 1950s and early 1960s when Christmas Island was used by the United States and United Kingdom for nuclear weapons testing including hydrogen bombs.
The groups have no administrative function.
The island groups include:
The United States eventually incorporated the Northern Line into its territories and did the same with the Phoenix Islands which lie between Kiribati and the Line Islands including Howland, Jarvis, and Baker islands, thus, bringing about a territorial dispute.
Either we can wait for the time when we have to move people en masse or we can prepare them—beginning from now ..." In New York in 2014, per ''The New Yorker'', President Tong told ''The New York Times'' that "according to the projections, within this century, the water will be higher than the highest point in our lands".
Marines landed in November 1943 and the Battle of Tarawa ensued.
In April 2013, President Tong began urging citizens to evacuate the islands and migrate elsewhere.
In addition, draw downs were made by the government of Kiribati to finance budgetary shortfalls during this period.
Most are outrigger sailors and fishermen.
The Kiribati Constitution, promulgated 12 July 1979, provides for free and open elections.
The nation comprises 33 atolls and reef islands  and one raised coral island, Banaba.
Older generations of I-Kiribati tend to use more complicated versions of the language.
Songs (''te anene'') and above all, dances (''te mwaie''), are held in high regard.
The native people of Kiribati are called I-Kiribati.
It was once a rich source of phosphates, but was exhausted in mining before independence.
There is also a non-elected representative of the Banabans on Rabi Island in Fiji.
Dogs introduced by European settlers have continued to grow in numbers and are roaming in traditional packs, particularly around South Tarawa.
Island councils make their own estimates of revenue and expenditure and generally are free from central government controls.
Kiribati is considered one of the least developed countries in the world.
The permanent population is just over 100,000 (2011), more than half of whom live on Tarawa Atoll.
A major Australian bank, ANZ, maintains a presence on Kiribati with a number of branches and ATM units.
Given Kiribati's limited domestic production ability, it must import nearly all of its essential foodstuffs and manufactured items; it depends on these external sources of income for financing.
Institutions of internal self-rule were established on Tarawa from about 1967.
The Ellice Islands were separated from the rest of the colony in 1975 and granted their own internal self-rule institutions.
For that reason, Caroline Island has been renamed Millennium Island.
Local government is through island councils with elected members.
He added, "To plan for the day when you no longer have a country is indeed painful but I think we have to do that."
The expulsion of the Japanese military in late 1943 involved one of the bloodiest battles in US Marine Corps history.
The soil is thin and calcareous.
Credit growth in the overall economy declined in 2009 as economic activity stalled.
Around the 14th century, Fijians, Samoans, and Tongans invaded the islands, thus diversifying the ethnic range and introducing Polynesian linguistic traits.
According to the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (previously South Pacific Regional Environment Programme), two small uninhabited Kiribati islets, Tebua Tarawa and Abanuea, disappeared underwater in 1999.
Anote Tong of the opposition party Boutokaan Te Koaua was elected to succeed Tito in July 2003.
The Frigate bird (''Fregata minor'') on the Kiribati flag refers to this bird-like style of Kiribati dancing.
Kiribati is a member of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), an intergovernmental organisation of low-lying coastal and small island countries.
These stick dances or "tirere" (pronounced seerere) are performed only during major festivals.
President Tito was re-elected in 2003 but was removed from office in March 2003 by a no-confidence vote and replaced by a Council of State.
Increasing urbanisation has raised the population of South Tarawa to 50,182.
A Japanese-built downrange tracking station operates on Kiritimati and an abandoned airfield on the island was designated as the landing strip for a proposed reusable unmanned space shuttle called HOPE-X.
As one of the world's most vulnerable nations to the effects of global warming, Kiribati has been an active participant in international diplomatic efforts relating to climate change, most importantly the UNFCCC conferences of the parties (COP).
It sent three competitors to its first Olympics, two sprinters and a weightlifter.
Their spread straddles the equator and the 180th meridian, although the International Date Line is indented to bring the Line Islands in the same day as the Kiribati Islands.
Kiritimati (Christmas Island) in the Line Islands is the world's largest atoll.
The major donors in 2010/2011 were Australia (A$15 million), Taiwan (A$11 million); New Zealand (A$6 million), the World Bank (A$4 million) and the Asian Development Bank.
In 2002, Kiribati passed a controversial law that enabled the government to shut down newspapers.
There are a total of 21 inhabited islands in Kiribati.
In recent years large numbers of citizens have moved to the more urban island capital of Tarawa.
There is also a prison in Ronton (London) on Kiritimati Island.
The police have one patrol boat.
Five of the Line Islands are uninhabited (Malden Island, Starbuck Island, Caroline Island, Vostok Island and Flint Island).
It is the only country that is situated within all four hemispheres.
The majority of Kiribati, including the capital, is not first, for example New Zealand (UTC+13 in January) has an earlier new year.
Today the only recognisable parties are the ''Boutokaan te Koaua'' Party, ''Maneaban te Mauri'' Party, ''Maurin Kiribati'' Party and ''Tabomoa'' Party.
Kiribati's population was 103,058 in 2010.
This name derives from the main archipelago that forms the nation.
In 1892 local authorities (uea, atun te boti) on each of the Gilbert Islands agreed to Captain Davis RN declaring them part of a British protectorate with the nearby Ellice Islands.
Many other Protestant denominations, including  evangelical churches, are also represented.
Among the 75 bird species, the Bokikokiko (''Acrocephalus aequinoctialis'') is endemic to Kiritimati.
Intermarriage among all ancestral groups, however, has led to a population reasonably homogeneous in appearance and traditions.
The rest of the land in Kiribati consists of the sand and reef rock islets of atolls or coral islands, which rise only one or two metres above sea level.
Fiji's national carrier Fiji Airways provides an international service from Fiji's main airport, Nadi International Airport to Cassidy Airport as well as to Bonriki Airport.
Banaba, known to Europeans as Ocean Island, was added to the protectorate in 1900.
Gradual sea-level rise also allows for coral polyp activity to raise the atolls with the sea level.
In one form or another, Kiribati gets a large portion of its income from abroad.
The original districts were:
The study by Paul Kench and Arthur Webb recognises that the islands are extremely vulnerable to sea level rise, and concluded that:  "This study did not measure vertical growth of the island surface nor does it suggest there is any change in the height of the islands.
Kiribati has competed at the Commonwealth Games since 1998 and the Summer Olympics since 2004.
This has introduced water-borne illnesses, compounding the health problems within Kiribati.
In 1990–2007, there were 23 physicians per 100,000 persons.
In recent years, there has been a longer than usual Aumaikai season resulting in additional water having to be drilled from beneath the water table.
Kiribati was mentioned in the study, and Webb and Kench found that the three major urbanised islands in Kiribati—Betio, Bairiki and Nanikai—increased by 30% (36 hectares), 16.3% (5.8 hectares) and 12.5% (0.8 hectares), respectively.
J. Maarten Troost's more recent autobiographical experiences on the Tarawa Atoll are documented in his book ''The Sex Lives of Cannibals'' (2004).
Most health problems are related to consumption of semi-raw seafood, limited amount of food storage facilities, and bacterial contamination of fresh water supplies.
These comprise about half the area of Tarawa Atoll.
The Kiribati archipelago was named "Îles Gilbert" ("Gilbert Islands" in French), in about 1820, by Russian admiral Adam von Krusenstern and French captain Louis Duperrey.
Kiribati consists of 33 atolls and one solitary island (Banaba), extending into the eastern and western hemispheres, as well as the northern and southern hemispheres.
Banaba is one of the least suitable places for agriculture in the world.
Seaweed farming is an important part of the economy, with two major species ''Eucheuma alcarezii'' and ''Eucheuma spinosium'' introduced to the local lagoons from the Philippines in 1977.
Each of the 21 inhabited islands has a local council that takes care of the daily affairs.
* Southern Gilbert Islands
Ad&nbsp;hoc opposition groups tend to coalesce around specific issues.
Kiribati folk music is generally based on chanting or other forms of vocalising, accompanied by body percussion.
The Kiribati football stadium is Bairiki National Stadium, which has a capacity of only 2500.
The atolls and reef islands can respond to changes in sea-level.
HOPE-X, however, was eventually cancelled by Japan in 2003.
He sighted many of the islands in 1788 while mapping out the Outer Passage route from Port Jackson to Canton.
"For our people to survive, then they will have to migrate.
Smiling whilst dancing is generally considered vulgar within the context of Kiribati dancing.
Local affairs are handled in a manner similar to town meetings in colonial America.
In 2008, the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund was valued at US$400 million.
Until recently, the people of Kiribati mostly lived in villages with populations between 50 and 3,000 on the outer islands.
For example, the annual average is 3,000&nbsp;mm (120&nbsp;in) in the north and 500&nbsp;mm (20&nbsp;in) in the south of the Gilbert Islands.
The Bahá'í Faith religion also exists in Kiribati (2.2%), along with Jehovah's Witnesses.The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) self-reports a membership of 17,472 (16.9%) with 26 congregations at the end of 2015.
It was named the Gilbert Islands after the British explorer Thomas Gilbert.
see Hawaian Board of Missionaries, 1895).
The pronunciation differs: "Kiribas" is the official pronunciation as "ti" in Kiribatese makes an "s" sound.
* Gilbert Islands: 16 atolls located some  north of Fiji
Fishing mostly targets the family Scombridae, particularly the skipjack tuna and yellowfin tuna as well as flying fish (''Cypselurus'' spp.
The conference strove to create an enabling environment for multi-party negotiations under the auspices of the UNFCCC.
The capital and now most populated area, South Tarawa, consists of a number of islets, connected by a series of causeways.
The Kiribati Uniting Church and the LDS Church maintain large physical presences in Kiribati; both churches have a large number of church buildings, predominantly in Batio and Bonriki.
The population is predominantly Roman Catholic (56%), although a substantial portion of the population belongs to the Kiribati Uniting Church (34%).
The people of Kiribati speak an Oceanic language called "Gilbertese".
Each inhabited island has its own council.
It contains about 83 indigenous and 306 introduced plants on Gilbert Islands, whereas the corresponding numbers for Line and Phoenix Islands are 67 and 283.
This has an effect on sea levels.
Kiribati maintains relations with its Pacific neighbours, Australia, New Zealand, Taiwan, Japan and Fiji.
Taiwan and Japan also have specified-period licences to fish in Kiribati's waters.
Christianity is the major religion in Kiribati, having been introduced by missionaries in the 19th century.
The name ''Kiribati'' was adopted at independence.
The multilateral donors providing development assistance in 2009 were the European Union (A$9 million), the United Nations Development Programme (A$3.7 million), UNICEF, and the World Health Organisation (A$100,000).
The spelling of "Gilberts" in the Gilbertese language as Kiribati may be found in books in Gilbertese prepared by missionaries and others (e.g.
Government expenditure on health was at US$268 per capita (PPP) in 2006.
Primary education is free and compulsory for the first six years, now being extended to nine years.
Kiribati is the country with the third highest prevalence of smoking, with 54% of the population reported as smokers.
Kiribati is expected to be the first country to lose all its land territory to global warming.
This is due to its origin of not being solely as a form of entertainment but as a form of storytelling and a display of the skill, beauty and endurance of the dancer.
To date, most choosing to do the latter have gone to Fiji to attend University of South Pacific, and those wishing to complete medical training have been sent to Cuba.
Kiribati is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, the IMF and the World Bank, and became a full member of the United Nations in 1999.
In 1902, the Pacific Cable Board laid the first trans-Pacific telegraph cable from Bamfield, British Columbia to Fanning Island (Tabuaeran) in the Line Islands and from Fiji to Fanning Island, thus completing the All Red Line, a series of telegraph lines circumnavigating the globe completely within the British Empire.
Tarawa Atoll has three councils: Betio Town Council, Te Inainano Urban Council (for the rest of South Tarawa) and Eutan Tarawa Council (for North Tarawa).
However, the name Kiribati was chosen as the name of the new independent nation by local consensus, on such grounds that it was modern; and to acknowledge the inclusion of islands (e.g., the Phoenix Group and Line Islands), which were never considered part of the Tungaru (or Gilberts) chain.
The New Zealand Court of Appeal also rejected the claim in a 2014 decision.
Despite the rise in world food and fuel prices, inflation has bounced from 2008 crisis-highs into negative territory, reflecting the strong appreciation of the Australian dollar, which is used as the domestic currency, and a decline in the world price of rice.
The conference was a successor event to the Climate Vulnerable Forum.
'''Kiribati''' (;  or ; ), officially the '''Republic of Kiribati''' (Gilbertese: ''Ribaberiki Kiribati''), is an island nation in the central Pacific Ocean.
It is often suggested that the indigenous name for the Gilbert Islands proper is ''Tungaru'' (e.g., see Arthur Grimble, 1989).
In June 2008, the Kiribati President Anote Tong said that the country has reached "the point of no return."
AOSIS has been very active from its inception, putting forward the first draft text in the Kyoto Protocol negotiations as early as 1994.
The legislation followed the launching of Kiribati's first successful non-government-run newspaper.
The population of Kiribati has a life expectancy at birth of 60 years (57 for males, and 63 for females) and an infant mortality rate of 54 deaths per 1,000 live births.
But it started to pick up in the second half of 2010 as the recovery gained traction.”
Kiribati has a few land mammals, none being indigenous or endemic.
The agreement stipulated that Japan was to pay US$840,000 per year and would also pay for any damage to roads and the environment.
Sir Arthur Grimble was a cadet administrative officer based at Tarawa (1913–1919) and became Resident Commissioner of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony in 1926.
Kiribati won its first ever Commonwealth Games medal at the 2014 Commonwealth Games when weightlifter David Katoatau won Gold in the 105&nbsp;kg Group.
It competes with collection of the black-lipped pearl oyster (''Pinctada margaritifera'') and shellfish, which are dominated by the strombid gastropod (''Strombus luhuanus'') and Anadara cockles (''Anadara uropigimelana''), whereas the stocks of the giant clam (''Tridacna gigas'') have been largely exhausted.
Each inhabited island has its own council: three councils on Tarawa: Betio, South-Tarawa, North-Tarawa—and two councils on Tabiteuea).
It is estimated to have grown by 1.75% for the year.
The Line Islands, including Christmas Island (later spelled Kiritimati) and Fanning Island (Tabuaeran), were added to the colony in 1919 and the Phoenix Islands were added in 1937.
The ultimate objective of TCCC was to reduce the number and intensity of fault lines between parties to the COP process, explore elements of agreement between the parties and thereby to support Kiribati's and other parties' contribution to COP16 held in Cancun, Mexico, from 29 November to 10 December 2010.
The RERF assets declined from A$637 million (420% of GDP) in 2007 to A$570.5 million (350% of GDP) in 2009 as the result of the global financial crisis and exposure to failed Icelandic banks.
University of South Pacific has a campus in Kiribati for distant/flexible learning, but also to provide preparatory studies towards obtaining certificates, diplomas and degrees at other campus sites.
Most houses are made of materials obtained from coconut and pandanus trees.
Law enforcement in Kiribati is carried out by the Kiribati Police Service which is responsible for all law enforcement and paramilitary duties for the island nation.
This was signed shortly after independence and ratified in 1983, the United States relinquishing all claims to the sparsely inhabited Phoenix Islands and those of the Line Islands that are part of Kiribati territory.
Public performances in modern Kiribati are generally performed by a seated chorus, accompanied by a guitar.
Betio became an airfield and supply base.
The archipelago's name was incorporated in the entire Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony from 1916, and retained after the Ellice Islands became the separate nation of Tuvalu in 1976.
At the time it was widely reported that the government planned to evacuate the entire population of Kiribati to Fiji.
Four of the former districts (including Tarawa) lie in the Gilbert Islands, where most of the country's population lives.
Examples include fishing licenses, development assistance, worker remittances, and tourism.
It is local enunciation of ''Gilberts''.
In 1956, Kiribati established a sovereign wealth fund to act as a store of wealth for the country's earnings from phosphate mining.
Western Pacific Order in Council of 1877.
In 1913 an anonymous correspondent to the New Age journal described the mis-administration of W. Telfer Campbell and questioned the partiality of Arthur Mahaffy as he was a former colonial official in the Gilberts.
Traditional songs are often love-themed, but there are also competitive, religious, children's, patriotic, war and wedding songs .
Neither the Phoenix nor Line Islands are served by the domestic carriers.
* Central Gilbert Island
The islands became the crown colony of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands in 1916.
Kiribati gained UN membership in 1999.
* Line Islands: 8 atolls and one reef, located about  east of the Gilberts
Since land height has not changed the vulnerability of the greater part of the land area of each island to submergence due to sea level rise is also unchanged and these low-lying atolls remain immediately and extremely vulnerable to inundation or sea water flooding."
The passing trade gave rise to European, Chinese, Samoan and other residents from the 1830s: they included beachcombers, castaways, traders and missionaries.
Several words in Gilbertese have been adopted from European settlers, for instance, ''kamea'' is the Gilbertese word for dog, which has its origins in the I-Kiribati people hearing the European settlers saying "come here" to their dogs, and adopting that as ''kamea''.
The only served airport by any airline is Cassidy International Airport on Kiritimati.
The Climate Change in the Pacific Report of 2011 describes Kiribati as having a low risk of cyclones; however in March 2015 Kiribati experienced flooding and destruction of seawalls and coastal infrastructure as the result of Cyclone Pam, a Category 5 cyclone that devastated Vanuatu.
Kiribati is divided into three island groups, including a group that unites the Line Islands and the Phoenix Islands (ministry at London, Kiritimati) Island.
Australia later joined the coalition, donating US $1.5 million to the effort.
* Phoenix Islands, in one of the largest marine protected areas on Earth.
(was largest from 2008 to 2010)
They include the Polynesian rat (''Rattus exulans''), dogs and pigs.
Copra plantations serve as a second source of employment.
There is universal suffrage at age 18.
Paul Kench at the University of Auckland in New Zealand and Arthur Webb at the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission in Fiji released a study in 2010 on the dynamic response of atolls and reef islands in the central Pacific.
Higher education is expanding; students may seek technical, teacher or marine training, or study in other countries.
Although English is also an official language, it is not used very often outside the island capital of Tarawa.
There are also stick dances which accompany legends and semi-historical stories .
In November 1999 it was announced that Japan's National Space Development Agency planned to lease land on Kiritimati (Christmas Island) for 20 years, on which to build a spaceport.
The area now called Kiribati has been inhabited by Micronesians speaking the same Oceanic language since sometime between 3000 BC and AD 1300.
Legislators serve for a four-year term.
On further appeal the New Zealand Supreme Court confirmed the earlier adverse rulings against the application for refugee status, but rejected the proposition “that environmental degradation resulting from climate change or other natural disasters could never create a pathway into the Refugee Convention or protected person jurisdiction.”
* Phoenix Islands: 8 atolls and coral islands located some  southeast of the Gilberts
The conduct of W. Telfer Campbell, the resident commissioner of the Gilberts of 1896 to 1908, was criticised as to his legislative, judicial and administrative management (including allegations of forced labour exacted from islanders) and became the subject of the 1909 report by Arthur Mahaffy.
Both their maps, published in 1820, were written in French.
Tuberculosis has a small presence in the country, with 365 cases of 100,000 a year.
Since independence, Kiribati is no longer divided into districts, see Subdivisions of Kiribati
The program is now focusing on the country's most vulnerable sectors in the most highly populated areas.
Initiatives include improving water supply management in and around Tarawa; coastal management protection measures such as mangrove re-plantation and protection of public infrastructure; strengthening laws to reduce coastal erosion; and population settlement planning to reduce personal risks.
Kiribati has few natural resources.
Tito was re-elected in 1998.
Teburoro Tito was elected president in 1994.
Copra and fish now represent the bulk of production and exports.
In 2013 attention was drawn to a claim of a Kiribati man of being a "climate change refugee" under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951).
The location of Fanning Island, one of the closest formations to Hawaii, led to its annexation by the British Empire in 1888.
