Carson wrote in his ''Memoirs'' that this battle was "the prettiest fight I ever saw."
In 1849, Carson guided soldiers on the trail of Mrs. Ann White and her baby daughter.
As an Indian agent, he saw to it that those under his watch were treated with honesty, fairness, and clothed and fed properly.
The battle was the result of General Carleton's belief that Indians were responsible for the continuing attacks on settlers along the Santa Fe Trail.
Carson has been widely depicted in film and television series.
In 1856, Carson told his life story to someone who wrote it down.
Four to five hours of battle ensued.
They were sent to Bosque Redondo.
Carson left home in rural present-day Missouri at age 16 to become a mountain man and trapper in the West.
A Captain Pettis estimated that 1,200 to 1,400 Comanche and Kiowa began to assemble.
David Roberts writes, "Carson's trajectory, over three and a half decades, from thoughtless killer of Apaches and Blackfeet to defender and champion of the Utes, marks him out as one of the few frontiersmen whose change of heart toward the Indians, born not of missionary theory but of first hand experience, can serve as an exemplar for the more enlightened policies that sporadically gained the day in the twentieth century."
He was embarrassed by this, and tried to hide it.
At that time, the fur trade began to drop off.
It was here that many Navajos had taken refuge.
Lindsay Carson had a Scots-Irish Presbyterian background.
During this expedition, Frémont trekked into the Mojave Desert.
Fitzpatrick, Levin and his trappers went north to the central Rocky Mountains.
His head was large and well-shaped with yellow straight hair, worn long, falling on his shoulders.
Sherman wrote: "His fame was then at its height, ... and I was very anxious to see a man who had achieved such feats of daring among the wild animals of the Rocky Mountains, and still wilder Indians of the plains ...
In the story line, Carson and Godey stop to help a settler in dire straits.
This suit offered some protection against particular weapons employed by Indians.
Few Navajo were killed or captured.
Many died along the way.
''Adios, compadres''".
The Volunteers fought the Confederate forces at Valverde, New Mexico in February 1862.
They believed that it would now be their strongest sanctuary.
He had suffered an injury two years before that gave him great trouble.
He became its military governor.
Her countenance even after death indicated a hopeless creature.
Fremont's expedition covered much of California, Oregon, and the Great Basin area.
In October 1861, he was made a colonel.
I have often thought that Mrs. White read the same ... and prayed for my appearance that she might be saved."
They had been captured by Apaches.
He went west with a caravan of fur trappers, tending their livestock.
They made their trek over the Santa Fe Trail to Santa Fe, the capital of Santa Fe de Nuevo México, reaching their destination in November 1826.
An additional 5,000 arrived in the camp.
Carson lived with Mathew Kinkead, a trapper and explorer who had served with Carson's older brothers during the War of 1812.
Her death was a crushing blow to Carson.
Sides said that Carson believed the Native Americans needed reservations as a way of physically separating and shielding them from white hostility and white culture.
'''Christopher Houston "Kit" Carson''' (December 24, 1809 – May 23, 1868) was an American frontiersman.
In 1818 Lindsay Carson died instantly when a tree limb fell on him while clearing a field.
He lived among and married into the Arapaho and Cheyenne tribes.
He wrote in a report that the Jicarilla Apaches "were truly the most degraded and troublesome Indians we have in our department ... We daily witness them in a state of intoxication in our plaza."
In addition to furs and the company of free-spirited, rugged mountain men, Carson sought action and adventure.
When the Confederate threat to New Mexico was eliminated, Carson led forces to suppress the Navajo, Mescalero Apache, and the Kiowa and Comanche Indians.
Other stories were also printed, such as ''Kit Carson: The Prince of the Goldhunters'' and ''The Prairie Flower''.
After destroying this village, he moved forward to Adobe Walls.
Frémont wrote, "I was pleased with him and his manner of address at this first meeting.
Carson joined another expedition led by Thomas Fitzpatrick and William Levin in 1831.
Grizzly bears were one of the mountain man's greatest enemies.
He was traveling with about one hundred mountain men led by Jim Bridger.
In January 1864, Carson swept through the  Canyon with his forces.
Carson wrote in his ''Memoirs'': "During our pursuit for the lost animals, we suffered considerably but, the success of having recovered our horses and sending many a redskin to his long home, our sufferings were soon forgotten."
They found the Blackfoot village, and killed ten Blackfeet warriors.
He resigned from the Army in February 1863.
The book was called ''Kit Carson, the Nestor of the Mountains, from Facts Narrated by Himself''.
It was later printed.
They swept the area, driving the Mexicans away.
On the way to California, the party suffered from bad weather in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, but were saved by Carson's good judgement and his skills as a guide.
These men were ready to kill any Indian who attacked.
When the book was read to Carson he said, "Peters laid it on a leetle too thick."
Frémont worked hard to win California for the United States.
His orders were almost the same as those for the Apache roundup: he was to shoot all males on sight, and take the women and children captives.
Many Navajo surrendered at Fort Canby.
Two bears crossed paths with him and quickly chased him up a tree.
When Carson ran low on ammunition and howitzer shells, he ordered his men to retreat to a nearby Kiowa village.
Adaline died in 1860 or after 1862.
His notions about Indians became more understanding and more humane.
Stragglers in the rear were shot and killed.
Singing Grass was a lovely young woman, and many mountain men were in love with her.
He was sorry for the rest of his life that Mrs. White had been killed.
Waanibe died about 1841.
Carson and the lieutenant removed their shoes because they made too much noise, and walked barefoot through the desert.
He wrote in his ''Memoirs'' that: "The bear finally concluded to leave, of which I was heartily pleased, never having been so scared in my life."
He never wrote about his first two marriages in his Memoirs.
It confirmed his status as a western hero in the eyes of the American people.
These reports made Carson's name known across the United States, and spurred a migration of settlers westward to Oregon via the Oregon Trail.
Carson became the hero of juvenile fiction not just in the United States, but also published in French, German, Portuguese, Gujarati, Hindi, Singhalese, Arabic and Japanese.
Major Carleton was fired.
Indian hunting grounds were disappearing as waves of white settlers filled the region.
His Indian scouts killed and mutilated four elderly and weak Kiowas.
In August 1826, against his mother's wishes, Kit ran away from his apprenticeship.
Making-Out-Road divorced him in the way of her people by putting Adaline and all of Carson's property outside their tent.
The Carson family moved to Boone's Lick, Howard County, Missouri when Kit was about one year old.
A factual biography was attempted by DeWitt C. Peters in 1859, but has been criticized for inaccuracies and exaggerations.
This fort was one of the greatest buildings in the West.
The purpose of the expedition was to map and describe the Oregon Trail from South Pass, Wyoming to the Columbia River.
Lindsay had had five children by his first wife Lucy Bradley, and ten more children by Rebecca.
Three men in camp were killed.
Fashionable men in London, Paris, and New York wanted silk hats instead of beaver hats.
Carson eventually learned to write "C. Carson", but it was very difficult for him.
Carson took military records to the Secretary of War in Washington, DC.
He thought as well that the remoteness and desolation of the reservation would discourage white settlement.
Carson hunted buffalo, antelope, deer, and other animals to feed these people.
Carson wrote in his ''Memoirs'': "For two or three years after our arrival, we had to remain forted and it was necessary to have men stationed at the extremities of the fields for the protection of those that were laboring."
In 1843, Frémont asked Carson to join his second expedition.
Carson wanted to take a winter break from the campaign.
The Mescalero Apaches walked  to the reservation.
He planned to break through the Mexican lines the next morning, but 200 mounted American soldiers arrived in San Pasqual late that night.
Carson left his job as an Indian agent, and joined the Union Army as a lieutenant.
Carson probably killed and took the scalp of his first Indian when he was nineteen years old, during Ewing Young's expedition.
Combatants at the First Battle were the United States Army and Indian scouts against Kiowas, Comanches, and Plains Apaches.
During August 1829 the party went into Apache country along the Gila River.
They took two days to find them.
Carson's notions about Indians softened over the years.
On July 7, Carson, with little heart for the Navajo roundup, started the campaign against the tribe.
Once in California, Frémont started to rouse the American settlers into a patriotic fever.
Fort Carson, an army training post near Colorado Springs, was named for him during World War II by popular vote of the men training there.
He returned to Bent's Fort several times during his life to again provide meat for the fort's residents.
There were few deaths among Carson's men.
The first story about Carson's adventures was printed in 1847.
Bosque Redondo was closed.
This was the first time that he found himself in print.
Her child had been carried away, and was never found.
Carson and two other men sprayed the Crow camp with gunfire, killing almost every Crow.
During the American Civil War, Carson led a regiment of mostly Hispanic volunteers from New Mexico on the side of the Union at the Battle of Valverde in 1862.
This was their first expedition into the West together.
Frémont was a United States Army officer in the Corps of Topographical Engineers.
Historian David Roberts writes, "Carson's sweep through the Canyon de Chelly in the winter of 1863–1864 would prove to be the decisive action in the Campaign."
On the morning of November 25, Carson discovered and attacked a Kiowa village of 176 lodges.
His face was fair and smooth as a woman's with high cheekbones, straight nose, a mouth with a firm, but somewhat sad expression, a keen, deep-set but beautiful, mild blue eye, which could become terrible under some circumstances, and like the warning of the rattlesnake, gave notice of attack.
This book is called ''Memoirs''.
His third wife was Mexican.
In 1992, for example, a young professor at Colorado College was successful in demanding that a period photograph of Carson be removed from the ROTC office.
The last rendezvous was held in 1840.
In 1858, she went to the California goldfields.
Carson knew it was time to find other work.
By March 1864, there were 3,000 refugees at Fort Canby.
The Carson home was in Taos, New Mexico.
There they burned the village and many fine buffalo robes.
Carson would hunt and trap in the West for about ten years.
He is buried in Taos, New Mexico, next to his third wife Josefa Jaramillo.
Under Fremont's command, Carson participated in the uprising against Mexican rule in California at the beginning of the Mexican-American War.
Making-Out-Road left Carson to travel with her people through the west.
Another equestrian statue can be seen in Trindad.
The lost manuscript was found in a trunk in Paris in 1905.
They did not want to go, and declared California an independent republic.
Later in the war, Carson was a scout and courier, celebrated for his rescue mission after the Battle of San Pasqual and for his coast-to-coast journey from California to Washington, DC to deliver news of the conflict in California to the U.S. government.
This reservation was called Bosque Redondo (Round Grove).
Carleton had chosen a bleak site on the Pecos River for his reservation.
Historians agree that these were most likely Modoc men.
These three were captured when they stepped ashore at San Francisco Bay.
Over time, historical analysis of Carson shifted again.
He wanted to punish them and brought in Carson to do the job.
Missouri was then the frontier of American expansionism west; cabins were "forted" with tall stockade fences to defend against Indian attacks.
In addition, he had two mountain howitzer cannons.
Their daughter Adaline became Kit's favorite playmate.
Kearny was in San Diego on December 12.
The Mexican government ordered him to leave.
They rushed into their camp, killing and scalping two of the murderers.
He may have thought he would be known as a "squaw man".
Carson was married three times.
After the five-month, trouble-free mission was accomplished, Frémont wrote his government reports.
Frémont wrote, "This was a service of great trust and honor ... and great danger also."
A guidebook, maps, and other paraphernalia would be printed for westward-bound migrants and settlers.
Carson enjoyed having other people read to him, and preferred the poetry of George Gordon, Lord Byron.
Eventually he became fluent in Spanish and several Indian languages.
This was illegal and dangerous because California was Mexican territory.
Exaggerated versions of his exploits were the subject of dime novels.
In 1843, she fell into a kettle of boiling soap in Taos, New Mexico.
It was the best-paying job of Carson's life.
He was a man of medium height, broad-shouldered, and deep-chested, with a clear steady blue eye and frank speech and address; quiet and unassuming."
By December 10, Kearny believed reinforcements would not arrive.
In April 1861, the American Civil War broke out.
Kit was their sixth, making him the eleventh of Lindsay's offspring.
He was the hero of adventure stories.
One hundred eighty-eight Navajo surrendered.
Carson found other Comanche villages in the area, and realized he would face a very large force of Native Americans.
Carleton led his forces deep into the Mescalero Apache territory.
In 1993, a symposium was organized to air various views on Carson, but the Navajo spokespeople refused to attend.
In fact, the hero of a hundred desperate encounters, whose life had been mostly spent amid wilderness, where the white man is almost unknown, was one of Dame Nature's gentleman ..."
She tended to his needs, and went with him on his trapping trips.
He traveled through many parts of the American West with famous mountain men like Jim Bridger and Old Bill Williams.
The number would swell to possibly 3,000.
In 1836, Carson met an Arapaho woman named Waanibe (Singing Grass, or Grass Singing) at a mountain man rendezvous held along the Green River in Wyoming.
Carson searched far and wide for the Navajo.
He led the 1st New Mexico Volunteer Infantry and  trained the new men.
The Mexican government ordered Frémont to leave.
At Klamath Lake in southern Oregon, Frémont's party was attacked by about twenty Indians on the night of March 6, 1846.
Had to travel over a country covered with prickly pear and rocks, barefoot."
In 1841, Carson married a Cheyenne woman named Making-Out-Road.
In 1848, he took news of the California Gold Strike to the nation's capitol.
A river in Nevada is named for Carson as well as the state's capital, Carson City.
Frémont may have been working under secret government orders.
He left the Presbyterian Church for the Catholic Church, and married 14-year-old Josefa on February 6, 1843.
Carson died from an abdominal aortic aneurysm in the surgeon's quarters of Fort Lyon, Colorado.
Kit wrote in his ''Memoirs'' that Workman was "a good man, and I often recall the kind treatment I received."
Life for Carson as a mountain man was not easy.
Carson was the father of ten children.
In the 1970s, a Navajo at a trading post said, "No one here will talk about Kit Carson.
They went to California and Oregon.
The real Kit Carson I found to be a plain, simple ... man; rather below the medium height, with brown, curling hair, little or no beard, and a voice as soft and gentle as a woman's.
Messages from Washington, DC made it clear that President Polk wanted California.
Carson was mentored by Kinkead in learning the skills of a trapper, while learning the necessary languages for trade.
He was paid one dollar a day.
He was there only briefly: poor health forced him to retire from military life.
Conflict with particular Indians sometimes occurred.
The first biography of Carson was written by DeWitt C. Peters in 1859.
He wrote that he would give a one cent reward to anyone who brought the boy back to Franklin.
The dime novels celebrated Carson's adventures, but were usually colored with exaggeration.
