Freed from smoke and dirt, the living room thus began to serve as an area for social functions and increasingly became a showcase for the owner's wealth.
The temperature was controlled by hanging the pot higher or lower over the fire, or placing it on a trivet or directly on the hot ashes.
Sometimes, they shared apartments with "night sleepers", unmarried men who paid for a bed at night.
Early models included the Franklin stove around 1740, which was a furnace stove intended for heating, not for cooking.
It was built for two purposes: to optimize kitchen work to reduce cooking time and lower the cost of building decently equipped kitchens.
The study or living room was saved for special occasions such as an occasional dinner invitation.
One early record of a kitchen is found in the 1648 inventory of the estate of a John Porter of Windsor, Connecticut.
These houses often had no chimney, but only a smoke hood above the fireplace, made of wood and covered with clay, used to smoke meat.
In a few European farmhouses, the smoke kitchen was in regular use until the middle of the 20th century.
Because of this, these middle-class kitchens were often more homely than those of the upper class, where the kitchen was a work-only room occupied only by the servants.
The houses in Ancient Greece were commonly of the atrium-type: the rooms were arranged around a central courtyard for women.
There's a trend for restaurants to only "finish" delivered convenience food or even just re-heat completely prepared meals, maybe at the utmost grilling, a hamburger, or a steak.
Very few manufacturers produce home built-in kitchens from stainless-steel.
With the advent of the chimney, the hearth moved from the center of the room to one wall, and the first brick-and-mortar hearths were built.
In the West, a modern residential kitchen is typically equipped with a stove, a sink with hot and cold running water, a refrigerator, counters and kitchen cabinets arranged according to a modular design.
A similar sugar bin was also common.
Before that, only a few earlier experiments, typically in newly built upper-middle-class family homes, had open kitchens.
It was criticized as "exiling the women in the kitchen", but post-World War II economic reasons prevailed.
Again, the work triangle is preserved, and there may even be space for an additional table at a third wall, provided it does not intersect the triangle.
In Japanese homes, the kitchen started to become a separate room within the main building at that time.
The fuel or heating resource was also important technique to practice the cooking skills.
Her ideas were taken up in the 1920s by architects in Germany and Austria, most notably Bruno Taut,Erna Meyer, and Margarete Schütte-Lihotzky.
The enhanced status of cooking also made the kitchen a prestige object for showing off one's wealth or cooking professionalism.
A natural arrangement is a triangle, with the refrigerator, the sink, and the stove at a vertex each.
The flat pack kitchens industry has changed the way people renovate their kitchens and homes by making it easy to put together and mixing and matching to suit your wants and needs.
Before the advent of modern pipes, water was brought from an outdoor source such as wells, pumps or springs.
Outdoor areas in which food is prepared are generally not considered to be kitchens, even though an outdoor area set up for regular food preparation, for instance when camping, might be called an "outdoor kitchen".
This may be common in an attic space that is being converted into a living space, or a studio apartment.
Especially in the early history of railways this required flawless organization of processes; in modern times, the microwave oven and prepared meals have made this task much easier.
The idea of standardized was first introduced locally with the Frankfurt kitchen, but later defined new in the "Swedish kitchen" (Svensk köksstandard, Swedish kitchen standard).
Besides a cupboard to store the kitchenware, there were a table and chairs, where the family would dine, and sometimes—if space allowed—even a fauteuil or a couch.
In wealthy homes, the ground floor was often used as a stable while the kitchen was located on the floor above, like the bedroom and the hall.
The first known stoves in Japan date from about the same time.
Like in Europe, the wealthier homes had a separate building which served for cooking.
This is the classical work kitchen and makes efficient use of space.
Commercial kitchens are found in restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, hospitals, educational and workplace facilities, army barracks, and similar establishments.
Although the first gas street lamps were installed in Paris, London, and Berlin at the beginning of the 1820s and the first U.S. patent on a gas stove was granted in 1825, it was not until the late 19th century that using gas for lighting and cooking became commonplace in urban areas.
Commercial kitchens are generally (in developed countries) subject to public health laws.
The kitchen, located in the basement or the ground floor, continued to be operated by servants.
Industrialization also caused social changes.
Both had open kitchens, with high ceilings (up to the roof) and were aired by skylights.
And there was a rejection by younger home-owners of the standard suburban model of separate kitchens and dining rooms found in most 1900-1950 houses.
The kitchen floors were tiled; kitchenware was neatly stored in cupboards to protect them from dust and steam.
Beginning in the late Middle Ages, kitchens in Europe lost their home-heating function even more and were increasingly moved from the living area into a separate room.
Examples are Frank Lloyd Wright's ''House Willey'' (1934) and ''House Jacobs'' (1936).
The design included regular shelves on the walls, ample work space, and dedicated storage areas for various food items.
In Connecticut, as in other colonies of New England during Colonial America, kitchens were often built as separate rooms and were located behind the parlor and keeping room or dining room.
These will consist of multiple workstations, each with their own oven, sink, and kitchen utensils.
Using open fire for cooking (and heating) was risky; fires devastating whole cities occurred frequently.
'', aboard a Space Shuttle (where it is also called the "galley") or the International Space Station.
In cheaper brands, all cabinets are kept a uniform color, normally white, with interchangeable doors and accessories chosen by the customer to give a varied look.
Unit construction since its introduction has defined the development of the modern kitchen.
During the 21st century there has been an increasing rise in the flat pack kitchens industry, closely aligned with those whom are renovating on a budget.
In the southern states, where the climate and sociological conditions differed from the north, the kitchen was often relegated to an outbuilding.
Social housing projects led to the next milestone: the Frankfurt Kitchen.
At the turn of the 20th century, electricity had been mastered well enough to become a commercially viable alternative to gas and slowly started replacing the latter.
In many such homes, a covered but otherwise open patio served as the kitchen.
Living in smaller apartments, the kitchen was the main room—here, the family lived.
These stoves were still fired with wood or coal.
Every Chinese New Year Eve, families will gather together to pray for the kitchen god to give a good report to heaven and wish him to bring back good news on the fifth day of the New Year.
The re-integration of the kitchen and the living area went hand in hand with a change in the perception of cooking: increasingly, cooking was seen as a creative and sometimes social act instead of work.
Christine Frederick published from 1913 a series of articles on "New Household Management" in which she analyzed the kitchen following Taylorist principles, presented detailed time-motion studies, and derived a kitchen design from them.
However, his stove was designed for large kitchens; it was too big for domestic use.
The earliest findings are from the Kofun period (3rd to 6th century).
When separating a family, it was called ''Kamado wo wakeru'', which means "divide the stove".
This is not optimal, but often the only solution if space is restricted.
The fast food and convenience food trends have also changed the way restaurant kitchens operate.
A typical Hoosier cabinet of the 1920s.
The urban middle class imitated the luxurious dining styles of the upper class as best as they could.
A kind of open fire pit fired with charcoal, called ''irori'', remained in use as the secondary stove in most homes until the Edo period (17th to 19th century).
The equipment used remained a standard for years to come: hot and cold water on tap and a kitchen sink and an electrical or gas stove and oven.
The "kitchen area" was between the entrance and the fireplace.
Modern kitchens often have enough informal space to allow for people to eat in it without having to use the formal dining room.
Chinese cooking will use a pot or wok for pan frying, stir frying, deep frying or boiling.
By rearranging the parts and taking advantage of (then) modern metal working, they were able to produce a well-organized, compact cabinet which answered the home cook's needs for storage and working space.
The medieval smoke kitchen (or Farmhouse kitchen) remained common, especially in rural farmhouses and generally in poorer homes, until much later.
Gas pipes were laid; gas was used first for lighting purposes, but once the network had grown sufficiently, it also became available for heating and cooking on gas stoves.
Until the 1950s, steel kitchens were used by architects, but this material was displaced by the cheaper particle board panels sometimes decorated with a steel surface.
Where workers' apartments were equipped with a gas stove, gas distribution would go through a coin meter.
In the 1980s, there was a backlash against industrial kitchen planning and cabinets with people installing a mix of work surfaces and free standing furniture, led by kitchen designer Johnny Grey and his concept of the "Unfitted Kitchen".
The "Trophy Kitchen" is equipped with very expensive and sophisticated appliances which are used primarily to impress visitors and to project social status, rather than for actual cooking.
In particular, the air in a kitchen differs from that of other rooms in that it typically contains grease, smoke and odours.
The kitchens in railway dining cars present special challenges: space is constrained, and, nevertheless, the personnel must be able to serve a great number of meals quickly.
This stove was much more energy efficient than earlier stoves; it used one fire to heat several pots, which were hung into holes on top of the stove and were thus heated from all sides instead of just from the bottom.
This is a typical work kitchen, too, unless the two other cabinet rows are short enough to place a table at the fourth wall.
Until the Meiji era, a kitchen was also called ''kamado'' (かまど; lit.
Food was cooked over an open fire.
* A ''single-file kitchen (also known as a one-way galley or a straight-line kitchen has all of these along one wall; the work triangle degenerates to a line.
Beecher's "model kitchen" propagated for the first time a systematic design based on early ergonomics.
Kitchens in China are called .
A social housing project in Frankfurt (the ''Römerstadt'' of architect Ernst May) realized in 1927/8 was the breakthrough for her Frankfurt kitchen, which embodied this new notion of efficiency in the kitchen.
The G-kitchen provides additional work and storage space, and can support two work triangles.
The Hoosier Manufacturing Co. of Indiana adapted an existing furniture piece, the baker's cabinet, which had a similar structure of a table top with some cabinets above it (and frequently flour bins beneath) to solve the storage problem.
A distinctive feature of the Hoosier cabinet is its accessories.
The ventilation of a kitchen, in particular a large restaurant kitchen, poses certain difficulties that are not present in the ventilation of other kinds of spaces.
The kitchen remained largely unaffected by architectural advances throughout the Middle Ages; open fire remained the only method of heating food.
For the servants the kitchen continued to also serve as a sleeping room; they slept either on the floor, or later in narrow spaces above a lowered ceiling, for the new stoves with their smoke outlet no longer required a high ceiling in the kitchen.
These kitchens are generally larger and equipped with  bigger and more heavy-duty equipment than a residential kitchen.
Gas was more expensive than coal, though, and thus the new technology was first installed in the wealthier homes.
Another reason for the trend back to open kitchens (and a foundation of the "kitchen object" philosophy) is changes in how food is prepared.
Pots and kitchenware were typically stored on open shelves, and parts of the room could be separated from the rest using simple curtains.
However, like their precursor, Colani's "kitchen satellite", such futuristic designs are exceptions.
Military camps and similar temporary settlements of nomads may have dedicated kitchen tents.
Nevertheless, kitchen design was mostly ad-hoc following the whims of the architect.
Many households have a microwave oven, a dishwasher and other electric appliances.
In some homes there were upwards of three kitchens.
For example, a large restaurant may have a huge walk-in refrigerator and a large commercial dishwasher machine.
The first ideas to optimize the work in the kitchen go back to Catharine Beecher's ''A Treatise on Domestic Economy'' (1843, revised and republished together with her sister Harriet Beecher Stowe as ''The American Woman's Home'' in 1869).
Gas and water pipes were first installed in the big cities; small villages were connected only much later.
In wealthy homes there was typically more than one kitchen.
Pre-manufactured modules, using mass manufacturing techniques developed during World War II, greatly brought down the cost of a kitchen.
In contrast, there were no dramatic changes for the upper classes.
Today's western restaurant kitchens typically have tiled walls and floors and use stainless steel for other surfaces (workbench, but also door and drawer fronts) because these materials are durable and easy to clean.
The items listed in the kitchen were: silver spoons, pewter, brass, iron, arms, ammunition, hemp, flax and "other implements about the room".
Out of sheer necessity, cities began planning and building water distribution pipes into homes, and built sewers to deal with the waste water.
The kitchen in such an apartment was often used as a living and sleeping room, and even as a bathroom.
They are inspected periodically by public-health officials, and forced to close if they do not meet hygienic requirements mandated by law.
This observation led to a few common kitchen forms, commonly characterized by the arrangement of the kitchen cabinets and sink, stove, and refrigerator:
Traditionally  Chinese were using wood or straw as the fuel to cook food.
The extractor hood made it possible to build open kitchens in apartments, too, where both high ceilings and skylights were not possible.
Gas pipes were first laid in the late 19th century, and gas stoves started to replace the older coal-fired stoves.
In some houses, water pumps were installed, and some even had kitchen sinks and drains (but no water on tap yet, except for some feudal kitchens in castles).
A stepstone was the kitchen designed in Frankfurt by Margarethe Schütte-Lihotzky.
While this "work kitchen" and variants derived from it were a great success for tenement buildings, home owners had different demands and did not want to be constrained by a 6.4&nbsp;m² kitchen.
In such houses, there was often a separate small storage room in the back of the kitchen used for storing food and kitchen utensils.
* The ''block kitchen (or island)'' is a more recent development, typically found in open kitchens.
A Chinese chef had to master flaming and heat radiation to reliably prepare traditional recipes.
In rural areas, the older technology using coal or wood stoves or even brick-and-mortar open fireplaces remained common throughout.
Starting in the 1980s, the perfection of the extractor hood allowed an open kitchen again, integrated more or less with the living room without causing the whole apartment or house to smell.
Some had small mobile bronze stoves, on which a fire could be lit for cooking.
In small areas of kitchen in an apartment, even a "tall storage unit" is available for effective storage.
The astronauts' food is generally completely prepared, dehydrated, and sealed in plastic pouches, and the kitchen is reduced to a rehydration and heating module.
Professional kitchens are often equipped with gas stoves, as these allow cooks to regulate the heat more quickly and more finely than electrical stoves.
The Frankfurt Kitchen of 1926 was made of several materials depending on the application.
These stoves, called ''kamado'', were typically made of clay and mortar; they were fired with wood or charcoal through a hole in the front and had a hole in the top, into which a pot could be hanged by its rim.
A modified version of the G-kitchen is the ''double-L'', which splits the G into two L-shaped components, essentially adding a smaller L-shaped island or peninsula to the L-kitchen.
On plantations, it was separate from the big house or mansion in much the same way as the feudal kitchen in medieval Europe: the kitchen was operated by slaves, and their working place had to be separated from the living area of the masters by the social standards of the time.
Such areas are called "breakfast areas", "breakfast nooks" or "breakfast bars" if the space is integrated into a kitchen counter.
Kitchens with enough space to eat in are sometimes called "eat-in kitchens".
The units which are held on the wall for storage purposes are termed as "wall units" or "wall cabinets".
As originally supplied, they were equipped with various racks and other hardware to hold and organize spices and various staples.
The initial reception was critical: it was so small that only one person could work in it; some storage spaces intended for raw loose food ingredients such as flour were reachable by children.
The living room was now heated by tiled stoves, operated from the kitchen, which offered the huge advantage of not filling the room with smoke.
Kitchens in Japan are called '''Daidokoro''' (台所; lit.
Pots made of iron, bronze, or copper started to replace the pottery used earlier.
"break the stove") means that the family was bankrupt.
In schools where home economics, food technology (previously known as "domestic science"), or culinary arts are taught, there will be a series of kitchens with multiple equipment (similar in some respects to laboratories) solely for the purpose of teaching.
Units which are kept on the floor are called "floor units", "floor cabinets", or "base cabinets" on which a kitchen worktop – originally often formica and often now made of granite, marble, tile or wood – is placed.
On passenger airliners, the kitchen is reduced to a mere pantry, the only function reminiscent of a kitchen is the heating of in-flight meals delivered by a catering company.
stove) and there are many sayings in the Japanese language that involve kamado as it was considered the symbol of a house and the term could even be used to mean "family" or "household" (similar to the English word "hearth").
The most common cooking equipment in Chinese family kitchens and restaurant kitchens are woks, steamer basket, and pots.
Many Chinese people believe that there is a Kitchen God who watches over the kitchen for the family.
The first electrical stove had been presented in 1893 at the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, but it was not until the 1930s that the technology was stable enough and began to take off.
* The ''double-file kitchen (or two-way galley)'' has two rows of cabinets at opposite walls, one containing the stove and the sink, the other the refrigerator.
Benjamin Thompson in England designed his "Rumford stove" around 1800.
One useful feature was the combination flour-bin/sifter, a tin hopper that could be used without having to remove it from the cabinet.
* A ''U-kitchen'' has cabinets along three walls, typically with the sink at the base of the "U".
The kitchen once more was seen as a work place that needed to be separated from the living areas.
But the Frankfurt kitchen embodied a standard for the rest of the 20th century in rental apartments: the "work kitchen".
Separate '''summer kitchens''' were also common on large farms in the north; these were used to prepare meals for harvest workers and tasks such as canning during the warm summer months.
In European medieval cities around the 10th to 12th centuries, the kitchen still used an open fire hearth in the middle of the room.
But like the gas stove, the electric stove had a slow start.
Additionally, the kitchen island's counter-top can function as an overflow-surface for serving buffet style meals or sitting down to eat breakfast and snacks.
* In the ''L-kitchen'', the cabinets occupy two adjacent walls.
Developed in 1926, this kitchen measured 1.9&nbsp;m by 3.4&nbsp;m (approximately 6&nbsp;ft 2&nbsp;in by 11&nbsp;ft 2&nbsp;in, with a standard layout).
In the upper classes, cooking and the kitchen were the domain of the servants, and the kitchen was set apart from the living rooms, sometimes even far from the dining room.
Some special appliances are typical for professional kitchens, such as large installed deep fryers, steamers, or a bain-marie.
The trend to increasing gasification and electrification continued at the turn of the 20th century.
In some castles the kitchen was retained in the same structure, but servants were strictly separated from nobles, by constructing separate spiral stone staircases for use of servants to bring food to upper levels.
The fireplace was typically on the floor, placed at a wall&mdash;sometimes raised a little bit&mdash;such that one had to kneel to cook.
Soon, the concept was amended by the use of smooth synthetic door and drawer fronts, first in white, recalling a sense of cleanliness and alluding to sterile lab or hospital settings, but soon after in more lively colors, too.
Schütte-Lihotzky's fitted kitchen was built in some 10,000 apartments in the housing projects erected in Frankfurt in the 1930s.
Some architects have capitalized on this "object" aspect of the kitchen by designing freestanding "kitchen objects".
This type of stove remained in use for centuries to come, with only minor modifications.
A '''kitchen''' is a room or part of a room used for cooking and food preparation in a dwelling or in a commercial establishment.
Many families also appreciated the trend towards open kitchens, as it made it easier for the parents to supervise the children while cooking and to clean up spills.
In the U.S., the "Small Homes Council", since 1993 the "Building Research Council", of the School of Architecture of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign was founded in 1944 with the goal to improve the state of the art in home building, originally with an emphasis on standardization for cost reduction.
In more expensive brands, the cabinets are produced matching the doors' colors and finishes, for an older more bespoke look.
Water pipes were laid only towards the end of the 19th century, and then often only with one tap per building or per story.
A large table served as a workbench; there were at least as many chairs as there were servants, for the table in the kitchen also doubled as the eating place for the servants.
Before and after the beginning of the 20th century, kitchens were frequently not equipped with built-in cabinetry, and the lack of storage space in the kitchen became a real problem.
More than 3000 years ago, the ancient Chinese used the ding for cooking food.
European medieval kitchens were dark, smoky, and sooty places, whence their name ''"smoke kitchen"''.
Daidokoro is the place where food is prepared in a Japanese house.
Here, the stove or both the stove and the sink are placed where an L or U kitchen would have a table, in a free-standing "island", separated from the other cabinets.
Kitchens aboard ships, aircraft and sometimes railcars are often referred to as galleys.
Practical reasons also played a role in this development: just as in the bourgeois homes of the past, one reason for separating the kitchen was to keep the steam and smells of cooking out of the living room.
Early medieval European longhouses had an open fire under the highest point of the building.
Technical advances in heating food in the 18th and 19th centuries changed the architecture of the kitchen.
Besides cooking, the fire also served as a source of heat and light to the single-room building.
The concept was refined in the "Swedish kitchen" using unit furniture with wooden fronts for the kitchen cabinets.
The "Oberlin stove" was a refinement of the technique that resulted in a size reduction; it was patented in the U.S. in 1834 and became a commercial success with some 90,000 units sold over the next 30 years.
Taylorism was born, and time-motion studies were used to optimize processes.
* A ''G-kitchen'' has cabinets along three walls, like the U-kitchen, and also a partial fourth wall, often with a double basin sink at the corner of the G shape.
Beecher even separated the functions of preparing food and cooking it altogether by moving the stove into a compartment adjacent to the kitchen.
A similar design can be found in the Iroquois longhouses of North America.
In a Roman villa, the kitchen was typically integrated into the main building as a separate room, set apart for practical reasons of smoke and sociological reasons of the kitchen being operated by slaves.
These ideas also spilled over into domestic kitchen architecture because of a growing trend that called for a professionalization of household work, started in the mid-19th century by Catharine Beecher and amplified by Christine Frederick's publications in the 1910s.
The inventory lists goods in the house "over the kittchin" and "in the kittchin".
The new factory working class in the cities was housed under generally poor conditions.
