A knight who is subsequently ordained does not lose his title.
The chivalric combat was fought when one party's honor was disrespected or challenged upon in which the conflict cannot be resolved in court.
The nobles also provided their knights with necessities, such as lodging, food, armour, weapons, horses, and money.
Countries like Germany, Britain and Ireland practiced this tradition.
These words are cognates derived from Germanic ''rīdan'' "to ride", in turn derived from the Proto-Indo-European root ''reidh-''.
A ''rādcniht'' (meaning "riding-servant") was a servant delivering messages or patrolling coastlines on horseback.
The most popular and romanticized contest for knights was the ''joust''.
One contest was a free-for-all battle called a ''melee'', where large groups of knights numbering hundreds assembled and fought one another, and the last knight standing was the winner.
On the day of the ceremony, the would-be knight would swear an oath and the master of the ceremony would dub the new knight on the shoulders with a sword.
On 30 November 1996, Lady Fraser was made Lady of the Thistle, the first non-Royal woman (post-nominal: LT).
As heavier armour, including enlarged shields and enclosed helmets, developed in the Middle Ages, the need for marks of identification arose, and with coloured shields and surcoats, coat armoury was born.
In the century or so following Charlemagne's death, his newly empowered warrior class grew stronger still, and Charles the Bald declared their fiefs to be hereditary.
An example of this was seen in the Battle of Nancy, when Charles the Bold and his armoured cavalry were decimated by Swiss soldiers only armed with pikes.
He receives the insignia of his honour and may place the appropriate letters after his name or title but he may not be called Sir and his wife may not be called Lady.
For its historical association with warfare and the landed gentry in the Middle Ages, it can be considered roughly equal to the titles of "Knight" or "Baronet".
A narrowing of the generic meaning "servant" to "military follower of a king or other superior" is visible by 1100.
Today, the head of the Royal House of Portugal HRH Duarte Pio, Duke of Braganza bestows hereditary knighthoods for extraordinary acts of sacrifice and service to the Royal House.
The first documented case is that of Marie-Angélique Duchemin (1772–1859), who fought in the Revolutionary Wars, received a military disability pension in 1798, the rank of 2nd lieutenant in 1822, and the Legion of Honor in 1852.
In the course of the 12th century knighthood became a social rank, with a distinction being made between ''milites gregarii'' (non-noble cavalrymen) and ''milites nobiles'' (true knights).
Although any medieval knight going to war would automatically serve as a man-at-arms, not all men-at-arms were knights.
In the British honours system the knightly style of ''Sir'' is accompanied by the given name, and optionally the surname.
Thus, all petty nobles intending to become prosperous knights needed a great deal of military experience.
The medieval literary genre of chivalric romance had been the high-water mark of idealism and romanticism in literature, but in the 16th century Machiavelli instructed aspiring political rulers to be ruthlessly pragmatic and to apply the principle that the ends justify the means, directly counter to the high-flown idealism of late medieval chivalry.
It usually ended with many knights either injured or even killed.
In all, 68 women were appointed between 1358 and 1488, including all consorts.
''Ridder'', Dutch for "knight", is a hereditary noble title in the Netherlands.
Castiglione's tale took the form of a discussion among the nobility of the court of the Duke of Urbino, in which the characters determine that the ideal knight should be renowned not only for his bravery and prowess in battle, but also as a skilled dancer, athlete, singer and orator, and he should also be well-read in the Humanities and classical Greek and Latin literature.
The first is the membership of one of the ''pure'' Orders of Chivalry such as the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle and the dormant Order of Saint Patrick, of which all members are knighted.
In some cases commoners could also be knighted as a reward for extraordinary military service.
Thus Sir Paul McCartney's ex-wife was formally styled ''Lady McCartney'' (rather than ''Lady Paul McCartney'' or ''Lady Heather McCartney'').
Often, a knight was a vassal who served as a fighter for a lord, with payment in the form of land holdings and food from serfs.
Outside the British honours system it is usually considered improper to address a knighted person as 'Sir' or 'Dame'.
In Ancient Rome there was a knightly class ''Ordo Equestris'' (order of mounted nobles) from which European knighthood may have been derived.
The modern female equivalent in the United Kingdom is Dame.
While the knight was essentially a title denoting a military office, the term could also be used for positions of higher nobility such as landholders.
This class is often translated as "knight"; the medieval knight, however, was called ''miles'' in Latin (which in classical Latin meant "soldier", normally infantry).
Like in the Netherlands, no female equivalent to the title exists.
During the Middle Ages, this grew from simple military professionalism into a social code including the values of gentility, nobility and treating others reasonably.
The ideal of chivalry as the ethos of the Christian warrior, and the transmutation of the term "knight" from the meaning "servant, soldier", and of ''chevalier'' "mounted soldier", to refer to a member of this ideal class, is significantly influenced by the Crusades, on one hand inspired by the military orders of monastic warriors, and on the other hand also cross-influenced by Islamic (Saracen) ideals of ''furusiyya''.
Likewise ''Ridder'', Dutch for "knight", or the equivalent French ''Chevalier'' is a hereditary noble title in Belgium.
The lords trusted the knights, who were skilled in battle on horseback.
In addition, many British Orders of Merit, namely the Order of the Bath, the Order of St Michael and St George, the Royal Victorian Order and the Order of the British Empire are part of the British honours system, and the award of their highest ranks (Knight/Dame Commander and Knight/Dame Grand Cross), comes together with an honorific knighthood, making them a cross between orders of chivalry and orders of merit.
In the Netherlands no female equivalent exists.
In the Early Medieval period any well-equipped horseman could be described as a knight, or ''miles'' in Latin.
The word ''knight'', from Old English ''cniht'' ("boy" or "servant"), is a cognate of the German word ''Knecht'' ("servant, bondsman").
The military service was the ''quid pro quo'' for each knight's fief.
There are other monarchies and also republics that also follow this practice.
Such orders were particularly popular in the 17th and 18th centuries, and knighthood continues to be conferred in various countries:
* the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, founded by Count Amadeus VI in 1346
The collective term for its holders in a certain locality is the Ridderschap (e.g.
During the Renaissance, the genre of chivalric romance became popular in literature, growing ever more idealistic and eventually giving rise to a new form of realism in literature popularised by Miguel de Cervantes' ''Don Quixote''.
This custom is not observed in Australia and New Zealand, where knighted Anglican clergymen routinely use the title "Sir".
Weapons were standardized and must be of the same caliber.
Similarly, actress Judi Dench DBE may be addressed as ''Dame Judi'' or ''Dame Judi Dench'', but never ''Dame Dench''.
In his Glossarium (s.v.
The Order has its Chapter.
Since the reign of Edward VII a clerk in holy orders in the Church of England has not normally received the accolade on being appointed to a degree of knighthood.
The advancement of high-powered firearms eradicated the use of plate armour, as the time it takes to train soldiers with guns is much less compared to that of the knight.
Additionally there remain a few hereditary knights in the Netherlands.
This designation is used as a title of nobility in all German-speaking areas.
By contrast, award of other British Orders of Merit, such as the Distinguished Service Order, the Order of Merit and the Order of the Companions of Honour does not confer a knighthood.
Baronets are not peers of the Realm, and have never been entitled to sit in the House of Lords, therefore like knights they remain commoners in the view of the British legal system.
Pages then become assistants to older knights in battle, carrying and cleaning armour, taking care of the horses, and packing the baggage.
Medieval French had two words, chevaleresse and chevalière, which were used in two ways: one was for the wife of a knight, and this usage goes back to the 14th century.
Modern French orders of knighthood include women, for example the Légion d'Honneur (Legion of Honor) since the mid-19th century, but they are usually called chevaliers.
The Royal House of Portugal historically bestowed hereditary knighthoods to holders of the highest ranks in the Royal Orders.
''Cavaliere'' Benito Mussolini), and Ritter in Germany and the Austro-Hungarian Empire (e.g.
who were often slaughtered after capture, and who were viewed during battle as mere impediments to knights' getting to other knights to fight them.
State Knighthoods in the Netherlands are issued in three orders, the Order of William, the Order of the Netherlands Lion, and the Order of Orange Nassau.
After 1488, no other appointments of women are known, although it is said that the Garter was granted to Neapolitan poet Laura Bacio Terricina, by King Edward VI.
Middle High German had the phrase ''guoter kneht'' which also meant knight, however, this meaning had gone into decline by around 1200.
They adopted newer technology while still retaining their age-old chivalric traditions.
Judicial combat were of two forms in medieval society, the feat of arms and chivalric combat.
Before 1814, the history of nobility is separate for each of the eleven provinces that make up the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The style ''Dame Heather McCartney'' could be used for the wife of a knight; however, this style is largely archaic and is only used in the most formal of documents, or where the wife is a Dame in her own right (such as Dame Norma Major, who gained her title six years before her husband Sir John Major was knighted).
At about this time the Franks increasingly remained on horseback to fight on the battlefield as true cavalry rather than mounted infantry, with the discovery of the stirrup, and would continue to do so for centuries afterwards.
There are very few hereditary knights and they are entitled to wear a breast star with the crest of the House of Braganza.
Chivalry and religion were mutually influenced during the period of the Crusades.
Since 1611, the British Crown has awarded a hereditary title in the form of the Baronetcy.
A knight fighting under another's banner was called a ''knight bachelor'' while a knight fighting under his own banner was a ''knight banneret''.
In continental Europe different systems of hereditary knighthood have existed or do exist.
These were given to the captains directly by the Emperor to reward their efforts in the conquests, and they in turn were to grant benefices to their warrior contingents, who were a mix of free and unfree men.
A famous example of this situation was The Revd Sir Derek Pattinson, who was ordained just a year after he was appointed Knight Bachelor, apparently somewhat to the consternation of officials at Buckingham Palace.
Although they have a higher rank than most soldiers because of their valuable lineage, they have lost their distinctive identity that previously set them apart from other common soldiers.
Upon turning 21, the squire was eligible to be knighted.
However, it was the Franks who generally fielded armies composed of large masses of infantry, with an infantry elite, the comitatus, which often rode to battle on horseback rather than marching on foot.
They feared the King would use Orders to gain support for absolutist goals and to make formal distinctions among the peerage which could lead to its legal breakup into two separate classes, and that the King would later play one against the other and eventually limit the legal privileges of hereditary nobility.
From ''caballus'' arose terms in the various Romance languages cognate to the (French-derived) English ''cavalier'': Italian ''cavaliere'', Spanish ''caballero'', French ''chevalier'' (hence chivalry), Portuguese ''cavaleiro'', Romanian ''cavaler''.
They would accompany the knights on expeditions, even into foreign lands.
Georg ''Ritter'' von Trapp'').
In Wolfram von Eschenbach's ''Parzival'' (c. 1205), chivalry had become a blend of religious duties, love and military service.
Here is a quote from Menestrier, a 17th-century writer on chivalry: "It was not always necessary to be the wife of a knight in order to take this title.
One family ennobled with that title is the house of Hauteclocque (by letters patents of 1752), even if its most recent members used a pontifical title of count.
In France, the hereditary knighthood existed in regions formerly under Holy Roman Empire control.
Soon, the remaining knights were absorbed into professional armies.
Examples of these brutal duels were the judicial combat known as the Combat of the Thirty in 1351, and the trial by combat fought by Jean de Carrouges in 1386.
In each of these, there were in the early Middle Ages a number of feudal lords who often were just as powerful, and sometimes more so than the rulers themselves.
As the feudal system came to an end, lords saw no further use of knights.
Her daughter received the same honor in 1872, as well as her granddaughter in 1910.
The knighting ceremony usually involved a ritual bath on the eve of the ceremony and a prayer vigil during the night.
The feat of arms were done to settle hostilities between two large parties and supervised by a judge.
Ministers of other Christian Churches are entitled to receive the accolade.
For example, Sir Norman Cardinal Gilroy did receive the accolade on his appointment as Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire in 1969.
Traditionally it denotes the second lowest rank within the nobility, standing above "Edler" (Noble) and below "Freiherr" (baron).
Medieval tournaments were made up of martial sports called ''hastiludes'', and were not only a major spectator sport but also played as a real combat simulation.
In the 14th century the use of infantrymen armed with pikes and fighting in close formation also proved effective against heavy cavalry.
The ideal courtier—the chivalrous knight—of Baldassarre Castiglione's ''The Book of the Courtier'' became a model of the ideal virtues of nobility.
The first military orders of knighthood were those of the Knights Hospitallers and of the Holy Sepulchre, both founded at the First Crusade of 1099, followed by the  Order of Saint Lazarus (1100), Knights Templars (1118) and the Teutonic Knights (1190).
''Chivalry'', derived from the French word ''chevalier'' ('cavalier'), simultaneously denoted skilled horsemanship and military service, and these remained the primary occupations of knighthood throughout the Middle Ages.
The position is therefore more comparable with hereditary knighthoods in continental European orders of nobility, such as ''ritter'', than with knighthoods under the British orders of chivalry.
However, unlike knights, the title is hereditary and the recipient does not receive an accolade.
At the initiative of Catherine Baw in 1441, and 10 years later of Elizabeth, Mary, and Isabella of the house of Hornes, orders were founded which were open exclusively to women of noble birth, who received the French title of chevalière or the Latin title of equitissa.
Chivalry developed as an early standard of professional ethics for knights, who were relatively affluent horse owners and were expected to provide military services in exchange for landed property.
This practice is similar to the award of the title of Knight Bachelor in the United Kingdom.
Armies of the time started adopting a more realistic approach to warfare than the honor-bound code of chivalry.
Historically, the ideals of chivalry were popularized in medieval literature, especially the Matter of Britain and Matter of France, the former based on Geoffrey of Monmouth's  ''Historia Regum Britanniae'' ("History of the Kings of Britain"), written in the 1130s.
Mercenaries also became an economic alternative to knights when conflicts arose.
The older Carolingian ceremony of presenting a young man with weapons influenced the emergence of knighthood ceremonies, in which a noble would be ritually given weapons and declared to be a knight, usually amid some festivities.
Knights and the ideals of knighthood featured largely in medieval and Renaissance literature, and have secured a permanent place in literary romance.
During this time the squires continued training in combat and were allowed to own armour (rather than borrowing it).
* the Order of Saint Michael, founded by Louis XI of France in 1469
The Anglo-Saxon ''cniht'' had no particular connection to horsemanship: the word referred to any servant.
Early notions of chivalry entailed loyalty to one's liege lord and bravery in battle, similar to the values of the Heroic Age.
The special prestige accorded to mounted warriors finds a parallel in the ''furusiyya'' in the Muslim world, and the Greek ''hippeus'' (ἱππεύς) and Roman ''eques'' of classical antiquity.
The great European legends of warriors such as the paladins, the Matter of France and the Matter of Britain popularized the notion of chivalry among the warrior class.
* the Order of the Elephant, which may have been first founded by Christian I of Denmark, but was founded in its current form by King Christian V in 1693
The Royal Victorian Order was opened to women in 1936, and the Orders of the Bath and Saint Michael and Saint George in 1965 and 1971 respectively.
In the late medieval period, new methods of warfare began to render classical knights in armour obsolete, but the titles remained in many nations.
Furthermore, Geoffroi de Charny's "Book of Chivalry" expounded upon the importance of Christian faith in every area of a knight's life.
Later, the high-flown values of chivalric romance were heavily satirized in Cervantes's ''Don Quixote'', which portrayed the charmingly idealistic protagonist as a lovable but hopelessly delusional imbecile.
They were placed on an early training regime of hunting with huntsmen and falconers, and academic studies with priests or chaplains.
The first woman to be granted a knighthood in modern Britain seems to have been H.H.
In peacetime, knights often demonstrated their martial skills in tournaments, which usually took place on the grounds of a castle.
Although in some nations the knight returned to foot combat in the 14th century, the association of the knight with mounted combat with a spear, and later a lance, remained a strong one.
The early Crusades helped to clarify the moral code of chivalry as it related to religion.
Knights are generally ''armigerous'' (bearing a coat of arms), and indeed they played an essential role in the development of heraldry.
Sir Thomas Malory's ''Le Morte d'Arthur'' ("The Death of Arthur"), written in 1485, was important in defining the ideal of chivalry, which is essential to the modern concept of the knight, as an elite warrior sworn to uphold the values of faith, loyalty, courage, and honour.
Modern knighthoods are typically awarded in recognition for services rendered to society, which are not necessarily martial in nature.
The order was open to "princes and chiefs" without distinction of gender.
Knights were expected, above all, to fight bravely and to display military professionalism and courtesy.
A knight had to be born of nobility &ndash; typically sons of knights or lords.
Many landowners found the duties of knighthood too expensive and so contented themselves with the use of squires.
Wives of knights, however, are entitled to the honorific pre-nominal "Lady" before their husband's surname.
In 1638, a proposal was made to revive the use of robes for the wives of knights in ceremonies, but this did not occur.
Knights can parade their armour and banner to the whole court as the tournament commence.
Ramon Llull's ''Book of the Order of Chivalry'' (1275) demonstrates that by the end of the 13th century, chivalry entailed a litany of very specific duties, including riding warhorses, jousting, attending tournaments, holding Round Tables and hunting, as well as aspiring to the more æthereal virtues of "faith, hope, charity, justice, strength, moderation and loyalty."
It is the lowest title within the nobility system and ranks below that of "Baron" but above "Jonkheer" (the latter is not a title, but a Dutch honorific to show that someone belongs to the untitled nobility).
It is the second lowest title within the nobility system above ''Écuyer'' or ''Jonkheer/Jonkvrouw'' and below ''Baron''.
The first knights appeared during the reign of Charlemagne in the 8th century.
In the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth the monarchs tried to establish chivalric orders but the hereditary lords who controlled the Union did not agree and managed to ban such assemblies.
These mobile mounted warriors made Charlemagne’s far-flung conquests possible, and to secure their service he rewarded them with grants of land called benefices.
Today, a number of orders of knighthood continue to exist in several countries, such as the English Order of the Garter, the Swedish Royal Order of the Seraphim, and the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav.
The higher nobles grant the vassals their portions of land (fiefs) in return for their loyalty, protection, and service.
It was only over the following century, with the successful conquest of the Holy Land and the rise of the crusader states, that these orders became powerful and prestigious.
After the Crusades, the military orders became idealized and romanticized, resulting in the late medieval notion of chivalry, as reflected in the Arthurian romances of the time.
The rise of Christian humanism in Renaissance literature demonstrated a marked departure from the chivalric romance of late medieval literature, and the chivalric ideal ceased to influence literature over successive centuries until it saw some pockets of revival in post-Victorian literature.
The first non-Royal woman to be made Lady Companion of the Garter was The Duchess of Norfolk in 1990, the second was The Baroness Thatcher in 1995 (post-nominal: LG).
Squires were required to master the “''seven points of agilities''” &ndash; riding, swimming and diving, shooting different types of weapons, climbing, participation in tournaments, wrestling, fencing, long jumping, and dancing &ndash; the prerequisite skills for knighthood.
Examples of holy orders that existed beyond the Middle Ages were the Knights Hospitallers and Teutonic Knights.
The seven-year-old boys were given the title of ''page'' and turned over to the care of the castle's lords.
militissa), Du Cange notes that still in his day (17th century), the female canons of the canonical monastery of St. Gertrude in Nivelles (Brabant), after a probation of 3 years, are made knights (militissae) at the altar, by a (male) knight called in for that purpose, who gives them the accolade with a sword and pronounces the usual words.
An Equestrian (Latin, from ''eques'' "horseman", from ''equus'' "horse") was a member of the second highest social class in the Roman Republic and early Roman Empire.
In the United Kingdom, honorific knighthood may be awarded in two different ways.
The first European woman to have been granted an order of knighthood was Queen Mary, when she was made a Knight Grand Commander of the same order, by special statute, in celebration of the Delhi Durbar of 1911.
In a religious ceremony the new squire swore on a sword consecrated by a bishop or priest, and attended to assigned duties in his lord’s household.
The other was possibly for a female knight.
Nawab Sikandar Begum Sahiba, Nawab Begum of Bhopal, who became a Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) in 1861, at the foundation of the order.
* The United Kingdom (see British honours system) and some Commonwealth of Nations countries such as New Zealand;
When the armies of the Frankish ruler Charles Martel defeated the Umayyad Arab invasion at the Battle of Tours in 732, the Frankish forces were still largely infantry armies, with elites riding to battle but dismounting to fight.
During the High Middle Ages, knighthood was considered a class of lower nobility.
Some countries, however, historically ''did'' have equivalent honorifics for knights, such as Cavaliere in Italy (e.g.
Italy and Poland also had the hereditary knighthood that existed within the nobility system.
In old times, no other title existed but that of knight.
* the Order of the Bath, founded by George I in 1725
In the Netherlands only 10 knightly families are still extant, a number which steadily decreases because in that country ennoblement or incorporation into the nobility is not possible anymore.
In the later Roman Empire the classical Latin word for horse, ''equus'', was replaced in common parlance by vulgar Latin ''caballus'', sometimes thought to derive from Gaulish ''caballos''.
The period of chaos in the 9th and 10th centuries, between the fall of the Carolingian central authority and the rise of separate Western and Eastern Frankish kingdoms (later to become France and Germany respectively) only entrenched this newly landed warrior class.
This meaning, of unknown origin, is common among West Germanic languages (cf Old Frisian ''kniucht'', Dutch ''knecht'', Danish ''knægt'', Swedish ''knekt'', Norwegian ''knekt'', Middle High German ''kneht'', all meaning "boy, youth, lad", as well as German ''Knecht'' "servant, bondsman, vassal").
Belgium still does have about 232 registered knightly families.
At the time of their foundation, these were intended as monastic orders, whose members would act as simple soldiers protecting pilgrims.
From roughly 1560, purely honorific orders were established, as a way to confer prestige and distinction, unrelated to military service and chivalry in the more narrow sense.
The husbands of Dames have no honorific pre-nominal, so Dame Norma's husband remained John Major until he received his own knighthood.
There were no particular honorifics that would accompany a knight's name as historically all (or at least by far most) its members would be royals or hereditary lords anyway.
Later Renaissance literature, such as Miguel de Cervantes's ''Don Quixote'', rejected the code of chivalry as unrealistic idealism.
In this hastilude, a knight or a group of knights would claim a bridge, lane or city gate, and challenge other passing knights to fight or be disgraced.
In France and Belgium, one of the ranks conferred in some Orders of Merit, such as the Légion d'Honneur, the Ordre National du Mérite, the Ordre des Palmes académiques and the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in France, and the Order of Leopold, Order of the Crown and Order of Leopold II in Belgium, is that of ''Chevalier'' (in French) or ''Ridder'' (in Dutch), meaning Knight.
To honour those women who defended Tortosa against an attack by the Moors, Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona, created the Order of the Hatchet (''Orden de la Hacha'') in 1149.
* The Holy See &mdash; see Papal Orders of Chivalry.
The knight generally held his lands by military tenure which was measured through military service that usually lasted 40&nbsp;days a year.
The last day was filled with feasting, dancing and minstrel singing.
* Some European countries, such as The Netherlands and Belgium (see below).
* the Order of the Garter, founded by Edward III of England around 1348
Vassals and lords could maintain any number of knights, although knights with more military experience were those most sought after.
* the Order of the Dragon, founded by King Sigismund of Luxemburg in 1408
If a lady passed unescorted, she would leave behind a glove or scarf, to be rescued and returned to her by a future knight who passed that way.
The loser in these tournaments had to turn his armour and horse over to the victor.
The cost of equipment is also significantly lower and guns give a reasonable chance to easily penetrate a knight's armour.
Ridderschap van Holland, Ridderschap van Friesland, etc.).
Children of the nobility were cared for by noble foster-mothers in castles until they reached age seven.
All of these were even performed while wearing armour.
