Various closures for the garments, such as frogs and buttons can be added; usually buttonholes are knitted into the garment, rather than cut.
Smaller items, such as socks and hats, are usually knit in one piece on double-pointed needles or circular needles.
Knitting also helps in the area of social interaction; knitting provides people with opportunities to socialize with others.
In the British Commonwealth (outside North America) yarns are measured as 1ply, 2ply, 3ply, 4ply, 5ply, 8ply (or double knit),10ply and 12ply (triple knit).
Not every stitch in a row need be knitted; some may be left "as is" and knitted on a subsequent row.
(See ''Circular knitting''.)
Even within a type of fiber, there can be great variety in the length and thickness of the fibers; for example, Merino wool and Egyptian cotton are favored because they produce exceptionally long, thin (fine) fibers for their type.
Cable needles are typically very short (a few inches), and are used to hold stitches temporarily while others are being knitted.
When in use, the cable needle is used at the same time as two regular needles.
However, large gauge needles emphasise those actions and knitting becomes increasingly more awkward when the needle diameter is greater than the width of the knitters finger.
The two tapered ends (typically  long) are rigid and straight, allowing for easy knitting; however, the two ends are connected by a flexible strand (usually nylon) that allows the two ends to be brought together.
Another problem is that too much knitting may lead to hand and wrist troubles; for this, special stress-relieving gloves are available.
By contrast, in warp knitting, one yarn is required for every wale.
A repository of research into the effect on health of hand knitting can be found at  Stitchlinks, an organisation founded in Bath, England.
The third needle type consists of circular needles, which are long, flexible double-pointed needles.
Modern projects usually entail the hand knitting of hats or helmet liners; the liners provided for soldiers must be of 100% worsted weight wool and be crafted using specific colors.
Of these types, wool is generally favored for knitting, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting; however, wool is generally less convenient to clean and some people are allergic to it.
Yarn bombers sometimes target existing pieces of graffiti for beautification.
The largest aluminum circular knitting needles on record are size US 150 and are nearly 7 feet tall.
This elasticity is all but unavailable in woven fabrics which only stretch along the bias.
Cable needles are a specific design, and are used to create the twisting motif of a knitted cable.
Such knitting needles may be made out of any materials, but the most common materials are metals, wood, bamboo, and plastic.
Many types of selvages have been developed, with different elastic and ornamental properties.
Various point-like ornaments may be added to knitting for their look or to improve the wear of the fabric.
In intarsia, the yarns are used in well-segregated regions, e.g., a red apple on a field of green; in that case, the yarns are kept on separate spools and only one is knitted at any time.
Other tools are used to prepare yarn for knitting, to measure and design knitted garments, or to make knitting easier or more comfortable.
Typically, a new stitch is passed through a single unsecured ("active") loop, thus lengthening that wale by one stitch.
DPNs are typically used for circular knitting, especially smaller tube-shaped pieces such as sleeves, collars, and socks; usually one needle is active while the others hold the remaining active stitches.
Other factors include allergenicity; speed of drying; resistance to chemicals, moths, and mildew; melting point and flammability; retention of static electricity; and the propensity to become stained and to accept dyes.
For individual hobbyists, websites such as Etsy, Big Cartel and Ravelry have made it easy to sell knitting patterns on a small scale, in a way similar to eBay.
The large and many holes in lacy knitting makes it extremely elastic; for example, some Shetland "wedding-ring" shawls are so fine that they may be drawn through a wedding ring.
This is known as slip-stitch knitting.
However, this need not be so, since the order in which stitches are knitted may be permuted so that wales cross over one another, forming a cable pattern.
Elizabeth Zimmermann is probably the best-known proponent of seamless or circular hand knitting techniques.
Cable needles are a special case of DPNs, although they are usually not straight, but dimpled in the middle.
More resilient yarns are more forgiving of irregularities in tension; highly twisted yarns are sometimes difficult to knit, whereas untwisting yarns can lead to split stitches, in which not all the yarn is knitted into a stitch.
A great variety of synthetic dyes have been developed since the synthesis of indigo dye in the mid-19th century; however, natural dyes are also possible, although they are generally less brilliant.
Hand knitting garments for free distribution to others has become common practice among hand knitting groups.
Many fashion designers make heavy use of knitted fabric in their fashion collections.
Most Western-style hand knitters follow either the English style (in which the yarn is held in the right hand) or the Continental style (in which the yarn is held in the left hand).
Julia knitted a square of ten stitches and ten rows in stockinette stitch using knitting needles that were 6.5 centimeters in diameter and 3.5 meters long.
The crochet hook is also essential for repairing dropped stitches and some specialty stitches such as tufting.
Although the new stitch is itself unsecured ("active" or "live"), it secures the stitch(es) suspended from it.
It is common practice to save the yarn band for future reference, especially if additional skeins must be purchased.
The most common texture for a knitted garment is that generated by the flat stockinette stitch—as seen, though very small, in machine-made stockings and T-shirts—which is worked in the round as nothing but knit stitches, and worked flat as alternating rows of knit and purl.
The hook catches the loop of yarn as each stitch is knitted, meaning that wrists and fingers don’t have to work so hard and there is less chance of stitches slipping off the needle.
Warp-knitted fabrics such as tricot and milanese are resistant to runs, and are commonly used in lingerie.
Additional patterns can be made on the surface of the knitted fabric using embroidery; if the embroidery resembles knitting, it is often called Swiss darning.
A wale can split into two or more wales using increases, most commonly involving a yarn over.
Mega needles may or may not have hooks carved in the ends.
However, yarns need not be dyed.
Cable patterns are made by permuting the order of stitches; although one or two stitches may be held by hand or knit out of order, cables of three or more generally require a cable needle.
The organization is not currently accepting donations, but maintains a list of volunteers.
Hats in particular can be started "top down" on double pointed needles with the increases added until the preferred size is achieved, switching to an appropriate circular needle when enough stitches have been added.
This is used to great effect in lace knitting, which consists of making patterns and pictures using such holes, rather than with the stitches themselves.
There are two major varieties of knitting: weft knitting and warp knitting.
Thicker yarns generally require thicker knitting needles, whereas thinner yarns may be knit with thick or thin needles.
Some more advanced knitting techniques create a surprising variety of complex textures.
A second potential difficulty is that the knitted piece will slide off the tapered end of the needles when unattended; this is prevented by "point protectors" that cap the tapered ends.
As of September 2011, Knitters Without Borders donors have contributed CAD$1,062,217.
Depending on the yarn and knitting pattern, knitted garments can stretch as much as 500%.
Individual stitches, or rows of stitches, may be made taller by drawing more yarn into the new loop (an elongated stitch), which is the basis for uneven knitting: a row of tall stitches may alternate with one or more rows of short stitches for an interesting visual effect.
The slipped stitches are naturally longer than the knitted ones.
Different materials have different frictions and grip the yarn differently; slick needles such as metallic needles are useful for swift knitting, whereas rougher needles such as bamboo offer more friction and are therefore less prone to dropping stitches.
However, this need not be so; the new loop may be passed through an already secured stitch lower down on the fabric, or even between secured stitches (a dip stitch).
If the former, the stitch is denoted as a ''knit stitch'' or a ''plain stitch''; if the latter, as a ''purl stitch''.
The fibers making up a yarn may be continuous ''filament'' fibers such as silk and many synthetics, or they may be ''staples'' (fibers of an average length, typically a few inches); naturally filament fibers are sometimes cut up into staples before spinning.
Traditionally those that get their passports fully stamped are eligible to win a larger gift basket filled with yarn, knitting and crochet goodies.
Extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams, as in the heel of a sock; the effect of darts, flares, etc.
Two knitted fabrics can be joined by embroidery-based grafting methods, most commonly the Kitchener stitch.
Examples include various types of bobbles, sequins and beads.
If a knitter buys insufficient yarn of a single dye lot to complete a project, additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online.
In spinning, the fibers are twisted so that the yarn resists breaking under tension; the twisting may be done in either direction, resulting in a Z-twist or S-twist yarn.
Variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects, such as diagonal stripes; conversely, a variegated yarn may frustrate an otherwise good knitting pattern by producing distasteful color combination.
By combining increases and decreases, it is possible to make the direction of a wale slant away from vertical, even in weft knitting.
This outreach is described as, "afghans for Afghans is a humanitarian and educational people-to-people project that sends hand-knit and crocheted blankets and sweaters, vests, hats, mittens, and socks to the beleaguered people of Afghanistan."
However, the two fabrics are usually integrated into one, giving it great warmth and excellent drape.
The position of the hook is most important.
Horizontal striping (welting) is also possible, by alternating ''rows'' of knit and purl stitches.
Girls and women hand knitted socks, sweaters, scarves, mittens, gloves, and hats for soldiers in Crimea, the American Civil War, and the Boer Wars; this practice continued in World War I, World War II and the Korean War, and continues for soldiers in Iraq  and Afghanistan.
A developing trend in the knitting world is interchangeable needles.
Circular needles are typically 24-60&nbsp;inches long, and are usually used singly or in pairs; again, the width of the knitted piece may be significantly longer than the length of the circular needle.
As each row progresses, a newly created loop is pulled through one or more loops from the prior row, placed on the gaining needle, and the loops from the prior row are then pulled off the other needle.
Patterns and motifs are coarser with thicker yarns; thicker yarns produce bold visual effects, whereas thinner yarns are best for refined patterns.
The related ''weight per unit length''  is usually measured in tex or denier.
Various tools have been developed to make hand-knitting easier.
Since a typical piece of knitted fabric may have hundreds of wales, warp knitting is typically done by machine, whereas weft knitting is done by both hand and machine.
Common synthetic fibers include acrylics, polyesters such as dacron and ingeo, nylon and other polyamides, and olefins such as polypropylene.
The new loop may also be passed between two stitches in the ''present'' row, thus clustering the intervening stitches; this approach is often used to produce a smocking effect in the fabric.
Although they are mirror images in form, right- and left-plaited stitches are functionally equivalent.
Dyeing may be done industrially, by hand or even hand-painted onto the yarn.
The resilience and propensity to (un)twist are general properties that affect the ease of hand-knitting.
Other simple textures can be made with nothing but knit and purl stitches, including garter stitch, ribbing, and moss and seed stitches.
The most important property of needles is their diameter, which ranges from below 2 to 25&nbsp;mm (roughly 1&nbsp;inch).
Chicken sweaters were also hand knitted to aid battery hens that had lost their feathers.
Yarn with multiple shades of the same hue are called ''ombre'', while a yarn with multiple hues may be known as a given ''colorway'' — a green, red and yellow yarn might be dubbed the "Parrot Colorway" by its manufacturer, for example.
The appearance of a garment is also affected by the ''weight'' of the yarn, which describes the thickness of the spun fibre.
Different methods of casting on are used for different effects: one may be stretchy enough for lace, while another provides a decorative edging.
Rayon and acetate fibers are also produced from cellulose mainly derived from trees.
Stitches can be worked from either side, and various patterns are created by mixing regular knit stitches with the "wrong side" stitches, known as purl stitches, either in columns (ribbing), rows (garter, welting), or more complex patterns.
The single yarns may be dyed separately before plying, or afterwards to give the yarn a uniform look.
In weft knitting, the entire fabric may be produced from a single yarn, by adding stitches to each wale in turn, moving across the fabric as in a raster scan.
The two most common approaches are intarsia and stranded colorwork.
Yarn for hand-knitting is usually sold as balls or skeins (hanks), although it may also be wound on spools or cones.
For example, a common choice is 2x2 ribbing, in which two wales of knit stitches are followed by two wales of purl stitches, etc.
It functions by holding together the stitches creating the cable as the other needles create the rest of the stitches for the knitted piece.
Other tools such as knitting spools or pom-pom makers are used to prepare specific ornaments.
When cabling a knitted piece, a hook is easier to grab and hold the yarn.
On the right side, the visible portions of the loops are the verticals connecting two rows which are arranged in a grid of ''V'' shapes.
can be obtained with short rows or by increasing or decreasing the number of stitches.
In very simple cases, knitting can be done without tools, using only the fingers to do these tasks; however, knitting is usually carried out using tools such as knitting needles, knitting machines or rigid frames.
The knitting of new stitches occurs only at the tapered ends.
Combining certain increases, which can create small eyelet holes in the resulting fabric, with assorted decreases  is key to creating knitted lace, a very open fabric resembling lace.
There is also a technique called knooking of knitting with a crochet hook that has a cord attached to the end, to hold the stitches while they're being worked.
Smooth, highly spun yarns are best for showing off stitch patterns; at the other extreme, very fuzzy yarns or eyelash yarns have poor stitch definition, and any complicated stitch pattern would be invisible.
Knitting can reduce the pain of arthritis if people make it a daily habit.
Fair Isle knitting uses two or more colored yarns to create patterns and forms a thicker and less flexible fabric.
There are also different ways to insert the needle into the stitch.
For example, a stitch slipped for one row before knitting would be roughly twice as tall as its knitted counterparts.
Different types of yarns (fibre type, texture, and twist), needle sizes, and stitch types may be used to achieve knitted fabrics with diverse properties (colour, texture, weight, heat retention, water resistance, and/or integrity).
Security blankets can also be made through the Project Linus organization which helps needy children.
For instance, Dave Cole is a contemporary sculpture artist who practiced knitting as graffiti for a large-scale public art installation in Melbourne, Australia for the Big West Arts Festival in 2009.
This can produce interesting visual effects, although the resulting fabric is more rigid because the slipped stitch "pulls" on its neighbours and is less deformable.
Hand knitting, along with other leisure activities has been linked to reducing the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease and dementia.
Depending on their size and shape, the rigid frames are called stocking frames, knitting boards, knitting rings (also called knitting looms) or knitting spools (also known as knitting knobbies, knitting nancies, or corkers).
Changing the order of stitches from one row to the next, usually with the help of a cable needle or stitch holder, is key to cable knitting, producing an endless variety of cables, honeycombs, ropes, and Aran sweater patterning.
The merged stitches need not be from the same row; for example, a tuck can be formed by knitting stitches together from two different rows, producing a raised horizontal welt on the fabric.
Originally started after the 2004 Indonesian tsunami,  Knitters Without Borders is a charity challenge issued by knitting personality Stephanie Pearl-McPhee that encourages hand knitters to donate to Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors Without Borders).
A single spun yarn may be knitted as is, or braided or plied with another.
Double-pointed needles are tapered at both ends, which allows them to be knit from either end.
Most knitters probably aren’t even aware of the many processes that their fingers perform in the making of a single stitch.
Open vertical stripes can be created using the drop-stitch knitting technique.
Plaited stitches are a common method for knitting jewelry from fine metal wire.
On the wrong side, the ends of the loops are visible, both the tops and bottoms, creating a much more bumpy texture sometimes called ''reverse stockinette''.
Studies have shown that hand knitting, along with other forms of needlework, provide several significant health benefits.
Gordana Gelhausen, who appeared in season six of the television show ''Project Runway'', is primarily a knit designer.
However, such circular wales are possible using Swiss darning, a form of embroidery, or by knitting a tube separately and attaching it to the knitted fabric.
Clothing and afghans are frequently made for children, the elderly, and the economically disadvantaged in various countries.
These meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics.
A yarn's usefulness for a knitting project is judged by several factors, such as its ''loft'' (its ability to trap air), its ''resilience'' (elasticity under tension), its washability and colorfastness, its ''hand'' (its feel, particularly softness vs. scratchiness), its durability against abrasion, its resistance to pilling, its ''hairiness'' (fuzziness), its tendency to twist or untwist, its overall weight and drape, its blocking and felting qualities, its comfort (breathability, moisture absorption, wicking properties) and of course its look, which includes its color, sheen, smoothness and ornamental features.
Finally, there are sundry bags and containers for holding knitting, yarns and needles.
Prayer shawls, or shawls in which the crafter meditates or says prayers of their faith while hand knitting with the intent on comforting the recipient, are donated to those experiencing loss or stress.
These kits consist of pairs of needles with usually nylon cables or cords.
Unknitted yarns may be worked into knitted fabrics for warmth, as is done in tufting and "weaving" (also known as "couching").
Some ways to increase social interaction with knitting is inviting friends over to knit and chat with each other.
Ordinarily, stitches are knitted in the same order in every row, and the wales of the fabric run parallel and vertically along the fabric.
Knitters have developed methods for giving the illusion of a circular wale, such as appear in Celtic knots, but these are inexact approximations.
(Despite being the "wrong side," reverse stockinette is frequently used as a pattern in its own right.)
Vertical stripes (ribbing) are possible by having alternating wales of knit and purl stitches.
Each fabric has different properties: a garter stitch has much more vertical stretch, while ribbing stretches much more horizontally.
Vertical and horizontal edges can be introduced within a knitted fabric, e.g., for button holes, by binding/casting off and re-casting on again (horizontal) or by knitting the fabrics on either side of a vertical edge separately.
Alternating rows of knit stitches and purl stitches produce what is known as a stockinette pattern/stocking stitch.
Although the diameter of the knitting needle is often measured in millimeters, there are several measurement systems, particularly those specific to the United States, the United Kingdom and Japan; a conversion table is given at knitting needle.
These studies have found the rhythmic and repetitive action of hand knitting can “help prevent and manage stress, pain and depression, which in turn strengthens the body’s immune system”,  as well as create a relaxation response in the body which can decrease blood pressure, heart rate, help prevent illness, and have a calming effect.
New wales can be begun from any of the edges of a knitted fabric; this is known as picking up stitches and is the basis for entrelac, in which the wales run perpendicular to one another in a checkerboard pattern.
Knitting through the front of a stitch is called Western knitting.
Although the mechanics are different from casting on, there is a similar variety of methods.
Knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of interlocking loops.
Entrelac forms a rich checkerboard texture by knitting small squares, picking up their side edges, and knitting more squares to continue the piece.
In plying, two or more yarns are spun together, almost always in the opposite sense from which they were spun individually; for example, two Z-twist yarns are usually plied with an S-twist.
Knitted items are occasional offered as prizes to donors.
They may be dyed just one color, or a great variety of colors.
In warp knitting, the wales and courses run roughly parallel.
Tools for measuring needle diameter and yarn properties have been discussed above, as well as the yarn swift, ballwinder and "yarntainers".
The Australian charity ''Wrap with Love'' continues to provide blankets hand knitted by volunteers to people most in need around the world who have been affected by war.
When seen from above, the twist can be clockwise (right yarn over left) or counterclockwise (left yarn over right); these are denoted as right- and left-plaited stitches, respectively.
Many knitters today hand knit and donate "chemo caps," soft caps for cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy.
Plied yarns may themselves be plied together, producing ''cabled yarns'' or ''multi-stranded yarns''.
In the more common ''weft knitting'', the wales are perpendicular to the course of the yarn.
Yarn companies offer free knitting patterns for these caps.
Because of their front-back symmetry, these two fabrics have little curl, making them popular as edging, even when their stretch properties are not desired.
Both knit and purl stitches may be twisted: usually once if at all, but sometimes twice and (very rarely) thrice.
Much like physical activity strengthens the body, mental exercise makes the human brain more resilient.
The basic knitted fabric (as in the diagram, and usually called a ''stocking'' or ''stockinette'' pattern) has a definite "right side" and "wrong side".
The thickness or weight of the yarn is a significant factor in determining the gauge/tension, i.e., how many stitches and rows are required to cover a given area for a given stitch pattern.
This means that the stitches are spread much further apart on mega knitting needles, making them more difficult to control.
When knitting, some knitters enclose their balls in jars to keep them clean and untangled with other yarns; the free yarn passes through a small hole in the jar-lid.
Such needles are usually  long but, due to the compressibility of knitted fabrics, may be used to knit pieces significantly wider.
For comparison, woven garments stretch mainly along one or other of a related pair of directions that lie roughly diagonally between the warp and the weft, while contracting in the other direction of the pair (stretching and contracting with the ''bias''), and are not very elastic, unless they are woven from stretchable material such as spandex.
Magda Sayeg is credited with starting the movement in the US and Knit the City are a prominent group of graffiti knitters in the United Kingdom.
Participants of the crawl receive a passport and get their passport stamped at each store they visit along the crawl.
They are made in different sizes, which produces cables of different widths.
Knitting may be done by hand or by using a machine.
There are many hundreds of different knitting stitches used by hand knitters.
Over the multi-day period, multiple local yarn and knit shops participate in the yarn crawl and offer up store discounts, give away free exclusive patterns, provide classes, trunk shows and conduct raffles for prizes.
The color-scheme of a yarn is sometimes called its colorway.
For large or complex knitting patterns, it is sometimes difficult to keep track of which stitch should be knit in a particular way; therefore, several tools have been developed to identify the number of a particular row or stitch, including circular stitch markers, hanging markers, extra yarn and row counters.
Hand-knitters generally produce right-plaited stitches by knitting or purling through the back loops, i.e., passing the needle through the initial stitch in an unusual way, but wrapping the yarn as usual.
Cables patterns tend to draw the fabric together, making it denser and less elastic; Aran sweaters are a common form of knitted cabling.
A piece of hand knitting begins with the process of ''casting on'', which involves the initial creation of the stitches on the needle.
The spun fibers are generally divided into animal fibers, plant and synthetic fibers.
With the invention of the knitting machine, knitting "by hand" became a craft used by country people with easy access to fiber.
Double knitting can produce two separate knitted fabrics simultaneously (e.g., two socks).
This transformation may be done by hand, or with a device known as a ballwinder.
Skeins and balls are generally sold with a ''yarn-band'', a label that describes the yarn's weight, length, dye lot, fiber content, washing instructions, suggested needle size, likely gauge/tension, etc.
In securing the previous stitch in a wale, the next stitch can pass through the previous loop from either below or above.
Yarns are grouped by thickness into six categories: superfine, fine, light, medium, bulky and superbulky; quantitatively, thickness is measured by the number of wraps per inch (WPI).
The darning needle is used in duplicate stitch (also known as Swiss darning).
Needles with lighted tips have been sold to allow knitters to knit in the dark.
These fiber types are chemically different, corresponding to proteins, carbohydrates and synthetic polymers, respectively.
