Koalas were hunted for food by Aboriginals.
In New South Wales, they are abundant only in Pilliga, while in Victoria they are common nearly everywhere.
A common technique used to capture the animals was to attach a loop of ropey bark to the end of a long, thin pole, so as to form a noose.
As the young koala approaches six months, the mother begins to prepare it for its eucalyptus diet by predigesting the leaves, producing a faecal pap that the joey eats from her cloacum.
The koala's "vulnerable" status in Queensland and New South Wales means that developers in these states must consider the impacts on this species when making building applications.
When feeding, a koala holds onto a branch with hindpaws and one forepaw while the other forepaw grasps foliage.
The modern koala is the only extant member of Phascolarctidae, a family that once included several genera and species.
He identified similarities between it and its fossil relatives ''Diprotodon'' and ''Nototherium'', which had been discovered just a few years before.
In this widely cited publication, he provided the first careful description of its internal anatomy, and noted its general structural similarity to the wombat.
In South Australia, koalas were extirpated by 1920 and subsequently reintroduced.
The joey crawls into its mother's pouch to continue the rest of its development.
Forbes used the opportunity to dissect the fresh female specimen, thus was able to provide explicit anatomical details on the female reproductive system, the brain, and the liver—parts not previously described by Owen, who had access only to preserved specimens.
While the chest glands can be functional as early as 18 months of age, males do not begin scent-marking behaviours until they reach sexual maturity.
Koalas from the northern populations are typically smaller and lighter in colour than their counterparts further south.
Food products shaped like the koala include the Caramello Koala chocolate bar and the bite-sized cookie snack Koala's March.
The animal is also depicted in rock carvings, though not as much as some other species.
Their numbers have significantly increased, and since the islands are not large enough to sustain such high koala numbers, overbrowsing has become a problem.
Koalas consume up to  of leaves a day, spread over four to six feeding sessions.
In addition, koalas live in many protected areas.
They are asocial animals, and bonding exists only between mothers and dependent offspring.
Koalas make numerous facial expressions.
The koala usually grooms itself with its hindpaws, but sometimes uses its forepaws or mouth.
As they get older, the squeak develops into a "squawk" produced both when in distress and to show aggression.
Created by Dorothy Wall in 1933, the character appeared in several books and has been the subject of films, TV series, merchandise, and a 1986 environmental song by John Williamson.
Females in oestrus tend to hold their heads further back than usual and commonly display tremors and spasms.
The partially worn molars of middle-aged koalas are optimal for breaking the leaves into small particles, resulting in more efficient stomach digestion and nutrient absorption in the small intestine, which digests the eucalyptus leaves to provide most of the animal's energy.
Fossil evidence shows that the koala's range stretched as far west as southwestern Western Australia during the late Pleistocene.
Perhaps the most famous fictional koala is Blinky Bill.
Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, visited the Koala Park Sanctuary in Sydney in 1934 and was "intensely interested in the bears".
Reports of the first capture of a live "koolah" appeared in ''The Sydney Gazette'' in August 1803.
Koala society appears to consist of "residents" and "transients", the former being mostly adult females and the latter males.
Koalas can be subject to pathogens such as Chlamydiaceae bacteria, which can cause keratoconjunctivitis, urinary tract infection, and reproductive tract infection.
Comparative anatomist Richard Owen, in a series of publications on the physiology and anatomy of Australian mammals, presented a paper on the anatomy of the koala to the Zoological Society of London.
Resident males appear to be territorial and dominate others with their larger body size.
English naturalist George Robert Waterhouse, curator of the Zoological Society of London, was the first to correctly classify the koala as a marsupial in the 1840s.
The Tharawal people believed that the animal helped row the boat that brought them to the continent.
Lewin painted three pictures, one of which was subsequently made into a print that was reproduced in Georges Cuvier's ''The Animal Kingdom'' (first published in 1827) and several European works on natural history.
cinereus'' may have emerged as a dwarf form of the giant koala (''P.&nbsp;stirtoni'').
The boundaries of these variations are based on state borders, and their status as subspecies is disputed.
The koala was heavily hunted by European settlers in the early 20th century, largely for its thick, soft fur.
Early European settlers in Australia considered the koala to be a prowling sloth-like animal with a "fierce and menacing look".
The Vombatiformes are a sister group to a clade that includes macropods (kangaroos and wallabies) and possums.
He affords no sport to the gun-man&nbsp;... And he has been almost blotted out already from some areas."
When another individual climbs over it, a koala makes a low grunt with its mouth closed.
Although the vowel 'u' was originally written in the English orthography as "oo" (in spellings such as ''coola'' or ''koolah''), it was changed to "oa", possibly in error.
Since the koala gains a low amount of energy from its diet, its metabolic rate is half that of a typical mammal, although this can vary between seasons and sexes.
The Platinum Koala coin features the animal on the reverse and Elizabeth II on the obverse.
A 1999 genetic study suggests that the variations represent differentiated populations with limited gene flow between them, and that the three subspecies comprise a single evolutionarily significant unit.
Similarly, Gerard Krefft, curator of the Australian Museum in Sydney, noted evolutionary mechanisms at work when comparing the koala to its ancestral relatives in his 1871 ''The Mammals of Australia''.
Koalas may live from 13 to 18 years in the wild.
Eaten for about a month, the pap provides a supplementary source of protein at a transition time from a milk to a leaf diet.
Alpha males tend to establish their territories close to breeding females, while younger males are subordinate until they mature and reach full size.
Although the foliage of over 600 species of ''Eucalyptus'' is available, the koala shows a strong preference for around 30.
The koala is found in coastal areas of the mainland's eastern and southern regions, inhabiting Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia.
Despite their adaptations to a low-energy lifestyle, they have meagre fat reserves and need to feed often.
It benefited the national tourism industry by over an estimated billion Australian dollars in 1998, a figure that has since grown.
Koalas have few natural predators and parasites, but are threatened by various pathogens, such as Chlamydiaceae bacteria and the koala retrovirus, as well as by bushfires and droughts.
At 13 weeks, the joey weighs around  and its head has doubled in size.
In general, however, koalas tend to avoid energy-wasting aggressive behaviour.
Since eucalypt leaves have a high water content, the koala does not need to drink often; its daily water turnover rate ranges from 71 to 91 ml/kg of body weight.
The koala's curved, sharp claws are well adapted for climbing trees.
Several political leaders and members of royal families had their pictures taken with koalas, including Queen Elizabeth II, Prince Harry, Crown Prince Naruhito, Crown Princess Masako, Pope John Paul II, US President Bill Clinton, Soviet premier Mikhail Gorbachev, South African President Nelson Mandela, Prime Minister Tony Abbott, and Russian President Vladimir Putin.
A 2008 study questions this hypothesis, noting that ''P.&nbsp;cinereus'' and ''P.&nbsp;stirtoni'' were sympatric during the middle to late Pleistocene, and possibly as early as the Pliocene.
Koalas from Victoria are twice as heavy as those from Queensland.
While the hindgut is proportionally larger in the koala than in other herbivores, only 10% of the animal's energy is obtained from fermentation.
The species is sexually dimorphic, with males 50% larger than females.
Being marsupials, koalas give birth to underdeveloped young that crawl into their mothers' pouches, where they stay for the first six to seven months of their lives.
They tend to choose species that have a high protein content and low proportions of fibre and lignin.
The pap is quite different in composition from regular faeces, resembling instead the contents of the caecum, which has a high concentration of bacteria.
The koala conserves water by passing relatively dry faecal pellets high in undigested fibre, and by storing water in the caecum.
The distribution of the koala has shrunk by more than 50% since European arrival, largely due to fragmentation of habitat in Queensland.
Several stories tell of how the koala lost its tail.
Despite its reputation as a fussy eater, the koala is more generalist than some other marsupial species, such as the greater glider.
The koala has several adaptations for its eucalypt diet, which is of low nutritive value, of high toxicity, and high in dietary fibre.
Some species, such as the Riversleigh rainforest koala (''Nimiokoala greystanesi'') and some species of ''Perikoala'', were around the same size as the modern koala, while others, such as species of ''Litokoala'', were one-half to two-thirds its size.
Because of his much larger size, a male can usually force himself on a female, mounting her from behind, and in extreme cases, the male may pull the female out of the tree.
In a three-year study of almost 600 koalas admitted to the Australian Zoo Wildlife Hospital in Queensland, 73.8% of the animals were infected with at least one species of the parasitic protozoal genus ''Trypanosoma'', the most common of which was ''T.&nbsp;irwini''.
The first Australian stamp featuring a koala was issued by the Commonwealth in 1930.
While koalas are typically docile herbivores, drop bears are described as unusually large and vicious marsupials that inhabit treetops and attack unsuspecting people (or other prey) that walk beneath them by dropping onto their heads from above.
As with all marsupials, the young are born while at the embryonic stage, weighing only .
It explores its new surroundings cautiously, clinging to its mother for support.
As in humans and other primates, koalas have friction ridges on their paws.
In 2000, Australia ranked fifth in the world by deforestation rates, having cleared .
They are predominantly active at night and spend most of their waking hours feeding.
During the Miocene, the Australian continent began drying out, leading to the decline of rainforests and the spread of open ''Eucalyptus'' woodlands.
Koalas usually survive falls from trees and immediately climb back up, but injuries and deaths from falls do occur, particularly in inexperienced young and fighting males.
Females bring their lips forward and raise their ears when agitated.
Northern populations are completely infected, while some southern populations (including Kangaroo Island) are free.
Its nose is fairly large and covered in leathery skin.
This scent-marking behaviour probably serves as communication, and individuals are known to sniff the base of a tree before climbing.
Because of its small brain, the koala has a limited ability to perform complex, unfamiliar behaviours.
The animal has a sturdy skeleton and a short, muscular upper body with proportionately long upper limbs that contribute to its climbing and grasping abilities.
In 1819, German zoologist Georg August Goldfuss gave it the binomial ''Lipurus cinereus''.
This involves the larger aggressor climbing up and attempting to corner the victim, which tries either to rush past him and climb down or to move to the end of a branch.
Scottish embryologist William Caldwell—well known in scientific circles for determining the reproductive mechanism of the platypus—described the uterine development of the koala in 1884, and used the new information to convincingly place the koala and the monotremes into an evolutionary time frame.
In the 1920s, Lewis initiated a program of large-scale relocation and rehabilitation programs to transfer koalas whose habitat had become fragmented or reduced to new regions, with the intent of eventually returning them to their former range.
Koalas may bellow at any time of the year, particularly during the breeding season, when it serves to attract females and possibly intimidate other males.
These young koalas, known as joeys, are fully weaned around a year old.
The first successful efforts at conserving the species were initiated by the establishment of Brisbane's Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary and Sydney's Koala Park Sanctuary in the 1920s and 1930s.
The fossil record of the modern koala extends back at least to the middle Pleistocene.
The animal was hunted heavily in the early 20th century for its fur, and large-scale cullings in Queensland resulted in a public outcry that initiated a movement to protect the species.
A koala's vision is not well developed, and its relatively small eyes are unusual among marsupials in that the pupils have vertical slits.
The public outcry over these cullings was probably the first wide-scale environmental issue that rallied Australians.
Perry called it the "New Holland Sloth" on account of its perceived similarities to the Central and South American tree-living mammals of genus ''Bradypus''.
Barrallier preserved the appendages and sent them and his notes to Hunter's successor, Philip Gidley King, who forwarded them to Joseph Banks.
Koalas are herbivorous, and while most of their diet consists of eucalypt leaves, they can be found in trees of other genera, such as ''Acacia'', ''Allocasuarina'', ''Callitris'', ''Leptospermum'',  and ''Melaleuca''.
In Victoria, home ranges are small and have extensive overlap, while in central Queensland they are larger and overlap less.
It occupies only 61% of the cranial cavity and is pressed against the inside surface by cerebrospinal fluid.
Popular artist John Gould illustrated and described the koala, introducing the species to the general British public.
The bellows and screams that accompany matings can attract other males to the scene, obliging the incumbent to delay mating and fight off the intruders.
A female may scream and vigorously fight off her suitors, but will submit to one that is dominant or  is more familiar.
In 2008, the International Union for Conservation of Nature listed the koala under Least Concern for the following reasons: "Its wide distribution, presumed large population, and because it is unlikely to be declining at nearly the rate required to qualify for listing in a threatened category".
Extensive cullings occurred in Queensland in 1915, 1917, and again in 1919, when over one million koalas were killed with guns, poisons, and nooses.
According to the customs of some tribes, it was considered taboo to skin the animal, while other tribes thought the animal's head had a special status, and saved them for burial.
The koala's geographic range covers roughly , and 30 ecoregions.
The ears have thick fur on both the inside and outside.
Although females can meet their water requirements from eating leaves, larger males require additional water found on the ground or in tree hollows.
The male's penile sheath contains naturally occurring bacteria that play an important role in fertilisation.
Scent marking is common during aggressive encounters.
Koalas were hunted by indigenous Australians and depicted in myths and cave art for millennia.
During the Pliocene and Pleistocene, when Australia experienced changes in climate and vegetation, koala species grew larger.
They also bellow to advertise their presence to their neighbours when they enter a new tree.
During screams, the lips retract and the ears are drawn back.
Models of climate change in Australia predict warmer and drier climates, suggesting that the koala's range will shrink in the east and south to more mesic habitats.
Females become sexually mature at about three years of age and can then become pregnant; in comparison, males reach sexual maturity when they are about four years old, although they can produce sperm as early as two years.
Pelage colour ranges from silver grey to chocolate brown.
His disdain for the koala, evident in his description of the animal, was typical of the prevailing early 19th-century British attitude about the primitiveness and oddity of Australian fauna: "...&nbsp;the eye is placed like that of the Sloth, very close to the mouth and nose, which gives it a clumsy awkward appearance, and void of elegance in the combination&nbsp;... they have little either in their character or appearance to interest the Naturalist or Philosopher.
Native forest trees are also taken down to be made into wood products.
According to biologist Stephen Jackson: "If you were to take a straw poll of the animal most closely associated with Australia, it's a fair bet that the koala would come out marginally in front of the kangaroo".
The most favoured species are ''Eucalyptus microcorys'', ''E.&nbsp;tereticornis'', and ''E.&nbsp;camaldulensis'', which, on average, make up more than 20% of their diet.
The '''drop bear''' is an imaginary creature in contemporary Australian folklore featuring a predatory, carnivorous version of the koala.
His photograph, with Noel Burnet, the founder of the park, and a koala, appeared in ''The Sydney Morning Herald''.
The koala has one of the lowest milk energy production rates in relation to body size of any mammal.
The Australian government similarly lists specific populations in Queensland and New South Wales as Vulnerable.
The Victorian koala is the largest, with shaggier, brown fur and a wider skull.
Dehydration and overheating can also prove fatal.
In April 2013, scientists from the Australian Museum and Queensland University of Technology announced they had fully sequenced the koala genome.
Adult males communicate with loud bellows that intimidate rivals and attract mates.
Botanist Robert Brown wrote the first detailed scientific description of the koala in 1814, although his work remained unpublished for 180 years.
Because the offspring have a long dependent period, female koalas usually breed in alternate years.
A female koala has two teats; the joey attaches itself to one of them and suckles for the rest of its pouch life.
For example, in 1930–31, 165 koalas were translocated to Quail Island.
Koalas typically inhabit open eucalypt woodlands, and the leaves of these trees make up most of their diet.
Other names suggested by European authors included ''Marodactylus cinereus'' by Goldfuss in 1820, ''P.&nbsp;flindersii'' by René Primevère Lesson in 1827, and ''P.&nbsp;koala'' by John Edward Gray in 1827.
The pelage of the koala is thicker and longer on the back, and shorter on the belly.
This would be used to snare an animal high in a tree, beyond the reach of a climbing hunter; an animal brought down this way would then be killed with a stone hand axe or hunting stick (waddy).
Australian policy makers declined a 2009 proposal to include the koala in the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999.
Injured koalas are often taken to wildlife hospitals and rehabilitation centres.
This narrative highlights the koala's status as a game animal and the length of its intestines.
As related by prosecutor to the society, William Alexander Forbes, the animal suffered an accidental demise when the heavy lid of a washstand fell on it and it was unable to free itself.
Populations in Victoria and South Australia appear to be abundant; however, the Australian Koala Foundation argues that the exclusion of Victorian populations from protective measures is based on a misconception that the total koala population is 200,000, whereas they believe it is probably less than 100,000.
At seven weeks of age, the joey's head grows longer and becomes proportionally large, pigmentation begins to develop, and its sex can be determined (the scrotum appears in males and the pouch begins to develop in females).
After a period of population growth, and subsequent overbrowsing of gum trees on the island, about 1,300 animals were released into mainland areas in 1944.
Female koalas bellow, though more softly, in addition to making snarls, wails, and screams.
The genus ''Phascolarctos'' split from ''Litokoala'' in the late Miocene and had several adaptations that allowed it to live on a specialised eucalyptus diet: a shifting of the palate towards the front of the skull; larger molars and premolars; smaller pterygoid fossa; and a larger gap between the molar and the incisor teeth.
The Queensland koala is the smallest of the three, with shorter, silver fur and a shorter skull.
The generic name, ''Phascolarctos'', is derived from the Greek words ''phaskolos'' "pouch" and ''arktos'' "bear".
Once the weaker individual is driven away, the victor bellows and marks the tree.
The koala instinctively seeks refuge in the higher branches, where it is vulnerable to intense heat and flames.
Koalas are asocial animals and spend just 15 minutes a day on social behaviours.
When a male enters a new tree, he marks it by rubbing his chest gland against the trunk or a branch; males have occasionally been observed to dribble urine on the trunk.
Factors that contribute to the koala's enduring popularity include its childlike body proportions and teddy bear-like face.
The koala has one of the smallest brains in proportion to body weight of any mammal, being 60% smaller than that of a typical diprotodont, weighing only .
Similar to Price, Barrallier's notes were not published until 1897.
At 26 weeks, the fully furred animal resembles an adult, and begins to poke its head out of the pouch.
The ancestors of vombatiforms were likely arboreal, and the koala's lineage was possibly the first to branch off around 40 million years ago during the Eocene.
Home, who in 1808 published his report in the journal ''Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society'', gave the animal the scientific name ''Didelphis coola''.
British surgeon Everard Home included details of the koala based on eyewitness accounts of William Paterson, who had befriended Brown and Bauer during their stay in New South Wales.
Because of its distinctive appearance, the koala is recognised worldwide as a symbol of Australia.
Price encountered the "cullawine" on 26 January 1798, during an expedition to the Blue Mountains, although his account was not published until nearly a century later in ''Historical Records of Australia''.
The first recorded encounter between a European and a koala was in 1798, and an image of the animal was published in 1810 by naturalist George Perry.
The series has been ranked among the greatest commercials of all time.
The first published image of the koala appeared in George Perry's (1810) natural history work ''Arcana''.
The function of this relatively large amount of fluid is not known, although one possibility is that it acts as a shock absorber, cushioning the brain if the animal falls from a tree.
The incisors are used for grasping leaves, which are then passed to the premolars to be snipped at the petiole before being passed to the highly cusped molars, where they are shredded into small pieces.
As with most native animals, the koala cannot legally be kept as a pet in Australia or anywhere else.
Another predicted negative outcome of climate change is the effect of elevations in atmospheric  levels on the koala's food supply: increases in  cause ''Eucalyptus'' trees to reduce protein and increase tannin concentrations in their leaves, reducing the quality of the food source.
Botanist Robert Brown was the first to write a detailed scientific description of the koala in 1814, based on a female specimen captured near what is now Mount Kembla in the Illawarra region of New South Wales.
Because of their low frequency, these bellows can travel far through air and vegetation.
Koalas may also store food in their cheek pouches before it is ready to be chewed.
The koala is a stocky animal with a large head and vestigial or non-existent tail.
Internal parasites are few and largely harmless.
Adult males occasionally venture outside their home ranges; when they do so, dominant ones retain their status.
The brain's surface is fairly smooth, typical for a "primitive" animal.
These include the tapeworm ''Bertiella obesa'', commonly found in the intestine, and the nematodes ''Marsupostrongylus longilarvatus'' and ''Durikainema phascolarcti'', which are infrequently found in the lungs.
The koala's olfactory senses are normal, and it is known to sniff the oils of individual branchlets to assess their edibility.
These sounds are thought to be generated by unique vocal organs found in koalas.
The koala hugs the tree to lose heat without panting.
A koala sometimes regurgitates the food into the mouth to be chewed a second time.
The koala was introduced near Adelaide and on several islands, including Kangaroo Island and French Island.
Koalas are seasonal breeders, and births take place from the middle of spring through the summer to early autumn, from October to May.
Pregnant and lactating females are particularly aggressive and attack individuals that come too close.
Around six years of age, the koala's chewing teeth begin to wear down and their chewing efficiency decreases.
The specific name, ''cinereus'', is Latin for "ash coloured".
This is made possible by the extraordinary length of their caecum— long and  in diameter—the largest proportionally of any animal.
Chest gland secretions are complex chemical mixtures—about 40 compounds were identified in one analysis—that vary in composition and concentration with the season and the age of the individual.
Such low genetic diversity may have been a characteristic of koala populations since the late Pleistocene.
This occasionally involves biting.
For example, when presented with plucked leaves on a flat surface, the animal cannot adapt to the change in its normal feeding routine and will not eat the leaves.
Because of the koala's resemblance to a bear, it is often called the koala bear, although it is a marsupial, and not a true bear.
