By means of the borough committees, the corporation undertakes urban planning and maintains roads, government-aided schools, hospitals, and municipal markets.
Each borough has a committee of councillors, each of whom is elected to represent a ward.
The ratio is depressed by the influx of working males from surrounding rural areas, from the rest of West Bengal; these men commonly leave their families behind.
Spread roughly north–south along the east bank of the Hooghly River, Kolkata sits within the lower Ganges Delta of eastern India; the city's elevation is .
Mother Teresa was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for founding and working with the Missionaries of Charity in Kolkata—an organisation "whose primary task was to love and care for those persons nobody was prepared to look after".
Kolkata, which is under the jurisdiction of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC), has an area of .
The Royal Calcutta Turf Club hosts horse racing and polo matches.
Eden Gardens, which has a capacity of 66,349 , hosted the final match of the 1987 Cricket World Cup.
Since the early 1990s, new genres have emerged, including one comprising alternative folk–rock Bengali bands.
Schools in Kolkata follow the "10+2+3" plan.
In the 2000s, Sector&nbsp;V in Bidhannagar developed into a business hub for information technology and telecommunication companies.
Coupled with social reforms led by Ram Mohan Roy, Swami Vivekananda, and others, this constituted a major part of the Bengal Renaissance.
Among Kolkata's widely circulated Bengali-language newspapers are ''Anandabazar Patrika'', ''Bartaman'', ''Sangbad Pratidin'',  ''Aajkaal'', ''Dainik Statesman'' and  ''Ganashakti''.
They usually choose a focus on liberal arts, business, or science.
The coalescence of British and Indian culture resulted in the emergence of a new ''babu'' class of urbane Indians, whose members were often bureaucrats, professionals, newspaper readers, and Anglophiles; they usually belonged to upper-caste Hindu communities.
In the period 1977–2011, West Bengal was governed from Kolkata by the Left Front, which was dominated by the Communist Party of India (CPM).
The highest monthly rainfall total occurs in July and August.
The discovery and archaeological study of Chandraketugarh,  north of Kolkata, provide evidence that the region in which the city stands has been inhabited for over two millennia.
According to the Bureau of Indian Standards, on a scale ranging from  in order of increasing susceptibility to earthquakes, the city lies inside seismic zone III.
Almost all of Kolkata's taxis are antiquated Hindustan Ambassadors by make; newer air-conditioned radio taxis are also in service.
The east–west dimension of the city is comparatively narrow, stretching from the Hooghly River in the west to roughly the Eastern Metropolitan Bypass in the east—a span of .
Located on the east bank of the Hooghly River, it is the principal commercial, cultural, and educational centre of East India, while the Port of Kolkata is India's oldest operating port and its sole major riverine port.
As in the rest of India, cricket is popular in Kolkata and is played on grounds and in streets throughout the city.
Major periodicals based in Kolkata include ''Desh'', ''Sananda'', ''Saptahik Bartaman'', ''Unish-Kuri'', ''Anandalok'', and ''Anandamela''.
The Maidan, a vast field that serves as the city's largest park, hosts several minor football and cricket clubs and coaching institutes.
Pollution is a major concern in Kolkata.
Summers (March–June) are hot and humid, with temperatures in the low 30s Celsius; during dry spells, maximum temperatures often exceed 40&nbsp;°C (104&nbsp;°F) in May and June.
In 2008 its gross domestic product (adjusted for purchasing power parity) was estimated to be 104 billion, which was the third highest among Indian cities, behind Mumbai and Delhi.
Severe air pollution in the city has caused a rise in pollution-related respiratory ailments, such as lung cancer.
The city has a tradition of political graffiti depicting everything from outrageous slander to witty banter and limericks, caricatures, and propaganda.
The Calcutta High Court is the oldest High Court in India.
Bengal basin comprises three structural units: shelf or platform in the west; central hinge or shelf/slope break; and deep basinal part in the east and southeast.
The highest recorded temperature is , and the lowest is .
, Kolkata has 7 percent of the total Broadband internet consumers in India; BSNL, VSNL, Tata Indicom, Sify, Airtel, and Reliance are among the main vendors.
Kolkata houses many premier research institutes like Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS), Indian Institute of Chemical Biology (IICB), Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Bose Institute, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics (SINP), All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute (CGCRI), S.N.
Flexible production has been the norm in Kolkata, which has an informal sector that employs more than 40% of the labour force.
In the early 19th century, the marshes surrounding the city were drained; the government area was laid out along the banks of the Hooghly River.
Fire services are handled by the West Bengal Fire Service, a state agency.
Kolkata is the main commercial and financial hub of East and North-East India and home to the Calcutta Stock Exchange.
It was the world's longest-serving democratically elected communist government, during which Kolkata was a key base for Indian communism.
The city serves as the headquarters of three railway Zone out of Seventeen of the Indian Railways regional divisions—the Kolkata Metro Railways, Eastern Railway and the South-Eastern Railway.
Durga Puja, held in September–October, is Kolkata's most important and largest festival; it is an occasion for glamorous celebrations and artistic decorations.
The other two are located at the Tollygunge Club and at Fort William.
4,486,679; its population density was .
Kolkata has three 18-hole golf courses.
The Beighton Cup, an event organised by the Bengal Hockey Association and first played in 1895, is India's oldest field hockey tournament; it is usually held on the Mohun Bagan Ground of the Maidan.
Another business hub is the area south of Park Street, which comprises thoroughfares such as Jawaharlal Nehru Road, Camac Street, Wood Street, Loudon Street, Shakespeare Sarani, and A. J. C. Bose Road.
Following Indian independence in 1947, Kolkata, which was once the centre of modern Indian education, science, culture, and politics, suffered several decades of economic stagnation.
The functions of the KMC include water supply, drainage and sewerage, sanitation, solid waste management, street lighting, and building regulation.
The Kolkata Municipal Corporation, or KMC, oversees and manages the civic infrastructure of the city's 15&nbsp;boroughs, which together encompass 141&nbsp;wards.
The National Library of India is the leading public library in the country while Science City is the largest science centre in the Indian subcontinent..
In the West Bengal Legislative Assembly election, 2011, Left Front was defeated by the Trinamool Congress.
According to a United Nations Development Programme report, its wind and cyclone zone is "very high damage risk".
Kolkata is the only Indian city with a tram network, which is operated by the Calcutta Tramways Company.
The city underwent rapid industrial growth starting in the early 1850s, especially in the textile and jute industries; this encouraged British companies to massively invest in infrastructure projects, which included telegraph connections and Howrah railway station.
Under the company rule, and later under the British Raj, Calcutta served as the capital of British-held territories in India until 1911, when its perceived geographical disadvantages, combined with growing nationalism in Bengal, led to a shift of the capital to New Delhi.
By the 1850s, Calcutta had two areas: White Town, which was primarily British and centred on Chowringhee and Dalhousie Square; and Black Town, mainly Indian and centred on North Calcutta.
According to the 2005 National Family Health Survey, around 14% of the households in Kolkata were poor, while 33% lived in slums, indicating a substantial proportion of households in slum areas were better off economically than the bottom quarter of urban households in terms of wealth status.
Vocational programs are also available.
India's state-owned television broadcaster, Doordarshan, provides two free-to-air terrestrial channels, while a mix of Bengali, Hindi, English, and other regional channels are accessible via cable subscription, direct-broadcast satellite services, or internet-based television.
Fort William, on the western part of the city, houses the headquarters of the Eastern Command of the Indian Army; its premises are under the jurisdiction of the army.
The area occupied by the present-day city encompassed three villages: Kalikata, Gobindapur, and Sutanuti.
Bengali Hindus form the majority of Kolkata's population; Marwaris, Biharis and Muslims compose large minorities.
According to one estimate, almost a quarter of the population live on less than 27 rupees (equivalent to 45 US cents) per day.
In Kolkata, 77% of the married women used contraceptives, which was the highest among the cities surveyed, but use of modern contraceptive methods was the lowest (46%).
Total thickness of sediment below Kolkata is nearly  above the crystalline basement; of these the top  is quaternary, followed by  of tertiary sediments,  trap wash of cretaceous trap and  permian-carboniferous Gondwana rocks.
Several well-maintained major buildings from the colonial period have been declared "heritage structures"; others are in various stages of decay.
Two planned townships in the greater Kolkata region are Bidhannagar, also known as Salt Lake City and located north-east of the city; and Rajarhat, also called New Town and sited east of Bidhannagar.
Calcutta continued to be a centre for revolutionary organisations associated with the Indian independence movement.
These rights were transferred to the East India Company in 1698.
During the mid-1980s, Mumbai (then called Bombay) overtook Kolkata as India's most populous city.
Typically, each ''para'' has its own community club and, on occasion, a playing field.
The Calcutta Rowing Club hosts rowing heats and training events.
The final population totals of census 2011 stated the population of city as 4,496,694.
, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide annual concentration were within the national ambient air quality standards of India, but respirable suspended particulate matter levels were high, and on an increasing trend for five consecutive years, causing smog and haze.
Residents engage in ''addas'', or leisurely chats, that often take the form of freestyle intellectual conversation.
Listed in ascending order by area, they are: Kolkata district; the Kolkata Police area and the Kolkata Municipal Corporation area, or "Kolkata city"; and the Kolkata metropolitan area, which is the city's urban agglomeration.
Kolkata is located atop the western part of the hinge zone which is about  wide at a depth of about  below the surface.
The Consulate General serves the states of Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, West Bengal, Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh.
Marble Palace is a classic example of a European mansion that was built in the city.
Some Kolkata schools, for example La Martiniere Calcutta, St. Xavier's Collegiate School, and Loreto House, have been ranked amongst the best schools in the country..
The U.S Consulate in Calcutta is the US Department of State's second oldest Consulate and dates from 19 November 1792.
'''Kolkata'''  (formerly '''Calcutta''' ) is the capital of the Indian state of West Bengal.
It spans the north–south length of the city and covers a distance of .
Calcutta was the centre for the Indian independence movement; it remains a hotbed of contemporary state politics.
Bengali and English are the primary languages of instruction; Urdu and Hindi are also used, particularly in central Kolkata.
In 1985, prime minister  Rajiv Gandhi dubbed Kolkata a "dying city" in light of its socio-political woes.
Diseases like diabetes, asthma, goitre and other thyroid disorders were found in large numbers of people.
The city has witnessed a steady increase in the number of registered vehicles; 2002 data showed an increase of 44% over a period of seven years.
Water-logging, caused by heavy rains that fall during the summer monsoon, can interrupt transportation networks.
Central Kolkata hosts the central business district.
Throughout the late 18th and 19th century, the city was a centre of the East India Company's opium trade.
Among the surveyed cities, Kolkata stood second (5%) for children who had not had any vaccinations under the Universal Immunization Programme .
Kolkata being the first city in India to have cell phone and 4G connectivity, the GSM and CDMA cellular coverage is extensive.
Buses, which are the most commonly used mode of transport, are run by government agencies and private operators.
The Calcutta High Court has jurisdiction over the state of West Bengal and the Union Territory of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
As the seat of the Government of West Bengal, Kolkata is home to not only the offices of the local governing agencies, but also the West Bengal Legislative Assembly; the state secretariat, which is housed in the Writers' Building; and the Calcutta High Court.
The authorised slums (with access to basic services like water, latrines, trash removal by the Kolkata Municipal Corporation) can be broadly divided into two groups—''bustees'', in which slum dwellers have some long term tenancy agreement with the landowners; and ''udbastu colonies'', settlements which had been leased to refugees from present-day Bangladesh by the Government.
These sediments are sandwiched between two clay beds: the lower one at a depth of ; the upper one  in thickness.
Ferry services connect Kolkata with its twin city of Howrah, located across the Hooghly River.
As a growing city in a developing country, Kolkata has pollution, traffic congestion, poverty, overcrowding, and other problems.
The Nawab of Bengal, Siraj ud-Daulah, condemned the militarisation and tax evasion by the company.
Kolkata has lower courts: the Court of Small Causes and the City Civil Court decide civil matters; the Sessions Court rules in criminal cases.
English is also used, particularly by the white-collar workforce.
The Kolkata police district registered 15,510&nbsp;Indian Penal Code cases in 2010, the 8th-highest total in the country.
East Kolkata is largely composed of newly developed areas and neighbourhoods of Saltlake, Rajarhat, Tangra, Beliaghata, Ultadanga, Phoolbagan etc.
The Calcutta Racket Club is a squash and racquet club in Kolkata.
, after adjusting for population density, the city's "road space" was only 6% compared to 23% in Delhi and 17% in Mumbai.
About 34% of the available labour force in Kolkata slums were unemployed.
For every 10,000&nbsp;people in the city, there are 61.7&nbsp;hospital beds, which is higher than the national average of 9&nbsp;hospital beds per 10,000.
Agencies operating long-distance bus services include Calcutta State Transport Corporation, South Bengal State Transport Corporation, North Bengal State Transport Corporation, and various private operators.
As the largest trading centre in East India, Kolkata has several high-circulation financial dailies, including ''The Economic Times'', ''The Financial Express'', ''Business Line'', and ''Business Standard''.
Outlying areas of South Kolkata include Garden Reach, Khidirpur, Metiabruz, Taratala, Maheshtala, Budge Budge, Behala, Sarsuna, Barisha, Parnasree Pally,  Thakurpukur, Kudghat, Ranikuthi, Bansdroni, Baghajatin, Tiljala and Garia.
It scored 4.0 on 10 compared to the national average of 3.3.
B. D. Bagh (formerly known as Dalhousie Square).
+Kolkata urban agglomeration population growth
The Calcutta Cricket and Football Club is the second-oldest cricket club in the world.
, the health care system in Kolkata consists of 48&nbsp;government hospitals, mostly under the Department of Health & Family Welfare, Government of West Bengal, and 366&nbsp;private medical establishments; these establishments provide the city with 27,687 hospital beds.
As a nucleus of the 19th- and early 20th-century Bengal Renaissance and a religiously and ethnically diverse centre of culture in Bengal and India, Kolkata has local traditions in drama, art, film, theatre, and literature.
According to the 2011 census, 76.51% of the population is Hindu, 20.60%&nbsp;Muslim, 0.88%&nbsp;Christian, and 0.47%&nbsp;Jain.
Hindi and Urdu are spoken by a sizeable minority.
The remaining undeveloped areas, known as the East Kolkata Wetlands, were designated a "wetland of international importance" by the Ramsar Convention (1975).
The Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971 led to a massive influx of thousands of refugees, many of them penniless, that strained Kolkata's infrastructure.
In the late 17th century, the three villages that predated Calcutta were ruled by the Nawab of Bengal under Mughal suzerainty.
Both Bidhannagar and New Town are situated outside the Kolkata Municipal Corporation limits, in their own municipalities.
The number of Armenians, Greeks, Jews, and other foreign-origin groups declined during the 20th century.
The partition of India led to further clashes and a demographic shift—many Muslims left for East Pakistan (present day Bangladesh), while hundreds of thousands of Hindus fled into the city.
One unorganised group, roadside hawkers, generated business worth  8,772&nbsp;crore ( 2&nbsp;billion) in 2005. , around 0.81% of the city's workforce was employed in the primary sector (agriculture, forestry, mining, etc.
Due to its diverse and abundant public transportation, privately owned vehicles are not as common in Kolkata as in other major Indian cities.
Richard Wellesley, Governor-General of the Presidency of Fort William between 1797 and 1805, was largely responsible for the development of the city and its public architecture.
Bengali-language 24-hour television news channels include ABP Ananda, Tara Newz, Kolkata TV, 24 Ghanta, News Time and Channel 10.
, about one-third of the population, or 1.5&nbsp;million people, lived in 3,500&nbsp;unregistered squatter-occupied and 2,011&nbsp;registered slums.
According to the 2005 National Family Health Survey, only a small proportion of Kolkata households were covered under any health scheme or health insurance.
Bengali, the official state language, is the dominant language in Kolkata.
Roughly 95% of the 4,000&nbsp;tonnes of refuse produced daily by the city is transported to the dumping grounds in Dhapa, which is east of the town.
The presence of ''paras'', which are neighbourhoods that possess a strong sense of community, is characteristic of the city.
Once India's leading city, Kolkata experienced a steady economic decline in the decades following India's independence due to steep population increases and a rise in militant trade-unionism, which included frequent strikes that were backed by left-wing parties.
Kolkata culture features idiosyncrasies that include distinctively close-knit neighbourhoods (''paras'') and freestyle intellectual exchanges (''adda'').
Nawab Siraj ud-Daulah occupied Calcutta in 1756, and the East India Company retook it the following year.
Facing frequent skirmishes with French forces, the British began to upgrade their fortifications in 1756.
The slow-moving tram services are restricted to certain areas of the city.
Among professional scientific institutions, Kolkata hosts the Agri Horticultural Society of India, the Geological Survey of India, the Botanical Survey of India, the Calcutta Mathematical Society, the Indian Science Congress Association, the Zoological Survey of India, the Institution of Engineers, the Anthropological Survey of India and the Indian Public Health Association.
It is a major commercial and military port, and is the only city in eastern India to have an international airport.
The city's fortunes improved after the Indian economy was liberalised in the 1990s and changes in economic policy were enacted by the West Bengal state government.
The Kolkata Port Trust, an agency of the central government, manages the city's river port.
Rains brought by the Bay of Bengal branch of the south-west summer monsoon lash Kolkata between June and September, supplying it with most of its annual rainfall of .
Much of the city was originally a wetland that was reclaimed over the decades to accommodate a burgeoning population.
Per the 1765 Treaty of Allahabad following the battle of Buxar, East India company was appointed imperial tax collector of the Mughal emperor in the province of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, while Mughal-appointed Nawabs continued to rule the province.
Kolkata is home to many industrial units operated by large public- and private-sector corporations; major sectors include steel, heavy engineering, mining, minerals, cement, pharmaceuticals, food processing, agriculture, electronics, textiles, and jute.
Kolkata has four long-distance railway stations, located at Howrah (the largest railway complex in India), Sealdah, Chitpur and Shalimar, which connect Kolkata by rail to most cities in West Bengal and to other major cities in India.
Kolkata reported 67.6% of Special and Local Laws crimes registered in 35&nbsp;large Indian cities during 2004.
Kolkata has many buildings adorned with Indo-Islamic and Indo-Saracenic architectural motifs.
The Kolkata Municipal Corporation supplies the city with potable water that is sourced from the Hooghly River; most of it is treated and purified at the Palta pumping station located in North&nbsp;24 Parganas district.
Many people from Kolkata—among them several Nobel laureates—have contributed to the arts, the sciences, and other areas.
The British moved the capital to New Delhi in 1911.
Each ward elects a councillor to the KMC.
His warning went unheeded, and the Nawab attacked; he captured Fort William which led to the killings of several East India company officials in the Black Hole of Calcutta.
); 15.49% worked in the secondary sector (industrial and manufacturing); and 83.69% worked in the tertiary sector (service industries).
Characterised by 19th-century architecture, dilapidated buildings, overpopulated slums, crowded bazaars and narrow alleyways, it includes areas such as Shyambazar, Hatibagan, Maniktala, Kankurgachi, Rajabazar, Shobhabazar, Shyampukur, Sonagachi, Kumortuli, Bagbazar, Jorasanko, Chitpur, Pathuriaghata, Cossipore, Sinthee, Belgachia, Jorabagan, and Dum Dum.
Tournaments, especially those involving cricket, football, badminton, and carrom, are regularly organised on an inter-locality or inter-club basis.
Most government establishments and institutions are housed in the centre of the city in B.
Vernacular newspapers, such as those in the Hindi, Urdu, Gujarati, Odia, Punjabi, and Chinese languages, are read by minorities.
In 2013, the airport was upgraded to handle increased air traffic.
Kolkata's literacy rate of 87.14% exceeds the all-India average of 74%.
Other important areas of Central Kolkata are Burrabazar, College Street, Sealdah, Taltala, Janbazar, Bowbazar, Entally, Chandni Chowk, Lalbazar, Chowringhee, Dharmatala, Tiretta Bazar, Bow Barracks,  Mullick Bazar, Park Circus, Babughat etc.
Often, in April–June, the city is struck by heavy rains or dusty squalls that are followed by thunderstorms or hailstorms, bringing cooling relief from the prevailing humidity.
, the majority of households in slums were engaged in occupations belonging to the informal sector; 36.5% were involved in servicing the urban middle class (as maids, drivers, etc.
After completing their secondary education, students typically enroll in schools that have a higher secondary facility and are affiliated with the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education, the ICSE, or the CBSE.
Kolkata has been called the "City of Furious, Creative Energy" as well as the "cultural or literary capital of India".
Cultural events include the Rabindra Jayanti, Independence Day(15 August), Republic Day(26 January), Kolkata Book Fair, the Dover Lane Music Festival, the Kolkata Film Festival, Nandikar's National Theatre Festival, Statesman Vintage & Classic Car Rally and Gandhi Jayanti.
The lack of capital and resources added to the depressed state of the city's economy and gave rise to an unwelcome sobriquet: the "dying city".
Bengal's large repertoire of seafood dishes includes various preparations of ''ilish'', a fish that is a favourite among Calcuttans.
Job Charnock, an administrator who worked for the company, was formerly credited as the founder of the city; In response to a public petition, the Calcutta High Court ruled in 2003 that the city does not have a founder.
The Kolkata Metro, in operation since 1984, is the oldest underground mass transit system in India.
The agency overseeing the latter, the Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority, is responsible for the statutory planning and development of greater Kolkata.
The Chinese community traditionally worked in the local tanning industry and ran Chinese restaurants.
Though home to major cricketing venues and franchises, Kolkata differs from other Indian cities by giving importance to association football and other sports.
West Bengal's share of the Bengali film industry is based in the city, which also hosts venerable cultural institutions of national importance, such as the Academy of Fine Arts, the Victoria Memorial, the Asiatic Society, the Indian Museum and the National Library of India.
In the 19th century, the Bengal Renaissance brought about an increased sociocultural sophistication among city denizens.
The total fertility rate in Kolkata was 1.4, which was the lowest among the eight cities surveyed.
The Academy of Fine Arts and other art galleries hold regular art exhibitions.
Kalikata was a fishing village; Sutanuti was a riverside weavers' village.
The 2000s saw a surge of investments in the real estate, infrastructure, retail, and hospitality sectors; several large shopping malls and hotels were launched.
Kolkata, considered the leading centre of rugby union in India, gives its name to the oldest international tournament in rugby union, the Calcutta Cup.
Street foods such as ''beguni'' (fried battered eggplant slices), ''kati'' roll (flatbread roll with vegetable or chicken, mutton, or egg stuffing), ''phuchka'' (a deep-fried crêpe with tamarind sauce) and Indian Chinese cuisine from Chinatown are popular.
The Victoria Memorial and Kolkata Race Course are located at the southern end of the Maidan.
To promote the recycling of garbage and sewer water, agriculture in encouraged on the dumping grounds.
Kolkata is the home of the Bengali cinema industry, dubbed "Tollywood" for Tollygunj, where most of the state's film studios are located.
Kolkata has rail and road connectivity with Dhaka, capital of Bangladesh.
Demands for the creation of a Muslim state led in 1946 to an episode of communal violence that killed over 4,000.
The Ordnance Factories Board of the Ministry of Defence, the Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers and the Eastern Command of the Indian Army are all headquartered in the city.
The Port of Kolkata, established in 1870, is India's oldest and the only major river port.
May is the hottest month, with daily temperatures ranging from ; January, the coldest month, has temperatures varying from .
As Kolkata's apex body, the corporation discharges its functions through the mayor-in-council, which comprises a mayor, a deputy mayor, and ten other elected members of the KMC.
Kolkata hosts the headquarters of three major public-sector banks: Allahabad Bank, UCO Bank, and the United Bank of India.
Among the other parks are Central Park in Bidhannagar and Millennium Park on Strand Road, along the Hooghly River.
The city and its port were bombed several times by the Japanese between 1942 and 1944, during World War II.
Kolkata is one of the districts in India with a high number of people with AIDS; it has been designated a district prone to high risk.
Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences (SNBNCBS), Indian Institute of Social Welfare and Business Management (IISWBM), National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Kolkata, Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre (VECC) and Indian Centre for Space Physics.
Notable scholars who were born, worked or studied in Kolkata include physicists Satyendra Nath Bose, Meghnad Saha, and Jagadish Chandra Bose; chemist Prafulla Chandra Roy; statisticians Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis and Anil Kumar Gain; physician Upendranath Brahmachari; educator Ashutosh Mukherjee; and Nobel laureates Rabindranath Tagore, C. V. Raman, and Amartya Sen.
