MacArthur had crossed the 38th parallel in the mistaken belief that the Chinese would not enter the war, leading to major allied losses.
Upon agreeing to the armistice, the belligerents established the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), which has since been patrolled by the KPA and ROKA, United States, and Joint UN Commands.
The PVA marched "dark-to-dark" (19:00–03:00), and aerial camouflage (concealing soldiers, pack animals, and equipment) was deployed by 05:30.
After the Chinese intervention in November, General MacArthur ordered the increased bombing campaign on North Korea, including incendiary attacks against their arsenals and communications centers and especially against the "Korean end" of all the bridges across the Yalu River.
Lei concluded that MacArthur would most likely attempt a landing at Incheon.
Zhou attempted to respond to the PVA's logistical concerns by increasing Chinese production and improving methods of supply, but these efforts were never completely sufficient.
The South Koreans did not have any tanks, anti-tank weapons, nor heavy artillery, that could stop such an attack.
On 27 June, Rhee evacuated from Seoul with some of the government.
In September 1950, an amphibious UN counter-offensive was launched at Inchon, and cut off many of the North Korean troops.
The PVA had outrun its logistics capability and thus were unable to press on beyond Seoul as food, ammunition, and matériel were carried nightly, on foot and bicycle, from the border at the Yalu River to the three battle lines.
However, since 1994, South Korean POWs have been escaping North Korea on their own after decades of captivity.
Many Korean nationalists fled the country.
The Soviet system of confirming air kills erred on the conservative side; the pilot's words had to be corroborated and enemy aircraft falling into the sea were not counted, the number might exceed 1,106.
During the Hungnam evacuation, about 193 shiploads of UN Command forces and matériel (approximately 105,000 soldiers, 98,000 civilians, 17,500 vehicles, and 350,000 tons of supplies) were evacuated to Pusan.
There was considerable resistance among many leaders, including senior military leaders, to confronting the U.S. in Korea.
There were no large foreign military garrisons in Korea at the time of the invasion, but there were large U.S. garrisons and air forces in Japan.
On 24 February 1952, the Military Commission, presided over by Zhou, discussed the PVA's logistical problems with members of various government agencies involved in the war effort.
In the Russian Korean Zone of Occupation, the Soviet Union established a communist government led by Kim Il-sung.
North Korean troops in the south, instead of effectively withdrawing north, rapidly disintegrated, leaving Pyongyang vulnerable.
After these dramatic reversals of fortune, which saw Seoul change hands four times, the last two years of conflict became a war of attrition, with the front line close to the 38th parallel.
The USAF countered the MiG-15 by sending over three squadrons of its most capable fighter, the F-86 Sabre.
In their southward advance, the KPA purged the Republic of Korea's intelligentsia by killing civil servants and intellectuals.
General Hodge began to distance himself from the proposal, even though it had originated with his government.
In northeast Korea by 11 December, the U.S. X Corps managed to cripple the PVA 9th Army Group while establishing a defensive perimeter at the port city of Hungnam.
Mao was concerned that the Americans would intervene but agreed to support the North Korean invasion.
North Korea was subject to a massive bombing campaign.
These soldiers disguised as refugees would approach UN forces asking for food and help, then open fire and attack.
To President Truman, MacArthur speculated there was little risk of Chinese intervention in Korea, and that the PRC's opportunity for aiding the KPA had lapsed.
Mao then asked Peng to speak in favor of intervention to the rest of the Chinese leaders.
Hagel also stated that the United States would deploy the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense anti-ballistic missile system to Guam, because of a credible and realistic nuclear threat from North Korea.
Conscription of Koreans for labor in war industries began in 1939, with as many as 2 million Koreans conscripted into either the Japanese Army or into the Japanese labor force.
The Soviet Air Force reported some 1,100 air-to-air victories and 335 MiG combat losses, while China's People's Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) reported 231 combat losses, mostly MiG-15s, and 168 other aircraft lost.
In addition to the invasion force, the North KPA had 114 fighters, 78 bombers, 105 T-34-85 tanks, and some 30,000 soldiers stationed in reserve in North Korea.
By the time the North Koreans withdrew from the South, a total of 239 T-34s and 74 SU-76s had been lost.
Any possibility of talks ended on 6 January when they conducted their fourth nuclear test.
According to the data from the U.S. Department of Defense, the United States suffered 33,686 battle deaths, along with 2,830 non-battle deaths, during the Korean War.
He believed that whether or not to use nuclear weapons should be his own decision, not the President's.
On the eve of war, KMAG's commander General William Lynn Roberts voiced utmost confidence in the ROK Army and boasted that any North Korean invasion would merely provide "target practice".
A Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea was founded in 1919 in Nationalist China.
He noted that he was "faced with the scarcity of US forces immediately available, and time and space factors, which would make it difficult to reach very far north, before Soviet troops could enter the area".
They insisted that only volunteers were allowed to serve in the KPA.
Units of the U.S. 2nd Infantry Division and the French Battalion fought a short but desperate battle that broke the attack's momentum.
In April 1950, Stalin gave Kim permission to invade the South under the condition that Mao would agree to send reinforcements if they became needed.
The UN Command protested the discrepancies and alleged that the Communists were forcing South Korean POWs to join the KPA.
Postwar, about 100,000 North Koreans were executed in purges.
China cancelled North Korea's war debts, provided 800 million yuan, promised trade cooperation, and sent in thousands of troops to rebuild damaged infrastructure.
The battle is sometimes known as the Gettysburg of the Korean War.
Although Kim's early successes had led him to predict that he would end the war by the end of August, Chinese leaders were more pessimistic.
From 1919 to 1925 and beyond, Korean communists led internal and external warfare against the Japanese.
Lacking sufficient anti-tank weapons, artillery or armor, they were driven back down the Korean peninsula to Pusan.
Basing this judgment on China's century of humiliation beginning in the early 19th century, American support for the Nationalists during the Chinese Civil War, and the ideological struggles between revolutionaries and reactionaries, the Chinese leadership believed that China would become a critical battleground in the United States' crusade against Communism.
In the winter of 1951, 50,000 to 90,000 South Korean National Defense Corps soldiers starved to death while marching southward under the Chinese offensive when their commanding officers embezzled funds earmarked for their food.
Fearful of confronting the United States directly, the Soviet Union denied involvement of their personnel in anything other than an advisory role, but air combat quickly resulted in Soviet pilots dropping their code signals and speaking over the wireless in Russian.
After Operation Glory, 416 Korean War unknown soldiers were buried in the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific (The Punchbowl), on the island of Oahu, Hawaii.
After initial success, they were halted by 20 May.
Once in a level flight dogfight, both swept-wing designs attained comparable maximum speeds of around .
During the massacre, the British protested to their allies and saved some citizens.
On 7 June 1950, Kim Il-sung called for a Korea-wide election on 5–8 August 1950 and a consultative conference in Haeju on 15–17 June 1950.
On the night of 10 August in Washington, American Colonels Dean Rusk and Charles H. Bonesteel III were tasked with dividing the Korean Peninsula into Soviet and U.S. occupation zones and proposed the 38th parallel.
The SS ''Meredith Victory'' was noted for evacuating 14,000 refugees, the largest rescue operation by a single ship, even though it was designed to hold 12 passengers.
In December 1945, Korea was administered by a U.S.-Soviet Union Joint Commission, as agreed at the Moscow Conference, with the aim of granting independence after a five-year trusteeship.
Another division night-marched a circuitous mountain route, averaging  daily for 18 days.
This was the city's fourth conquest in a years' time, leaving it a ruin; the 1.5&nbsp;million pre-war population was down to 200,000, and people were suffering from severe food shortages.
Throughout 1949 and 1950 the Soviets continued to arm North Korea.
After the war, and to the present day, the USAF reports an F-86 Sabre kill ratio in excess of 10:1, with 792 MiG-15s and 108 other aircraft shot down by Sabres, and 78 Sabres lost to enemy fire.
North Korea held parliamentary elections three months later on 25 August.
The Korean War was the first war in which jet aircraft played the central role in air combat.
Defense Prisoner of War/Missing Personnel Office (DPMO) records indicate that the PRC and the DPRK transmitted 1,394 names, of which 858 were correct.
In early July, when U.S. forces arrived, what was left of the South Korean forces were placed under U.S. operational command of the United Nations Command.
At the same time, the Administration was worried that a war in Korea could quickly widen into another world war should the Chinese or Soviets decide to get involved as well.
In addition to conventional military operations, North Korean soldiers fought the UN forces by infiltrating guerrillas among refugees.
On 4 August 1950, with the PRC invasion of Taiwan aborted, Mao Zedong reported to the Politburo that he would intervene in Korea when the People's Liberation Army's (PLA) Taiwan invasion force was reorganized into the PLA North East Frontier Force.
The Central Intelligence Agency did note the southward movement by the Korean People's Army (KPA), but assessed this as a "defensive measure" and concluded an invasion was "unlikely".
Such battlefield discipline allowed a three-division army to march the  from An-tung, Manchuria, to the combat zone in some 19 days.
In 1960, the April Revolution occurred and students joined an anti-Syngman Rhee demonstration; 142 were killed by police; in consequence Syngman Rhee resigned and left for exile in the United States.
In China, the Nationalist National Revolutionary Army and the communist People's Liberation Army helped organize Korean refugees against the Japanese military, which had also occupied parts of China.
During October, the ROK police executed people who were suspected to be sympathetic to North Korea, and similar massacres were carried out until early 1951.
At the Cairo Conference in November 1943, China, the United Kingdom, and United States all decided "in due course Korea shall become free and independent".
On 25 November at the Korean western front, the PVA 13th Army Group attacked and overran the ROK II Corps at the Battle of the Ch'ongch'on River, and then decimated the US 2nd Infantry Division on the UN forces' right flank.
He attempted to establish control by restoring Japanese colonial administrators to power, but in the face of Korean protests he quickly reversed this decision.
As a token of gratitude, between 50,000 and 70,000 Korean veterans that served in the PLA were sent back along with their weapons, and they later played a significant role in the initial invasion of South Korea.
The United Nations, with the United States as the principal force, came to the aid of South Korea.
In August 1945, the Soviet Union declared war on Japan, as a result of an agreement with the United States, and liberated Korea north of the 38th parallel.
After MacArthur was removed as Supreme Commander in Korea in April 1951, his successors continued this policy and eventually extended it to all of North Korea.
In a series of emergency meetings that lasted from 2–5 October, Chinese leaders debated whether to send Chinese troops into Korea.
On 27 September, MacArthur received the top secret National Security Council Memorandum 81/1 from Truman reminding him that operations north of the 38th parallel were authorized only if "at the time of such operation there was no entry into North Korea by major Soviet or Chinese Communist forces, no announcements of intended entry, nor a threat to counter our operations militarily..." On 29 September MacArthur restored the government of the Republic of Korea under Syngman Rhee.
Soviet generals with extensive combat experience from the Second World War were sent to North Korea as the Soviet Advisory Group.
On 15 October 1950, President Truman and General MacArthur met at Wake Island in the mid-Pacific Ocean.
The US proposed that a commission of India and Sweden determine what the US should pay in compensation but the Soviets vetoed the US proposal.
The PVA, KPA, and UN Command could not agree on a system of repatriation because many PVA and KPA soldiers refused to be repatriated back to the north, which was unacceptable to the Chinese and North Koreans.
They report that they were not told about the POW exchange procedures, and were assigned to work in mines in the remote northeastern regions near the Chinese and Russian border.
China justified its entry into the war as a response to "American aggression in the guise of the UN".
President Rhee's régime excluded communists and leftists from southern politics.
Chinese troops suffered from deficient military equipment, serious logistical problems, overextended communication and supply lines, and the constant threat of UN bombers.
After the Incheon landing, the 1st Cavalry Division began its northward advance from the Pusan Perimeter.
Twelve days after Chinese troops entered the war, Stalin allowed the Soviet Air Force to provide air cover, and supported more aid to China.
Surrounded on all sides, the U.S. 2nd Infantry Division Warrior Division's 23rd Regimental Combat Team with an attached French Battalion was hemmed in by more than 25,000 Chinese Communist forces.
Over 88,000 South Korean soldiers were missing and the Communists' themselves had claimed that they had captured 70,000 South Koreans.
The Chinese New Year's Offensive overwhelmed UN forces, allowing the PVA and KPA to conquer Seoul for the second time on 4 January 1951.
The North Koreans had a combined arms force including tanks supported by heavy artillery.
After a new wave of UN sanctions, on 11 March 2013, North Korea claimed that it had invalidated the 1953 armistice.
The first major U.S. strategic bombing campaign against North Korea, begun in late July 1950, was conceived much along the lines of the major offensives of World War II.
In occupied areas, North Korean Army political officers purged South Korean society of its intelligentsia by executing every educated person—academic, governmental, religious—who might lead resistance against the North; the purges continued during the NPA retreat.
Following the initial assault by the north, the Korean War saw limited use of the tank and featured no large-scale tank battles.
Contemporary North Korea remains underdeveloped.
There were numerous atrocities and massacres of civilians throughout the Korean war committed by both the North and South Koreans.
By early 1950, Syngman Rhee had about 30,000 alleged communists in jails and about 300,000 suspected sympathizers enrolled in the Bodo League re-education movement.
On that day, the United Nations Security Council recognized this North Korean act as invasion and called for an immediate ceasefire.
In mid-February, the PVA counterattacked with the '''Fourth Phase Offensive''' and achieved initial victory at Hoengseong.
On 24 November, the '''Home-by-Christmas Offensive''' was launched with the U.S. Eighth Army advancing in northwest Korea, while the US X Corps were attacking along the Korean east coast.
Starting in 1939, the populace was required to use Japanese names under the Sōshi-kaimei policy.
During the operation, the division and police conducted the Geochang massacre and Sancheong-Hamyang massacre.
On 27 June President Truman ordered U.S. air and sea forces to help the South Korean regime.
Korea was considered to be part of the Empire of Japan as an industrialized colony along with Taiwan, and both were part of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
The mission was to get behind Chinese forces and block their movement north.
In November 1950, the North Korean leadership instructed their population to build dugouts and mud huts, as well as dig underground tunnels, in order to solve the acute housing problem.
There were several reasons for the dismissal.
The Korean War marked a major milestone not only for fixed-wing aircraft, but also for rotorcraft, featuring the first large-scale deployment of helicopters for medical evacuation (medevac).
To counter a possible U.S. deployment, Zhou Enlai secured a Soviet commitment to have the Soviet Union support Chinese forces with air cover, and deployed 260,000 soldiers along the Korean border, under the command of Gao Gang.
The UN forces, once prepared, counterattacked and broke out of the Pusan Perimeter.
However, upon the arrival of the charismatic General Ridgway, the ''esprit de corps'' of the bloodied Eighth Army immediately began to revive.
Chinese commanders were not briefed on North Korean troop numbers or operational plans.
While these preparations were underway in the North, there were frequent clashes along the 38th parallel, especially at Kaesong and Ongjin, many initiated by the South.
The Eighth U.S. Army and the ROK Army drove up western Korea and captured Pyongyang city, the North Korean capital, on 19 October 1950.
North Korea may have detained up to 50,000 South Korean POWs after the ceasefire.
Turkey, for example, entered NATO in 1952, and the foundation was laid for bilateral diplomatic and trade relations with South Korea.
The POW exchange proceeded without access to South Korean POWs not on the Communist rosters.
In late April Peng Dehuai sent his deputy, Hong Xuezhi, to brief Zhou Enlai in Beijing.
On 28 November, Bomber Command reported on the campaign's progress: 95 percent of Manpojin was destroyed, along with 90 percent of Hoeryong, Namsi and Koindong, 85 percent of Chosan, 75 percent of both Sakchu and Huichon, and 20 percent of Uiju.
The war ended as it had begun, without American nuclear weapons deployed near battle.
In fact, because of the extensive defense cuts and the emphasis placed on building a nuclear bomber force, none of the services were in a position to make a robust response with conventional military strength.
In addition, a large number of mixed-race "G.I.
The UN POWs said that most of the Chinese camps were located near the easily supplied Sino-Korean border, and that the Chinese withheld food to force the prisoners to accept the communism indoctrination programs.
As of 2010, the South Korean Ministry of Unification reported that 79 ROK POWs had escaped the North.
Pyongyang, which saw 75 percent of its area destroyed, was so devastated that bombing was halted as there were no longer any worthy targets.
Two days later, the 1st Cavalry Division captured Pyongyang, the North's capital city, on 19 October 1950.
In October 1951, the United States effected Operation Hudson Harbor to establish a nuclear weapons capability.
After secretly crossing the Yalu River on 19 October, the PVA 13th Army Group launched the '''First Phase Offensive''' on 25 October, attacking the advancing UN forces near the Sino-Korean border.
The Demilitarized Zone runs northeast of the 38th parallel; to the south, it travels west.
After Peng made the case that if U.S. troops conquered Korea and reached the Yalu they might cross it and invade China the Politburo agreed to intervene in Korea.
However, when ceasefire negotiations began in 1951, the Communists reported that they held only 8,000 South Koreans.
Explaining the choice of the 38th parallel, Rusk observed, "even though it was further north than could be realistically reached by U.S. forces, in the event of Soviet disagreement...we felt it important to include the capital of Korea in the area of responsibility of American troops".
In the 1960s, prostitution and related services earned 25 percent of South Korean GNP.
In 1953, South Korea and the United States concluded a Mutual Defense Treaty.
About 43 percent of all U.S. POWs died during this period.
On 6 December 1950, after the Chinese intervention repelled the UN Command armies from northern North Korea, General J. Lawton Collins (Army Chief of Staff), General MacArthur, Admiral C. Turner Joy, General George E. Stratemeyer, and staff officers Major General Doyle Hickey, Major General Charles A. Willoughby, and Major General Edwin K. Wright met in Tokyo to plan strategy countering the Chinese intervention; they considered three potential atomic warfare scenarios encompassing the next weeks and months of warfare.
The unpreparedness of U.S. POWs to resist heavy communist indoctrination during the Korean War led to the Code of the United States Fighting Force which governs how U.S. military personnel in combat should act when they must "evade capture, resist while a prisoner or escape from the enemy".
On 28 June, at 2&nbsp;am, the South Korean Army blew up the highway bridge across the Han River in an attempt to stop the North Korean army.
The atmosphere became so tense that Zhou was forced to adjourn the conference.
By 30 November, the PVA 13th Army Group managed to expel the U.S. Eighth Army from northwest Korea.
UN forces retreated to Suwon in the west, Wonju in the center, and the territory north of Samcheok in the east, where the battlefront stabilized and held.
The offensive's first thrust fell upon I Corps, which fiercely resisted in the Battle of the Imjin River (22–25 April 1951) and the Battle of Kapyong (22–25 April 1951), blunting the impetus of the offensive, which was halted at the "No-name Line" north of Seoul.
One facet of the changing attitude toward Korea and whether to get involved was Japan.
The U.S. landings at Inchon on 15 September cut off the North Korean supply lines, causing their armored forces and infantry to run out of fuel, ammunition, and other supplies.
With Lieutenant-General Matthew Ridgway assuming the command of the U.S. Eighth Army on 26 December, the PVA and the KPA launched their '''Third Phase Offensive''' (also known as the "Chinese New Year's Offensive") on New Year's Eve of 1950.
With increasing B-29 losses, the Air Force was forced to switch from a daylight bombing campaign to a safer but less accurate nighttime bombing of targets.
The combat veterans from China, the tanks, artillery and aircraft supplied by the Soviets, and rigorous training increased North Korea's military superiority over the South, which had been armed by the American military with mostly small arms and given no heavy weaponry such as tanks.
The 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team's ("Rakkasans") second of two combat jumps was on Easter Sunday, 1951, at Munsan-ni, South Korea, codenamed Operation Tomahawk.
babies" (offspring of American and other UN soldiers and Korean women) were filling up the country's orphanages.
In a subsequent meeting, Stalin told Zhou that he would only provide China with equipment on a credit basis, and that the Soviet air force would only operate over Chinese airspace, and only after an undisclosed period of time.
After November 1950, North Korean armor was rarely encountered.
Taking advantage of the UN Command's strategic momentum against the communists, General MacArthur believed it necessary to extend the Korean War into China to destroy depots supplying the North Korean war effort.
On 27 June 1950, two days after the KPA invaded and three months before the Chinese entered the war, President Truman dispatched the United States Seventh Fleet to the Taiwan Strait, to prevent hostilities between the Nationalist Republic of China (Taiwan) and the People's Republic of China (PRC).
North Korea continued to claim that any South Korean POW who stayed in the North did so voluntarily.
At the same time, "there was no suggestion from anyone that the United Nations or the United States could back away from the conflict".
Truman believed if aggression went unchecked a chain reaction would be initiated that would marginalize the United Nations and encourage Communist aggression elsewhere.
The war's highest-ranking American POW, U.S. Major General William F. Dean, reported that most of the North Korean cities and villages he saw were either rubble or snow-covered wastelands.
The Communist side denied such allegations.
Consequently, the over-extended KPA could not be supplied throughout the south.
The United States denied ROC's request for combat, lest it provoke a communist Chinese retaliation.
The initial assault by North Korean KPA forces was aided by the use of Soviet T-34-85 tanks.
The agreement created the Korean Demilitarized Zone to separate North and South Korea, and allowed the return of prisoners.
Interdiction by ground attack aircraft was the only means of slowing the advancing Korean armor.
On 23 June, UN observers inspected the border and did not detect that war was imminent.
In 1976, the axe murder incident was widely publicized.
Meanwhile, daylight advance parties scouted for the next bivouac site.
On 15 October, after moderate KPA resistance, the 7th Cavalry Regiment and Charlie Company, 70th Tank Battalion captured Namchonjam city.
The situation became so serious that, on November 1951, Zhou Enlai called a conference in Shenyang to discuss the PVA's logistical problems.
Both governments claimed to be the legitimate government of Korea, and neither side accepted the border as permanent.
By 1949, South Korean forces had reduced the active number of communist guerrillas in the South from 5,000 to 1,000.
The 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team ("Rakkasans") made their first of two combat jumps during the Korean War on 20 October 1950 at Sunchon and Sukchon.
American air raids caused heavy damage to the KPA, destroying most of its tanks and much of its artillery.
On 25 September, Seoul was recaptured by South Korean forces.
Thereafter, vessels from the UN nations held undisputed control of the sea about Korea.
Again in 2010, North Korea fired artillery shells on Yeonpyeong island, killing two military personnel and two civilians.
Stalin, however, maintained his wartime policy of co-operation, and on 16 August the Red Army halted at the 38th parallel for three weeks to await the arrival of U.S. forces in the south.
In his later years Mao believed that Stalin only gained a positive opinion of him after China's entrance into the Korean War.
At month's end, the U.S. Eighth Army counterattacked and regained "Line Kansas", just north of the 38th parallel.
In the months after the Shenyang conference Peng Dehuai went to Beijing several times to brief Mao and Zhou about the heavy casualties suffered by Chinese troops and the increasing difficulty of keeping the front lines supplied with basic necessities.
Turkish POWs felt most comfortable, as some of them even thought the food was better than what they ate at home.
Mao was equally ambitious in improving his own prestige inside the communist international community by demonstrating that his Marxist concerns were international.
What Chinese soldiers feared, Hong said, was not the enemy, but that they had nothing to eat, no bullets to shoot, and no trucks to transport them to the rear when they were wounded.
A major, problematic negotiation point was prisoner of war (POW) repatriation.
When authorized, he activated a combined U.S. Army and Marine Corps, and ROK Army force.
1,106 enemy airplanes were officially downed by the Soviet pilots, 52 of whom got ace status.
During the war, five U.S. Navy ships were lost to mines: two minesweepers, two minesweeper escorts, and one ocean tug.
U.S. POWs also threw sick comrades out of their room to freezing outside.
The principal battles of the stalemate include the Battle of Bloody Ridge (18 August–15 September 1951), the Battle of the Punchbowl (31 August-21 September 1951), the Battle of Heartbreak Ridge (13 September–15 October 1951), the Battle of Old Baldy (26 June–4 August 1952), the Battle of White Horse (6–15 October 1952), the Battle of Triangle Hill (14 October–25 November 1952), the Battle of Hill Eerie (21 March–21 June 1952), the sieges of Outpost Harry (10–18 June 1953), the Battle of the Hook (28–29 May 1953), the Battle of Pork Chop Hill (23 March–16 July 1953), and the Battle of Kumsong (13–27 July 1953).
Many American officials viewed the deployment of nuclear-capable (but not nuclear-armed) B-29 bombers to Britain as helping to resolve the Berlin Blockade of 1948–1949.
In contrast, the ROK Army defenders were relatively unprepared and ill-equipped.
