Ssireum is a traditional form of wrestling that has been practiced in Korea for thousands of years, with evidence discovered from Goguryeo of Korea's Three Kingdoms Period (57&thinsp; to 688).
During the 15th and 16th centuries, Joseon enjoyed many benevolent rulers who promoted education and science.
In August 1948, only a few years after Korea achieved its independence from Japan, the Korean War, in Korea also known as the 6.25 war, broke out between North and South Korea.
However, in recent years, immigration from mainland China has increased; 624,994 persons of Chinese nationality have immigrated to South Korea, including 443,566 of ethnic Korean descent.
This brief period saw the partially successful modernisation of the military, economy, real property laws, education system, and various industries, influenced by the political encroachment into Korea of Russia, Japan, France, and the United States.
The name is derived from Korean 삼 "sam" 'three', 일 "il" 'one,' and 절 "jeol" 'day', the date of the uprising in 1919.
Hapkido is a modern Korean martial art with a grappling focus that employs joint locks, throws, kicks, punches and other striking attacks like attacks against pressure points.
The prevailing philosophy of the Joseon dynasty was Neo-Confucianism, which was epitomized by the seonbi class, scholars who passed up positions of wealth and power to lead lives of study and integrity.
King Munmu, son of Muyeol and nephew of General Kim Yu-shin launched another campaign in 667 and Goguryeo fell in the following year.
Since the 1960s, the South Korean economy has grown enormously and the economic structure was radically transformed.
The first, Hyangak, literally means ''The local music'' or ''Music native to Korea'' of which example is ''Sujecheon'', a piece of instrumental music as old as 1,300 years.
The name Korea is now commonly used in English contexts by both North and South Korea.
By the end of World War II, there were over 850,000 Japanese settlers in Korea.
Native or endemic species of the Korean Peninsula include Korean hare, Korean water deer, Korean field mouse, Korean brown frog, Korean pine and Korean spruce.
The southern extension of Mount Paektu is a highland called Gaema Heights.
Its convoluted coastline provides mild seas, and the resulting calm environment allows for safe navigation, fishing, and seaweed farming.
Baekje absorbed all of the Mahan states and subjugated most of the western Korean peninsula (including the modern provinces of Gyeonggi, Chungcheong, and Jeolla, as well as parts of Hwanghae and Gangwon) to a centralised government; during the expansion of its territory, Baekje acquired Chinese culture and technology through maritime contacts with the Southern Dynasties.
To the northwest, the Amnok River (Yalu River) separates Korea from China and to the northeast, the Duman River (Tumen River) separates Korea from China and Russia.
Goryeo was founded in 918 and replaced Silla as the ruling dynasty of Korea.
During the later part of the dynasty, however, Korea's isolationist policy earned it the Western nickname of the "Hermit Kingdom".
"Great Joseon" was the name of the kingdom ruled by the Joseon dynasty from 1393 until their declaration of the short-lived Great Korean Empire in 1897.
Later Silla carried on the maritime prowess of Baekje, which acted like the Phoenicia of medieval East Asia, and during the 8th and 9th centuries dominated the seas of East Asia and the trade between China, Korea and Japan, most notably during the time of Jang Bogo; in addition, Silla people made overseas communities in China on the Shandong Peninsula and the mouth of the Yangtze River.
The Korean alphabet hangul was also invented during this time by King Sejong the Great.
The publication of the Tripitaka Koreana onto more than 80,000 wooden blocks and the invention of the world's first metal movable type in the 13th century attest to Goryeo's cultural achievements.
Korean is the official language of both North and South Korea, and (along with Mandarin) of Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in Manchuria area of China.
During a match, opponents grip each other by sash belts wrapped around the waist and the thigh, attempting to throw their competitor to the sandy ground of the ring.
Following the Yuan Dynasty's collapse, severe political strife followed, and Goryeo eventually fell to a coup led by General Yi Seong-gye, who established Joseon in 1388.
Each block consists of at least two of the 24 hangul letters (''jamo''): at least one each of the 14 consonants and 10 vowels.
Meals are usually accompanied by a soup or stew, such as galbitang (stewed ribs) or doenjang jjigae (fermented bean paste soup).
Other popular dishes include ''bibimbap'' which literally means "mixed rice" (rice mixed with meat, vegetables, and red pepper paste) and naengmyeon (cold noodles).
Ssireum is the traditional national sport of Korea.
Korean scholars were writing poetry in the classical Korean style as early as the 2nd century&thinsp;, reflecting Korean thoughts and experiences of that time.
South Korea, officially the ''Republic of Korea'', is a multi-party state with a capitalist market economy, alongside membership in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the Group of Twenty.
Some linguists place it in the Altaic language family; others consider it to be a language isolate.
"Korea" is the modern spelling of '''Corea''', a name attested in English as early as 1614.
In 108&thinsp;, Gojoseon and the Han Chinese war, defeated GoJoseon retreated.
Exhausted after decades of fighting, Goryeo sent its crown prince to the Yuan capital to capitulate to the Mongols; Kublai Khan accepted, and married one of his daughters to the Korean crown prince, and the dynastic line of Goryeo continued to survive under the overlordship of the Mongol Yuan dynasty as a semi-autonomous vassal state and compulsory ally.
Goryeo had a hostile relationship with the Khitans, because the Khitan Empire destroyed Balhae, also a successor state of Goguryeo.
The collapse of the traditional Korean value system is another common theme of the time.
According to 2005 statistics compiled by the South Korean government, about 46% of citizens profess to follow no particular religion.
Since Korea only wrote Chinese characters that simply sounded like Koreans, it was very difficult for lower class to read Chinese since lower class did not have chance to learn Chinese characters.
The classification of Korean is debated.
Notable islands include Jeju Island (Jejudo), Ulleung Island (Ulleungdo), and Liancourt Rocks (Dokdo).
In 1897, the Joseon dynasty proclaimed the Korean Empire (1897–1910), and King Gojong became Emperor Gojong.
This eventually led to the Korean War in 1950, which ended in a stalemate without a formalized peace treaty, a factor that contributes to the high tensions which continue to divide the peninsula.
Competitions are also held throughout the year as a part of festivals and other events.
Although South Korean students often rank high on international comparative assessments, the education system is criticised for emphasising too much upon passive learning and memorization.
Outside the formal structure of schools and classrooms in the north is the extremely important "social education".
In addition to contesting for control of the Korean Peninsula, Goguryeo had many military encounters with various Chinese dynasties, most notably the Goguryeo-Sui War, in which Goguryeo defeated a huge force said to number over a million men.
The combined population of the Koreans is about 75 million (North Korea: 25 million, South Korea: 50 million).
Hangulnal was first founded during Japanese colonization to evoke how great Hangul was; at that time Japan tried to rid of Korean words and taught young students Japanese to colonize not only the property but also culture itself.
By the 2nd century, Silla existed as a large state in the southeast, occupying and influencing its neighboring city-states.
Hangul was created by King Sejong in 1446 October 9.
Hyunchoongil is the national holiday in Korea commemorating those who fought and died for the nation.
Instant noodles or ''ramyun'' are a popular snack food and Koreans also enjoy food from ''pojangmachas'' (street vendors), where customers can buy tteokbokki (rice cake and fish cake with a spicy gochujang sauce), ''gimbap'' made of steamed white rice wrapped in dried laver seaweed  as well as fried squid and glazed sweet potato.
These rivers have vast flood plains and provide an ideal environment for wet-rice cultivation.
Although written in Hanja as , , or , this ''Han'' has no relation to the Chinese place names or peoples who used those characters but was a  or ''Gan'') of a native Korean word that seems to have had the meaning "big" or "great", particularly in reference to leaders.
Goryeo sent the diplomat Seo Hui to negotiate, who persuaded the Khitan leader to let Goryeo expand to the banks of the Amnok River.
Kimchi is said to relieve the pores on the skin, thereby reducing wrinkles and providing nutrients to the skin naturally.
It is believed to have been printed in Korea in 750–51 AD which, if correct, would make it older than the Diamond Sutra.
Goryeo was invaded by the Mongols in seven major campaigns from the 1230s until the 1270s, but was never conquered.
In 1945, the Soviet Union and the United States agreed on the surrender of Japanese forces in Korea in the aftermath of World War II, leaving Korea partitioned along the 38th parallel, with the North under Soviet occupation and the South under U.S. occupation.
It has been tentatively linked with the title ''khan'' used by the nomads of Manchuria and Central Asia.
There are several lower, secondary mountain series whose direction is almost perpendicular to that of Baekdudaegan.
While Hangul may appear logographic, it is actually a phonemic alphabet organised into syllabic blocks.
With expanding British and American trade following the opening of Korea in the late 19th century, the spelling "Korea" appeared and gradually grew in popularity; its use in transcribing East Asian languages avoids the issues caused by the separate hard and soft Cs existing in English vocabulary derived from the Romance languages.
The name "Goryeo" (高麗) is a short form of "Goguryeo" (高句麗) and was first used during the time of King Jangsu.
Later Silla was a golden age of art and culture, as evidenced by the Hwangnyongsa, Seokguram, and Emille Bell.
Korean is agglutinative in its morphology and SOV in its syntax.
Confucian tradition has dominated Korean thought, along with contributions by Buddhism, Taoism, and Korean Shamanism.
Much of the post-war literature in South Korea deals with the daily lives of ordinary people, and their struggles with national pain.
In 1993, Japanese Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono acknowledged the terrible injustices faced by these euphemistically named "comfort women".
North Korea, officially the ''Democratic People's Republic of Korea'', is a one-party state, now centred on Kim Il-sung's Juche ideology, with a centrally planned industrial economy.
Early historical records of Han(한,韓), the ancestor of Korea was first mentioned in Shigyeong(시경,詩經), which was one of the Seven Chinese Classics: the Four Books and the Three Classics (사서삼경,四書三經), written in 1000 BC; In the story, Han(한후(韓侯), a King of Dongyi people(동이민족,東夷民族), also Joseon(朝鮮) Dynasty, had meeting with Zhou King (선왕,宣王) and negotiated border between the two nations.
However, the Emperor is said to have not actually ratified the treaty according to Yi Tae-jin.
The Korean War broke out when Soviet-backed North Korea invaded South Korea, though neither side gained much territory as a result.
Practitioners seek to gain advantage through footwork and body positioning to employ leverage, avoiding the pure use of strength against strength.
The second, ''yangak'', represent a more Western style.
The two nations became intertwined for 80 years as all subsequent Korean kings married Mongol princesses, and the last empress of the Yuan dynasty was a Korean princess.
Beginning in 1871, Japan began to force Korea out of the China's traditional sphere of influence into its own.
After World War II, most of these overseas Japanese repatriated to Japan.
After the second Manchu invasion and stabilized relations with the new Qing dynasty, Joseon experienced a nearly 200-year period of peace.
It is separated from Japan to the east by the Korea Strait and the East Sea.
Nurungji can also be eaten as a snack or a dessert.
In one notorious case it was reported that a woman in China became ill after consuming nothing but fried chicken and beer – the character's favorite snack – for several days.
Estimates based on the most recent North Korean census suggest that 240,000 to 420,000 people died as a result of the 1990s famine and that there were 600,000 to 850,000 unnatural deaths in North Korea from 1993 to 2008.
Ssireum competitions are traditionally held twice a year, during the Dano Festival (the 5th day of the fifth lunar month) and Chuseok (the 15th day of the 8th lunar month).
However, multiple invasions by the Mongol Yuan Dynasty during the 13th century greatly weakened the nation, which eventually agreed to become a vassal state after decades of fighting.
Soondae, a sausage made of cellophane noodles and pork blood, is widely eaten.
General Kim Yu-shin, aided by Tang forces, conquered Baekje after defeating General Gyebaek at the Battle of Hwangsanbeol.
To this day, valuable Korean artifacts can often be found in Japanese museums or among private collections.
In addition to the complex coastline, the western coast of the Korean Peninsula has an extremely high tidal amplitude (at Incheon, around the middle of the western coast.
The best preserved Korean pottery goes back to the paleolithic times around 10,000&thinsp; and the Neolithic period begins around 6000&thinsp;.
Taekwondo has become an official Olympic sport, starting as a demonstration event in 1988 (when South Korea hosted the Games in Seoul) and becoming an official medal event in 2000.
Animal life of Korea includes a considerable number of bird species and native freshwater fish.
It combines combat techniques, self-defense, sport, exercise and in some cases meditation and philosophy.
According to a North Korean official interviewed in 1990, 'School education is not enough to turn the rising generation into men of knowledge, virtue, and physical fitness.
The Khitans initially tried to make good relations, sending 50 camels as a gift, but Wang Geon tied the camels under a bridge and starved them to death.
This ''go'' is the Hanja  and simply means "ancient" or "old"; it is a modern usage to distinguish the ancient Joseon from the later dynasty.
Mahan was the largest and consisted of 54 states.
Other large groups of Korean speakers through Korean diaspora are found in China, the United States, Japan, former Soviet Union and elsewhere.
In 661, Silla and Tang attacked Goguryeo but were repelled.
The first opponent to touch the ground with any body part above the knee or to lose hold of their opponent loses the round.
Korea is unique among Asian countries in its use of metal chopsticks.
Wang Geon, the founder of Goryeo, was of Goguryeo descent and made Kaesong, his hometown, the capital.
There is great sensitivity to the influence of the social environment on the growing child and its role in the development of his or her character.
This education includes not only extracurricular activities but also family life and the broadest range of human relationships within society.
Taekwondo is one of Korea's most famous sports.
Located in the southern part of the Korean Peninsula, Samhan refers to the three confederacies of Mahan, Jinhan, and Byeonhan.
Fluorescent and high-magnetic analyses indicate the volcanic fossils may be from as early as 300,000&thinsp;.
Koreans were forced to take Japanese surnames, known as Sōshi-kaimei.
The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, ranks South Korea's science education as the third best in the world and being significantly higher than the OECD average.
Metal chopsticks have been discovered in archaeological sites belonging to the ancient Korean kingdoms of Goguryeo, Baekje and Silla.
One investigation by the South Korean government identified 75,311 cultural assets that were taken from Korea, 34,369 in Japan and 17,803 in the United States.
Korean music has been practiced since prehistoric times.
The Korean War led to the development of literature centered on the wounds and chaos of war.
The ideal of social education is to provide a carefully controlled environment in which children are exposed only to pro-Juche and anti-south influences.
Some significant mountains include Mount Sobaek or Sobaeksan (1,439&nbsp;m), Mount Kumgang or Kumgangsan (1,638&nbsp;m), Mount Seorak or Seoraksan (1,708&nbsp;m), Mount Taebaek or Taebaeksan (1,567&nbsp;m), and Mount Jiri or Jirisan (1,915&nbsp;m).
The southern and southwestern coastlines of Korea form a well-developed ria coastline, known as ''Dadohae-jin'' in Korean.
The North Korean education system consists primarily of universal and state funded schooling by the government.
Less than 30 years after the Japanese invasions, Joseon suffered an invasion by the Manchus, who went on to conquer Ming China and establish the Qing dynasty.
In South Korea, Korea as a whole is referred to as  lit.&thinsp;"country of the ''Han''").
There are also approximately 3,034 species of vascular plants.
Located on the Korean Peninsula, Korea is bordered by China to the northwest and Russia to the northeast.
Traditional Korean music includes combinations of the folk, vocal, religious and ritual music styles of the Korean people.
Korea was annexed to the Empire of Japan on August 29, 1910 following the imposed Japan-Korea Treaty.
Throughout Korean history and culture, regardless of separation; the influence of traditional beliefs of Korean Shamanism, Mahayana Buddhism, Confucianism and Taoism have remained an underlying religion of the Korean people as well as a vital aspect of their culture; all these traditions have coexisted peacefully for hundreds of years up to today despite strong Westernisation from Christian missionary conversions in the South or the pressure from the Juche government in the North.
Consequently, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, a Soviet-style socialist republic, was established in the north while the Republic of Korea, a Western-style regime, was established in the South.
In addition, Joseon received tribute from Jurchens and Japanese until the 17th century, and had a small enclave in the Ryukyu Kingdom that engaged in trade with Siam and Java.
The Three Kingdoms of Korea often warred with each other and Silla was often dominated by Baekje and Goguryeo.
After conquering Baekje and Goguryeo, Silla repulsed Tang China from the Korean peninsula in 676.
The development of celadon industries flourished in the 12th and 13th centuries.
Christians account for 29.2% of the population (of which are Protestants 18.3% and Catholics 10.9%) and Buddhists 22.8%.
Worldwide, there are up to 80 million speakers of the Korean language.
Jeju Island, situated off the southern coast, is a large volcanic island whose main mountain Mount Halla or Hallasan (1950&nbsp;m) is the highest in South Korea.
Ulleung Island is a volcanic island in the Sea of Japan, whose composition is more felsic than Jeju-do.
Two exceptions are the southward-flowing Nakdong River (Nakdonggang) and Seomjin River (Seomjingang).
Later Silla divided into three separate states during the Later Three Kingdoms period.
Korean resistance to the brutal Japanese occupation was manifested in the nonviolent March 1st Movement of 1919, during which 7,000 demonstrators were killed by Japanese police and military.
The peninsula is surrounded by the Yellow Sea to the west, the East China Sea and Korea Strait to the south, and the Sea of Japan.
Former Goguryeo general Dae Joyeong led a group of Goguryeo refugees to the Jilin area in Manchuria and founded Balhae, 30 years after the collapse of Goguryeo, as the successor to Goguryeo.
Gwanbok means "returned light" representing gaining national sovereignty from Japan.
As a result of the Sino-Japanese War (1894–95), the Qing Dynasty  had to give up such a position according to Article 1 of the Treaty of Shimonoseki, which was concluded between China and Japan in 1895.
Goryeo's name was a continuation of the earlier Goguryeo or  the northernmost of the ''Samguk'' (the Three Kingdoms of Korea), which was officially known by the shortened form Goryeo after the 5th-century reign of King Jangsu.
Bulgogi (roasted marinated meat, usually beef), galbi (marinated grilled short ribs), and samgyeopsal (pork belly) are popular meat entrees.
In 1910, an already militarily occupied Korea was a forced party to the Japan-Korea Annexation Treaty.
Around the same time, Balhae collapsed and its last remaining crown prince fled south to Goryeo, where he was accepted into the imperial family.
Silla first annexed the adjacent Gaya confederacy in 562.
In 1957, South Korea had a lower per capita GDP than Ghana, and by 2008 it was 17 times as high as Ghana's.
Beginning in the 6th century, Silla's power gradually extended across the Korean Peninsula.
Because the mountainous region is mostly on the eastern part of the peninsula, the main rivers tend to flow westwards.
By the 660s, Silla formed an alliance with the Tang Dynasty of China to conquer Baekje and later Goguryeo.
Product placements in the dramas have proven effective in advertising;  for example, sales of cosmetics, clothing and food favored by the female lead played by actress Jun Ji-hyun in the drama My Love from the Star rose significantly after the relevant episodes aired.
South Korea ranks second on math and literature and first in .
Silla was the smallest and weakest of the three, but it used cunning diplomatic means to make opportunistic pacts and alliances with the more powerful Korean kingdoms, and eventually Tang China, to its great advantage.
During this tumultuous period, Goryeo momentarily conquered Liaoyang in 1356, repulsed two large invasions by the Red Turbans in 1359 and 1360, and defeated the final attempt by the Yuan to dominate Goryeo when General Choe Yeong defeated a Mongol tumen in 1364.
After defeating the Khitan Empire, which was the most powerful empire of its time, Goryeo experienced a golden age that lasted a century, during which the Tripitaka Koreana was completed, and there were great developments in printing and publishing, promoting learning and dispersing knowledge on philosophy, literature, religion, and science; by 1100, there were 12 universities that produced famous scholars and scientists.
In North Korea, China, Japan, Vietnam, and Chinese and Vietnamese-speaking areas, Korea as a whole is referred to as , (), ''Cháoxiǎn'', (), ''Chōsen'', '''' () lit.&thinsp;"land of the Morning Calm").
In 642, the powerful general Yeon Gaesomun led a coup and gained complete control over Goguryeo.
Although later records claim that Silla was the oldest of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, it is now believed to have been the last kingdom to develop.
Goryeo had to defend frequently against attacks by nomadic empires, especially the Khitans and the Mongols.
Modern Korean is written almost exclusively in the script of the Korean alphabet (known as Hangul in South Korea and Chosungul in China and North Korea), which was invented in the 15th century.
The most prestigious university in the DPRK is Kim Il-sung University.
Subsequent to its establishment, Hyungchoogil was reinterpreted as a day of remembrance for those who died defending Korea in all conflicts, not only during the Korean War.
The number of foreigners living in Korea has also steadily increased since the late 20th century, particularly in South Korea, where more than 1 million foreigners reside.
Later, Wangbu's(왕부,王符) book, Jamburon (잠부론,潛夫論) written in Han(한) Dynasty(circa AD 100) described Han King's(한후,韓侯) descendants began using Han(한,韓) as their sir-name.
Islam in South Korea is practiced by about 45,000 natives (about 0.09% of the population) in addition to some 100,000 foreign workers from Muslim countries.
The Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) with its forest and natural wetlands is a unique biodiversity spot, which harbours eighty two endangered species.
The name references the ''Samhan''Ma, Jin, and Byeonwho preceded the Three Kingdoms in the southern and central end of the peninsula during the 1st centuries&thinsp; and .
Literature, written in Chinese characters (hanja), was established at the same time as the Chinese script arrived on the peninsula.
However, experts estimate that over 100,000 artifacts actually remain in Japan.
In Manchuria on 26 October 1909, An Jung-geun assassinated the former Resident-General of Korea, Itō Hirobumi for his role in trying to force Korea into occupation.
Children go through one year of kindergarten, four years of primary education, six years of secondary education, and then on to universities.
The Korean liberation movement also spread to neighbouring Manchuria and Siberia.
Modern literature is often linked with the development of hangul, which helped spread literacy from the aristocracy to the common men and women.
The original name was a combination of the adjective ''go'' ("high, lofty") with the name of a local Yemaek tribe, whose original name is thought to have been either * "walled city," inferred from some toponyms in Chinese historical documents) or * "center").
This highland was mainly raised during the Cenozoic orogeny and partly covered by volcanic matter.
However, during the last years of the Joseon dynasty, Korea's isolationist policy earned it the name of the "Hermit Kingdom", primarily for its protection against Western imperialism before it was forced to open trade, beginning an era leading into Japanese imperial rule.
The war ended in an Armistice Agreement at approximately the Military Demarcation Line.
Japanese officials considered returning Korean cultural properties, but to date this has not occurred.
''Joseon'' itself is the modern Korean pronunciation of  but it is unclear whether this was a transcription of a native Korean name (OC&thinsp;*''Trawser'', MC&thinsp;''Trjewsjen'') or a partial translation into Chinese of the Korean capital  whose meaning has been reconstructed as "Morning Land" or "Mountain".
The Tang-Silla alliance finally conquered Goguryeo in 668.
Hangulnal is the day to celebrate the creation of Hunminjeongeum (Hangul, Korean letter), which is now registered in UNESCO Memory of the World, and praise its superiority.
The Korean Peninsula remains divided, the Korean Demilitarized Zone being the ''de facto'' border between the two states.
This golden age saw great cultural and scientific advancements, including in printing, meteorological observation, astronomy, calendar science, ceramics, military technology, geography, cartography, medicine, and agricultural technology, some of which were unrivaled elsewhere.
There was a significant level of emigration to the overseas territories of the Empire of Japan during the Japanese occupation period, including Korea.
Fish is also a popular commodity, as it is the traditional meat that Koreans eat.
Buddhism flourished during this time, and many Korean Buddhists gained great fame among Chinese Buddhists and contributed to Chinese Buddhism, including: Woncheuk, Wonhyo, Uisang, Musang, and Kim Gyo-gak, a Silla prince whose influence made Mount Jiuhua one of the Four Sacred Mountains of Chinese Buddhism.
Goryeo had a bustling economy with a capital that was frequented by merchants from all over the known world.
Toyotomi Hideyoshi intended to conquer China and India through the Korean Peninsula, but was defeated by strong resistance from the Righteous Army, the naval superiority of Admiral Yi Sun-sin and his turtle ships, and assistance from Wanli Emperor and Ming China.
Hapkido emphasizes circular motion, non-resisting movements and control of the opponent.
It was estimated in 2006 that only 26,700 of the old Chinese community now remain in South Korea.
Baekje was a great maritime power; its nautical skill, which made it the Phoenicia of East Asia, was instrumental in the dissemination of Buddhism throughout East Asia and continental culture to Japan.
Nearly 400,000 Korean labourers died.
(Scholars who discount the historicity of Polo's account instead derive it via Persian variations of the same Chinese name.)
Later Silla fell apart in the late 9th century, giving way to the tumultuous Later Three Kingdoms period (892–935), and Balhae was destroyed by the Khitans in 926.
King Taejo had named them for the earlier  who ruled northern Korea from its legendary prehistory until their conquest in 108&thinsp; by China's Han Empire.
This mountain range is named Baekdudaegan.
Goryeo (also known as Later Goguryeo) unified the Later Three Kingdoms and received the last crown prince of Balhae, thus bringing about a unification of the two successor nations of Goguryeo.
Like Japanese and Vietnamese, Korean has borrowed much vocabulary from the Chinese or created vocabulary on Chinese models.
