During the war, upon becoming angry with Arjuna for not fighting in true spirit against his ancestors, Krishna once picked up a carriage wheel in order to use it as a weapon to challenge Bhishma.
The news was conveyed to Hastinapur and Dwaraka by eyewitnesses to this event.
Overcome with grief he laid down his arms, and on Krishna's instruction Dhrishtadyumna beheaded Drona.
He had considered the Kurukshetra war to be a last resort after voluntarily acting as a messenger in order to establish peace between the Pandavas and Kauravas.
This idea of having a playful god is very important in Hinduism.
Some Vaishnavite scholars, such as Bhaktivinoda Thakura, claim that this herdsman refers to Krishna.
Krishna told Jara, "O Jara, you were Bali in your previous birth, killed by myself as Rama in Tretayuga.
Vasudeva, along with his nine other brothers (each son a powerful wrestler) and one elder sister (Anjana) capture all of Jambudvipa  (many consider this to be India) after beheading their evil uncle, King Kansa, and later all other kings of Jambudvipa with his Sudarshana Chakra.
Shiva asked Krishna to spare Bana and asked him to give his daughter in marriage to Aniruddha.
Lord Vishnu agreed to help her and promised her that he would be born on Earth.
Due to a vow given to Shishupal's mother, Krishna forgave a hundred verbal abuses by Shishupal, and upon the one hundred and first, he assumed his Virat (universal) form and killed Shishupal with his Chakra.
Krishna is central to many of the main stories of the epic.
Based on his name, Krishna is often depicted in murtis as black or blue-skinned.
Krishna never appears to grow old or age at all in the historical depictions of the Puranas despite passing of several decades, but there are grounds for a debate whether this indicates that he has no material body, since battles and other descriptions of the Mahabhārata epic show clear indications that he seems to be subject to the limitations of nature.
The stories of his play with the gopis (milkmaids) of Vrindavana, especially Radha (daughter of Vrishbhanu, one of the original residents of Vrindavan) became known as the ''Rasa lila'' and were romanticised in the poetry of Jayadeva, author of the Gita Govinda.
Krishna had eight principal wives, also known as Ashtabharya: Rukmini, Satyabhama, Jambavati, Nagnajiti, Kalindi, Mitravinda, Bhadra and Lakshmana.
In South India, devotion to Krishna, as an avatar of Vishnu, spread in the face of opposition to Buddhism, Shaktism, and Shaivism and ritualistic Vedic sacrifices.
He is also known to have four symbols of the jambu fruit on his right foot as mentioned in the Srimad Bhagavatam commentary (verse 10.30.25), "Sri Rupa Cintamani" and "Ananda Candrika" by Srila Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakura.
In South India, Vaishnavas usually belong to the Sri Sampradaya.
While discussing the origin of Indian theatre, Horwitz talks about the mention of the Krishna story in Patanjali's Mahabhashya (c. 150&nbsp;BC), where the episodes of slaying of Kansa (Kansa Vadha) and "Binding of the heaven storming titan" (Bali Bandha) are described.
Since the 1960s the worship of Krishna has also spread to the Western world and to Africa largely due to the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON).
According to Arrian, Diodorus, and Strabo, Megasthenes described an Indian tribe called Sourasenoi, who especially worshipped Herakles in their land, and this land had two cities, Methora and Kleisobora, and a navigable river, the Jobares.
Roughly one quarter of the ''Bhagavata Purana'' is spent extolling his life and philosophy.
The flute of Krishna means the flute of revelation and not the physical flute.
There is no scope for contemplation now or remorse later, it is indeed time for war and the world will remember your might and immense powers for time to come.
Theologists, like Kristin Johnston Largen, believe that Krishna's childhood can even inspire other religions to look for lila in deities so that they have a chance to experience a part of their faith that they may not have previously seen.
The term Krishnaism has been used to describe the sects of Krishna, reserving the term "Vaishnavism" for sects focusing on Vishnu in which Krishna is an avatar, rather than as a transcendent Supreme Being.
Many Puranas tell Krishna's life-story or some highlights from it.
Krishna belonged to the Vrishni clan of Yadavas from Mathura, and was the eighth son born to the princess Devaki, and her husband Vasudeva.
Most of Krishna's life was spent in slaying each of Jarasandha' allies.
Krishna's elder brother, Balarama, then gave up his body using Yoga.
In southern India, Purandara Dasa  and Kanakadasa  of Karnataka composed songs devoted to the Krishna image of Udupi.
The food's proximity to Krishna added a "spiritual effect," and was seen to "counteract material contamination affecting the soul."
The scenes from the narrative are set in ancient India mostly in the present states of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Delhi  and Gujarat.
Other traditions are Bhagavatism  and the cult of Gopala, that along with the cult of Bala Krishna form the basis of current tradition of monotheistic religion of Krishna.
While it was a unanimous feeling amongst most present at the ceremony that Krishna should get the first honours, his cousin Shishupala felt otherwise and started berating Krishna.
All Vaishnava traditions recognise Krishna as an avatar of Vishnu; others identify Krishna with Vishnu; while traditions, such as Gaudiya Vaishnavism, Vallabha Sampradaya and the Nimbarka Sampradaya, regard Krishna as the ''Svayam Bhagavan'', original form of God.
In the story of Krishna, the deity is the agent of conception and also the offspring.
The earliest text to explicitly provide detailed descriptions of Krishna as a personality is the epic Mahabharata  which depicts Krishna as an incarnation of Vishnu.
Seldomly he is shown with his brother Balarama and sister Subhadra, or his queens Rukmini and Satyabhama
He also possessed the Narayanastra, NagaPasha and the Vasavi Shakti and all other divine astras.
Another verse mentions musical instruments being played at meetings in the temples of Rama (Balarama) and Kesava (Krishna).
He was the first to defeat mighty Jarasandha, the ruler of Magadha even though he couldn't kill him.
The blind king Dhritarashtra also obtained divine vision to be able to see this form of Krishna during the time when Duryodana tried to capture Krishna when he came as a peace bearer before the great Mahabharat War.
However Krishna married them to reinstate their status in the society.
Krishna asked Arjuna, "Have you within no time, forgotten the Kauravas' evil deeds such as not accepting the eldest brother Yudhishtira as King, usurping the entire Kingdom without yielding any portion to the Pandavas, meting out insults and difficulties to Pandavas, attempt to murder the Pandavas in the Barnava lac guest house, publicly attempting to disrobe and disgracing Draupadi.
The stories of Krishna's childhood and youth tell how he became a cow herder, his mischievous pranks as ''Makhan Chor'' (butter thief), his foiling of attempts to take his life, and his role as a protector who robbed the hearts of the people in both Gokul and Vrindavana.
Baladeva is the upholder of the Jain principle of non-violence.
Swaminarayan, the founder of the Swaminarayan Sampraday, also worshipped Krishna as God himself.
In ''Lecture Sialkot'', Ghulam Ahmed wrote:
The principal scriptures discussing Krishna's story are the ''Srimad Bhagavatam'', the ''Mahabharata'', the ''Harivamsa'', the ''Bhagavata Purana'', and the ''Vishnu Purana''.
The 'divine boy' Krishna as an embodiment of wisdom and endearing prankster forms a part of the pantheon of gods in Japanese Buddhism
Lord Krishna was a mighty Maha Maharathi greater than any past, present or future warrior.
Cave paintings dated to 800&nbsp;BCE in Mirzapur, Mirzapur district, Uttar Pradesh, show raiding horse-charioteers, one of whom is about to hurl a wheel, and who could potentially be identified as Krishna.
He was full of love for God, a friend of virtue and an enemy of evil.
While Karna was trying to take out the chariot from the grip of the Earth,unarmed, Krishna reminded Arjuna how Karna and the other Kauravas had broken all rules of battle while simultaneously attacking and killing Abhimanyu, and he convinced Arjuna to do the same in revenge in order to kill Karna.Thus Arjuna broke all the rules of the battle too.
Krishna married Rukmini, the Vidarbha princess, by abducting her, at her request, from her proposed wedding with Shishupala.
"Greater Krishnaism" corresponds to the second and dominant phase of Vaishnavism, revolving around the cults of the Vasudeva, Krishna, and Gopala of the late Vedic period.
Additionally, the practice of distributing prasad or "sanctified food" worked as a catalyst in the dissemination of his works.
A year later in 1966, after gaining many followers, he was able to form the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON), popularly known as the Hare Krishna movement.
Many believe that lila being connected with Krishna gives Hindus a deeper connection to him and thus a deeper connection to Vishnu also; seeing as Krishna is an incarnation of Vishnu.
When the 8th child is born, it is the reincarnation of Lord Vishnu, Lord Krishna.
Some early scholars would equate it with Bhagavatism,  and the founder of this religious tradition is believed to be Krishna, who is the son of Vasudeva, thus his name is ''Vāsudeva'';  he is said to be historically part of the Satvata tribe, and according to them his followers called themselves Bhagavatas and this religion had formed by the 2nd century BC (the time of Patanjali), or as early as the 4th century BC according to evidence in Megasthenes and in the Arthasastra of Kautilya, when ''Vāsudeva'' was worshiped as supreme deity in a strongly monotheistic format, where the supreme being was perfect, eternal and full of grace.
Agrawal has also accepted this identification.
Krishna is recognised as the Svayam Bhagavan in his own right or as the complete/absolute incarnation of Lord Vishnu.
You are aware that Bhishmacharya and your Teachers are tied down to their dharma of protecting the unitarian power of the Kuru throne.
Krishna was born to Devaki and her husband, Vasudeva.
Krishna is one of the most widely revered and popular of all Hindu deities.
Because Kansa was uncertain of which of the 8 nephews would kill him, Kansa brutally murdered all six of Devaki's children often bashing their heads in .This indeed forced Kansa to slain all the previous six children brutally, born to Devaki and Vasudeva.
Krishna is often described and portrayed as an infant eating butter; a young boy playing a flute, as in the ''Bhagavata Purana''; a young man along with Radha; a young man surrounded by women; or as an elder giving direction and guidance, as in the ''Bhagavad Gita''.
The death date was deduced from Puranic hints such as the Matsya Purana mention which says Krishna was 89 years old when the Kurukshetran War was fought and the verses from Mahabharata which states that Sri Krishna lived 36 years after the Kurukshetra war.
The purpose of this movement was to write about Krishna in English and to share the Gaudiya Vaishnava philosophy with people in the Western world by spreading the teachings of the saint Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
Once, the thousand armed Daitya Banasura arrested Krishna's grandson Aniruddha as his own daughter was in love with him.
Brahmi inscription on the Mora stone slab, now in the Mathura Museum.
The movement, which started in the 6th-7th century A.D. in the Tamil-speaking region of South India, with twelve Alvar (one immersed in God) saint-poets, who wrote devotional songs.
Some religiously oriented scholars have tried to calculate dates for the birth of Krishna, some believing that Krishna, under the name of "Vasudeva Govinda Krishna Shauri," flourished as the ruler of Shuraseni and Vrishni tribes on the now-submerged island of Dwaraka (off the coast of Gujarat, India) sometime between 3200 and 3100 BC.
Each son of Krishna sired ten sons.
Due to the countinous threat by the demons sent by Kansa, Lord Krishna gave idea to his father and the villagers that they can leave Gokul and go to Vrindavan.
The acharyas of the Sri Sampradaya have written reverentially about Krishna in most of their works like the Thiruppavai by Andal and Gopala Vimshati by Vedanta Desika.
The ''Bhagavata Purana'', ''Vishnu Purana'', and ''Harivamsa'' list the children of Krishna from the Ashtabharya with some variation, while Rohini's sons are interpreted to represent the unnumbered children of his junior wives.
Upon seeing this, Bhishma dropped his weapons and asked Krishna to kill him.
Among these disciples was Krishnananda Dutta Chaudhury,
In Hindu art, Krishna is often depicted dancing on the multi-hooded Kāliyā.
The waning moon is called Krishna Paksha, relating to the adjective meaning "darkening."
The Bodhisattva, is born in this tale as one of his youngest brothers named Ghatapandita, and saves Krishna from the grief of losing his son.
But, once these peace negotiations failed and was embarked into the war, then he became a clever strategist.
Although, the rampage of demons continued in Vrindavan, in the lord's presence they were reduced to dust.
He also defeated demons like Dhenukasura, Vatsasura, Keshi, Aghasura, Arishtasura, Bakasura, Vyomasura, Pralambasura and many others in Vrindavan.
Many Bengalis surrendered at his lotus feet, becoming his disciples and adopting the Gaudiya Vaisnava way of life.
Krishna lifted the Govardhana hill  and taught Indra, the king of the devas, a lesson to protect the native people of Vrindavana from persecution by Indra and prevent the devastation of the pasture land of Govardhan.
Mackay, who did the excavation at Mohanjodaro, compares this image with the Yamalarjuna episode.
So rise O Arjuna!, tighten up your Gandiva and let all directions shiver till their farthest horizons, by the reverberation of its string."
Krishna is easily recognized by his representations.
Krishna subsequently married 16,000 or 16,100 maidens who were held captive by the demon Narakasura, to save their honour.
In the Buddhist version, Krishna is called ''Vasudeva'', ''Kanha'' and Keshava, and Balarama is his older brother, Baladeva.
These became important as part of the development of the Krishna bhakti traditions worshiping Radha Krishna.
You are aware that Duryodhana particularly have long harboured jealousy and hatred for you Pandavas and badly want to prove their hegemony.
Krishna had a profound effect on the Mahabharata war and its consequences.
* Dr. Manish Pandit's 2009 study places Krishna's life in the 31st century BC
Because of his sympathy for the earth, the almighty lord Vishnu himself descended into the womb of Devaki and was born as her son, Vaasudeva (i.e., Krishna).
'''Krishna''' (; Sanskrit: , '''' in IAST, pronounced ) is a major Hindu deity worshiped in a variety of different perspectives.
Krishna invaded his city and fought Banasura.
Later with the help of Vrishabanu (who was both Radha's father and Nand 'friend) helped Nand and his villagers to settle in Vridavan.
Krishna is especially looked upon as a full manifestation of Vishnu, and as one with Vishnu himself.
Yet it presents many peculiarities and is either an independent version or a misrepresentation of a popular story that had wandered far from its home.
Krishna killed the demoness Putana, disguised as a wet nurse, shaktasur, and the tornado demon Trinavarta both sent by Kansa to kill krishna in Gokul.
While battles apparently seem to indicate limitations, Mahabharata also shows in many places where Krishna is not subject to any limitations through episodes Duryodhana trying to arrest Krishna where his body burst into fire showing all creation within him.
According to Puranic sources, Krishna's departure marks the end of Dvapara Yuga and the start of Kali Yuga, which is dated to 17/18 February 3102&nbsp;BCE.
Out of many deities, Krishna is particularly important, and traditions of Vaishnava lines are generally centred either on Vishnu or on Krishna as supreme.
Nanda was the head of a community of cow-herders in Gokul.
However, Arjuna apologised to Krishna, promising that he would fight with full dedication here/after, and the battle continued.
Many scholars have suggested that the deity identified as Herakles was Krishna.
The earliest works included those of the Alvar saints of the Tamil country.
Krishna aided Arjuna in killing Jayadratha, who had held the other four Pandava brothers at bay while Arjuna's son Abhimanyu entered Drona's Chakravyuha formation—an effort in which he was killed by the simultaneous attack of eight Kaurava warriors.
The other miracles like changing a basket of fruit into precious stones and jewels of a fruit vendor due to her offering of fruit to the Lord for her love for the godchild is well known.He later in Vrindavan, tamed the serpent Kāliyā, who previously poisoned the waters of Yamuna river, thus leading to the death of the cowherds.
This image recalls the Yamalarjuna episode of ''Bhagavata'' and ''Harivamsa Purana''.
He was one of the very few people who knew the secret of both entering in to and coming out of Chakra Vyuha.
But as soon as Yudhishthira had uttered the first line, Pandava army on Krishna's direction broke into celebration with drums and conchs, in the din of which Drona could not hear the second part of the Yudhishthira's declaration and assumed that his son indeed was dead.
454) gives an account of Krishna's childhood and subsequent exploits which in many points corresponds with the Brahmanic legends of his life and contains several familiar incidents and names, such as Vâsudeva, Baladeva, Kaṃsa.
A steatite (soapstone) tablet unearthed from Mohenjo-daro, Larkana district, Sindh depicting a young boy uprooting two trees from which are emerging two human figures is an interesting archaeological find for fixing dates associated with Krishna.
Essentially, Shishupala and Dantavakra were both re-incarnations of Vishnu's gate-keepers Jaya and Vijaya, who were cursed to be born on Earth, to be delivered by the Vishnu back to Vaikuntha.
Representations in temples often show him standing in a bent posture, holding a flute in his hand accompanied with his consort Radha and gopis.
The anecdotes and narratives of Krishna, in topic, are generally titled as ''Krishna Leela''.
Sharing this sanctified food with the public, in turn, enabled the movement to gain new recruits and further spread these teachings.
Mathura (in present-day Mathura district, Uttar Pradesh) was the capital of the Yadavas, to which Krishna's parents Vasudeva and Devaki belonged.
Later, he took his Yadava subjects to the city of Dwaraka (in modern Gujarat) and established a new kingdom there.
Worship of Krishna as ''Svayam Bhagavan'', or the Supreme Being known as Krishnaism, arose in the Middle Ages in the context of the Bhakti movement.
The worship of Krishna is part of Vaishnavism, which regards Vishnu as the supreme God and venerates his associated avatars, their consorts, and related saints and teachers.
The Jain tradition lists of sixty-three Śalākāpuruṣa or notable figures includes, amongst others, the twenty-four Tirthankaras and nine sets of this triad.
In an effort to gain attention, followers chanted the names of God in public locations.
Among the most common names are ''Mohnish'' "Attractive God," ''Mohan'' "enchanter," ''Govinda'', "Finder of 'Go' - Veda or the cows" or ''Gopala'', "Protector of the 'Go' - "Soul" or the cows" as 'Govinda' (like cowherds who protect cows, the Lord protect the souls of the living beings) which refer to Krishna's childhood in Braj (in present-day Uttar Pradesh).
Krishna himself is eventually speared by a hunter in the foot by mistake, leaving the sole survivor of their family being their sister, Anjanadevi of whom no further mention is made.
This reduced Indra's pride and he felt guilt of his act and sought forgivness from the lord in the form of a sage.
Jain tradition also shows that these tales were popular and were worked up into different forms, for the Jains have an elaborate system of ancient patriarchs which includes Vâsudevas and Baladevas.
became epitomes of Krishna-devotion in north India.
Two of his other siblings also survived, Balarama  (Devaki's seventh child, miraculously transferred to the womb of Rohini, Vasudeva's first wife) and Subhadra (daughter of Vasudeva and Rohini, born much later than Balarama and Krishna).
Krishna then lifted Govardhan and held it over the people like an umbrella.
Chandogya Upanishad (3.17.6), dated between 8th and 6th century BCE, mentions Vasudeva Krishna as the son of Devaki and the disciple of Ghora Angirasa, the seer who preached his disciple the philosophy of ‘Chhandogya.’ Having been influenced by the philosophy of ‘Chhandogya’ Krishna in the Bhagavadgita while delivering the discourse to Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra discussed about sacrifice, which can be compared to purusha or the individual.
* A. K. Bansal calculated 21 July 3228 BCE as the birth date of Sri Krishna.
Krishna then advises him about the battle, with the conversation soon extending into a discourse which was later compiled as the Bhagavad Gita.
The former dwells only on his childhood exploits and the latter is a one-act play based on a single episode from the ''Mahābhārata'' when Krishna tries to make peace between the warring cousins.
Krishna had directed Yudhishthira and Arjuna to return to Bhishma the boon of "victory" which he had given to Yudhishthira before the war commenced, since he himself was standing in their way to victory.
The hunter Jara, mistook Krishna's partly visible left foot for that of a deer, and shot an arrow, wounding him mortally.
The acharyas of the Sri Sampradaya like Manavala Mamunigal, Vedanta Desika strongly advocated surrender to Vishnu as the aim of the Vedas.
Krishna is also depicted and worshipped as a small child (''Bala Krishna'',  the child Krishna), crawling on his hands and knees, or dancing, often with butter or Laddu in his hand being Laddu Gopal.
Krishna is also known as Govinda, Mukunda, Madhusudhana, and Vasudeva.
Despite skepticism from some parts of the scientific fraternity these findings found immense popular support in India.
Lord Vishnu himself later appeared to Devaki and Vasudeva and told them that he himself would be their eighth son and kill Kansa and destroy sin in the world.
Gaudia Math is also a leading proponent of Krishna worship.
as the ''drapsa ... krishna''  "black drop" of RV 8.96.13.
In each age of the Jain cyclic time is born a Vasudeva with an elder brother termed the Baladeva.
The incarnation of Sri Krishna is a virgin conception.
Krishna's childhood reinforces the Hindu concept of lila, playing for fun and enjoyment and not for sport or gain.
One of these triads is Krishna as the Vasudeva, Balarama as the Baladeva and Jarasandha as the Prati-Vasudeva.
A paper presented in a conference in 2004 by a group of archaeologists, religious scholars and astronomers from Somnath Trust of Gujarat, which was organised at Prabhas Patan, the supposed location of the death of Sri Krishna, fixes the death of Sri Krishna on 18 February 3102 BC at the age of 125 years and 7 months.
Ahmadis maintain that the Sanskrit term ''Avatar'' is synonymous with the term  'prophet' of the Middle Eastern religious tradition as God's intervention with man; as God appoints a man as his vicegerent upon earth.
Thirty-six years later, a fight broke out between the Yadavas at a festival, who killed each other.
Ashwathama had died but he was nor sure whether it was a Drona's son or an elephant.
On Earth in the Yadava clan, he was yadav according to his birth, a prince named Kansa (who is actually an Asura by birth) conquered the whole earth and indralok (heaven)  .
The scene on the battlefield of the epic ''Mahabharata'', notably where he addresses Pandava prince Arjuna in the ''Bhagavad Gita'', is another common subject for representation.
Since Jataka tales are given from the perspective of Buddha's previous lives (as well as the previous lives of many of Buddha's followers), Krishna appears as the "Dhammasenapati" or "Chief General of the Dharma" and is usually shown being Buddha's "right-hand man" in Buddhist art and iconography.
This summary is a historical account, based on literary details from the ''Mahābhārata'', the ''Harivamsa'', the ''Bhagavata Purana'' and the ''Vishnu Purana''.
He also stated that the Kurukshetra war took place in 3139 BCE.
Krishna is often depicted wearing a silk golden yellow dhoti, and a peacock feather crown.
In this image, the young boy is Krishna, and the two human beings emerging from the trees are the two cursed gandharvas, identified as Nalakubara and Manigriva.
Quintus Curtius also mentions that when Alexander the Great confronted Porus, Porus's soldiers were carrying an image of Herakles in their vanguard.
Kulasekaraazhvaar's Mukundamala was another notable work of this early stage.
* Dr. Narhari Achar states that Krishna lived sometime between 3200 BC and 3112 BCE.
She went to visit Lord Vishnu and ask for help.
Other depictions show him stealing butter from neighboring houses in the form of Gopkrishna; defeating the vicious serpent in the form of Navneet Chora or Gokulakrishna; or lifting the hill in the form of Giridhara Krishna.
During the wedding ceremony of Kansa's sister Devaki to his childhood friend Vasudev, a divine prophecy (loud voice from the sky- Akasha Vani in Samskrutam) prophesied that the 8th son of Kansa's sister Devaki would kill Kansa.
The movement originated in South India during the seventh-century CE, spreading northwards from Tamil Nadu through Karnataka and Maharashtra; by the fifteenth century, it was established in Bengal and northern India
* Jain tradition consider Krishna to be cousin of Neminatha, who is believed to be born 84000 years before Parshvanatha (i.e.
The ''Harivamsa'', a later appendix to this epic, contains the earliest detailed version of Krishna's childhood and youth.
According to Arthasastra of Kautilya (4th century BCE) ''Vāsudeva'' was worshiped as supreme Deity in a strongly monotheistic format.
On asked by Drona, Yudhishthira proclaimed  i.e.
Lord Vishnu agreed to help them.
At the time of the great battle, Krishna acted as Arjuna's charioteer, since this position did not require the wielding of weapons.
Open your eyes O Bhaarata and know that I encompass the Karta, Karma and Kriya, all in myself.
As depicted in the Mahābhārata, all of the sons are eventually killed due to a curse of sage Kanhadipayana (Veda Vyasa, also known as Krishna Dwaipayana).
Even those who could not physically be there joined him through meditation.
According to Srimad Bhagavatham, Rishi Vyas cursed yadavas (due to a tactful play by Yadavas with Rishi Vyas) saying, your entire community will die.
Krishna further exhorted in his famous Bhagavad Gita, "Arjuna, do not engage in philosophical analyses at this point of time like a Pundit.
According to social custom of the time, all of the captive women were degraded, and would be unable to marry, as they had been under the Narakasura's control.
The deity ''Krishna-Vasudeva'' (''''  "Krishna, the son of Vasudeva") is historically one of the earliest forms of worship in Krishnaism and Vaishnavism.
Shatapatha Brahmana and ''Aitareya-Aranyaka'', associate Krishna with his Vrishni origins.
On the order of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu traveled extensively throughout Bengal, humbly begging everyone he met to chant the holy names and worship Radha-Krishna.
On his return to Mathura as a young man, Krishna overthrew and killed his maternal uncle, Kansa, after quelling several assassination attempts from Kansa's followers.
Vasudeva secretly carries the infant Krishna out of the prison and trades him with Nanda, a kinsman of Vasudeva for his daughter(this daughter was yog maya (durga) incarnated herself who warned kans that his death is arrived in his kingdom and she disappears) .
Vartak places Lord Krishna's birth year as 5561 BCE.
Lord krishna is considered as the greatest warrior in all of Hindu mythology.
Krishna killed the demon and released them all.
He was a cousin of the twenty-second Tirthankara, Neminatha.
Finally, they settled in Vrindavana.
Once battle seemed inevitable, Krishna offered both sides the opportunity to choose between having either his army called Narayani Sena or himself alone, but on the condition that he personally would not raise any weapon.
He is a protector, but he only appears to be a young boy having fun.
Ghulam Ahmad also claimed to be the likeness of Krishna as a latter day reviver of religion and morality whose mission was to reconcile man with God.
Out of affection for Devaki, Kansa did not kill her outright.
Mother Bhudevi (goddess Earth) became upset by the sin being committed on Earth, she sought help from Lord Vishnu.
Krishna also caused the downfall of Drona, when he signalled Bhima to kill an elephant called Ashwatthama, the namesake of Drona's son.
