In early 1980s, the company spun off all its operating activities and was restructured as a holding company.
Later that year, Krupp and Thyssen announced a full merger, which was completed in 1999 with the formation of ThyssenKrupp AG.
Alfried was the richest man in Europe, and among the world’s handful of billionaires.
In 1951, Adenauer acknowledged that "unspeakable crimes were perpetrated in the name of the German people, which impose upon them the obligation to make moral and material amends."
After Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated in 1914, Krupp bought his villa Blühnbach, in Werfen in the Austrian Alps, and which was a former residence of the Archbishops of Salzburg.
Neu Westend was built in 1871 and 1872.
These workers were initially paid, but as Nazi fortunes declined they were kept as slave workers.
Fritz Krupp authorized many new products that would do much to change history.
After Krupp's death in 1887, his only son, Friedrich Alfred, carried on the work.
Fritz was a skilled businessman, though of a different sort from his father.
After Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany in 1933, the Krupp works became the center for German rearmament.
Krupp's construction of the Great Venezuela Railway from 1888 to 1894 raised Venezuelan national debt.
However, after Hitler won power, Gustav became enamoured with the Nazis (Fritz Thyssen described him as "a super-Nazi") to a degree his wife and subordinates found bizarre.
Krupp AG Hoesch Krupp,” under Cromme.
This allowed him to retain much of his fortune and hide it overseas.
When Alfred started with the firm, it had five employees.
Arndt, a trader, arrived in town just before an epidemic of the Black Death plague and became one of the city's wealthiest men by purchasing the property of families who fled the epidemic.
The treatment of Jews during the war had remained an issue.
In the 1930s, Krupp developed two 800&nbsp;mm railway guns, the Schwerer Gustav and the Dora.
The young director laboured alongside the workmen by day and carried on his father's experiments at night, when not touring Europe trying to make sales.
In 1810, the widow died, and in what would prove a disastrous move, left virtually all the Krupp fortune and property to Friedrich.
At the Krupp Trial, held in 1947–1948 in Nuremberg following the main Nuremberg trials, Alfried and most of his co-defendants were convicted of crimes against humanity (plunder and slave labor), while being acquitted of crimes against peace, and conspiracy.
For years, the works made barely enough money to cover the workmen's wages.
The company began to make steel cannons in the 1840s—especially for the Russian, Turkish, and Prussian armies.
Russia and the Ottoman Empire both bought large quantities of Krupp guns.
Krupp Industries employed workers conscripted by the Nazi regime from across Europe.
Friedrich Krupp (1787–1826) launched the family's metal-based activities, building a pioneering steel foundry in Essen in 1810.
There is scant evidence that Alfried intended to fulfill his side of the bargain, and he continued to receive royalties from the sequestered industries.
The Krupp family first appeared in the historical record in 1587, when Arndt Krupp joined the merchants' guild in Essen.
Countless fleas, bugs and other vermin tortured the inhabitants of these camps.
He focused on arms manufacturing, as the US railroad market purchased from its own growing steel industry.
Beginning in 1943, Allied bombers targeted the main German industrial district in the Ruhr.
At his death twenty thousand people worked for Krupp—making it the world's largest industrial company and the largest private company in the German empire.
However, by the end of the war, with a manpower shortage preventing repairs, the main factories were out of commission.
Krupp Steel Works of Essen, Germany, manufactured the spherical pressure chamber of the dive vessel ''Trieste'', the first vessel to take humans to the deepest known point in the oceans, accomplished in 1960.
After Germany's defeat, Gustav was senile and incapable of standing trial, and the Nuremberg Military Tribunal convicted Alfried as a war criminal in the Krupp Trial for "plunder" and for his company's use of slave labor.
Nazi Germany kept two million French POWs captured in 1940 as forced laborers throughout the war.
German industry was seen as integral to western Europe’s economic recovery, the limit on steel production was lifted, and the reputation of Hitler-era firms and industrialists was rehabilitated.
His father's death forced him to leave school at the age of fourteen and take on responsibility for the steel works.
Stahlwerke Südwestfalen was bought for stainless steel, and Polysius AG and Heinrich Koppers for engineering and the construction of industrial plants.
These were novelties in modern warfare and in violation of the Hague Conventions, to which Germany was a signatory.
Allied High Commission Law 27, in 1950, mandated the decartelization of German industry.
After the war, the Ruhr became part of the British Zone of occupation.
The French high command refused to purchase Krupp guns despite Napoleon III's support.
Krupp artillery was a significant factor at the battles of Wissembourg and Gravelotte, and was used during the siege of Paris.
French soldiers inspecting Krupp’s factory in Essen were cornered by workers in a garage, opened fire with a machine gun, and killed thirteen.
Gustav attempted to reorient to consumer products, under the slogan "Wir machen alles!"
In 1968, the company became a corporation.
The '''Krupp family''' (see pronunciation), a prominent 400-year-old German dynasty from Essen, have become famous for their production of steel, artillery, ammunition, and other armaments.
The common English pronunciations are  or .
In 1953 Krupp negotiated the Mehlem agreement with the governments of the US, Great Britain and France.
The choices of the Krupp family and firm during the Nazi era, including support of Hitler and use of forced labour, are an infamous part of the family's legacy.
Nevertheless, Thyssen agreed to merge the two firms' flat steel operations, and Thyssen Krupp Stahl AG was created in 1997 as a jointly owned subsidiary (60% by Thyssen and 40% by Krupp).
In 1912, Krupp began manufacturing stainless steel.
He ended unprofitable businesses including shipbuilding, railway tyres, and farm equipment.
Krupp GmbH, whose capital stock was increased to 700 million DM by the summer of 1978.
In India, Krupp rebuilt Rourkela in Odisha as company town similar to his own Essen.
About 6,300 workers were laid off.
That year, Gerhard Cromme became chairman and chief executive of Krupp.
The company expanded to 125,000 employees worldwide, and in 1959 Krupp was the fourth largest in Europe (after Royal Dutch, Unilever, and Mannesmann), and the 12th largest in the world.
Despite this, as late as the day before President Paul von Hindenburg appointed Hitler Chancellor, Gustav warned him not to do so.
Expansion was significant in the former colonies of Great Britain and behind the Iron Curtain, in countries eager to industrialize but suspicious of NATO.
He was thus the only German to be accused of being a war criminal after both world wars.
On 25 July 1943 the Royal Air Force attacked the Krupp Works with 627 heavy bombers, dropping 2,032 long tons of bombs in an Oboe-marked attack.
Krupp's exhibits caused a sensation in the engineering world, and the Essen works became famous.
Prussia fortified the major North German ports with batteries that could hit French ships from a distance of 4,000 yards, inhibiting invasion.
The largest number worked in the giant Krupp steel works in Essen.
Although Krupp was a monarchist at heart, he cooperated with the Weimar Republic; as a munitions manufacturer his first loyalty was to the government in power.
Friedrich Alfred was called "Fritz" all his life, and was strikingly dissimilar to his father in appearance and personality.
Krupp took over production, including at the Molotov steel works near Kharkov and Kramatorsk in eastern Ukraine, and at mines supplying the iron, manganese, and chrome vital for steel production.
At this time 50% of Krupp’s armaments were sold to Germany, and the rest to 52 other nations.
Krupp received original contracts in the United States and enjoyed a period of technological superiority while also contributing the majority of rail to the new continental railway system.
Although Arndt was homosexual, like his great-grandfather Friedrich (Fritz) Krupp, he married but was childless.
Prospects were daunting: his father had spent a considerable fortune in the attempt to cast steel in large ingots, and to keep the works going the widow and family lived in extreme frugality.
Cromme and Ekkehard Schulz were named co-chief executives of the new company, operating worldwide in three main business areas: steel, capital goods (elevators and industrial equipment), and services (specialty materials, environmental services, mechanical engineering, and scaffolding services).
In 1916, the German government seized Belgian industry and conscripted Belgian civilians for forced labor in the Ruhr.
Gustav led the firm through World War I, concentrating almost entirely on artillery manufacturing, particularly following the loss of overseas markets as a result of the Allied blockade.
Alfried's only son, Arndt von Bohlen und Halbach (1938–1986), would not develop an interest in the family business and was willing to renounce his inheritance.
During the war, Friedrich Krupp Germaniawerft produced 84 U-boats for the German navy, as well as the Deutschland submarine freighter, intended to ship raw material to Germany despite the blockade.
Gustav supported the "Adolf Hitler Endowment Fund of German Industry", administrated by Bormann, who used it to collect millions of Marks from German businessmen.
Thus the ''u'' is usually treated as short in both languages, corresponding logically (in either language's regular orthography) with the doubled consonant that follows.
Later in 1943 it was taken over by Union Werke.
German Chancellor Wirth arranged for Krupp to secretly continue designing artillery and tanks, coordinating with army chief von Seeckt and navy chief Paul Behncke.
Unfortunately, Friedrich proved too idiotic for his own good, and quickly ran the formerly profitable forge into the ground.
The British dismantled Krupp’s factories, sending machinery all over Europe as war reparations.
In West Germany, Krupp made jet fighters in Bremen, as a joint venture with United Aircraft, and built an atomic reactor in Jülich, partly funded by the government.
In the 20th century the company was headed by Gustav Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach (1870–1950), who assumed the surname of Krupp when he married the Krupp heiress, Bertha Krupp.
Unusual for the era, he provided social services for his workers, including subsidized housing and health and retirement benefits.
These guns were the biggest artillery pieces ever fielded by an army during wartime, and weighed almost 1,344 tons.
In 1751, he married Helene Amalie Ascherfeld (another of Arndt's great-great-grandchildren); Jodocus died six years later, which left his widow to run the business: a family first.
In 1942, although Russia in retreat relocated many factories to the Urals, steel factories were simply too large to move.
He was deeply involved with the Reichswehr's evasion of the Treaty of Versailles, and secretly engaged in arms design and manufacture.
In 1997 Krupp attempted a hostile takeover of the larger Thyssen, but the bid was abandoned after resistance from Thyssen management and protests by its workers.
Germaniawerft in Kiel was dismantled, and Krupp’s role as an arms manufacturer came to an end.
At the Great Exhibition (London) of 1851, he exhibited a 6 pounder made entirely from cast steel, and a solid flawless ingot of steel weighing , more than twice as much as any previously cast.
Excretion contaminated the entire floors of these lavatories.
In 1921 Krupp bought Bofors in Sweden as a front company and sold arms to neutral nations including the Netherlands and Denmark.
In 1878 and 1879 Krupp held competitions known as ''Völkerschiessen'', which were firing demonstrations of cannon for international buyers.
Conversely, from 1902 Krupps was contracted by Vickers to supply its patented fuses to Vickers bullets.
The shortage of volunteers led the Vichy government of France to deport workers to Germany, where they constituted 15% of the labor force by August 1944.
It is known that wounded and deceased German soldiers  were found to have spent Vickers bullets with the German inscription "Krupps patent zuinder fuses" lying around their bodies.
The widow soon had to sell it away.
These were held in Meppen, at the largest proving ground in the world; privately owned by Krupp.
Jewish women were used as slave labor there, leased from the SS for 4 Marks a head per day.
They added compulsory (and volunteer) workers from occupied nations, especially in metal factories.
After closing one main steel plant and laying off 20,000 employees, the company had a steelmaking capacity of around eight million metric tons and sales of about 28 billion DM (US$18.9 billion).
In 1928, German industry under Krupp leadership put down a general strike, locking out 250,000 workers, and encouraging the government to cut wages 15%.
For the next century the Krupps continued to acquire property and became involved in municipal politics in Essen.
Friedrich spent a significant amount of time and money in the small, waterwheel-powered facility, neglecting other Krupp business, but in 1816 he was able to produce smelted steel.
A British documentary on the Krupp family and firm included footage of German-speakers of the 1930s who would have had speaking contact with the family, which attests the long , thus  or , rather than what would be the regular German spelling pronunciation,  or .
Part of his philanthropy supported the study of eugenics, part of progressive thought at the time.
Hitler’s Lex Krupp was upheld, reestablishing Alfried as sole proprietor, but Krupp mining and steel businesses were sequestered and pledged to be divested by 1959.
This made him a national hero, and he was granted an amnesty by the French after seven months.
When Napoleon began his blockade of the British Empire (see Continental System), British steel became unavailable, and Napoleon offered a prize of four thousand francs to anyone who could replicate the British process.
The Krupp social services program began about 1861, when it was found that there were not sufficient houses in the town for firm employees, and the firm began building dwellings.
It sentenced him to 12 years in prison and ordered him to sell 75% of his holdings.
He surpassed this with a  ingot for the Paris Exposition in 1855.
Krupp was the first company to patent a seamless, reliable and strong enough railway tyre for rail freight.
He took on 46 nations as customers.
Krupp was also held in high esteem by the kaiser, who dismissed Julius von Verdy du Vernois and his successor Hans von Kaltenborn for rejecting Krupp's design of the C-96 field gun, quipping, “I’ve canned three War Ministers because of Krupp, and still they don’t catch on!”
Two years later, on January 31, 1951, John J. McCloy, High Commissioner of the American zone of occupation, issued an amnesty to the Krupp defendants.
Krupp established the ''Generalregulativ'' as the firm’s basic constitution.
Krupp's had a Great Krupp Building with an exhibition of guns at the Columbian Exposition in 1893.
France and Belgium occupied the Ruhr and established martial law.
Alfried arranged for the firm to be reorganized as a corporation and a foundation for scientific research, with a generous pension for Arndt.
She spent most of their married years in resorts and spas, with their only child, a son.
By 1905, 400 houses were provided, many being given rent free to widows of former workers.
In an address to the Hitler Youth, Adolf Hitler stated "In our eyes, the German boy of the future must be slim and slender, as fast as a greyhound, tough as leather and hard as Krupp steel" (''„... der deutsche Junge der Zukunft muß schlank und rank sein, flink wie Windhunde, zäh wie Leder und hart wie Kruppstahl."'')
In the Panic of 1873, Alfred continued to expand, including the purchase of Spanish mines and Dutch shipping, making Krupp the biggest company in Europe but nearly bankrupting it.
His wife was institutionalized for insanity.
He was bailed out with a 30 million Mark loan from a consortium of banks arranged by the Prussian State Bank.
In 1942–1943, Krupp built the Berthawerk factory (named for his mother), near the Markstadt forced labour camp, for production of artillery fuses.
After the war, the firm was forced to renounce arms manufacturing.
The Common Market allowed these moves, effectively ending the Allied policy of decartelization.
Fritz married Magda and they had two daughters: Bertha (1886–1957) and Barbara (1887–1972); the latter married Tilo Freiherr von Wilmowsky (1878–1966) in 1907.
Profits were divided according to amounts purchased.
Then, in 1841, Alfred's brother Hermann invented the spoon-roller—which Alfred patented, bringing in enough money to enlarge the factory—and cast steel blocks.
More crucial to the operations of the German military was Krupp's development of the famed 88 mm anti-aircraft cannon which found use as a notoriously effective anti-tank gun.
They could fire a 7-ton shell over a distance of 37 kilometers.
Gustav's skepticism toward the Nazis waned when Hitler dropped plans to nationalize business, the Communists gained seats in the November 6 elections, and Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher suggested a planned economy with price controls.
The documentary's narration used the English  equivalent, .
The Widow Krupp greatly expanded the family's holdings over the decades, acquiring a fulling mill, shares in four coal mines, and (in 1800) an iron forge located on a stream near Essen.
However, Bertha owned all but four shares.
His son Alfred (1812–87), known as "the Cannon King" or as "Alfred the Great", invested heavily in new technology to become a significant manufacturer of steel rollers (used to make eating utensils) and railway tyres.
Negotiations with the Claims Conference resulted in the Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany.
Krupp Steel Works was also contracted in the mid-1960s to construct the Effelsberg 100-m Radio Telescope, which, from 1972 to 2000 was the largest fully steerable radio telescope in the world.
In 1892, Krupp bought Gruson in a hostile takeover.
Gustav ousted Jews from the organization and disbanded the board, establishing himself as the sole-decision maker.
The 2nd largest customer in the Balkans was Romania, which purchased 1,450 guns in the same period, while Bulgaria purchased 517 pieces, Greece 356, Austria-Hungary 298, Montenegro 25, and Serbia just 6 guns.
The Ruhr Red Army, or Rote Soldatenbund, took over much of the demilitarized Rhineland unopposed.
In the hyperinflation of 1923, the firm printed Kruppmarks for use in Essen, which was the only stable currency there.
In 1993 Krupp became a publicly traded company for the first time in its long history, though as late as 1998 the foundation still held 50.47% and the Iranian government 22.92%.
In 1922, Krupp established Suderius AG in the Netherlands, as a front company for shipbuilding, and sold submarine designs to neutrals including the Netherlands, Spain, Turkey, Finland, and Japan.
Upon Fritz's death, his teenage daughter Bertha inherited the firm.
It was important to weapons development and production in both world wars.
Alfred strongly believed in the superiority of breech-loaders, on account of improved accuracy and speed, but this view did not win general acceptance among military officers, who remained loyal to tried-and-true muzzle-loaded bronze cannon.
Krupp's marriage was not a happy one.
The Tartars and Kirghiz suffered most; they collapsed like flies from bad housing, the poor quality and insufficient quantity of food, overwork and insufficient rest.
After he became regent in 1859, Prussia bought its first 312 steel cannon from Krupp, which became the main arms manufacturer for the Prussian military.
In 1851, another successful innovation, no-weld railway tyres, began the company's primary revenue stream, from sales to railways in the United States.
In 1943, by a special order from Hitler, the company reverted to a sole-proprietorship, with Gustav and Bertha's eldest son Alfried Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach (1907–67) as proprietor.
Later in the year, Britain oversaw the dismantling of much of Krupp’s factory, reducing capacity by half and shipping industrial equipment to France as war reparations.
He realized he would need a large facility with a power source for success, and so he built a mill and foundry on the Ruhr River, which unfortunately proved an unreliable stream.
Krupp Hüttenwerke AG, and in 1976 it bought 25.01% of Fried.
(we make everything!
The highest number of Jewish slave laborers at any one time was about 25,000 in January 1943.
Beginning with Adenauer, he established personal diplomacy with heads of state, making both open and secret deals to sell equipment and engineering expertise.
The father had been a hard man, known as "Herr Krupp" since his early teens.
He also included his text "Theorie und Konstruktion eines rationellen Wärmemotors".
This prize piqued Friedrich's interest.
At the time of his death in 1887, he had 75,000 employees, including 20,200 in Essen.
The Russians seized Krupp’s Grusonwerk in Magdeburg, including the formula for tungsten steel.
It was alleged suicide, but foul play was suspected and details of the event were vague.
In 1969, the coal mines were transferred to Ruhrkohle AG.
Essen became a large company town and Krupp became a de facto state within a state, with "Kruppianer" as loyal to the company and the Krupp family as to the nation and the Hohenzollern family.
The company laid off 70,000 workers but was able to stave off Socialist unrest by continuing severance pay and its famous social services for workers.
Gustav was alarmed at Hitler's aggressive foreign policy after the Munich Agreement, but by then he was fast succumbing to senility and was effectively displaced by his son Alfried.
In 1920, the Ruhr Uprising occurred in reaction to the Kapp Putsch.
He also invested in fluidized hotbed technologies (notably the Bessemer process) and acquired many mines in Germany and France.
Alfred Krupp (born Alfried Felix Alwyn Krupp), son of Friedrich Carl, was born in Essen in 1812.
Most damage at Krupp’s works was actually to the slave labor camps, and German tank production continued to increase from 1,000 to 1,800 per month.
Gustav and especially Bertha were initially skeptical of Hitler, who was not of their class.
Krupp proclaimed he wished to have "a man come and start a counter-revolution" against Jews, socialists and liberals.
Fritz was a master of the subtle sell, and cultivated a close rapport with the Kaiser, Wilhelm II.
By 1862 ten houses were ready for foremen, and in 1863 the first houses for workingmen were built in Alt Westend.
Much of Alfried’s industrial empire was restored, but he was forced to transfer some of his fortune to his siblings, and he renounced arms manufacturing.
The king's brother Wilhelm, however, realized the significance of the innovation.
In the mid-1960s, a series of blows ended the special status of Krupp.
In an affidavit provided at the Nuremberg Trials following the war, Dr. Wilhelm Jaeger, the senior doctor for the Krupp "slaves," wrote, "Sanitary conditions were atrocious.
As another war crime, Krupp used slave labor, both POWs and civilians from occupied countries, and Krupp representatives were sent to concentration camps to select laborers.
Accident, life, and sickness  insurance societies  were formed, and the firm contributed to their support.
By the mid-18th-century, Friedrich Jodocus Krupp, Arndt's great-great-grandson, headed the Krupp family.
VDM Nickel-Technologie was bought in 1989, for high-performance materials, mechanical engineering and electronics.
He died in Essen in 1967, and the company’s transformation was completed the next year, capitalized at 500 million DM, with Beitz in charge of the Alfried Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach Foundation and chairman of the corporation’s board until 1989.
He was indicted at the Nuremberg Trials but never tried, due to his advanced dementia.
In his lifetime, Krupp manufactured a total of 24,576 guns; 10,666 for the German government and 13,910 for export.
Meanwhile, Alfried was held in Landsberg prison, where Hitler had been imprisoned in 1924.
The number of slaves cannot be calculated due to constant fluctuation but is estimated at 100,000, at a time when the free employees of Krupp numbered 278,000.
Vickers of England naturally suspended royalty payments during the war (Krupp held the patent on shell fuses, but back-payment was made in 1926).
Krupp was able to sell, alternately, improved artillery and improved steel shielding to countries from Russia to Chile to Siam.
