Many KKK groups have formed strong alliances with other white supremacist groups, such as neo-Nazis.
Its official rhetoric focused on the threat of the Catholic Church, using anti-Catholicism and nativism.
* '''Kloreroe''' – delegate
Gunfire was exchanged, and the Klan was routed at what became known as the Battle of Hayes Pond.
: because it stood for the most organized means of resisting the social and economic forces that had transformed community life, undermined traditional values, and made average citizens feel more isolated from one another and more powerless in their relationships with the major institutions that governed their lives.
More than 2,000 persons were killed, wounded and otherwise injured in Louisiana within a few weeks prior to the Presidential election of November 1868.
The second Klan grew primarily in response to issues of declining morality as typified by divorce, adultery, defiance of prohibition, and criminal gangs in the news every day.
They drove successful black farmers off their land.
Indeed, all they had in common, besides being overwhelmingly white, southern, and Democratic, was that they called themselves, or were called, Klansmen.
Recruitment activity has also been reported in the United Kingdom, dating back to the 1960s when Robert Relf was involved in establishing a British KKK.
By the mid-1920s the second Klan had a nationwide reach, with its densest per capita membership in Indiana.
She was a Southern-raised Detroit mother of five who was visiting the state in order to attend a civil rights march.
Ball finds regarding the KKK that Black "sympathized with the group's economic, nativist, and anti-Catholic beliefs."
They discovered that the original interpretation was very largely mistaken about the membership and activities of the Klan.
Opposing groups worked to penetrate the Klan's secrecy.
Many groups and leaders, including prominent Protestant ministers such as Reinhold Niebuhr in Detroit, spoke out against the Klan, gaining national attention.
In the mid-1870s, new groups of insurgents, local paramilitary organizations such as the White League, Red Shirts, saber clubs, and rifle clubs, emerged, continuing to intimidate and murder black political leaders.
In Indiana, traditional political historians focused on notorious leaders, especially D. C. Stephenson, the Grand Dragon of the Indiana Klan, whose conviction for 1925 kidnap, rape, and murder of Madge Oberholtzer helped destroy the Ku Klux Klan movement nationwide.
The Jewish Anti-Defamation League was formed in the early 20th century in response to attacks against Jewish Americans and the Klan's campaign to outlaw private schools.
By 1868, two years after the Klan's creation, its activity was beginning to decrease.
This added to the enmity that southern white Democrats bore toward him.
Klan leaders tried to infiltrate political parties; as Cummings notes, " it was non-partisan in the sense that it pressed its nativist issues to both parties."
The new Klan was inaugurated in 1915 by William Joseph Simmons on top of Stone Mountain.
In 1964, the FBI's COINTELPRO program began attempts to infiltrate and disrupt civil rights groups.
The Ku Klux Klan was one of a number of secret, oath-bound organizations using violence, which included the Southern Cross in New Orleans (1865) and the Knights of the White Camelia (1867) in Louisiana.
Forrest called for the Klan to disband in 1869, arguing that the Klan was "being perverted from its original honorable and patriotic purposes, becoming injurious instead of subservient to the public peace".
They put an end to violence by threatening Klansmen with reprisals unless they stopped whipping Unionists and burning black churches and schools.
One Alabama newspaper editor declared "The League is nothing more than a nigger Ku Klux Klan."
In 1982, a jury awarded the five women $535,000 in a civil trial.
Detailed analysis from Indiana showed the rural stereotype was false for that state:
It claimed over 30% of white male Hoosiers.
The KKK night riders "sometimes claimed to be ghosts of Confederate soldiers so, as they claimed, to frighten superstitious blacks.
(Today the paper says it "waged war on the resurgent KKK".)
Led by the minister of the First Christian Church, the Klan represented a rising group of politically oriented non-ethnic Germans who denounced the elite as corrupt, undemocratic and self-serving.
Starting in 1921, it adopted a modern business system of using full-time paid recruiters and appealed to new members as a fraternal organization, of which many examples were flourishing at the time.
In his novel ''The Clansman'' Dixon invented the notion that the first Klan had used fiery crosses.
The SPLC released a similar report stating that "there were significant increases in Klan as well as black separatist groups."
In 1944, the IRS filed a lien for $685,000 in back taxes against the Klan, and Colescott dissolved the organization that year.
The new city council tried to enforce prohibition.
Individuals who joined the Klan had earlier demonstrated a much higher rate of voting and civic activism than did their opponents.
Some local groups threatened violence against rum runners and notorious sinners; the violent episodes generally took place in the South.
The new organization and chapters adopted regalia featured in ''The Birth of a Nation''.
The manual of rituals was printed by Laps D. McCord of Pulaski.
They fired known city employees who were Catholic and replaced them with Klan appointees.
On the other hand, it caused a sharp backlash, with passage of federal laws that historian Eric Foner says were a success in terms of "restoring order, reinvigorating the morale of Southern Republicans, and enabling blacks to exercise their rights as citizens."
Its appeal was directed exclusively at white Protestants; it opposed Jews, blacks, Catholics, and newly arriving Southern European groups such as Italians.
The members had conjured up a veritable Frankenstein.
If the movement had aligned itself with a single political party, it would have substantially narrowed its pool of potential recruits.
The Klan soon spread into nearly every southern state, launching a "reign of terror against Republican leaders both black and white.
Scholars compared it to fascism, which in the 1920s took over Italy.
The Klan opposed bootleggers, sometimes with violence.
Historians agree that the Klan's resurgence in the 1920s was aided by the national debate over prohibition.
Because of the rapid pace of population growth in industrializing cities such as Detroit and Chicago, the Klan grew rapidly in the U.S. Midwest.
There was also resistance to the Klan.
It sought to overthrow the Republican state governments in the South during the Reconstruction Era, especially by using violence against African American leaders.
In an 1868 newspaper interview, Forrest stated that the Klan's primary opposition was to the Loyal Leagues, Republican state governments, people such as Tennessee governor William Gannaway Brownlow and other "carpetbaggers" and "scalawags".
Although there was little organizational structure above the local level, similar groups rose across the South and adopted the same name and methods.
It had a national base by 1925.
Its imagery was based on Dixon's romanticized concept of old England and Scotland, as portrayed in the novels and poetry of Sir Walter Scott.
Klan costumes, also called "regalia", disappeared from use by the early 1870s.
Moore goes on to say that they joined:
She heeded the warning and left the county.
Throughout its varied history, the Klan has coined many words beginning with "Kl" including:
The second Klan embraced the burning Latin cross as a dramatic display of symbolism, with a tone of intimidation.
Continuing disfranchisement of blacks across the South meant that most could not serve on juries, which were all white.
By 1926 the Klan was "crippled and discredited."
Although Forrest boasted that the Klan was a nationwide organization of 550,000 men and that he could muster 40,000 Klansmen within five days' notice, as a secret or "invisible" group, it had no membership rosters, no chapters, and no local officers.
Scholars and biographers have recently examined Hugo Black's Klan role.
In Birmingham and elsewhere, the KKK groups bombed the houses of civil rights activists.
Cocoltchos suggests that many of the individuals in Orange County joined the Klan out of that sense of civic activism.
Figures, Donald's mother, Beulah Mae Donald, sued the KKK in civil court in Alabama.
This incident took place during the ''Death to the Klan'' rally sponsored by the Communist Workers Party, in their efforts to organize predominantly black industrial workers in the area.
The historian Leonard Moore says that a failure in leadership caused the Klan's collapse:
Activism by such independent KKK groups increased as a reaction against the Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s.
In the South, where the great majority of whites were Democrats, the Klansmen were Democrats.
In 1866, Mississippi Governor William L. Sharkey reported that disorder, lack of control, and lawlessness were widespread; in some states armed bands of Confederate soldiers roamed at will.
In 1937 President Franklin D. Roosevelt appointed Black to the Supreme Court without knowing how active in the Klan he had been in the 1920s.
Thirteen captives were taken from jail and shot; a half-buried pile of 25 bodies was found in the woods.
* The 1964 murders of three civil rights workers, Chaney, Goodman and Schwerner, in Mississippi.
Duke has an account on Stormfront which he uses to post articles from his own website, as well as polling forum members for opinions and questions, in particular during his internet broadcasts.
This approach was made possible by the discovery of membership lists and the minutes of local meetings from chapters scattered around the country.
The Klan drew its members from Democratic as well as Republican voters.
Indiana's Klansmen represented a wide cross section of society: they were not disproportionately urban or rural, nor were they significantly more or less likely than other members of society to be from the working class, middle class, or professional ranks.
It issued hundreds of indictments for crimes of violence and terrorism.
During the tenure of Bull Connor as police commissioner in the city, Klan groups were closely allied with the police and operated with impunity.
By 1872, the Klan was broken as an organization.
After exhausting the appeals process, Hays was executed by electric chair for Donald's death in Alabama on June 6, 1997.
The Klan attacked black members of the Loyal Leagues and intimidated southern Republicans and Freedmen's Bureau workers.
The Klan was indeed white Protestant, and was highly suspicious of Catholics, Jews and blacks who were accused of subverting the ideal Protestant moral standards.
Half of the members were Swedish American, including some first-generation immigrants.
The Klan also moved north into Canada, especially Saskatchewan, where it opposed Catholics.
All of the above terminology was created by William Joseph Simmons, as part of his 1915 revival of the Klan.
Many of them operated in small towns and rural areas where people otherwise knew each other's faces, and sometimes still recognized the attackers by voice and mannerisms.
In Michigan, for instance, 40,000 members lived in Detroit, where they made up more than half of the state's membership.
It recommended that persons who had been victimized should seek relief in state courts, which were entirely unsympathetic to such appeals.
Some of the bombing victims were social activists whose work exposed them to danger, but most were either people who refused to bow to racist convention or were innocent bystanders, unsuspecting victims of random violence.
At its peak, claimed Klan membership exceeded four million and comprised 20% of the adult white male population in many broad geographic regions, and 40% in some areas.
The symbol has been associated with the Klan ever since.
According to ''The Cyclopædia of Fraternities'' (1907) "Beginning in April, 1867, there was a gradual transformation...
The number of KKK chapters nationwide grew from 72 to 190 in 2015.
He was a former Klan chapter head.
He finds, "the Southern Baptist press condoned the aims but condemned the methods of the Klan."
The second Ku Klux Klan was founded in 1915 by William Joseph Simmons at Stone Mountain, outside Atlanta, with fifteen "charter members".
, the Anti-Defamation League puts total Klan membership nationwide at around 3,000 while the Southern Poverty Law Center puts it at 6,000 members total.
Nearly one in five of the eligible Indiana population were members.
Up to one third of Indiana's Protestant men joined the order making it, Moore argued,  "a kind of interest group for average white Protestants who believed that their values should be dominant in their community and state.
Those political leaders assassinated during the campaign included Arkansas Congressman James M. Hinds, three members of the South Carolina legislature, and several men who served in constitutional conventions."
According to a report from the Southern Regional Council in Atlanta, the homes of 40 black Southern families were bombed during 1951 and 1952.
Judges Hugh Lennox Bond and George S. Bryan presided over the trial of KKK members in Columbia, South Carolina during December 1871.
By 1975, there were known KKK groups on most college campuses in Louisiana as well as at Vanderbilt University, the University of Georgia, the University of Mississippi, the University of Akron, and the University of Southern California.
In 1999, the city council of Charleston, South Carolina passed a resolution declaring the Klan a terrorist organization.
Its efforts in public schools included distributing Bibles and petitioning for the dismissal of Roman Catholic teachers.
In São Paulo, Brazil, the website of a group called Imperial Klans of Brazil was shut down in 2003, and the group's leader was arrested.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People created public education campaigns in order to inform people about Klan activities and lobbied in Congress against Klan abuses.
The Indiana Klan was perhaps the most powerful Ku Klux Klan in the nation.
By the November presidential election, Klan intimidation led to suppression of the Republican vote and only one person voted for Ulysses S. Grant.
Local Klan groups closed over the following years.
In 1971, KKK members used bombs to destroy 10 school buses in Pontiac, Michigan.
* The 1963 assassination of NAACP organizer Medgar Evers in Mississippi.
Given their tradition of moderate social drinking, the German Americans did not strongly support prohibition laws—the mayor had been a saloon keeper.
At an 1867 meeting in Nashville, Tennessee, Klan members gathered to try to create a hierarchical organization with local chapters eventually reporting to a national headquarters.
Northern Indiana had a large Catholic population and a major college near South Bend.
Klan members were prosecuted, and many fled from areas that were under federal government jurisdiction, particularly in South Carolina.
In 1870 and 1871, the federal government passed the Enforcement Acts, which were successfully enforced in prosecuting and suppressing Klan crimes.
In the late 1940s and 1950s, members launched a reign of terror by bombing the homes of upwardly mobile African Americans.
The name was formed by combining the Greek '''' (''κύκλος'', ''circle'') with ''clan''.
In reality, their religious affiliations mirrored the whole of white Protestant society, including those who did not belong to any church.
In 1923 he had led the states under his control to separate from the national KKK organization.
Today, Stormfront has become a prominent online forum for white nationalism, Neo-Nazism, hate speech, racism, and antisemitism.
It was, in this view, a movement of country parsons and small-town malcontents who were out of step with the dynamism of twentieth-century urban America."
During the 1930s and 1940s, Klan leaders urged members to disrupt the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), which advocated industrial unions and accepted African-American members, unlike earlier unions.
* '''Kloran''' – ritual book
:Depicted the Klan movement as an irrational rebuke of modernity by undereducated, economically marginal bigots, religious zealots, and dupes willing to be manipulated by the Klan's cynical, mendacious leaders.
The Klansmen were apprehended and prosecuted in federal court.
In 1871, President Ulysses S. Grant signed Butler's legislation.
Among the more notorious murders by Klan members:
(The years given in the table represent approximate time periods.)
With numerous chapters across the South, it was suppressed around 1871, through federal law enforcement.
There were never hierarchical levels or state headquarters.
The Klan in Anaheim quickly collapsed, its newspaper closed after losing a libel suit, and the minister who led the local Klavern moved to Kansas.
Today, researchers estimate that there may be 150 Klan chapters with upwards of 5,000 members nationwide.
The first Klan flourished in the Southern United States in the late 1860s, then died out by the early 1870s.
By 1925, the Klan was a political force in the state, as leaders such as J. Thomas Heflin, David Bibb Graves, and Hugo Black tried to build political power against the Black Belt planters, who had long dominated the state.
They focused on opposition to the Civil Rights Movement, often using violence and murder to suppress activists.
The economic and occupational profile of the pro and anti-Klan groups shows the two were similar and about equally prosperous.
:In effect, the Klan was a military force serving the interests of the Democratic party, the planter class, and all those who desired restoration of white supremacy.
Although in decline, a measure of the Klan's influence was its march along Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, DC in 1928.
The first Klan was founded in Pulaski, Tennessee, sometime between December 1865 and August 1866 by six former members of the Confederate army  as a fraternal social club inspired at least in part by the then largely defunct Sons of Malta, from which parts of the initiation ceremony were borrowed, with the same purpose: "ludicrous initiations, the baffling of public curiosity, and the amusement for members were the only objects of the Klan."
In Alabama, Klan members advocated better public schools, effective prohibition enforcement, expanded road construction, and other political measures to benefit lower-class white people.
Attorney General Amos Tappan Ackerman led the prosecutions.
Its purposes were political, but political in the broadest sense, for it sought to affect power relations, both public and private, throughout Southern society.
In the rest of the country, the membership comprised both Republicans and Democrats, as well as independents.
A religious tone was present in its activities: "two-thirds of the national Klan lecturers were Protestant ministers," says historian Brian R. Farmer.
Violence was quite uncommon in the chapters.
After World War II, the folklorist and author Stetson Kennedy infiltrated the Klan; he provided internal data to media and law enforcement agencies.
Members were hiding behind Klan masks and robes as a way to avoid prosecution for freelance violence.
* The 1963 bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, which killed four African-American girls.
In Germany a KKK-related group, the European White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, has organised and it gained notoriety in 2012 when it was widely reported in the German media that two police officers who held membership in the organisation would be allowed to keep their jobs.
Aside from Canada, there have been various attempts to organise KKK chapters outside the United States.
Klan members were Protestants, as were most of their opponents, but the latter also included many Catholic Germans.
The following table shows the change in the Klan's estimated membership over time.
Klan members used violence to settle old personal feuds and local grudges, as they worked to restore general white dominance in the disrupted postwar society.
A Hollywood press agent claimed that after seeing the film Wilson said, "It is like writing history with lightning, and my only regret is that it is all so terribly true."
In 1915, the second Klan was founded in Atlanta, Georgia.
Despite Gordon's and Forrest's work, local Klan units never accepted the Prescript and continued to operate autonomously.
Secondly, it was a response to the growing power of Catholics and American Jews and the accompanying proliferation of non-Protestant cultural values.
The members of the first Klan in the South were exclusively Democrats.
Specific events contributed to the decline as well.
Pegram, reviewing the studies, concludes, "the popular Klan of the 1920s, while diverse, was more of a civic exponent of white Protestant social values than a repressive hate group."
They had played with an engine of power and mystery, though organized on entirely innocent lines, and found themselves overcome by a belief that something must lie behind it all—that there was, after all, a serious purpose, a work for the Klan to do."
in conversation to surreptitiously identify himself to another potential member.
Historian Rory McVeigh has explained the Klan's strategy in appealing to members of both parties:
Local chapters and bands were highly independent.
Historians apply the newest techniques of methodology to test the original interpretation.
Klan opponents in 1925 took back local government, and succeeded in a special election in recalling the Klansmen who had been elected in April 1924.
The all-white jury found the Klan responsible for the lynching of Donald and ordered the Klan to pay US$7 million, but the KKK did not have sufficient funds to pay the fine, and had to give up their national headquarters building in Tuscaloosa.
The Second Klan saw threats from every direction.
Many influential southern Democrats feared that Klan lawlessness provided an excuse for the federal government to retain its power over the South, and they began to turn against it.
Small independent units continued to be active in the industrial city of Birmingham.
* The 1967 multiple bombings in Jackson, Mississippi of the residence of a Methodist activist, Robert Kochtitzky, and those at the synagogue and at the residence of Rabbi Perry Nussbaum on Old Canton Road were executed by a Klan member named Thomas Albert Tarrants III who was convicted in 1968.
While hate (not just white supremacist) groups are on the rise in the US, according to an analysis by the Southern Poverty Law Center, The ADL released a report in 2016 that says the Klan "organized Ku Klux Klan groups are actually continuing a long-term trend of decline".
The Governor of South Carolina appealed for federal troops to assist his efforts in keeping control of the state.
They had no connection with the second KKK, except for the fact that they copied its terminology and costumes.
Their cross was a religious symbol, and their ritual honored Bibles and local ministers.
Membership in the Klan and in other prohibition groups overlapped, and they often coordinated activities.
Simmons initially met with little success in either recruiting members or in raising money, and the Klan remained a small operation in the Atlanta area until 1920.
There was almost no evidence regarding the actual behavior or beliefs of individual Klansmen.
As a result of the Women's Klan's efforts, Texas would not hire Catholic teachers to work in its public schools.
In February, former Union General and Congressman Benjamin Franklin Butler of Massachusetts introduced the Civil Rights Act of 1871 (Ku Klux Klan Act).
After Stephenson's conviction, the Klan declined dramatically in Indiana.
These were filed after KKK members shot into a group of African Americans.
It opposed Catholics and Jews, especially newer immigrants, and stressed opposition to the Catholic Church.
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) has provided legal support to various factions of the KKK in defense of their First Amendment rights to hold public rallies, parades, and marches, as well as their right to field political candidates.
Klan operations ended in South Carolina and gradually withered away throughout the rest of the South, where it had gradually been faltering.
The second and third incarnations of the Ku Klux Klan made frequent references to America's "Anglo-Saxon" blood, hearkening back to 19th-century nativism.
The third and current manifestation of the KKK emerged after 1950, in the form of small, local, unconnected groups that use the KKK name.
When the KKK held a nighttime rally nearby, they were quickly surrounded by hundreds of armed Lumbees.
At its peak in the mid-1920s, the organization claimed to include about 15% of the nation's eligible population, approximately 4–5 million men.
Economists Fryer and Levitt argue that the rapid growth of the Klan in the 1920s was partly the result of an innovative marketing campaign.
Investigators in the 1920s used KKK publicity, court cases, exposés by disgruntled Klansman, newspaper reports, and speculation to write stories about what the Klan was doing.
