While Tamil is dominant amongst the local Indian population, other Indian languages spoken include Telugu, Malayalam, Punjabi and Hindi.
Kuala Lumpur is rated as an alpha world city, and is the only global city in Malaysia, according to the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network (GaWC).
Nine mayors have been appointed since then.
It was established to be a major centre for military and defence technology studies.
There is another park in the close vicinity to Kuala Lumpur i.e.
Government offices and a new police headquarter was built on Bukit Aman, and the Padang was created initially for police training.
Several institutions in the city are older than 100 years—such as Bukit Bintang Girls' School (1893–2000, relocated to Taman Shamelin Perkasa in Cheras and renamed GIS Garden International school Seri Bintang Utara), Victoria Institution (1893); Methodist Girls' School (1896); Methodist Boys' School (1897); Convent Bukit Nanas (1899), St. John's Institution (1904), Confucian Private Secondary School(1906), Kuen Cheng High School (1908) and Tsun Jin High School (1913).
Greater Kuala Lumpur, also known as the Klang Valley, is an urban agglomeration of 7.2 million people .
Law reforms were implemented and new legal measures introduced to the assembly.
That the town was rebuilt a few times and thrived was due in large part to the tenacity and persistence of  Yap Ah Loy.
Destroyed ''atap'' buildings were replaced with brick and tiled ones, and many of the new brick buildings are characterised by the "five foot ways" as well as Chinese carpentry work.
It was ranked the best university in Malaysia, the 32nd best in Asia, and 3rd in Southeast Asia in 2014.
By December 2016, the 1st phase of Klang Valley Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) Project, Sungai Buloh-Kajang Line will be completed, providing a more efficient ride around Greater Kuala Lumpur.
The third Chinese Kapitan of Kuala Lumpur appointed in 1868, Yap Ah Loy, aligned himself with Tengku Kudin, and the rival Chinese gang allied themselves with Raja Mahdi.
This resulted in a distinct eclectic shop house architecture typical to this region.
A railway line between Kuala Lumpur and Klang, initiated by Swettenham and completed in 1886, increased accessibility which resulted in the rapid growth of the town.
It has also been proposed that Kuala Lumpur was originally named Pengkalan Lumpur (a muddy landing place) but became corrupted into Kuala Lumpur, while others suggest it was initially a Cantonese word ''lam-pa'' meaning 'flooded jungle' or 'decayed jungle'.
The Kuala Lumpur Performing Arts Centre (KLPac) in Sentul West is one of the most established centres for the performing arts, notably theatre, music, and film screening, in the country.
The Malaysian Houses of Parliament was completed at the edge of the Lake Gardens in 1963.
Kuala Lumpur has several golf courses including the Kuala Lumpur Golf and Country Club (KLGCC) and the Malaysia Civil Service Golf Club in Kiara and the Berjaya Golf Course at Bukit Jalil.
According to the World Tallest 50 Urban Agglomeration 2010 Projection by the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat, Kuala Lumpur was ranked 10th among cities to have most buildings above 100 metres with a combined height of 34,035 metres from its 244 high rise buildings.
The Chinatown of Kuala Lumpur, commonly known as Petaling Street, is one of them.
Taxis can be hailed from taxi stands or from the streets.
Examples of these buildings are Menara Telekom, Menara Maybank, Dayabumi Complex, and the Islamic Centre.
Kuala Lumpur holds the Malaysia International Gourmet Festival annually.
Kuala Lumpur grew through the war, and continued after the war during the Malayan Emergency, during which Malaya was preoccupied with the communist insurgency and New Villages were established on the outskirts of the city.
Bursa Malaysia or the Malaysia Exchange is based in the city and forms one of its core economic activities.
Kuala Lumpur is a Malay term that translates to "muddy confluence" as it is located at the confluence of the Klang and Gombak rivers.
Apart from Suria KLCC, Bukit Bintang district has the highest concentration of shopping malls in Kuala Lumpur.
The Minangkabaus are also important socio-religious figures, for example Utsman bin Abdullah was the first kadi of Kuala Lumpur as well as Muhammad Nur bin Ismail.
The local administration is carried out by the Kuala Lumpur City Hall, an agency under the Federal Territories Ministry of Malaysia.
By the 2010 census, according to the Department of Statistics and excluding non-citizens, the percentage of the Bumiputera population in Kuala Lumpur has reached around 45.9%, with the Chinese population at 43.2% and Indians 10.3%.
Templer Park initiated and opened by Sir Gerald Templer in 1954 during the "Emergency" time.
The war and other setbacks, such as a drop in tin prices, led to a slump, furthermore a major outbreak of cholera in late 1870s caused many to flee the town.
The Padang, now known as Merdeka Square, would later become the centre of the British administrative offices when the colonial government offices were moved to the Sultan Abdul Samad Building in 1897.
Kuala Lumpur has a Cultural Craft Complex coupled with a museum that displays a variety of textile, ceramic, metal craft and weaved products.
As ''Chinese Kapitan'', he was vested with wide powers on a par with Malay community leaders.
In its pewtersmithing workshop, "The School of Hard Knocks," participants are taught to create their own pewter dish using traditional tools and methods.
It was only 0.65&nbsp;km2 in 1895, but was extended to encompass 20&nbsp;km2 in 1903.
In 1957, the Federation of Malaya gained its independence from British rule.
There are also football fields, local sports complexes, swimming pools and tennis courts scattered around the suburbs.
The premier performing arts venue is the Petronas Philharmonic Hall.
One of the highlights in 2006 was the KL Sing Song 2006 music fest, which featured Malaysian singer-songwriters of various cultural backgrounds, from both West and East Malaysia, through two days of performances and workshops.
Most of the styling has been modified to use local resources and acclimatised to the local climate, which is hot and humid all year around.
Kuala Lumpur hosted the official Asian Basketball Championship in 1965, 1977 and 1985.
The current mayor is Mhd Amin Nordin Abdul Aziz, who has been in office since 18 July 2015.
They were designed to resemble motifs found in Islamic art.
In addition, Kuala Lumpur is home to the tallest twin buildings in the world, the Petronas Twin Towers, which have become an iconic symbol of Malaysia's futuristic development.
Royal Selangor has an ultra modern visitor's centre, which allows tours to be conducted through its pewter museum, gallery and its factory.
The city remains as the economic and business centre of the country.
Although the early miners suffered a high death toll due to the malarial conditions of the jungle, the Ampang mines were successful, and the first tin was exported in 1859.
More recently the Bumiputra component of the city has increased substantially and they are now the dominant group.
In 1931, 61% of Kuala Lumpur's 111,418 inhabitants were Chinese, and in 1947 63.5%.
'''Kuala Lumpur''' ( or ; ), officially the '''Federal Territory of Kuala Lumpur''', is the national capital of Malaysia as well as its largest city.
Despite cities around Asia suffering declining tourist arrivals, Kuala Lumpur tourist arrivals increased from 6,210,900 in 1997 to 10,221,600 in 2000, or 64.6% increase in tourist arrivals.
Prior to the Second World War, many shophouses, usually two stories with functional shops on the ground floor and separate residential spaces upstairs, were built around the old city centre.
The Minangkabaus were another important group of people in the early period;  Minangkabau traders from Sumatra include Utsman Abdullah, and Haji Mohamed Taib who was involved in the early development of Kampung Baru.
Kuala Lumpur also has advantages stemming from the high concentration of educational institutions that provide a wide-ranging of courses.
The National Art Gallery serves as a centre of excellence and trustee of the national art heritage.
Between 1947 and 1957 the population of Malays in Kuala Lumpur doubled, increasing from 12.5 to 15%, while the proportion of Chinese dropped.
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for Kuala Lumpur is estimated at RM73,536 million in 2008 with an average annual growth rate of 5.9 percent.
Protected by the Titiwangsa Mountains in the east and Indonesia's Sumatra Island in the west, Kuala Lumpur has a tropical rainforest climate (Köppen climate classification ''Af''), which is warm and sunny, along with abundant rainfall, especially during the northeast monsoon season from October to March.
Smoke from forest fires of nearby Sumatra sometimes cast a haze over the region.
As capital of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur has a comprehensive road network that leads to the rest of Peninsular Malaysia.
Census the population of Kuala Lumpur is 46.4% Muslim, 35.7% Buddhist, 8.5% Hindu, 5.8% Christian, 1.1% Taoist or Chinese religion adherent, 2.0% follower of other religions, and 0.5% non-religious.
The largest public transport operator in Kuala Lumpur and the Klang Valley is Prasarana Malaysia via its subsidiaries of Rapid Rail and Rapid Bus using Rapid KL brands service.
The municipality of the city covers an area of , with an average elevation of .
Another notable trend is the increased presence of budget hotels in the city.
Raja Asal and Sutan Puasa also switched side to Raja Mahdi, and Kuala Lumpur was captured in 1872 and burnt to the ground.
Residents of the city are colloquially known as KLites.
Some of these shophouses have made way for new developments but there are still many standing today around Medan Pasar (Old Market Square), Chinatown, Jalan Tuanku Abdul Rahman, Jalan Doraisamy, Bukit Bintang and Tengkat Tong Shin areas.
The other airport is Sultan Abdul Aziz Shah Airport, also known as Subang Skypark and served as the main international gateway to Kuala Lumpur from 1965 until KLIA opened in 1998.
Large number of Malays now considered Bumiputra were originally from the Indonesian archipelago – the Minangkabaus, Javanese, and Buginese began arriving in Kuala Lumpur in the 19th century, while the Acehnese arrived in the late 20th century.
There is however no firm contemporary evidence for these suggestions other than anecdotes.
Kapitan Yap Ah Loy expanded road access in the city significantly, linking up tin mines with the city; these roads include the main arterial routes of the present Ampang Road, Pudu Road and Petaling Street.
The city covers an area of  and has an estimated population of 1.7 million .
The main rapid transit hub is KL Sentral, which is an interchange station for the rail systems.
In Kuala Lumpur, most taxis have distinctive white and red liveries.
Trendy nightclubs, bars and lounges, such as the Beach Club, Espanda, the Hakka Republic Wine Bar & Restaurant, Hard Rock Cafe, the Luna Bar, Nuovo, Rum Jungle, the Thai Club, Zouk, and many others are located here.
Kuala Lumpur is a centre for finance, insurance, real estate, media and the arts of Malaysia.
Some Chinese and Indians also subscribe to Christianity.
The slump lasted until late 1879, when a rise in the price of tin allowed the town to recover.
Kuala Lumpur also has an Islamic Arts Museum, which houses more than seven thousand Islamic artefacts including rare exhibits as well as a library of Islamic art books.
Public transport in Kuala Lumpur and the rest of the Klang Valley covers a variety of transport modes such as bus, rail and taxi.
Kuala Lumpur hosted the 128th IOC Session in 2015 where the IOC elected Beijing as the host city of the 2022 Winter Olympics and Lausanne as the host city of the 2020 Winter Youth Olympics.
The Petronas Art Gallery, another centre for fine art, is situated in Kuala Lumpur City Centre (KLCC).
They occupied the city until 15 August 1945, when the commander in chief of the Japanese Seventh Area Army in Singapore and Malaysia, Seishirō Itagaki, surrendered to the British administration following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The process continued after Malayan independence with the growth of a largely Malay civil service, and later the implementation of the New Economic Policy which encouraged Malay participation in urban industries and business.
Kapitan Yap Ah Loy bought a sprawling piece of real estate to set up a brick industry for the rebuilding of Kuala Lumpur; this place is the eponymous Brickfields.
Chinatown features many pre-independence buildings with Straits Chinese and colonial architectural influences.
Kuala Lumpur is pluralistic and religiously diverse.
The rail system in Kuala Lumpur is expanding fast with more train lines due for completion or in the pipeline.
The resident orchestra is the Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra (MPO), consisting of musicians from all over the world and features regular concerts, chamber concerts and traditional cultural performances.
Other annual sport events hosted by the city include the KL Tower Run, the KL Tower International BASE Jump Merdeka Circuit and the Kuala Lumpur International Marathon.
Kreative.Asia gathers local, regional and international experts in the creative industry who are involved in the creation, development and delivery of interactive content, arts, community and applications.
It has been argued by some that Sungai Lumpur is in fact Gombak River (therefore the point where it joined the Klang River would be Kuala Lumpur), although Sungai Lumpur has also been suggested to be another river a mile upstream from the Gombak confluence.
Islam is practised primarily by the Malays and the Indian Muslim communities.
The new federal territory Kuala Lumpur flag and anthem were introduced.
Kuala Lumpur is at the forefront of the convergence of media, art, culture and communications.
The Formula One event contributes significantly to tourist arrivals and tourism income to Kuala Lumpur.
Kuala Lumpur is one of the major ASEAN city with taxis extensively running on natural gas.
Changkat area of Bukit Bintang hosts various cafes, alfresco dining outlets and illegal activities.
Buildings with all-glass shells exist throughout the city, with the most prominent examples being the Petronas Twin Towers and Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre.
Previously the commercial activities of Kuala Lumpur were run to a large extent by Chinese businessmen such as Loke Yew who was then the richest and most influential Chinese of Kuala Lumpur.
These figures also do not include a significant number of illegal immigrants.
The development of the rubber industry in Selangor in the early 20th century led to a boom of the town, with the population of Kuala Lumpur increasing from 30,000 in 1900 to 80,000 in 1920.
Further, the city is home to the Westports Malaysia Dragons, 2016 Champion of the ASEAN Basketball League.
The total employment in Kuala Lumpur is estimated at around 838,400.
Cantonese and Mandarin are prominent as they are spoken by the local majority Chinese population.
All the information of the production process are portrayed in diorama format complete with historical facts, technique and traditionally engineered equipment.
The AFC House—current headquarters of the Asian Football Confederation—is built on a  complex in the Kuala Lumpur suburb of Bukit Jalil.
Every year during the Thaipusam celebration, a silver chariot carrying the statue of Lord Muruga together with his consort Valli and Teivayanni would be paraded through the city beginning at the temple all the way to Batu Caves in the neighboring Selangor.
Most of the countries' largest companies have their headquarters based here and as of December 2007 and excluding Petronas, there are 14 companies that are listed in Forbes 2000 based in Kuala Lumpur.
Kuala Lumpur is a hub for cultural activities and events in Malaysia.
It is a major source of pollution in the city together with open burning, emission from motor vehicles and construction work.
Kuala Lumpur however still retained its legislative function, and remained the home of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Constitutional King).
Another estimate put the population of Kuala Lumpur in 1890 at 20,000.
In the following decade which saw the rebuilding of the town it showed considerable increase, due in large part to the construction of a railway line in 1886 connecting Kuala Lumpur and Klang.
This annual event draws the world's top riders and their prized horses to Malaysia.
KLIA2 is served by an extension of the KLIA Ekspres and by buses from KL Sentral.
Some schools provide Mandarin and Tamil as languages of instruction for certain subjects.
A census in 1891 of uncertain accuracy gave a figure of 43,796 inhabitants, 79% of whom were Chinese (71% of the Chinese were Hakka), 14% Malay, and 6% Indian.
The architecture of Kuala Lumpur is a mixture of old colonial influences, Asian traditions, Malay Islamic inspirations, modern, and postmodern architecture mix.
Kuala Lumpur also is becoming the centre for new media, innovation and creative industry development in the region and hosts the international creative industry event, Kreative.Asia.
The ceremony for the Declaration of Independence was held at the Merdeka Stadium by the first Prime Minister of Malaya, Tunku Abdul Rahman.
KLIA connects the city with direct flights to destinations in six continents around the world, and is the main hub for the national carrier, Malaysia Airlines and low-cost carrier, AirAsia.
Early Kuala Lumpur was a small town that suffered from many social and political problems – the buildings were made of wood and ''atap'' (palm frond thatching) that were prone to fire, lack of proper sanitation plagued the town with diseases, and it suffered from a constant threat of flooding.
In 1880, the state capital of Selangor was moved from Klang to the more strategically advantageous Kuala Lumpur by the colonial administration, and the British Resident William Bloomfield Douglas then decided that the government buildings and living quarters should be located to the west of the river.
Kuala Lumpur had seen a number of civil disturbances over the years.
On 1 February 2001, Putrajaya was declared a Federal Territory, as well as the seat of the federal government.
These residual forest areas are home to a number of fauna species particularly monkeys, treeshrews, pygmy goats, budgerigars, squirrels and birds.
A riot in 1897 was a relatively minor affair that began with the confiscation of faulty ''dacing'' (a scale used by traders), and in 1912, a more serious disturbance called the ''tauchang'' riot began during the Chinese New Year with the cutting of pigtails and ended with rioting and factional fighting lasting a number of days.
Some sections of the judiciary still remain in the capital city of Kuala Lumpur.
Yap, together with Frank Swettenham who was appointed the Resident in 1882, were the two most important figures of early Kuala Lumpur with Swettenham credited with its rapid growth and development and its transformation into a major urban center.
The early Chinese and Malay settlements were along the east bank of the Klang River – the Chinese mainly settled around the commercial centre of Market Square; the Malays, later Indian Chettiars and Indian Muslims resided in the Java Street (now Jalan Tun Perak) area.
The LRT system has 2 lines namely, Kelana Jaya Line and Ampang Line, connecting many locations in the city with major suburbs in Greater Kuala Lumpur.
The city also has numerous large private fitness centres run by Celebrity Fitness, Fitness First, True Fitness and major five-star hotels.
Bahasa Malaysia is the principal language in Kuala Lumpur.
Kuala Lumpur is poised to become the global Islamic Financing hub with an increasing number of financial institutions providing Islamic Financing and the strong presence of Gulf's financial institutions such as the world's largest Islamic bank, Al-Rajhi Bank and Kuwait Finance House.
Another event hosted annually by the city is the Kuala Lumpur Fashion Week, which includes international brands as well as local designers.
Many of these facilities including the main stadium (with running track and a football field), hockey stadium and swimming pools are located in the National Sports Complex at Bukit Jalil while a velodrome and more swimming pools are located in Bandar Tun Razak, next to the Taman Tasik Permaisuri Lake Gardens.
Like  most other Asian cities, driving is the main mode of commuting in Kuala Lumpur.
Yap also presided over a small claims court.
With the economic development, old buildings such as Bok House have been razed to make way for new ones.
Kuala Lumpur remained the capital after the formation of Malaysia on 16 September 1963.
Birth rates in Kuala Lumpur have declined and resulted in the lower proportion of young people &ndash; the proportion of those in the below 15 years old category fell from 33% in 1980 to slightly less than 27% in 2000.
Kuala Lumpur was recaptured by Yap in March 1873 when Raja Mahdi forces were defeated with the help of fighters from Pahang.
Kuala Lumpur is also the centre of the wider Klang Valley conurbation (covering Petaling Jaya, Klang, Subang Jaya, Shah Alam, Gombak and others) which has an estimated metropolitan population of 7.2 million .
With a police force of six, he was able to uphold the rule of law, constructing a prison that could accommodate 60 prisoners at any time.
Being a relatively young city compared with other Southeast Asian capitals such as Bangkok, Jakarta and Manila, most of Kuala Lumpur's notable colonial-era buildings were built toward the end of the 19th and early 20th centuries.
Nevertheless, taxis are known to charge high rates for foreigners.
Rated as an alpha world city, Kuala Lumpur is the cultural, financial and economic centre of Malaysia due to its position as the capital as well as being a key city.
It has a strong presence, especially in business and is a compulsory language taught in schools.
One suggestion is that it is named after Sungai Lumpur (River Lumpur); it was recorded in 1824 that Sungei Lumpoor was the most important tin-producing settlement up the Klang River.
Its collection comprises artefacts and paintings collected throughout the country.
The population of Kuala Lumpur was estimated to be around three thousand in 1880 when it was made the capital of Selangor.
Beside the Malay language, there are a variety of languages spoken by people of Indonesian descent, such as Minangkabau and Javanese.
He also stipulated that buildings should be constructed of brick and tile so that they would be less flammable, and that the town be rebuilt with wider streets to reduce fire risk.
Kuala Lumpur is the seat of the Parliament of Malaysia.
It includes: Pavilion,  Fahrenheit 88, Plaza Low Yat, Berjaya Times Square, Lot 10, BB Plaza, Sungai Wang Plaza.
Hence, every part of the city is well connected by highways.
In terms of household income distribution, 23.5% of households in the city earned more than RM5,000 (USD 1,613) per month compared to 9.8% for the entire country, while 8.1% earned less than RM1,000 (USD 323) a month.
From 1980 to 2000 the number of Bumiputras increased by 77%, but the Chinese still outnumbered the Bumiputras in Kuala Lumpur in the 2000 census at 43% compared to Bumiputras at 38%.
Among the processes shown are pottery making, intricate wood carving, silver-smithing, weaving songket cloth, stamping batik patterns on cloth and boat making.
Other universities located in Kuala Lumpur include International Islamic University Malaysia (IIUM), Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR), UCSI University (UCSI), International Medical University (IMU), Open University Malaysia (OUM), Kuala Lumpur University (UniKL), Wawasan Open University (WOU), Tunku Abdul Rahman University College (TARUC) and the branch campus of the National University of Malaysia (UKM) and University of Technology Malaysia (UTM).
Maximums hover between  and have never exceeded , while minimums hover between  and have never fallen below .
Kuala Lumpur has been home for years to important research centres such as the Rubber Research Institute of Malaysia, the Forest Research Institute Malaysia and the Institute of Medical Research and more research centres are expected to be established in the coming years.
The entertainment hub of the city is mainly centred in the Golden Triangle encompassing '' Jalan P. Ramlee'', ''Jalan Sultan Ismail'' and Ampang Road.
The remaining 17 percent comes from manufacturing and construction.
One of the oldest hotels is the Hotel Majestic.
It has a population density of , and is the most densely populated administrative district in Malaysia.
In terms of air connectivity, Kuala Lumpur is served by two airports.
The infrastructure development in the surrounding areas such as the Kuala Lumpur International Airport at Sepang, the creation of the Multimedia Super Corridor and the expansion of Port Klang further reinforce the economic significance of the city.
The official residence of the Malaysian King, the Istana Negara, is also situated in Kuala Lumpur.
The growth of the rubber industry led to an influx of foreign capital and planters, with new companies and industries becoming established in Kuala Lumpur, and other companies previously based in Singapore and elsewhere also found a presence here.
Kuala Lumpur's rapid development has triggered a huge influx of low-skilled foreign workers from Indonesia, Nepal, Burma, Thailand, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Philippines, and Vietnam into Malaysia, many of whom enter the country illegally or without proper permits.
Other important economic activities in the city are education and health services.
Kuala Lumpur is home to the University of Malaya (UM).
A significant architect of the early period is Arthur Benison Hubback who designed a number of the colonial era buildings including the Kuala Lumpur Railway Station and Jamek Mosque.
Since the 1990s, the city has played host to many international sporting, political and cultural events including the 1998 Commonwealth Games and the Formula One Grand Prix.
Kuala Lumpur's heterogeneous populace includes the country's three major ethnic groups: the Malays, the Chinese and the Indians, although the city also has a mix of different cultures including Eurasians, as well as Kadazans, Ibans and other indigenous races from East Malaysia and Peninsula Malaysia.
The riots caused the deaths of 196 people, and led to major changes in the country's economic policy to promote and prioritise Malay economic development over that of the other ethnicities.
Later, on 1 February 1974, Kuala Lumpur became a Federal Territory.
Kuala Lumpur ceased to be the capital of Selangor in 1978 after the city of Shah Alam was declared the new state capital.
Bangsar district also has a few shopping complexes, including Bangsar Village, Bangsar Shopping Centre, and Mid Valley Megamall.
MICE tourism, which mainly encompasses conventions— has expanded in recent years to become a vital component of the industry, and is expected to grow further once the Malaysian government's Economic Transformation Programme kicks in, and with the completion of a new 93,000m2-size MATRADE Centre in 2014.
In 2000, the Malaysian Ministry of Tourism introduced the mega sale event for shopping in Malaysia.
Kuala Lumpur contains 13 tertiary education institutions, 79 high schools, 155 elementary schools and 136 kindergartens.
Its location on the west coast of Peninsular Malaysia, which has wider flat land than the east coast, has contributed to its faster development relative to other cities in Malaysia.
Some Pahang Malays who fought in the Selangor Civil War in 1873 also chose to settle in Kuala Lumpur after the war.
KL Grand Prix CSI 5*, a five-star international showjumping equestrian event is held annually in the city.
The Prasarana Malaysia has adopted the hub and spoke system to provide greater connectivity, and cut down the need of more buses.
Rail transport in Kuala Lumpur encompasses the light metro (LRT), monorail, commuter rail and Airport rail link.
The service sector comprising finance, insurance, real estate, business services, wholesale and retail trade, restaurants and hotels, transport, storage and communication, utilities, personal services and government services form the largest component of employment representing about 83.0 percent of the total.
KLIA can be reached using the KLIA Ekspres a airport rail link service from KL Sentral, which takes twenty-eight&nbsp;minutes, while travelling by car or bus via highway will take about an hour.
However, public transport utilisation is set to rise with the opening of 2 light metro (LRT) extension lines on 30 June 2016.
In recent years, the number of international students at University of Malaya has risen, as a result of increasing efforts made to attract more international students.
The geography of Kuala Lumpur is characterised by the huge Klang Valley.
In 1974, Kuala Lumpur was separated from Selangor to form the first Federal Territory governed directly by the Malaysian Federal Government.
Kuala Lumpur is home to the Parliament of Malaysia.
