Coleridge believed that the Tartars were violent, and that their culture was opposite to the civilised Chinese.
The text about Xanadu in ''Purchas, His Pilgrimes'', which Coleridge admitted he did not remember exactly, was:  In Xandu did Cublai Can build a stately Pallace, encompassing sixteen miles of plaine ground with a wall, wherein are fertile Meddowes, pleasant Springs, delightfull streames, and all sorts of beasts of chase and game, and in the middest thereof a sumptuous house of pleasure, which may be moved from place to place.
:And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething,
"Near where Abessian Kings their issue Guard,
The poet, in Coleridge's system, is able to move from the world of understanding, where men normally are, and enter into the world of the imagination through poetry.
There is also a strong connection between the idea of retreating into the imagination found within Keats's ''Lamia'' and in Tennyson's "Palace of Art".
Yet from the still surviving recollections in his mind, the Author has frequently purposed to finish for himself what had been originally, as it were, given to him.
The account of Cublai Can in Purchas's work, discussed in Coleridge's Preface, connects the idea of paradise with luxury and sensual pleasure.
Throughout the autumn, he worked on many poems, including "The Brook" and the tragedy ''Osorio''.
The Preface and the poem are different in their locations, as the Preface discusses Coleridge's England while the poem discusses ancient China, but both discuss the role of the poem and his abilities.
Taken together, the Preface could connect with the first half of the poem to suggest that the poem is from the view of a dreaming narrator, or it could connect with the second half of the poem to show how a reader is to interpret the lines by connecting himself with the persona in a negative manner.
::With Walls and Towers were compass'd round.
::And soon the fragments dim of lovely forms
:...Nor where ''Abassin'' Kings thir issue Guard,
:Through wood and dale the sacred river ran,
The Crewe Manuscript has some small changes and three notable differences from the final version published in 1816.
The figure is related to Heliodurus's work, ''Aethiopian History'' with its description of "a young Lady, sitting upon a Rock, of so rare and perfect a Beauty, as one would have taken her for a Goddess, and though her present misery opprest her with extreamest grief, yet in the greatness of her afflection, they might easily perceive the greatness of her Courage: A Laurel crown'd her Head, and a Quiver in a Scarf hanged at her back".
Mount Amara also appears in Milton's Paradise Lost:
Coleridge attributed the poem's origins to one of his stays at Ash Farm, possibly the one that happened in October 1797: "This fragment with a good deal more, not recoverable, composed, in a sort of Reverie brought on by two grains of Opium taken to check a dysentry, at a Farm House between Porlock & Linton, a quarter of a mile from Culbone Church, in the fall of the year, 1797".
Though the imagery can be dark, there is little moral concern as the ideas are mixed with creative energies.
:Floated midway on the waves;
The land is constructed as a paradisical garden, but like Eden after Man's fall, Xanadu is isolated by walls.
Fountains are often symbolic of the inception of life, and in this case may represent forceful creativity.
There are some small variations in different versions of this text.
The narrator turns prophetic, referring to a vision of an unidentified "Abyssinian maid" who sings of "Mount Abora".
::Vanishes, and a thousand circlets spread,
It is gilt all over, and most elaborately finished inside.
In 1934, a copy of the poem written by Coleridge himself sometime before its publication in 1816 was discovered in a private library.
She is also similar to the later subject of many of Coleridge's poems, Asra, based on Sara Hutchinson, whom Coleridge wanted but was not his wife and experienced opium induced dreams of being with her.
A copy of the manuscript is a permanent exhibit at the British Museum in London.
:It was an Abyssinian maid,
When she sings, she is able to inspire and mesmerise the poet by describing a false paradise.
Harold Bloom suggests that the power of the poetic imagination, stronger than nature or art, fills the narrator and grants him the ability to share this vision with others through his poetry.
::From forth this Chasm with hideous Turmoil seething (Crewe Manuscript)
As a symbol within the preface, the person represents the obligations of the real world crashing down upon the creative world or other factors that kept Coleridge from finishing his poetry.
The image is further connected to the Biblical, post-Edenic stories in that a mythological story attributes the violent children of Ham becoming the Tartars, and that Tartarus, derived from the location, became a synonym for hell.
Such a subject I conceived myself to have found in a stream, traced from its source in the hills among the yellow-red moss and conical glass-shaped tufts of bent, to the first break or fall, where its drops become audible, and it begins to form a channel".
:And close your eyes with holy dread,
The person from Porlock later became a word to describe interrupted genius, and the literary critic Walter Jackson Bate recounted that while John Livingston Lowes taught the poem, he told his students "If there is any man in the history of literature who should be hanged, drawn, and quartered, it is the man on business from Porlock."
However, the styles are very different as one is heavily structured and rhymed while the other tries to mimic conversational speech.
One theory says that "Kubla Khan" is about poetry and the two sections discuss two types of poems.
Mount Amara, though this by some suppos'd
The passage continues with a famous account of an interruption: "At this moment he was unfortunately called out by a person on business from Porlock, and detained by him above an hour, and on his return to his room, found, to his no small surprise and mortification, that though he still retained some vague and dim recollection of the general purpose of the vision, yet, with the exception of some eight or ten scattered lines and images, all the rest had passed away like the images on the surface of a stream into which a stone has been cast, but, alas!
The Tartars were also in contrast to the concept of Prester John, who may have been Prester Chan and, in Ludolphus's account, chased out of Asia by the Tartars and, in John Herbert's ''Travels'', was Abyssinian.
Maurice's ''History of Hindostan'' also describes aspects of Kashmir that were copied by Coleridge in preparation for hymns he intended to write.
:Singing of Mount Amara.
The poem is different in style and form from other poems composed by Coleridge.
The narrator introduces a character he once dreamed about, an Abyssinian maid who sings of another land.
Moreover at a spot in the Park where there is a charming wood he has another Palace built of cane, of which I must give you a description.
It passed to the Marquess of Crewe, who donated it in 1962 to the British Museum, where it is now on display.
:And on her Dulcimer she play'd
This is not to say they would be two different poems, since the technique of having separate parts that respond to another is used in the genre of the odal hymn, used in the poetry of other Romantic poets including John Keats or Percy Bysshe Shelley.
Sometimes, the Preface is included in modern editions but lacks both the first and final paragraphs.
I can ''at times'' feel strong the beauties, you describe, in themselves, & for themselves – but more frequently ''all things'' appear little – all the knowledge, that can be acquired, child's play – the universe itself – what but an immense heap of ''little'' things?
The poet of the Preface is a dreamer who must write and the poet of the poem is a vocal individual, but both are poets who lose inspiration.
:And all who heard should see them there,
:And 'mid these dancing rocks at once and ever
The image of himself that Coleridge provides is of a dreamer who reads works of lore and not as an opium addict.
:Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
::Come trembling back, unite, and now once more
The woman may also refer to Mnemosyne, the Greek personification of memory and mother of the muses, referring directly to Coleridge's claimed struggle to compose this poem from memory of a dream.
The original published version of the work was separated into 2 stanzas, with the first ending at line 30.
Most modern critics now view "Kubla Khan" as one of Coleridge's three great poems, along with ''The Rime of the Ancient Mariner'' and ''Christabel''.
Its rhyme scheme found in the first seven lines is repeated in the first seven lines of the second stanza.
In the Crewe manuscript, the earlier unpublished version of the poem, the Abyssinian maid is singing of Mount Amara, rather than Abora.
::And each mis-shape the other.
A contract was drawn up on 12 April 1816 for 80 pounds.
those caves of ice!
Which, in the published version, became:
The only word that has no true connection to another word is "dome" except in its use of a "d" sound.
The poem relies on many sound-based techniques, including cognate variation and chiasmus.
I remember the other's coming away from him, highly struck with his poem, and saying how wonderfully he talked.
:For he on honey-dew hath fed,
:Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher's flail:
The work, and others based on it, describe a temple with a dome.
As a contrast to this vision, I have annexed a fragment of a very different character, describing with equal fidelity the dream of pain and disease.
Only the poet of the poem feels that he can recover the vision, and the Preface, like a Coleridge poem that is quoted in it, ''The Picture'', states that visions are unrecoverable.
Through use of the imagination, the poem is able to discuss issues surrounding tyranny, war, and contrasts that exist within paradise.
In the final work, Coleridge added the expanded subtitle "Or, A Vision in a Dream.
In his ''Biographia Literaria'' (1817), he explained, "I sought for a subject, that should give equal room and freedom for description, incident, and impassioned reflections on men, nature, and society, yet supply in itself a natural connection to the parts and unity to the whole.
In the second stanza, Khan is able to establish some order in the natural world but he cannot stop the forces of nature that constantly try to destroy what he made.
Although the land is one of man-made "pleasure", there is a natural, "sacred" river that runs past it.
Kubla Khan hears voices of the dead, and refers to a vague "war" that appears to be unreferenced elsewhere in the poem.
Water imagery permeated through many of his poems, and the coast that he witnessed on his journey to Linton appears in ''Osorio''.
The river, Alph, replaces the one from Eden that granted immortality and it disappears into a sunless sea that lacks life.
It was not until years later that critics began to openly admire the poem.
Ethopian tradition says that the Blue Nile is the River Gihon of the Bible, one of the four rivers that flow out of the Garden of Eden in the Book of Genesis, which says that Gihon flows through the Kingdom of Kush, the Biblical name for Ethiopia and Sudan.
From the dark chasm a fountain violently erupts, then forms the meandering river Alph, which runs to the sea described in the first stanza.
It is possible that the words of Purchas were merely remembered by Coleridge and that the depiction of immediately reading the work before falling asleep was to suggest that the subject came to him accidentally.
he has been so unwise as to publish his fragments of 'Christabel' & 'Kubla-Khan' ... we were all sadly vexed when we read the advertisement of these things."
:A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice!
:And on her Dulcimer she play'd
These were both times he was in the area, and, by 1799, Coleridge was able to read Robert Southey's ''Thalaba the Destroyer'', a work which also drew on Purchas's work.
who scarcely dar'st lift up thine eyes--
:As e'er beneath a waning moon was haunted
This was the impression of everyone who heard him."
This separation causes a combative relationship between the poet and the audience as the poet seeks to control his listener through a mesmerising technique.
Coleridge did write to John Thelwall, 14 October 1797, to describe his feelings related to those expressed in the poem:
The narrator would thereby be elevated to an awesome, almost mythical status, as one who has experienced an Edenic paradise available only to those who have similarly mastered these creative powers:
There is a heavy use of assonance, the reuse of vowel sounds, and a reliance on alliteration, repetition of the first sound of a word, within the poem including the first line: "In Xanadu did Kubla Khan".
There also is a strong break following line 36 in the poem that provides for a second stanza, and there is a transition in narration from a third person narration about Kubla Khan into the poet discussing his role as a poet.
The description and the tradition provide a contrast between the daemonic and genius within the poem, and Khan is a ruler who is unable to recreate Eden.
:And sank in tumult to a lifeless ocean: (lines 17–28)
The subsequent passage refers to unnamed witnesses who may also hear this, and thereby share in the narrator's vision of a replicated, ethereal, Xanadu.
This quotation was based upon the writings of the Venetian explorer Marco Polo who is widely believed to have visited Xanadu in about 1275.
Yarlott interprets this chasm as symbolic of the poet struggling with decadence that ignores nature.
A note written on the back of the Crewe manuscript by Coleridge gave a shorter and slightly different description of how the poem was written than the version published in 1816.
::So twice six miles of fertile ground
The lines describing the river have a markedly different rhythm from the rest of the passage:
In about 1298–1299, he dictated a description of Xanadu which includes these lines:
She is a figure of imaginary power within the poem who can inspire within the narrator his own ability to craft poetry.
::The pool becomes a mirror.
There are also comparisons between Khan with Catherine the Great or Napoleon with their building and destroying nations.
Additionally, many of the images are connected to a broad use of Ash Farm and the Quantocks in Coleridge's poetry, and the mystical settings of both ''Osorio'' and "Kubla Khan" are based on his idealised version of the region.
:Weave a circle round him thrice,
Though the lines are interconnected, the rhyme scheme and line lengths are irregular.
Later lines do not contain the same amount of symmetry but do rely on assonance and rhymes throughout.
The preface then provided an origin to both the poem and why it was merely a smaller portion of an intended larger work.
Originally, his dream included between 200 and 300 lines, but he was only able to compose the first 30 before he was interrupted.
:So twice five miles of fertile ground
The use of dome instead of house or palace could represent the most artificial of constructs and reinforce the idea that the builder was separated from nature.
(''Paradise Lost'', iv.
The poem's self-proclaimed fragmentary nature combined with Coleridge's warning about the poem in the preface turns "Kubla Khan" into an "anti-poem", a work that lacks structure, order, and leaves the reader confused instead of enlightened.
Marco Polo also mentioned a large portable palace made of gilded and lacquered cane or bamboo which could be taken apart quickly and moved from place to place.
The literary critic D. F. Rauber claimed that the man was "necessary to create the illusion of the cut short rather than the stopped".
She is similar to John Keats's Indian woman in ''Endymion'' who is revealed to be the moon goddess, but in "Kubla Khan" she is also related to the sun and the sun as an image of divine truth.
In the manuscript copy, the location was named both Amora and Amara, and the location of both is the same.
In short, the whole Palace is built of these canes, which (I may mention) serve also for a great variety of other useful purposes.
::The visions will return!
:Her symphony and song,
After reading from Purchas's book, "The Author continued for about three hours in a profound sleep, at least of the external senses, during which time he had the most vivid confidence, that he could not have composed less than from two or three hundred lines ... On Awaking he appeared to himself to have a distinct recollection of the whole, and taking his pen, ink, and paper, instantly and eagerly wrote down the lines that are here preserved."
:As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
The vision of the sites, including the dome, the cavern, and the fountain, are similar to an apocalyptic vision.
The collection of poems was published 25 May 1816, and Coleridge included "A Fragment" as a subtitle to the 54 line version of the poem to defend against criticism of the poem's incomplete nature.
:Down to a sunless sea.
:That with music loud and long,
This is reinforced by the connection of the river Alph with the Alpheus, a river that in Greece was connected to the worship of the sun.
The sons of the Emperors of Abyssinia, except for the heir, were held prisoner there, to prevent them from staging a coup against their father, until the Emperor's death.
that deep romantic chasm which slanted
Yarlott argues that the war represents the penalty for seeking pleasure, or simply the confrontation of the present by the past:
The second stanza is not necessarily part of the original dream and refers to the dream in the past tense.
::::::Then all the charm
They were seen as worshippers of the sun, but uncivilised and connected to either the Cain or Ham line of outcasts.
In the tradition Coleridge relies on, the Tartar worship the sun because it reminds them of paradise, and they build gardens because they want to recreate paradise.
The place was described in negative terms and seen as an inferior representation of paradise, and Coleridge's ethical system did not connect pleasure with joy or the divine.
On his return, he became sick and rested at Ash Farm, located at Culbone Church and one of the few places to seek shelter on his route.
The poem is considered one of the most famous examples of Romanticism in English poetry.
Whereas in the final published version, Mount Abora was purely imaginary, evidently chosen simply for the beauty of its sound.
The woman herself is similar to the way Coleridge describes Lewti in another poem he wrote around the same time ''Lewti''.
In September 1797, Coleridge lived in Nether Stowey in the south west of England and spent much of his time walking through the nearby Quantock Hills with his fellow poet William Wordsworth and Wordsworth's sister Dorothy; (His route today is memorialised as the "Coleridge Way".)
Instead, the effects of the opium, as described, are intended to suggest that he was not used to its effects.
The poem begins with a fanciful description of Kublai Khan's capital Xanadu, which Coleridge places near the river Alph, which passes through caverns before reaching a dark or dead sea.
:A stately pleasure-dome decree :
Some time between 9 and 14 October 1797, when Coleridge says he had completed the tragedy, he left Stowey for Lynton.
without the after restoration of the latter!"
As followers of the sun, the Tartar are connected to a tradition that describes Cain as founding a city of sun worshippers and that people in Asia would build gardens in remembrance of the lost Eden.
As for specific aspects of the scene, the river and cavern images are used to describe how creativity operates in a post-Edenic reality.
This was the "sumptuous house of pleasure" mentioned by Purchas, which Coleridge transformed into a "stately pleasure dome".
It was a rare book, unlikely to be at a "lonely farmhouse", nor would an individual carry it on a journey; the folio was heavy and almost 1000 pages in size.
:It was a miracle of rare device,
The version published in 1816 reads:
when will he ever give his friends anything but pain?
Unlike Coleridge's usual approach to his poetry, he did not mention the poem in letters to his friends.
Mount Amara is a real mountain, today called Amba Geshen, located in the Amhara Region of modern Ethiopia, formerly known as the Abyssinian Empire.
This was notable, because in the Crewe Manuscript she sang of Mount Amara, mentioned in ''Paradise Lost'' by John Milton:
In particular, the poem emphasises the use of the "æ" sound and similar modifications to the standard "a" sound to make the poem sound Asian.
The rhythm of the poem, like its themes and images, is different from other poems Coleridge wrote during the time, and it is organised in a structure similar to 18th-century odes.
:Through caverns measureless to man
:A damsel with a dulcimer
:With walls and towers were girdled round:
It is possible that the imagery of ''Biographia Literaria'' followed the recovery of the "Kubla Khan" manuscript during the composition of the book.
The Preface, when added to the poem, connects the idea of the paradise as the imagination with the land of Porlock, and that the imagination, though infinite, would be interrupted by a "person on business".
Purchas's work does not mention a dome but a "house of pleasure".
The stressed sounds, "Xan", "du", "Ku", "Khan", contain assonance in their use of the sounds a-u-u-a, have two rhyming syllables with "Xan" and "Khan", and employ alliteration with the name "Kubla Khan" and the reuse of "d" sounds in "Xanadu" and "did".
:Singing of Mount Abora.
It is possible that the poem was recited to his friends during this time and was kept for private use instead of publication.
:And here were forests ancient as the hills,
The poem remained buried in obscurity until a 10 April 1816 meeting between Coleridge and Lord Byron, who persuaded Coleridge to publish ''Christabel'' and "Kubla Khan" as fragments.
The thoughts expressed in Coleridge's letter date "Kubla Khan" to October 1797, but two alternatives have been postulated by Coleridge's biographers: May 1798 and October 1799.
He described it this way:
In post-Milton accounts, the kingdom is linked with the worship of the sun, and his name is seen to be one that reveals the Khan as a priest.
::So twice five miles of fertile ground
They are cut across at each knot, and then the pieces are split so as to form from each two hollow tiles, and with these the house is roofed; only every such tile of cane has to be nailed down to prevent the wind from lifting it.
The poet is separated from the rest of humanity after he is exposed to the power to create and is able to witness visions of truth.
As a component to the idea of imagination in the poem is the creative process by describing a world that is of the imagination and another that is of understanding.
The second stanza of the poem is the narrator's response to the power and effects of an Abyssinian maid's song, which enraptures him but leaves him unable to act on her inspiration unless he could hear her once again.
::The stream will soon renew its smoothness, soon
as holy and enchanted
::And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething (1816 published text)
Nature, in the poem is not a force of redemption but one of destruction, and the paradise references reinforce what Khan cannot attain.
Coleridge, when composing the poem, believed in a connection between nature and the divine but believed that the only dome that should serve as the top of a temple was the sky.
... My mind feels as if it ached to behold & know something ''great'' – something ''one'' & ''indivisible'' – and it is only in the faith of this that rocks or waterfalls, mountains or caverns give me the sense of sublimity or majesty!
Byron arranged for John Murray to publish the poem with ''Christabel'' and "The Pains of Sleep" along with prefaces to the works.
What they do have in common is that they use scenery based on the same location, including repeated uses of dells, rocks, ferns, and a waterfall found in the Somerset region.
In addition to real life counterparts of the Abyssinian maid, Milton's ''Paradise Lost'' describes Abyssinian kings keeping their children guarded at Mount Amara and a false paradise, which is echoed in "Kubla Khan".
"The custome is that all the male child of the Kings, except the Heires, as soone as they be brought up, they send them presendly to a very great Rock, which stands in the province of Amara, and there they pass all their life, and never come out from thence, except the King which reignith departeth their life without Heires."
However, the odal hymn as used by others has a stronger unity among its parts, and Coleridge believed in writing poetry that was unified organically.
:Where was heard the mingled measure
:And all should cry, Beware!
:Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
