During Phagspa's absence in Tibet, the Tibetan monk Sangha rose to high office and had the office renamed the Commission for Buddhist and Tibetan Affairs.
Kublai began the practice of having the four great aristocrats in his kheshig sign jarligs (decrees), a practice that spread to all other Mongol khanates.
His grandfather smeared fat from killed animals onto Kublai's middle finger in accordance with a Mongol tradition.
Toghan had to split his army into two and retreated in 1288.
Kublai cut off supplies of food to Karakorum with the support of his cousin Kadan, son of Ögedei Khan.
Later Gaykhatu of the Ilkhanate attempted to adopt the system in Iran and the Middle East, which was a complete failure, and shortly afterwards he was assassinated.
Kublai Khan is considered to be the first fiat money maker.
In the new official version of his family's history, Kublai refused to write Berke's name as the khan of the Golden Horde because of Berke's support for Ariq Böke and wars with Hulagu; however, Jochi's family was fully recognized as legitimate family members.
The Chagatayid khan, Duwa, helped the rebels, laying siege to Gaochang and defeating Kublai's garrisons in the Tarim Basin.
Muslim physicians organized hospitals and had their own institutes of Medicine in Beijing and Shangdu.
Kublai appointed Lian Xixian of the Kingdom of Qocho (1231–1280) the head of his pacification commission in 1254.
Most of the Yuan domains were administered as provinces, also translated as the "Branch Secretariat", each with a governor and vice-governor.
Meanwhile, Kublai tried to stabilize his control over the Korean Peninsula by mobilizing another Mongol invasion after he enthroned Wonjong of Goryeo (r. 1260–1274) in 1259 on Ganghwado.
Kublai and his generals adopted an elaborate, moderate style of military campaigns in South China.
Guo began to construct astronomical instruments, including water clocks for accurate timing and armillary spheres that represented the celestial globe.
Bayan was in control of Karakorum and was re-establishing control over surrounding areas in 1293, so Kublai's rival Kaidu did not attempt any large-scale military action for the next three years.
Few members of the royal family supported Kublai's claims to the title, though the small number of attendees included representatives of all the Borjigin lines except that of Jochi.
The blowing wind played a song among the green pines at the mountain pass
Two days later, the funeral cortège took his body to the burial place of the khans in Mongolia.
After Kublai Khan was proclaimed Khagan at his residence in Shangdu on May 5, 1260, he began to organize the country.
Yizhou governor Li Tan revolted against Mongol rule in February 1262, and Kublai ordered his Chancellor Shi Tianze and Shi Shu to attack Li Tan.
Groups of Đại Việt infantry were ordered to attack the Mongols in Vạn Kiếp.
The latter was still allied with Kaidu who fashioned an alliance with him in 1269, although Möngke Temür had promised Kublai his military support to protect Kublai from the Ögedeids.
This rebellion forced Kublai to approve the creation of the Liaoyang Branch Secretariat on December 4, 1287, while rewarding loyal fraternal princes.
Möngke dismissed Mahmud Yalavach, which met with resistance from Chinese Confucian-trained officials.
Möngke Khan sent two tax inspectors, Alamdar (Ariq Böke's close friend and governor in North China) and Liu Taiping, to audit Kublai's officials in 1257.
When he met Haiyun in Karakorum in 1242, Kublai asked him about the philosophy of Buddhism.
Most importantly, the Chinese, under Kublai's control, built many ships quickly in order to contribute to the fleets in both of the invasions.
In 1252, Kublai criticized Mahmud Yalavach, who was never highly valued by his Chinese associates, over his cavalier execution of suspects during a judicial review, and Zhao Bi attacked him for his presumptuous attitude toward the throne.
To secure the southern front, Kublai attempted a diplomatic resolution and sent envoys to Hangzhou, but Jia broke his promise and arrested them.
''Lú yān fú wù ruì guāng chóng;''
Kublai instigated Baraq to attack Kaidu.
The incident instilled in Kublai a distrust of ethnic Hans.
Kublai sank into depression due to the loss of his family, his poor health and advancing age.
Haiyun named Kublai's son, who was born in 1243, Zhenjin (Chinese: ''True Gold'').
It was considered the most important region of the dynasty and was directly governed by the Zhongshu Sheng at Dadu.
Kublai employed people of other nationalities as well, for he was keen to balance local and imperial interests, Mongol and Turk.
Liu was a painter, calligrapher, poet, and mathematician, and he became Kublai's advisor when Haiyun returned to his temple in modern Beijing.
Despite his controversial election, which accelerated the disunity of the Mongols, Kublai's willingness to formalize the Mongol realm's symbiotic relation with China brought the Mongol Empire to international attention.
*Zhenjin, father of Temür Khan, Kublai's successor.
The Song minister Jia Sidao secretly approached Kublai to propose terms.
The Ilkhan Hulagu also sided with Kublai and criticized Ariq Böke.
Mongol and Chinese units were organized using the same decimal organization that Genghis Khan used.
The naval fleet rapidly attained victory in Vân Đồn near Hạ Long Bay.
In October 2011, a wreck, possibly one of Kublai's invasion craft, was found off the coast of Nagasaki.
The Mongol administration had issued paper currencies from 1227 on.
As he was suffering from gout, Kublai was allowed to stay home, but he moved to assist Möngke anyway.
Kaidu had ridden away before Kublai could mobilize a larger army.
Once his own kheshig was organized in 1263, Kublai put three of the original kheshigs under the charge of the descendants of Genghis Khan's assistants, Borokhula, Boorchu, and Muqali.
In 1286, maritime trade was put under the Office of Market Taxes.
It was better organized than the previous effort; a large fleet and plentiful stocks of food were used.
The first incursion was in 1257, but the Trần dynasty was able to repel the invasion and ultimately re-established the peace treaty between the Mongols and Đại Việt in the twelfth lunar month of 1257.
Kublai and his wives' children included:
Threatened by the advance of Kublai's bureaucratization, Nayan a fourth generation descendant of one of Genghis Khan's brothers, either Temüge or Belgutei, instigated a revolt in 1287.
By the end of 1256, Uryankhadai had completely pacified Yunnan.
However, their kings soon declined to attend the Mongol court in person.
Kublai had to be content with establishing a formal suzerainty, but Pagan finally became a tributary state, sending tributes to the Yuan court until the Mongols were expelled from China in the 1360s.
It was translated into Mongolian by the Inner Mongolian scholar B.Buyan in the same style as classical Mongolian poetry and transcribed into Cyrillic by Ya.Ganbaatar.
Kublai also sent his protege Ghiyas-ud-din Baraq to overthrow the court of the Oirat Orghana, the empress of the Chagatai Khanate, who put her young son Mubarak Shah on the throne in 1265, without Kublai's permission after her husband's death.
Before his death, Kublai passed the seal of Crown Prince to Zhenjin's son Temür, who would become the next Khagan of the Mongol Empire and the second ruler of the Yuan dynasty.
Toghan risked his life to take a shortcut through thick forest in order to flee home.
At that time, a number of fire rafts quickly rushed toward the Mongols, who were frightened and jumped down to reach the banks where they were dealt a heavy blow by an army led by the Trần king and Trần Hưng Đạo.
His team's findings strongly indicate that Kublai rushed to invade Japan and attempted to construct his enormous fleet in one year, a task that should have taken up to five years.
''Huā sè yìng xiá xiáng cǎi hùn;''
Hüis tsetseg tuyaaran myaralzaad ölziit öngö solongormui
These costly invasions and conquests and the introduction of paper currency caused inflation.
Goryeo became a Mongol military base, and several myriarchy commands were established there.
In the first armed clash between Ariq Böke and Kublai, Ariq Böke lost and his commander Alamdar was killed at the battle.
He offered an annual tribute of 200,000 taels of silver and 200,000 bolts of silk, in exchange for Mongol agreement to the Yangtze as the frontier between the states.
The fleet was hastily assembled and ill-equipped to cope with maritime conditions.
The first attempt took place in 1274, with a fleet of 900 ships.
And on the way back I rode a Blue Dragon in the royal carriage.
I ascended on Fragrant Hill in the friendly season of spring
Thanks to those efforts, many of the people who fled returned.
The Mongols' boats were halted, and many were damaged and sank.
He also pushed out Great Khan's overseer from the Tarim Basin.
As bridges and roads were destroyed and attacks were launched by Đại Việt troops, the Mongols reached Bạch Đằng without an infantry escort.
Đại Việt's small flotilla engaged in battle and pretended to retreat.
Seeking an old companion to comfort him in his final illness, the palace staff could choose only Bayan, more than 30 years his junior.
Other administrators were Nasr al-Din (Yunnan) and Mahmud Yalavach (mayor of the Yuan capitol).
In 1251, Kublai's eldest brother Möngke became Khan of the Mongol Empire, and Khwarizmian Mahmud Yalavach and Kublai were sent to China.
Kublai's commander Oz Temür's Mongol force attacked Nayan's 60,000 inexperienced soldiers on June 14, while Chinese and Alan guards under Li Ting protected Kublai.
The Trần king assembled all his citizens, allowing all to vote on whether to surrender to the Yuan or to stand and fight for their homeland.
''Fēng xí qín shēng lǐng jì sōng;''
Opaque watercolor, ink and gold on paper.
Kublai ordered Möngke Temür to revise the second census of the Golden Horde to provide resources and men for his conquest of China.
"Great Capital", known as Khanbaliq or Daidu to the Mongols, at modern-day Beijing) the following year.
After his wife Chabi died in 1281, Kublai began to withdraw from direct contact with his advisers, and he issued instructions through one of his other queens, Nambui.
Kublai's niece, Kelmish, who married a Khongirad general of the Golden Horde, was powerful enough to have Kublai's sons Nomuqan and Kokhchu returned.
It is believed that both attempts were thwarted by bad weather or a flaw in the design of ships that were based on river boats without keels, and his fleets were destroyed.
In 1292, Temür Khan, Kublai Khan's successor, returned all detained envoys and settled for a tributary relationship with the Trần king, which continued to the end of the Yuan dynasty.
Kublai sent Bayan to keep Nayan and Kaidu apart by occupying Karakorum, while Kublai led another army against the rebels in Manchuria.
Kublai Khan invaded Đại Việt (now Vietnam) three times, each repelled by the ruling Trần dynasty.
Not discouraged I climbed to the peak and met the Golden Face
Turkestani architect Ikhtiyar al-Din, also known as "Igder", designed the buildings of the city of the Khagan, Khanbaliq (Chinese ''Dadu'').
The mysterious deaths of three Jochid princes in Hulagu's service, the Siege of Baghdad (1258), and unequal distribution of war spoils strained the Ilkhanate's relations with the Golden Horde.
Astronomers such as Jamal ad-Din introduced 7 new instruments and concepts that allowed the correction of the Chinese calendar.
Guo was interested in engineering, was an expert astronomer and skilled instrument maker, and he understood that good astronomical observations depended on expertly made instruments.
Zhenjin died soon afterwards in 1286, eight years before his father.
Kublai Khan patronized Muslim scholars and scientists, and Muslim astronomers contributed to the construction of the observatory in Shaanxi.
In November, they sailed into the treacherous waters that separate Korea and Japan by 110 miles.
When Kublai summoned them to a new ''kurultai'', Alghu Khan demanded recognition of his illegal position from Kublai in return.
In 1273, Kublai issued a new series of state sponsored bills to finance his conquest of the Song, although eventually a lack of fiscal discipline and inflation turned this move into an economic disaster.
The region called Lia-tung was immediately brought under the Khagan's control, in 1284, eliminating autonomy of the Mongol nobles there.
From that time up until the Yuan dynasty, there were two Duke Yanshengs, once in the north in Qufu and the other in the south at Quzhou.
To unify China, Kublai began a massive offensive against the remnants of the Southern Song in 1274 and finally destroyed the Song in 1279, unifying the country at last.
In the beginning of the 13th century, large numbers of Europeans and Central Asians&nbsp;– merchants, travelers, and missionaries of different orders&nbsp;– made their way to China.
Kublai weakened steadily, and on February 18, 1294, he died at the age of 78.
The main source of revenue of the government was the monopoly of salt production.
Kublai's seizure of power in 1260 pushed the Mongol Empire into a new direction.
Kublai sent a two-man embassy with his wives and then appealed in person to Möngke, who publicly forgave his younger brother and reconciled with him.
Confucius's descendants in Quzhou alone number 30,000.
Effective assimilation of Chinese naval techniques allowed the Yuan army to quickly conquer the Song.
Under Kublai, direct contact between East Asia and Europe was established, made possible by Mongol control of the central Asian trade routes and facilitated by the presence of efficient postal services.
Nomukhan, after returning from captivity in the Golden Horde, expressed resentment that Zhenjin had been made heir apparent, but he was banished to the north.
Hadan deerh has hulsnaa huriin dusal bömbölzönhön
Despite political disagreement between contending branches of the family over the office of Khagan, the economic and commercial system continued.
To ensure its use, Kublai's government confiscated gold and silver from private citizens and foreign merchants, but traders received government-issued notes in exchange.
Prince Kaidu of the House of Ögedei declined to personally attend the court of Kublai.
He proposed connecting the water supply across different river basins, built new canals with sluices to control the water level, and achieved great success with the improvements he made.
The emperor overindulged in alcohol and the traditional meat-rich Mongol diet, which may have contributed to his gout.
Mughal dynasty, Reign of Akbar, 1596.
In 1287, Kublai's minister Sangha created a new currency, Zhiyuan Chao, to deal with a budget shortfall.
Kublai heavily relied on his Chinese advisers until about 1276.
Kublai's Chinese staff encouraged Kublai to ascend the throne, and almost all the senior princes in North China and Manchuria supported his candidacy.
He also wrote that Kublai was determined to mount a third invasion, despite the horrendous cost to the economy and to his and Mongol prestige of the first two defeats, and only his death and the unanimous agreement of his advisers not to invade prevented a third attempt.
The second column under Subutai's son Uryankhadai took a difficult route into the mountains of western Sichuan.
The Dali King Duan Xingzhi (段興智) himself defected to the Mongols, who used his troops to conquer the rest of Yunnan.
While Uryankhadai travelled along the lakeside from the north, Kublai took the capital city of Dali and spared the residents despite the slaying of his ambassadors.
In the eighth year of Zhiyuan (1271), Kublai officially created the Yuan dynasty and proclaimed the capital as Dadu (, lit.
The vote was a unanimous decision to stand and fight the invaders.
Ariq Böke captured Abishqa, two other princes, and 100 men, and he had his own man, Alghu, crowned khan of Chagatai's territory.
If one counts the Mongol Empire at that time as a whole, his realm reached from the Pacific Ocean to the Black Sea, from Siberia to what is now Afghanistan&nbsp;– one fifth of the world's inhabited land area.
Kublai Khan invaded Goryeo (the state on the Korean Peninsula) and made it a tributary vassal state in 1260.
When Kaidu and Mentemu together defeated Kublai, Baraq joined an alliance with the House of Ögedei and the Golden Horde against Kublai in the east and Abagha in the west.
Despite the opposition of some of his Confucian-trained advisers, Kublai decided to invade Japan, Burma, Vietnam, and Java, following the suggestions of some of his Mongol officials.
After the Mongol conquest of the Song, the merchants expanded their operations to the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean.
A rich merchant from the Madurai Sultanate, Abu Ali (in Chinese, 孛哈里 ''Bèihālǐ'' or 布哈爾 ''Bùhār''), was associated closely with its royal family.
To guard against devaluation, the currency was convertible with silver and gold, and the government accepted tax payments in paper currency.
Widespread but uncoordinated uprisings of Nayan's supporters continued until 1289; these were ruthlessly repressed.
Guo travelled extensively along with his friend Zhang taking notes of the work needed to be done to unblock damaged parts of the system and to make improvements to its efficiency.
The second Mongol invasion of Đại Việt began late in 1284, when the Mongol Yuan forces under the command of Toghan, the prince of Kublai Khan, crossed the border and quickly occupied Thăng Long (now Hanoi) in January 1285, after the victorious battle of Omar in Vạn Kiếp (north east of Hanoi).
Kublai Khan dispatched his grandson Gammala to Burkhan Khaldun in 1291 to ensure his claim to Ikh Khorig, where Genghis was buried, a sacred place strongly protected by the Kublaids.
Kublai was nine years old and with his eldest brother killed a rabbit and an antelope.
Kublai decided to keep the death of his brother secret and continued the attack on Wuhan, near the Yangtze.
Kublai quickly came to his appanage in Hebei and ordered reforms.
Karakorum quickly fell to Kublai's large army, but following Kublai's departure it was temporarily re-taken by Ariq Böke in 1261.
Kublai Khan twice attempted to invade Japan.
Konchi, khan of the White Horde, established friendly relations with the Yuan and the Ilkhanate, and as a reward received luxury gifts and grain from Kublai.
''Shí yīng sháo jǐng zhì lán fēng;''
Freer Gallery of Art.
Baraq began to expand his realm northward; he seized power in 1266 and fought Kaidu and the Golden Horde.
In 1253, Kublai was ordered to attack Yunnan and he asked the Dali Kingdom to submit.
Kublai's original choice of successor was his son Zhenjin, who became the head of the Zhongshu Sheng and actively administered the dynasty according to Confucian fashion.
Soon after, general Trần Nhật Duật also won a battle in Hàm Tử (now Hưng Yên) and Toghan was defeated by General Trần Hưng Đạo, thus Kublai failed in his first attempt to invade Đại Việt.
The court of Goryeo supplied Korean troops and an ocean-going naval force for the Mongol campaigns.
From the beginning of his reign, he adopted Chinese political and cultural models and worked to minimize the influences of regional lords, who had held immense power before and during the Song Dynasty.
In 1258, Möngke put Kublai in command of the Eastern Army and summoned him to assist with an attack on Sichuan.
The Đại Việt army began their general offensive and recaptured a number of locations occupied by the Mongols.
Haiyun also introduced Kublai to the formerly Daoist and now Buddhist monk, Liu Bingzhong.
During the conquest of the Jin, Genghis Khan's younger brothers received large appanages in Manchuria.
In Beijing was the renown ''Guang Hui Si'' "Department of extensive mercy", where Hui medicine and surgery were taught.
After a hard fight, Nayan's troops withdrew behind their carts, and Li Ting began bombardment and attacked Nayan's camp that night.
The paper bills made collecting taxes and administering the empire much easier and reduced the cost of transporting coins.
In 1264 he was asked to go to Gansu to repair the damage that had been caused to the irrigation systems by the years of war during the Mongol advance through the region.
To provide Dadu with a new supply of water, Guo found the Baifu spring in Mount Shen and had a  channel built to move water to Dadu.
An invitation to come back to Qufu was extended to the southern Duke Yansheng Kong Zhu by the Yuan dynasty Emperor Kublai Khan.
Many Uyghurs abandoned Kashgar for safer bases back in the eastern part of the Yuan dynasty.
The third Mongol invasion began in 1287.
Butsah zamd süih teregnee höh luu hölöglöjühüi
He was a well learned man in the Confucian and Daoist traditions and is believed to have propagated Islam in China.
Raindrops were like bubbles on jade bamboos at the edge of the big rock
Nevertheless, the Trần king accepted Kublai Khan's supremacy as the Great Khan in order to avoid more conflicts.
However, Kaidu defeated a major Yuan army in the Khangai Mountains and briefly occupied Karakorum in 1289.
After Chabi's death in 1281, Kublai married Chabi's young cousin, Nambui, presumably in accordance with Chabi's wish.
When Hulagu died on February 8, 1264, Berke marched to cross near Tbilisi to conquer the Ilkhanate but died on the way.
*Manggala, a viceroy in Shaanxi.
The Mongol Yuan forces, under the command of Toghan, moved to Vạn Kiếp from the north west and met the infantry and cavalry of Kublai's Kipchak commander Omar (coming by another way along the Red River) and quickly won the battle.
In 1274, Kublai appointed Lian Xixian to investigate abuses of power by Mongol appanage holders in Manchuria.
After becoming emperor, Kublai banned granting the titles of and tithes to Han Chinese warlords.
Before he reached Mongolia, he learned that Ariq Böke had held a ''kurultai'' (Mongol great council) at the capital Karakorum, which had named him Great Khan with the support of most of Genghis Khan's descendants.
At the conference, the Taoist claim was officially refuted, and Kublai forcibly converted 237 Daoist temples to Buddhism and destroyed all copies of the Daoist texts.
The Daoists had obtained their wealth and status by seizing Buddhist temples.
Eventually, the remaining Japanese withdrew from the coastal zone inland to a fortress.
Ariq Böke surrendered to Kublai at Xanadu on August 21, 1264.
Kublai Khan named Abaqa as the new Ilkhan (obedient khan) and nominated Batu's grandson Mentemu for the throne of Sarai, the capital of the Golden Horde.
*Dorji, the director of the Secretariat and head of the Bureau of Military Affairs from 1263, but was sickly and died young.
During the Southern Song, the descendant of Confucius at Qufu, Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou fled south with the Song Emperor to Quzhou, while the newly established Jin dynasty (1115–1234) in the north appointed Kong Duanyou's brother Kong Duancao who remained in Qufu as Duke Yansheng.
Kublai Khan and the Yuan dynasty clearly favored Buddhism, while his counterparts in the Chagatai Khanate, the Golden Horde, and the Ilkhanate later converted to Islam at various times in history – Berke of the Golden Horde being the only Muslim during Kublai's era (his successor did not convert to Islam).
These armies also executed Wang Wentong, Li Tan's father-in-law, who had been appointed the Chief Administrator of the Central Secretariat (Zhongshu Sheng) early in Kublai's reign and became one of Kublai's most trusted Han Chinese officials.
Kublai was well versed in Chinese poetry, though most of his works have not survived.
After Kublai's grandson Buqa-Temür crushed the resistance of the Drikung Kagyu, killing 10,000 Tibetans in 1291, Tibet was fully pacified.
These acts received great acclaim from the Chinese warlords and were essential to the building of the Yuan Dynasty.
The Kublaids in the east retained suzerainty over the Ilkhans until the end of their regime.
His summer capital was in Shangdu (, "Upper Capital", also called Xanadu, near what today is Dolon Nor).
Kublai and his predecessors' conquests were largely responsible for re-creating a unified, militarily powerful China.
Kaidu withdrew westward to avoid a battle.
Kublai's son Nomukhan and his generals occupied Almaliq from 1266 to 1276.
Kublai's son Manggala established direct control over Chang'an and Shanxi in 1272.
Thirty Muslims served as high officials in the court of Kublai Khan.
