The KMT is a member of the International Democrat Union.
In 2008, the KMT won a landslide victory in the Republic of China Presidential Election on March 22, 2008.
The KMT won a decisive victory in the 3-in-1 local elections of December 2005, replacing the DPP as the largest party at the local level.
KMT branch in Guangxi province, led by the New Guangxi Clique implemented anti-imperialist, anti-religious, and anti-foreign policies.
After failing to convince Wang to stay on as a vice chairman, Ma named holdovers Wu Po-hsiung, Chiang Pin-kung and Lin Cheng-chi (林澄枝), as well as long-time party administrator and strategist John Kuan as vice-chairmen.
They subsequently flew to the former ROC capital of Nanjing to commemorate Sun Yat-sen.  During the trip, the KMT signed a 10-points agreement with the CPC.
In 1939 Isa Yusuf Alptekin and Ma Fuliang were sent on a mission by KMT to the Middle eastern countries such as Egypt, Turkey and Syria to gain support for the Chinese War against Japan, they also visited Afghanistan in 1940 and contacted Muhammad Amin Bughra, they asked him to come to Chongqing, the capital of the Nationalist Government.
It was the ruling party in mainland China from 1928 until its retreat to Taiwan in 1949 after being defeated by the Communist Party of China (CPC) during the Chinese Civil War.
Until the 1970s, the KMT successfully pushed ahead with land reforms, developed the economy, implemented a democratic system in a lower level of the government, improved relations between Taiwan and the mainland and created the Taiwan economic miracle.
The various government bodies previously in Nanjing, that were re-established in Taipei as the KMT-controlled government, actively claimed sovereignty over all China.
During the 2000-2008 DPP presidency, a law was proposed by the DPP in the Legislative Yuan to recover illegally acquired party assets and return them to the government.
At first, the KMT had the edge with the aid of weapons and ammunition from the United States (US).
The brief period of celebration was soon shadowed by the possibility of a civil war between the KMT and CPC.
The KMT faced a split in 1993 that led to the formation of the Chinese New Party in August 1993, alleged to be a result of Lee's "corruptive ruling style".
On 5 April 2005, Taipei Mayor Ma Ying-jeou said he wished to lead the opposition KMT with Wang Jin-pyng.
Kung's son David was arrested, the Kung's responded by blackmailing the Chiang's, threatening to release information about them, eventually he was freed after negotiations, and Ching-kuo resigned, ending the terror on the Shanghainese merchants.
Sun understood it as an industrial economy and equality of land holdings for the Chinese peasant farmers.
The Viet Nam Revolutionary League was a union of various Vietnamese nationalist groups, run by the pro Chinese VNQDD.
With the support of the Soviet agent Mikhail Borodin, Wang declared the National Government as having moved to Wuhan.
The KMT traditionally has strong cooperation with military officers, teachers, and government workers.
Ching-kuo ordered KMT agents to raid the Yangtze Development Corporation's warehouses, which was privately owned by H.H.
However, the KMT has been forced to moderate its stance by advocating the political and legal status quo of modern Taiwan.
Muslim Generals in Kansu waged war against the Guominjun in favor of the KMT during the conflict in Gansu in 1927-1930.
The KMT also acknowledged that part of its assets were acquired through extra-legal means and thus promised to "retro-endow" them to the government.
Now the people of Mongolia and Tibet are closely related to us, and we have great affection for one another: our common existence and common honor already have a history of over a thousand years.... Mongolia and Tibet's life and death are China's life and death.
Full-scale civil war between CPC and the KMT erupted in 1946.
The new scrip became worthless in only ten months and greatly reinforced the nationwide perception of the KMT as a corrupt or at best inept entity.
However, the fortunes of the party were greatly improved when the KMT did well in the legislative elections held in December 2004 by maintaining its support in southern Taiwan achieving a majority for the Pan-Blue Coalition.
The KMT's position on the cross-strait relations was redefined as hoping to remain in the current neither-independent-nor-united situation.
This marked the first meeting between leaders of the KMT and CPC after the end of Chinese Civil War in 1949.
Although Chiang finally won the war, the conflicts among the cliques would have a devastating effect on the survival of the KMT.
Shortly after the indictment, he submitted his resignation as KMT chairman at the same press conference at which he formally announced his candidacy for ROC President.
After the Northern Expedition in 1928, the Nationalist government under the KMT declared that China had been exploited for decades under unequal treaties signed between the foreign powers and the Qing Dynasty.
In addition to being anticommunist, some KMT members, like Chiang Kai-shek's right-hand man Dai Li were anti-American, and wanted to expel American influence.
Masud Sabri, a Uyghur was appointed as Governor of Xinjiang by KMT, as was the Tatar Burhan Shahidi and the Uyghur Yulbars Khan.
The provision declared martial law in Taiwan and halted some democratic processes, including presidential and parliamentary elections, until the mainland could be recovered from the CPC.
Chiang, with Soviet supplies, conquered the southern half of China in nine months.
Its stated goal was for unity with China under the Three Principles of the People, created by KMT founder Dr. Sun and opposition to Japanese and French Imperialists.
Less than 10% of the communist army survived the long retreat to Shaanxi province, but they re-established their military base quickly with aid from the Soviet Union.
The Chinese Muslim brotherhood became a Chinese nationalist organization and supported KMT rule.
In 1924, Sun Yat-sen sent Chiang to spend three months in Moscow studying the political and military system of the Soviet Union.
The VNQDD was founded with KMT aid in 1925, they were against Ho Chi Minh's Viet Nam Revolutionary Youth League.
After the election, Lee's strong relationship with the opponent became apparent.
KMT was extensively involved in the Kham region, recruiting the Khampa people to both oppose the Dalai Lama's Tibetan government, fight the Communist Red Army, and crush the influence of local Chinese warlords who did not obey the central government.
KMT Muslim Governor of Ningxia, Ma Hongkui promoted state owned monopoly companies.
During the Kumul Rebellion, KMT 36th Division (National Revolutionary Army) crushed a separatist Uyghur First East Turkestan Republic, delivering it a fatal blow at the Battle of Kashgar (1934).
The merchants were supported by the foreign, western Imperialists such as the British, who led an international flotilla to support them against Dr. Sun.
By the end of 1949, the CPC controlled almost all of mainland China, as the KMT retreated to Taiwan with a significant amount of China's national treasures and 2 million people, including military forces and refugees.
Aboriginals have criticized politicians for abusing the "indigenization" movement for political gains, such as aboriginal opposition to the DPP's "rectification" by recognizing the Taroko for political reasons, with the majority of mountain townships voting for Ma Ying-jeou.
Tibetans and Mongols refused to allow other ethnic groups like Kazakhs to participate in the Kokonur ceremony in Qinghai, but the KMT Muslim General Ma Bufang allowed them to participate.
KMT was known for sponsoring Muslim students to study abroad at Muslim universities like Al Azhar and it established schools especially for Muslims, Muslim KMT warlords like Ma Fuxiang promoted education for Muslims.
Song Jiaoren was assassinated in Shanghai in 1913.
Thus, many old revolutionaries did not join Sun's new organisation, and he was largely sidelined within the Republican movement during this period.
When it was established, it was based on the Chinese KMT and was pro Chinese.
As his life progressed, he became increasingly attached to Chinese culture and traditions.
The predecessor of the KMT, the Revolutionary Alliance, was one of the major advocates of the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty and the establishment of a republic.
Fitzgerald describes China under the rule of the KMT thus: "the Chinese people groaned under a regime Fascist in every quality except efficiency."
Corporations such as CSBC Corporation, Taiwan, CPC Corporation, Taiwan and Aerospace Industrial Development Corporation are owned by the state in the Republic of China.
The most influential member of the party was the third ranking Song Jiaoren, who mobilized mass support from gentry and merchants for the KMT to advocate a constitutional parliamentary democracy.
During the Nanking Incident in March 1927, the NRA stormed the consulates of the United States, United Kingdom (UK) and Empire of Japan, looted foreign properties and almost assassinated the Japanese consul.
Many PFP members including legislators and municipal leaders have defected to the KMT, and the PFP is seen as a fading party.
A Muslim, Ma Fuxiang, was appointed as its Chairman.
The previous president, Ma Ying-jeou, elected in 2008 and re-elected in 2012, was the seventh KMT member to hold the office of the presidency.
Ma Chengxiang was a Muslim and a KMT member, and refused to surrender to the Communists.
1 instructed Japan to surrender its troops in Taiwan to Chiang Kai-shek.
Chiang met Leon Trotsky and other Soviet leaders, but quickly came to the conclusion that the Soviet model of government was not suitable for China.
This decision gave CPC a chance to move freely through the countryside.
There has been a recent warming of relations between the Pan-Blue Coalition and the PRC, with prominent members of both the KMT and PFP in active discussions with officials on the mainland.
The ROC in Taiwan was once referred to synonymously with the KMT and known simply as "Nationalist China" after its ruling party.
General Zhang Fakui (Chang Fa-kuei), who based himself in Guangxi, established the Viet Nam Cach Menh Dong Minh Hoi meaning "Viet Nam Revolutionary League" in 1942, which was assisted by the VNQDD to serve the KMT's aims.
The CPC was under Comintern instructions to cooperate with the KMT, and its members were encouraged to join while maintaining their separate party identities, forming the First United Front between the two parties.
KMT pursued a sinicization policy, it was stated that "the time had come to set about the business of making all natives either turn Chinese or get out" by foreign observers of KMT policy.
This was even more evident following Sun's elevation into a cult figure after his death.
KMT kept the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission for dealing with Mongolian And Tibetan affairs.
In 1895, Formosa (now called Taiwan), including the Penghu islands, became a Japanese colony via the Treaty of Shimonoseki following the First Sino-Japanese War.
Among the ethnic groups in Taiwan, the KMT has solid support among mainlanders and their descendants for ideological reasons and among Taiwanese aboriginals.
The two VNQDD parties merged into a single organization, the Canton branch removed the word "revolutionary" from the party name.
The merchants were conservative and reactionary, and their Volunteer Corp leader Chen Lianbao was a prominent comprador trader.
NRA took Peking in 1928.
He and his New Life Movement called for the crushing of Soviet, Western, American and other foreign influences in China.
In 1923, the KMT and its government accepted aid from the Soviet Union after being denied recognition by the western powers.
The Chinese Muslim general Ma Bufang of Qinghai presented himself as a Chinese nationalist to the people of China, fighting against British imperialism, to deflect criticism by opponents that his government was feudal and oppressed minorities like Tibetans and Buddhist Mongols.
The KMT fought the Battle of Guningtou on 25–27 October 1949 and stopped the PLA invasion.
Bai led the anti-religious movement, against superstition.
The slogan was "prepare in the first year, start fighting in the second, and conquer in the third year."
The capital was moved from Peking to Nanking, the original capital of the Ming Dynasty, and thus a symbolic purge of the final Qing elements.
The KMT backed the New Life Movement, which promoted Confucianism, and it was also against westernization.
Ma argued that it was customary for officials to use the special expense fund for personal expenses undertaken in the course of their official duties.
At this time, there is not a single nation on earth except China that will sincerely develop Mongolia and Tibet.''
Ma garnered 72.4% of vote share, or 375,056 votes, against Wang's 27.6%, or 143,268 votes.
KMT also promotes Government-owned corporations.
The guiding ideology is the Three Principles of the People, advocated by Sun Yat-sen. Its party headquarters are located in Taipei.
Rapga stated that "the Sanmin Zhuyi was intended for all peoples under the domination of foreigners, for all those who had been deprived of the rights of man.
Chiang Ching-kuo, appointed as KMT director of Secret Police in 1950, was educated in the Soviet Union, and initiated Soviet style military organization in the Republic of China Military, reorganizing and Sovietizing the political officer corps, surveillance, and KMT activities were propagated throughout the military.
At the same time, Wang Jin-pyng, speaker of the Legislative Yuan and the Pan-Blue Coalition's campaign manager in the 2004 presidential election, said that the party no longer opposed Taiwan's "eventual independence".
The KMT government demanded that the foreign powers renegotiate the treaties on equal terms.
Ma Bufang was fully supported by President Chiang Kai-shek, who ordered him to prepare his Muslim army to invade Tibet several times and threatened aerial bombardment on the Tibetans.
On 25 June 2009, President Ma launched his bid to regain KMT's leadership and registered as the sole candidate for the election of the KMT chairmanship.
The Chinese Yunnan provincial army, under the KMT, occupied northern Vietnam after the Japanese surrender in 1945, the VNQDD tagging alone, opposing Ho Chi Minh's communist party.
In the West and in the Soviet Union, Chiang was known as the "Red General".
This is even more true for those groups which are not of our kind Ch.
The Chinese KMT helped the party, known as the VNQDD, set up headquarters in Canton and Yunnan, to aid their anti imperialist struggle against the French occupiers of Indo China and against the Vietnamese Communist Party.
These looters also stormed and seized millions of dollars worth of British concessions in Hankou, refusing to hand them back to the UK.
Chiang assumed leadership of the KMT on 6 July 1926.
The PRC associated this idea with Taiwan independence.
The KMT also won a landslide victory in the 2008 legislative elections, winning 81 of 113 seats, or 71.7% of seats in the Legislative Yuan.
Education came under the total control of state, which meant, in effect, the KMT, via the Ministry of Education.
The KMT candidate placed third behind Soong in the elections.
Opponents of the KMT include strong supporters of Taiwan independence, middle classes in major cities and rural residents particularly in southern Taiwan.
Brotherhood Imams like Hu Songshan ordered Muslims to pray for the Nationalist Government, salute KMT flags during prayer, and listen to nationalist sermons.
Also, the KMT actively sold assets under its title in order to quench its recent financial difficulties, which the DPP argues is illegal.
He and Dr. Sun Yat-sen criticized these May Fourth intellectuals for corrupting morals of youth.
The loss of the presidential election of 2004 to DPP President Chen Shui-bian by merely over 30,000 votes was a bitter disappointment to party members, leading to large scale rallies for several weeks protesting alleged electoral fraud and the "odd circumstances" of the shooting of President Chen.
Westerners fled from the province, and some Chinese Christians were also attacked as imperialist agents.
Tensions between the local Taiwanese and mainlanders from Mainland China increased in the intervening years, culminating in a flashpoint on February 27, 1947 in Taipei when a dispute between a female cigarette vendor and an anti-smuggling officer in front of Tianma Tea House triggered civil disorder and protests that would last for days.
Other Muslim sects, like the Xidaotang were also supported by the KMT.
Prior to this, the party's voters had defected to both the PFP and TSU, and the KMT did poorly in the December 2001 legislative elections and lost its position as the largest party in the Legislative Yuan.
This cult of personality around KMT leader and KMT was standard in all meetings.
Why not worship something alive such as Nationalism?".
KMT was referred to having a socialist ideology.
This marked the first official visit by the KMT to the mainland since it was defeated by communist forces in 1949 (although KMT members including Chiang had made individual visits in the past).
The Tibet Improvement Party was founded by Pandatsang Rapga, a pro-ROC and pro-KMT Khampa revolutionary, who worked against the 14th Dalai Lama's Tibetan Government in Lhasa.
Some 54% of the party's 1.04 million members cast their ballots.
In the 1970s, the KMT began to allow for "supplemental elections" in Taiwan to fill the seats of the aging representatives in the National Assembly.
Unlike Sun Yat-sen, whom he admired greatly, Chiang had relatively less contact with the West.
Chiang Kai-shek, the head of KMT, warned the Soviet Union and other foreign countries about interfering in Chinese affairs.
The Chinese KMT used the VNQDD for its own interests in south China and Indo China.
Sun believed that the only hope for a unified and better China lies in a military conquest, followed by a period of political tutelage that would culminate in the transition to democracy.
This became an issue which proved to be a hindrance of its relationship with US government.
The KMT estimated it would take 3 years to defeat the Communists.
Ching-kuo copied Soviet methods, which he learned during his stay there, to start a social revolution by attacking middle-class merchants.
KMT incited anti Yan Xishan and Feng Yuxiang sentiments among Chinese Muslims and Mongols, encouraging for them to topple their rule during the Central Plains War.
KMT founder Sun Yat-sen, was heavily influenced by the economic ideas of Henry George, who believed that the rents extracted from natural monopolies or the usage of land belonged to the public.
In December 2003, then-KMT chairman (present chairman emeritus) and presidential candidate Lien Chan initiated what appeared to some to be a major shift in the party's position on the linked questions of Chinese reunification and Taiwan independence.
KMT Muslim General Ma Bufang waged war on the invading Tibetans during the Sino-Tibetan War with his Muslim army, and he repeatedly crushed Tibetan revolts during bloody battles in Qinghai provinces.
Chiang was assisted by Soviet advisors, who supplied him with weapons, while the merchants were supplied with weapons from the Western countries.
The KMT was also known to have used terror tactics against suspected communists, through the utilization of a secret police force, who were employed to maintain surveillance on suspected communists and political opponents.
KMT attempted to levy taxes upon merchants in Canton, and the merchants resisted by raising an army, the Merchant's volunteer corps.
With the advice from German military advisors, the KMT forced the Communists to withdraw from their bases in southern and central China into the mountains in a massive military retreat known as the Long March.
The KMT fielded former Taipei mayor and former KMT chairman Ma Ying-jeou to run against the DPP's Frank Hsieh.
Some leading officials and military leaders of the KMT hoarded material, armament and military-aid funding provided by the US.
Using this ideology, Chiang built himself into the dictator of the Republic of China, both in the Chinese mainland and when the national government was relocated to Taiwan.
General Chang Fa-kuei planned to lead a Chinese army invasion of Tonkin in Indochina to free Vietnam from French control, and to get Chiang Kai-shek's support.
No agreements were signed because incumbent Chen Shui-bian's government threatened to prosecute the KMT delegation for treason and violation of ROC laws prohibiting citizens from collaborating with CPC.
On 29 November 2014, the KMT suffered a heavy loss in the local election to the DPP, winning only 6 municipalities and counties, down from 14 in the previous election in 2009 and 2010.
Dr. Sun initiated this anti merchant policy, and Chiang Kai-shek enforced it, Chiang led his army of Whampoa Military Academy graduates to defeat the merchant's army.
KMT Muslim Warlord Ma Bufang built a girls' school for Muslim girls in Linxia City which taught modern secular education.
The New Guangxi Clique clashed with Chiang Kai-shek, which led to the Central Plains War where Chiang defeated the clique.
General Zhang shrewdly blocked the Communists of Vietnam, and Ho Chi Minh from entering the league, as his main goal was Chinese influence in Indo China.
The KMT assisted VNQDD with funds and military training.
KMT leaders across China adopted nationalist rhetoric.
KMT had several influences upon its ideology by revolutionary thinking.
Ma Tianying (馬天英) (1900–1982) led the 1939 mission which had 5 other people including Isa and Fuliang.
Ma Bufang stressed "racial harmony" as a goal when he was Governor of Qinghai.
The British Communist party congratulated Dr. Sun for his war against foreign imperialists and capitalists.
Chiang, however, knew relatively little about the West.
A cold war with a couple of minor military conflicts was resulted in the early years.
Muslim brotherhood) was the predominant Muslim sect backed by KMT.
Soviet advisers - the most prominent of whom was Mikhail Borodin, an agent of the Comintern – arrived in China in 1923 to aid in the reorganization and consolidation of the KMT along the lines of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, establishing a Leninist party structure that lasted into the 1990s.
Following the establishment of the People's Republic of China (PRC) on 1 October 1949, the commanders of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) believed that Kinmen and Matsu had to be taken before a final assault on Taiwan.
KMT also fought against a Soviet and White Russian invasion during the Soviet Invasion of Xinjiang.
After 2000, the KMT's financial holdings appeared to be more of a liability than a benefit, and the KMT started to divest itself of its assets.
General Ma Bufang and other high ranking Muslim Generals attended the Kokonuur Lake Ceremony where the God of the Lake was worshipped, and during the ritual, the Chinese national anthem was sung, all participants bowed to a Portrait of KMT founder Dr. Sun Yat-sen, and the God of the Lake was also bowed to, and offerings were given to him by the participants, which included the Muslims.
Sun had forged all his political, economic and revolutionary ideas primarily from what he had learned in Hawaii and indirectly through British Hong Kong and Empire of Japan under Meiji Restoration.
"The railroads, public utilities, canals, and forests should be nationalized, and all income from the land and mines should be in the hands of the State.
''Our party (KMT) takes the development of the weak and small and resistance to the strong and violent as our sole and most urgent task.
The concept may be understood as social welfare as well.
The KMT moved into a smaller building on Bade Road in the eastern part of the city.
KMT also incorporated Confucianism in its jurisprudence.
General Ma Fuxiang, the chairman of the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission stated that Mongolia and Tibet were an integral part of the Republic of China.
With its power confirmed in the southeast, the Nationalist Government appointed Chiang Kai-shek commander-in-chief of the National Revolutionary Army (NRA), and the Northern Expedition to suppress the warlords began.
Portraits of Sun Yatsen replaced the crucifix in several churches, KMT posters proclaimed- "Jesus Christ is dead.
At the same time, the suspension of American aid and tens of thousands of deserted or decommissioned soldiers being recruited to PLA cause tipped the balance of power quickly to CPC side, and the overwhelming popular support for the CPC in most of the country made it all but impossible for the KMT forces to carry out successful assaults against the Communists.
The KMT backed Muslim insurgents formerly belonging to the NRA during the KMT Islamic insurgency in 1950–1958 in Mainland China.
With support from KMT, Ma Bufang repeatedly attacked the Tibetan area of Golog seven times during the KMT Pacification of Qinghai, eliminating thousands of Tibetans.
All appointments were approved by a hand count of party delegates.
The KMT is currently the main opposition party in the Legislative Yuan.
Huang Shaoxiong, also a KMT member of the New Guangxi Clique, supported Bai's campaign, and Huang was not a Muslim, the anti religious campaign was agreed upon by all Guangxi KMT members.
Chairmanship election was held on 17 January 2015 and Eric Chu was elected to become the new chairman.
But it was conceived especially for the Asians.
Later led by Chiang Kai-shek, the KMT formed the National Revolutionary Army and succeeded in its Northern Expedition to unify much of China in 1928.
With this money in hand, the State can therefore finance the social welfare programs."
The Communist armies, People's Liberation Army (PLA), previously a minor faction, grew rapidly in influence and power due to several errors on the KMT's part.
Joseph Stalin ordered CPC to obey the KMT leadership.
Members of the KMT led by Sun Yat-sen suspected that Yuan was behind the plot and thus staged the Second Revolution in July 1913, a poorly planned and ill-supported armed rising to overthrow Yuan, and failed.
Wang Jing Wei, who led the KMT leftist allies took the city of Wuhan in January 1927.
The three goals of his movement were anti-foreign, anti-imperialism, and anti-religion.
Chiang called the warlords feudalists, and called for feudalism and counterrevolutionaries to be stamped out by KMT.
Chiang also initiated the Project National Glory to retake back the mainland in 1965, but was eventually dropped in July 1972 after many unsuccessful attempts.
With the founding of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) on 28 September 1986, the KMT started competing against the DPP in Parliamentary elections.
Upset at the choice of Lien Chan as the party's presidential nominee, former party Secretary-General James Soong launched an independent bid, which resulted in the expulsion of Soong and his supporters and the formation of the People First Party (PFP) on 31 March 2000.
In Taiwan, the President performs a ritual honoring Yellow Emperor, while facing west, in the direction of the mainland China.
Together with the People First Party and Chinese New Party, the KMT forms what is known as the Taiwanese Pan-Blue Coalition, which supports eventual unification with the mainland.
But Yuan soon began to ignore the parliament in making presidential decisions.
These two elections gave the KMT firm control of both the executive and legislative yuans.
Lu Han, a KMT official in Nanjing, who was originally from Yunnan, was contacted by the VNQDD, and the KMT Central Executive Committee and Military made '''direct''' contact with VNQDD for the first time, the party was reestablished in Nanjing with KMT help.
While the KMT army received heavy casualties fighting the Japanese, the CPC expanded its territory by guerrilla tactics within Japanese occupied regions, leading some claims that the CPC often refused to support the KMT troops, choosing to withdraw and let the KMT troops take the brunt of Japanese attacks.
Foreign missionaries were attacked and anti foreign riots broke out.
In Taiwan, the KMT continued as the single ruling party until the reforms in the late 1970s through the 1990s loosened its grip on power.
This split appeared to widen in early 2005, as the leader of the PFP, James Soong appeared to be reconciling with President Chen Shui-Bian and the Democratic Progressive Party.
