Cease-fire has been established on September 2011 following the Iranian offensive on PJAK bases, but several clashes between PJAK and IRGC took place after it.
Unlike other indigenous Persianate faiths, the Yarsan explicitly reject class, caste and rank, which sets them apart from the Yazidis and Zoroastrians.
Michael Radu who had worked for the United States's Pennsylvania Foreign Policy Research Institute argued that such claims mostly come from Kurdish nationalists, Western human rights activists, and European leftists.
Among the Qizilbash, the militant groups which predate the Alevis and helped establish the Safavid Dynasty, there were numerous Kurdish tribes.
During and shortly after the First World War the government of Iran was ineffective and had very little control over events in the country and several Kurdish tribal chiefs gained local political power, even established large confederations.
The 1970s saw an evolution in Kurdish nationalism as Marxist political thought influenced some in the new generation of Kurdish nationalists opposed to the local feudal authorities who had been a traditional source of opposition to authority; eventually they would form the militant separatist organization PKK, also known as the Kurdistan Workers' Party in English.
Even though many of the Kurds remained under Safavid rule till its fall, the Kurds would revolt several times against their rulers.
The Kurds are the majority population in the autonomous region of Iraqi Kurdistan and in the autonomous region of Rojava, and are a significant minority group in the neighboring countries Turkey and Iran, where Kurdish nationalist movements continue to pursue greater autonomy and cultural rights.
The number of Kurds living in Southwest Asia is estimated at close to 30 million, with another one or two million living in diaspora.
The Ahl-i Haqq consider the Bektashi and Alevi as kindred communities.
Having been denied the right to Syrian nationality, around 300,000 Kurds have been deprived of any social rights, in violation of international law.
Kurdistan boasts many examples from ancient Iranic, Roman, Greek and Semitic origin, most famous of these include Bisotun and Taq-e Bostan in Kermanshah, Takht-e Soleyman near Takab, Mount Nemrud near Adiyaman and the citadels of Erbil and Diyarbakir.
Thereafter he had the strategically located city repaired, provisioned and garrisoned with his best troops.
The Partiya Karkerên Kurdistan (PKK), also known as ''KADEK'' and ''Kongra-Gel'' is Kurdish militant organization which has waged an armed struggle against the Turkish state for cultural and political rights and self-determination for the Kurds.
The Kurdish region of Iran has been a part of the country since ancient times.
Recent emigration accounts for a population of close to 1.5 million in Western countries, about half of them in Germany.
This classification was changed to the new euphemism of ''Eastern Turk'' in 1980.
Nowadays the Kurds, in Turkey, are still known under the name ''Easterner'' (Doğulu).
Techniques used to suppress the ethnic identity of Kurds in Syria include various bans on the use of the Kurdish language, refusal to register children with Kurdish names, the replacement of Kurdish place names with new names in Arabic, the prohibition of businesses that do not have Arabic names, the prohibition of Kurdish private schools, and the prohibition of books and other materials written in Kurdish.
*The Annazids (990–1117) ruled western Iran and upper Mesopotamia  (succeeded the Hasanwayhids).
In 19th century Iran, Shia–Sunni animosity and the describing of Sunni Kurds as an Ottoman fifth column was quite frenquent.
The most prominent Kurdish-Turkish club is Diyarbakirspor.
The term gained the characteristic of an ethnonym following the Muslim conquest of Persia, as it was adopted into Arabic and gradually became associated with an amalgamation of Iranian and Iranicised tribes and groups in the region.
''While acts of terrorism in other regions are done by the PKK; in Tunceli it is state terrorism.
Kurds are often regarded as "the largest ethnic group without a state," although larger stateless nations exist.
Many of these features are found in Yazidism, another Kurdish faith, in the faith of Zoroastrians and in ghulat (non-mainstream Shia) groups; certainly, the names and religious terminology of the Yarsan are often explicitly of Muslim origin.
Lotf Ali Khan made multiple successes before ultimately succumbing to the rivaling faction.
The campaign included the use of ground offensives, aerial bombing, systematic destruction of settlements, mass deportation, firing squads, and chemical attacks, including the most infamous attack on the Kurdish town of Halabja in 1988 that killed 5000 civilians instantly.
It is mainly spoken in those parts of Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey which comprise Kurdistan.
After the collapse of the Kurdish uprising in March 1991, Iraqi troops recaptured most of the Kurdish areas and 1.5 million Kurds abandoned their homes and fled to the Turkish and Iranian borders.
However, most contemporary Kurdish Christians are recent converts.
It is also hypothesized that ''Kurd'' could derive from the Persian word ''gord'' , because the Arabic script lacks a symbol corresponding uniquely to ''g'' (گ).
Secular Pahlavi dynasty has endorsed Iranian ethnic nationalism which seen the Kurds as integral part of the Iranian nation.
The American missionary Stephen van Renssalaer Trowbridge, working at Aintab (present Gaziantep) reported that his Alevi acquaintances considered as their highest spiritual leaders an Ahl-i Haqq sayyid family in the Guran district.
It arose along with Azerbaijan People's Government, another Soviet puppet state.
The Yarsan faith's unique features include millenarism, nativism, egalitarianism, metempsychosis, angelology, divine manifestation and dualism.
The name would be continued as the first element in the toponym ''Corduene'', mentioned by Xenophon as the tribe who opposed the retreat of the Ten Thousand through the mountains north of Mesopotamia in the 4th century BC.
The term "Kurd," however, is first encountered in Arabic sources of the seventh century.
They became runners-up in 2009 and 2010, before ultimately becoming champion in 2012.
This groups' population was estimated at close to 0.4 million in 1990.
The plan was to be implemented in four years.
During the late 1910s and early 1920s, tribal revolt led by Kurdish chieftain Simko Shikak struck north western Iran.
Kurds form the largest minority group in Turkey, and they have posed the most serious and persistent challenge to the official image of a homogeneous society.
However, modern tattoos are becoming more prevalent; and temporary tattoos are still being worn on special occasions (such as henna, the night before a wedding) and as tribute to the cultural heritage.
Love songs, dance music, wedding and other celebratory songs (''dîlok/narînk''), erotic poetry, and work songs are also popular.
This makes them the largest ethnic minority in the country.
The underlying toponym is recorded in Assyrian as ''Qardu'' and in Middle Bronze Age Sumerian as ''Kar-da''.
After the fall of the Safavids, Iran fell was under the control of the Afsharid Empire ruled by Nader Shah at its peak.
At least thirty people were killed and more than 160 injured.
In the early 2000s, presence of thirty Kurdish deputies in the 290-strong parliament has also helped to undermine claims of discrimination.
The Kurds of Khorasan, numbering around 700,000, still use the Kurmanji Kurdish dialect.
The authority of the KRG and legality of its laws and regulations were recognized in the articles 113 and 137 of the new Iraqi Constitution ratified in 2005.
Between 1984 and 1999, the PKK and the Turkish military engaged in open war, and much of the countryside in the southeast was depopulated, as Kurdish civilians moved from villages to bigger cities such as Diyarbakır, Van, and Şırnak, as well as to the cities of western Turkey and even to western Europe.
The Kurdish tribes present in Baluchistan and some of those in Fars are believed to be remnants of those that assisted and accompanied Lotf Ali Khan and Karim Khan, respectively.
Revolts did occur sporadically but only in 1880 with the uprising led by Sheik Ubeydullah did the Kurds as an ethnic group or nation make demands.
The judgments are related to executions of Kurdish civilians, torturing, forced displacements systematic destruction of villages, arbitrary arrests murdered and disappeared Kurdish journalists.
*Zouran-Patouleh, practised in Kurdistan;
Armenian Kurds were permitted their own state-sponsored newspaper, radio broadcasts and cultural events.
On a national level, the Kurdish clubs of Iraq have achieved success in recent years as well, winning the Iraqi Premier League four times in the last five years.
The Kurdish language (Kurdish: ''Kurdî'' or کوردی) refers collectively to the related dialects spoken by the Kurds.
The Alevis (usually considered adherents of a branch of Shia Islam with elements of Sufism) are another religious minority among the Kurds, living in Eastern Anatolia.
Government's forced detribalization and sedentarization in 1920s and 1930s resulted with many other tribal revolts in Iranian regions of Azerbaijan, Luristan and Kurdistan.
Kurds subsequently faced many repressive measures, including deportations, imposed by the Soviet government.
Other examples are the mythology of the Yezidis, and the stories of the Dersim Kurds, which had a substantial Armenian influence.
In the 10th-12th centuries, a number of Kurdish principalities and dynasties were founded, ruling Kurdistan and neighbouring areas:
The revolt was organized by a Kurdish party called ''Khoybun'' which signed a treaty with the Dashnaksutyun (Armenian Revolutionary Federation) in 1927.
According to CIA Factbook, Kurds formed approximately 18% of the population in Turkey (approximately 14 million) in 2008.
Still, many of dissident leaders, among others Qazi Muhammad and Abdul Rahman Ghassemlou, were executed or assassinated.
Kurds also have a presence in Kirkuk, Mosul, Khanaqin, and Baghdad.
It was critically acclaimed, and went on to win multiple awards.
Between 1975 and 1978, 200,000 Kurds were deported to other parts of Iraq.
Its central religious text is the Kalâm-e Saranjâm, written in Gurani.
Zare, released in 1927, produced by Hamo Beknazarian, details the story of Zare and her love for the shepherd Seydo, and the difficulties the two experience by the hand of the village elder.
During the reign of the Pahlavis Kurds received many favours from the authorities, for instance to keep their land after the land reforms of 1962.
However, in the 19th and 20th century various travel logs tell of Kurdish Christian tribes, as well as Kurdish Muslim tribes who had substantial Christian populations living amongst them.
During the reign of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi some members of parliament and high army officers were Kurds, and there was even a Kurdish Cabinet Minister.
The unrest spread to other Kurdish towns along the northern border with Turkey, and then to Damascus and Aleppo.
After a long and hard-fought siege, Shapur II breached the walls, conquered the city and massacred all its defenders.
In 2015, it was claimed that up to 100,000 Iraqi Kurdish inhabitants practice Zoroastrianism.
The genocidal campaign, conducted between 1986 and 1989 and culminating in 1988, carried out by the Iraqi government against the Kurdish population was called ''Anfal'' ("Spoils of War").
Because the Kurds have no independent state, they have no representative team in FIFA or the AFC; however a team representing Iraqi Kurdistan has been active in the Viva World Cup since 2008.
The use of Kurdish language, dress, folklore, and names were banned and the Kurdish-inhabited areas remained under martial law until 1946.
Through these measures, the Young Turk leaders aimed at weakening the political influence of the Kurds by deporting them from their ancestral lands and by dispersing them in small pockets of exiled communities.
*The Marwanids (990–1096) ruled eastern Anatolia.
Following the military coup of 1980, the Kurdish language was officially prohibited in public and private life.
On 14 August 2007, Yazidis were targeted in a series of bombings that became the deadliest suicide attack since the Iraq War began, killing 796 civilians, wounding 1,562.
However, a number of writers have made great strides in the preservation of these tales.
He also resettled the rich pastoral country between Erzerum and Erivan, which had lain in waste since the passage of Timur, with Kurds from the Hakkari and Bohtan districts.
These are further decorated with coloured glass, this stems from an old belief that if light passes through a combination of seven colours it helps keep the atmosphere clean.
Leading characteristics, such as messianism, the Golden Rule, heaven and hell, and free will influenced other religious systems, including Second Temple Judaism, Gnosticism, Christianity, and Islam.
Total number of ethnic Kurds residing in the United States is estimated by the US Census Bureau to be 15,400.
*The Ayyubids (1171–1341) ruled parts of southeastern Anatolia, the Arabian Peninsula and North Africa.
In the 12th and 13th centuries the Ayyubid dynasty constructed many buildings throughout the Middle East, being influenced by their predecessors, the Fatimids, and their rivals, the Crusaders, whilst also developing their own techniques.
At the same time waves of nationalism from the disintegrating Ottoman Empire partly influenced some Kurdish chiefs in border regions to pose as Kurdish nationalist leaders.
He has given a detailed account of the deportation of Kurds from Erzurum and Bitlis in the winter of 1916.
Regardless of its possible roots in ancient toponymy, the ethnonym ''Kurd'' might be derived from a term ''kwrt-'' used in Middle Persian as a common noun to refer to "nomads" or "tent-dwellers," which could be applied as an attribute to any Iranian group with such a lifestyle.
During the Sassanid era, in  ''Kar-Namag i Ardashir i Pabagan'', a short prose work written in Middle Persian, Ardashir I is depicted as having battled the Kurds and their leader, Madig.
Forced movements and deportations on behalf of various  geo-political and policy-related interests were also used by Abbas I and other Safavid rulers, most notably, against other ethnic groups within his vast empire, such as the Armenians, Georgians, and Circassians, who were also moved en masse from and to other districts in his empire.
In 1977, ''Mehdi Zana'' a supporter of KSP-T won the mayoralty of Diyarbakir in the local elections.
Kurds have been well integrated in Iranian political life during reign of various governments.
*Southern group (part of the Sorani dialect group)  including Kermanshahi, Ardalani and Laki
The most famous Kurdish rugs are those from the Bijar region, in the Kurdistan Province.
In 1970 the Kurds rejected limited territorial self-rule within Iraq, demanding larger areas including the oil-rich Kirkuk region.
Kurdish men and women participate in mixed-gender dancing during feasts, weddings and other social celebrations.
Kurds account for 9% of Syria's population, a total of around 1.6 million people.
Books from the early Islamic era, including those containing legends such as the Shahnameh and the Middle Persian Kar-Namag i Ardashir i Pabagan, and other early Islamic sources provide early attestation of the name ''Kurd''.
After Karim Khan's death, the dynasty would decline in favor of the rivaling Qajars due to infighting between the Khan’s incompetent offspring.
Another common theme are the origins of a tribe.
For the next centuries, from the Peace of Amasya until the first half of the 19th century, several regions of the wide Kurdish homelands would be contested as well between the Ottomans and the neighboring rivalling successive Iranian dynasties (Safavids, Afsharids, Qajars) in the frequent Ottoman-Persian Wars.
There have been tensions between Kurds and the established Muslim community in Dewsbury, which is home to very traditional mosques such as the Markazi.
As a response to growing Pan-Turkism and Pan-Arabism in region which were seen as potential threats to the territorial integrity of Iran, Pan-Iranist ideology has been developed in the early 1920s.
They are especially known for their great knot density and high quality mountain wool.
The first modern Kurdish nationalist movement emerged in 1880 with an uprising led by a Kurdish landowner and head of the powerful Shemdinan family, Sheik Ubeydullah, who demanded political autonomy or outright independence for Kurds as well as the recognition of a Kurdistan state without interference from Turkish or Persian authorities.
Prominent historical Kurdish Christians include Theophobos and the brothers Zakare and Ivane.
Kurds led by Mustafa Barzani were engaged in heavy fighting against successive Iraqi regimes from 1960 to 1975.
Kurdish bags are mainly known from the works of one large tribe: the Jaffs, living in the border area between Iran and Iraq.
The Kurds are culturally and linguistically closely related to the Iranian peoples and, as a result, are often themselves classified as an Iranian people.
There was substantial immigration of ethnic Kurds in Canada and the United States, who are mainly political refugees and immigrants seeking economic opportunity.
In Turkey, a Kurd named Celal Ibrahim was one of the founders of Galatasaray S.K.
Nearly all Kurdistan was part of Persian Empire until its Western part was lost during wars against the Ottoman Empire.
During the Iran–Iraq War in the 1980s, the regime implemented anti-Kurdish policies and a ''de facto'' civil war broke out.
Turkish State actions has included forced inscription, forced evacuation, destruction of villages, severe harassment, illegal arrests and executions of Kurdish civilians.
In this text, the religion's basic pillars are summarized as: "The Yarsan should strive for these four qualities: purity, rectitude, self-effacement and self-abnegation".
In the United States, Kurdish immigrants started to settle in large numbers in Nashville in 1976, which is now home to the largest Kurdish community in the United States and is nicknamed ''Little Kurdistan''.
The design is drawn on the skin using a thin twig and is, by needle, penetrated under the skin.
It culminated in the Iran crisis of 1946 which included a separatist attempt of KDP-I and communist groups to establish the Soviet puppet government called Republic of Mahabad.
*The Hasanwayhids (959–1015) ruled western Iran and upper Mesopotamia.
Safavid king Ismail I (r. 1501-1524) put down a Yezidi rebellion which went on from 1506-1510.
Although elements of Kurdish nationalism were present in this movement, historians agree these were hardly articulate enough to justify a claim that recognition of Kurdish identity was a major issue in Simko's movement, and he had to rely heavily on conventional tribal motives.
Shia Islam in the particular case of Iran.
Karim Khan was portrayed as being a ruler who truly cared about his subjects, thereby gaining the title Vakil e-Ra’aayaa (meaning Representative of the People in Persian).
Kurds constitute approximately 17% of Iraq's population.
No specific music was associated with the Kurdish princely courts.
This strategy appears to have been successful given the loyalty displayed by the Kurdish Hamidiye regiments during World War I.
Kurdish culture is a legacy from the various ancient peoples who shaped modern Kurds and their society.
Ascribed to the teachings of the prophet Zoroaster, the faith's Supreme Being is Ahura Mazda.
Kurdish medalists in the 2012 Summer Olympics were Nur Tatar, Kianoush Rostami and Yezidi Misha Aloyan; who won medals in taekwondo, weightlifting and boxing, respectively.
Iraq was widely condemned by the international community, but was never seriously punished for oppressive measures such as the mass murder of hundreds of thousands of civilians, the wholesale destruction of thousands of villages and the deportation of thousands of Kurds to southern and central Iraq.
In a letter Ardashir I received from his foe, Ardavan V, which is also featured in the same work, he is referred to as being a Kurd himself.
In 1991, the language was decriminalized, yet the now highly available radios and TV’s had as an effect a diminished interest in traditional storytelling.
This area has been divided by modern Turkey, Syria and Iraq.
On 12 March 2004, beginning at a stadium in Qamishli (a largely Kurdish city in northeastern Syria), clashes between Kurds and Syrians broke out and continued over a number of days.
They are mostly concentrated in the northeast and the north, but there are also significant Kurdish populations in Aleppo and Damascus.
Tattoos are more prevalent among women than among men, and were generally worn on feet, the chin, foreheads and other places of the body.
Furthermore, women of the Ayyubid family took a prominent role in the patronage of new constructions.
Although his uprising is not classified as a nationalist one, his children played significant roles in the emergence and the development of Kurdish nationalism through the next century.
Turkish government also encouraged Islamic extremist group Hezbollah to assassinate suspected PKK members and often ordinary Kurds.
By the 1970s, Kurdish leftist organizations such as ''Kurdistan Socialist Party-Turkey'' (KSP-T) emerged in Turkey which were against violence and supported civil activities and participation in elections.
Some of the Kurdish groups sought self-determination and the confirmation of Kurdish autonomy in the Treaty of Sèvres, but in the aftermath of World War I, Kemal Atatürk prevented such a result.
Some modern Iranian dynasties like the Safavids and Zands are considered to be partly of Kurdish origin.
Over the centuries many Kurdish architectural marvels have been erected, with varying styles.
Religious symbolism is also common among both traditional and modern Kurdish tattoos.
A madrasa system was used before the modern era.
In Tunceli, it is the state that is evacuating and burning villages.
Due to the Turkic invasion of Anatolia, the 11th century Kurdish dynasties crumbled and became incorporated into the Seljuk Dynasty.
Kurds would hereafter be used in great numbers in the armies of the Zengids.
According to a 2011 Statistics Canada household survey, there were 11,685 people of Kurdish ethnic background living in Canada, and according to the 2011 Census, 10,325 Canadians spoke Kurdish language.
By the end of World War I, up to 700,000 Kurds had been forcibly deported and almost half of the displaced perished.
Saladin led the Muslims to recapture the city of Jerusalem from the Crusaders at the Battle of Hattin; also frequently clashing with the Hashashins.
Zana, Dicle, Sadak and Dogan were sentenced to 15 years in jail by the Supreme Court in October 1995.
Other movies of his would follow this example; making him one of the best known film producers of Iran of today.
in Turkish Kurdistan, Iraqi Kurdistan, Iranian Kurdistan and Syrian Kurdistan.
Virtually none of the perpetrators were investigated nor punished.
During the time of rule of this dynasty, Kurdish chief and ruler, Badr ibn Hasanwaih, established himself as one of the most important emirs of the time.
Most of these blades in circulation stem from the 19th century.
A number of these mythological figures can be found in other cultures, like the Simurgh and Kaveh the Blacksmith in the broader Iranian Mythology, and stories of Shahmaran throughout Anatolia.
Several large scale Kurdish revolts in 1925, 1930 and 1938 were suppressed by the Turkish government and more than one million Kurds were forcibly relocated between 1925 and 1938.
In the southeast there are two million people left homeless.''
Several Christian prayers in Kurdish have been found from earlier centuries.
However, houses with a beehive-like roof, not unlike those in Harran, are also present.
Yazidism is another syncretic religion practiced among Kurdish communities, founded by Sheikh Adi ibn Musafir, a 12th-century mystic from Lebanon.
In Ottoman Iraq, following the Ottoman–Persian War (1775–76), he managed to seize Basra for several years.
Kurdish blades include a distinct jambiya, with its characteristic I-shaped hilt, and oblong blade.
Officially protected death squads are accused of disappearance of 3,200 Kurds and Assyrians in 1993 and 1994 in the so-called "mystery killings".
The claimed Median descent is reflected in the words of the Kurdish national anthem: "We are the children of the Medes and Kai Khosrow."
He found it heavily fortified, and guarded by three legions and a large body of Kurdish archers.
In October 1991, Kurdish guerrillas captured Erbil and Sulaimaniyah after a series of clashes with Iraqi troops.
Another distinct form of art from Sanandaj is 'Oroosi', a type of window where stylized wooden pieces are locked into each other, rather than being glued together.
Assyrian ''Qardu'' refers to an area in the upper Tigris basin, and it is presumably reflected in corrupted form in Arabic (Quranic) ''Ǧūdī'', re-adopted in Kurdish as ''Cûdî''.
Recently, he released Rhinos Season, starring Behrouz Vossoughi, Monica Bellucci and Yilmaz Erdogan, detailing the tumultuous life of a Kurdish poet.
*The Kakuyids (1008–1051) ruled Isfahan, Yazd and Abarkuh.
The Kurdish languages form a subgroup of the Northwestern Iranian languages.
The Kurds were perceived to be subversive elements that would take the Russian side in the war.
Sürü (1979), Yol (1982) and Duvar (1983) are his best-known works, of which the second won Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival of 1982, the most prestigious award in the world of cinema.
Kurdish sources claim there are as many as 20 or 25 million Kurds in Turkey.
The total number of Kurds in 1991 was placed at 22.5 million, with 48% of this number living in Turkey, 18% in Iraq, 24% in Iran, and 4% in Syria.
Iran and all its Kurdish territories would hereby be incorporated in the Qajar Dynasty.
Kurdish Marxist groups have been marginalized in Iran since the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
There is also a 7th-century text by an unidentified author, written about the legendary Christian martyr Mar Qardagh.
This sentiment is reflected in the saying "Compared to the unbeliever, the Kurd is a Muslim".
Throughout the Middle East, there are many prominent Kurdish artists.
In 934 the Daylamite Buyid dynasty was founded, and subsequently conquered most of present-day Iran and Iraq.
Itakh won this war and executed many of the Kurds.
During the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh, many non-Yazidi Kurds were forced to leave their homes since both the Azeri and non-Yazidi Kurds were Muslim.
Among Kurdish Jews a common practice was the making of talismans, which were believed to combat illnesses and protect the wearer from malevolent spirits.
Iraq started another wave of Arabization by moving Arabs to the oil fields in Kurdistan, particularly those around Kirkuk.
In Iranian Wrestling, there are three styles originating from Kurdish regions:
In 1948 and 1959, two documentaries were made concerning the Yezidi Kurds in Armenia.
The period of existence of the Kurdish administrative unit was brief and did not last beyond 1929.
The uprising against Qajar Persia and the Ottoman Empire was ultimately suppressed by the Ottomans and Ubeydullah, along with other notables, were exiled to Istanbul.
