Using a youthful narrative voice allowed Vonnegut to deliver concepts in a modest and straightforward way.
He escapes to a television studio, tears away his handicaps, and frees a ballerina from her lead weights.
Several editions were printed—one by Bantam with the title ''Utopia 14'', and another by the Doubleday Science Fiction Book Club—whereby Vonnegut gained the repute of a science fiction writer, a genre held in disdain by writers at that time.
She labored to regain the family's wealth and status, and Vonnegut said she expressed hatred "as corrosive as hydrochloric acid" for her husband.
He was deployed to Europe to fight in World War II, and was captured by the Germans during the Battle of the Bulge.
After graduating from Shortridge in 1940, Vonnegut enrolled at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York.
He despised the televangelists of the late 20th century, feeling that their thinking was narrow-minded.
Vonnegut's works have, at various times, been labeled science fiction, satire and postmodern.
Hoenikker, in addition to the bomb, has developed another threat to mankind, ice-9, solid water stable at room temperature, and if a particle of it is dropped in water, all of it becomes ice-9.
Speaking for Vonnegut, he dismisses it as a "false god".
If you are against those perversions and for the rich, you're a conservative.
Vonnegut enrolled at Shortridge High School in Indianapolis in 1936.
Much of the second half of the book is spent on the fictional Caribbean island of San Lorenzo, where John explores a religion called Bokononism, whose holy books (excerpts from which are quoted), give the novel the moral core science does not supply.
The book went immediately to the top of ''The New York Times'' Best Seller list.
The large artificial families that the U.S. population is formed into in ''Slapstick'' soon serve as an excuse for tribalism, with people giving no help to those not part of their group, and with the extended family's place in the social hierarchy becoming vital.
Bill, and worked for the Chicago City News Bureau at night.
Vonnegut's compositions are also laced with distinct references to his own life, notably in ''Slaughterhouse-Five'' and ''Slapstick''.
"When we came up the city was gone&nbsp;...
"Towards the end he was very feeble, very depressed and almost morose", said Jerome Klinkowitz of the University of Northern Iowa, who has examined Vonnegut in depth.
In the nearly twenty years that followed, Vonnegut published several novels that were only marginally successful, such as ''Cat's Cradle'' (1963) and ''God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater'' (1964).
"What is the point of life?"
The story is told in a non-linear fashion, with many of the story's climaxes—Billy's death in 1976, his kidnapping by aliens from the planet Tralfamadore nine years earlier, and the execution of Billy's friend Edgar Derby in the ashes of Dresden for stealing a teapot—disclosed in the story's first pages.
In 2008, the Kurt Vonnegut Society was established, and in November 2010, the Kurt Vonnegut Memorial Library was opened in Vonnegut's hometown of Indianapolis.
She took short-story courses at night.
General Electric (GE) hired Vonnegut as a publicist for the company's Schenectady, New York research laboratory.
After he returned to the United States, 22-year-old Vonnegut married Jane Marie Cox, his high school girlfriend and classmate since kindergarten, on September 1, 1945.
Once in Heaven, Vonnegut interviews twenty-one deceased celebrities, including Isaac Asimov, William Shakespeare, and Kilgore Trout—the last a fictional character from several of his novels.
Eliot Rosewater, the wealthy son of a Republican senator, seeks to atone for his wartime shooting of noncombatant firefighters by serving in a volunteer fire department, and by giving away money to those in trouble or need.
Vonnegut did not however disdain those who seek the comfort of religion, hailing church associations as a type of extended family.
Both shared pessimistic outlooks on humanity, and a skeptical take on religion, and, as Vonnegut put it, were both "associated with the enemy in a major war", as Twain briefly enlisted in the South's cause during the American Civil War, and Vonnegut's German name and ancestry connected him with the United States' enemy in both world wars.
Within his own family, Vonnegut stated that his mother, Edith, had the greatest influence on him.
"She gave me decent moral instruction and was exceedingly nice to me.
Also published in 1961 was Vonnegut's short story, "Harrison Bergeron", set in a dystopic future where all are equal, even if that means disfiguring beautiful people and forcing the strong or intelligent to wear devices that negate their advantages.
He lived so close to his home that he was "able to sleep in his own bedroom and use the family car on weekends".
Vonnegut resented being called a black humorist, feeling that, as with many literary labels, it allows readers to disregard aspects of a writer's work that do not fit the label's stereotype.
He thrust out his jaw.
Kurt's father, and his father before him, Bernard, were architects; the architecture firm under Kurt Sr. designed such buildings as Das Deutsche Haus (now called "The Athenæum"), the Indiana headquarters of the Bell Telephone Company, and the Fletcher Trust Building.
He was later elected vice president of the National Institute of Arts and Letters, and given honorary degrees by, among others, Indiana University and Bennington College.
He also uses this theme to demonstrate the recklessness of those who put powerful, apocalypse-inducing devices at the disposal of politicians.
In 1972, Universal Pictures adapted ''Slaughterhouse-Five'' into a film which the author said was "flawless".
Hans-Jürgen von Bose ''Schlachthof 5'' (Slaughterhouse five) – opera, libretto by the composer, 1994/95.
For example, when taken to see the artificially intelligent supercomputer EPICAC, the Shah asks it "what are people for?"
Vonnegut was sent to Dresden, the "first fancy city he had ever seen".
For him, that was writing.
After the oceans are converted to ice-9, wiping out most of humankind, John wanders the frozen surface, seeking to have himself and his story survive.
Vonnegut's ''magnum opus'', however, was his immediately successful sixth novel, ''Slaughterhouse-Five''.
Marvin suggests that Vonnegut's works demonstrate what happens when a "hereditary aristocracy" develops, where wealth is inherited along familial lines: the ability of poor Americans to overcome their situations is greatly or completely diminished.
He died on the night of April 11, 2007 in Manhattan, as a result of brain injuries incurred several weeks prior from a fall at his New York brownstone home.
As his father had been a member at MIT, Vonnegut was entitled to join the Delta Upsilon fraternity, and did.
In ''Cat's Cradle'', John's original purpose in setting pen to paper is to write an account of what prominent Americans had been doing as Hiroshima was bombed.
The narrator, John, intends to write of Dr. Felix Hoenikker, one of the fictional fathers of the atomic bomb, seeking to cover the scientist's human side.
Beyond his marriage, he was deeply affected when his son Mark suffered a mental breakdown in 1972, which exacerbated Vonnegut's chronic depression, and led him to take Ritalin.
After spending much of two years at the writer's workshop at the University of Iowa, teaching one course each term, Vonnegut was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for research in Germany.
Sent by his boss, Kroner, as a double agent among the poor (who have all the material goods they want, but little sense of purpose), he leads them in a machine-smashing, museum-burning revolution.
Three months following his mother's suicide, Vonnegut was sent to Europe as an intelligence scout with the ill fated 106th Infantry Division.
Vonnegut had not intended to publish again, but his anger against the George W. Bush administration led him to write ''A Man Without a Country''.
Vonnegut described Young as "humane and wise", adding that "the compassionate, forgiving aspects of his beliefs" came from her.
Furthermore, Vonnegut often humorizes the problems that plague societies, as is done in satirical works.
'''Kurt Vonnegut Jr.''' (; November 11, 1922April 11, 2007) was an American author.
In early 1944, the ASTP was canceled due to the Army's need for soldiers to support the D-Day invasion, and Vonnegut was ordered to an infantry battalion at Camp Atterbury, south of Indianapolis in Edinburgh, Indiana, where he trained as a scout.
In 1952, Vonnegut's first novel, ''Player Piano'', was published by Scribner's.
In several of his books, Vonnegut imagines alien societies and civilizations, as is common in works of science fiction, but unlike conventional science fiction, Vonnegut does this to emphasize or exaggerate absurdities and idiosyncrasies in our own world.
Vonnegut would often return to a quote by socialist and five-time presidential candidate Eugene V. Debs, who went to prison for his beliefs: "As long as there is a lower class, I am in it.
With the captives abandoned by their guards, Vonnegut reached a prisoner-of-war repatriation camp in Le Havre, France, before the end of May 1945, with the aid of the Soviets.
Regarding political parties, Vonnegut said, "The two real political parties in America are the Winners and the Losers.
The offensive subsided on February 15, leaving tens of thousands dead.
In the case of ''Island Trees School District v. Pico'', the United States Supreme Court ruled that a school district's ban on ''Slaughterhouse-Five''—which the board had called "anti-American, anti-Christian, anti-Semitic, and just plain filthy"—and eight other novels was unconstitutional.
It tells of the life of Billy Pilgrim, who like Vonnegut was born in 1922 and survives the bombing of Dresden.
Vonnegut recalled the sirens going off whenever another city was bombed.
With ''Cat's Cradle'' (1963), Allen wrote, "Vonnegut hit full stride for the first time".
Grappling with family challenges, Vonnegut continued to write, publishing novels vastly dissimilar in terms of plot.
They often use unreliable, first-person narration, and narrative fragmentation.
He later stated that the loss of confidence in government that Vietnam caused finally allowed for an honest conversation regarding events like Dresden.
After its release, ''Slaughterhouse-Five'' went to the top of ''The New York Times'' Best Seller list, thrusting Vonnegut into fame.
He returned to the United States and continued to serve in the Army, stationed at Fort Riley, Kansas, typing discharge papers for other soldiers.
Tally, writing in 2013, suggests that Vonnegut has only recently become the subject of serious study rather than fan adulation, and much is yet to be written about him.
Vonnegut uses this style to convey normally complex subject matter in a way that is intelligible to a large audience.
In the hours and days that followed, the Allies engaged in a fierce firebombing of the city.
Vonnegut had a deep dislike for the Christian religion, often reminding his readers of the bloody history of the Crusades and other religion-inspired violence.
Thus, they never taught their youngest son German or introduced him to German literature and tradition, leaving him feeling "ignorant and rootless".
Postmodernists contend that truth is subjective, rather than objective, as it is biased towards each individual's beliefs and outlook on the world.
The Liebers's brewery was closed in 1921 after the advent of Prohibition in the United States.
He did not always sugarcoat his points: much of ''Player Piano'' leads up to the moment when Paul, on trial and hooked up to a lie detector, is asked to tell a falsehood, and states, "every new piece of scientific knowledge is a good thing for humanity".
However, literary theorist Robert Scholes noted in ''Fabulation and Metafiction'' that Vonnegut "rejects the traditional satirist's faith in the efficacy of satire as a reforming instrument.
Kurt Vonnegut has inspired numerous posthumous tributes and works.
Suicide by fire is another common theme in Vonnegut's works; the author often returns to the theory that "many people are not fond of life."
He later penned a piece, "Well All Right",  focusing on pacifism, a cause he strongly supported, arguing against U.S. intervention in World War II.
During the battle, the 106th Infantry Division, which had only recently reached the front and was assigned to a "quiet" sector due to its inexperience, was overrun by advancing German armored forces.
Vonnegut laced a number of his speeches with religion-focused rhetoric, and was prone to using such expressions as "God forbid" and "thank God".
In ''Kurt Vonnegut: A Critical Companion'', Thomas F. Marvin states: "Vonnegut points out that, left unchecked, capitalism will erode the democratic foundations of the United States."
Vonnegut commented that Robert Louis Stevenson's stories were emblems of thoughtfully put together works that he tried to mimic in his own compositions.
"Because I'm 83 years old.
He credited his time as a journalist for his ability, pointing to his work with the Chicago City News Bureau, which required him to convey stories in telephone conversations.
Vonnegut was 84 years old.
What could be simpler?"
The novel has a post-third world war setting, in which factory workers have been replaced by machines.
The book's antiwar sentiment resonated with its readers amidst the ongoing Vietnam War, and its reviews were generally positive.
In his 1976 biography of Vonnegut, Stanley Schatt suggested that the short story shows "in any leveling process, what really is lost, according to Vonnegut, is beauty, grace, and wisdom".
When asked about the impact Vonnegut had on his work, author Josip Novakovich stated that he has "much to learn from Vonnegut—how to compress things and yet not compromise them, how to digress into history, quote from various historical accounts, and not stifle the narrative.
He lived in a slaughterhouse when he got to the city, and worked in a factory that made malt syrup for pregnant women.
fragmentation and metafictional elements, in some of his works, he more distinctly focuses on the peril posed by individuals who find subjective truths, mistake them for objective truths, then proceed to impose these truths on others.
Early on in his career, Vonnegut decided to model his style after Henry David Thoreau, who wrote as if from the perspective of a child, allowing Thoreau's works to be more widely comprehensible.
"Vonnegut makes sense through humor, which is, in the author's view, as valid a means of mapping this crazy world as any other strategies."
This is most starkly represented in his first novel, ''Player Piano'', where many Americans are left purposeless and unable to find work as machines replace human workers.
In ''God Bless You, Dr. Kevorkian'', Vonnegut goes to Heaven after he is euthanized by Dr. Jack Kevorkian.
Donald E. Morse notes that Vonnegut, "is now firmly, if somewhat controversially, ensconced in the American and world literary canon as well as in high school, college and graduate curricula".
Similarly, in ''Slapstick'', the U.S. government codifies that all Americans are a part of large extended families.
After the war, Vonnegut married Jane Marie Cox, with whom he had three children.
Vonnegut disregarded more mainstream political ideologies in favor of socialism, which he thought could provide a valuable substitute for what he saw as social Darwinism and a spirit of "survival of the fittest" in American society, believing that "socialism would be a good for the common man".
His central character, Paul Proteus, has an ambitious wife, a backstabbing assistant, and a feeling of sympathy for the poor.
Vonnegut was a member of Reserve Officers' Training Corps, but poor grades and a satirical article in Cornell's newspaper cost him his place there.
Vonnegut made a number of comparisons between Dresden and the bombing of Hiroshima in ''Slaughterhouse-Five'' and wrote in ''Palm Sunday'' (1991) that "I learned how vile that religion of mine could be when the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima".
In an interview for ''Playboy'', he stated that his forebears who came to the United States did not believe in God, and he learned his atheism from his parents.
He described the activity as a "terribly elaborate Easter-egg hunt".
At times, Vonnegut was disgruntled by the personal nature of his detractors' complaints.
Vonnegut's mother was born into Indianapolis high society, as her family, the Liebers, were among the wealthiest in the city, their fortune derived from ownership of a successful brewery.
Marvin finds Trout's theory curious, given that Vonnegut was an atheist, and thus for him, there is no Creator to report back to, and comments that, "as Trout chronicles one meaningless life after another, readers are left to wonder how a compassionate creator could stand by and do nothing while such reports come in."
Loss of purpose is also depicted in ''Galápagos'', where a florist rages at her spouse for creating a robot able to do her job, and in ''Timequake'', where an architect kills himself when replaced by computer software.
As long as there is a criminal element, I'm of it.
In 1949, Kurt and Jane had a daughter named Edith.
As long as there is a soul in prison, I am not free."
Vonnegut would often talk about religion, in his novels and elsewhere.
The attack on Pearl Harbor brought the U.S. into the war.
''Mother Night'', published in 1961, received little attention at the time of its publication.
Later in his career, Vonnegut published several autobiographical essays and short-story collections, including ''Fates Worse Than Death'' (1991), and ''A Man Without a Country'' (2005).
Vonnegut's 1976 novel ''Slapstick'', which meditates on the relationship between him and his sister (Alice), met a similar fate.
Vonnegut also confronts the idea of free will in a number of his pieces.
After his death, he was hailed as a morbidly comical commentator on the society in which he lived, and as one of the most important contemporary writers.
In 1986, Vonnegut was seen by a younger generation when he played himself in Rodney Dangerfield's film ''Back to School''.
Todd F. Davis notes that Vonnegut's work is kept alive by his loyal readers, who have "significant influence as they continue to purchase Vonnegut's work, passing it on to subsequent generations and keeping his entire canon in print—an impressive list of more than twenty books that Dell Publishing has continued to refurbish and hawk with new cover designs."
Rumfoord, who is based on Franklin D. Roosevelt, also physically resembles the former president.
In ''Cat's Cradle'', Vonnegut devises two separate methods for loneliness to be combated: A "karass", which is a group of individuals appointed by God to do his will, and a "granfalloon", defined by Marvin as a "meaningless association of people, such as a fraternal group or a nation".
''Player Piano'' expresses Vonnegut's opposition to McCarthyism, something made clear when the Ghost Shirts, the revolutionary organization Paul penetrates and eventually leads, is referred to by one character as "fellow travelers".
Postmodernism often entails a response to the theory that the truths of the world will be discovered through science.
A book composed of Vonnegut's unpublished pieces, ''Armageddon in Retrospect'', was compiled and posthumously published by Vonnegut's son Mark in 2008.
After ''Player Piano'', Vonnegut continued to sell short stories to various magazines.
In 1970, he was also a correspondent in Biafra during the Nigerian Civil War.
He was discharged from the U.S. Army and returned to Indianapolis.
In ''Cat's Cradle'', Vonnegut invented the religion of Bokononism.
Vonnegut wrote another story, after being coached by the fiction editor at ''Collier's'', Knox Burger, and again sold it to the magazine, this time for $950.
Meanwhile, Vonnegut's personal life was disintegrating.
The financial security and social prosperity that the Vonneguts once enjoyed were destroyed in a matter of years.
In a 2006 ''Rolling Stone'' interview, Vonnegut sardonically stated that he would sue the Brown & Williamson tobacco company, the maker of the Pall Mall-branded cigarettes he had been smoking since he was twelve or fourteen years old, for false advertising.
Vonnegut was a vocal critic of the society in which he lived, and this was reflected in his writings.
Vonnegut's brother and sister had finished their primary and secondary educations in private schools, but Vonnegut was placed in a public school, called Public School No.
Vonnegut's life and work also share similarities with that of ''Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'' writer Mark Twain.
Vonnegut also wrote a play called ''Happy Birthday, Wanda June'', which opened on October 7, 1970 at New York's Theatre de Lys.
In ''The Sirens of Titan'', Rumfoord proclaims The Church of God the Utterly Indifferent.
Other influences on Vonnegut include ''The War of the Worlds'' author H. G. Wells, and satirist Jonathan Swift.
"Cruel, nasty and scary are the adjectives commonly used to describe him by the friends, colleagues, and relatives Shields quotes", said 's Wendy Smith.
"And do you know why?"
The lying bastards!
Stress from a battle for control of his charitable foundation pushes him over the edge, and he is placed in a mental hospital by a dishonest lawyer.
So she was as great an influence on me as anybody."
written in a bathroom, his response is, "To be the eyes and ears and conscience of the Creator of the Universe, you fool."
Fourteen-year-old Harrison is a genius and athlete forced to wear record-level "handicaps" and imprisoned for attempting to overthrow the government.
Vonnegut was descended from German immigrants who settled in the United States in the mid-19th century; his patrilineal great-grandfather, Clemens Vonnegut of Westphalia, Germany, settled in Indianapolis and founded the Vonnegut Hardware Company.
In 1958, his sister, Alice, died of cancer two days after her husband, James Carmalt Adams, was killed in a train accident.
His novels have attacked our deepest fears of automation and the bomb, our deepest political guilts, our fiercest hatreds and loves.
When the Great Depression hit, few people could afford to build, causing clients at Kurt Sr.'s architectural firm to become scarce.
Vonnegut wrote in a foreword to a later edition, "we are what we pretend to be, so we must be careful about what we pretend to be".
Edith Vonnegut forayed into writing and tried to sell short stories to magazines like ''Collier's'' and ''The Saturday Evening Post'' with no success.
''Slaughterhouse-Five'' sees Billy Pilgrim, lacking religion himself, nevertheless become a chaplain's assistant in the military and display a large crucifix on his bedroom wall.
Vonnegut believed that ideas, and the convincing communication of those ideas to the reader, were vital to literary art.
On May 14, 1944, Vonnegut returned home on leave for Mother's Day weekend to discover that his mother had committed suicide the previous night by overdosing on sleeping pills.
Fear of the loss of one's purpose in life is a theme in Vonnegut's works.
He has one character, Mary O'Hare, opine that "wars were partly encouraged by books and movies", made by "Frank Sinatra or John Wayne or some of those other glamorous, war-loving, dirty old men".
William Rodney Allen, in his guide to Vonnegut's works, stated that Rumfoord foreshadowed the fictional political figures who would play major roles in ''God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater'' and ''Jailbird''.
Vonnegut also often laments social Darwinism, and a "survival of the fittest" view of society.
Vonnegut said his tenure with the ''Echo'' allowed him to write for a large audience—his fellow students—rather than for a teacher, an experience he said was "fun and easy".
When it was finally released in 1973, it was panned critically.
While there, he played clarinet in the school band and became an editor for the Tuesday edition of the school newspaper, ''The Shortridge Echo''.
Vonnegut stated in a 1987 interview that, "my own feeling is that civilization ended in World War I, and we're still trying to recover from that", and that he wanted to write war-focused works without glamorizing war itself.
He was not bothered by this, but both his parents were affected deeply by their economic misfortune.
Neither of them finished their degrees.
He later adopted his sister's three sons, after she died of cancer and her husband died in a train accident.
Howard W. Campbell Jr., Vonnegut's protagonist, is an American who goes to Nazi Germany during the war as a double agent for the U.S. Office of Strategic Services, and rises to the regime's highest ranks as a radio propagandist.
Vonnegut's earlier works had appealed strongly to many college students, and the antiwar message of ''Slaughterhouse Five'' resonated with a generation marked by the Vietnam War.
In a career spanning over 50 years, Vonnegut published fourteen novels, three short story collections, five plays, and five works of non-fiction.
His wife Jane had embraced Christianity, which was contrary to Vonnegut's atheistic beliefs, and with five of their six children having left home, Vonnegut said the two were forced to find "other sorts of seemingly important work to do."
The American prisoners of war were evacuated on foot to the border of Saxony and Czechoslovakia after General George S. Patton captured Leipzig.
One critic has argued that Vonnegut’s most famous novel, ''Slaughterhouse-Five'', features a so-called metafictional, Janus-headed outlook insofar as the novel seeks to represent actual historical events while, at the same time, problematizing the very notion of doing exactly that at the same time.
Reviewers were uncertain what to think of the book, with one comparing it to Offenbach's opera ''The Tales of Hoffmann''.
We know he's worth reading.
On December 22, Vonnegut was captured with about fifty other American soldiers.
Rumfoord is described, "he put a cigarette in a long, bone cigarette holder, lighted it.
Late 2011 saw the release of two Vonnegut biographies, Gregory Sumner's ''Unstuck in Time'' and Charles J. Shields's ''And So It Goes''.
Robert T. Tally Jr., in his volume on Vonnegut's novels, wrote, "rather than tearing down and destroying the icons of twentieth-century, middle-class American life, Vonnegut gently reveals their basic flimsiness."
His death was reported by his wife Jill.
In ''Player Piano'', Vonnegut originates many of the techniques he would use in his later works.
He had survived by taking refuge in a meat locker three stories underground.
Aristophanes, like Vonnegut, wrote humorous critiques of contemporary society.
He was interned in Dresden and survived the Allied bombing of the city by taking refuge in a meat locker of the slaughterhouse where he was imprisoned.
He was the youngest of three children of Kurt Vonnegut Sr. and his wife Edith ( Lieber).
In subsequent years, his popularity resurged as he published several satirical books, including ''Jailbird'' (1979), ''Deadeye Dick'' (1982), ''Galápagos'' (1985), ''Bluebeard'' (1987), and ''Hocus Pocus'' (1990).
In 1979, Vonnegut married Jill Krementz, a photographer whom he met while she was working on a series about writers in the early 1970s.
He also read the Classics, like those of Aristophanes.
Literary critic Lawrence Berkove considered the novel, like Mark Twain's ''Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'', to illustrate the tendency for "impersonators to get carried away by their impersonations, to become what they impersonate and therefore to live in a world of illusion".
Jane dropped out of the school after becoming pregnant with the couple's first child, Mark (born May 1947), and after Kurt's master's thesis, which analyzed the Ghost Dance religious movement among Native Americans, was unanimously rejected, he left the university without his degree.
Opening of the Munich Opernfestspiele 1996.
