In 2014 and 2015, Kuwait was ranked first among Arab countries in the Global Gender Gap Report.
Soap operas have become important national pastimes in Kuwait.
After a series of failed diplomatic negotiations, the United States led a coalition to remove the Iraqi forces from Kuwait, in what became known as the Gulf War.
The parliament can be dissolved under a set of conditions based on constitutional provisions.
The Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA) is Kuwait's sovereign wealth fund specializing in foreign investment.
In June 1961, Kuwait became independent with the end of the British protectorate and the sheikh Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah became an Emir.
Kuwait currently pumps 2.9 million bpd and its full production capacity is a little over 3 million bpd.
The shamal, a northwesterly wind common during June and July, causes dramatic sandstorms.
During the economic depression, luxuries like pearls were in little demand.
Kuwait is divided into six governorates.
Darb El Zalag, Khalti Gmasha, and Ruqayya wa Sabika are among the most important television productions in the Gulf region.
Between the years 1775 and 1779, the Indian trade routes with Baghdad, Aleppo, Smyrna and Constantinople were diverted to Kuwait.
According to the World Bank, Kuwait is the fourth richest country in the world per capita.
The country's public transportation network consists almost entirely of bus routes.
Kuwait has also been to one FIFA World Cup, in 1982, but tied 1-1 with Czechoslovakia on the first round.
He is regarded as the founder of portrait art in the region.
In 2015, Kuwait won the IIHF Challenge Cup of Asia.
The Kuwaiti artist Mojeb al-Dousari was the earliest recognized visual artist in the Gulf region.
On major highways the maximum speed is .
There are currently more than six desalination plants.
A unique characteristic in Kuwait is the use of words and phrases by women exclusively, for example "يَا حَافِظ", roughly translated to "Oh Saver God", is rarely or never used by men.
In 1975, the Higher Institute of Theatrical Arts was founded by the government to provide higher education in theatrical arts.
Over the last decade of satellite television stations, many Kuwaitis have become household names in other Arab countries.
Theatre activities are still popular today.
Since 1953, the Kuwaiti government has directed investments into Europe, United States and Asia Pacific.
The East India Company was diverted to Kuwait in 1792.
Kuwaiti music contains musical influences from many cultures, including India and East Africa.
The Kuwait national handball team is controlled by the Kuwait Handball Association.
The international mobility of Kuwaiti students is close to record levels.
Kuwait consistently ranks as having the freest media in the Arab world.
The hybrid political system is divided between an elected parliament and appointed government.
The Kuwait national basketball team is governed by the Kuwait Basketball Association (KBA).
A portion of the airport complex is designated as Al Mubarak Air Base, which contains the headquarters of the Kuwait Air Force, as well as the Kuwait Air Force Museum.
In the eighteenth century, Kuwait prospered and rapidly became the principal commercial center for the transit of goods between India, Muscat, Baghdad and Arabia.
Kuwait has a flourishing scientific research sector.
Kuwait's constitution criminalizes criticism of the Emir.
Sections of the civil court system administer family law.
The Emir is the head of state.
English is taught since first grade at all schools and is widely understood and often used as a business language.
Kuwait is widely considered the cultural capital of the Gulf region, frequently dubbed the "Hollywood of the Gulf" due to the popularity of its Arabic television soap operas and theatre.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Kuwait's press was described as one of the freest in the world.
Indians and Egyptians are the largest expat communities respectively.
Kuwait was the pioneer in the Middle East in diversifying its earnings away from oil exports.
As a result, Kuwait's maritime commerce boomed.
Kuwaiti society is diverse and tolerant.
The judiciary's independence has come under question, although the Constitutional Court is widely regarded as one of the most judicially independent courts in the Arab world.
The political participation of Kuwaiti women has been limited, although Kuwaiti women are among the most emancipated women in the Middle East.
In 1990, Kuwait was invaded by Iraq.
Due to historical immigration, Persian is used among Ayam Kuwaitis.
However, numerous political groups function as ''de facto'' political parties in elections, and there are blocs in the parliament.
Some Kuwaiti merchant families became rich due to gold smuggling to India.
, the holdings were valued at $592 billion in assets.
During the Iran-Iraq war, Kuwait supported Iraq.
Beside English, French is taught as a third language for the students of humanities section at schools, but for two years only.
Kuwaiti society embraced liberal and Western attitudes throughout the 1960s and 1970s.
During the 1991 Kuwaiti oil fires, more than 500 oil lakes were created covering a combined surface area of about .
Roadways extended , of which  is paved.
Kuwaiti soap operas are the most-watched soap operas in the Gulf region.
From the 1970s onward, Kuwait scored highest of all Arab countries on the Human Development Index.
Since the parliament can conduct inquiries into government actions and pass motions of no confidence, checks and balances are robust in Kuwait.
The highest recorded temperature was , which is the highest temperature recorded in Asia.
The Kuwaiti Division I Basketball League is the highest professional basketball league in Kuwait.
The Kuwait Football Association (KFA) is the governing body of football in Kuwait.
According to the constitution, all natural resources in the country are state property.
In 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2014, Kuwait surpassed Israel as the country with the greatest press freedom in the Middle East.
The Japanese invention of cultured pearls also contributed to the collapse of Kuwait's pearl industry.
After the Iran-Iraq war ended, Kuwait declined an Iraqi request to forgive its US$65 billion debt.
Major ''de facto'' political parties include the National Democratic Alliance, Popular Action Bloc, Hadas (Kuwaiti Muslim Brotherhood), National Islamic Alliance and the Justice and Peace Alliance.
Kuwait has a large wealth-management industry that stands out in the region.
According to the United Nations, Kuwait's legal system is a mix of English common law, French civil law, Egyptian civil law and Islamic law.
Saleh and Daoud Al-Kuwaity were prominent Kuwaiti musicians who wrote over 650 songs, many of which are considered traditional and still played daily on radio stations both in Kuwait and the rest of the Arab world.
Kuwait has a leading position in the financial industry in the GCC; the abyss that separates Kuwait from its Gulf neighbors in terms of tourism, transport, and other measures of diversification is absent in the financial sector.
Since there is no railway system in the country, most people travel by automobiles.
In 2013, 53% of Kuwaiti women participated in the labor force.
70% of the population are expatriates, while only 30% of the population are Kuwaiti citizens.
Kuwait has a petroleum-based economy, petroleum is the main export product.
Kuwait's theatre industry was well-known throughout the Arab world.
With an area of , the Bubiyan is the largest island in Kuwait and is connected to the rest of the country by a  long bridge.
The Kuwait Financial Centre, in a rough calculation, estimated that Kuwaiti firms accounted for over one-third of the total assets under management in the GCC.
2007 estimates indicate that Kuwait also has a large community of expatriate Christians, Hindus, Buddhists, and Sikhs.
In 1965, the Kuwaiti government commissioned the Swedish engineering company of VBB (Sweco) to develop and implement a plan for a modern water-supply system for Kuwait City.
Kuwait has the oldest modern arts movement in the Arabian Peninsula.
Upon the death of the Emir Jaber, in January 2006, Saad Al-Sabah succeeded him but was removed nine days later by the Kuwaiti parliament due to his ailing health.
State-owned Kuwait Airways is the largest airline in the country.
Kuwait is the only country in the Gulf with a theatrical tradition.
Kuwait was the center of boat building in the Persian Gulf region.
Beginning in 1936, Kuwait was the first Gulf country to grant scholarships in the arts.
Kuwaiti women outnumber men in the workforce.
Petroleum accounts for half of GDP and 90% of government income.
Kuwait's marine and littoral ecosystems contain the bulk of the country's biodiversity heritage.
More than half of Kuwait was lost due to Uqair.
They have been the champions of the 1980 AFC Asian Cup, runners-up of the 1976 AFC Asian Cup, and have taken third place of the 1984 AFC Asian Cup.
Kuwait has proven crude oil reserves of 104 billion barrels, estimated to be 10% of the world's reserves.
Kuwait has one of the largest shipping industries in the region.
Kuwait also faced a serious destruction of its habitat during the gulf war.
Kuwait is a constitutional monarchy with a high income economy backed by the world's sixth largest oil reserves.
In 2011, financial and banking companies made up more than half of the market capitalization of the Kuwaiti bourse; among all the Gulf states, the market capitalization of Kuwaiti financial-sector firms was, in total, behind only that of Saudi Arabia.
In the late 18th century, Kuwait partly functioned as a haven for Basra's merchants, who were fleeing Ottoman government persecution.
After the Persians withdrew from Basra in 1779, Kuwait continued to attract trade away from Basra.
Kuwaiti women outnumber men in the workforce.
This massive growth attracted many foreign workers, especially from Palestine, Egypt and India.
According to the constitution, at least one minister has to be an elected MP from the parliament.
Kuwait was the first Gulf country to establish a constitution and parliament.
Taleb al-Refai, Laila al-Othman, A. H. Almaas, Taibah Al-Ibrahim, Najma Idrees, and Fatimah Yousif al-Ali are also among the pioneer writers.
International trading was one of Kuwait's main sources of income before oil.
The governorates are further subdivided into areas.
In popular discourse, the years between 1946 and 1982 are referred to as the "Golden Era".
60% of Kuwait's total population is Arab (including Arab expats).
The institute has several divisions.
In July 1987, Kuwait refused to allow U.S. military bases in its territory.
Most Gulf soap operas are based in Kuwait.
Following the Kuwait–Najd War of 1919–20, Ibn Saud imposed a trade blockade against Kuwait from the years 1923 until 1937.
The Iraqi occupation came to an end in 1991 after military intervention by United States-led forces.
In March 2003, Kuwait became the springboard for the US-led invasion of Iraq.
Kuwaiti music has considerably influenced music culture in other GCC countries.
The temperature in Kuwait during summer is above .
Kuwait has several music festivals, including the International Music Festival hosted by the National Council for Culture, Arts and Letters (NCCAL).
In 1716, the Bani Utubs settled in Kuwait, which at this time was inhabited by a few fishermen and primarily functioned as a fishing village.
Kuwait's 2014 population was 4.1 million people, of which 1.2 million were Kuwaitis, 1.1 million are Arab, 1.4 million Asian expatriates, and 76,698 Africans.
For a sixth site, the Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmed, wanted a more spectacular design.
Ibn Saud persuaded Sir Percy Cox to give him two-thirds of Kuwait's territory.
There are limits to Kuwait's press freedom; while criticism of the government and ruling family members is permitted, many people have been jailed for defaming the Emir.
By the mid 1700s, Kuwait had already established itself as the major trading route from the Persian Gulf to Aleppo.
In 2005, the second private airline, Wataniya Airways was founded.
Kuwait is the most democratic country in the region.
After the Uqair conference, Kuwait was still subjected to a Saudi economic blockade and intermittent Saudi raiding.
Kuwaiti popular culture, in the form of dialect poetry, film, theatre, radio and television soap opera, flourishes and is even exported to neighboring states.
The National Assembly consists of fifty elected members, who are chosen in elections held every four years.
Kuwait's fresh water resources are limited to groundwater, desalinated seawater, and treated wastewater effluents.
The parliament is often rigorous in holding the government accountable, government ministers are frequently interpellated and forced to resign.
In 1943, al-Dousari launched Kuwait's first art gallery.
In June 2015, a suicide bombing took place at a mosque.
Kuwaiti Arabic is a variant of Gulf Arabic, sharing similarities with the dialects of neighboring coastal areas in Eastern Arabia.
In response to Kuwait becoming the 169th signatory of the Ramsar Convention, Bubyan island's Mubarak al-Kabeer reserve was designated as the country's first Wetland of International Importance.
In 1950, a major public-work programme began to enable Kuwaitis to enjoy a modern standard of living.
There are three major municipal wastewater treatment plants.
Kuwait is among the Middle East's freest countries in terms of civil liberties and political rights.
Kuwait's media is annually classified as "partly free" in the Freedom of Press survey by Freedom House.
They are most popular during the time of Ramadan, when families gather to break their fast.
Kuwait has more government accountability and transparency than other GCC countries.
Kuwait acted as a conduit for the Soviets to the other Gulf states and Kuwait was used to demonstrate the benefits of a pro-Soviet stance.
Southeasterly damp winds spring up between July and October.
The festival is a month-long commemoration of the liberation of Kuwait, and runs from February 1 to February 28.
Sabah Al-Sabah was sworn in as Emir.
It is a long-standing member of the Arab League and Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf.
The Kuwaiti dinar is the highest-valued unit of currency in the world.
Bye Bye London and Saif al Arab are among the most important theatrical productions in the region.
The marshes in northern Kuwait and Jahra have become increasingly important as a refuge for passage migrants.
As a result of the decline of European demand for goods from India and Africa, Kuwait's economy suffered.
The state owned Kuwait Public Transportation Company was established in 1962.
Kuwaiti Sign Language is used by the deaf community.
Professional groups like the Chamber of Commerce maintain their autonomy from the government.
Hockey in Kuwait is governed by the Kuwait Ice Hockey Association.
Abdallah Al Rowaished, Nawal El Kuwaiti, Abdul Kareem Abdul-Qader, and Nabeel Shoail are the most popular contemporary artists.
Ismail Fahd Ismail was one of the first Kuwaiti writers to achieve success in the Arab world.
There are two airports in Kuwait.
Kuwaiti law does not recognize political parties.
The state-owned Kuwait News Agency (KUNA) is the largest media house in the country.
Construction of another major port located in Bubiyan island started in 2007.
The annual "Hala Febrayer" festival attracts many tourists from neighboring GCC countries, and includes a variety of events including music concerts, parades, and carnivals.
Kuwait made its international debut in 1959.
In 2001, there were 165,000 Internet subscribers served by three service providers.
Human rights in Kuwait has been the subject of criticism, particularly regarding foreign workers rights.
The institute has several divisions.
Kuwait was the pioneer in the literary renaissance in the Arab region.
Kuwait has the second most lively gallery scene in the Gulf, after Dubai.
Regional geopolitical turbulence helped foster economic prosperity in Kuwait in the second half of the 18th century.
The resulting soil contamination due to oil and soot accumulation had made eastern and south-eastern parts of Kuwait uninhabitable.
In addition, more than 600 Kuwaitis went missing during Iraq's occupation, approximately 375 remains were found in mass graves in Iraq.
In the past five years, there has been a significant rise in entrepreneurship and small business start-ups in Kuwait.
The judiciary is nominally independent of the executive and the legislature, and the Constitutional Court is charged with ruling on the conformity of laws and decrees with the constitution.
As a result of the Gulf War, Kuwait's relations with the U.S. have improved and currently hosts thousands of US military personnel and contractors within active U.S. facilities.
More than 363 species of birds were recorded in Kuwait, 18 species of which breed in the country.
In 2014 and 2015, Kuwait was ranked first among Arab countries in the Global Gender Gap Report.
Many Arab writers moved to Kuwait because they enjoyed greater freedom of expression than elsewhere in the Arab world.
Kuwait ranks highly in regional metrics of gender equality, as it has the region's highest Global Gender Gap ranking.
Kuwait was the first country in the world to use desalination to supply water for large scale domestic use.
The reserve is home to the world's largest breeding colony of crab-plover.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, an alternative stock market, trading in shares of Gulf companies, emerged in Kuwait, the Souk Al-Manakh.
Freedom House rates the country as "Partly Free" in the Freedom in the World survey.
Most tourists are citizens of GCC countries.
In recent years, Kuwaiti investment companies have invested large percentages of their assets abroad, and their foreign assets have become substantially larger than their domestic assets.
The Constitutional Court and Emir both have the power to dissolve the parliament, although the Constitutional Court can invalidate the Emir's dissolve.
Once elected, many deputies form voting blocs in the National Assembly.
The national team has been to the FIBA Asian Championship in basketball eleven times.
From 2001 to 2009, Kuwait had the highest Human Development Index ranking in the Arab world.
Situated in the northern edge of Eastern Arabia at the tip of the Persian Gulf, it shares borders with Iraq and Saudi Arabia.
Kuwait is the only GCC country besides Bahrain to have a local Christian population who hold citizenship.
In 2004, the first private airline of Kuwait, Jazeera Airways, was launched.
In August 1990, Iraqi forces invaded and annexed Kuwait.
Many prominent musicians have graduated from the institute.
As they retreated, Iraqi forces carried out a scorched earth policy by setting oil wells on fire.
Expatriates account for 70% of Kuwait's total population.
Oil reserves were discovered in 1938.
Due to immigration during its early history as well as trade, Kuwaiti Arabic borrowed a lot of words from Persian, Indian, Turkish, English and even Italian.
Kuwait has nine islands, all of which, with the exception of Failaka Island, are uninhabited.
It runs local bus routes across Kuwait as well as longer distance services to other Gulf states.
State-owned Kuwait Television (KTV) offered first colored broadcast in 1974 and operates five television channels.
Among the endangered mammalian species are the red fox and wild cat.
Cricket in Kuwait is governed by the Kuwait Cricket Association.
