Following the emergence of independent post-Soviet states, the rail lines which were built without regard for administrative boundaries have been cut by borders, and traffic is therefore severely curtailed.
Kyrgyzstan is also a member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), a league of 56 participating states committed to peace, transparency, and the protection of human rights in Eurasia.
This means that no airline which is registered in Kyrgyzstan may operate services of any kind within the European Union, due to safety standards which fail to meet European regulations.
The commission's report, released in January 2011, concluded that the events in southern Kyrgyzstan constituted a “planned, large-scale provocation, oriented towards the splitting of Kyrgyzstan and disrupting the unity of its people.”  Responsibility for this provocation was seen as lying with “nationalistically-minded leaders of the Uzbek community”.
On 6 April 2010, civil unrest broke out in the town of Talas after a demonstration against government corruption and increased living expenses.
The official governing body is the Football Federation of Kyrgyz Republic, which was founded in 1992, after the split of the Soviet Union.
This considerably eases communication between the two major population centres of the country—the Chuy Valley in the north and the Fergana Valley in the South.
'''Kyrgyzstan''' ( ;  ''Kyrgyzstan'' (); ), officially the '''Kyrgyz Republic''' ( ''Kyrgyz Respublikasy'';  ''Kyrgyzskaya Respublika''), formerly known as '''Kirghizia''', is a landlocked country located in Central Asia.
Chong-Kara is on the Sokh river, between the Uzbek border and the Sokh enclave.
Agriculture is an important sector of the economy in Kyrgyzstan (see agriculture in Kyrgyzstan).
By the early 1990s, the private agricultural sector provided between one-third and one-half of some harvests.
Though long inhabited by a succession of independent tribes and clans, Kyrgyzstan has periodically come under foreign domination and attained sovereignty as a nation-state only after the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991.
Nevertheless, secessionist forces pushed Kyrgyzstan's independence through in August of that same year.
On 2 August 2010, a Kyrgyz government commission began investigating the causes of the clashes.
While Islam in Kyrgyzstan is more of a cultural background than a devout daily practice for many, public figures have expressed support for restoring religious values.
There are four Uzbek enclaves within Kyrgyzstan.
At the end of the Soviet period there were about 50 airports and airstrips in Kyrgyzstan, many of them built primarily to serve military purposes in this border region so close to China.
Children are usually accepted to primary schools at the age of 7.
The Kyrgyz economy was severely affected by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the resulting loss of its vast market.
son Maksim and brother Janish – were forced to flee to Kazakhstan and then to sought asylum in Belarus.
Remittances of around 800,000 Kyrgyz migrants working in Russia represent 40% of Kyrgyzstan's GDP.
The average population density is 25 people per km².
Two additional Muslim holidays ''Orozo Ait'' and ''Kurman Ait'' are defined by lunar calendar.
A law banning women under the age of twenty three from traveling abroad without a parent or guardian, with the purpose of "increased morality and preservation of the gene pool" passed in the Kyrgyz parliament in June 2013.
They played in the Bandy World Championship 2012, their first appearance in that tournament.
Members of the National Commission, led by former parliament speaker Abdygany Erkebaev, met with people from the predominantly ethnic Uzbek villages of Mady, Shark, and Kyzyl-Kyshtak in the Kara-Suu district of Osh Oblast.
There is a contemporary Sufi order present which gives a somewhat different form of Islam than the orthodox Islam.
* Manas International Airport near Bishkek is the main international airport, with services to Moscow, Tashkent, Almaty, Beijing, Urumqi, Istanbul, London, Baku, Dubai (from 7 February 2012).
Local guides and porters can be hired from many tour companies in Bishkek and in the regional capitals.
The UN High Commissioner told reporters in Geneva that evidence suggested that the violence seemed to have been staged up.
In addition, there is a small community of Ashkenazi Jews, who fled to the country from eastern Europe during the Second World War.
''oblast'' (область), pl.
The country is rural: only about one-third of the population live in urban areas.
, it no longer reaches the sea, as its water is withdrawn upstream to irrigate cotton fields in Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and southern Kazakhstan.
It administers the Kyrgyzstan national football team.
However, due to the economical and political instability in the region, the number has declined in recent years.
President Bakiyev returned to his home in Jalal-Abad and stated his terms of resignation at a press conference on 13 April 2010.
Of those, 34.4% are under the age of 15 and 6.2% are over 65.
Overall, the government appears committed to the transition to a market economy.
The Kyrgyz peacefully became a part of Mongol Empire in 1207.
Osh became relatively calm on 14 June 2010, but Jalal-Abad witnessed sporadic incidents of arson.
The country's provisional leaders announced that Bakiyev signed a formal letter of resignation prior to his departure.
In the late nineteenth century, the majority part of what is today Kyrgyzstan was ceded to Russia through two treaties between China (then Qing Dynasty) and Russia.
''oblasttar'' (областтар)) administered by appointed governors.
The Kyrgyzstan Air Company provides air transport to China, Russia, and other local countries.
There are a few Ahmadiyya Muslims, though unrecognised by the country.
"Kyrgyz" is believed to have been derived from the Turkic word for "forty", in reference to the forty clans of Manas, a legendary hero who united forty regional clans against the Uyghurs.
Kyrgyzstan is a landlocked country in Central Asia, bordering Kazakhstan, China, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
The closure was approved by Parliament on 19 February 2009 by 78–1 for the government-backed bill.
The ski base of Toguz Bulak is  from Bishkek, on the way to Issyk Ata valley.
Finding it difficult to control the situation, Otunbayeva, the interim leader, sent a letter to the Russian president, Dimitry Medvedev, asking him to send Russian troops to help the country control the situation.
Horses are still a much-used transport option, especially in more rural areas; Kyrgyzstan's road infrastructure is not extensive, so horses are able to reach locations that motor vehicles cannot, and they do not require expensive, imported fuel.
The government has actively encouraged foreign involvement in extracting and processing gold from the Kumtor Gold Mine and other regions.
In October 1991, Akayev ran unopposed and was elected president of the new independent Republic by direct ballot, receiving 95 percent of the votes cast.
It was signed by President Kurmanbek Bakiyev on 12 January 2009.
During the summer months, a weekly flight links Jalal-Abad with the Issyk-Kul Region.
Balykchy (Ysyk-Kol or Rybach'ye), on Issyk Kul Lake.
To control the situation, the interim government gave special shoot-to-kill powers to the security forces.
It keeps our society more moral, cleaner."
Chinese and Muslim sources of the 7th–12th centuries AD describe the early Kyrgyz as red-haired with white skin and blue eyes, which is indicative of ancient Indo-European tribes like the Slavic peoples.
In 2011, the Kyrgyzstan men's national ice hockey team won 2011 Asian Winter Games Premier Division dominating in all six games with six wins.
A few Animistic traditions survive, as do influences from Buddhism such as the tying of prayer flags onto sacred trees, though some view this practice rooted within Sufi Islam.
Opposition members also called for the closing of the US-controlled Manas Air Base.
The 2010 South Kyrgyzstan ethnic clashes occurred between the two main ethnic groups—the Uzbeks and Kyrgyz—in Osh, the second largest city in the country, on 11 June 2010.
Parliamentary elections for a new, 75-seat unicameral legislature were held on 27 February and 13 March 2005, but were widely viewed as corrupt.
On 3 February 2009, President Kurmanbek Bakiyev announced the imminent closure of the Manas Air Base, the only US military base remaining in Central Asia.
The other faiths practiced in Kyrgyzstan include Russian Orthodox and Ukrainian Orthodox versions of Christianity, practiced primarily by Russians and Ukrainians respectively.
Kyrgyzstan is a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Eurasian Economic Union, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, the Turkic Council, the TÜRKSOY community and the United Nations.
However, the Republic's press was permitted to adopt a more liberal stance and to establish a new publication, ''Literaturny Kirghizstan'', by the Union of Writers.
Russia's President Dmitry Medvedev ordered measures to ensure the safety of Russian nationals and tighten security around Russian sites in Kyrgyzstan to protect them against possible attacks.
On 5 May 1993, the official name changed from the Republic of Kyrgyzstan to the Kyrgyz Republic.
File:Caravansary on Silk Road in Kyrgyzstan.jpg|Silk road caravansary utilized during the Islamic Golden Age
Reporters Without Borders, which ranks Kyrgyzstan 111th equal out of 173 countries on its Press Freedom Index, strongly criticised the decision.
Skiing is still in its infancy as a tourism industry, but there is one fairly cheap and well-equipped base about a half-hour from Bishkek.
Kyrgyz tribes were overrun in the 17th century by the Mongol Oirats, in the mid-18th century by the Manchu Qing Dynasty, and in the early 19th century by the Uzbek Khanate of Kokand.
Roads have to snake up steep valleys, cross passes of  altitude and more, and are subject to frequent mud slides and snow avalanches.
Peak Jengish Chokusu, at , is the highest point and is considered by geologists to be the northernmost peak over  in the world.
With support from the Asian Development Bank, a major road linking the north and southwest from Bishkek to Osh has recently been completed.
The majority of Muslims are non-denominational Muslims at 64% while roughly 23% are Sunni, adhering to the Hanafi school of thought.
President Roza Otunbayeva also said in August 2010 that an international commission would also be formed to investigate the clashes.
Issyk Kul Lake was a stopover on the Silk Road, a land route for traders, merchants and other travelers from the Far East to Europe.
(In 1993, it became the Kyrgyz Republic.)
The country's plentiful water resources and mountainous terrain enable it to produce and export large quantities of hydroelectric energy.
In regards to telecommunication infrastructure, Kyrgyz Republic ranks last in Central Asia in the World Economic Forum's Network Readiness Index (NRI) – an indicator for determining the development level of a country’s information and communication technologies.
The Russian government, however, said it would be sending humanitarian aid to the troubled nation.
Issyk-Kul Lake, or Ysyk-Köl in Kyrgyz, in the north-eastern Tian Shan is the largest lake in Kyrgyzstan and the second largest mountain lake in the world after Titicaca.
Water transport exists only on Issyk Kul Lake, and has drastically shrunk since the end of the Soviet Union.
Prime Minister Daniar Usenov accused Russia of supporting the protests; this accusation was denied by Russian Prime Minister, Vladimir Putin.
Together with the representatives of seven other Republics that same month, he signed the Treaty of the New Economic Community.
This National Commission, including representatives of many ethnic groups, was established by a presidential decree.
The subsequent protests led to a bloodless coup on 24 March 2005, after which Akayev with his family fled the country and was replaced by acting president Kurmanbek Bakiyev (see: Tulip Revolution).
Heavy snowfall in winter leads to spring floods which often cause serious damage downstream.
On 19 August 1991, when the State Emergency Committee assumed power in Moscow, there was an attempt to depose Akayev in Kyrgyzstan.
Kyrgyz officials told the media that a person suspected to be behind the violence in Jalal-Abad had been detained.
Metallurgy is an important industry, and the government hopes to attract foreign investment in this field.
There were also reports that the armed forces supported ethnic Kyrgyz gangs entering the city, but the government denied the allegations.
The small bits of rail lines within Kyrgyzstan, about  ( broad gauge) in total, have little economic value in the absence of the former bulk traffic over long distances to and from such centres as Tashkent, Almaty, and the cities of Russia.
Some of the most popular locations for camping are southern Osh, the area between Naryn City and the Torugart pass, and the mountains and glaciers surrounding Karakol in Issyk-Kul.
In the coldest areas temperatures are sub-zero for around 40 days in winter, and even some desert areas experience constant snowfall in this period.In the lowlands, the temperature ranges from around - in January to  in July.
Kyrgyzstan's population is estimated at 5.6 million in 2013.
During the 1920s, Kyrgyzstan developed considerably in cultural, educational and social life.
Attempts to appropriate Uzbek collective farms for housing development triggered the Osh Riots.
The police are commanded by the Ministry of the Interior Affairs, along with the border guard.
There are vague plans about extending rail lines from Balykchy in the north and/or from Osh in the south into China, but the cost of construction would be enormous.
In a referendum on the preservation of the Soviet Union in March 1991, 88.7% of the voters approved the proposal to retain the Soviet Union as a "renewed federation".
Many aspects of Kyrgyz national culture were retained despite the suppression of nationalist activity under Joseph Stalin, who controlled the Soviet Union from the late 1920s until 1953.
File:Kyrgyz 1813.JPG|Kyrgyz people
Kyrgyzstan gained full independence a few days later on 25 December 1991.
Political stability appeared to be elusive, however, as various groups and factions allegedly linked to organized crime jockeyed for power.
The Russian government decided to send a battalion to the country to protect Russian facilities.
With the rise of the Mongol Empire in the thirteenth century, the Kyrgyz migrated south.
Because of the processes of migration, conquest, intermarriage, and assimilation, many of the Kyrgyz peoples that now inhabit Central and Southwest Asia are of mixed origins, often stemming from fragments of many different tribes, though they now speak closely related languages.
The clashes incited fears that the country could be heading towards a civil war.
It oversees an elite counterterrorism special forces unit known as "Alfa", the same name used by other former Soviet countries, including Russia and Uzbekistan.
File:Киргизские кибитки на реке Чу.jpg|Kyrgyz yurt, 1869–1870, by Vasily Vereshchagin
The lines inside the sun represent the crown or tündük (Kyrgyz түндүк) of a yurt, a symbol replicated in many facets of Kyrgyz architecture.
On 10 July 2005, acting president Bakiyev won the presidential election in a landslide, with 88.9% of the vote, and was inaugurated on 14 August.
The election was held in November and won by Almazbek Atambayev, leader of the Social Democratic Party and the then-Prime Minister.
At the time, in the early 9th century AD, the Uyghurs dominated much of Central Asia (including Kyrgyzstan), Mongolia, and parts of Russia and China.
In 1992, Kyrgyzstan joined the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
Thus, the nation's economic performance in the early 1990s was worse than any other former Soviet republic except war-torn Armenia, Azerbaijan and Tajikistan, as factories and state farms collapsed with the disappearance of their traditional markets in the former Soviet Union.
There also are two enclaves belonging to Tajikistan: Vorukh (exclave area between , population estimated between 23,000 and 29,000, 95% Tajiks and 5% Kyrgyz, distributed among 17 villages), located  south of Isfara on the right bank of the Karafshin river, and a small settlement near the Kyrgyz railway station of Kairagach.
However, after much behind-the-scenes negotiation between Kyrgyz, Russian and American diplomats, the decision was reversed in June 2009.
On 15 April 2010, Bakiyev left the country and flew to neighboring Kazakhstan, along with his wife and two children.
Police and special services arrested many opposition leaders.
Grades 10–11 are optional, but it is necessary to complete them to graduate and receive a state-accredited school diploma.
The majority of the population (64 percent) are non-denominational Muslims.
Plans are now being formulated to build a major road from Osh into China.
The entire region was still under a state of emergency as Uzbeks were reluctant to leave their houses for fear of attacks by the mobs.
The parliament currently is unicameral.
She emphasized that many mosques have recently been built and that the Kyrgyz are increasingly devoting themselves to Islam, which she noted was "not a bad thing in itself.
Barak is administratively part of Kara-Suu District in Kyrgyzstan's Osh Region.
Among its mineral reserves are substantial deposits of coal, gold, uranium, antimony, and other valuable metals.
In the twelfth century the Kyrgyz dominion had shrunk to the Altay Range and Sayan Mountains as a result of the Mongol expansion.
For those interested in trekking and camping, every region offers attractions and challenges.
Reforms led to Kyrgyzstan's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) on 20 December 1998.
In 2005, a popular uprising known as the "Tulip Revolution", took place after the parliamentary elections in March 2005, forced President Askar Akayev's resignation on 4 April 2005.
It would be immoral to develop a market-based society without an ethical dimension."
There are 77 public schools in Bishkek (capital city) and more than 200 in the rest of the country.
Economic and social development also was notable.
Opposition leaders formed a coalition, and a new government was formed under President Kurmanbek Bakiyev and Prime Minister Feliks Kulov.
The military works with the US Armed Forces, which leased a facility named the Transit Center at Manas at Manas International airport near Bishkek until June 2014.
The mountainous region of the Tian Shan covers over 80% of the country (Kyrgyzstan is occasionally referred to as "the Switzerland of Central Asia", as a result), with the remainder made up of valleys and basins.
To graduate, a student must complete the 11-year school course and pass 4 mandatory state exams in writing, maths, history and a foreign language.
Literally, Kyrgyz means ''We are forty''.
The south-western Fergana Valley is subtropical and extremely hot in summer, with temperatures reaching  The northern foothills are temperate and the Tian Shan varies from dry continental to polar climate, depending on elevation.
Kyrgyzstan was the second poorest country in the former Soviet Union, and is today the second poorest country in Central Asia.
The Agency of National Security works with the military and serves similar purposes to its Soviet predecessor, the KGB.
In 1990, some 98% of Kyrgyz exports went to other parts of the Soviet Union.
As the prices of imported agrichemicals and petroleum are so high, much farming is being done by hand and by horse, as it was generations ago.
The 1993 constitution defines the form of government as a democratic unicameral republic.
After the coup collapsed the following week, Akayev and Vice President German Kuznetsov announced their resignations from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), and the entire bureau and secretariat resigned.
Ethnic Uzbeks threatened to blow up an oil depot in Osh if they failed to get guarantees of protection.
Protesters attacked President Bakiyev's offices, as well as state-run radio and television stations.
Although geographically isolated by its highly mountainous terrain – which has helped preserve its ancient culture – Kyrgyzstan has historically been at the crossroads of several great civilizations, namely as part of the Silk Road and other commercial and cultural routes.
The 40-rayed yellow sun in the center of the flag represent the 40 tribes that once made up the entirety of Kyrgyz culture before the intervention of Russia during the rise of the Soviet Union.
Three of the 75 members of Parliament elected in March 2005 were assassinated, and another member was assassinated on 10 May 2006 shortly after winning his murdered brother's seat in a by-election.
There were at least 170 people left dead by 15 June 2010 but Pascale Meige Wagner of the International Committee of the Red Cross said the official death toll was an underestimate.
It was the first major international event that Kyrgyzstan's ice hockey team took part in.
The official language, Kyrgyz, is closely related to the other Turkic languages, although Russian remains widely spoken, a legacy of a century-long policy of Multiculturalism.
On 7 April 2010, President Bakiyev imposed a state of emergency.
Despite these political moves toward independence, economic realities seemed to work against secession from the Soviet Union.
Kyrgyzstan appears on the European Union's list of prohibited countries for the certification of airlines.
The number of tourists visiting the lake was more than a million a year in 2006 and 2007.
* Other facilities built during the Soviet era are either closed down, used only occasionally or restricted to military use (e.g., Kant Air Base near Bishkek, which is used by the Russian Air Force).
The government has reduced expenditures, ended most price subsidies and introduced a value-added tax.
The Chuy Valley in the north and the Ferghana valley in the south were endpoints of the Soviet Union's rail system in Central Asia.
* Jalal-Abad Airport is linked to Bishkek by daily flights.
Two of them are the towns of Sokh (area  and a population of 42,800 in 1993, although some estimates go as high as 70,000; 99% are Tajiks, the remainder Uzbeks) and Shakhimardan (also known as Shahimardan, Shohimardon, or Shah-i-Mardan, area  and a population of 5,100 in 1993; 91% are Uzbeks, the remainder Kyrgyz); the other two are the tiny territories of Chong-Kara (roughly  long by  wide) and Jangy-ayyl (a dot of land barely  across).
Ethnic Kyrgyz make up the majority of the country's 5.7 million people, followed by significant minorities of Uzbeks and Russians.
By then, the Kyrgyzstan Democratic Movement (KDM) had developed into a significant political force with support in Parliament.
A transition government, led by former foreign minister Roza Otunbayeva, by 8 April 2010 had taken control of state media and government facilities in the capital, but Bakiyev had not resigned from office.
The Chu River also briefly flows through Kyrgyzstan before entering Kazakhstan.
According to the CIA World Factbook, in 2011, a third of the country's population lived below the poverty line.
Kyrgyzstan has significant deposits of metals including gold and rare earth metals.
In 2010 another revolution erupted in the country (see: April uprising).
Due to the country's predominantly mountainous terrain, less than 8% of the land is cultivated, and this is concentrated in the northern lowlands and the fringes of the Fergana Valley.
Numerous hotels, vacation resorts, boarding houses and sanatoriums are located along its Northern shore.
The clashes caused a shortage of food and other essential commodities with more than 200 killed and 1,685 people hurt, .
The second city is the ancient town of Osh, located in the Fergana Valley near the border with Uzbekistan.
An emergency meeting of Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) was held on the same day (14 June) to discuss the role it could play in helping to end the violence.
All four are reputed to have been directly involved in major illegal business ventures.
Transport in Kyrgyzstan is severely constrained by the country's alpine topography.
Media agencies reported on 14 June 2010 that the Russian government was considering a request by the Kyrgyz government.
In the 2008 Summer Olympic Games, two athletes from Kyrgyzstan won medals in Greco-Roman wrestling: Kanatbek Begaliev (silver) and Ruslan Tyumenbayev (bronze).
President Kurmanbek Bakiyev together with his relatives – e.g.
Winter travel is close to impossible in many of the more remote and high-altitude regions.
The nation's capital was looted during the protests.
Reports by Kyrgyzstan government officials indicated that at least 75 people were killed and 458 hospitalized in bloody clashes with police in the capital.
UTRK had stopped retransmitting RFE/RL programming on October 2008, a week after it failed to broadcast an RFE/RL programme called 'Inconvenient Questions' which covered the October elections, claiming to have lost the missing material.
The principal river is the Kara Darya, which flows west through the Fergana Valley into Uzbekistan.
Otunbayeva accused the family of Bakiyev of "instigating the riots".
The Americans were allowed to remain under a new contract, whereby rent would increase from $17.4 million to $60 million annually.
Its capital and largest city is Bishkek.
The judicial branch comprises a Supreme Court, local courts and a Chief Prosecutor.
Agricultural processing is a key component of the industrial economy as well as one of the most attractive sectors for foreign investment.
Finally, on 21 December 1991, Kyrgyzstan joined with the other four Central Asian Republics to formally enter the new Commonwealth of Independent States.
* ''total:''  (including  of expressways)
Kyrgyzstan's recorded history spans over 2,000 years, encompassing a variety of cultures and empires.
Additionally, Bermet Akayeva, the daughter of Askar Akayev, the former President of Kyrgyzstan, stated during a July 2007 interview that Islam is increasingly taking root across the nation.
