British government officials noted in a report written in 1977: "It has not and never had any authority whatsoever to issue diplomas or degrees and the dean is sought by the authorities 'for questioning'."
His airman certificate, however, records that he qualified to fly only gliders rather than powered aircraft and gave up his certificate when he could not afford the renewal fee.
During the 1970s, Hubbard faced an increasing number of legal threats.
He was impressed by the Great Wall of China near Beijing, but concluded of the Chinese: "They smell of all the baths they didn't take.
'''Lafayette Ronald Hubbard''' (March 13, 1911&nbsp;– January 24, 1986), better known as '''L.
Although he was best known for his fantasy and science fiction stories, Hubbard wrote in a wide variety of genres, including adventure fiction, aviation, travel, mysteries, westerns and even romance.
Garrison refused to write a "puff piece" and declared that he would not "repeat all the falsehoods they the Church of Scientology had perpetuated over the years".
Hubbard also traveled to the United Kingdom to establish his control over a Dianetics group in London.
On one occasion, van Vogt saw Hubbard taking a lump sum of $56,000 (equivalent to $0.5 million at 2010 prices) out of the Los Angeles Foundation's proceeds.
This came well after Hubbard had promised that Dianetics would provide "a cure for the very ailments that plagued the author himself then and throughout his life, including allergies, arthritis, ulcers and heart problems".
Van Vogt temporarily abandoned writing and became the head of the newly established Los Angeles branch of the Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation.
Hubbard decided to relocate back to the United States to establish a "land base" for the Sea Org in Florida.
Hubbard's troubles increased in February 1978 when a French court convicted him in absentia for obtaining money under false pretenses.
Hubbard ordered his staff to find "lurid, blood sex crime actual evidence  on Scientology's attackers".
Hubbard introduced a device called an E-meter that he presented as having, as Miller puts it, "an almost mystical power to reveal an individual's innermost thoughts".
According to church materials, his travels were funded by his "wealthy grandfather".
An October 1945 Naval Board found that Hubbard was "considered physically qualified to perform duty ashore, preferably within the continental United States".
He was said to be the "center of most turbulence in our organization" and "active and dangerous".
If one has the right to communicate, then one must also have the right to not receive communication from another.
His literary career began with contributions to the George Washington University student newspaper, ''The University Hatchet'', as a reporter for a few months in 1931.
Campbell told Winter:
According to Dorthe Refslund Christensen, Hubbard's hagiography directly compares him with Buddha.
The Church of Scientology describes Hubbard in hagiographic terms, and he portrayed himself as a pioneering explorer, world traveler, and nuclear physicist with expertise in a wide range of disciplines, including photography, art, poetry, and philosophy.
Hubbard expanded upon the basics of Dianetics to construct a spiritually oriented (though at this stage not religious) doctrine based on the concept that the true self of a person was a thetan—an immortal, omniscient and potentially omnipotent entity.
The ''Apollo'' was banned from several Spanish ports and was expelled from Curaçao in October 1975.
Hubbard's health deteriorated significantly during this period.
Hubbard took three major new initiatives in the face of these challenges.
It consisted of a brief stop-over in a couple of Chinese ports before traveling on to Guam, where he stayed for six weeks before returning home.
French prosecutors charged him and the French Church of Scientology with fraud and customs violations in 1972.
The Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater, Florida, was secretly acquired as the location for the "land base".
This is how religion works.
However, he was ruled out of consideration due to his near-sightedness.
Although Hubbard's mother also went to Guam, Hubbard himself did not accompany them but was placed in his grandparents' care in Helena, Montana to complete his schooling.
Hubbard is the Guinness World Record holder for the most published author, with 1,084 works, most translated book (70 languages for ''The Way to Happiness'') and most audiobooks (185 as of April 2009).
The ruling prompted Purcell and the other directors of the Wichita Foundation to file for voluntary bankruptcy in February 1952.
Hubbard, his wife Mary Sue and his secretary John Galusha became the trustees of all three corporations.
He was advised that he was at risk of being extradited to France.
The FBI had a lengthy file on him, including a 1951 interview with an agent who considered him a "mental case".
Hubbard and his collaborators decided to announce Dianetics in Campbell's ''Astounding Science Fiction'' instead.
Scientology franchises became Churches of Scientology and some auditors began dressing as clergymen, complete with clerical collars.
According to Hubbard, Sara was "currently intimate with communists but evidently under coercion.
He was described as being of doubtful sanity, having a persecution complex and displaying strong indications of paranoid schizophrenia with delusions of grandeur.
The FBI did not take Hubbard seriously: an agent annotated his correspondence with the comment, "Appears mental."
He disinherited two of his other children.
It warned that "four of the first fifteen people who read it went insane" and that it would be "released only on sworn statement not to permit other readers to read it.
The American Psychological Association criticized Hubbard's claims as "not supported by empirical evidence".
A chain-smoker, he also suffered from bursitis and excessive weight, and had a prominent growth on his forehead.
He was "severely wounded and was taken crippled and blinded" to a military hospital, where he "worked his way back to fitness, strength and full perception in less than two years, using only what he knew and could determine about Man and his relationship to the universe".
For the last two years of his life, Hubbard lived in a luxury Blue Bird motorhome on Whispering Winds, a 160-acre ranch near Creston, California.
After returning from Alaska, Hubbard applied to join the United States Navy.
Following one incident in which the rudder of the ''Royal Scotman'' was damaged during a storm, Hubbard ordered the ship's entire crew to be reduced to a "condition of liability" and wear gray rags tied to their arms.
Hubbard's literary earnings helped him to support his new wife, Margaret "Polly" Grubb.
He was the only child of Ledora May ( Waterbury), who had trained as a teacher, and Harry Ross Hubbard, a former United States Navy officer.
The Mexican government complained and Hubbard was relieved of command.
The Church of Scientology has nonetheless acknowledged Hubbard's involvement with the OTO; a 1969 statement, written by Hubbard himself, said:
The title character in the 2012 film ''The Master'' drew comparisons with Hubbard.
''Magician's'' engine broke down only two days after setting off in July 1940.
At the start of March 1966, Hubbard created the Guardian's Office (GO), a new agency within the Church of Scientology that was headed by his wife Mary Sue.
Scientologists claim he "made the first complete mineralogical survey of Puerto Rico" as a means of "augmenting his father's pay with a mining venture", during which he "sluiced inland rivers and crisscrossed the island in search of elusive gold" as well as carrying out "much ethnological work amongst the interior villages and native hillsmen".
The expedition consisted of Hubbard and his wife—the children were left at South Colby—aboard his ketch ''Magician''.
He further claimed that “skills have been developed for their invariable cure.” Dianetics was duly launched in ''Astounding's'' May 1950 issue and on May 9, Hubbard's companion book ''Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health'' was published by Hermitage House.
However, he remained short of money and his son, L. Ron Hubbard Jr, testified later that Hubbard was dependent on his own father and Margaret's parents for money and his writings, which he was paid at a penny per word, never garnered him any more than $10,000 prior to the founding of Scientology.
Scientology biographies describe this encounter as giving Hubbard training in a particular scientific approach to the mind, which he found unsatisfying.
Scientology texts describe him as becoming "well established as an essayist" even before he had concluded college.
Hubbard also claimed to have written ''Dive Bomber'' (1941), Cecil B. DeMille's ''The Plainsman'' (1936) and John Ford's ''Stagecoach'' (1939).
From about 1970, Hubbard was attended aboard ship by the children of Sea Org members, organized as the Commodore's Messenger Organization (CMO).
According to one of his friends at the time, Robert MacDonald Ford, the Hubbards were "in fairly dire straits for money" but sustained themselves on the income from Hubbard's writing.
Hubbard began to make the first public mentions of what was to become Dianetics.
The aims of the "Caribbean Motion Picture Expedition" were stated as being to explore and film the pirate "strongholds and bivouacs of the Spanish Main" and to "collect whatever one collects for exhibits in museums".
What they found was rather different from the image.
However, contemporary records show that his grandfather, Lafayette Waterbury, was a veterinarian, not a rancher, and was not wealthy.
On August 10, 1946, Hubbard bigamously married Sara, while still married to Polly.
In October 1947 he wrote:
He was removed both times when his superiors found him incapable of command.
At the same time, Hubbard was still developing Scientology's doctrines.
They are actively preventing any effectiveness in this field."
Jack Horner, who became a Dianetics auditor in 1950, later said, "He was very impressive, dedicated and amusing.
Marco Frenschkowski notes that "non-Scientologist readers immediately recognize some parts of Hubbard's life are here systematically left out: no information whatsoever is given about his private life (his marriages, divorces, children), his legal affairs and so on."
They are divided about how far Hubbard's expedition actually traveled, whether  or .
Following Hubbard's death, Bridge Publications has published several stand-alone biographical accounts of his life.
His expedition came to an end when Britain, Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Venezuela all closed their ports to his fleet.
Drug addiction set in fall 1950.
It was undertaken over several nights in February and March 1946 in order to summon an "elemental" who would participate in further sex magic.
The Church of Scientology attributes this decision to the activities on the ''Apollo'' having "outgrown the ship's capacity".
Parsons received only a $2,900 promissory note from Hubbard and returned home "shattered".
The 1950s saw Scientology growing steadily.
Hubbard renamed the ships after Greek gods—the ''Royal Scotman'' was rechristened ''Apollo''—and he praised the recently established military dictatorship.
It is this latter corollary of the right to communicate that gives us our right to privacy.” Scientologists were also required to write "Knowledge Reports" on each other, reporting transgressions or misapplications of Scientology methods.
Behind the attacks, stated Hubbard, lay a vast conspiracy of "psychiatric front groups" secretly controlling governments: "Every single lie, false charge and attack on Scientology has been traced directly to this group's members.
A leading rocket propulsion researcher at the California Institute of Technology and a founder of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Parsons led a double life as an avid occultist and Thelemite, follower of the English ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley and leader of a lodge of Crowley's magical order, Ordo Templi Orientis (OTO).
Winter became disillusioned and wrote that he had never seen a single convincing Clear: "I have seen some individuals who are supposed to have been 'clear,' but their behavior does not conform to the definition of the state.
Hubbard lived over a hundred miles from the Blackfeet reservation.
While some sources support Scientology's claim of Hubbard's blood brotherhood, other sources say that the tribe did not practice blood brotherhood and no evidence has been found that he had ever been a Blackfeet blood brother.
As Atack comments, he was "a charismatic figure who compelled the devotion of those around him".
Two years later he announced the release of OT3, the "Wall of Fire", revealing the secrets of an immense disaster that had occurred "on this planet, and on the other seventy-five planets which form this Confederacy, seventy-five million years ago".
An early 1950s Scientology publication offered signed "gold-bound and locked" copies for the sum of $1,500 apiece (equivalent to about $29,000 now).
Their collaboration ended after less than a year when they fell out over the future direction of Dianetics.
It ran into trouble even before it left the port of Baltimore: Ten participants quit and storms blew the ship far off course to Bermuda.
In addition to his wife Mary Sue, he was accompanied by all four of his children by her, though not his first son Nibs, who had defected from Scientology in late 1959.
Sociologist Roy Wallis comments that the report drastically changed public perceptions of Scientology:
The following year, Harry Ross Hubbard was posted to Puget Sound Naval Shipyard at Bremerton, Washington.
A week later, Allied Enterprises was dissolved.
So you see I've got to do something about it and at the same time strengthen the old financial position."
His critics, including his own son Ronald DeWolf, have characterized him as a liar, a charlatan, and mentally unstable, though DeWolf later repudiated those statements.
He wrote a "warts and all" biography while Armstrong quit Scientology, taking five boxes of papers with him.
His Congressman, Warren G. Magnuson, wrote to President Roosevelt to recommend Hubbard as "a gentleman of reputation" who was "a respected explorer" and had "marine masters papers for more types of vessels than any other man in the United States".
Moreover, an individual supposed to have been 'clear' has undergone a relapse into conduct which suggests an incipient psychosis."
The Danish historian of religions Mikael Rothstein describes Scientology as "a movement focused on the figure of Hubbard".
Hubbard suffered further ill-health, including chronic pancreatitis, during his residence at Whispering Winds.
Hubbard stated: “Communication, however, is a two-way flow.
According to the Church,
It asserts that the records are incomplete and perhaps falsified "to conceal Hubbard's secret activities as an intelligence officer".
In an editorial, Campbell said: "Its power is almost unbelievable; it proves the mind not only can but does rule the body completely; following the sharply defined basic laws set forth, physical ills such as ulcers, asthma and arthritis can be cured, as can all other psychosomatic ills."
However, it was saved by Don Purcell, a millionaire businessman and Dianeticist who agreed to support a new Foundation in Wichita, Kansas.
Biographical accounts published by the Church of Scientology describe Hubbard as "a child prodigy of sorts" who rode a horse before he could walk and was able to read and write by the age of four.
Many of those who knew him spoke of being impressed by his personal charisma.
The program ended in failure when it became caught up in internal Moroccan politics, and Hubbard left the country hastily in December 1972.
To date, there has not been a single volume comprehensive official biography published
The City University of New York's American Religious Identification Survey found that by 2009 only 25,000 Americans identified as Scientologists.
During a journey to Washington, D.C. in 1923 Hubbard learned of Freudian psychology from Commander Joseph "Snake" Thompson, a U.S. Navy psychoanalyst and medic.
The book soundtrack ''Space Jazz'' was released in 1982.
In 1965, he designated several existing Scientology courses as confidential, repackaging them as the first of the esoteric "OT levels".
Hubbard blamed the expedition's problems on the captain: "the ship's dour Captain Garfield proved himself far less than a Captain Courageous, requiring Ron Hubbard's hand at both the helm and the charts."
Lafayette Ronald Hubbard was born in 1911, in Tilden, Nebraska.
In late 1948 Hubbard and Sara moved to Savannah, Georgia.
Aleister Crowley strongly criticized Parsons's actions, writing: "Suspect Ron playing confidence trick—Jack Parsons weak fool—obvious victim prowling swindlers."
His attitude was that if you took your flag down the Japanese would not know one boat from another, so he tied up at the dock, went ashore and wandered around by himself for three days."
He suffered serious injuries in a motorcycle accident in 1973 and had a heart attack in 1975 that required him to take anticoagulant drugs for the next year.
He attended George Washington University in Washington, D.C. at the start of the 1930s, before dropping out and beginning his career as a prolific writer of pulp fiction stories.
His daughter Katherine presented a rather different version: his wife had refused to uproot their children from their home in Bremerton, Washington, to join him in California.
Back on Guam, Hubbard spent much of his time writing dozens of short stories and essays and failed the Naval Academy entrance examination.
A year later, in 1968, he unveiled OT levels 4 to 6 and began delivering OT training courses to Scientologists aboard the ''Royal Scotman''.
The Hubbards lived for a while in Laytonsville, Maryland, but were chronically short of money.
In November 1987, the British journalist and writer Russell Miller published ''Bare-faced Messiah'', the first full-length biography of L. Ron Hubbard.
They were mainly young girls dressed in hot pants and halter tops, who were responsible for running errands for Hubbard such as lighting his cigarettes, dressing him or relaying his verbal commands to other members of the crew.
He repeatedly wrote to the Veterans Administration (VA) asking for an increase in his war pension.
Over the next six years, pulp magazines published around 140 of his short stories under a variety of pen names, including Winchester Remington Colt, Kurt von Rachen, René Lafayette, Joe Blitz and Legionnaire 148.
He intended to write an exposé of Hubbard and sent a copy of his findings and key records to a number of contacts but was unable to find a publisher.
After two GO agents were caught in the Washington, D.C. headquarters of the IRS, the FBI carried out simultaneous raids on GO offices in Los Angeles and Washington, D.C. on July 7, 1977.
After Hubbard created the Sea Org "fleet" in early 1967 it began an eight-year voyage, sailing from port to port in the Mediterranean Sea and eastern North Atlantic.
Control such agencies."
It called Hubbard "a powerful influence" in the Northwest and said that he was "well known in many parts of the world and has considerable influence in the Caribbean and Alaska".
It is advertised as a "Biographic Encyclopedia" and is primarily authored by the official biographer, Dan Sherman.
Hubbard was described as "a key figure" in writing organizations, "making him politically potent nationally".
Although many aspects of Hubbard's life story are disputed, there is general agreement about its basic outline.
In September 1985, the IRS notified the Church that it was considering indicting Hubbard for tax fraud.
She criticized Hubbard for creating "a temperate zone voodoo, in its inelasticity, unexplainable procedures, and mindless group euphoria".
(1987) and Jon Atack's ''A Piece of Blue Sky'' (1990).
His university records indicate that his exposure to "nuclear physics" consisted of one class in "atomic and molecular phenomena" for which he earned an "F" grade.
He also sought to exert political influence, advising Scientologists to vote against Richard Nixon in the 1960 presidential election and establishing a Department of Government Affairs "to bring government and hostile philosophies or societies into a state of complete compliance with the goals of Scientology".
The GO carried out covert campaigns on his behalf such as Operation Bulldozer Leak, intended "to effectively spread the rumor that will lead Government, media, and individual Suppressive Persons to conclude that LRH has no control of the C of S and no legal liability for Church activity".
In 2014, Hubbard was cited by the Smithsonian magazine as one of the 100 most significant Americans of all time, as one of the eleven religious figures on that list.
The Church of Spiritual Technology (CST), a sister organization of the Church of Scientology, has engraved Hubbard's entire corpus of Scientology and Dianetics texts on steel tablets stored in titanium containers.
The copyrights of his works and much of his estate and wealth were willed to the Church of Scientology.
He successfully graduated from the school in June 1930 and entered the university the following September.
The Church of Scientology issued "the only authorized LRH Biography" in October 1977 (it has since been followed by the Sherman "Biographic Encyclopedia").
According to Miller, this was not true.
Any individual breaking away from Scientology and setting up his own group was to be shut down:
Charge enough and we'd be swamped.").
On September 24, 1952, only a few weeks after arriving in London, Hubbard's wife Mary Sue gave birth to her first child, a daughter whom they named Diana Meredith de Wolfe Hubbard.
The ship stopped at Manila in the Philippines before traveling on to Qingdao (Tsingtao) in China.
It was not until 1947 that his first wife learned that he had remarried.
He promulgated Scientology through a series of lectures, bulletins and books such as ''A History of Man'' ("a cold-blooded and factual account of your last sixty trillion years") and ''Scientology: 8-8008'' ("With this book, the ability to make one's body old or young at will, the ability to heal the ill without physical contact, the ability to cure the insane and the incapacitated, is set forth for the physician, the layman, the mathematician and the physicist.")
They retrieved wiretap equipment, burglary tools and some 90,000 pages of incriminating documents.
Ron Hubbard''' (, ) and often referred to by his initials, '''LRH''', was an American author and the founder of the Church of Scientology.
A small group of Scientology officials and physician Dr. Eugene Denk attended to him before his death, for a number of ailments including chronic pancreatitis.
According to the Church of Scientology, Hubbard was "called to Hollywood" to work on film scripts in the mid-1930s, although Scientology accounts differ as to exactly when this was (whether 1935, 1936 or 1937).
Finally, at the end of 1966, Hubbard acquired his own fleet of ships.
His medical records state that he was hospitalized with an acute duodenal ulcer rather than a war injury.
Hubbard's unofficial biographer Russell Miller writes that neither the United States Geological Survey nor the Puerto Rican Department of Natural Resources have any record of any such expedition.
In the late 1970s two men began to assemble a very different picture of Hubbard's life.
Hubbard resigned immediately and accused Purcell of having been bribed by the American Medical Association to destroy Dianetics.
Hubbard's failure to sell ''Excalibur'' depressed him; he told his wife in an October 1938 letter: "Writing action pulp doesn't have much agreement with what I want to do because it retards my progress by demanding incessant attention and, further, actually weakens my name.
Only six weeks after setting up the Hubbard College and marrying a staff member, 18-year-old Mary Sue Whipp, Hubbard closed it down and moved with his new bride to Phoenix, Arizona.
''The New Yorker'' reported in February 2011 that the Scientology document was considered by federal archivists to be a forgery.
Hubbard later denied founding the Church of Scientology, and to this day, Scientologists maintain that the "founding church" was actually the Church of Scientology of California, established on February 18, 1954, by Scientologist Burton Farber.
According to his own account, he "was abandoned by family and friends as a supposedly hopeless cripple and a probable burden upon them for the rest of my days".
Nevertheless, the German Protestant theologian and history of religion scholar Marco Frenschkowski wrote in the ''Marburg Journal of Religion'' that the publicly available copies of Hubbard's military records (of which Frenschkowski has a complete collection) are "much nearer" in his assessment to Hubbard's statements about his military career than Miller's Bare-Faced Messiah.
On May 7, 1934, she gave birth prematurely to a son who was named Lafayette Ronald Hubbard, Jr. and the nickname "His Nibs", invariably shortened to "Nibs".
His second visit was a family holiday which took Hubbard and his parents to China via the Philippines in 1928.
He suffered a  stroke on January 17, 1986, and died a week later.
At the time, ''The Apollo Stars'', a musical group founded by Hubbard and made up entirely of shipbound members of the Sea Org, was offering free on-pier concerts in an attempt to promote Scientology, and the riot occurred at one of these events.
Although Dianetics was not cheap, a great many people were nonetheless willing to pay; van Vogt later recalled "doing little but tear open envelopes and pull out $500 checks from people who wanted to take an auditor's course".
By carrying out a process he called "auditing", a person could be regressed through his engrams to re-experiencing past experiences.
His body was cremated and the ashes were scattered at sea.
In 2012, Ohio State University professor Hugh Urban asserted that Hubbard had adopted many of his theories from the early to mid 20th century astral projection pioneer Sylvan Muldoon stating that Hubbard's description of exteriorizing the thetan is extremely similar if not identical to the descriptions of astral projection in occult literature popularized by Muldoon's widely read  Phenomena of Astral Projection (1951) (co-written with Hereward Carrington)  and that Muldoon's description of the astral body as being connected to the physical body by a long thin, elastic cord is virtually identical to the one described in Hubbard's "Excalibur" vision.
L. Ron Hubbard, Jr. had become estranged, changed his name to "Ronald DeWolf" and, in 1982, sued unsuccessfully for control of his father's estate.
i.e., job penetration, janitor penetration, suitable guises utilizing covers."
Hubbard also faced other practitioners moving into leadership positions within the Dianetics community.
In the spring of 1936 they moved to Bremerton, Washington.
Scientology claims he "solved his finances, and his desire to travel by writing anything that came to hand" and to have earned an "astronomical" rate of pay for the times.
His writings became the guiding texts for the Church of Scientology and a number of affiliated organizations that address such diverse topics as business administration, literacy and drug rehabilitation.
Ford later said that Hubbard had written the letter himself: "I don't know why Ron wanted a letter.
While he did not graduate from George Washington, his time there subsequently became important because, as George Malko puts it, "many of his researches and published conclusions have been supported by his claims to be not only a graduate engineer, but 'a member of the first United States course in formal education in what is called today nuclear physics.'"
Branches or "orgs" were organized as franchises, rather like a fast food restaurant chain.
David G. Bromley of the University of Virginia comments that the real Hubbard has been transformed into a "prophetic persona", "LRH", which acts as the basis for his prophetic authority within Scientology and transcends his biographical history.
Hubbard is presented as a virtually superhuman religious ideal just as Scientology itself is presented as the most important development in human history.
Hubbard insisted humanity was imperiled by the forces of "aberration", which were the result of engrams carried by the immortal thetans for billions of years.
and "Have you ever had unkind thoughts about L. Ron Hubbard?"
After establishing a career as a writer, becoming best known for his science fiction and fantasy stories, he developed a system called Dianetics which was first expounded in book form in May 1950.
