The other feared the lake was being emptied."
Situated below Lake Huron, Erie's primary inlet is the Detroit River.
A variety of other species are taken in smaller quantities by both commercial and sport fleets.
There periodically is a ''dead zone'', or region of low oxygen, in the lake whose exact location varies.
Generally, the lowest levels are in January and February, and the highest in June or July, although there have been exceptions.
In past years, lake ice was so thick that it was possible to drive over it or go sailing on iceboats; but in the first decade of the 21st century, the ice has not been thick enough for such activities.
In 1885, lake winds were so strong that water levels dropped substantially, sometimes by as much as two feet, so that at ports such as Toledo, watercraft could not load coal or depart the port.
Environmentalists and biologists study lake conditions via installations such as the Franz Theodore Stone Laboratory on Gibraltar Island.
It is even possible to  build bonfires on the ice.
Management of the fishery is by consensus of all management agencies with an interest in the resource and include the states of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan and the province of Ontario, and work under the mandate of the Great Lakes Fishery Commission.
Lake Erie is primarily fed by the Detroit River (from Lake Huron and Lake St. Clair) and drains via the Niagara River and Niagara Falls into Lake Ontario.
The Erie tribe (from whom the lake takes its name) lived along the southern edge, while the Neutrals (also known as Attawandaron) lived along the northern shore.
Meanwhile, at the western end of the lake, Toledo experienced a similar drop in water level.
It is illegal for swimmers younger than 14 to attempt such a crossing.
Not all walleyes thrived.
The club had a basement casino with poker tables and slot machines.
It is possible to fish off piers in winter for a fish called the burbot, also known by pseudonyms such as eelpout, mudblow, lawyer fish, cusk, or freshwater cod which looks "ugly" but tastes great; the burbot make a midwinter spawning run and is reportedly one of "Erie's glacial relics."
They have been described as "greedy giants that suck plankton from the water with the brutal efficiency of vacuum cleaners" and scientists worry that they may unravel the "aquatic food web" by crowding out other species.
The lake is dotted by distinct lighthouses.
The lake has been plagued with a number of invasive species, including zebra and quagga mussels, the goby and the grass carp.
There, the sandy dry lake bed soil was not enough to support large trees with the exception of a few species of oaks, forming a rare oak savanna.
As the power of the Iroquois waned during the last quarter of the 17th century, several other, mainly Anishinaabe Native American tribes, displaced them from the territories they claimed on the north shore of the lake.
The invasive plant species that fill Lake Erie consist mainly of Eurasian Milfoil, and Purple Loosestrife,
At its deepest point Lake Erie is  deep.
Lake Erie's environmental health has been an ongoing concern for decades, with issues such as overfishing, pollution, algae blooms and eutrophication generating headlines.
The Lake Erie fishery was one of the first fisheries in the world managed on individual transferable quotas and features mandatory daily catch reporting and intensive auditing of the catch reporting system.
One account suggests that climate change is causing greater evaporation of lake water, leading to warmer temperatures as well as ice in winter which is less thick or nonexistent, fueling concerns that "Erie appears to be shrinking" and is the most likely candidate among the five Great Lakes to "turn into a festering mud puddle."
Since the border between the two nations is largely unpatrolled, it is possible for people to cross undetected from one country to the other, in either direction, by boat.
By the 1980s, there were about 130 fishing vessels with about 3,000 workers, but commercial fishing was declining rapidly, particularly from the American side.
The last of these lakes to form, Lake Warren, existed between about 13,000 and 12,000 years ago.
The finding of the well-preserved wreck of the Canadian-built British troop transport warship ''Caledonia'', sunk during the War of 1812, has led to accusations about plundering of the site and legal wrangling about whether the vessel should be resurfaced in time for the 2013 war's bicentennial.
Buffalo typically gets  of snow each winter, and sometimes ten feet (3&nbsp;m) of snow; the snowiest city is Syracuse, New York, which can receive heavy snowfall from both the lake effect process and large coastal cyclones.
It is the southernmost, shallowest, and smallest by volume of the Great Lakes and therefore also has the shortest average water residence time.
The 1972 Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement also significantly reduced the dumping and runoff of phosphorus into the lake.
Some of the rebels stationed themselves in the U.S. and crossed the ice from Sandusky Bay to Pelee Island wearing "tattered overcoats and worn-out boots", and carrying muskets, pitchforks, and swords, but the islanders had already fled.
Since the 1970s environmental regulation has led to a great increase in water quality and the return of economically important fish species such as walleye and other biological life.
The outlook was gloomy:
Growth of organisms in the lake is then spiked to the point that oxygen levels are depleted.
According to chemical engineer Peter Douglas, there is sufficient storage space beneath Lake Erie to hold between 15 and 50 years of liquid CO2 emissions from the 4,000 megawatt Nanticoke coal plant.
Several islands are found in the western end of the lake; these belong to Ohio except for Pelee Island and eight neighboring islands, which are part of Ontario.
One account suggests 130 people drowned while another suggests about 20 drowned.
Known as Steel Winds, the project currently houses 14 turbines capable of generating up to 35 megawatts of electricity.
Here's an 1895 newspaper account in which critics of commercial fishing issued dire predictions and calling for government action to solve the problem:
This ancient drainage system was destroyed by the first major glacier in the area, while it deepened and enlarged the lowland areas, allowing water to settle and form a lake.
One report suggests there are more "wrecks per square mile" than any other freshwater location, including wrecks from Native American watercraft.
Major cities along Lake Erie include Buffalo; Erie, Pennsylvania; Toledo, Ohio; and Cleveland, Ohio.
Common non-indigenous fish species include the rainbow smelt, alewife, white perch and common carp.
Occasionally there have been mass die-offs of certain species of fish, sometimes for reasons unknown, such as many numbers of rainbow smelt in May 2010.
There were incidents of the oily surfaces of tributary rivers emptying into Lake Erie catching fire: in 1969, Cleveland's Cuyahoga River erupted in flames, chronicled in a ''Time'' magazine article which lamented a tendency to use rivers flowing through major cities as "convenient, free sewers"; the Detroit River caught fire on another occasion.
During the 19th century, ships could enter the Buffalo River and travel the Erie Canal eastward to Albany then south to New York City along the Hudson River.
There have been incidents of birds dying from botulism, in 2000, and in 2002.
In 1984, Ohio sold 27,000 nonresident fishing permits, and sport fishing was described as big business.
Because it is the shallowest, it is also the warmest of the Great Lakes, and in 1999 this almost became a problem for two nuclear power plants which require cool lake water to keep their reactors cool.
Ships headed eastward can take the Welland Canal and a series of eight locks descending  to Lake Ontario which takes about 12 hours, according to one source.
There are efforts to identify shipwreck sites and survey the lake floor to map the location of underwater sites, possibly for further study or exploration.
The island-village of Put-in-Bay on South Bass Island attracts young crowds who sometimes wear "red bucket hats" and are prone to "break off cartwheels in the park" and general merriment.
Lake Erie was carved out by glacier ice, and in its current form is less than 4,000 years old, which is a short span in geological terms.
In a freak incident in 2009, warming temperatures and winds of 35 miles per hour and currents pushing eastward dislodged a miles-wide ice floe which broke away from the shore, trapping more than 130 fishermen offshore; one man died while the rest were rescued by helicopters or boats.
The improved farming practices, which were voluntary, were followed for a while, resulting in remarkable recovery of the lake in the 1970s.
The "waves build very quickly", according to other accounts.
The lake has been a "bustling thoroughfare" for maritime vessels for centuries.
Much grape juice is produced in this region.
The Compact was signed into law by President George W. Bush in September 2008.
Navigation downstream is provided by the Welland Canal, part of the Saint Lawrence Seaway.
In 2003, divers discovered the steamer ''Canobie'' near Presque Isle, which sunk in 1921.
The Canadian region of Lake Erie's north shore is becoming a more prominent wine region as well; it has been dubbed the Lake Erie North Shore, or LENS region, and includes Pelee Island, and since it is farther north than comparable wine-growing areas in the world, the season is longer in terms of light.
An important business was fishing.
New sewer lines were built.
There was a tentative exploratory plan to capture CO2, compress it to a liquid form, and pump it a half-mile (800 m) beneath Lake Erie's surface underneath the porous rock structure.
Clevelanders approved a bond issue by 2 to 1 to seriously upgrade Cleveland's sewage system.
One estimate was that $5&nbsp;billion was spent to upgrade plants to treat sewage.
A report in ''Time'' magazine in 1969 described the lake as a "gigantic cesspool" since only three of 62 beaches were rated "completely safe for swimming".
During this twelve-month period water levels ranged from  to the Chart Datum.
A balloonist named John Steiner of Philadelphia made an ambitious trip across the lake in 1857.
The lake effect ends or its effect is reduced, however, when the lake freezes over.
The cold conditions make diving difficult and "strenuous" requiring divers with skill and experience.
There was a legend of an Indian woman named Huldah who, despairing over her lost British lover, hurled herself from a high rock from Pelee Island.
The fish can reach 5 feet 11&nbsp;inches (1.8 m) in length and "survive out of water for four days" and "has a mouth full of teeth that can shear fish in half" and can "eat ducks and small mammals."
All these sources contribute nutrients, primarily phosphorus, to the lake.
Some introductions have been seen as beneficial such as the introduction of Pacific salmon.
Storm-driven seiches can cause damage onshore.
There was concern in 2007 that snakehead fish could get into the Great Lakes area.
According to one report, the Canadian town of Port Dover is the home of the lake's largest fishing fleet, and the town features miniature golf, dairy bars, French-fry stands, and restaurants serving perch.
Strong winds have caused lake currents to shift sediment on the bottom, leading to "wickedly shifting sandbars" which have been a source of shipwrecks.
They went through the cities of Cleveland, Erie, Windsor, Detroit and Toledo as well as resort towns, vineyards, and cornfields.
It should be noted however the snakehead fish can not live in a lake that has completely frozen over.
Here's one account of ice life around Put-in-Bay:
During the War of 1812, Oliver Hazard Perry captured an entire British fleet in 1813 near Put-in-Bay, Ohio, despite having inferior numbers.
Lake Erie has a complex ecosystem with many species in constant interaction.
In that year, the United States and Canada established water pollution limits in an International Water Quality Agreement.
However, there are reports that some Canadian commercial fishermen are dissatisfied with fishing quotas, and have sued their government about this matter, and there have been complaints that the legislative body writing the quotas is "dominated by the U.S." and that sport fishing interests are favored at the expense of commercial fishing interests.
A YouTube video mentioned in a newspaper account has a man claiming that the fish could "bite your entire hand off".
For decades after those wars, the land around eastern Lake Erie was claimed and utilized by the Iroquois as a hunting ground.
Sometimes the clouds of mayflies have caused power outages as well as causing roads to become slippery with squashed insects.
According to one estimate, 34 to 36 inches of water evaporates each year from the surface of the lake, which allows for rainfall and other precipitation in surrounding areas.
Birds affected included grebes, common and red-breasted mergansers, loons, diving ducks, ring-billed gulls and herring gulls.
Short-term level changes are often caused by seiches that are particularly high when southwesterly winds blow across the length of the lake during storms.
The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.
A second report focuses on the zebra mussels as being the cause of "big oxygen-poor dead zones" since they filter so much sediment that they have resulted in the growth of algae.
Possible causes for declines in bird populations are farming practices, loss of habitats, soil depletion and erosion, and toxic chemicals.
A storm around Christmas in 2001 pounded Buffalo with seven feet of snow.
The Ontario fishery is one of the most intensively managed in the world.
In 1992, there were accounts of fishermen catching 8, 10, and 12 pound walleyes, and that the "runt of a five-man daily limit of 25 walleye might be a nuisance of 5 pounds."
Many industrial and municipal sources have since then been greatly reduced.
This project is planned to start in 2010 and will be completed by 2020.
Cleanup efforts were described in 1979 as a notable environmental success story, suggesting that the cumulative effect of legislation, studies, and bans had reversed the effects of pollution:
The lake is "loaded with superstars" such as steelhead, walleye (American usage) or pickerel (Canadian usage), smallmouth bass, perch, as well as bass, trout, salmon, whitefesh, smelt, and many others.
Long distance swimmers have swum across the lake to set records; for example, a 15-year-old amputee swam the  stretch across the lake in 2001.
Another report cited Ohio's Maumee River as the main source of polluted runoff of phosphorus from industries, municipalities, tributaries and agriculture, and in 2008, satellite images showed the algal bloom heading toward Pelee Island, and possibly heading to Lake Erie's central basin.
In 2010, Canadian police arrested persons crossing the border illegally from the United States to Canada, near the Ontario town of Amherstburg.
In addition, the Great Lakes Institute of the University of Windsor has experts who study issues such as lake sediment pollution and the flow of contaminants such as phosphorus.
In western Pennsylvania, a wildlife reserve was established in 1991 in Springfield Township for hiking, fishing, cross-country skiing and walking along the beach.
A second estimate was that the fishing industry was valued at more than $7 billion.
The wreck belongs to the state of Ohio and "salvaging it is illegal" but divers can visit it after it is surveyed.
The beach is gently sloping with no sharp drop-offs or rip currents, and is usually cooled by southwest breezes, even on the hottest days.
Up until the end of the 1950s, the most commonly caught commercial fish (more than 50% of the commercial catch) was a subspecies of the walleye known as the blue walleye (''Sander vitreus glaucus'') sometimes erroneously called "blue pike".
As many as three glaciers advanced and retreated over the land causing temporary lakes to form in the time periods in between each of them.
He was described in ''The New York Times'' as an ''eronaut'' or ''aeronaut''; powered boats were called ''propellers''; and fast was deemed ''railroad speed''.
It had support from both political parties, including former United States Senator George Voinovich (R-OH) and former Governor Jennifer Granholm (D-MI), but is not popular in the southwestern states due to frequent drought conditions and water scarcity.
When the lake freezes over, this usually shuts down the lake effect snowfall.
In 2009, there was a confirmed instance of a sturgeon being caught, which was returned to the lake alive, and there are hopes that the population of sturgeons is resurging.
Sometimes fierce waves springing up unexpectedly have led to dramatic rescues; in one instance, a Cleveland resident trying to measure the dock near his house became trapped but was rescued by a fire department diver from Avon Lake, Ohio:
In this area there are many greenhouses which produce a "variety of tropical plants rarely cultivated so far north", including some species of cacti, because of the lake's tempering effect.
The deep cool waters that spawn the best fishing is in the Canadian side of the lake.
The trip highlights were the "small port towns and rural farmlands of southern Ontario".
One account suggests that bird populations are in trouble, notably the woodland warbler, which had population declines around 60 percent in 2008.
Because each lake had a different volume of water their shorelines rested at differing elevations.
While commercial fishing declined, sport fishing has remained.
Later, there was a battle on the ice with the Royal 32nd regiment, with the rebels being driven to retreat.
The high water records were set from 1986 (April) through January 1987.
The insects mate over a 72-hour period from June through September; they fly in masses up to the shore, mate in the air, then females lay up to 8,000 eggs each over the water; the eggs sink back down and the cycle repeats.
The warm summer of 1999 caused lake temperatures to come close to the 85&nbsp;°F (29&nbsp;°C) limit necessary to keep the plants cool.
On February 16, 2010, meteorologists reported that the lake had frozen over marking the first time the lake had completely frozen over since the winter of 1995–1996.
The controls were effective, but it took several decades to take effect; by 1999, there were signs that large numbers of mayflies were spotted on the lake after a forty-year absence, signalling a return to health.
''The New York Times'' reporter Donna Marchetti took a bike tour around the Lake Erie perimeter in 1997, traveling  per day and staying at bed and breakfasts.
Unfortunately, the conservative practices are not monitored, and have not been kept up.
At the time of European contact, there were several groups of Iroquoian cultures living around the shores of the eastern end of the lake.
One report suggests that battling between diverse fishing interests began around Lake Michigan and evolved to cover the entire Great Lakes region.
It kills fish and microscopic creatures of the lake's food chain and fouls the water, and may cause further problems in later years for sport and commercial fishing.
There is a concern that Asian carp might enter the Great Lakes region and alter the ecosystem negatively.
One can still see some of these ancient sand dunes that formed in the Oak Openings Region in Northwestern Ohio.
These cause water to pile up at the eastern end of the lake.
In 1991, the 19th-century sidewheeler ''Atlantic'' was discovered.
During the Prohibition years from 1919 to 1933, a "great deal of alcohol crossed Erie" along with "mobster corpses" dumped into the Detroit River which sometimes washed up on the beaches of Pelee Island.
Being the shallowest of the Great Lakes, it is the most likely to freeze and frequently does.
Some outflow occurs via the Welland Canal which diverts water for ship passages from Port Colborne, Ontario on Lake Erie, to St. Catharines on Lake Ontario, an elevation difference of .
But since high levels of pollution were discovered in the 1960s and 1970s, there has been continued debate over the desired intensity of commercial fishing.
Lake Erie experiences its lowest levels in the winter.
An international water rights policy overseen by the Great Lakes Commission, the Compact aims to prevent diversion of water from Great Lakes to distant states, as well as to set standards for use and conservation.
But venturing on Lake Erie ice can be dangerous.
Lake Erie's northern shore is bounded by the Canadian province of Ontario, with the U.S. states of Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York on its southern and easternmost shores and Michigan on the west.
During the history of the lake as a ''fishery'', there has been marked battling by opposing interest groups.
Crystal Beach, in the Village of Crystal Beach, Ontario, at the eastern end of the lake, is one of many South-facing beaches on the Canadian side.
The Commission has been the focus of considerable recrimination, primarily from angler and charter fishing groups in the U.S. which have had a historical antipathy to commercial fishing interests.
Cuts of 30 to 45 percent for certain fish were made in 2007.
In contrast, Lake Michigan has never completely frozen over since the warmer and deeper portion is in the south, although it came close to being totally frozen during three harsh winters over the past century.
It was described as a "spit of sand, trees and swamp that arcs off the shore" with seafood restaurants and beautiful sunsets.
Pelee Island is the largest of Erie's islands, accessible by ferry from Leamington, Ontario and Sandusky, Ohio.
In the 1970s and 1980s, as pollution in the lake declined, counts of walleyes which were caught grew from 112,000 in 1975 to 4.1 million in 1985, with estimates of the numbers of walleyes in the lake at around 33 million in the basin, with many of 8 pounds or more.
Joint U.S.–Canadian agreements pushed 600 of 864 major industrial dischargers to meet requirements for keeping the water clean.
The change toward cleaner water has been in a positive direction since the 1970s.
There were reports of disasters usually from sea captains passing information to reporters; in 1868, the captain of the ''Grace Whitney'' saw a sunken vessel "three men clinging to the masthead" but he could not help because of the gale and high seas.
The Cotps' LEWMS, mentioned above, was also instituted at that time.
Officials warn that if the fish invades, it could "decimate the aquatic food chain".
In 1999, Doppler radar weather sensors detected millions of mayflies heading for Presque Isle in blue and green splotches on the radar in clouds measuring ten miles (16&nbsp;km) long.
Scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration have been studying the lake's blue-green algae blooms, and trying to find ways to predict when they are spreading or where they might hit landfall; typically the blooms arrive late each summer.
One account suggested that Canadian fishermen are "still at it and making money" and they "know how to fish" by "using the old nets."
A lighthouse off the coast of Cleveland, beset with cold lake winter spray, has an unusual artistic icy shape, although sometimes ice prevents the light from being seen by maritime vessels.
Some scientists speculate that the dead zone is a naturally occurring phenomenon.
The shorelines of these lakes left behind high ground sand ridges that cut through swamps and were used as trails for Indians and later, pioneers.
The longest fish in Lake Erie is reportedly the sturgeon which can grow to ten feet long and weight 300 pounds, but it is an endangered species and mostly lives on the bottom of the lake.
The lake's fish population accounts for an estimated 50% of all fish inhabiting the Great Lakes.
These events embarrassed officials and spurred local officials, including Cleveland's director of public utilities, Ben Stefanski, to pursue a massive effort to "scrub the Cuyahoga"; the effort cost $100 million in bonds, according to one estimate.
In 2007, there was a protest against Ontario's energy policy which allows the shipping of coal in the lake; GreenPeace activists climbed a ladder on a freighter and "locked themselves to the conveyor belt device that helps to unload the ship's cargo"; three activists were arrested and the ship was delayed for more than four hours, and anti-coal messages were painted on the ship.
Commercial landings are dominated by yellow perch and walleye, with substantial quantities of rainbow smelt and white bass also taken.
As of the 2010s much of the phosphorus in the lake comes from fertilizer applied to no-till soybean and corn fields but washed into streams by heavy rains.
Currents can pose a problem, and there have been occasional incidents of drownings.
This area is also known as the "thunderstorm capital of Canada" with "breathtaking" lightning displays.
A nonprofit development group near Cleveland was developing plans to construct hundreds of turbines in the lake.
The analysis suggests that in the Lake Erie context, the competition between sport and commercial fishing involves universals and that these conflicts are cultural, not scientific, and therefore not resolvable by reference to ecological data.
The Lake Erie water snake, a subspecies of the northern water snake (''Nerodia sipedon''), lives in the vicinity of Ohio's Put-in-Bay Harbor, and had been put on the threatened species list.
The shallowest section of Lake Erie is the western basin where depths average only ; as a result, "the slightest breeze can kick up lively waves," according to a ''New York Times'' reporter in 2004.
In 1998, the shipwreck of the vessel ''Adventure'' was the first shipwreck registered with the state of Ohio as an "underwater archaeological site"; when it was discovered that the ''Adventure's'' propeller had been removed and given to a junkyard, the propeller was rescued days before being converted to scrap metal and brought back to the dive site and back to its underwater home.
The north coast of Ohio is widely referred to as its nursery capital.
LEWMS made recommendations for reducing point source outflows, as well as reducing farm contributions of phosphorus by changing fertilizer usage, employing "no-till" farming and other conservative practices.
They must come to the surface to breathe via their swim bladder.
Near Port Stanley, there is an Indian village dating from the 16th century known as the ''Southwold Earthworks'' where as many as 800 Neutral Indians once lived; the archaeological remains include double earth walls winding around the grass-covered perimeter.
The glaciers were able to carve away more land on the eastern side of the lowland because the bedrock is made of shale which is softer than the carbonate rocks of dolomite and limestone on the western side.
Each is an inch and a half long; the three main species of mayflies are ''Ephemera simulans'', ''Hexagenia rigida'' and ''Hexagenia limbata''.
The Port of Cleveland generated over $350 million and over 15 million tons of cargo in a recent year.
Sometimes poorly constructed sanitary systems meant that when old mains broke, raw sewage would spill directly into the Cuyahoga and into the lake.
U.S. Route 30 west of Delphos and U.S. Route 20 west of Norwalk and east of Cleveland were formed in this manner.
Other wrecks include the fish tub ''Neal H. Dow'' (1910), the ''Elderado'' "steamer-cum-barge" (1880), the ''W.
The island has a "fragile and unique ecosystem" with plants rarely found in Canada, such as wild hyacinth, yellow horse gentian (''Triosteum angustifolium'') and prickly pear cactus, as well as two endangered snakes, the blue racer and the Lake Erie water snake.
Drivers can cross from the United States to the Canadian town of Fort Erie by going over the Peace Bridge.
This conflict is complex, dating from the 1960s and earlier, with the result in the United States that, in 2011, commercial fishing was mostly eliminated from Great Lakes states.
An ongoing concern is that "nutrient overloading from fertilizers, human and animal waste", known as eutrophication, in which additional nitrogen and phosphorus enter the lake, will cause plant life to "run wild and multiply like crazy".
Lake Erie is a favorite for divers since there are many shipwrecks, perhaps 1,400 to 8,000 according to one estimate, of which about 270 are "confirmed shipwreck locations."
It is a matter of conjecture whether the lake was named after the tribe, or if the tribe was called ''"Erie"'' because of its proximity to the lake.
The lake's formerly more extensive lakebed creates a favorable environment for agriculture in the bordering areas of Ontario, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and New York.
