It is the abundance of both which has led to the area becoming known as the Lake District.
The primary site, on the slopes of the Langdale Pikes, is sometimes described as a "stone axe factory" of the Langdale axe industry.
Out of his long life of eighty years, sixty were spent amid its lakes and mountains, first as a schoolboy at Hawkshead, and afterwards living in Grasmere (1799–1813) and Rydal Mount (1813–50).
During the early 20th century, the children's author Beatrix Potter was in residence at Hill Top Farm, setting many of her famous Peter Rabbit books in the Lake District.
Later intrusions have formed individual outcrops of igneous rock in each of these groups.
Normally, significant snow fall only occurs between November and April.
West listed "stations", viewpoints where tourists could enjoy the best views of the landscape, being encouraged to appreciated the formal qualities of the landscape and to apply aesthetic values.
The famous guides were revised by Chris Jesty between 2005 and 2009 to reflect changes, mainly in valley access and paths, and are currently being revised by Clive Hutchby, the author of The Wainwright Companion.
The narrow gauge Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway runs from Ravenglass on the west coast up Eskdale as far as Dalegarth Station near the hamlet of Boot, catering for tourists.
The growth in tourist numbers continued into the age of the motor car, when railways began to be closed or run down.
The Lake District is home to a great variety of wildlife, due to its range of varied topography, lakes and forests.
The region is also a recurring theme in Ernest Hemingway's 1926 novella ''The Torrents of Spring'' and features prominently in Ian McEwan's ''Amsterdam'', which won the 1998 Booker Prize.
He was joined two years later by a second, and since then the number of rangers has been rising.
Railways once served Broughton-in-Furness and Coniston (closed to passengers in 1958) and another ran from Penrith to Cockermouth via Keswick (closed west of Keswick in 1966 and completely in 1972).
The south of this region consists of lower forests and knolls, with Kirkby Moor on the southern boundary.
The western slopes of these summits tend to be grassy, with rocky corries and crags on the eastern side.
Finally the A595 trunk road runs through the coastal plains to the west of the area linking the A66 with the A5092.
It is reducing its landholding.
In Neolithic times, the Lake District was a major source of stone axes, examples of which have been found all over Britain.
Other tops include Seatallan, Haystacks and Kirk Fell.
A minor road through the Newlands Valley connects via Newlands Hause with the B5289 at Buttermere.
The B5289 serves Lorton Vale and Buttermere and links via the Honister Pass with Borrowdale.
Together they comprise the Skiddaw Group and include the rocks traditionally known as the Skiddaw Slates.
The most frequently encountered approach is that made popular by Alfred Wainwright who published seven separate area guides to the Lakeland Fells.
As the highest ground in England, Scafell Pike naturally has a very extensive view on a clear day, ranging from the Mourne Mountains in Northern Ireland to Snowdonia in Wales.
The poet and his wife lie buried in the churchyard of Grasmere and very near to them are the remains of Hartley Coleridge (son of the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge), who himself lived for many years in Keswick, Ambleside and Grasmere.
Arthur Ransome lived in several areas of the Lake District, and set five of his Swallows and Amazons series of books, published between 1930 and 1947, in a fictionalised Lake District setting.
In December 2009, Natural England proposed extending the National Park in the direction of the Yorkshire Dales National Park.
However, in 2016 the  English Lake District bid for World Heritage Status was submitted to UNESCO in the category of cultural landscape.
Seasonal birds include the ring ouzel and the redstart.
To the north stand Grasmoor, highest in the range at , Grisedale Pike and the hills around the valley of Coledale, and in the far north west is Thornthwaite Forest and Lord's Seat.
The southwestern Lake District ends near the Furness peninsula and Barrow-in-Furness, a town which many Lake District residents rely on for basic amenities.
The native red squirrel is found in the Lake District and in a few other parts of England.
knowledge of the area offers the reader a precise view of the natural beauty of the Lake District.
There are also seasonal passenger boats on Coniston Water, Derwent Water and Ullswater.
It also includes the Wastwater Screes overlooking Wasdale, the Glaramara ridge overlooking Borrowdale, the three tops of Crinkle Crags, Bowfell and Esk Pike.
The Lake District National Park is almost contained within a box of trunk routes.
The Kendal and Windermere Railway was the first to penetrate the Lake District, reaching Kendal in 1846 and Windermere in 1847.
The Lake District takes the form of a roughly circular upland massif deeply dissected by a broadly radial pattern of major valleys whose character is largely the product of repeated glaciations over the last 2&nbsp;million years.
March to June tend to be the driest months, with October to January the wettest, but at low levels there is relatively little difference between months.
The Lake District is intimately associated with English literature of the 18th and 19th centuries.
At the time of the outbreak, worries existed about the future of certain species of sheep such as Ryeland and Herdwick in the district, however these fears have been allayed and sheep now occupy the district in abundance.
A spur extends south east to Loughrigg Fell above Ambleside.
This gives Atlantic mosses, ferns, lichen, and liverworts the chance to grow.
In addition, Cumbria has more microbreweries than any other county in Britain and together with Jennings Brewery supply a variety of ales to pubs and restaurants throughout the region.
William Wordsworth published his ''Guide to the Lakes'' in 1810, and by 1835 it had reached its fifth edition, now called ''A Guide Through the District of the Lakes in the North of England''.
It is flanked to the east by the A6 road which runs from Kendal to Penrith (though the extension approved in 2015 will be east of the A6).
The second group, otherwise known as the Furness Fells or Coniston Fells, have as their northern boundary the steep and narrow  Hardknott and Wrynose passes.
Other bird species resident to the Lake District include the buzzard, dipper, peregrine and raven.
Landowners include:
Another heritage railway, the Lakeside and Haverthwaite Railway, runs between Lake Windermere and Haverthwaite, and tourists can connect at Lakeside with the boats up the lake to Bowness.
Kendal and Morecambe Bay stand at the eastern and southern edges of the area.
The area has also become associated with writer Beatrix Potter.
It culminates in the height of Red Screes overlooking the Kirkstone Pass.
Around the edges of these Ordovician and Silurian rocks on the northern, eastern and southern fringes of the area is a semi-continuous outcrop of Carboniferous Limestone seen most spectacularly at places like Whitbarrow Scar and Scout Scar.
The decision to recommend approval was announced on October 23, 2015, and the size of the park increased by 3% on 1 August 2016.
Other notable peaks are Blencathra (also known as Saddleback) () and Carrock Fell.
They culminate in the  peak of Skiddaw.
The lakes of the Lake District support three rare and endangered species of fish: the vendace, which can be found only in Derwent Water and until 2008 in Bassenthwaite Lake.
Another bird species which has had recolonisation attempts is the red kite which, as of 2012, have a population of approximately 90 in the dense forest areas near Grizedale.
The woodlands provide habitats for native English wildlife.
The principal radial valleys are (clockwise from the south) Dunnerdale, Eskdale, Wasdale, Ennerdale, Lorton Vale and the Buttermere valley, the Derwent Valley and Borrowdale, the valleys containing Ullswater and Haweswater, Longsleddale, the Kentmere valley and those radiating from the head of Windermere including Great Langdale.
The last of these is connected with the first two by the Wrynose and Hardknott passes respectively; both of these passes are known for their steep gradients and are together one of the most popular climbs in the United Kingdom for cycling enthusiasts.
*United Utilities owns 8%
The tradition of theatre is carried on by venues such as Theatre by the Lake in Keswick with its summer season of six plays in repertoire, Christmas and Easter productions, and the many literature, film, mountaineering, jazz and creative arts festivals, such as the Kendal Mountain Festival and the Keswick Mountain Festival.
A decision is expected in 2017.
The northern central peaks, such as Great Rigg, were produced by considerable lava flows.
Cultural tourism is becoming an increasingly important part of the wider tourist industry.
The M6 Motorway helped bring traffic to the Lake District, passing up its eastern flank.
The railways, built with traditional industry in mind, brought with them a huge increase in the number of visitors, thus contributing to the growth of the tourism industry.
The Lake District is a major sanctuary for the red squirrel and has the largest population in England (out of the estimated 140,000 red squirrels in the United Kingdom, compared with about 2.5&nbsp;million grey squirrels).
The central band is a mix of volcanic and sedimentary rocks of mid-to-late Ordovician age comprising the lavas and tuffs of the Borrowdale Volcanic Group, erupted as the former Iapetus Ocean was subducted beneath what is now the Scottish border during the Caledonian orogeny.
The A590 which connects the M6 to Cumbria's largest town, Barrow-in-Furness, and the A5092 trunk roads cut across its southern fringes and the A66 trunk road between Penrith and Workington cuts across its northern edge.
These pyroclastic rocks give rise to the craggy landscapes typical of the central fells.
The negative impact of tourism has been seen, however.
In 2002, the Environment Agency introduced a new fisheries byelaw, banning the use of all freshwater fish as live or dead bait in 14 of the lakes in the Lake District.
The Northern Fells are a clearly defined range of hills contained within a  diameter circle between Keswick in the south west and Caldbeck in the north east.
Writer and author Melvyn Bragg was brought up in the region and has used it as the setting for some of his work, such as his novel ''A Time to Dance'', later turned into a television drama.
Motor vehicles are only allowed on "byways open to all traffic" (green lanes) but in practice Traffic Regulation Orders have been brought in on several prohibiting motor traffic, although a system of permits operates on Gatesgarth Pass.
In 2006, two tourist information centres in the National Park were closed.
There are extensive plantations of non-native pine trees.
Wordsworth, Coleridge and Southey became known as the Lake Poets.
The maritime climate means that the Lake District experiences relatively moderate temperature variations through the year.
The Lake District has been regarded as one of the best places to eat in Britain.
The area was badly affected by the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease across the United Kingdom in 2001.
The valleys break the mountains up into separate blocks, which have been described by various authors in different ways.
Robert Southey, the Poet Laureate and friend of Wordsworth (who would succeed Southey as Laureate in 1843), was a resident of Keswick for forty years (1803–43), and was buried in Crosthwaite churchyard.
The precise extent of the Lake District was not defined traditionally, but is slightly larger than that of the National Park, the total area of which is about .
The fells in this area are rounded Skiddaw slate, with few tarns and relatively few rock faces.
Historically split between Cumberland, Westmorland and Lancashire, the Lake District is now entirely in Cumbria.
Coppiced woodland was used extensively to provide charcoal for smelting.
Part of the track of the latter is used by the improved A66 trunk road.
The novelist Sir Hugh Walpole lived at "Brackenburn" on the lower slopes of Catbells overlooking Derwent Water from 1924 until his death in 1941.
With all the sheep lost at once, this knowledge has to be relearnt and some of the fells have had discreet electric fences strung across them for a period of five years, to allow the sheep to "re-heaf".
Thousands of sheep, include the native Herdwicks which graze on the fellsides across the district, were destroyed.
There are 14 lakes in the Lake District which are affected.
"The A591, Grasmere, Lake District" was short-listed in the 2011 Google Street View awards in the Most Romantic Street category.
Whilst living at "Brackenburn" he wrote ''The Herries Chronicle'' detailing the history of a fictional Cumbrian family over two centuries.
The southeastern area is the territory between Coniston Water and Windermere and east of Windermere towards Kendal and south to Lindale.
Features such as dry stone walls, for example, are there as a result of sheep farming.
Broadly speaking the area can be divided into three bands, the divisions between which run south west to north east.
Thomas Gray was the first to bring the region to attention, when he wrote a journal of his Grand Tour in 1769, but it was William Wordsworth whose poems were most famous and influential.
Though it is slightly lower it has a  rockface, Scafell Crag, on its northern side.
The railways led to another expansion in tourism.
There are, however, only a handful of major settlements within this mountainous area, the towns of Keswick, Windermere, Ambleside, and Bowness-on-Windermere being the four largest.
The lakes and mountains combine to form impressive scenery.
(By comparison, Moscow, at the same latitude, ranges from .)
Significant towns immediately outside the boundary of the national park include Millom, Barrow-in-Furness, Kendal, Ulverston, Cockermouth, Penrith, and Grange-over-Sands; each of these has important economic links with the area.
The Lake District failed in a previous attempt to gain World Heritage status as a natural World Heritage Site, because of human activities, such as commercial forestry, which have adversely impacted the park's assessment.
Ennerdale bisects the area, which consists of the High Stile ridge north of Ennerdale, the Loweswater Fells in the far north west, the Pillar group in the south west, and Great Gable () near Sty Head.
In parts of the Lake District the rainfall is higher than in any other part of England.
The B5322 serves the valley of St John's in the Vale whilst Great Langdale is served by the B5343.
Although the entire region receives above average rainfall, there is a wide disparity between the amount of rainfall in the western and eastern lakes, as the Lake District experiences relief rainfall.
Tourism has now become the park's major industry, with about 12&nbsp;million visitors each year, mainly from the UK's larger settlements, China, Japan, Spain, Germany and the US.
The mountains of the Lake District are also known as the "Cumbrian Mountains", although this name is less frequently used than terms like "the Lake District" or "the Lakeland Fells".
This non-native fish has now been introduced into a number of lakes in recent years.
On average, snow falls on Helvellyn 67 days per year.
From 1807 to 1815 John Wilson lived at Windermere.
Anglers not complying with the new byelaw can face fines of up to £2,500.
Deciduous native woodland occurs on many steeper slopes below the tree line, but with native oak supplemented by extensive conifer plantations in many areas, particularly Grizedale Forest in the generally lower southern part of the area.
It also contains the deepest and longest bodies of water in England, respectively Wastwater and Windermere.
Some valleys which are not penetrated by A roads are served by B roads.
First published between 1955 and 1966, these books provided detailed information on 214 fells across the region, with carefully hand-drawn maps and panoramas, and also stories and asides which add to the colour of the area.
The first of the revised volumes, Book One: The Eastern Fells, was published in March 2015.
This book was particularly influential in popularising the region.
This means that they are susceptible to predators for up to 120 days.
This would include land of high landscape value in the Lune Valley.
The first group includes England's highest mountains; Scafell Pike in the centre, at  and Scafell  to the southwest.
The outbreak started in Surrey in February, but had spread to Cumbria by end of March.
Some land is also used for silage and dairy farming.
Abandoned mine workings can be found on fellsides throughout the district.
The north western band is composed of early to mid-Ordovician sedimentary rocks, largely mudstones and siltstones of marine origin.
They take the form of a ridge running between Derwent Water in the west and Thirlmere in the east, from Keswick in the north to Langdale Pikes in the south.
The former Keswick School of Industrial Art at Keswick was started by Canon Rawnsley, a friend of John Ruskin.
Their friability generally leads to mountains with relatively smooth slopes such as Skiddaw itself.
In the middle of the 19th century, half the world textile industry's bobbin supply came from the Lake District area.
The park extends just over  from east to west and nearly  from north to south, with areas such as the Lake District Peninsulas to the south lying outside the National Park.
The Lakes has been an inspirations for many notable artists.
These lava eruptions were followed by a series of pyroclastic eruptions which produced a series of calderas, one of which includes present-day Scafell Pike.
The introduction of non-native fish can lead to the predation of the native fish fauna or competition for food.
The Lake District is mentioned in Jane Austen's ''Pride and Prejudice''; Elizabeth Bennet looks forward to a holiday there with her aunt and uncle and is "excessively disappointed" upon learning they cannot travel that far.
Indeed, it rises only as high as  at Top o' Selside east of Coniston Water; the wide expanse of Grizedale Forest stands between the two lakes.
Some mining still takes place today; for example, slate mining continues at the Honister Mines, at the top of Honister Pass.
Following recolonisation attempts, a pair of ospreys nested in the Lake District for the first time in over 150 years near Bassenthwaite Lake during 2001.
*The National Trust owns about a quarter of the total area (including some lakes and land of significant landscape value).
A number of tourists visit to see her family home, with particularly large numbers coming from Japan.
There are no high summits in this area which is mainly low hills, knolls and limestone cuestas such as Gummer's How and Whitbarrow.
The remains of Claife Station (on the western shore Windermere below Claife Heights) can be visited today.
Villages such as Coniston, Threlkeld, Glenridding, Pooley Bridge, Broughton-in-Furness, Grasmere, Newby Bridge, Staveley, Lindale, Gosforth and Hawkshead are more local centres.
Their southernmost point is at Honister Pass.
The south eastern band comprises the mudstones and wackes of the Windermere Supergroup and which includes (successively) the rocks of the Dent, Stockdale, Tranearth, Coniston and Kendal groups.
The noted author and poet Norman Nicholson came from the south west lakes, living and writing about Millom in the 20th century – he was known as the last of the Lake Poets and came close to becoming the Poet Laureate.
Smaller lakes known as tarns occupy glacial cirques at higher elevations.
Ospreys now frequently migrate north from Africa in the spring to nest in the Lake District, and a total of 23 chicks have fledged in The Lakes since 2001.
This area includes the Derwent Fells above the Newlands Valley and hills to the north amongst which are Dale Head, Robinson.
Wordsworth's poem "I Wandered Lonely as a Cloud", inspired by the sight of daffodils on the shores of Ullswater, remains one of the most famous in the English language.
These are: Bassenthwaite Lake, Brothers Water, Buttermere, Coniston Water, Crummock Water, Derwent Water, Ennerdale Water, Haweswater, Loweswater, Red Tarn, Thirlmere, Ullswater, Wast Water and Windermere.
The eggs of other fish, for example roach, are only at risk for as little as three days.
The female golden eagle has not been seen since 2004 although the male still remains.
Generally speaking the rocks become younger from north west to south east.
Some of the most famous artists to depict the region in their work have been Alfred Heaton Cooper and William Heaton Cooper.
Below the tree line are wooded areas, including British and European native oak woodlands and introduced softwood plantations.
Most of these valleys display the U-shaped cross-section characteristic of glacial origin, and often contain elongate lakes occupying sizeable bedrock hollows, often with tracts of relatively flat ground at their heads.
It provides a home for the red squirrel and colonies of sundew and butterwort, two of the few carnivorous plants native to Britain.
* Individual farmers and other private landowners, with more than half of the agricultural land farmed by the owners.
Wordsworth's favourite valley was Dunnerdale or the Duddon Valley nestling in the south west of the Lake District.
The Lakes are also home to two other rare species: the schelly, which lives in Brothers Water, Haweswater, Red Tarn and Ullswater, and the Arctic charr, which can be found in Buttermere, Coniston Water, Crummock Water, Ennerdale Water, Haweswater, Loweswater, Thirlmere, Wast Water, and Windermere.
The A592 also continues northwards from Windermere to Ullswater and Penrith by way of the Kirkstone Pass.
Wastwater, located in this part, is England's deepest lake.
Beyond these are a scattering of hamlets and many isolated farmsteads, some of which are still tied to agriculture; others now function as part of the tourist economy.
This was partly a result of wars in Continental Europe, restricting the possibility of travel there.
These include Percy Bysshe Shelley, Sir Walter Scott, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Arthur Hugh Clough, Henry Crabb Robinson, "Conversation" Sharp, Thomas Carlyle, John Keats, Lord Tennyson, Matthew Arnold, Felicia Hemans, and Gerald Massey.
Most of the land in the park is in private ownership, with about 55% registered as agricultural land.
They are still used by many visitors to the area as guides for walking excursions, with the ultimate goal of bagging the complete list of ''Wainwrights''.
The line to Coniston opened in 1848 (although until 1857 this was only linked to the national network with ferries between Fleetwood and Barrow-in-Furness); the line from Penrith through Keswick to Cockermouth in 1865; and the line to Lakeside at the foot of Windermere in 1869.
Her life was made into a biopic film, starring Renée Zellweger and Ewan McGregor.
The Lake District's location on the northwest coast of England, coupled with its mountainous geography, makes it the wettest part of England.
The West Coast Main Line skirts the eastern edge of the Lake District and the Cumbrian Coast Line passes through the southern and western fringes of the area.
In replacing the sheep, one problem to overcome was that many of the lost sheep were ''heafed'', that is, they knew their part of the unfenced fell and did not stray, with this knowledge being passed between generations.
The North Western Fells lie between Borrowdale and Bassenthwaite Lake to the east and Buttermere and Lorton Vale to the west.
Sheep farming remains important both for the economy of the region and for preserving the landscape which visitors want to see.
Mean temperature in the valleys ranges from about  in January to around  in July.
The narrow roads present a challenge for traffic flow and, from the 1960s, certain areas have been very congested.
Seathwaite in Borrowdale is the wettest inhabited place in England with an average of  of rain a year, while nearby Sprinkling Tarn is even wetter, recording over  per year; by contrast, Keswick, at the end of Borrowdale receives  every year, and Penrith (just outside the Lake District) only .
There is some ancient woodland in the National Park.
The granite can be seen at the surface as the Ennerdale, Skiddaw, Carrock Fell, Eskdale and Shap granites.
Conservationists believe he is now the only resident golden eagle in England.
There is also the risk of disease being introduced, which can further threaten native populations.
For example, a major problem has been found with ruffe.
There are networks of minor roads in the lower-lying southern part of the area, connecting numerous communities between Kendal, Windermere and Coniston.
Its aim is to protect the landscape by restricting unwelcome change by industry or commerce.
It continues up the east side of Bassenthwaite Lake.
Farmland and settlement add aesthetic value to the natural scenery with an ecology modified by human influence for millennia and including important wildlife habitats.
The Lake District is one of the most highly populated national parks.
This area is craggy and steep, with the impressive pinnacle of Pillar Rock its showpiece.
The Lake District's geology is very complex but well-studied.
Railway services were supplemented by steamer boats on the major lakes of Ullswater, Windermere, Coniston Water, and Derwent Water.
The economies of almost all are intimately linked with tourism.
The proposal was opposed by Cumbria County Council who said it would lead to less democratic control and would make local housing less affordable.
Conservationists hope the reintroduction will create a large red kite population in the Lake District and in North West England where the red kite population is low.
