Morphemes can either be ''free'' or ''bound''.
In this way, issues of identity and politics can have profound effects on language structure.
A prominent proponent of this view is archaeologist Steven Mithen.
The only prominent proponent of a discontinuity-based theory of human language origins is linguist and philosopher Noam Chomsky.
There is some evidence that the use of writing also has effects on the cognitive development of humans, perhaps because acquiring literacy generally requires explicit and formal education.
This is sometimes called ''agreement''.
These languages are called ''fusional languages'', because several meanings may be fused into a single morpheme.
Other populous language families are the Dravidian languages of South Asia (among them Kannada Tamil and Telugu), the Turkic languages of Central Asia (such as Turkish), the Austroasiatic (among them Khmer), and Tai–Kadai languages of Southeast Asia (including Thai).
This ability depends on the physiology of the human speech organs.
An important difference between first language acquisition and additional language acquisition is that the process of additional language acquisition is influenced by languages that the learner already knows.
A similar debate exists for the Chinese script, which developed around 1200 BC.
:''san-bon no ki'' (三本の木) lit.
From roughly the age of three to five years, a child's ability to speak or sign is refined to the point that it resembles adult language.
The study of how the meaning of linguistic expressions changes depending on context is called pragmatics.
From birth, newborns respond more readily to human speech than to other sounds.
A similar number of people speak the Afroasiatic languages, which include the populous Semitic languages such as Arabic, Hebrew language, and the languages of the Sahara region, such as the Berber languages and Hausa.
For example, in a language that does not distinguish between voiced and unvoiced consonants, the sounds  and  (if they both occur) could be considered a single phoneme, and consequently, the two pronunciations would have the same meaning.
Language change happens at all levels from the phonological level to the levels of vocabulary, morphology, syntax, and discourse.
Languages that belong to different families nonetheless often have features in common, and these shared features tend to correlate.
Another source of sound change is the erosion of words as pronunciation gradually becomes increasingly indistinct and shortens words, leaving out syllables or sounds.
In most languages, it is possible to construct complex words that are built of several morphemes.
This ability to refer to events that are not at the same time or place as the speech event is called ''displacement'', and while some animal communication systems can use displacement (such as the communication of bees that can communicate the location of sources of nectar that are out of sight), the degree to which it is used in human language is also considered unique.
Writing systems represent language using visual symbols, which may or may not correspond to the sounds of spoken language.
It is a common belief, going back to the biblical narrative of the tower of Babel in the Old Testament, that linguistic diversity causes political conflict, but this is contradicted by the fact that many of the world's major episodes of violence have taken place in situations with low linguistic diversity, such as the Yugoslav and American Civil War, or the genocide of Rwanda, whereas many of the most stable political units have been highly multilingual.
Acoustically, these different segments are characterized by different formant structures, that are visible in a spectrogram of the recorded sound wave (See illustration of Spectrogram of the formant structures of three English vowels).
Depending on philosophical perspectives regarding the definition of language and meaning, when used as a general concept, "language" may refer to the cognitive ability to learn and use systems of complex communication, or to describe the set of rules that makes up these systems, or the set of utterances that can be produced from those rules.
In this way, neuroscientists in the 19th century discovered that two areas in the brain are crucially implicated in language processing.
The Indo-European family achieved prevalence first during the Eurasian Migration Period (c. 400–800 AD), and subsequently through the European colonial expansion, which brought the Indo-European languages to a politically and often numerically dominant position in the Americas and much of Africa.
The language comes to contain mostly the grammatical and phonological categories that exist in both languages.
However, each language contrasts sounds in different ways.
As well as segments such as consonants and vowels, some languages also use sound in other ways to convey meaning.
Linguistic anthropologists and sociologists of language define communicative style as the ways that language is used and understood within a particular culture.
It is mostly undisputed that pre-human australopithecines did not have communication systems significantly different from those found in great apes in general, but scholarly opinions vary as to the developments since the appearance of the genus ''Homo'' some 2.5 million years ago.
One important source of language change is contact and resulting diffusion of linguistic traits between languages.
These debates about language in relation to meaning and reference, cognition and consciousness remain active today.
Pidgin languages are defined by not having any native speakers, but only being spoken by people who have another language as their first language.
All spoken languages have phonemes of at least two different categories, vowels and  consonants, that can be combined to form syllables.
The Sino-Tibetan languages are spoken by 20% of the world's population and include many of the languages of East Asia, including Hakka, Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese, and hundreds of smaller languages.
At present, there are also dozens of language isolates: languages that cannot be shown to be related to any other languages in the world.
The use of language is deeply entrenched in human culture.
For example, spoken language uses the auditive modality, whereas sign languages and writing use the visual modality, and braille writing uses the tactile modality.
These theories can be called continuity-based theories.
For example, in the Basque phrase ''ikusi nauzu'', or "you saw me", the past tense auxiliary verb ''n-au-zu'' (similar to English "do") agrees with both the subject (you) expressed by the ''n''- prefix, and with the object (me) expressed by the -''zu'' suffix.
They may express the equivalent of an entire English sentence in a single word.
The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered to be the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400–3200 BC with the earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC.
By way of contrast, such transformational grammars are also commonly used to provide formal definitions of language are commonly used in formal logic, in formal theories of grammar, and in applied computational linguistics.
Often, semantic concepts are embedded in the morphology or syntax of the language in the form of grammatical categories.
This meaning is implied by the context in which it is spoken; these kinds of effects of meaning are called conversational implicatures.
Changes may affect specific sounds or the entire phonological system.
Because all languages have a very large number of words, no purely logographic scripts are known to exist.
Similarly, many species of birds and whales learn their songs by imitating other members of their species.
By controlling the different parts of the speech apparatus, the airstream can be manipulated to produce different speech sounds.
Multilingualism is likely to have been the norm throughout human history and most people in the modern world are multilingual.
Voicing is what separates English  in ''bus'' (unvoiced sibilant) from  in ''buzz'' (voiced sibilant).
A few writing systems use opposite directions for alternating lines, and others, such as the ancient Maya script, can be written in either direction and rely on graphic cues to show the reader the direction of reading.
For example, descriptive linguistics examines the grammar of single languages, theoretical linguistics develops theories on how best to conceptualize and define the nature of language based on data from the various extant human languages, sociolinguistics studies how languages are used for social purposes informing in turn the study of the social functions of language and grammatical description, neurolinguistics studies how language is processed in the human brain and allows the experimental testing of theories, computational linguistics builds on theoretical and descriptive linguistics to construct computational models of language often aimed at processing natural language or at testing linguistic hypotheses, and historical linguistics relies on grammatical and lexical descriptions of languages to trace their individual histories and reconstruct trees of language families by using the comparative method.
the act of "naming", which creates a new name for some entity, or the act of "pronouncing someone man and wife", which creates a social contract of marriage.
Some languages change the meaning of words by changing the phonological structure of a word, for example, the English word "run", which in the past tense is "ran".
The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, who defined the modern discipline of linguistics, first explicitly formulated the distinction using the French word ''langage'' for language as a concept, ''langue'' as a specific instance of a language system, and ''parole'' for the concrete usage of speech in a particular language.
English uses the nominative-accusative word typology: in English transitive clauses, the subjects of both intransitive sentences ("I run") and transitive sentences ("I love you") are treated in the same way, shown here by the nominative pronoun ''I''.
The Latin alphabet (and those on which it is based or that have been derived from it) was originally based on the representation of single sounds, so that words were constructed from letters that generally denote a single consonant or vowel in the structure of the word.
Humans use language as a way of signalling identity with one cultural group as well as difference from others.
The shared features of languages which belong to the same typological class type may have arisen completely independently.
These organs consist of the lungs, the voice box (larynx), and the upper vocal tract&nbsp;– the throat, the mouth, and the nose.
This process is called ''ablaut''.
Affixes serve to modify or elaborate the meaning of the root.
Languages are used by those who speak them to communicate and to solve a plethora of social tasks.
However, any precise estimate depends on a partly arbitrary distinction between languages and dialects.
In opposition to the formal theories of the generative school, functional theories of language propose that since language is fundamentally a tool, its structures are best analyzed and understood by reference to their functions.
In free flowing speech, there are no clear boundaries between one segment and the next, nor usually are there any audible pauses between words.
First language acquisition proceeds in a fairly regular sequence, though there is a wide degree of variation in the timing of particular stages among normally developing infants.
In ''The Descent of Man'', naturalist Charles Darwin called this process "an instinctive tendency to acquire an art".
However, many languages also have grammatical conventions that signal the social position of the speaker in relation to others through the use of registers that are related to social hierarchies or divisions.
The ways in which languages use sounds or signs to construct meaning are studied in phonology.
For example, "the cat" is one phrase, and "on the mat" is another, because they would be treated as single units if a decision was made to emphasize the location by moving forward the prepositional phrase: "And on the mat, the cat sat".
If the tongue is located towards the back of the mouth, the quality changes, creating vowels such as  (English "oo").
In logographic scripts, each sign represents an entire word, and will generally bear no relation to the sound of that word in spoken language.
However, several categories are so common as to be nearly universal.
The rules of the internal structure of phrases and sentences are called ''syntax''.
Humans acquire language through social interaction in early childhood, and children generally speak fluently when they are approximately three years old.
In spoken language, meaning is produced when sounds become part of a system in which some sounds can contribute to expressing meaning and others do not.
In English, for example, the words ''bat''  and ''pat''  form a minimal pair, in which the distinction between  and  differentiates the two words, which have different meanings.
Conversely, in Latin, both ''Dominus servos vituperabat'' and ''Servos vituperabat dominus'' mean "the master was reprimanding the slaves", because ''servos'', or "slaves", is in the accusative case, showing that they are the grammatical object of the sentence, and ''dominus'', or "master", is in the nominative case, showing that he is the subject.
Language is therefore dependent on communities of speakers in which children learn language from their elders and peers and themselves transmit language to their own children.
The use of writing has made language even more useful to humans.
For example, languages can be classified on the basis of their basic word order, the relative order of the verb, and its constituents in a normal indicative sentence.
in Standard Spanish, but  in Caribbean Spanish.
If they are free to be moved around within an utterance, they are usually called ''words'', and if they are bound to other words or morphemes, they are called affixes.
with the -like suffix, as in "noun-like").
This definition stresses the universality of language to all humans, and it emphasizes the biological basis for the human capacity for language as a unique development of the human brain.
These languages together account for 94% of the world's population, whereas 94% of the world's languages account for the remaining 6% of the global population.
The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt.
Vowels are called ''close'' when the lips are relatively closed, as in the pronunciation of the vowel  (English "ee"), or ''open'' when the lips are relatively open, as in the vowel  (English "ah").
Because of the increased language contact in the globalizing world, many small languages are becoming endangered as their speakers shift to other languages that afford the possibility to participate in larger and more influential speech communities.
Due to the way in which language is transmitted between generations and within communities, language perpetually changes, diversifying into new languages or converging due to language contact.
Academic consensus holds that between 50% and 90% of languages spoken at the beginning of the 21st century will probably have become extinct by the year 2100.
In some languages, for example, Chinese, there are no morphological processes, and all grammatical information is encoded syntactically by forming strings of single words.
Other sounds are defined by the way the tongue moves within the mouth: such as the l-sounds (called ''laterals'', because the air flows along both sides of the tongue), and the r-sounds (called ''rhotics'') that are characterized by how the tongue is positioned relative to the air stream.
The Indo-European family is the most widely spoken and includes languages such as English, Russian, and Hindi; the Sino-Tibetan family, which includes Mandarin and the other Chinese languages, and Tibetan; the Afro-Asiatic family, which includes Arabic, Somali, and Hebrew; the Bantu languages, which include Swahili, and Zulu, and hundreds of other languages spoken throughout Africa; and the Malayo-Polynesian languages, which include Indonesian, Malay, Tagalog, and hundreds of other languages spoken throughout the Pacific.
"saddened") or nouns (e.g.
Many other word classes exist in different languages, such as conjunctions like "and" that serve to join two sentences, articles that introduce a noun, interjections such as "wow!
The original consonant * became /b/ in the Germanic languages, the previous * in turn became /p/, and the previous * became /f/.
The semantic study of meaning assumes that meaning is located in a relation between signs and meanings that are firmly established through social convention.
In linguistics, the study of the internal structure of complex words and the processes by which words are formed is called morphology.
This is because the vowel shift brought the already established orthography out of synchronization with pronunciation.
An important example of this is the process called deixis, which describes the way in which certain words refer to entities through their relation between a specific point in time and space when the word is uttered.
The meaning that is connected to individual signs, morphemes, words, phrases, and texts is called semantics.
Some proponents of Saussure's view of language have advocated a formal approach which studies language structure by identifying its basic elements and then by presenting a formal account of the rules according to which the elements combine in order to form words and sentences.
In situations of extreme and sustained language contact, it may lead to the formation of new mixed languages that cannot be considered to belong to a single language family.
Not all meanings in a language are represented by single words.
This view of language is associated with the study of language in pragmatic, cognitive, and interactive frameworks, as well as in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology.
Furthermore, morphology distinguishes between the process of inflection, which modifies or elaborates on a word, and the process of derivation, which creates a new word from an existing one.
The English sign "dog" denotes, for example, a member of the species ''Canis familiaris''.
Languages differ widely in whether they are encoded through the use of categories or lexical units.
Because norms for language use are shared by members of a specific group, communicative style also becomes a way of displaying and constructing group identity.
And early human fossils can be inspected for traces of physical adaptation to language use or pre-linguistic forms of symbolic behaviour.
Proponents of the view that the drive to language acquisition is innate in humans argue that this is supported by the fact that all cognitively normal children raised in an environment where language is accessible will acquire language without formal instruction.
Chomsky proposes that "some random mutation took place, maybe after some strange cosmic ray shower, and it reorganized the brain, implanting a language organ in an otherwise primate brain."
Formal theories of grammar seek to define the different elements of language and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or operations, while functional theories seek to define the functions performed by language and then relate them to the linguistic elements that carry them out.
Early work in neurolinguistics involved the study of language in people with brain lesions, to see how lesions in specific areas affect language and speech.
This kind of change caused Latin ''mea domina'' to eventually become the French ''madame'' and American English ''ma'am''.
These bound morphemes or affixes can be classified according to their position in relation to the root: ''prefixes'' precede the root, suffixes follow the root, and infixes are inserted in the middle of a root.
The reason sentences can be seen as being composed of phrases is because each phrase would be moved around as a single element if syntactic operations were carried out.
Many languages conventionally employ different genres, styles, and registers in written and spoken language, and in some communities, writing traditionally takes place in an entirely different language than the one spoken.
Debates about the nature and origin of language go back to the ancient world.
Words appear around the age of 12 to 18 months; the average vocabulary of an eighteen-month-old child is around 50 words.
The sound of speech can be analyzed into a combination of segmental and suprasegmental elements.
Sign forms must be something that can be perceived, for example, in sounds, images, or gestures, and then related to a specific meaning by social convention.
While languages have always gone extinct throughout human history, they have been disappearing at an accelerated rate in the 20th and 21st centuries due to the processes of globalization and neo-colonialism, where the economically powerful languages dominate other languages.
There are many different formalist and functionalist frameworks that propose theories for describing syntactic structures, based on different assumptions about what language is and how it should be described.
People with a lesion to this area develop expressive aphasia, meaning that they know what they want to say, they just cannot get it out.
This article specifically concerns the properties of natural human language as it is studied in the discipline of linguistics.
Consonants and vowel segments combine to form syllables, which in turn combine to form utterances; these can be distinguished phonetically as the space between two inhalations.
Even though language change is often initially evaluated negatively by speakers of the language who often consider changes to be "decay" or a sign of slipping norms of language usage, it is natural and inevitable.
Another common category is the adjective: words that describe properties or qualities of nouns, such as "red" or "big".
The academic study of language is conducted within many different disciplinary areas and from different theoretical angles, all of which inform modern approaches to linguistics.
All languages, for instance, make a basic distinction between a group of words that prototypically denotes things and concepts and a group of words that prototypically denotes actions and events.
Nonetheless, there are only 250 countries in the world corresponding to some 6000 languages, which means that most countries are multilingual and most languages therefore exist in close contact with other languages.
Phonemes are abstract units of sound, defined as the smallest units in a language that can serve to distinguish between the meaning of a pair of minimally different words, a so-called minimal pair.
Human language is also the only known natural communication system whose adaptability may be referred to as ''modality independent''.
This learning process is referred to as first-language acquisition, since unlike many other kinds of learning, it requires no direct teaching or specialized study.
The word is sometimes used to refer to codes, ciphers, and other kinds of artificially constructed communication systems such as formally defined computer languages used for computer programming.
However, Sumerian scribes already studied the differences between Sumerian and Akkadian grammar around 1900 BC.
All languages contain the semantic structure of predication: a structure that predicates a property, state, or action.
The exact number of known living languages varies from 6,000 to 7,000, depending on the precision of one's definition of "language", and in particular, on how one defines the distinction between languages and dialects.
Estimates vary depending on many factors.
Consonant sounds vary by place of articulation, i.e.
An example of such mixed languages is Tok Pisin, the official language of Papua New-Guinea, which originally arose as a Pidgin based on English and Austronesian languages; others are Kreyòl ayisyen, the French-based creole language spoken in Haiti, and Michif, a mixed language of Canada, based on the Native American language Cree and French.
Linguistic differences may become salient markers of divisions between social groups, for example, speaking a language with a particular accent may imply membership of an ethnic minority or social class, one's area of origin, or status as a second language speaker.
Many projects aim to prevent or slow this loss by revitalizing endangered languages and promoting education and literacy in minority languages.
Such models of meaning are explored in the field of pragmatics.
The Austronesian languages are considered to have originated in Taiwan around 3000 BC and spread through the Oceanic region through island-hopping, based on an advanced nautical technology.
The simple sound change has affected both morphology and syntax.
By using these speech organs, humans can produce hundreds of distinct sounds: some appear very often in the world's languages, whereas others are much more common in certain language families, language areas, or even specific to a single language.
Theories that stress continuity often look at animals to see if, for example, primates display any traits that can be seen as analogous to what pre-human language must have been like.
Thus, languages must have a vocabulary of signs related to specific meaning.
Similarly, theories based on Chomsky's generative view of language see language mostly as an innate faculty that is largely genetically encoded, whereas functionalist theories see it as a system that is largely cultural, learned through social interaction.
Hakka, Cantonese and Mandarin are, for example, often classified as "dialects" of Chinese, even though they are more different from each other than Swedish is from Norwegian.
For trees, it would be:
Thinkers such as Rousseau have argued that language originated from emotions while others like Kant have held that it originated from rational and logical thought.
For instance, in languages of east Asia such as Thai, Burmese, and Javanese, different words are used according to whether a speaker is addressing someone of higher or lower rank than oneself in a ranking system with animals and children ranking the lowest and gods and members of royalty as the highest.
Signs also change their meanings over time, as the conventions governing their usage gradually change.
But with the ideology that made one people, one state, and one language the most desirable political arrangement, monolingualism started to spread throughout the world.
The pre-Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems (including among others Olmec and Maya scripts) are generally believed to have had independent origins.
The languages of the Dravidian family that are spoken mostly in Southern India include Tamil and Telugu.
Another common cause of grammatical change is the gradual petrification of idioms into new grammatical forms, for example, the way the English "going to" construction lost its aspect of movement and in some varieties of English has almost become a full-fledged future tense (e.g.
In the philosophy of language, the view of linguistic meaning as residing in the logical relations between propositions and reality was developed by philosophers such as Alfred Tarski, Bertrand Russell, and other formal logicians.
In this way the semantic roles can map onto the grammatical relations in different ways, grouping an intransitive subject either with Agents (accusative type) or Patients (ergative type) or even making each of the three roles differently, which is called the tripartite type.
For example, in Persian the single word ''nafahmidamesh'' means ''I didn't understand it'' consisting of morphemes ''na-fahm-id-am-esh'' with the meanings, "negation.understand.past.I.it".
These kinds of definitions are often applied in studies of language within a cognitive science framework and in neurolinguistics.
Sounds as part of a linguistic system are called phonemes.
Also, larger areas such as South Asia, Europe, and Southeast Asia have sometimes been considered language areas, because of widespread diffusion of specific areal features.
The total number of languages in the world is not known.
To the right is a table of the world's 10 most spoken languages with population estimates from the ''Ethnologue'' (2009 figures).
The resurgence of the view that language plays a significant role in the creation and circulation of concepts, and that the study of philosophy is essentially the study of language, is associated with what has been called the linguistic turn and philosophers such as Wittgenstein in 20th-century philosophy.
While humans have the ability to learn any language, they only do so if they grow up in an environment in which language exists and is used by others.
", that is, in fact, not a question about the length of the arms of the one being addressed, but a request to pass the salt across the table.
Around six months of age, a child will begin babbling, producing the speech sounds or handshapes of the languages used around them.
In many polysynthetic languages, verbs cross-reference their subjects and objects.
The second, which includes "run" and "sing", are called verbs.
Linguists use the term "varieties" to refer to the different ways of speaking a language.
Africa is home to a large number of language families, the largest of which is the Niger-Congo language family, which includes such languages as Swahili, Shona, and Yoruba.
Acquisition of second and additional languages can come at any age, through exposure in daily life or courses.
In other languages such as Korean, the situation is the opposite, and new pronouns can be constructed, whereas the number of adjectives is fixed.
These social rules for which ways of using language are considered appropriate in certain situations and how utterances are to be understood in relation to their context vary between communities, and learning them is a large part of acquiring communicative competence in a language.
The study of language, linguistics, has been developing into a science since the first grammatical descriptions of particular languages in India more than 2000 years ago, after the development of the Brahmi script.
The opposite of fusional languages are agglutinative languages which construct words by stringing morphemes together in chains, but with each morpheme as a discrete semantic unit.
Other continuity-based models see language as having developed from music, a view already espoused by Rousseau, Herder, Humboldt, and Charles Darwin.
The language family of the world that has the most speakers is the Indo-European languages, spoken by 46% of the world's population.
This is possible because human language is based on a dual code, in which a finite number of elements which are meaningless in themselves (e.g.
Segments therefore are distinguished by their distinct sounds which are a result of their different articulations, and they can be either vowels or consonants.
During the Enlightenment and its debates about human origins, it became fashionable to speculate about the origin of language.
Some languages have only a few phonemes, for example, Rotokas and Pirahã language with 11 and 10 phonemes respectively, whereas languages like Taa may have as many as 141 phonemes.
This is because human language is modality-independent.
For example, most (but not all) languages that are of the SOV type have postpositions rather than prepositions, and have adjectives before nouns.
Vowels are those sounds that have no audible friction caused by the narrowing or obstruction of some part of the upper vocal tract.
Those who see language as being mostly innate, for example psychologist Steven Pinker, hold the precedents to be animal cognition, whereas those who see language as a socially learned tool of communication, such as psychologist Michael Tomasello, see it as having developed from animal communication in primates: either gestural or vocal communication to assist in cooperation.
For example, if at a dinner table a person asks, "Can you reach the salt?
These areas together account for the majority of the world's languages, though not the majority of speakers.
Functionalist theories tend to study grammar as dynamic phenomena, as structures that are always in the process of changing as they are employed by their speakers.
