The Japanese attempted to force Sisavang Vong (the King of Luang Phrabang) to declare Laotian independence but on 8 April he instead simply declared an end to Laos' status as a French protectorate.
The European Union, UNHCHR, and international groups have since spoken out about the forced repatriation.
The assembly was expanded to 99 members in 1997, to 115 members in 2006 and finally to 132 members during the 2011 elections.
Rice dominates agriculture, with about 80 percent of the arable land area used for growing rice.
The conflict between Hmong rebels and the Vietnam People's Army of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam (SRV), as well as the SRV-backed Pathet Lao continued in key areas of Laos, including in Saysaboune Closed Military Zone, Xaisamboune Closed Military Zone near Vientiane Province and Xieng Khouang Province.
The National University of Laos is the Laos state's public university.
The small arms used by the army include the Soviet AKM assault rifle, PKM machine gun, Makarov PM pistol, and RPD light machine gun.
Stone artefacts including Hoabinhian types have been found at sites dating to the Late Pleistocene in northern Laos.
Many elements of Lao culture predate Buddhism, however.
The officials were to participate in a ceremony to mark the liberation of the Plain of Jars from the former Royal Lao government forces.
In 1950 the French granted Laos semi-autonomy as an "associated state" within the French Union.
According to linguistic and other historical evidence, Tai-speaking tribes migrated southwestward to the modern territories of Laos and Thailand from Guangxi sometime between the 8th–10th centuries.
Most people live in valleys of the Mekong River and its tributaries.
This includes decreasing the environmental and cultural impact of tourism; increasing awareness in the importance of ethnic groups and biological diversity; providing a source of income to conserve, sustain and manage the Lao protected area network and cultural heritage sites; and emphasising the need for tourism zoning and management plans for sites that will be developed as ecotourism destinations.
In 2014, the country ranked 141st on the Human Development Index (HDI), indicating lower medium development.
, Nhân Dân (The People) and the Xinhua News Agency are the only foreign media organisations permitted to open offices in Laos—both opened bureaus in Vientiane in 2011.
Shortly after independence, a long civil war ended the monarchy, when the Communist Pathet Lao movement came to power in 1975.
Other terms are Khmu, Khamu (Kammu) or Kha as the Lao Loum refer to them as indicating their Austroasiatic origins.
In response, the United States initiated a bombing campaign against the North Vietnamese positions, supported regular and irregular anticommunist forces in Laos and supported South Vietnamese incursions into Laos.
A short portage railway, the Don Det—Don Khon narrow gauge railway was built by the French in Champasak Province but has been closed since the 1940s.
Recently a few local production companies have succeeded to produce Lao feature films and gain international recognition.
The Lao National Tourism Administration, related government agencies and the private sector are working together to realise the vision put forth in the country's National Ecotourism Strategy and Action Plan.
Médecins Sans Frontières has refused to assist the Hmong refugees because of what they have called "increasingly restrictive measures" taken by the Thai military.
The revised constitution of 11 May 1957 omitted reference to the French Union, though close educational, health and technical ties with the former colonial power persisted.
Laos' ambitious strategies for development are based on generating electricity from its rivers and selling the power to its neighbors, namely Thailand, China, and Vietnam, as well as its initiative to become a 'land-linked' nation, shown by the planning of four new railways connecting Laos to those same countries.
In 1990 only eight percent of the rural population had access to improved sanitation.
Through the development, release and widespread adoption of improved rice varieties, and through economic reforms, production has increased by an annual rate of five percent between 1990 and 2005,
According to the Global Hunger Index (2015), Laos ranks as the 29th hungriest nation in the world out of the list of the 52 nations with the worst hunger situation(s).
Among them are Lao New Wave Cinema's ''At the Horizon'', directed by Anysay Keola, that was screened at the OzAsia Film Festival and Lao Art Media's ''Chanthaly'' directed by Mattie Do, which was screened at the 2013 Fantastic Fest.
The official and dominant language is Lao, a tonal language of the Tai linguistic group.
Metallurgy is an important industry, and the government hopes to attract foreign investment to develop the substantial deposits of coal, gold, bauxite, tin, copper, and other valuable metals.
The country is one of four in the opium poppy growing region known as the "Golden Triangle".
Laos has the youngest population of any country in Asia with a median age of 21.6 years.
Since the founding of the Lao PDR only very few films have been made in Laos.
Democratic Congressman Bruce Vento, Senator Paul Wellstone, Dana Rohrabacher and others also raised concerns.
However, only slightly more than half of the population can speak Lao.
During his reign, Lan Xang became an important trade centre.
In the central and southern mountains, Mon-Khmer tribes, known as Lao Theung or mid-slope Laotians, predominate.
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam and the Vietnam People's Army continue to have significant influence in Laos.
The elections were widely disputed and questioned by Lao and Hmong opposition and dissident groups abroad and in Laos and Thailand.
This National Assembly, which essentially acts as a rubber stamp for the LPRP, approves all new laws, although the executive branch retains authority to issue binding decrees.
Laos's first, French-written and monarchical constitution was promulgated on 11 May 1947, and declared Laos to be an independent state within the French Union.
The attack resulted in the army largely demobilising, leaving the conflict to irregular ethnic Hmong forces of the "U.S. Secret Army" backed by the United States and Thailand, and led by General Vang Pao.
The country's most widely recognised product may well be Beerlao which is exported to a number of countries including neighbours Cambodia and Vietnam.
King Sisavang Vong of Luang Phrabang became ruler of a unified Laos and Vientiane once again became the capital.
In 2009, despite the fact that the government is still officially communist, the Obama administration in the US declared Laos was no longer a Marxist–Leninist state and lifted bans on Laotian companies receiving financing from the US Export-Import Bank.
The capital and largest city of Laos is Vientiane and other major cities include Luang Prabang, Savannakhet, and Pakse.
Much of Laos lacks adequate infrastructure.
Its thickly forested landscape consists mostly of rugged mountains, the highest of which is Phou Bia at , with some plains and plateaus.
Lao Theung constitute about 30 percent of the population.
Theravada Buddhism is a dominant influence in Lao culture.
Other large cities include Luang Prabang, Savannakhet, and Pakse.
Chao Anouvong was installed as a vassal king of Vientiane by the Siamese.
However, the government of Laos frequently breaches its own constitution and the rule of law, since the judiciary and judges are appointed by the ruling communist party—an independent judicial branch does not exist.
Throughout the country signage is bilingual in Laotian and French, with French being predominant.
Laos has no railways, except a short link to connect Vientiane with Thailand over the Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge.
Ostensibly, the Constitution of Laos that was promulgated in 1991, and amended in 2003, contains most key safeguards for human rights.
The economy receives development aid from the IMF, ADB, and other international sources; and also foreign direct investment for development of the society, industry, hydropower and mining (most notably of copper and gold).
It is a member of the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), East Asia Summit and La Francophonie.
This has deterred foreign investment and created major problems with the rule of law, including the nation's ability to enforce contract and business regulation.
His ministers, unable to tolerate his ruthlessness, forced him into exile to the present-day Thai province of Nan in 1373, where he died.
In 2008, 43 percent of the population did not have access to sanitary water resources.
The Pathet Lao were backed militarily by the NVA and Vietcong.
In 1520, Photisarath came to the throne and moved the capital from Luang Prabang to Vientiane to avoid a Burmese invasion.
His reign is often regarded as Laos's golden age.
Around 5,000 Hmong people who were not resettled at the time of the camp closures sought asylum at Wat Tham Krabok, a Buddhist monastery in central Thailand where more than 10,000 Hmong refugees had already been living.
67 percent of Laotians are Theravada Buddhist, 1.5 percent are Christian, and 31.5 percent are other or unspecified (mostly practitioners of Satsana Phi) according to the 2005 census.
CPPA also said other Christian and independent Buddhist and animist believers were being persecuted.
This success is in part due to small-scale independent providers emerging in a spontaneous manner or having been promoted by public authorities.
A number of Laotian sign languages are used in areas with high rates of congenital deafness.
Of the potential capacity of approximately 18,000 megawatts, around 8,000 megawatts have been committed for exporting to Thailand and Vietnam.
In 1993, Vue Mai, a former Hmong soldier and leader of the largest Hmong refugee camp in Thailand, who had been recruited by the US&nbsp;Embassy in Bangkok to return to Laos as proof of the repatriation programme's success, disappeared in Vientiane.
Forest coverage decreased to 41 percent in a 2002 survey.
Neighbouring Vietnam warned that the dam would harm the Mekong Delta, which is the home to nearly 20 million people and supplies around 50 percent of Vietnam's rice output and over 70 percent of both its seafood and fruit output.
French is still commonly used in government and commerce and over a third of Laos' students are educated through the medium of French with French being compulsory for all other students.
There are many traditions and rituals associated with rice production in different environments and among many ethnic groups.
The King then secretly sent Prince Kindavong to represent Laos to the Allied forces and Prince Sisavang as representative to the Japanese.
All newspapers are published by the government, including two foreign language papers: the English-language daily ''Vientiane Times'' and the French-language weekly ''Le Rénovateur''.
The khaen traditionally accompanied the singer in ''lam'', the dominant style of folk music.
A new constitution was adopted in 1991 and enshrined a "leading role" for the LPRP.
Laos was requested in 1979 by the Socialist Republic of Vietnam to end relations with the People's Republic of China, leading to isolation in trade by China, the United States, and other countries.
The rebellion failed and Vientiane was ransacked.
Laos can be considered to consist of three geographical areas: north, central, and south.
One of the first commercial feature-length films was ''Sabaidee Luang Prabang'', made in 2008.
Several thousand Hmong people, fearing forced repatriation to Laos if they were not accepted for resettlement in the United States, fled the camp to live elsewhere within Thailand where a sizeable Hmong population has been present since the 19th century.
Today, the Lua people are considered endangered.
Approximately 77 percent of Lao farm households are self-sufficient in rice.
The most recent elections took place in April 2011.
Milton Osborne, Visiting Fellow at the Lowy Institute for International Policy who has written widely on the Mekong, warns: "The future scenario is of the Mekong ceasing to be a bounteous source of fish and guarantor of agricultural richness, with the great river below China becoming little more than a series of unproductive lakes."
The Mekong River Commission, a regional intergovernmental body designed to promote the "sustainable management" of the river, famed for its giant catfish, carried out a study that warned if Xayaburi and subsequent schemes went ahead, it would "fundamentally undermine the abundance, productivity and diversity of the Mekong fish resources".
Human rights advocates including Vang Pobzeb, Kerry and Kay Danes and others have also raised concerns about human rights violations, torture, the arrest and detention of political prisoners as well as the detention of foreign prisoners in Laos including at the infamous Phonthong Prison in Vientiane.
It is a political term that includes the non-ethnic Lao groups within Laos and identifies them as "Laotian" because of their political citizenship.
In October 1999, 30 young people were arrested for attempting to display posters calling for peaceful economic, political and social change in Laos.
Within 20 years of its formation, the kingdom expanded eastward to Champa and along the Annamite mountains in Vietnam.
On 17 May 2014 the Defense Minister, who was also Deputy Prime Minister, Major General Douangchay Phichit, with other top ranking officials was killed in a plane crash in the north of the country.
Laos became independent in 1953, with a constitutional monarchy under Sisavang Vong.
For the time being, countries willing to resettle the refugees are hindered in their immigration and settlement procedures because the Thai administration does not grant them access to the refugees.
It was not until 1637, when Sourigna Vongsa ascended the throne, that Lan Xang would further expand its frontiers.
They were the indigenous inhabitants of northern Laos.
Access rose rapidly from 10 percent in 1995 to 38 percent in 2008.
Massive aerial bombardment against the Pathet Lao and invading People's Army of Vietnam forces were carried out by the United States to prevent the collapse of the Royal Kingdom of Laos central government, and to deny the use of the Ho Chi Minh Trail to attack US forces in the Republic of Vietnam.
The surviving three men should have been released by October 2009, but their whereabouts remains unknown.
English, the language of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), has become increasingly studied in recent years.
Laos produced tin, rubber, and coffee, but never accounted for more than one percent of French Indochina's exports.
In 1960, amidst a series of rebellions in the Kingdom of Laos, fighting broke out between the Royal Lao Army and the communist North Vietnam-backed, and Soviet Union-backed Pathet Lao guerillas.
The Lao government heavily controls all media channels to prevent critique of its actions.
Of those Hmong who did return to Laos, some quickly escaped back to Thailand, describing discrimination and brutal treatment at the hands of Lao authorities.
(Due to the particularly heavy impact of cluster bombs during this war, Laos was a strong advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban the weapons, and was host to the First Meeting of States Parties to the convention in November 2010.)
The term "Laotian" does not necessarily refer to the Lao language, ethnic Lao people, language or customs.
For example, Khammu farmers in Luang Prabang plant the rice variety Khao Kam in small quantities near the hut in memory of dead parents, or at the edge of the rice field to indicate that parents are still alive.
Government policies are determined by the party through the all-powerful eleven-member Politburo of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party and the 61-member Central Committee of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party.
The main attractions for tourists include Buddhist culture and colonial architecture in Luang Prabang; gastronomy and ancient temples in the capital of Vientiane; backpacking in Muang Ngoi Neua and Vang Vieng; ancient and modern culture and history in The Plain of Jars region (main article: Phonsavan); Laos Civil War history in Sam Neua; trekking and visiting hill tribes in a number of areas including Phongsaly and Luang Namtha; spotting tigers and other wildlife in Nam Et-Phou Louey; caves and waterfalls near Thakhek; relaxation, the Irrawaddy dolphin and Khone Phapheng Falls at Si Phan Don or, as they are known in English, the Four Thousand Islands; Wat Phu, an ancient Khmer temple complex; and the Bolaven Plateau for waterfalls and coffee.
Only 4.01 percent of the country is arable land, and a mere 0.34 percent used as permanent crop land, the lowest percentage in the Greater Mekong Subregion.
In many rural areas electricity is at least partly available.
Polygamy is officially a crime in Laos, though the penalty is minor.
The Lao alphabet, which evolved sometime between the 13th and 14th centuries, was derived from the ancient Khmer script and is very similar to Thai, and easily understood by readers of Thai script.
Illegal logging is also a major problem.
In the Lao language, the country's name is "Muang Lao" () or "Pathet Lao" (): both literally mean "Lao Country".
Ngum was descended from a long line of Lao kings, tracing back to Khoun Boulom.
Five of them were arrested and subsequently sentenced to up to 10 years imprisonment on charges of treason.
Export earnings from international visitors and tourism goods are expected to generate 15.5 percent of total exports or US$270.3 million in 2010, growing in nominal terms to US$484.2 million (12.5 percent of the total) in 2020.
The Pathet Lao began a war against the French Colonial forces with the aid of the Vietnamese independence organisation (the Viet Minh).
Shortly after, the Kingdom of Champasak and the territory of Vientiane were added to the protectorate.
During their rule, the French introduced the corvée, a system that forced every male Lao to contribute 10&nbsp;days of manual labour per year to the colonial government.
From 1975 to 1996, the United States resettled some 250,000 Lao refugees from Thailand, including 130,000 Hmong.
A Siamese military campaign in Laos in 1876 was described by a British observer as having been "transformed into slave-hunting raids on a large scale".
Laos never had any importance for France other than as a buffer state between British-influenced Thailand and the more economically important Annam and Tonkin.
The official language is Lao.
Internet cafes are now common in the major urban centres and are especially popular with the younger generation.
Although some accusations of forced repatriation were denied, thousands of Hmong people refused to return to Laos.
The official tourism slogan is "Simply Beautiful".
Lending further support to earlier claims that the government of Laos was persecuting the Hmong, filmmaker Rebecca Sommer documented first-hand accounts in her documentary, ''Hunted Like Animals'', and in a comprehensive report which includes summaries of claims made by the refugees and was submitted to the UN in May 2006.
The country's population density was 27/km2.
Sinh is a traditional garment worn by Laotian women in daily life.
Setthathirat became king in 1548, after his father was killed, and ordered the construction of what would become the symbol of Laos, That Luang.
This, along with growth of the mining sector, Laos has been referred to as one of  East Asia and Pacific's fastest growing economies by the World Bank, with annual GDP growth averaging 7% for the past decade.
Following the Vue Mai incident, debate over the Hmong's planned repatriation to Laos intensified greatly, especially in the United States, where it drew strong opposition from many American conservatives and some human rights advocates.
lead and other minerals have been identified, explored and mined.
The national carrier is Lao Airlines.
The scheme was aborted in the 1930s.
Healthy life expectancy was 54 years in 2007.
On 27 December 2009, the ''New York Times'' reported that the Thai military was preparing to forcibly return 4,000 Hmong asylum seekers to Laos by the end of the year: the BBC later reported that repatriations had started.
Between 1964 and 1973, the U.S. dropped two million tons of bombs on Laos, nearly equal to the 2.1 million tons of bombs the U.S. dropped on Europe and Asia during all of World War II, making Laos the most heavily bombed country in history relative to the size of its population; ''The New York Times'' noted this was "nearly a ton for every person in Laos."
(See: Indochina refugee crisis)
The authorities in Laos have recently developed an innovative regulatory framework for Public–Private partnership contracts signed with small enterprises, in parallel with more conventional regulation of State-owned water enterprises.
One has since died due to his treatment by prison guards, while one has been released.
Some 80 million bombs failed to explode and remain scattered throughout the country, rendering vast swathes of land impossible to cultivate and killing or maiming 50 Laotians every year.
Important government decisions are vetted by the Council of Ministers.
In 1996 as the deadline for the closure of Thai refugee camps approached, and under mounting political pressure, the United States agreed to resettle Hmong refugees who passed a new screening process.
In 1993 the Laos government set aside 21 percent of the nation's land area for habitat conservation preservation.
Lao authorities have said that, in reality, forest coverage might be no more than 35 percent because of development projects such as dams, on top of the losses to illegal logging.
US Representative Steve Gunderson (R-WI), for instance, told a Hmong gathering: "I do not enjoy standing up and saying to my government that you are not telling the truth, but if that is necessary to defend truth and justice, I will do that."
This sector, since 2003-04, has made significant contributions to the economic condition of Laos.
An updated map of the Laos provinces(from 2014).
Lao Soung account for only about 10 percent of the population.
According to the anti-corruption non-governmental organisation Transparency International, Laos remains one of the most corrupt countries in the world.
The only legal political party is the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP).
Laos and Vietnamese (SRV) troops were reported to have raped and killed four Christian Hmong women in Xieng Khouang province in 2011, according to the US-based non-governmental public policy research organisation The Centre for Public Policy Analysis.
Archaeological evidence suggests agriculturist society developed during the 4th millennium BC.
Songthaews (pick-up trucks with benches) are used in the country for long-distance and local public transport.
Vientiane prefecture, the capital and largest city, had about 740,010 residents in 2008.
Between 20,000 and 70,000 Laotians died during the Civil War.
The male literacy rate exceeds the female literacy rate.
In 1893, it became a French protectorate, with the three territories uniting to form what is now known as Laos.
An ancient human skull was recovered from the Tam Pa Ling Cave in the Annamite Mountains in northern Laos; the skull is at least 46,000 years old, making it the oldest modern human fossil found to date in Southeast Asia.
Tourism is the fastest-growing industry in the country.
A second Provisional Government of National Unity formed by Prince Souvanna Phouma in 1962 proved to be unsuccessful, and the situation steadily deteriorated into large scale civil war between the Royal Laotian government and the Pathet Lao.
The Thai foreign ministry has said that it will halt deportation of Hmong refugees held in Detention Centres in Nong Khai, while talks are underway to resettle them in Australia, Canada, the Netherlands and the United States.
More than 540 mineral deposits of gold, copper, zinc,
For example, Article&nbsp;8 makes it clear that Laos is a multiethnic state and is committed to equality between ethnic groups.
Debate on the issue escalated quickly.
France rescued King Oun Kham and added Luang Phrabang to the Protectorate of French Indochina.
Laos' progress is notable in comparison to similar developing countries.
This has contributed to a third of the population of Laos currently living below the international poverty line (living on less than US$1.25 per day).
Sticky rice is a characteristic staple food and has cultural and religious significance to the Lao people.
Laos' predominantly rural (68 percent, source: Department of Statistics, Ministry of Planning and Investment, 2009) population makes investing in sanitation difficult.
In 2004 and 2005, thousands of Hmong fled from the jungles of Laos to a temporary refugee camp in the Thai province of Phetchabun.
In 1977, a communist newspaper promised the party would hunt down the “American collaborators” and their families “to the last root”.
It espouses Marxism and is governed by a single party communist politburo dominated by military generals.
Recognized asylum seekers were to be given resettlement opportunities, while the remaining refugees were to be repatriated under guarantee of safety.
Local tradition holds that there are three seasons (rainy, cold and hot) as the latter two months of the climatologically defined dry season are noticeably hotter than the earlier four months.
The adult literacy rate exceeds two thirds.
Additionally, the Khao San Pathet Lao, the country's official news agency, publishes English and French versions of its eponymous paper.
Following threats of forcible removal by the Thai government, the United States, in a significant victory for the Hmong, agreed to accept 15,000 of the refugees in 2003.
The army marine section, equipped with 16 patrol crafts, has 600 personnel.
In the late 19th century, Luang Prabang was ransacked by the Chinese Black Flag Army.
The total literacy rate is 73 percent (2010 estimate).
In 1992 elections were held for a new 85-seat National Assembly with members, nominated by the one-party communist government, elected by secret ballot to five-year terms.
The refugees claim that attacks against them have continued almost unabated since the war officially ended in 1975, and have become more intense in recent years.
Outside government representatives have not been allowed to interview this group over the last three years.
Laos currently has nine daily newspapers, 90 magazines, 43 radio stations, and 32 TV stations operating throughout the country.
In an effort to halt the planned repatriation, the Republican-led US&nbsp;Senate and House of Representatives both appropriated funds for the remaining Thailand-based Hmong to be immediately resettled in the United States; Clinton, however, responded by promising a veto of the legislation.
In 2010, one in every 10.9 jobs was in the tourism sector.
The major roads connecting the major urban centres, in particular Route 13, have been significantly upgraded in recent years, but villages far from major roads can be reached only through unpaved roads that may not be accessible year-round.
When Japan surrendered, some Lao nationalists (including Prince Phetsarath) declared Laotian independence, but by early 1946, French troops had reoccupied the country and conferred limited autonomy on Laos.
Anouvong was taken to Bangkok as a prisoner, where he died.
Male life expectancy at birth was at 60.85 years and female life expectancy was at 64.76 years in 2012.
Laos' population was estimated at 6.5 million in 2012, dispersed unevenly across the country.
In 1975 the Pathet Lao, along with the Vietnam People's Army, and backed by the Soviet Union, overthrew the royalist Lao government, forcing King Savang Vatthana to abdicate on 2 December 1975.
More than half of the nation's population, 60 percent, is ethnic Lao—the principal lowland inhabitants, and the politically and culturally dominant people of Laos.
