It proved to be a successful formula; more than 850,000&nbsp;copies of his books were sold in the twelve years after the first compilation of his editorial cartoons went on sale in 1977.
He has no intentions to preach his beliefs through his art, believing that people should be free to make up their own minds and that the best he can do is to make readers ponder the deeper meanings behind a humorous scene.
The situation erupted with the racial riots of 1969, and for several years after these incidents relationships among the races were raw and fragile.
Mohammad Nor Khalid was born on 5 March 1951 in a ''kampung'' (village) in Gopeng, Perak, Malaysia.
The book was a commercial hit; according to Lat, the first printing—60,000 to 70,000&nbsp;copies—sold out within four&nbsp;months of the book's release.
Lat's pride in cartooning pushed him to promote the art as a respectable career.
He set up his own company, Kampung Boy Sendirian Berhad (Village Boy private limited), to oversee the merchandising of his cartoon characters and publishing of his books.
Lat's fans recognised the trademark of his oeuvre as "a safe and nice humour that made everyone feel good and nostalgic by appealing to their benevolent sides rather than by poking at their bad sides".
In 1974, he switched careers to be an editorial cartoonist.
The series ran in the paper every week for 26&nbsp;years.
In 1968, at the age of 17, Lat started penning ''Keluarga Si Mamat'' (''Mamats Family''), a comic strip for ''Berita Minggu'' (the Sunday edition of ''Berita Harian'').
Graduating with an education equivalent to that of high school, Lat started looking for a job and had his sights set on becoming an illustrator.
He professes that his primary aim in drawing cartoons is to make people laugh; his role as a cartoonist is "to translate the reaction of the people into humorous cartoons".
Lat is also partial to country music, and to singers such as Hank Williams and Roy Rogers because he finds their tunes "humble".
In such cases, Lat uses his art to help educate the young about his faith.
His works mostly illustrate Malaysia's social and political scenes, portraying them in a comedic light without bias.
Zambriabu and Rasyid Asmawi copied the distinctive three loop noses and hairstyles of Lat's characters.
Lat's successes showed Malaysians that they could thrive and succeed as cartoonists, and inspired them to look to the cartooning profession for potential careers.
Rejabhad was not the first local figure to have exerted an influence on Lat.
''Tiga Sekawan'' was the culmination of that desire, the success after numerous failed submissions and an affirmation to Lat that he could become a cartoonist like his idol.
Lat is adamant on not changing what he has already drawn; several pieces of his cartoons remain unpublished because editors refused to print them unchanged.
Lat prefers to portray his ideas with as little antagonism as possible.
Music has played a crucial part in Lat's life since his youth; he revealed in an interview that listening to songs such as Peggy March's "I Will Follow Him" and Paul & Paula's "Hey Paula" helped him learn English.
Lat covers various genres in his works.
Malaysian comics scholar Muliyadi Muhamood commented that the humour in Lat's cartoons is evoked through graphical and textual means; "short, compact dialogues" and puns form the text while "facial expressions and actions" of the characters help to bring out the funny side of things.
In 2011–12, he is to join other artists from around the world in Italy for the Civitella Ranieri Fellowship programme.
The boy changed schools several times; the nature of his father's job moved the family from one military base to another across the country, until they settled back at his birthplace in 1960.
There were comments on its similarities to ''The Simpsons'', and on its English which was not entirely local.
After noticing Lat's submissions to newspapers and magazines, he corresponded with the young cartoonist.
His wife helps him in his work, scanning his completed cartoons and emailing them to the newspaper offices in Kuala Lumpur.
Drawing cartoons is more than a career to him:
Lat's formal education began at a local Malay ''kampung(village)'' school; these institutions often taught in the vernacular and did not aspire to academic attainment.
''Keluarga Si Mamat'' and ''The Kampung Boy'' faithfully depicted their characters' appearances and attitudes.
The inspiration for his cartoons about ''Bersunat'' came about when he was on assignment at a hospital.
After failing to attain the grades that were required to continue education beyond high school, Lat became a newspaper reporter.
His father was a government clerk with the Malaysian Armed Forces, and his mother a housewife.
Lat's artistic skills were cultivated from youth and self-taught.
Humorous stories of children at play also populated the series.
Lat illustrated an obese teacher who conducted a physical education session to his eventual collapse.
Despite the lowly reputation of his profession at that time, Lat is very proud of his choice of career; he once took umbrage with an acquaintance's girlfriend for her presumption that the words and ideas in his cartoons were not his own.
In 1975, however, Lat's next attempt at a political cartoon won Lee's approval.
After visiting Malaysia in 1987, Aragonés used the experience to create a story for Groo in which the bumbling swordsman chances on the isle of Felicidad, whose inhabitants and natural habitat were modelled after those of the Southeast Asian country.
''Keluarga Si Mamat'' and its protagonist were named after his youngest brother Mamat, its stories based on Lat's observations of his fellow villagers and schoolmates.
The first country to do so was the United States, followed by others such as Australia, Germany, and Japan.
Lat treated Rejabhad with great respect, holding up his mentor as a role model.
In 1997, Ron Provencher, a professor emeritus at Northern Illinois University, reported that Lat's style reminded his informants on the Malaysian cartooning scene of ''The Beano''.
The elongated "L" in Lat's signature was born from his joy in completing a work.
Lat trusts his editors to do their jobs and cull what is socially unacceptable for print.
Lat's work with pen and ink so impressed Larry Gonick that the American cartoonist was tempted into experimenting with this medium for part of his ''The Cartoon History of the Universe''.
Malaysian society used to look down on cartoonists, assuming that those who practised the trade were intellectually inferior to writers, or were lesser artists; Lat was not the only cartoonist to be paid with movie tickets in the 1950s; Rejabhad once received one ticket for ten cartoons, and many others were likewise recompensed, or were paid very little money.
Rejabhad was well respected by his countrymen, who titled him the "''penghulu'' (chief) of Malay cartoonists".
He had the benefit of the mentorship of Rejabhad, an experienced political cartoonist.
Thus, Lat was able to make his readers believe his stories and characters were substantially "Malay".
After the foreign influences in his works were noticed by a family friend, Lat was advised by his father to observe and draw upon ideas from their surroundings instead.
While in school, he supplemented his family's income by contributing cartoon strips to newspapers and magazines.
Muliyadi suggested that the cartoon could be interpreted as a simple tease of the teacher's plight, a suggestion to examine the curriculum taught (change physical education to an informal session), a remark on the shortage of teachers, or more extremely, a criticism of the government's failure to prevent the situation from happening.
His later works, however, were mostly in English; ''Scenes of Malaysian Life'' ran only in the English-language ''New Straits Times''.
Furthermore, his "breathtakingly detailed, lurid and graphically gory descriptions" of the aftermaths of crimes had to be frequently toned down by his seniors.
He was 13&nbsp;years old when he achieved his first published comic book, ''Tiga Sekawan'' (''Three Friends Catch a Thief'').
Lee refused to print the work unchanged, and pointedly asked the cartoonist "You want to go to jail?!"
The English idiom in his works reflects the local pidgin form—"Malglish"—containing smatterings of Malay words and a simpler grammatical structure.
He explained that this quality arose from the well-thought-out composition of Lat's works, which helped to clearly express the ideas behind the cartoons.
In 1994, the Sultan of Perak bestowed the honorific title of ''datuk'' on Lat, in recognition of the cartoonist's work in helping to promote social harmony and understanding through his cartoons.
Datuk '''Mohammad Nor Khalid''' (Jawi: '''محمد نور خالد'''), more commonly known as '''Lat''', (born 5 March 1951) is a Malaysian cartoonist.
Foreign embassy officials have sought Lat for his insight into the cultures of their societies.
Lent further hazards that the cartoonist profession was made more respectable in Malaysia by the award to Lat in 1994 of a ''datuk'' title (equivalent to a knighthood).
Aside from retreating slightly from the cartooning scene, he wanted to be close to his old ''kampung'' and let his children experience life in a small town or village; he had married in 1977, and the couple have four children—two daughters and two sons.
One of the park's attractions will be the sight of performers dressed up as ''Kampung Boy'' characters beside those in Hello Kitty and Bob the Builder costumes and also reported in August 2012 will be a Lat-inspired diner called ''Lat's Place''.
When Rejabhad was requested by Lat's mother to take care of her 15-year-old son in the cartooning industry, he accepted.
His first duty was to document Malaysian culture in a series of cartoons titled ''Scenes of Malaysian Life''.
Singaporean cartoonist Morgan Chua believed that Lat "managed to create an impressively local style while remaining original", and although comics historian Isao Shimizu found Lat's lines "somewhat crude", he noted that the cartoonist's work was "highly original" and "full of life".
These cartoons imbued Lat with a fascination of family life and the antics of children, which served him well in his later works.
Four years later, in 1964, the young cartoonist achieved his first published work: a local movie magazine—''Majallah Filem''—printed his comic strips, paying him with movie tickets.
In 1991, he banded together with fellow cartoonists Zunar, Rejabhad, and Muliyadi to start "Pekartun" (Persatuan Kartunis Selangor dan Kuala Lumpur).
Lat's works are recognised as visual records of Malaysia's cultural history; he was awarded a Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize in 2002 for preserving Malay rural culture in his works.
The Malaysian Press Institute felt Lat had "become an institution in his own right", honouring him with their Special Jury Award in 2005.
Lat felt compelled to illustrate the differences between life in his ''kampung'' and the city.
By 1978, two collections of his works (''Lots of Lat'' and ''Lat's Lot'') had been compiled and sold to the public.
Malaysian art critic and historian Redza Piyadasa believes Lat's early years in the ''kampung'' ingrained the cartoonist with pride in his ''kampung'' roots and a "peculiarly Malay" outlook—"full of ... gentleness and refinement".
The art critic was not alone in having a high regard for Lat's works.
He found their experiences clinical, devoid of the elaborate and personal ceremonies that celebrated his own rite to manhood in the village.
After 27&nbsp;years of living and working in Kuala Lumpur, Lat moved back to Ipoh for a more sedate lifestyle in semi-retirement.
Lat's best known work is ''The Kampung Boy'' (1979), which is published in several countries across the world.
Bestowed on Lat by the Sultan of Perak, the title was Malaysia's highest recognition of the cartoonist's influence on his countrymen and his contributions to the country.
Lent (2003) and Shimizu (1996) both suggest that the Malaysian comic industry began to boom after Lat joined the profession on a full-time basis in 1974.
Lat said that raising his children has helped him cope with the pressures of his fame and made him realise that he might be losing touch with the new generation of Malaysians who have different tastes in cartoons.
Others commented that Lat's art stood out on its own.
By 2009, the book has been reprinted 16&nbsp;times and published in several other countries in various languages, including Portuguese, French, and Japanese.
Raja Hamzah also had success with comic strips on family life, such as ''Mat Jambul's Family'' and ''Dol Keropok and Wak Tempeh''.
At the Fourth Asian Cartoon Exhibition in Tokyo, Lat revealed that when it came to making religious comments in his work, he only did so on his own religion (Islam).
It also helps to clarify legal issues such as copyrights to its members, and acts as an intermediary between them and the government.
The success of ''The Kampung Boy'' established Lat as the "most renowned cartoonist in Malaysia."
The scores, composed by Carl Davis, complemented Lat's visuals, capturing the spirit of ''kampung'' childhood in a "simple, idyllic past".
In 1993 he produced a short animated feature, ''Mina Smiles'', for Unesco; the video, featuring a female lead, was for a literacy campaign.
His parents actively encouraged him to develop his artistic skills, although his father occasionally told him not to make a career of it.
Personal concerns motivated Lat for his next foray into animation; judging that Western animation of the 1980s and 90s had negative influences, he wanted to produce a series for Malaysian children that espoused local values.
According to Lent, Redza judged that Lat had "elevated cartooning to the level of 'high visual arts' through his social commentary and 'construction of the landscape'".
Lat admitted of his unprinted works: "Okay, maybe I've pushed the line a little bit, but I've never got into trouble and, frankly, only a handful of my cartoons were ever spiked."
Aside from promoting the rights of fellow cartoonists, Lat developed an interest in encouraging conservation of the natural environment.
The cartoonist's compliance with tradition in his art earned him the country's respect.
As he devises the concept for his cartoon, he eliminates anything he believes to be malicious or insensitive.
When he sketches "fashionable girls", he puts on Paul McCartney's tracks, and switches to Indonesian gamelan when he needs to draw intricate details.
In Redza's opinion, Lat played a great role in making cartooning respectable among his fellow Malaysians.
The result was ''Kampung Boy'' the television series (1997), an adaptation of his trademark comic.
Lat liked to doodle with materials provided by his parents, and his other forms of recreation were reading comics and watching television; Lat idolised local cartoonist Raja Hamzah, who was popular with his tales of swashbuckling Malay heroes.
The academics use his drawings to help them illustrate their points in a humorous yet educational manner.
Lat's works have been used in academic studies—the fields of which are diverse, spanning law, urban planning, and diets.
Redza's judgement was that ''The Beano'' and ''The Dandy'' were "early formative influences" on Lat before he came into his own style.
''Far Eastern Economic Review'' journalist Suhaini Aznam remarked that Lat's strength was his ability to portray the plight of the common man in a satiric light without any form of bias.
At that time, Lat's father had fallen seriously ill and could not work; Lat had to become the breadwinner of his family.
He adapted his life experiences and published them as his autobiographies, ''The Kampung Boy'' and ''Town Boy'', telling stories of rural and urban life with subtle comparisons between the two.
Lat is also particularly concerned over what he sees as the negative side of urban development.
Lat produced a steady stream of editorial cartoons that entertained Malaysian society.
During their one-month stay, they are encouraged to share ideas in an environment fostered to stimulate their creativity.
In 2009, Kampung Boy partnered Sanrio and Hit Entertainment in a project to open an indoor theme park which would later be called as ''Puteri Harbour Family Theme Park'' in Nusajaya, Johor in August 2012.
Lat was later transferred to ''Berita''s parent publication, ''New Straits Times''.
The cartoonist believes he inherited the talent and interest from his father, who doodled as a hobby and was notorious for his sense of humour as the "village jester".
Returning to Malaysia full of fascination with his experience, Lat transformed ''Scenes of Malaysian Life'' into a series of editorial cartoons.
Lat became convinced that he was a failure at his job, and his despondency led him to tender his resignation.
Winner of the Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize in 2002, Lat has published more than 20&nbsp;volumes of cartoons since he was 13&nbsp;years old.
He was surprised to be told that Lat was already working within his organisation.
When that happens, the editors spike (blank) the space for his regular cartoon in the newspaper.
They have invited him to tour their countries, in the hope that he will record his experiences in cartoon form to share with the world.
Lat still draws with his usual pens and inks, avoiding the use of computers except to read his emails.
Gonick tried to use the medium as he did his regular brushes; however, the results proved unsatisfactory.
He became the paper's column cartoonist, taking up a position created for him by Samad, now deputy editor of the ''New Straits Times''.
Lat was the eldest child in his family,  and he often played in the jungles, plantations, and tin mines with his friends.
The newspaper also sent him to study for four&nbsp;months at St Martin's School of Art in London, where he was introduced to English editorial cartoons and newspapers.
A year later, Lat passed the Special Malay Class Examination, qualifying him to attend an English medium boarding school—National Type Primary School—in the state's capital, Ipoh.
Readers of the book were captivated by his "heart-warming" portrayal of Malaysian rural life, rendered with "scribbly black-and-white sketches" and accompanied by "simple but eloquent prose".
In his ''Keluarga Si Mamat'' series, Lat drew slapsticks and satires that examined the encounters between traditional and modern values.
Despite his many works of political nature, Lat does not consider himself a political cartoonist and openly admits that there are others better than he is in this field.
In 1986, Lat became the first cartoonist to exhibit his work at the National Museum in Kuala Lumpur; the event drew a record number of 600,000&nbsp;visitors in two months.
Lat has experimented with media other than paper.
The characters in a cartoon were often of one race, and negative focus on the foibles of particular races or cultures worked its way into the mainstream.
In the previous year, Lat's company, Kampung Boy, had organised the first Malaysian International Cartoonists Gathering, bringing together cartoonists from several countries across the world to exhibit their art and participate in conferences to educate others in their work.
His works, reflecting his view about Malaysian life and the world, are staple features in national newspapers such as ''New Straits Times'' and ''Berita Minggu''.
Rejabhad, a well-respected cartoonist, was Lat's mentor, and imbued the junior cartoonist with a preference to be sensitive to the subjects of his works.
In 1979, Berita Publishing Sendirian Berhad published Lat's ''The Kampung Boy'', an autobiographical cartoon account of his youth.
When Lat was critical of politicians, he portrayed them in situations "unusual, abnormal or unexpected" to their status or personalities, using the contrast to make the piece humorous.
In 2007, the National University of Malaysia awarded him an Honorary Doctorate in Anthropology and Sociology.
Lat's career took a turn for the better on 10 February 1974; ''Asia Magazine'', a periodical based in Hong Kong, published his cartoons about ''Bersunat''—a circumcision ceremony all Malaysian boys of the Islamic faith have to undergo.
Others, such as Reggie Lee and Nan, incorporated Lat's detailed "thematic and stylistic approaches" in their works.
He is treated as a celebrity, and his cartoon characters decorate stamps, financial guides, and aeroplanes.
In 1981, ''Town Boy'' was published.
He further reminisced about the simple cleaner life he had enjoyed as a child in the ''kampung''.
He enjoys pop music, particularly rock music of the 1950s and 60s, listening to The Beatles, Bob Dylan, and Elvis Presley.
Thirty-six years after taking Lat under his wing, Rejabhad recounted their relationship in these words:
In 1977, when a protest was organised against logging activities in the Endau-Rompin Reserves, Lat helped gain support for the movement by drawing cartoons in the newspapers that highlighted the issue.
He drew ''Mat Som'', a story of a ''kampung'' boy who moved to the city to work as a writer and courted a pretty city girl.
He has, however, come into his own way of illustration, drawing the common man on the streets with bold strokes in pen and ink.
Before Lat's emergence, Malaysian cartooning was largely unappreciated by the public, despite the popular works of Raja Hamzad and Rejabhad.
At the age of nine, Lat began to supplement his family's income through his artistic skills, by drawing comics and selling them to his friends.
Jennifer Rodrigo Willmott, writer for ''Reader's Digest'', stated that:
He prefers to be assertive in areas with which he is comfortable or competent.
Although still a schoolboy, Lat was earning a monthly income of RM100, a large sum in those days, from his cartoons.
Invited to give a speech at the 9th Osaka International Symposium on Civilisation in 1988, Lat talked about the environmental problems associated with overpopulation and heavy industrialisation.
Several of his works caricature the consequences of pollution and over-exploitation of resources.
He gave advice and influenced Lat's growth as a cartoonist.
Heeding the advice, the young cartoonist intimated himself with local happenings.
His defence and fondness of the old ways are manifested in his ''The Kampung Boy'', ''Town Boy'', ''Mat Som'', and ''Kampung Boy: Yesterday and Today'', which champion the old lifestyles  as spiritually superior.
Several younger artists imitated his style in the hopes of capturing equivalent rewards.
She found the illustration of a group of Malaysians huddled under an umbrella, taking shelter from a rain of xenophobic phrases, full of profound sadness.
Lat's first comic book publication, ''Tiga Sekawan'' (''Three Friends Catch a Thief''), was published by Sinaran Brothers that year.
Their toys were usually improvised from everyday sundries and items of nature.
The early influences on his art style were from the West.
Groening, creator of ''The Simpsons'', gave a testimonial for the United States version of ''The Kampung Boy'', praising Lat's signature work as "one of the all-time great cartoon books".
Her teachings expanded Lat's mind and made him more receptive to ideas that looked beyond his ''kampung''.
Lee found Lat's portrayal of the important ceremony humorous yet sensitive, and grumbled that the newspaper should have hired the artist.
His most recent involvement with animation was in 2009; ''Lat's Window to the World'', a musical animated feature, played at the Petronas Philharmonic Hall.
As he was taking breaks from investigating the dead victims of crime brought to the morgue, Lat chanced upon the circumcisions performed by the hospital on ethnic Malay boys.
Moving to the Malaysian capital Kuala Lumpur, Lat applied for a cartoonist's position at ''Berita Harian''.
Using a large cast of characters—a wide assortment of personalities and cultures—allows Lat to comment on a wider range of topics than is possible with a small group of characters.
Such cartoons did not help to sooth racial tensions that were simmering then.
After his study trip to London in 1975, Lat's works exhibited the influences of editorial cartoonists such as Frank Dickens, Ralph Steadman, and Gerald Scarfe.
Malaysia's political class grew comfortable with Lat's caricatures, and like the rest of the country, found them entertaining.
When ''Reader's Digest'' asked Malaysians in 2010 to rank which of 50&nbsp;local personalities was most worthy of trust, Lat was returned fourth on the list.
Lat accepted, a decision he explained was borne from necessity rather than choice: "It was a question of survival.
Like most of the Malaysian children in the 1950s, Lat watched Hanna-Barbera cartoons (''The Flintstones'' and ''The Jetsons'') on television and read imported British comics, such as ''The Dandy'' and ''The Beano''.
When Lat formally entered the cartooning industry, he was not totally unfamiliar with the profession.
The effects of Lat's works were not confined to the artistic sector.
In an interview, he revealed his discomfort with the concept of self-publishing, believing that unadulterated or unsupervised cartoon drawing could lead to "rubbish".
According to Redza, Lat soothed the nation's racial woes with his works.
Redza highlights Lat's move to Ipoh for higher schooling as a significant point in the cartoonist's development; the multi-racial environment helped establish his diverse friendships, which in turn broadened his cultural perspectives.
His approach proved popular, and at the end of 1975 he was appointed full-time cartoonist with total freedom in his work.
Raja Hamzah, popular with his action comics and ghost stories, was Lat's "hero" in his childhood.
The affection and admiration was mutual.
In 1997, after 27&nbsp;years of living in Kuala Lumpur, Lat moved back to Ipoh with his family.
Lat had been commissioned to help create three animated vignettes based on ''The Kampung Boy'' to accompany the instruments of the Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra.
His enjoyment of music is more than a passive interest; he is proficient with the guitar and piano, and can play them by ear.
Lat, however, pushed the boundaries; although he portrayed the politicians with dignity, he exaggerated notable features of their appearances and traits.
Muliyadi further stated that Lat's works offer many levels of interpretation; one reader would laugh at Lat's cartoon for its slapstick, while another would find the same work hilarious for its subtle critique of society.
Moving throughout the city to report on crimes gave Lat opportunities to observe and interact with the myriads of lives in the urban landscape, enabling him to gather material for his cartoons and increasing his understanding of the world.
As an example, Muliyadi referred to a ''Keluarga Si Mamat'' strip published in 1972.
Although Malaysians knew of Lat through ''Scenes of Malaysian Life'', it was his next work that propelled him into national consciousness and international recognition.
Cartoonists in the Southeast Asian region, such as Muliyadi, Chua, and Rejabhad, have given high praise to Lat, and his admirers further abroad include North American cartoonists Matt Groening and Eddie Campbell.
Lent gave his assessment in 1999:
The comic was in Malay and a commercial hit; its first print of 30,000&nbsp;copies sold out in three months.
His name and works are recognised internationally; foreign cartoonists, such as Matt Groening and Sergio Aragonés, admire his art, and foreign governments invite Lat to tour their countries, hoping to gain greater exposure for their countries through Lat's cartoons of his experiences in them.
He was told there was no vacancy, but the paper's editor, Abdul Samad Ismail, offered him the post of a crime reporter.
