Some Latin American countries viewed the U.S. interventions, allowed by the Monroe Doctrine when the U.S. deems necessary, with suspicion.
These percentages are lower among vulnerable population groups: only 75% of the poorest youth between the ages of 13 and 17 years attend school.
In the wake of the Boom, influential precursors such as Juan Rulfo, Alejo Carpentier, and above all Jorge Luis Borges were also rediscovered.
The 2000s commodities boom caused positive effects for many Latin American economies.
A national constitution was only enacted in 1853, reformed in 1860, and the country reorganized as a federal republic led by a liberal-conservative elite.
From the early 1980s through the mid-1990s, homicide rates increased by 50 percent.
This politico-economical initiative was institutionalized in North America by the 1994 NAFTA, and elsewhere in the Americas through a series of like agreements.
Despite significant progress, education access and school completion remains unequal in Latin America.
By the first millennium CE, South America's vast rainforests, mountains, plains and coasts were the home of tens of millions of people.
Enrique Iglesias, although not a Latin American, has also contributed for the success of Latin music.
Napoleon's fear of the United States' economic influence over the Pacific trade region, and in turn all New World economic activity, pushed France to intervene in Mexico under the pretense of collecting on Mexico's debt.
In Nicaragua, Spanish is the official language, but on the country's Caribbean coast English and indigenous languages such as Miskito, Sumo, and Rama also hold official status.
Though inflation fell sharply, industrial production dropped with the decline of official protection.
Among the most successful have been Gloria Estefan (Cuba), Mercedes Sosa (Argentina), Roberto Carlos (Brazil), Carlos Santana (Mexico) of whom have sold over 90 million records, Luis Miguel (Mexico), Shakira (Colombia) and Vicente Fernández (Mexico) with over 50 million records sold worldwide.
In 1837, conservative Rafael Carrera conquered Guatemala and separated from the Central American Union.
Zimmermann sent the telegram in anticipation of the resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare by Germany on 1 February, an act which Germany presumed would lead to war.
In the absence of a charismatic figure who could represent a moderate face of power, during this period a series of localized rebellions took place, as the Cabanagem, the Malê Revolt, the Balaiada, the Sabinada, and the Ragamuffin War, which emerged from the dissatisfaction of the provinces with the central power, coupled with old and latent social tensions peculiar of a vast, slaveholding and newly independent nation state.
The term Latin America was supported by the French Empire of Napoleon III during the French invasion of Mexico as a way to include France among countries with influence in the Americas and to exclude Anglophone countries.
In several nations, especially in the Caribbean region, creole languages are spoken.
About 10 million Mexicans live in the United States.
Some groups formed more permanent settlements such as the Chibchas (or "Muiscas" or "Muyscas") and the Tairona groups.
More recently, Reggaeton, which blends Jamaican reggae and dancehall with Latin America genres such as bomba and plena, as well as that of hip hop, is becoming more popular, in spite of the controversy surrounding its lyrics, dance steps (Perreo) and music videos.
Prior to 1959, Cuba, who fought for its independence along American soldiers in the Spanish–American War, was also known to have a close socioeconomic relation with the United States.
The region was home to many indigenous peoples and advanced civilizations, including the Aztecs, Toltecs,  Maya, and Inca.
This bloc nominally opposes any Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States, although Uruguay has manifested its intention otherwise.
production, which is largely a women's issue because of how it draws on women for cheap labor.
However, tensions between the two countries were still high and over the next six years things only got worse with raids along the border and attacks by Native Americans against Mexican citizens.
Initially, Brazil wanted to only provide resources and shelter for the war to have a chance of gaining a high postwar status but ended up sending 25,000 men to fight.
Some of the countries that abolished sodomy laws or banned any reference to state interference in consensual adult sexuality in the 19th century were Dominican Republic (1822), Brazil (1824), Peru (1836), Mexico (1871), Paraguay (1880), Argentina (1887), Honduras (1899), Guatemala and El Salvador.
From the early twentieth century, the art of Latin America was greatly inspired by the Constructivist Movement.
The incident proved to be very embarrassing for the new Kennedy administration.
As newly appointed president, Benito Juárez suspended payment of debts for next two years, to focus on a rebuilding and stabilization initiative in Mexico under the new government.
Indigenous legacies in music, dance, foods, arts and crafts, clothing, folk culture and traditions are very strong in Latin America.
Creole languages of mainland Latin America, similarly, are derived from European languages and various African tongues.
The comprehensive Free Trade Area of the Americas project, however, was rejected by most South American countries at the 2005 4th Summit of the Americas.
Between 1946 and 1959 Latin America received only 2% of the United States foreign aid despite having poor conditions similar to the main recipients of The Marshall Plan.
But also from Japanese and Korean immigration especially headed to Brazil.
In Latin American countries not named above, the population of speakers of indigenous languages tend to be very small or even non-existent (e.g.
Instead, the reform failed because of the simplistic theory that guided it and the lack of experienced American experts who could understand Latin American customs.
In some countries e.g.
In the mid-1840s some leaders in Caracas organized a liberal opposition.
The Brazilian Expeditionary Force was sent to Naples, Italy to fight for democracy.
Hispanic America) with the inclusion of nations that according to him do not share the same pattern of conquest and colonization.
Neoliberal restructuring consistently redistributed income upward while denying political responsibility to provide social welfare rights, and though development projects took place throughout the region, both inequality and poverty increased.
From the early 1820s to 1850, the post-independence economies of Latin American countries were lagging and stagnant.
Many analysts attribute the reason to why the region has such an alarming crime rate and criminal culture is largely due to social and income inequality within the region, they say that growing social inequality is fueling crime in the region.
Spanish is the official language of most of the rest of the countries on the Latin American mainland (Spanish language in the Americas), as well as in Cuba, Puerto Rico (where it is co-official with English), and the Dominican Republic.
The victory came to symbolize Mexico's power and national resolve against foreign occupancy and as a result delayed France's later attack on Mexico City for an entire year (Cinco de Mayo (Mexican History)).
The message came as a coded telegram dispatched by the Foreign Secretary of the German Empire, Arthur Zimmermann, on January 16, 1917.
In Colombia alone, one person was murdered every 10 minutes in 2005.
Markets that were previously unopposed as a result of the war in Latin America grew stagnant as the rest of the world no longer needed their goods.
Eventually these early movements were crushed by the royalist troops by 1810, including those of Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla in Mexico in the year 1810.
The Garifuna language is spoken along the Caribbean coast in Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Belize mostly by the Garifuna people a mixed race Zambo people who were the result of mixing between Indigenous Caribbeans and escaped Black slaves.
Caribbean Hispanic music, such as merengue, bachata, salsa, and more recently reggaeton, from such countries as the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Trinidad and Tobago, Cuba, and Panama, has been strongly influenced by African rhythms and melodies.
Antonio Leocadio Guzman was an active participant and journalist in this movement and gained much popularity among the people of Caracas.
Portuguese is spoken only in Brazil (Brazilian Portuguese), the biggest and most populous country in the region.
These groups are in the circum Caribbean region.
Compared to prior generations, Latin American youth have seen an increase in their levels of education.
By the end of the sixteenth century Spain and Portugal had been joined by others, including France, in occupying large areas of North, Central and South America, ultimately extending from Alaska to the southern tips of the Patagonia.
Other notable successful mainstream acts through the years, include Soda Stereo, Celia Cruz, Thalía, Ricky Martin, Marc Anthony, Selena, Lynda Thomas and Menudo.
About 70% of the Latin American population consider themselves Catholic.
On January 22, 1942, Brazil officially ended all relations with Germany, Japan, and Italy, becoming a part of the Allies.
Joaquín Torres García and Manuel Rendón have been credited with bringing the Constructivist Movement into Latin America from Europe.
Recent economic liberalisation also plays a role as not everyone is equally capable of taking advantage of its benefits.
Cuban cinema has enjoyed much official support since the Cuban revolution and important film-makers include Tomás Gutiérrez Alea.
The industry suffered during the 1976–1983 military dictatorship; but re-emerged to produce the Academy Award winner ''The Official Story'' in 1985.
Encouraged by the success of Guatemala in the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état, in 1960, the U.S. decided to support an attack on Cuba by anti-Castro rebels.
Latin America has also produced world-class classical performers such as the Chilean pianist Claudio Arrau, Brazilian pianist Nelson Freire and the Argentine pianist and conductor Daniel Barenboim.
However, what really put Latin American literature on the global map was no doubt the literary boom of the 1960s and 1970s, distinguished by daring and experimental novels (such as Julio Cortázar's ''Rayuela'' (1963)) that were frequently published in Spain and quickly translated into English.
The British were able to capture numerous amounts of precious metals, before a French naval force intervened on behalf of the Spanish King and took down the invading force.
The doctrine warns European nations that the United States will no longer tolerate the colonization of Latin American countries.
The era of Somoza family rule was characterized by strong U.S. support for the government and its military15 as well as a heavy reliance on U.S. based multi-national corporations.
Indigenous peoples of the Americas in various European colonies were forced to work in European plantations and mines; along with African slaves who were also introduced in the proceeding centuries.
With the last Portuguese soldiers surrendering on 8 March 1824, Portugal officially recognized Brazil on 29 August 1825.
Latin American film flourished after sound was introduced in cinema, which added a linguistic barrier to the export of Hollywood film south of the border.
Due to the impact of Enlightenment ideals after the French revolution, a certain number of Iberian-American countries decriminalized homosexuality after France and French territories in the Americas in 1791.
The telegram instructed Ambassador Eckardt that if the U.S. appeared certain to enter the war, he was to approach the Mexican Government with a proposal for military alliance, with funding from Germany.
They tried to assist the army by bringing them up to the European military standard but constant civil missions did not prepare them for World War II.
Over the past two centuries, Latin America’s GDP per capita has fluctuated around world average.
Latin America was more concerned with issues of economic development, while the United States focused on fighting communism, even though the presence of communism was small in Latin America.
Significantly, as democracy spread across much of Latin America, the realm of government more inclusive (a trend that proved conductive to social movements), the economic ventures remained exclusive to a few elite groups within society.
With heavy resistance by Mexican rebels and the fear of United States intervention against France, forced Napoleon III to withdraw from Mexico, leaving Maximilian to surrender, where he would be later executed by Mexican troops under the rule of Porfirio Díaz.
The main cause of the war was the United States' annexation of Texas in 1845 and a dispute afterwards about whether the border between Mexico and the United States ended where Mexico claimed, at the Nueces River, or ended where the United States claimed, at the Rio Grande.
These differences have a strong impact on the distribution of income, capital and political standing.
Another trend is the rapidly increasing importance of the relations with China.
As part of the alliance, Germany would assist Mexico to reconquer Texas and the Southwest.
A wave of imported U.S. films again damaged the industry in the early 1990s, though it soon recovered, thriving even during the Argentine economic crisis around 2001.
During the invasion of Portugal (1807), the Portuguese royal family fled to Brazil, establishing Rio de Janeiro as the de facto capital of Portugal.
Crime-related violence in Latin America represents the most threat to public health, striking more victims than HIV/AIDS or other infectious diseases.
Colombian sculptor and painter Fernando Botero is also widely known by his works which, on first examination, are noted for their exaggerated proportions and the corpulence of the human and animal figures.
The United States imposed a trade embargo on Cuba, and combined with Castro's expropriation of private enterprises, this was detrimental to the Cuban economy.
The effects of Asian influences have especially and mostly effected the nations of Belize, Brazil, Cuba, Panama and Peru.
Yiddish and Hebrew are possible to be heard around Buenos Aires and São Paulo especially.
Tertiary education has the lowest coverage, with only 70% of people between the ages of 18 and 25 years outside of the education system.
Brazil has more overall homicides than any country in the world, at 50,108, accounting for one in 10 globally.
Its occupation dates to some 14,000 years ago and there is some disputed evidence of even earlier occupation.
The top 10 highest homicide rates per 100,000 inhabitants ever recorded since 1995 were entirely made up of countries from Latin America and they were El Salvador, Honduras, and Colombia with El Salvador scoring the highest homicide rate ever recorded at 139.1 back in 1995.
In general, these programs provide money to poor families under the condition that those transfers are used as an investment on their children's human capital, such as regular school attendance and basic preventive health care.
Inequality has been reproduced and transmitted through generations because Latin American political systems allow a differentiated access on the influence that social groups have in the decision making process, and it responds in different ways to the least favored groups that have less political representation and capacity of pressure.
Mexico is possibly the only country that contains a wider variety of indigenous languages than any Latin American country, but the most spoken language is Nahuatl.
However, the constant state of warfare left Mexico with a tremendous amount of debt owed to Spain, England, and France, all of whom funded the Mexican war effort (Neeno).
The European powers of Spain and Portugal colonized the region, which along with the rest of the uncolonized world, was divided into areas of Spanish and Portuguese control by the line of demarcation in 1494, which gave Spain all areas to the west, and Portugal all areas to the east (the Portuguese lands in South America subsequently becoming Brazil).
These issues lead to adolescents dropping out of the educational system early.
Alejandro González Iñárritu directed in 2010 ''Biutiful'' and ''Birdman'' (2014), Alfonso Cuarón directed ''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban'' in 2004 and ''Gravity'' (2013).
According to some estimates, there are 40 million street children in Latin America.
The Aztec empire was ultimately the most powerful civilization known throughout the Americas, until its downfall in part by the Spanish invasion.
The golden age of the Maya began about 250, with the last two great civilizations, the Aztecs and Incas, emerging into prominence later on in the early fourteenth century and mid-fifteenth centuries, respectively.
Latin America consists of twenty sovereign states and several territories and dependencies which cover an area that stretches from the northern border of Mexico to the southern tip of South America, including the Caribbean.
From the very moment of Europe's discovery of the continents, early explorers and conquistadores produced written accounts and crónicas of their experiencesuch as Columbus's letters or Bernal Díaz del Castillo's description of the conquest of Mexico.
Painter Frida Kahlo, one of the most famous Mexican artists, painted about her own life and the Mexican culture in a style combining Realism, Symbolism and Surrealism.
Another important aspect of United States involvement in Latin America is the case of the filibuster William Walker.
Crime and violence prevention and public security are now important issues for governments and citizens in Latin America and the Caribbean region.
This debt crisis would lead to neoliberal reforms that would instigate many social movements in the region.
The following decade, the Mexican–American War (1846–48) caused Mexico to lose a significant amount of territory to the United States.
Mexico, in the middle of the Mexican Revolution, far weaker militarily, economically and politically than the U.S., ignored the proposal; after the U.S. entered the war, it officially rejected it.
In 1806 a small British force surprise attacked the capitol of the viceroyalty in&nbsp;Río de la Plata.&nbsp;As a result, the local garrison protecting the capitol was destroyed in an attempt to defend against the British conquest.
More recently, films such as ''Amores Perros'' (2000) and ''Y tu mamá también'' (2001) enjoyed box office and critical acclaim and propelled Alfonso Cuarón and Alejandro González Iñarritu to the front rank of Hollywood directors.
President Woodrow Wilson moved to arm American merchant ships to defend themselves against German submarines, which had started to attack them.
In 1919, the French Military Mission was established by the French Commission in Brazil.
Linguistic effects on Spanish and Portuguese are also marked, such as in terms like pampa, taco, tamale, cacique.
People with European ancestry are the largest single group, and along with people of part-European ancestry, they combine to make up approximately 80% of the population, or even more.
Despite civil war, high crime and political instability, most Latin American countries eventually adopted bourgeois liberal democracies while Cuba maintained its socialist system.
The message was sent to the German ambassador of Mexico, Heinrich von Eckardt.
The presidencies of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela, Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet in Chile, Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff in Brazil, Néstor Kirchner and his wife Cristina Fernández in Argentina, Tabaré Vázquez and José Mujica in Uruguay, Evo Morales in Bolivia, Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua, Rafael Correa in Ecuador, Fernando Lugo in Paraguay, Manuel Zelaya in Honduras (removed from power by a coup d'état), Mauricio Funes and Salvador Sánchez Cerén in El Salvador are all part of this wave of left-wing politicians who often declare themselves socialists, Latin Americanists, or anti-imperialists (often implying opposition to US policies towards the region).
Under the leadership of a new generation of leaders, such as Simón Bolívar "The Liberator", José de San Martín of Argentina, and other ''Libertadores'' in South America, the independence movement regained strength, and by 1825, all Spanish America, except for Puerto Rico and Cuba, had gained independence from Spain.
The number of Brazilians living overseas is estimated at about 2 million people.
The president-elect of Ecuador has manifested his intentions of following the same path.
As the new Emperor could not exert his constitutional powers until he became of age, a regency was set up by the National Assembly.
NGOs which addressed those problems on the local level before could help with that.
Asian and Afro-Amerindian (historically sometimes called Zambo) minorities are also identified regularly.
More recently, additional cultural influences came from the United States and Europe during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, due to the growing influence of the former on the world stage and immigration from the latter.
Central Americans living abroad in 2005 were 3,314,300, of which 1,128,701 were Salvadorans, 685,713 were Guatemalans, 683,520 were Nicaraguans, 414,955 were Hondurans, 215,240 were Panamanians, 127,061 were Costa Ricans and 59,110 were Belizeans.
Eventually France began plans to build the Panama Canal in 1881 until 1904 when the United States took over and proceeded with its construction and implementation ("Read Our Story").
Furthermore, Germany also ensured that they would be attacking the Americas soon.
Undernourishment affects to 47% of Haitians, 27% of Nicaraguans, 23% of Bolivians and 22% of Hondurans.
Samba, North American jazz, European classical music and choro combined to form ''bossa nova'' in Brazil, popularized by guitarist João Gilberto with singer Astrud Gilberto and pianist Antonio Carlos Jobim.
Eckardt was instructed to urge Mexico to help broker an alliance between Germany and Japan.
* Indigenous cultures of the people who inhabited the continent prior to European Colonization.
Intermixing between the indigenous peoples and the European colonists was very common, and, by the end of the colonial period, people of mixed ancestry (mestizos) formed majorities in several colonies.
Liberalists wanted to see a change in the ruling systems, and to move away from monarchs and social classes in order to promote equality.
Inequality in Latin America has deep historical roots in the Latin European racially based Casta system instituted in Latin America in colonial times that have been difficult to eradicate since the differences between initial endowments and opportunities among social groups have constrained the poorest's social mobility, thus making poverty to be transmitted from generation to generation, becoming a vicious cycle.
Eventually Brazil decided to stop trading with Germany once Germany started attacking offshore trading ships resulting in Germany declaring a blockade against the Americas in the Atlantic Ocean.
In Argentina, the conflict manifested itself as a prolongued civil war between ''unitarianas'' (i.e.
Later on Francisco de Miranda in Venezuela by 1812.
Guaraní, along with Spanish, is an official language of Paraguay, and is spoken by a majority of the population (who are, for the most part, bilingual), and it is co-official with Spanish in the Argentine province of Corrientes.
His presidency did not last long, however, as he was met with much opposition from political groups in Nicaragua and neighbouring countries.
It played a role in his campaign to imply cultural kinship of the region with France, transform France into a cultural and political leader of the area, and install Maximilian of Habsburg as emperor of the Second Mexican Empire.
31.7 million Americans listed their ancestry as Mexican as of 2010, or roughly 10% of the population.
After the dissolution of Gran Colombia, New Grenada continued to have conflicts between conservatives and liberals.
By 1959, Cuba was afflicted with a corrupt dictatorship under Batista, and Fidel Castro ousted Batista that year and set up the first communist state in the hemisphere.
The term originated in 19th century France to consider French-speaking territories in the Americas along the larger group of countries where Spanish and Portuguese languages prevail.
The doctrine was put into effect in 1865 when the U.S. government supported Mexican president, Benito Juárez, diplomatically and militarily.
High inequality is rooted in the deepest exclusionary institutions of the Casta system that have been perpetuated ever since colonial times and that have survived different political and economic regimes.
Once the German submarines attacked unarmed Brazilian trading ships, President Vargas met with United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt to discuss how they could retaliate.
It is therefore broader than the terms Ibero-America or Hispanic America—though it usually excludes French Canada.
French is spoken in Haiti and in the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe, Martinique and Guiana, and the French overseas collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon; it is also spoken by some Panamanians of Afro-Antillean descent.
It was not until 1861 that the liberalist rebels, led by Benito Juárez, took control of Mexico City, consolidating liberal rule.
Brazil continued to try to remain neutral to the United States and Germany because it was trying to make sure it could continue to be a place of interest for both opposing countries.
In addition, the United States also helped Panama become an independent state from Colombia and built the twenty-mile-long Panama Canal Zone in Panama which held from 1903 (the Panama Canal opened to transoceanic freight traffic in 1914) to 1999, when the Torrijos-Carter Treaties restored Panamanian control of the Canal Zone.
It boasted a huge industry comparable to Hollywood at the time with stars such as María Félix, Dolores del Río, and Pedro Infante.
Following the American occupation of Nicaragua in 1912, as part of the Banana Wars, the Somoza family political dynasty came to power, and would rule Nicaragua until their ouster in 1979 during the Nicaraguan Revolution.
Colombia recognizes all indigenous languages spoken within its territory as official, though fewer than 1% of its population are native speakers of these languages.
The inhabitants of Latin America are of a variety of ancestries, ethnic groups, and races, making the region one of the most diverse in the world.
It rested on the conviction that no democracy could take the harsh measures to curb inflation, reassure investors, and quicken economic growth quickly and effectively.
The Zimmermann Telegram was a 1917 diplomatic proposal from the German Empire for Mexico to join an alliance with Germany in the event of the United States entering World War I against Germany.
The Atlantic slave trade was abandoned in 1850, as a result of the British' Aberdeen Act, but only in May 1888 after a long process of internal mobilization and debate for an ethical and legal dismantling of slavery in the country, was the institution formally abolished.
During the last phase of the monarchy, internal political debate was centered on the issue of slavery.
Their main goal was to contain the inner rebellions in Brazil.
On average, they have completed two years schooling more than their parents.
Losing the North American colonies at the end of the 18th century left Great Britain in need of new markets to supply resources in the early 19th century.
Historically, the main centers of production have been Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Cuba.
''centralists'') and ''federalists'', which were in some aspects respectively analogous to liberals and conservatives in other countries.
This term was also used in 1861 by French scholars in ''La revue des races Latines,'' a magazine dedicated to the Pan-Latinism movement.
The term "Latin America" was first used in 1861 in ''La revue des races Latines'', a magazine "dedicated to the cause of Pan-Latinism".
The news helped generate support for the United States declaration of war on Germany in April of that year.
Many of the survivors were forced to work in European plantations and mines.
A critical component of U.S. intervention in Latin American affairs took form in the Spanish–American War, which drastically affected the futures of Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Americas, as well as Guam and the Philippines, by dismantling some of the last remaining Spanish colonial possessions throughout the world.
Towards the end of the 18th Century and the beginning of the 19th, a distinctive criollo literary tradition emerged, including the first novels such as Lizardi's ''El Periquillo Sarniento'' (1816).
In Brazil, rural aristocrats were in conflict with the urban conservatives.
European culture, customs and government were introduced, with the Roman Catholic Church becoming the major economic and political power to overrule the traditional ways of the region, eventually becoming the only official religion of the Americas during this period.
Ancient and very advanced civilizations developed their own political, social and religious systems.
Minor blocs or trade agreements are the G3 Free Trade Agreement, the Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement ('''DR-CAFTA'''), the Caribbean Community ('''CARICOM''') and the Andean Community of Nations ('''CAN''').
The next year the British attacked once again with a much larger force attempting to reach and conquer Montevideo.
Oral accounts of mythological and religious beliefs were also sometimes recorded after the arrival of European colonizers, as was the case with the Popol Vuh.
Haitian independence inspired independence movements in Spanish America.
A month later, Prince Pedro was declared the first Emperor of Brazil, with the regnal title of Dom Pedro&nbsp;I, resulting in the foundation of the Empire of Brazil.
According to the World Bank, the poorest countries in the region were (as of 2008): Haiti, Nicaragua, Bolivia and Honduras.
In the 1970s,  Mexico was the location for many cult horror and action movies.
In order to solve this problem, Great Britain turned to the Spanish colonies in South America for resources and markets.
An estimated 1.5 to two million Salvadorans reside in the United States.
However, there is a substantial gap between Latin America and the western economies.
Carlos Carrera (''The Crime of Father Amaro)'', and screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga are also some of the most known present-day Mexican film makers.
The Mayas, the Aztecs and the Incas are examples of these.
'''Latin America''' (occasionally referred to in writing by the portmanteau "LatAm" or "LATAM") is the group of countries and dependencies in the Americas where Romance languages are predominant.
With the end of colonialism, French culture was also able to exert a direct influence in Latin America, especially in the realms of high culture, science and medicine.
According to a study by the World Bank,the richest decile of the population of Latin America earn 48% of the total income, while the poorest 10% of the population earn only 1.6% of the income.
This thrust appeared to be successful.
Studies have shown that Latin America contains the majority of the world's most dangerous cities.
Most of these transfer schemes are now benefiting around 110 million people in the region and are considered relatively cheap, costing around 0.5% of their GDP.
Britain now replaced Spain as the region's largest trading&nbsp;partner.&nbsp;Great Britain invested significant capital in Latin America in order to develop the area as a market for processed goods.
