Approximately 30,000 species of flora and fauna have been registered in Latvia.
Sorrel soup is also consumed by Latvians.
It was a member of the League of Nations (1921–1946).
In the beginning of the 13th century, Germans ruled large parts of today's Latvia.
The national tournament is the Latvian Hockey Higher League, held since 1931.
The War of Independence that followed was part of a general chaotic period of civil and new border wars in Eastern Europe.
The president is elected by the ''Saeima'' in a separate election, also held every four years.
Latvia's foreign policy priorities include co-operation in the Baltic Sea region, European integration, active involvement in international organisations, contribution to European and transatlantic security and defence structures, participation in international civilian and military peacekeeping operations, and development co-operation, particularly the strengthening of stability and democracy in the EU's Eastern Partnership countries.
An inlet of the Baltic Sea, the shallow Gulf of Riga is situated in the northwest of the country.
Latvia is a democratic parliamentary republic established in 1918.
The emancipation of the serfs took place in Courland in 1817 and in Vidzeme in 1819.
New industry was created in Latvia, including a major machinery factory RAF in Jelgava, electrotechnical factories in Riga, chemical factories in Daugavpils, Valmiera and Olaine—and some food and oil processing plants.
In the north, Latvia, Finland and Estonia were assigned to the Soviet sphere.
Riga Technical University and University of Latvia are two major universities in the country, both been established on the basis of Riga Polytechnical Institute and located in Riga.
German crusaders were sent into Latvia.
In 2015 Latvia held the presidency of Council of the European Union.
airBaltic is the Latvian flag carrier airline and a low-cost carrier.
There are 2,256 lakes that are bigger than , with a collective area of .
Latvia participates in the Northern Dimension and Baltic Sea Region Programme, European Union initiatives to foster cross-border co-operation in the Baltic Sea region and Northern Europe.
there are 109 schools for minorities that use Russian as the language of instruction for 40% of subjects (the rest 60% of subjects are taught in Latvian), however the Latvian government is planning to completely abolish Russian as a language of instruction by 2018.
There were 59 hospitals in Latvia in 2009, down from 94 in 2007, and 121 in 2006.
The total length of its maritime boundary is , which is shared with Estonia, Sweden and Lithuania.
Latvians and Livs are the indigenous people of Latvia.
According to statistics in late 2013, 45% of the population supported the introduction of the euro, while 52% opposed it.
Latvia participates in international peacekeeping and security operations.
However, there were not enough people to operate the newly built factories.
The longest river on Latvian territory is the Gauja, at  in length.
Future co-operation will include sharing of national infrastructures for training purposes and specialisation of training areas ''(BALTTRAIN)'' and collective formation of battalion-sized contingents for use in the NATO rapid-response force.
Latvia held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union in the first half of 2015.
* Baltic Battalion ''(BALTBAT)''&nbsp;– infantry battalion for participation in international peace support operations, headquartered near Riga, Latvia;
The peaceful Singing Revolution, starting in 1987, called for Baltic emancipation of Soviet rule.
The private sector accounted for nearly 68% of the country's GDP in 2000.
Riga's boulevards and some streets outside the Old Town date from this period.
Latvia's highest point is Gaiziņkalns, .
Latvia has over 12,500 rivers, which stretch for .
Another two important universities, which were established on the base of State University of Latvia, are Latvia University of Agriculture (established in 1939 on the basis of the Faculty of Agriculture) and Riga Stradiņš University (established in 1950 on the basis of the Faculty of Medicine)&nbsp;– both nowadays cover a variety of different fields.
The prices of real estate, which were at some points growing by approximately 5% a month, were long perceived to be too high for the economy, which mainly produces low-value goods and raw materials.
Latvia and Estonia share a long common history.
Approximately 30,000 performers altogether participate in the event.
Together with Southern Estonia, these conquered areas formed the crusader state that became known as Terra Mariana or Livonia.
Latvia is a member of the United Nations, European Union, Council of Europe, NATO, OECD, OSCE, IMF, and WTO.
By 1959 about 400,000 people arrived from other Soviet republics and the ethnic Latvian population had fallen to 62%.
The share of ethnic Latvians had fallen from 77% (1,467,035) in 1935 to 52% (1,387,757) in 1989.
Latvian is an Indo-European language; it and Lithuanian are the only two surviving Baltic languages.
As a consequence of the Soviet occupation, both countries are home to a large number of ethnic Russians (26.9% in Latvia and 25.5% in Estonia), some of whom are non-citizens.
Approximately 270,000 non-citizens&nbsp;– including stateless persons&nbsp;– have limited access to some political rights – only citizens are allowed to participate in parliamentary or municipal elections, although there are no limitations in regards to joining political parties or other political organizations.
By 2011, more than half of non-citizens had taken naturalisation exams and received Latvian citizenship.
On 18 November 1918, in Riga, the People's Council of Latvia proclaimed the independence of the new country, with Kārlis Ulmanis becoming the head of the provisional government.
The occupation was followed immediately by SS Einsatzgruppen troops who were to act in accordance with the Nazi Generalplan Ost which required the population of Latvia to be cut by 50 percent.
Throughout all the centuries, however, an actual Latvian state had not been established, so the borders and definitions of who exactly fell within that group are largely subjective.
Latvia is historically predominantly Protestant Lutheran, except for the Latgale region in the southeast, which has historically been predominantly Roman Catholic.
However, most indigenous Latvians did not participate in this particular cultural life.
The highest number of inventions, which are patented both nationwide and abroad, are made in the branch of medical chemistry.
It is also a member of the Council of the Baltic Sea States and Nordic Investment Bank.
Former Latvian basketball club ASK Riga won the Euroleague tournament three times in a row before being defunct.
However, its ''de facto'' independence was interrupted at the outset of World War II.
During the Great Northern War (1700–1721), up to 40 per cent of Latvians died from famine and plague.
On 4 May 1990, the Supreme Council adopted the Declaration on the Restoration of Independence of the Republic of Latvia, and the Latvian SSR was renamed Republic of Latvia.
Latvia develop their scientific potential on the basis of the existing scientific traditions, particularly in organic chemistry, medical chemistry, genetic engineering, physics, materials science and information technologies.
Major rivers include the Daugava River, Lielupe, Gauja, Venta, and Salaca, the largest spawning ground for salmon in the eastern Baltics.
The government denationalised private property confiscated by the Soviets, returning it or compensating the owners for it, and privatised most state-owned industries, reintroducing the prewar currency.
In formal divisions, Riga region, which includes the capital and parts of other regions that have a strong relationship with the capital, is also often included in regional divisions; e.g., there are five planning regions of Latvia (), which were created in 2009 to promote balanced development of all regions.
Lutheranism was more prominent before the Soviet occupation, when it was a majority religion due to strong historical links with the Nordic countries and Northern Germany.
In practice, however, the emancipation was actually advantageous to the landowners and nobility, as it dispossessed peasants of their land without compensation, forcing them to return to work at the estates "of their own free will".
The Young Latvian () movement laid the groundwork for nationalism from the middle of the century, many of its leaders looking to the Slavophiles for support against the prevailing German-dominated social order.
Latvia acts as the lead nation in the coordination of the Northern Distribution Network for transportation of non-lethal ISAF cargo by air and rail to Afghanistan.
Early in the morning of 24 August 1939, the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany signed a 10-year non-aggression pact, called the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.
After 1934, Ulmanis established government corporations to buy up private firms with the aim of "Latvianising" the economy.
Fish is commonly consumed due to Latvia's location on the Baltic Sea.
Latvia is a member of the World Trade Organisation (1999) and the European Union (2004).
The Republic of Latvia declared the end of the transitional period and restored full independence on 21 August 1991, in the aftermath of the failed Soviet coup attempt.
The length of Latvia's Baltic coastline is .
Latvian food is generally quite fatty, and uses few spices.
In the 12th century in the territory of Latvia, there were 14 lands with their rulers: Vanema, Ventava, Bandava, Piemare, Duvzare, Ceklis, Megava, Pilsāts, Upmale, Sēlija, Koknese, Jersika, Tālava and Adzele.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church, with an estimated 600,000 members in 1956, was affected most adversely.
For example, one of the most popular celebrations is Jāņi, a pagan celebration of the summer solstice—which Latvians celebrate on the feast day of St. John the Baptist.
With the onset of World War II, many Latvian artists and other members of the cultural elite fled the country yet continued to produce their work, largely for a Latvian émigré audience.
Additionally, there have been reports of police abuse of detainees and arrestees, poor prison conditions and overcrowding, judicial corruption, discrimination against women, incidents of violence against ethnic minorities, and societal violence and incidents of government discrimination against homosexuals.
It has direct flight to over 80 destinations in 30 countries.
* Baltic Naval Squadron ''(BALTRON)''&nbsp;– naval force with mine countermeasures capabilities, headquartered near Tallinn, Estonia;
Its national insect is the two-spot ladybird (''Adalia bipunctata'', ).
They promoted Latvian culture and encouraged Latvians to take part in cultural activities.
In ancient times, amber found along the Baltic Sea coast was sought by Vikings as well as traders from Egypt, Greece and the Roman Empire.
The Soviets immediately began to reinstate the Soviet system.
The Balts established trade routes to Rome and Byzantium, trading local amber for precious metals.
Latvia has participated successfully in both Winter and Summer Olympics.
Elections were held with single pro-Soviet candidates listed for many positions.
Estonian and Latvian forces defeated the Germans at the Battle of Wenden in June 1919, and a massive attack by a predominantly German force—the West Russian Volunteer Army—under Pavel Bermondt-Avalov was repelled in November.
Since independence, theatre, scenography, choir music, and classical music have become the most notable branches of Latvian culture.
Nordic-Baltic Six (NB-6), comprising Nordic-Baltic countries that are European Union member states, is a framework for meetings on EU-related issues.
The terms inspired the variations on the country's name in Romance languages from "Letonia" and in several Germanic languages from "Lettland".
The Soviet Union incorporated Latvia on 5 August 1940, as The ''Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic.''
In spite of this, 73% of all Latvian residents confirmed their strong support for independence on 3 March 1991, in a nonbinding advisory referendum.
Several species of flora and fauna are considered national symbols.
The borders of historical and cultural regions usually are not explicitly defined and in several sources may vary.
The country has a temperate seasonal climate.
Several nature reserves protect unspoiled landscapes with a variety of large animals.
Latvia was one of the EuroBasket 2015 hosts.
In the summer of 1988, a national movement, coalescing in the Popular Front of Latvia, was opposed by the Interfront.
Latvia showed signs of economic recovery, and the electorate had steadily moved toward the centre during the parliamentary period.
Latvia's national parks are Gauja National Park in Vidzeme (since 1973), Ķemeri National Park in Zemgale (1997), Slītere National Park in Kurzeme (1999), and Rāzna National Park in Latgale (2007).
The constitution was partly suspended by Kārlis Ulmanis after his coup in 1934 but reaffirmed in 1990.
The life expectancy in 2013 was estimated at 73.19 years (68.13 years male, 78.53 years female).
There were 290,660 non-citizens living in Latvia or 14.1% of Latvian residents, mainly ethnic Russians who arrived after the occupation of 1940 and their descendants.
State administrators were liquidated and replaced by Soviet cadres.
Latvia also took part in the US-led Multi-National Force operation in Iraq (2003–2008) and OSCE missions in Georgia, Kosovo and Macedonia.
During July 2014, Riga hosted the 8th World Choir Games as it played host to over 27,000 choristers representing over 450 choirs and over 70 countries.
The 19th century and beginning of the 20th century is often regarded as a classical era of Latvian culture.
In the 19th century, Latvian nationalist movements emerged.
The Republic of Latvia was founded on 18 November 1918.
In 2014, Riga was the European Capital of Culture, the euro was introduced as the currency of the country and a Latvian was named vice-president of the European Commission.
On 21 June 1941 German troops attacked Soviet forces in Operation Barbarossa.
Privatisation in Latvia is almost complete.
However, universal citizenship for all permanent residents was not adopted.
Latvian is the official language.
Latvia is a democratic and developed country and member of the European Union, NATO, the Council of Europe, the United Nations, CBSS, the IMF, NB8, NIB, OECD, OSCE, and WTO.
Another 30,000 Jews from the Riga ghetto being killed in the Rumbula Forest in November and December 1941, to reduce overcrowding in the ghetto and make room for more Jews being brought in from Germany and the west.
Several important cultural changes occurred during this time.
42 percent of Latvia's territory is covered by forests, mostly Scots pine, birch, and Norway spruce.
All of the minority schools (Jewish, Polish, Belarusian, Estonian, Lithuanian) were closed down leaving only two media of instructions in the schools: Latvian and Russian.
Eastern Latvia was cleared of Red Army forces by Latvian and Polish troops in early 1920 (from the Polish perspective the Battle of Daugavpils was a part of the Polish–Soviet War).
Latvia has three big hydroelectric power stations in Pļaviņu HES (825MW), Rīgas HES (402 MW) and Ķeguma HES-2 (192 MW).
Latvia has hundreds of kilometres of undeveloped seashore—lined by pine forests, dunes, and continuous white sand beaches.
Latvia had many European basketball stars like Jānis Krūmiņš, Maigonis Valdmanis, Valdis Muižnieks, Valdis Valters, Igors Miglinieks, as well as the first Latvian NBA player Gundars Vētra.
There are more than 600 Latvian neopagans, ''Dievturi'' (The Godskeepers), whose religion is based on Latvian mythology.
Interparliamentary co-operation between the Baltic Assembly and Nordic Council was signed in 1992 and since 2006 annual meetings are held as well as regular meetings on other levels.
70% percent of the mires are untouched by civilisation, and they are a refuge for many rare species of plants and animals.
Currently, VEF Rīga, which competes in EuroCup, is the strongest professional basketball club in Latvia.
A week later, on 1 September 1939, Germany and on 17 September, the Soviet Union invaded Poland.
Thus, the mostly peasant local pagan heritage was preserved, partly merging with Christian traditions.
Posters show the influence of other European cultures, for example, works of artists such as the Baltic-German artist Bernhard Borchert and the French Raoul Dufy.
In 1940, the country was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union, invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany in 1941, and re-occupied by the Soviets in 1944 to form the Latvian SSR for the next fifty years.
The local people, however, did not convert to Christianity as readily as the Church had hoped.
The Latvian policy of science and technology set out the long term goal – transition from labor-consuming economy to knowledge-based economy.
The most senior civil servants are the sixteen Secretaries of State.
By the spring of 1919, there were actually three governments—Ulmanis's government; the Latvian Soviet government led by Pēteris Stučka, whose forces, supported by the Red Army, occupied almost all of the country; and the Baltic German government of the United Baltic Duchy, headed by Andrievs Niedra and supported by the Baltische Landeswehr and the German Freikorps unit ''Iron Division''.
Kenneth Orchard, senior analyst at Moody's Investors Service argued that:
The racially approved being resettled mainly in Poland, being given land and businesses in exchange for the money they had received from the sale of their previous assets.
The country's Orthodox Christians belong to the Latvian Orthodox Church, a semi-autonomous body within the Russian Orthodox Church.
Some managed to escape arrest and joined the partisans.
Most of Latvia's territory is less than  above sea level.
In January 2011, the Baltic states were invited to join NORDEFCO, the defence framework of the Nordic countries.
There also developed a growing urban proletariat and an increasingly influential Latvian bourgeoisie.
The Latvian SSR, along with the other Baltic Republics was allowed greater autonomy, and in 1988, the old pre-war Flag of Latvia flew again, replacing the Soviet Latvian flag as the official flag in 1990.
From 1 January 2007, Latvia switched to a professional fully contract-based army.
In the summer of 1987, the first large demonstrations were held in Riga at the Freedom Monument—a symbol of independence.
Most of those who remained left for Germany in summer 1940, when a second resettlement scheme was agreed.
Its largest lake, Lubāns, has an area of , its deepest lake, Drīdzis, is  deep.
The Duchy of Courland and Semigallia became an autonomous Russian province (the Courland Governorate) in 1795, bringing all of what is now Latvia into the Russian Empire.
In 1282, Riga, and later the cities of Cēsis, Limbaži, Koknese and Valmiera, became part of the Hanseatic League.
To maintain and expand industrial production, skilled workers were migrating from all over the Soviet Union, decreasing the proportion of ethnic Latvians in the republic.
Latvia's defence concept is based upon the Swedish-Finnish model of a rapid response force composed of a mobilisation base and a small group of career professionals.
The major goals of Latvia in the 1990s, to join NATO and the European Union, were achieved in 2004.
An internal document of 18 March 1987, near the end of communist rule, spoke of an active membership that had shrunk to only 25,000 in Latvia, but the faith has since experienced a revival.
An extensive programme to impose bilingualism was initiated in Latvia, limiting the use of Latvian language in official uses in favour of using Russian as the main language.
The southern part of Estonia and the northern part of Latvia were ceded to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and formed into the ''Ducatus Ultradunensis'' (Pārdaugavas hercogiste).
Popular discontent exploded in the 1905 Russian Revolution, which took a nationalist character in the Baltic provinces.
The Baltic Council is the joint forum of the interparliamentary Baltic Assembly (BA) and the intergovernmental Baltic Council of Ministers (BCM).
On 5 October 1939, Latvia was forced to accept a "mutual assistance" pact with the Soviet Union, granting the Soviets the right to station between 25,000 and 30,000 troops on Latvian territory.
Most were deported to Siberia where deaths were estimated at 40 percent, officers of the Latvian army being shot on the spot.
Fighting continued sporadically between Sweden and Poland until the Truce of Altmark in 1629.
Latvia, then a puppet government, was headed by Augusts Kirhenšteins.
More than 200,000 Latvian citizens died during World War II, including approximately 75,000 Latvian Jews murdered during the Nazi occupation.
Half the residents of Riga were killed by plague in 1710–1711.
Instead, citizenship was granted to persons who had been citizens of Latvia at the day of loss of independence at 1940 as well as their descendants.
Population of Latvia reached its peak in 1990 at just under 2.7 million people.
Joint Nordic-Baltic co-operation initiatives include the education programme NordPlus and mobility programmes for public administration, business and industry and culture.
It plans to establish the NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence in Riga.
Less than 400 people are considered Livonians, supposedly the original inhabitants of Latvia.
At this time, songs often made fun of the characteristics of Soviet life and were concerned about preserving Latvian identity.
In 2011 there were even fewer Latvians than in 1989, though their share of the population was larger&nbsp;– 1,284,194 (62.1% of the population).
The total length of Latvia's boundary is .
On occasions, especially in 1944, opposing Latvian troops faced each other in battle.
Mires occupy 9.9% of Latvia's territory.
Latvia had its own film industry and musical records factory (LPs).
There were some spontaneous uprisings by Latvians against the Red Army which helped the Germans.
Riga became the capital of Swedish Livonia and the largest city in the entire Swedish Empire.
Foreign investment in Latvia is still modest compared with the levels in north-central Europe.
Big European events have been celebrated in Riga such as the Eurovision Song Contest 2003 and the European Film Awards 2014.
On 1 January 2014, the Euro became the country's currency, superseding the Lats.
Under this division Riga region includes large parts of what traditionally is considered Vidzeme, Courland, and Zemgale.
Citizenship was not automatically extended to former Soviet citizens who settled during the Soviet occupation, or to their offspring.
In Latvia, the Swedish period is generally remembered as positive; serfdom was eased, a network of schools was established for the peasantry, and the power of the regional barons was diminished.
The Nordic Council of Ministers has an office in Riga.
Latvian paramilitary and Auxiliary Police units established by the occupation authority participated in the Holocaust and other atrocities.
Latvia has the 5th highest proportion of land covered by forests in the European Union, after Sweden, Finland, Estonia and Slovenia.
With the dismantling of collective farms, the area devoted to farming decreased dramatically – now farms are predominantly small.
Still, today there are 290,660 non-citizens in Latvia, which represent 14.1% of population.
On 15 May 1934, Ulmanis staged a bloodless coup, establishing a nationalist dictatorship that lasted until 1940.
Latvia's Red Book (Endangered Species List of Latvia), which was established in 1977, contains 112 plant species and 119 animal species.
It ended with the Declaration on the Restoration of Independence of the Republic of Latvia on 4 May 1990, and restoring de facto independence on 21 August 1991.
The secretariat of the Northern Dimension Partnership on Culture (NDPC) will be located in Riga.
Latvian armed forces will contribute to a UK-led Battlegroup in 2013 and the Nordic Battlegroup in 2015 under the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) of the European Union.
This operation had the desired effect of reducing the anti Soviet partisan activity.
It is among the lowest-ranked healthcare systems in Europe, due to excessive waiting times for treatment, insufficient access to the latest medicines, and other factors.
Statistical regions of Latvia, established in accordance with the EU Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics, duplicate this division, but divides Riga region into two parts with the capital alone being a separate region.
In the same year, the United States of America exported $58.2 million of goods and services to Latvia and imported $87.9 million.
Unique geological conditions at Inčukalns and other locations in Latvia are particularly suitable for underground gas storage.
Though the duchy was a vassal state to Poland, it retained a considerable degree of autonomy and experienced a golden age in the 17th century.
Since Latvia had maintained a well-developed infrastructure and educated specialists, Moscow decided to base some of the Soviet Union's most advanced manufacturing in Latvia.
