Douglass also included examples of laughter of people from other cultures, whose sounds were noticeably different from Americans.
A Douglass laugh was inserted into the final broadcast version to compensate."
As laughter has deminished from television comedies over the decades, it is not uncommon for certain markets to remove laugh tracks from older comedies for modern reruns and syndication.
"I worked on shows in the past where the 'sweetener' was ladled on with a heavy hand, mainly because there were hardly any laughs from the living.
We don't really like to talk about it too much."
Si Rose, executive producer for Sid and Marty Krofft, convinced the Kroffts to use a laugh track on their puppet shows, such as ''H.R.
While unique and appropriate for the nature of the show, the use and quality of the laugh track varied from season to season.
Animated shows that used to employ a laugh track, such as ''Scooby-Doo'', had dismissed the laugh track altogether by the 1990s.
* ''The Flintstones: Little Big League'' (NBC, 1978)
"It's a kind of decline in American feistiness and an ability to think for yourself," she said.
In addition to Bob Douglass, Los Angeles-based mixers Bob LaMasney, and Sound One's Jack Donato and John Bickelhaupt currently specialize in audience sweetening.
Saturday morning shows featuring the HB laugh track:
Laugh track historian/re-recording mixer Paul Iverson commented "the Hanna Barbera laugh track did more to give laugh tracks a bad name than Douglass's work could ever have done.
If a joke did not get the desired chuckle, Douglass inserted additional laughter; if the live audience chuckled too long, Douglass gradually muted the guffaws.
Lear's decision resulted in the show being a huge success, and ushered in the return of live audiences to the U.S. sitcom mainstream.
Repackaging over the years has resulted in both theatrical and television versions of the entries being available.
Cooper's comedy/drama ''Hennesey'' (CBS, 1959—62) was cancelled in 1962 after three seasons.
Co-creator/executive producer Garry Marshall also disliked utilizing a laugh track, and Theatre veteran Randall, in particular, resented the process of having to wait several seconds between punchlines in order to allot enough space for the laugh track.
Game shows taped at NBC Studios Burbank used three different applause tracks for sweetening: one with a smaller crowd, one with a medium crowd, and one with a large crowd with a cheerful male audience member in the background.
As of 2015, broadcasters in the UK have removed the laugh track from ''Hogan's Heroes''; as with their reruns of ''M*A*S*H'', their reasoning is to downplay the series' humorous tone, and emphasize whatever serious and dramatic moments the series had.
Though the use of canned laughter reached its peak in the 1960s, a few shows still retained the multi-camera tradition.
Prime time specials/TV movies:
The practice of simulating an audience reaction was controversial from the beginning.
Examples include ''Super Sunday'', ''Kangxi Lai Le'', ''Variety Big Brother'' and ''Home Run''.
But in editing, when sections of the show are taken out, when they take out lines to make the show fit a time slot&nbsp;— we have to cover the bridge between one laugh and another by using the laugh machine."
Television and laugh track historian Ben Glenn, II, commented that the laugh tracks currently used are radically different from the "carefree" quality of the laughter of past:
Videotaped live, Lear was more spontaneous; he wanted the studio audience to act like the performer, with hopes of the two developing a rapport with each other.
The last six episodes of 1982 corrected the repetition of the kiddie track by mixing different laughs together, along with the titter track.
Directors gradually left room for as-yet-unheard audience reactions; producers budgeted for post-production so Douglass could edit with greater ease.
It was necessary, as much as we were always looking to have a ''real'' laugh track, ''a real'' audience.
After taking his directive, Douglass would then go to work at creating the audience, out of sight from the producer or anyone else present at the studio.
When Douglass inserted a hearty laugh, he increased the volume of the titter track to smooth out the final mix.
Some later editions, in 1992 (Election Special) and 1993 (two episodes) did use a laughter track, as these were performed live in front of a studio audience and included a spoof ''Question Time''.
Sid Krofft commented, "We were sort of against that the laugh track, but Si Rose&nbsp;— being in sitcoms&nbsp;— he felt that when the show was put together that the children would not know when to laugh."
* ''Rocky and His Friends'' (ABC, 1959—61; NBC, 1961—64 as ''The Bullwinkle Show'') was originally broadcast with a laugh track, against the wishes of creators Jay Ward and Bill Scott, who  disputed the laugh track with ABC; given the rapid-fire pace of the show's humor, the laugh track slowed the timing and at times interrupted dialogue.
Also, many single-camera sitcoms by this time started diverting from a laugh track altogether to create a more dramatic environment.
Pratt and his brother had been working under Douglass since the early 1960s, but began to notice that Douglass' technique was falling behind as advances were made in production technology.
Laughter and applause are often sweetened and edited prior to public viewing, or if aired live, are done on the spot via a seven-second delay (the same crew is also used to mute swear words and controversial statements from award winners).
The pilot episode of the satirical series ''Spitting Image'' was also broadcast with a laugh track, apparently at the insistence of Central Television.
**''The Flintstones: Jogging Fever'' (NBC, 1981)
Outlandish or fantasy shows, like ''Bewitched'', ''The Munsters'', ''I Dream of Jeannie'' and ''The Beverly Hillbillies'', were virtual showcases of Douglass' editing skill.
They want a more subtle track.” Bickelhaupt concluded, "I have a great job.
And that's the way the audience at home was programmed to view these shows."
These recorded laughs could be added to single-camera filmed programs.
By the mid-1960s, nearly every U.S. sitcom was shot single-camera and was fitted with a laughter track.
This continued through season two until low ratings led to its cancellation in 1970.
* ''The Flintstone Comedy Hour'' (CBS, 1972–73)
**''The Flintstones' New Neighbors'' (NBC, 1980)
The show was broadcast with the laugh track, and CBS utilized a laugh track for all
Scheimer confirmed that ''The Archie Show'' was the first Saturday morning cartoon to utilize a laugh track.
* ''The Scooby-Doo Show'' (ABC, 1976–78)
* ''Captain Caveman and the Teen Angels'' (ABC, 1977–80)
Several Latin American countries like Argentina replace the laugh track with a crew of off-screen people paid specifically to laugh on command whenever the comedic situation merits a laugh.
These custom laugh tracks were controversial and contemporaries and historians questioned the sensibility and realism for the use of these tracks.
HB used these laughs regularly over the next decade on nearly all of their Saturday morning fare.
On sweetening, he continued, "Then it's determined by the taste of the producers – by the morality of the producers...After a while, you learn that it is valueless.
* ''The Funky Phantom'' (ABC, 1971–72)
Douglass knew his material well, as he had compiled it himself.
1983 took a noticeable downturn, with the laugh track being considerably muted and poorly edited.
Brain scans suggested that viewers found the same things funny and the same regions of their brain lit up whether or not they heard others laughing.
During a typical game show's closing credits, the show would use canned cheers and applause noises to sweeten the live studio audience applause noises that viewers would not hear during the credits.
Over the years, Douglass would add new recordings as well as revive old ones that had been retired and then retire the newer tracks.
Douglass regularly slightly sped up the laughter to heighten the effect.
HB also used the limited laugh track when they produced ''Wait Till Your Father Gets Home'' in 1972, their first prime time animated television show production of ''The Flintstones'' ceased in 1966.
and was one of the most talked-about men in the television industry.
He had dozens of reactions, and he knew where to find each one.
* ''Casper's First Christmas'' (NBC, 1979)
Filming in a studio with an audience, as ''I Love Lucy'' or ''The Ed Sullivan Show'' did, had its limitations as well: half the audience could not see the show from where they were sitting.
The second taping, however, provided better air conditioning and a better quality sound system to the stage.
As a result of this success, all subsequent ''Peanuts'' specials afterward aired with no laugh track present.
Pratt parted ways with Douglass, and created a new "laff box," one that was simpler to use and had greater capacity than Douglass' (Pratt's recordings were on cassette tape, Douglass' on an older reel-to-reel tape).
When it came time to "lay in the laughs", the producer would direct Douglass where and when to insert the type of laugh requested.
''Holliston'', an independently produced multicamera sitcom on the defunct Fearnet, used laugh tracks to mimic the look and feel of popular sitcoms from the 1980s and 1990s.
The more outlandish the show, the more invasive the laugh track.
* ''Shasta McNasty''
The laugh track was also used on some prime time animated television series, like ''The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show'' (ABC, 1959–61; NBC, 1961–64), ''The Flintstones'' (ABC, 1960–66), ''The Jetsons'' (ABC, 1962–63).
Komack instead employed music to counteract the sweetened laughs.
While still working for CBS, Douglass built a prototype laugh machine that consisted of a large, wooden wheel 28 inches in diameter with a reel of tape glued to the outer edge of it containing recordings of mild laughs.
The combination of classic loud guffaws, mixed with his own new, less invasive recordings, had middling results.
However, sitcoms made by It's a Laugh Productions, such as ''That's So Raven'', use laugh tracks.
Certain shows, like ''Get Smart'', featured a laugh track that became more invasive as the series progressed, while shows like ''M*A*S*H'' toned down the laughter as the series became more dramatic (it was entirely absent during operating room scenes).
Since the tapes were looped, laughs were played in the same order repeatedly.
While working with Bob Hope on one of his television specials, the comedian took Douglass's hands in his own and began rubbing them to create the effect of limbering up Douglass's fingers, saying "OK, now, give me some good laughs."
* ''Casper and the Angels'' (NBC, 1979)
Critical reception thus improved, and the show used the multi-camera format thereafter, and became a major success during its seven-year run.
A year later, ''The Good Guys'' (CBS, 1968–70) followed the same format.
The executive producers would say, 'Don't worry&nbsp;— you know who will love that joke?
This can even affect DVD releases of these series as well; while theatrical versions of ''The Pink Panther'' shorts have been released on DVD in their original format, certain entries (including "Pink Punch," "The Pink Blueprint," and "Gong with the Pink") include the laugh track from their television broadcasts.
This process was originally employed for their sitcom ''I Love Lucy'', which used a live studio audience and no laugh track.
Because it was constructed on company time, CBS demanded possession of the machine when Douglass decided to terminate his time with them.
New laughs, chuckles and applause were recorded for the first few episodes so they would sound fresh and new.
And the laugh track, Si was right.
Certain local syndication markets have removed the laugh track from certain episodes of ''The Andy Griffith Show'' (particularly more somber, heartfelt episodes like "Opie the Birdman").
Iverson added "all it takes is watching an episode of ''Josie and the Pussycats'' alongside of ''Josie and the Pussycats in Outer Space'' and it is painfully obvious.
In order to gauge the continued relevance of Douglass' laugh track, a study was published in 1974 in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology that concluded people were still more likely to laugh at jokes that were followed by canned laughter.
Robert Douglass also orchestrated the audience for Disney's unsuccessful ''Muppet Show'' reboot, ''Muppets Tonight''.
The original theatrical versions did not contain laugh tracks, but NBC insisted on its inclusion for television broadcast.
A man's deep laugh would be switched for a new woman's laugh, or a high-pitched woman's giggle would be replaced with a man's snicker.
Although Douglass had a monopoly on the laugh track, he eventually faced competition by 1977 when other sound engineers began to offer laugh tracks that differed from Douglass' distinctive laughs.
While modern digital machines are not as cumbersome as Douglass's original machinery, Bickelhaupt confirmed they “are pretty anonymous, with unlabeled knobs and buttons.
Shows like  ''The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd'' (NBC, 1987–88), ''Hooperman'' (ABC, 1987–89) and ''Doogie Howser, M.D.''
They were paying for dinner."
The children's sketch comedy series ''You Can't Do That on Television'' (1979–1990) had no laugh track during its first season as a locally televised program.
Multi-camera shows with live audiences sometimes used recorded laughs to supplement responses.
* ''Jabberjaw'' (ABC, 1976–78)
* ''The New Fred and Barney Show'' (NBC, 1979)
Following Filmation were producers Sid and Marty Krofft.
The show consisted of previous theatrical entries compiled into a series of half-hour showcases, which included other DFE theatrical shorts including ''The Inspector'', ''Roland and Ratfink'', ''The Ant and the Aardvark'', ''The Tijuana Toads'' (redubbed into ''The Texas Toads''), ''The Blue Racer'', ''Hoot Kloot'', and ''The Dogfather''.
* ''Speed Buggy'' (CBS, 1973–75)
The machine was operated by a key that would play until it hit another detent on the wheel, thus playing a complete laugh.
Most episodes of ''Only Fools and Horses'' feature a studio audience; the exceptions, which featured no laughter at all, were all Christmas specials, "To Hull and Back", "A Royal Flush" and the second part of "Miami Twice".
Both performers and producers gradually began to realize the power behind prerecorded laughter.
* ''Harlem Globetrotters'' (CBS, 1970–71; used for the second season episodes)
* ''The Roman Holidays'' (CBS, 1972)
Komack, who was involved in the short-lived sitcom ''Hennesey'' starring Jackie Cooper, was a longtime critic of the Douglass laugh track, believing the laughs were too predictable and could hinder the effect of the sitcom's humor.
Laugh tracks are commonly used in variety shows for comic effect.
A silent minority of producers despised the idea of a prerecorded audience reaction.
Bing Crosby eventually adopted the technology to pre-record his radio show, which was scheduled for a certain time every week, to avoid having to perform the show live, as well as having to perform it a second time for West Coast audiences.
* The sitcom ''Dinosaurs'' (ABC, 1991–94) initially featured a laugh track: it was eventually dropped as the show grew in popularity at the insistence of co-producers Brian Henson (son of Jim Henson) and Michael Jacobs.
From 1968 to 1983, most comedic cartoons produced for the Saturday morning genre were fitted with a laugh track, beginning with Filmation's ''The Archie Show'' in 1968.
Critic Dick Hobson commented in a July 1966 ''TV Guide'' article that the Douglass family were "the only laugh game in town."
''The Alvin Show'' was cancelled after a single season.
In addition, it gave the show a certain edge that was lost in the first season, though actors now had to deliver lines louder, since they were on a larger sound stage as opposed to a quiet studio with only minimal crew present.
The series' pilot episode, "Love is All Around", had been initially filmed using the single-camera method.
Some of these laughs were provided by the actual cast and crew members reacting to dailies of episodes; eventually, ''The Muppet Show'' began recycling these same chuckles for later shows, establishing its own one-of-a-kind laugh track.
Since the first several episodes were taped in late summer, the pilot's first taping was not received well due to bad insulation and poor audio.
Douglass' "laff box" was purchased, unseen, at auction in 2010 when its owner failed to pay rent on the storage locker where it was housed.
I told you it was funny".
In 1986, a new children's laugh track was used with decidedly younger sounding laughs to match the material, which targeting a younger demographic than earlier seasons.
* ''Scooby-Doo Goes Hollywood'' (ABC, 1979)
By the 1980s, the Douglass family was eventually outrivalled by other sound engineers who created stereophonic laugh tracks different from the original analog track.
* In September 1964, the comedy/drama ''Kentucky Jones'' (NBC, 1964—65), starring Dennis Weaver, tried to eliminate laughs, simulated or live.
Hanna-Barbera (HB) was the first cartoon production studio to cease using Douglass' services.
On occasion, the studio would slow down the laugh track for a greater effect; this was done for the second season of ''The New Scooby-Doo Movies''.
Few re-recording mixers have carried on the "laff box" tradition.
The 1982 season, which was the first season of the series produced for U.S. cable channel Nickelodeon, used fewer laughs, but also employed Carroll Pratt's titter track used on U.S. sitcoms such as ''Happy Days'' and ''What's Happening
* ''It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia''
When the special first aired on December 9, 1965, it was a surprise critical and commercial hit.
Pufnstuf'' in 1969, executive producer Si Rose viewed any comedy without a laugh track as a handicap, and convinced the Kroffts to include one on ''Pufnstuf''.
In these cases, Douglass orchestrated the laugh track from scratch.
* Andy Griffith initially resisted the inclusion of a laugh track on ''The Andy Griffith Show''.
NBC, already annoyed by the manufactured rock group wanting too much control over their show, cancelled ''The Monkees'' after the conclusion of its second season, citing the removal of the laugh track as a significant factor.
After getting support from sponsor General Mills, Ward and Scott convinced ABC, and the laugh track ended after its fourth episode; while current syndicated prints of these episodes still retain the laugh track, it has been subsequently removed from the DVD release.
This laugh track, which added an additional belly laugh to the mix, was noticeably slowed during production (''Wait Till Your Father Gets Home'' was the only television series produced by Hanna-Barbera to have included that specific belly laugh track).
This editing technique became known as sweetening, in which recorded laughter is used to augment the response of the real studio audience if they did not react as strongly as desired.
In the 21st century, many sitcoms inspired by the new wave of British comedies of the late 1990s have not featured a laugh track or studio audience.
Scenes recorded outdoors, traditionally recorded in advance of studio work, are played back to the studio audience and their laughter is recorded for the broadcast episode (occasionally, entire shows have been recorded in this fashion).
Henson himself knew that having a live audience would be impractical, given the production complexities (the NBC sitcom ''ALF'' was also difficult to produce and utilized only a laugh track); he also notes that because of the series' vaudeville inspiration, having sounds of laughter was a necessity, but admits that it was not an easy task – "I look at some of the early shows, I'm really embarrassed by them.
Network research suggested that the laugh track was mandatory in order to brand a single-camera show as a comedy.
The only way to get away from a laugh track is to use music, which can indicate when something is funny."
With the exception of ''All in the Family'', sweetening was still a necessity during post-production in order to bridge any gaps in audience reactions.
* ''Parks and Recreation''
Writers gradually became more conscious of the space required for the laugh track and began timing their scripts around it.
To make his point clear, an announcement proclaimed over the closing credits each week that "''All in the Family'' was recorded on tape before a live audience" or during the show's final seasons where live audiences no longer attended tapings of the show, "''All in the Family'' was played to a studio audience for live responses."
Up to 40 different laugh clips could be combined and layered at one time, creating the effect of a larger, louder reaction when in fact the same laughs were later heard individually.
Nickelodeon – Disney's top competitor – utilizes a laugh track for shows such as ''iCarly'' and ''Victorious'' since closing the original studio facilities fitted for live audience seating.
Inside the machine was a wide array of recorded chuckles, yocks and belly laughs; exactly 320 laughs on 32 tape loops, 10 to a loop.
The results showed no measurable difference in the audience's enjoyment.
We shall carry on without mechanical tricks".
The 1970s began with the decline of rural-based shows (such as ''The Beverly Hillbillies'', ''Green Acres'' and ''Mayberry RFD'') and the rise of socially conscious programming (such as ''All in the Family'', ''M*A*S*H'' and ''Maude'').
* ''Sports Night'' (ABC, 1998—2000) premiered with a laugh track, against the wishes of show creator Aaron Sorkin, but the laugh track became more subtle as the season progressed and was completely removed at the start of the second season.
Post-''Muppet Show'' fare then turned to Douglass for audience reactions; one-shot specials such as ''The Fantastic Miss Piggy Show'' and ''The Muppets: A Celebration of 30 Years'' were given full audience by Douglass's son, Robert, who by that time was running Northridge Electronics following his father's retirement.
* ''Fred and Barney Meet The Thing'' (NBC, 1979)
"Because you feel that you are watching the program with a group of people instead of being alone."
Douglass kept recordings fresh, making minor changes every few months, believing that the viewing audience evolved over time.
* ''Real Husbands of Hollywood''
His work was crisp and clean, and considered a craft by many in the television industry.
By 1984, the editors corrected this problem, with laughs reverting to 1982 minus the effective titter track.
Its first two seasons used only a laugh track, and by third season, shifted over to a live audience.
(ABC, 1986–88) utilized a laugh track for the first 13 episodes of Season One, which creator Alan Spencer did not approve of.
By 1960, nearly every prime time show in the U.S. was sweetened by Douglass.
There were still some producers who either still did not trust a live audience, produced a show that was too complex for an audience to be present, or favored the single-camera method.
The microphones onstage often do not fully pick up the audience's laughter and reaction to the monologues as audiences are not microphoned in live awards shows due to the amount of conversation that takes place during filming.
Conversely, the process could be used to "desweeten" audience reactions, toning down unwanted loud laughter or removing inappropriate applause, thus making the laughter more in line with the producer's preferred method of telling the story.
Leading industry experts reasoned that laugh tracks were a necessary evil in prime time television: without the canned laughter, a show was doomed to fail.
Successful series prior to 1971, like ''Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!
Midday programming, like ''The Banana Splits Adventure Hour'' (NBC, 1968–70), gradually followed suit.
After Douglass inserted a hearty laugh after the failed joke, Berle reportedly commented, "See?
Creator Adam Green also expressed interest in using a live studio audience in the future.
The prototype machine fell apart within months of use.
Only immediate members of the family knew what the inside actually looked like (at one time, the "laff box" was called "the most sought after but well-concealed box in the world").
He stated that his opposition to NBC's desire to add a laugh track led to the show's cancellation after two seasons.
* ''Kirby Buckets''
A '''laugh track''' (or '''laughter track''') is a separate soundtrack for a recorded comedy show containing the sound of audience laughter.
As the medium evolved, production costs associated with broadcasting live television escalated.
Attentive viewers could spot when he decided to mix chuckles together to give the effect of a more diverse audience.
and they'll turn off your program."
I thought it was a stroke of genius when it was eliminated in the second season."
"They're a lie," said Gelbart in a 1992 interview.
The DVD releases, meanwhile, give the viewer a choice of watching every episode with or without the laugh tracks (though the French and Spanish track do not have this option).
There was also a 30-second "titter" track in the loop, which consisted of individual people laughing quietly.
In the fourth episode of the series, Kermit the Frog is asked by guest Ruth Buzzi if he felt a gag or routine would be funny enough for the show, to which he turns to the camera and replies, "That's up to the laugh track."
Each loop contained 10 individual audience laughs spliced end-to-end, whirling around simultaneously waiting to be cued up.
As a result, a laugh track for ''The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy'' was recorded for the first episode, but dropped before transmission.
* ''Inch High, Private Eye'' (NBC, 1973–74)
Soon after the advent of the laugh track, Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz devised a method of filming with a live audience using a multi-camera setup.
Directors initially did not allow space for inserting reactions, making sweetening difficult and resulted in dialogue being drowned out.
* ''Parker Lewis Can't Lose''
Sweetening is a common practice in live awards shows such as the Emmy Awards, the Academy Awards and the MTV Video Music Awards.
Seasons 1–5 utilized Douglass' more invasive laugh track; Carroll Pratt's quieter laugh track was employed for Seasons 6-11 when the series shifted from sitcom to comedy-drama with the departure of Gelbart and Reynolds.
