He was gifted, brilliant, and one of the great controversial figures of our time in theatre, which is a virtue and not a vice at all."
Olivier was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, and won the Golden Globe of the same category.
On the completion of filming, Olivier and Leigh returned to Britain.
Korda—with Churchill's support and involvement—directed ''That Hamilton Woman'', with Olivier as Horatio Nelson and Leigh in the title role.
For the opening season in 1962 he directed two neglected 17th-century English plays, John Fletcher's 1638 comedy ''The Chances'' and John Ford's 1633 tragedy ''The Broken Heart'', followed by ''Uncle Vanya''.
The theatre, in an unfashionable location south of the Thames, had offered inexpensive tickets for opera and drama under its proprietor Lilian Baylis since 1912.
In 1930 Noël Coward cast Olivier as Victor Prynne in his new play ''Private Lives'', which opened at the new Phoenix Theatre in London in September.
His presentations at the St James's included seasons by Ruggero Ruggeri's company giving two Pirandello plays in Italian, followed by a visit from the Comédie-Française playing works by Molière, Racine, Marivaux and Musset in French.
In ''The New York Times'' Brooks Atkinson praised the scenery but not the acting: "Although Miss Leigh and Mr Olivier are handsome young people they hardly act their parts at all."
Olivier dismissed the suggestion, regarding it as an insult to his integrity as an actor.
In 1916, after attending a series of preparatory schools, Olivier passed the singing examination for admission to the choir school of All Saints, Margaret Street, in central London.
Olivier played Victor in the West End and then on Broadway; Adrianne Allen was Sybil in London, but could not go to New York, where the part was taken by Esmond.
By his own admission, he was not a very conscientious student, but Fogerty liked him and later said that he and Ashcroft stood out among her many pupils.
In February, following another request from Leigh, her husband also applied for their marriage to be terminated.
I wasn't likely to do any better at my age and with my undistinguished track-record, so I promptly fell in love with her."
Thorndike was joined by, among others, Harcourt Williams, Joyce Redman and Margaret Leighton.
The quick changes of mood and manner absorbed me, and I have never forgotten them."
The Shakespearean actors one saw were terrible hams like Frank Benson."
In 1983 he played his last Shakespearean role as Lear in ''King Lear'', for Granada Television, earning his fifth Emmy.
The first consisted of ''Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2''.
Olivier and Leigh settled in a cottage just outside RAF Worthy Down, where he was stationed with a training squadron; Noël Coward visited the couple and thought Olivier looked unhappy.
Billington ascribes this failure rate to poor choices by Olivier rather than mere bad luck.
Shortly after filming started she suffered a breakdown, and returned to Britain where, between periods of incoherence, she told Olivier that she was in love with Finch, and had been having an affair with him; she gradually recovered over a period of several months.
Olivier followed ''Rebecca'' with ''Pride and Prejudice'', in the role of Mr. Darcy.
In 1935 he played in a celebrated production of ''Romeo and Juliet'' alongside Gielgud and Peggy Ashcroft, and by the end of the decade he was an established star.
A son, Richard, was born in December 1961; two daughters followed, Tamsin Agnes Margaret—born in January 1963—and Julie-Kate, born in July 1966.
The cultural historian Jeffrey Richards describes Olivier's look as an attempt by Fox Studios to produce a likeness of Ronald Colman, and Colman's moustache, voice and manner are "perfectly reproduced".
According to Morley, Gielgud was widely considered "the best actor in the world from the neck up and Olivier from the neck down."
John Betjeman, the press attaché at the British embassy in Dublin, played a key liaison role with the Irish government in making suitable arrangements.
The notices were laudatory, mentioning him alongside great predecessors such as Edmund Kean, William Macready and Henry Irving.
She would be shaking and white and quite distraught at the end of it."
He also won two British Academy Film Awards out of ten nominations, five Emmy Awards out of nine nominations, and three Golden Globe Awards out of six nominations.
As a result of the breakdown, many of the Oliviers' friends learned of her problems.
His next major role, and his last appearance in a Shakespeare play, was as Shylock in ''The Merchant of Venice'', his first appearance in the work.
He had ambitions to be the first head of the National Theatre and had no intention of letting actors run it.
Osborne was already at work on a new play, ''The Entertainer'', an allegory of Britain's post-colonial decline, centred on a seedy variety comedian, Archie Rice.
In 1943, at the behest of the Ministry of Information, Olivier began working on ''Henry V''.
He had for years maintained that he might easily have been a third-rate comedian called "Larry Oliver", and would sometimes play the character at parties.
Shortly afterwards Finch moved to London, where Olivier auditioned him and put him under a long-term contract with Laurence Olivier Productions.
Olivier secured the casting of Leigh to replace Cherry Cottrell as Ophelia.
Brooke, writing for the BFI, considers that it "came too late in the Second World War to be a call to arms as such, but formed a powerful reminder of what Britain was defending."
Professionally, and to secure financial security, he made a series of advertisements for Polaroid cameras in 1972, although he stipulated that they must never be shown in Britain; he also took a number of cameo film roles, which were in "often undistinguished films", according to Billington.
Olivier was tiring of Leigh's suffocating adulation, and she was drinking to excess.
He made little mark until his final year, when he played Puck in the school's production of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream''; his performance was a tour de force that won him popularity among his fellow pupils.
His success was vitiated by his breaking an ankle two months into the run, in one of the athletic, acrobatic stunts with which he liked to enliven his performances.
The second of them was Joan Plowright, with whom Olivier began a relationship that endured for the rest of his life.
In the interim he had a great success playing a thinly disguised version of the American actor John Barrymore in Edna Furber's ''Theatre Royal''.
The music for the film was written by William Walton, "a score that ranks with the best in film music", according to the music critic Michael Kennedy.
Olivier described the contrast thus: "I've always thought that we were the reverses of the same coin... the top half John, all spirituality, all beauty, all abstract things; and myself as all earth, blood, humanity."
In 1930, with his impending marriage in mind, Olivier earned some extra money with small roles in two films.
He held the post for six years, and a stable family life was at last possible.
In 1947 Olivier was appointed a Knight Bachelor, and in 1970 he was given a life peerage; the Order of Merit was conferred on him in 1981.
I hated myself for cheating on Jill, but then I had cheated before, but this was something different.
In February 1960, for his contribution to the film industry, Olivier was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame, with a star at 6319 Hollywood Boulevard; he is included in the American Theater Hall of Fame.
Campbell Dixon, the critic for ''The Daily Telegraph'' thought the film "brilliant&nbsp;... one of the masterpieces of the stage has been made into one of the greatest of films."
This was love that I really didn't ask for but was drawn into."
The younger man received the accolade six months later, by which time the days of the triumvirate were numbered.
The Old Vic governors approached the Royal Navy to secure the release of Richardson and Olivier; the Sea Lords consented, with, as Olivier put it, "a speediness and lack of reluctance which was positively hurtful."
He bids me watch the wheels go round."
Their first substantial successes in works by any of Osborne's generation were Alan Bennett's ''Forty Years On'' (Gielgud in 1968) and David Storey's ''Home'' (Richardson and Gielgud in 1970).
Later he would comment that he "lost Vivien" in Australia, a reference to Leigh's affair with the Australian actor Peter Finch, whom the couple met during the tour.
His family had no theatrical connections, but Olivier's father, a clergyman, decided that his son should become an actor.
Instead of appearing with Leigh, he cast Marilyn Monroe as the showgirl.
In 1945 the company toured Germany, where they were seen by many thousands of Allied servicemen; they also appeared at the Comédie-Française theatre in Paris, the first foreign company to be given that honour.
''The Times'' said that the triumvirate's years were the greatest in the Old Vic's history; as ''The Guardian'' put it, "the governors summarily sacked them in the interests of a more mediocre company spirit".
It was widely remarked that Olivier seemed reluctant to recruit his peers to perform with his company.
He thought the role of Lear much less demanding than other tragic Shakespearean heroes: "No, Lear is easy.
In 1935, under Albery's management, John Gielgud staged ''Romeo and Juliet'' at the New Theatre, co-starring with Peggy Ashcroft, Edith Evans and Olivier.
After that, he was free to embark on a new career as an actor-manager.
Olivier was enraged at the notices after the first night, which praised the virility of his performance but fiercely criticised his speaking of Shakespeare's verse, contrasting it with his co-star's mastery of the poetry.
Olivier was thought by some critics to be under par in both his roles, and some suspected him of playing deliberately below his usual strength so that Leigh might appear his equal.
Olivier's Lear received good but not outstanding reviews.
During the production of ''The Prince and the Showgirl'', Olivier, Monroe and her husband, the American playwright Arthur Miller, went to see the English Stage Company's production of John Osborne's ''Look Back in Anger'' at the Royal Court.
Olivier's initial foray into American films had not provided the breakthrough he hoped for; disillusioned with Hollywood, he returned to London, where he appeared in two British films, ''Perfect Understanding'' with Gloria Swanson and ''No Funny Business''—in which Esmond also appeared.
Richardson made it a condition of accepting that he should share the acting and management in a triumvirate.
The film became a critical and commercial success in Britain and abroad, although Lejeune, in ''The Observer'', considered it "less effective than Olivier's stage work.&nbsp;...
The critic Harold Hobson wrote that Richardson and Olivier quickly "made the Old Vic the most famous theatre in the Anglo-Saxon world."
Her drama company specialised in the plays of Shakespeare, and many leading actors had taken very large cuts in their pay to develop their Shakespearean techniques there.
There is simply no such thing as a greatest actor, or painter or composer".
He told Tynan this was because he was influenced as a young man by Douglas Fairbanks, Ramon Navarro and John Barrymore in films, and Barrymore on stage as Hamlet: "tremendously athletic.
The National Theatre's largest auditorium is named in his honour, and he is commemorated in the Laurence Olivier Awards, given annually by the Society of London Theatre.
In his scenes of decline and madness towards the end of the play some critics found him less moving than his finest predecessors in the role.
After attending a drama school in London, Olivier learned his craft in a succession of acting jobs during the late 1920s.
In ''Richard III'', according to Billington, Olivier's triumph was absolute: "so much so that it became his most frequently imitated performance and one whose supremacy went unchallenged until Antony Sher played the role forty years later".
O'Toole was a guest star, one of occasional exceptions to Olivier's policy of casting productions from a regular company.
In January 1950 he produced, directed and starred in Christopher Fry's verse play ''Venus Observed''.
To J. C. Trewin, Olivier's was "the finest Macbeth of our day"; to Darlington it was "the best Macbeth of our time".
He was also awarded the Danish Sonning Prize in 1966, the Gold Medallion of the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities in 1968; and the Albert Medal of the Royal Society of Arts in 1976.
In finding an ''avant-garde'' play that suited him, he was, as Osborne remarked, far ahead of Gielgud and Ralph Richardson, who did not successfully follow his lead for more than a decade.
In 1978 he appeared in the film ''The Boys from Brazil'', playing the role of Ezra Lieberman, an ageing Nazi hunter; he received his eleventh Academy Award nomination.
The reviewer for ''The Guardian'' thought the performances were good, and wrote that Olivier "on the screen as on the stage, achieves the tour de force of bringing Archie Rice&nbsp;... to life".
In a school production of ''Julius Caesar'' in 1917, the ten-year-old Olivier's performance as Brutus impressed an audience that included Lady Tree, the young Sybil Thorndike, and Ellen Terry, who wrote in her diary, "The small boy who played Brutus is already a great actor."
Nonetheless, some colleagues, particularly film actors such as Spencer Tracy, Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall, came to regard Olivier as the finest of his peers.
When strong enough, he was contacted by the director John Schlesinger, who offered him the role of a Nazi torturer in the 1976 film ''Marathon Man''.
The next production was ''Macbeth''.
He was tempted back to Hollywood in 1933 to appear opposite Greta Garbo in ''Queen Christina'', but was replaced after two weeks of filming because of a lack of chemistry between the two.
The theatricality of the services appealed to Olivier, and the vicar encouraged the students to develop a taste for secular as well as religious drama.
A pacifist, as he then was, Olivier was as reluctant to play the warrior king as Guthrie was to direct the piece, but the production was a success, and Baylis had to extend the run from four to eight weeks.
Two films featuring Olivier were released in 1960.
After a series of box-office failures, the company balanced its books in 1951 with productions of Shaw's ''Caesar and Cleopatra'' and Shakespeare's ''Antony and Cleopatra'' which the Oliviers played in London and then took to Broadway.
In 1969 Olivier appeared in two war films, portraying military leaders.
The resulting film was a commercial and critical success that earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor, and created his screen reputation.
They were married in August 1940, at the San Ysidro Ranch in Santa Barbara.
Olivier's sister had been a student there and was a favourite of Elsie Fogerty, the founder and principal of the school.
''Hamlet'' became the first non-American film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture, while Olivier won the Award for Best Actor.
Leigh's Lady Macbeth received mixed but generally polite notices, although to the end of his life Olivier believed it to have been the best Lady Macbeth he ever saw.
He recovered enough to take the heavy role of Edgar in Strindberg's ''The Dance of Death'', the finest of all his performances other than in Shakespeare, in Gielgud's view.
In the view of the critic and biographer W.&nbsp;A. Darlington, he was simply miscast both as Caesar and Antony, finding the former boring and the latter weak.
In the same year Olivier portrayed the Mahdi, opposite Heston as General Gordon, in the film ''Khartoum''.
Originally he had no intention of taking the directorial duties, but ended up directing and producing, in addition to taking the title role.
When the production was first shown on American television, the critic Steve Vineberg wrote:
Olivier's life was under threat from the Nazis and pro-German sympathisers.
After Olivier's death, Gielgud reflected, "He followed in the theatrical tradition of Kean and Irving.
In January 1940 Olivier and Esmond were granted their divorce.
In May 1960 divorce proceedings started; Leigh reported the fact to the press and informed reporters of Olivier's relationship with Plowright.
The National Theatre production of ''Othello'' was released as a film in 1965, which earned four Academy Award nominations, including another for Best Actor for Olivier.
For ''Othello'' he played Iago, with Richardson in the title role.
Olivier missed him greatly and asked his father how soon he could follow.
Olivier was born in Dorking, Surrey, the youngest of the three children of the Revd Gerard Kerr Olivier (1869–1939) and his wife Agnes Louise, ''née'' Crookenden (1871–1920).
In 1977 Olivier was awarded a British Film Institute Fellowship.
I insisted on getting married from a pathetic mixture of religious and animal promptings.&nbsp;... She had admitted to me that she was in love elsewhere and could never love me as completely as I would wish".
Following Olivier's success in Shakespearean stage productions, he made his first foray into Shakespeare on film in 1936, as Orlando in ''As You Like It'', directed by Paul Czinner, "a charming if lightweight production", according to Michael Brooke of the British Film Institute's (BFI's) Screenonline.
In 1926, on Thorndike's recommendation, Olivier joined the Birmingham Repertory Company.
As the play speculatively depicted Churchill as complicit in the assassination of the Polish prime minister Władysław Sikorski, Chandos regarded it as indefensible.
The day after her final performance in the play she miscarried and entered a period of depression that lasted for months.
Late in his career, he had considerable success in television roles.
Behind Archie's brazen façade there is a deep desolation, and Olivier caught both aspects, switching, in the words of the biographer Anthony Holden, "from a gleefully tacky comic routine to moments of the most wrenching pathos".
Darlington considers a 1951 production of ''Othello'' starring Orson Welles as the pick of Olivier's productions at the theatre.
Darlington comments, "Olivier, in his middle forties when he should have been displaying his powers at their very peak, seemed to have lost interest in his own acting".
As a young man Gerard Olivier had considered a stage career and was a dramatic and effective preacher.
He played Richard&nbsp;III, Sir Peter Teazle in Sheridan's'' The School for Scandal'' and Antrobus in Thornton Wilder's ''The Skin of Our Teeth'', appearing alongside Leigh in the latter two plays.
In 1972 he took leave of absence from the National to star opposite Michael Caine in Joseph L. Mankiewicz's film of Anthony Shaffer's ''Sleuth'', which ''The Illustrated London News'' considered to be "Olivier at his twinkling, eye-rolling best"; both he and Caine were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor, losing to Marlon Brando in ''The Godfather''.
The stylised production by Michel Saint-Denis was not well liked, but Olivier had some good notices among the bad.
At his urging the board unanimously vetoed the production.
Cooper advised him to remain where he was and speak to the film director Alexander Korda, who was based in the US at Churchill's behest, with connections to British Intelligence.
Caroline Lejeune, writing for ''The Observer'', considered that "Olivier's dark, moody face, abrupt style, and a certain fine arrogance towards the world in his playing are just right" in the role, while the reviewer for ''The Times'' wrote that Olivier "is a good embodiment of Heathcliff&nbsp;... impressive enough on a more human plane, speaking his lines with real distinction, and always both romantic and alive."
In 1960 he made his second appearance for the Royal Court company in Ionesco's absurdist play ''Rhinoceros''.
Rehearsals were difficult, with Olivier determined to play his conception of the role despite the director's view that it was vulgar.
He was encouraged by Guthrie, who, having instigated the appointment of Richardson and Olivier, had come to resent their knighthoods and international fame.
Olivier's acting technique was minutely crafted, and he was known for changing his appearance considerably from role to role.
His performance divided opinion.
There were Oscar nominations for the film, including Best Picture and Best Actor, but it won none and Olivier was instead presented with a "Special Award".
From All Saints, Olivier went on to St Edward's School, Oxford, from 1920 to 1924.
In January 1924, his brother left England to work in India as a rubber planter.
Olivier began to notice a change in Leigh's behaviour, and he later recounted that "I would find Vivien sitting on the corner of the bed, wringing her hands and sobbing, in a state of grave distress; I would naturally try desperately to give her some comfort, but for some time she would be inconsolable."
In 1928 Olivier created the role of Stanhope in R.&nbsp;C. Sherriff's ''Journey's End'', in which he scored a great success at its single Sunday night premiere.
Several of the roles he played were minor characters, including a crazed butler in Feydeau's ''A Flea in Her Ear'' and a pompous solicitor in Maugham's ''Home and Beauty''; the vulgar soldier Captain Brazen in Farquhar's 1706 comedy ''The Recruiting Officer'' was a larger role but not the leading one.
The production was popular, despite poor reviews, but the expensive production did little to help the finances of Laurence Olivier Productions.
He modelled his performing style on that of Gerald du Maurier, of whom he said, "He seemed to mutter on stage but had such perfect technique.
While Olivier was on the Australian tour and Richardson was in Hollywood, Esher terminated the contracts of the three directors, who were said to have "resigned".
After his wedding Olivier wanted to help the war effort.
The production was chiefly remarkable for the star's quarrels with the director, Orson Welles, who according to the biographer Francis Beckett suffered the "appalling treatment" that Olivier had inflicted on Gielgud at Stratford five years earlier.
He received good reviews for both films and showed a more confident screen presence than he had in his early work.
In partnership with Binkie Beaumont he staged the English premiere of Tennessee Williams's ''A Streetcar Named Desire'', with Leigh in the central role of Blanche DuBois.
The first—filmed in 1959—was ''Spartacus'', in which he portrayed the Roman general, Marcus Licinius Crassus.
In 1991 Gielgud unveiled a memorial stone commemorating Olivier in Poets' Corner at Westminster Abbey.
The British government agreed to release funds for a new building on the South Bank of the Thames.
In addition to giving the 23-year-old Olivier his first successful West End role, Coward became something of a mentor.
He won a BAFTA award for the role and was nominated for the Best Actor Academy Award, which Yul Brynner won.
Olivier's honours included a knighthood (1947), a life peerage (1970) and the Order of Merit (1981).
For the first weeks of the run Gielgud played Mercutio and Olivier played Romeo, after which they exchanged roles.
In the 1950s Olivier was an independent actor-manager, but his stage career was in the doldrums until he joined the ''avant garde'' English Stage Company in 1957 to play the title role in ''The Entertainer'', a part he later played on film.
Although he did not win the Oscar, he was presented with an Honorary Award for his lifetime achievement.
The director, William Wyler, was a hard taskmaster, and Olivier learned to remove what Billington described as "the carapace of theatricality" to which he was prone, replacing it with "a palpable reality".
The actor Robert Speaight described it as "Olivier's first incontestably great performance".
In 1949 he was made Commander of the Order of the Dannebrog by the Danish King Frederik IX ; the French appointed him '''', Legion of Honour, in 1953; the Italian government created him '''', Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, in 1953; and in 1971 he was granted the Order of Yugoslav Flag with Golden Wreath.
The studio owners were concerned enough that Samuel Goldwyn and Cecil B. DeMille both provided support and security to ensure his safety.
Among Olivier's films are ''Wuthering Heights'' (1939), ''Rebecca'' (1940), and a trilogy of Shakespeare films as actor-director: ''Henry V'' (1944), ''Hamlet'' (1948), and ''Richard III'' (1955).
In the late 1960s Olivier told Sheridan Morley:
This meant a nomadic existence, and for Laurence's first few years, he never lived in one place long enough to make friends.
The decree ''nisi'' was issued in December 1960, which enabled him to marry Plowright in March 1961.
Apart from his Astrov in the ''Uncle Vanya'', familiar from Chichester, his first leading role for the National was Othello, directed by Dexter in 1964.
By the end of Australian tour, both Leigh and Olivier were exhausted and ill, and he told a journalist, "You may not know it, but you are talking to a couple of walking corpses."
Reviewers were lukewarm about the direction by Glen Byam Shaw and the designs by Roger Furse, but Olivier's performance in the title role attracted superlatives.
Olivier directed his third Shakespeare film in September 1954, ''Richard III'' (1955), which he co-produced with Korda.
Victor is a secondary character, along with Sybil Chase; the author called them "extra puppets, lightly wooden ninepins, only to be repeatedly knocked down and stood up again".
He respected tradition in the theatre, but he also took great delight in breaking tradition, which is what made him so unique.
His cremation was held three days later, and a funeral was held in Poets' Corner of Westminster Abbey in October that year.
On leaving the school after a year, Olivier gained work with small touring companies before being taken on in 1925 by Sybil Thorndike and her husband, Lewis Casson, as a bit-part player, understudy and assistant stage manager for their London company.
Olivier shaved his pate and wore oversized glasses to enlarge the look of his eyes, in a role that the critic David Robinson, writing for ''The Times'', thought was "strongly played", adding that Olivier was "always at his best in roles that call for him to be seedy or nasty or both".
Olivier did not enjoy working in film, which he dismissed as "this anaemic little medium which could not stand great acting", but financially it was much more rewarding than his theatre work.
For his work in films, Olivier received four Academy Awards: an honorary award for ''Henry V'' (1947), a Best Actor award and one as producer for ''Hamlet'' (1948), and a second honorary award in 1979 to recognise his lifetime of contribution to the art of film.
He speaks the lines nobly, and with the caress of one who loves them, but he nullifies his own thesis by never, for a moment, leaving the impression of a man who cannot make up his own mind; here, you feel rather, is an actor-producer-director who, in every circumstance, knows exactly what he wants, and gets it".
In January 1953 Leigh travelled to Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) to film ''Elephant Walk'' with Peter Finch.
From 1963 to 1973 he was the founding director of Britain's National Theatre, running a resident company that fostered many future stars.
Olivier had intended to step down from the directorship of the National Theatre at the end of his first five-year contract, having, he hoped, led the company into its new building.
''The Times'' commented, "It is doubtful if the Moscow Arts Theatre itself could improve on this production."
Most of the reviewers and theatrical colleagues praised it highly; Franco Zeffirelli called it "an anthology of everything that has been discovered about acting in the past three centuries."
Throughout the war Tyrone Guthrie had striven to keep the Old Vic company going, even after German bombing in 1942 left the theatre a near-ruin.
The same year Olivier decided to direct and produce a film version of ''The Sleeping Prince'', retitled ''The Prince and the Showgirl''.
Of the relationship, Olivier later said that "I couldn't help myself with Vivien.
Olivier did not enjoy making ''Wuthering Heights'', and his approach to film acting, combined with a dislike for Oberon, led to tensions on set.
The same year he also appeared in a cameo alongside Gielgud and Richardson in ''Wagner'', with Burton in the title role; his final screen appearance was as an old, wheelchair-bound soldier in Derek Jarman's 1989 film ''War Requiem''.
Although the filming was challenging because of Monroe's behaviour, the film was appreciated by the critics.
At his worst, he would have acted the parts more ably than they are usually lived."
Olivier again ignored his director and undermined his authority.
Olivier's move from leading parts to supporting and cameo roles came about because his poor health meant he could not get the necessary long insurance for larger parts, with only short engagements in films available.
Among the actors whom Olivier joined in late 1936 were Edith Evans, Ruth Gordon, Alec Guinness and Michael Redgrave.
Gerard Olivier had begun a career as a schoolmaster, but in his thirties he discovered a strong religious vocation and was ordained as a priest of the Church of England.
'''Laurence Kerr Olivier, Baron Olivier''',  (; 22 May 1907 – 11 July 1989) was an English actor who, along with his contemporaries Ralph Richardson and John Gielgud, dominated the British stage of the mid-20th century.
