The film was not a success and it brought an end to Laurel and Hardy's film careers.
These films, while not considered the team's best work, were financially very successful.
The humor of Laurel and Hardy was highly visual with slapstick used for emphasis.
He brought the team together and they worked for Hal Roach Studios for over 20 years.
Upon their return to the European stage in 1952, they undertook a well-received series of public appearances, performing a short sketch Laurel had written called "A Spot of Trouble".
The Fox films were so profitable that the studio kept making Laurel and Hardy comedies after Fox discontinued its other "B" series films.
Laurel had expected the tour to be merely a pleasant interval before returning to London; however, he emigrated to the U.S. during the trip.
Laurel was unhappy with the plot, and after an argument, was allowed to make the film his way.
In popular culture the catchphrase is often misquoted as "Well, here's another '''fine''' mess you've gotten me into."
''Night Owls'' was made in both Spanish and Italian and ''Below Zero'' along with ''Chickens Come Home'' were only made in Spanish.
Following Hardy's death, Laurel and Hardy's films were returned to movie theaters as clips of their work were featured in Robert Youngson's silent-film compilation ''The Golden Age of Comedy''.
In 1950, before retiring from the screen, they made their last film, a French/Italian co-production called ''Atoll K''.
* "I was dreaming I was awake but I woke up and found meself asleep."
Critics were disappointed with the storyline, English dubbing and Laurel's sickly physical appearance in the film.
The third one is located in Solingen, Germany.
Actors Bronson Pinchot and Gailard Sartain were cast playing the lookalike nephews of Laurel and Hardy named Stanley Thinneus Laurel and Oliver Fatteus Hardy.
Despite having a long and successful career, it was reported that Hardy's home was sold to help cover the cost of his medical expenses during this time.
As Laurel made so many suggestions there was not much left for the credited director to do.
While Laurel and Hardy could not speak these foreign languages they received voice coaching for their lines.
The Indian comedy duo Ghory and Dixit was known as the Indian Laurel and Hardy.Also Tamil Actors Goundamani and Senthil have been described as "Tamil cinema's Laurel and Hardy"
The title took its name from the familiar phrase "Unaccustomed as we are to public speaking".
Dahlberg held Laurel's career back because she demanded roles in his films, and her tempestuous nature made her difficult to work with.
As a team they proved skilful in their melding of visual and verbal humor and made a seamless transition to the talking era in their first sound film ''Unaccustomed As We Are'' from 1929.
Stan Laurel (June 16, 1890 – February 23, 1965) was born Arthur Stanley Jefferson in Ulverston, Lancashire (today Cumbria), England into a theatrical family.
Nevertheless, their association continued for another six years.
His thumb ignites and he matter-of-factly lights his "pipe".
Another short film which revolves around such an altercation was titled ''Tit for Tat'' (1935).
Prior to that, he experienced only modest success.
He was rejected for enlistment by the Army during World War I due to his size.
Late in life, he hosted visitors of the new generation of comedians and celebrities including Dick Cavett, Jerry Lewis, Peter Sellers, Marcel Marceau, and Dick Van Dyke.
A number of their films were reshot with Laurel and Hardy speaking in Spanish, Italian, French or German.
While many enthusiasts claim the superiority of ''The Music Box'', their 1929 silent film ''Big Business'' is by far the most consistently acclaimed.
''Big Business'' was added to the National Film Registry in the United States as a national treasure in 1992.
The association was casual, according to interviews given in the 1930s, and both of them had forgotten it entirely.
Arthur Jefferson secured Laurel his first acting job with the juvenile theatrical company of Levy and Cardwell, which specialized in Christmas Pantomimes.
According to the notes, Ollie informs Stan that the television program has an audience of six million and that host Henry Hall is "going to introduce us to them".
(Laurel, ''Brats'')
It was difficult for producers, writers, and directors to write for his character, with American audiences knowing him either as a "nutty burglar" or as a Charlie Chaplin imitator.
Seeing film comedies inspired an urge to take up comedy himself and, in 1913, he began working with Lubin Motion Pictures in Jacksonville.
In the opening dialogue, Laurel and Hardy began by spoofing the slow and self-conscious speech of the early talking actors which became a routine they would use regularly.
In 1960, Laurel was given a special Academy Award for his contributions to film comedy but was unable to attend the ceremony, due to poor health, and actor Danny Kaye accepted the award for him.
During the filming, Hardy began to lose weight precipitously and developed an irregular heartbeat.
Maurice Sendak showed three identical Oliver Hardy figures as bakers preparing cakes for the morning in his award-winning 1970 children's book ''In the Night Kitchen''.
Prior to their being teamed up, both actors had well-established film careers.
Following the making of ''Atoll K'' Laurel and Hardy took some months off, allowing Laurel to recuperate.
However, the working conditions were now completely different as they were hired simply as actors, relegated to the B-film divisions, and were initially not allowed to improvise or contribute to the scripts.
Several years later both comedians separately signed with the Hal Roach film studio and next appeared in the 1926 film ''45 Minutes From Hollywood''.
They also made 12 guest or cameo appearances that included the ''Galaxy of Stars'' promotional film of 1936.
The plots for these films were similar to the English-language version although the supporting cast were often native language speaking actors.
And another, not-as-often used catchphrase of Ollie, particularly after Stan has accidentally given a verbal idea to an adversary of theirs to torment them even more: "Why don't you keep your (big) mouth shut?!"
Merchandiser Larry Harmon claimed ownership of Laurel's and Hardy's likenesses and has issued Laurel and Hardy toys and coloring books.
In 2005, they were voted the seventh-greatest comedy act of all time by a UK poll of fellow comedians.
His animated versions of Laurel and Hardy guest-starred in a 1972 episode of Hanna-Barbera's ''The New Scooby-Doo Movies''.
From this point, Laurel was an uncredited film director for their films.
He died on February 23 in Santa Monica and is buried at Forest Lawn-Hollywood Hills in Los Angeles, California.
The joke ends, this time with a match Laurel was using, relighting itself, which Hardy throws into the fireplace, whereupon it explodes with a loud bang.
'''Laurel and Hardy''' were a comedy double act during the early Classical Hollywood era of American cinema.
It was first used by Hardy in ''The Laurel-Hardy Murder Case'' in 1930.
To achieve a flat-footed walk, Laurel removed the heels from his shoes.
The Beatles used cut-outs of Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy in the cutout celebrity crowd for the cover of their 1967 album ''Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band''.
Hardy's character is a mugger attempting to rob Laurel.
The 1927 film ''Sailors Beware'' was a significant film for Hardy because two of his enduring trademarks were developed.
Oliver Hardy (January 18, 1892 – August 7, 1957) was born Norvell Hardy in Harlem, Georgia.
In some cases, their comedy bordered on the surreal, in a style that Stan Laurel called "white magic".
They remained with the Roach studio until 1940 and then appeared in eight "B" movie comedies for 20th Century Fox and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer from 1941 to 1945.
His father Arthur Joseph Jefferson was a theatrical entrepreneur and theatre owner in northern England and Scotland who, together with his wife, was a major force in the industry.
After finishing their movie commitments at the end of 1944, they concentrated on performing in stage shows and embarked on a music hall tour of England, Ireland and Scotland.
Hardy said "I had to become exasperated so I just stared right into the camera and registered my disgust."
Although the results of adding color were often in dispute, many popular titles are currently only available in the colorized version.
Many silent film actors failed to make the transition because they decided their prime duty was to tell stories in words or they overemphasized their speech.
The first feature film starring Laurel and Hardy was ''Pardon Us'' from 1931.
Their teaming up was suggested by Leo McCarey who was their supervising director from 1927 and 1930.
In 1925, Laurel joined the Hal Roach film studio as a director and writer.
His second trademark was the "camera look" in which he breaks the fourth wall.
For the remaining eight years of his life, Stan Laurel refused to perform and even turned down Stanley Kramer's offer of a cameo in his landmark 1963 movie ''It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World''.
I always explain that we came together naturally."
However, they were not a comedy team at that time and it was not until 1926 that they appeared in a movie short together, when both separately signed contracts with the Hal Roach film studio.
After calmly surveying the damage, they would find something else to vandalize, and conflict would escalate until both sides were simultaneously destroying items in front of each other.
He then flicks his thumb upward as if working a lighter.
Rather than showing Hardy suffering the pain of misfortunes, such as falling down stairs or being beaten by a thug, banging and crashing sound effects were often used so the audience could visualize the scene for themselves.
With any director, if Laurel said 'I don't like this idea,' the director didn't say 'Well, you're going to do it anyway.'
They appeared as a team in 107 films, starring in 32 short silent films, 40 short sound films, and 23 full-length feature films.
The plot of this film sees Laurel and Hardy as Christmas tree salesman involved in a classic tit-for-tat battle with a character played by James Finlayson that eventually destroys his house and their car.
Hoping for greater artistic freedom, Laurel and Hardy split with Roach and signed with 20th Century-Fox and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.
Hoping to repeat the success the following year Laurel wrote a routine entitled "Birds of a Feather".
In 1912, Laurel left England with the Fred Karno Troupe to tour the United States.
* "You can lead a horse to water but a pencil must be led."
Also, in 1927, the pair starred in ''The Battle of the Century'', a lost but now found classic short, which involved over 3,000 cream pies.
The catchphrase most used by Laurel and Hardy on film is: "Well, here's another nice mess you've gotten me into!"
Much later Hardy finally succeeds, only to be terrified when his thumb catches fire.
He started by helping around the studio with lights, props, and other duties, gradually learning the craft as a script-clerk for the company.
A popular routine the team performed was a "tit-for-tat" fight with an adversary.
Laurel heard the tune on the station and asked Hatley if they could use it as the Laurel and Hardy theme song.
An Emmy-winning film documentary about the group, ''Revenge of the Sons of the Desert'', has been released on DVD as part of ''The Laurel and Hardy Collection, Vol.&nbsp;1.''
The title track was released as a single in the UK and reached #2 in the charts.
They became well known during the late 1920s through the mid-1940s for their slapstick comedy, with Laurel playing the clumsy and childlike friend of the pompous Hardy.
The films, budgeted between $250,000 and $300,000 each, earned millions at the box office.
Laurel starred in over 50 films for various producers before teaming up with Hardy.
On September 9, 1953 their boat arrived in Cobh in the Republic of Ireland.
Hardy, who had difficulty understanding Laurel's idea even when expressed clearly, would understand perfectly when hearing the jumbled version.
Since the 1930s, the works of Laurel and Hardy have been released in numerous theatrical reissues, television revivals, 8-mm and 16-mm home movies, feature-film compilations, and home videos.
That was understood."
Exhibiting a versatility in playing heroes, villains and even female characters, Hardy was in demand for roles as a supporting actor, comic villain or second banana.
Laurel and Hardy avoided this pitfall because they continued making primarily visual films.
occurred in the Ullman short "Punching Bag" (1988).
In 1917, after the collapse of the Florida film industry, Hardy and his wife Madelyn moved to California to seek new opportunities.
A compilation of songs from their films, titled ''Trail of the Lonesome Pine'', was released in 1975.
It was founded in New York City in 1965 by Laurel and Hardy biographers John McCabe, Orson Bean, Al Kilgore, Chuck McCann and John Municino with the sanction of Stan Laurel.
They used some details to enhance this natural contrast.
The exact date the film was produced is not recorded but film historian Bo Bergulund dated it between late 1920 and January 1921.
Their first "official" film together as a team was the 1927 film ''Putting Pants on Philip''.
Laurel and Hardy officially became a team in 1927 when they appeared together in the silent short film ''Putting Pants on Philip''.
This film was a French-Italian co-production directed by Leo Joannon, but was plagued by problems with language barriers, production issues, and the serious health issues of both Laurel and Hardy.
Despite not appearing onscreen after Hardy's death, Laurel did contribute gags to several comedy filmmakers.
The duo's signature tune is known variously as "The Cuckoo Song", "Ku-Ku", or "The Dance of the Cuckoos".
Hal Roach was considered to be the most important person in the development of their film careers.
From May 1925 until September 1926, he received credit in at least 22 films.
Hardy was laid to rest at Pierce Brothers Valhalla Memorial Park, North Hollywood.
In 1917, Laurel was teamed with Mae Dahlberg as a double act for stage and film; they were living as common law husband and wife.
They made their final appearance on camera in 1956 in a private home movie, shot by a family friend at the Reseda, CA home of Stan Laurel‘s daughter, Lois.
In 1955, Laurel and Hardy made their final public appearance together while taking part in the program ''This Is Music Hall''.
In 1951, Laurel and Hardy made their final feature-length film together, ''Atoll K''.
The rift damaged Roach-Laurel relations to the point that Roach said that after ''Toyland'', he no longer wished to produce Laurel and Hardy films.
After Stan Laurel's death in 1965, there were two major motion-picture tributes: ''Laurel and Hardy's Laughing '20s'' was Robert Youngson's compilation of the team's silent-film highlights, and ''The Great Race'' was a large-scale salute to slapstick that director Blake Edwards dedicated to "Mr. Laurel and Mr. Hardy".
The plot involves Laurel as Philip, a young Scots man newly arrived in the United States, in full kilted splendor, suffering mishaps involving the kilt.
When interviewed Hal Roach spoke scathingly about the film and Laurel's behavior during the production.
They did not ignore sound but were not ruled by it.
For many years the duo were impersonated by Jim MacGeorge (as Laurel) and Chuck McCann (as Hardy) in children's TV shows and television commercials for various products.
On December 1, 1954, the team made their only American television appearance when they were surprised and interviewed by Ralph Edwards on his live NBC-TV program ''This Is Your Life''.
In 1909, Laurel was employed by Britain's leading comedy impresario Fred Karno as a supporting actor, and as an understudy for Charlie Chaplin.
In 1914, Hardy was billed as "Babe Hardy" in his first film, ''Outwitting Dad''.
Their film ''Helpmates'' was the first film to undergo the process and was released by Colorization Inc., a subsidiary of Hal Roach Studios, in 1983.
To which Stan replies "That's going to take a long time, isn't it?"
Leroy Shield composed the majority of the music used in the Laurel and Hardy short sound films.
The first was his "tie-twiddle" to demonstrate embarrassment.
Laurel lived until 1965 and survived to see the duo's work rediscovered through television and classic film revivals.
He also co-produced a series of ''Laurel and Hardy'' cartoons in 1966 with Hanna-Barbera Productions.
Laurel said of Karno, "There was no one like him.
Laurel would tell Hardy a genuinely smart idea he came up with, and Hardy would reply, "Tell me that again."
Quite unwittingly Laurel and Hardy's parts grew larger while those of their fellow stars diminished because Laurel and Hardy were considered to be great actors.
The following year ''The Music Box'', whose plot revolved around the pair pushing a piano up a long flight of steps, won an Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Subject.
In 1956, while following his doctor's orders to improve his health due to a heart condition, Hardy lost over .
Most Laurel and Hardy films have survived and have not gone out of circulation permanently.
Homer's first intentional use of "d'oh!"
It was played over the opening credits of their films and has become as emblematic of the duo as their bowler hats.
His uncle, played by Hardy, is shown trying to put trousers on him.
Unfortunately, these shows do not appear to have been preserved on record, tape or kinescope, but notes from the ''Face The Music'' television appearance have been recently discovered.
However, plans for the specials had to be shelved as the aging comedians continued to suffer from declining health.
While much of their comedy remained visual, various lines of humorous dialogue appeared in Laurel and Hardy's talking films.
When the films proved popular the studios allowed the team more input and Laurel and Hardy starred in eight features until 1944.
The amazed Hardy, seeing this, would unsuccessfully attempt to duplicate it throughout the film.
This telecast was preserved on a kinescope and later released on home video.
(Hardy, ''Way Out West'')
This was a BBC Television program about the Grand Order of Water Rats, a British variety organization.
While on tour of the British Isles in 1953, Stan and Babe appeared on radio in Ireland and on a live BBC television broadcast of the popular show ''Face the Music'' with host Henry Hall a week later.
As Laurel obviously relished writing gags, Hardy was more than happy to leave the job to his partner and was once quoted as saying "After all, just doing the gags was hard enough work, especially if you have taken as many falls and been dumped in as many mudholes as I have.
McCarey also influenced the slowing down of their comedy to a more natural pace.
In the 1930 operatic Technicolor musical ''The Rogue Song'', Laurel and Hardy appear in 10 sequences and only one of which is known to exist with the complete soundtrack.
The film ''Sons of the Desert'' from 1933 is often claimed to be Laurel and Hardy's best feature-length film.
Other actors in the Lubin company mimicked this and Hardy was billed as "Babe Hardy" in his early films.
In 1929 the silent era of film was coming to an end, and many actors saw their careers decline with the advent of sound.
A 2005 poll by fellow comedians and comedy insiders of the top 50 comedians for ''The Comedian's Comedian'', a TV documentary broadcast on UK's Channel 4, voted the duo the seventh-greatest comedy act ever, making them the top double act on the list.
Colorization was a success for the studio and ''Helpmates'' was released on home video with the colorized version of ''The Music Box'' in 1986.
This is treated as a clear example of "interpretative illustration" wherein the comedians' inclusion harked back to the author's childhood.
Laurel and Hardy would accidentally damage someone's property, with the injured party retaliating by ruining something belonging to Laurel or Hardy.
Partly due to the positive response from the television broadcast the pair was renegotiating with Hal Roach, Jr. for a series of color NBC Television specials to be called ''Laurel and Hardy's Fabulous Fables''.
Stan had three or four writers who joined in a perpetual game of 'Can You Top This?'
Laurel would attempt to repeat the idea, but babble utter nonsense.
For example, in the 1937 film ''Way Out West'', Laurel clenches his fist and pours tobacco into it as if it were a pipe.
The nickname "Babe" originated from an Italian barber near the Lubin Studios in Jacksonville, Florida who would rub Hardy's face with talcum powder and say "That's nice-a baby!"
Laurel kept his hair short on the sides and back, growing it long on top to create a natural "fright wig".
Hardy's sports jacket was a tad small and done up with one straining button, whereas Laurel's double-breasted jacket was loose fitting.
Much of their comedy involves milking a joke, where a simple idea provides a basis from which to build multiple gags without following a defined narrative.
The duo's famous signature tune, known variously as "The Cuckoo Song", "Ku-Ku" or "The Dance of the Cuckoos", was composed by Roach musical director Marvin Hatley as the on-the-hour chime for the Roach studio radio station.
* "A lot of weather we've been having lately."
Hardy, while acting, had been met with a pail of water in the face.
This could be with their wives—often played by Mae Busch, Anita Garvin or Daphne Pollard—or with a neighbor, often played by Charlie Hall or James Finlayson.
The first half of the 1927 film ''Now I'll Tell One'' is lost and the second half has yet to be released on video.
It was during this period that McCarey and Laurel jointly devised the team's format.
On December 1, 1954, the pair made one American television appearance when they were surprised and interviewed by Ralph Edwards on his live NBC-TV program ''This Is Your Life''.
He died of a stroke on August 7, 1957, and longtime friend Bob Chatterton stated that Hardy weighed just  at the time of his death.
Charley Rogers worked closely with the three men for many years and said, "It could not have happened if Laurel, Hardy and Roach had not met at the right place and the right time."
In contrast, Hardy's thinning hair was pasted on his forehead in spit curls and he sported a toothbrush moustache.
An early example of the routine occurs in their classic short, ''Big Business'' (1929), which was added to the National Film Registry in 1992.
Laurel was experiencing painful prostate complications as well.
For his stage name he took his father's first name calling himself "Oliver Norvell Hardy" while offscreen his nicknames were "Ollie" and "Babe".
Numerous colorized versions of copyright-free Laurel and Hardy features and shorts have been reproduced by a multitude of production studios.
There are three Laurel and Hardy museums.
One is in Laurel's birthplace, Ulverston, United Kingdom and another one is in Hardy's birthplace, Harlem, Georgia, United States.
At times of shock, he would simultaneously cry while pulling up his hair.
Roach remarked: "Laurel bossed the production.
The two comedians had previously worked together as cast members on the film ''The Lucky Dog'' in 1921.
The official Laurel and Hardy appreciation society is known as The Sons of the Desert which was named after a fictitious fraternal society featured in the Laurel and Hardy film of the same name.
After teaming up they played the same characters for 30 years.
I think I earned my money".
Some examples include:
were made in French and Spanish versions.
The official Laurel and Hardy appreciation society is known as The Sons of the Desert, after a fraternal society in their film of the same name (1933).
Dressing room arguments were common between the two; it was reported that producer Joe Rock paid her to leave Laurel and to return to her native Australia.
Laurel recounted their reception:
