On 22–2 April 2008, the Provincial Government of Ontario announced that it will pass legislation that will prohibit, province-wide, the cosmetic use and sale of lawn and garden pesticides.
Although lawns had been a recognizable feature in English residences since the 19th century, a revolution in industrialization and monoculture of the lawn since the Second World War fundamentally changed the ecology of the lawn.
Front lawns became standardized in the 1930s when, over time, specific aspects such as grass type and maintenance methods became popular.
Lawns are useful as a playing surface both because they mitigate erosion and dust generated by intensive foot traffic and because they provide a cushion for players in sports such as rugby, football, soccer, cricket, baseball, golf, tennis, hockey and lawn bocce.
They refined the English landscape garden style with the design of natural, or "romantic", estate settings for wealthy Englishmen.
Character Nick Carraway rents the house next to Gatsby's and fails to maintain his lawn according to West Egg standards.
For example, the Canadian province of Quebec and over 130 municipalities prohibit the use of synthetic lawn pesticides.
Pesticides, which includes biological and chemical herbicides, insecticides and fungicides are available.
Trees and shrubs in close proximity to lawns provide habitat for birds in traditional, cottage and wildlife gardens.
Thus began a great expansion in the lawn mower production in the 1860s.
Lawn growth, 20-hour time lapse
The growing use of rainwater storage tanks has improved the ability to maintain them.
*Bermudagrass (''Cynodon'' spp.)
Hydroseeding is a quick, less expensive method of planting large, sloped or hillside landscapes.
*Carpetgrass (''Axonopus'')
Many warm season grasses are quite drought tolerant, and can handle very high summer temperatures, although temperatures below  can kill most southern ecotype warm season grasses.
:Some lower sedges used are:
In many suburban areas, there are bylaws in place requiring houses to have lawns and requiring the proper maintenance of these lawns.
Soon, farmers began to purposefully plant new species of grass in these areas, hoping to improve the quality and quantity of hay to provide for their livestock as native species had a lower nutritive value.
Between 1947 and 1951, Abraham Levitt and his sons built more than seventeen thousand homes, each with its own lawn.
Bill in the United States let American ex-servicemen buy homes without providing a down payment, while the Federal Housing Administration offered lender inducements that aided the reduction of down payments for the average American from 30% to as little as 10%.
The use of pesticides and other chemicals to care for lawns has also lead to the death of nearly 7 million birds each year, a topic that was central to Silent Spring by the conservationist Rachel Carson.
Kentucky Bluegrass is now one of the top three pasture grasses in the United States and the most desirable species of grass for lawns.
The term "lawn", referring to a managed grass space, dates to no earlier than the 16th century.
By this time, the word "lawn" in England had semantically shifted to describe a piece of a garden covered with grass and closely mown.
Women were encultured over time to view the lawn as part of the household, as an essential furnishing, and to encourage their husbands to maintain a lawn for the family and community reputation.
Until then, Americans had typically worked half days on Saturdays, leaving little time to focus on their lawns.
In an agreement between John Ferrabee and Edwin Budding, Ferrabee paid the costs of development and acquired rights to manufacture, sell and license other manufacturers in the production of lawn mowers.
Budding realised that a similar device could be used to cut grass if the mechanism was mounted in a wheeled frame to make the blades rotate close to the lawn's surface.
Many scholars link this development to the romantic and transcendentalist movements of the 19th century.
Abraham Levitt wrote "No single feature of a suburban residential community contributes as much to the charm and beauty of the individual home and the locality as well-kept lawns".
Within Australia it is reported that there are nearly 400 turf farms.
Grass typically goes dormant during cold, winter months, and turns brown during hot, dry summer months, thereby reducing its demand for water.
Thousands of varieties of grasses and grasslike  plants are used for lawns, each adapted to specific conditions of precipitation and irrigation, seasonal temperatures, and sun/shade tolerances.
They were made up of meadow plants, such as camomile, a particular favorite.
After World War II, the lawn aesthetic once again became a standard feature of North America, bouncing back from its minor decline in the decades before with a vengeance, particularly as a result of the housing and population boom post-war.
In both of these films, green space surrounding a house in the suburbs becomes an indicator of moral integrity as well as of social and gender norms as lawn care has long been associated with men.
Usually once a week is adequate for maintaining a lawn in most climates.
Much of the new grasses brought by Europeans spread quickly and effectively, often ahead of the colonists.
uncifolia'' (ruby sedge)
The Ontario provincial government promised on 24–2 September 2007 to also implement a province-wide ban on the cosmetic use of lawn pesticides, for protecting the public.
The lawn as a reflection of someone's character and the neighborhood at large is not restricted to films, the same theme is evident in ''The Great Gatsby'', a book written by American novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Levittown, New York was the beginning of the industrial suburb in the 20th Century, and by proxy the industrial lawn.
In 1780, the Shaker community began the first industrial production of high-quality grass seed in North America, and a number of seed companies and nurseries were founded in Philadelphia.
James Sumner of Lancashire patented the first steam-powered lawn mower in 1893.
The damp climate of maritime Western Europe in the north made lawns possible to grow and manage.
The northern varieties, such as buffalograss and blue grama, are hardy to .
Eventually the wealthy began to move away from the cities into new suburban communities.
A 2005 NASA study "conservatively" estimated there was  of irrigated lawn in the US, three times the area of irrigated corn.
While Middle Eastern and Europeans species of grass did extremely well on the East Coast of North America, it was a number of grasses from the Mediterranean that dominated the Western seaboard.
The creation in the early 20th century of country clubs and golf courses completed the rise of lawn culture.
Lawns are a common feature of  private gardens, public landscapes and parks in many parts of the world.
New colonists were even urged by their country and companies to bring grass seed with them to North America.
Middle-class families across the country, in imitation of aristocratic landscape gardens, began to grow finely trimmed lawns in their back gardens.
In order for the lawn to grow and flourish, the soil must be prepared properly.
Lawns are used around houses, apartments, commercial buildings and offices.
However, in the hot and rainy seasons of regions contained in hardiness zones greater than 8, lawns may need to be maintained up to two times a week.
Lawn is a cognate of ''llan'' which is derived from the Common Brittonic word ''landa'' () that originally means heath, barren land, or clearing.
For example, in the New Forest, England, such grazed areas are common, and are known as lawns, for example Balmer Lawn.
Many city parks also have large lawn areas.
The lawn-care industry boomed, but the Great Depression of the 1930s and in the period prior to World War II made it difficult to maintain the cultural standards that had become heavily associated with the lawn due to grass seed shortages in Europe, America's main supplier.
His work still endures at Croome Court (where he also designed the house), Blenheim Palace, Warwick Castle, Harewood House, Bowood House, Milton Abbey (and nearby Milton Abbas village), in traces at Kew Gardens and many other locations.
It was likely carried to Midwestern United States in the early 1600s by French missionaries and spread via the waterways to the region around Kentucky.
Knowing which farm is currently selling what turf variety is difficult.
The lawn became less associated with being a status symbol, instead giving way to a landscape aesthetic.
The web site lists generic and technical information on over 100 warm- and cool-season turfgrasses and provides the location of reputable turf producers from across Australia that sell these turf varieties.
Common characteristics of a lawn are that it is composed only of grass species, it is subject to weed and pest control, it is subject to practices aimed at maintaining its green color (e.g., watering), and it is regularly mowed to ensure an acceptable length, although these characteristics are not binding as a definition.
Often, a mix of grass or low plant types is used to form a stronger lawn when one type does better in the warmer seasons and the other in the colder ones.
These grasses were more drought resistant than their European counterparts, and many who wished to keep their lawns switched to these alternatives or allowed their green carpets to revert to the indigenous scrub in an effort to reduce the strain on water supplies.
A '''lawn''' is an area of soil-covered land planted with grasses or (rarely) other durable plants such as clover which are maintained at a short height with a lawnmower and used for aesthetic and recreational purposes.
It was not until the 17th and 18th century that the garden and the lawn became a place created first as walkways and social areas.
Lawns became popular with the aristocracy in northern Europe from the Middle Ages onward.
Aerating just before planting/seeding may promote deeper root growth and thicker turf.
However, it may also have spread across the Appalachian mountains after an introduction on the east coast.
As Europeans moved into the region, it was noted by colonists in New England, more than others, that the grasses of the New World were inferior to those of England and that their livestock seemed to receive less nutrition from it.
An example of an organic alternative  to insecticide use is applying beneficial nematodes to combat soil-dwelling grubs, such as the larvae of chafer beetles.
The Integrated Pest Management approach is a coordinated low impact approach.
Some forest areas where extensive grazing is practiced still have these seminatural lawns.
They often go dormant in cooler months, turning shades of tan or brown.
Landscaping was one of the most important factors in Levittown's success - and no feature was more prominent than the lawn.
JP Engineering of Leicester, founded after World War I, invented the first riding mowers.
In the United States, 50 to 70% of residential water is used for landscaping, most of it to water lawns.
Maintaining a rough lawn requires only occasional cutting with a suitable machine, or grazing by animals.
Many of these concerns over the safety and environmental impact of some of the synthetic fertilizers and pesticides has led to their ban by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and many local governments.
Other alternatives to lawns include meadows, drought-tolerant xeriscape gardens, natural landscapes, native plant habitat gardens, paved Spanish courtyard and patio gardens, butterfly gardens, rain gardens, tapestry lawn and kitchen gardens.
Intensive suburbanization both concentrated and expanded the spread of lawn maintenance which meant increased inputs in not only petrochemicals, fertilizers, and pesticides, but also natural resources like water.
One such species, Bermuda grass (''Cynodon dactylon''), became the most important pasture grass for the southern colonies.
The language of these marketing campaigns still intended to imbue the female population with notions of family, motherhood, and the duties of a wife; it has been argued that this was done so that it would be easier for men returning from war to resume the roles their wives had taken over in their absence.
The exportation of the lawn ideal to more arid regions of the world, however, such as the U.S. Southwest and Australia, has crimped already scarce water resources in such areas, requiring larger, more environmentally invasive water supply systems.
The open "English style" of parkland first spread across Britain and Ireland, and then across Europe, such as the garden ''à la française'' being replaced by the French landscape garden.
The lawn aesthetic in Europe and Australia seems to exhibit the same cultural tendencies as a representation of order, power over nature, patriotism, and suburban family life while still adhering to other gender constructs present throughout the world's suburbs.
Before the invention of mowing machines in 1830, lawns were managed very differently.
The appearance of the lawn in Australia followed closely after its establishment in North America and parts of Europe.
Some grasses are adapted to oceanic climates with cooler summers, and others to tropical and continental climates with hotter summers.
The EPA found, in some urban areas, up to 5% of smog was due to small gasoline engines made before 1997, such as are typically used on lawnmowers.
However, lawns with high maintenance (mowing, irrigation, and leaf blowing) and high fertilization rates have a net emission of carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide that have large global warming potential.
Plant hybridizers and botanists are constantly creating and finding improved varieties of the basic species and new ones, often more economical and environmentally sustainable by needing less water, fertilizer, pest and disease treatments, and maintenance.
However, there are differences in the particulars of lawn maintenance and appearance, such as the length of the grass, species (and therefore its color), and mowing.
They were not a part of gardens in other regions and cultures of the world until contemporary influence.
Improvements in the lawn mower and water supply enabled the spread of lawn culture from the Northeast to the South where the grass grew more poorly.
It is possible that lawn maintenance could come at the expense of precious resources, especially when faced with extreme weather conditions.
The blade would often spin above the grass uselessly.
The increased availability of these grasses meant they were in plentiful supply for parks and residential areas, not just livestock.
It is speculated that the association between the word "pasture" and biblical mentions  made lawns a cultural affinity for some.
Warm season grasses only start growth at temperatures above , and grow fastest when temperatures are between  and , with one long growth period over the spring and summer (Huxley 1992).
Many different species of grass are currently used, depending on the intended use and the climate.
A cultivar is a cross-breed of two different varieties of grass and aims to combine certain traits taken from each individual breed.
The prevalence of the lawns in films such as ''Pleasantville'' and ''Edward Scissorhands'' alludes to the importance of the lawn as a social mechanism that gives great importance to visual representation of the American suburb as well as its practised culture.
The rift between the two lawns troubles Gatsby to the point that he dispatches his gardener to mow Nick's grass and thereby create uniformity.
Lawns began to proliferate in America from the 1870s onwards.
*Bahiagrass (''Paspalum'')
During 1948, the first spring that Levittown had enjoyed, Levitt and Sons fertilized and reseeded all of the lawns free of charge.
The economic recession that began in 2008 has resulted in many communities worldwide to dig up their lawns and plant fruit and vegetable gardens.
Brown, remembered as "England's greatest gardener", designed over 170 parks, many of which still endure.
The machine was much lighter and quieter than the gear driven machines that preceded them, and won first prize at the first lawn mower trial at the London Horticultural Gardens.
Since the 1970s there has been an interest in using indigenous species for lawns, especially considering their lower water requirements.
Eventually even the grasses of the Great Plains were overrun with European species that were more durable to the grazing patterns of imported livestock.
However, lawns remain a popular surface and their practical and aesthetically pleasing appearance reduces the use of water-impervious surfaces such as concrete.
This was especially apparent in the 1950s and 1960s, when lawn-care rhetoric emphasized the lawn as a husband's responsibility and as a pleasurable hobby when he retired.
However, in 2016 an independent web site called  TurfFinder was developed to assist homeowners and professional turf managers in choosing the appropriate turfgrass that meets their needs.
His landscapes were fundamentally different from what they replaced, the well-known formal gardens of England which were criticised by Alexander Pope and others from the 1710s.
In 1856, an architectural book was published to accompany the development of the new suburbia that placed importance on the availability of a grassy space for children to play on and a space to grow fruits and vegetables that further imbued the lawn with cultural importance.
Harrow Weald went from just 1,500 to over 10,000 while Pinner jumped from 3,00 to over 20,000.
They allowed other companies to build copies of their mower under license, the most successful of these, was Ransomes, Sims & Jefferies of Ipswich which began mower production as early as 1832.
Some grasses and sedges are available and planted from 'liner' and  containers, from 'flats', 'plugs' or 'sprigs', and are planted apart to grow together.
Over time, an increasing number towns in New England began to emphasize grass spaces.
If this step is overlooked as many do, the lawn will burn out as soon as it runs out of nutrients.
Areas of grass grazed regularly by rabbits, horses or sheep over a long period often form a very low, tight sward similar to a modern lawn.
Lawns similar to those of today first appeared in France and England in the 1700s when André Le Nôtre designed the gardens of Versailles that included a small area of grass called the '''', or "green carpet".
In recreational contexts, the specialised names '''turf''', '''pitch''', '''field''' or '''green''' may be used, depending on the sport and the continent.
His influence was so great that the contributions to the English garden made by his predecessors Charles Bridgeman and William Kent are often overlooked.
His style of smooth undulating lawns which ran seamlessly to the house and meadow, clumps, belts and scattering of trees and his serpentine lakes formed by invisibly damming small rivers, were a new style within the English landscape, a "gardenless" form of landscape gardening, which swept away almost all the remnants of previous formally patterned styles.
*St. Augustine grass
They are created for aesthetic pleasure, as well as for sports or other outdoor recreational use.
By the end of this period, the English lawn was a symbol of status of the aristocracy and gentry; it showed that the owner could afford to keep land that was not being used for a building, or for food production.
Both low-growing and spreading ornamental cultivars and native species are used in for sustainable landscaping as low-maintenance and drought-tolerant grass replacements for lawns and garden meadows.
Lawns and the resulting lawn clipping waste can be used as an ingredient in making compost and is also viewed as fodder, used in the production of lawn clipping silage which is fed to livestock as a sustainable feed source.
Sodding (American English), or turfing (British English), provides an almost instant lawn, and can be undertaken in most temperate climates in any season, but is more expensive and more vulnerable to drought until established.
Replacing turf grass with low-maintenance groundcovers or employing a variety of low-maintenance perennials, trees and shrubs can be a good alternative to traditional lawn spaces, especially in hard-to-grow or hard-to-mow areas, as it сan reduce maintenance requirements, associated pollution and offers higher aesthetic and wildlife value.
A positive benefit of a healthy lawn is it filters contaminants and prevents runoff and erosion of bare soil.
divulsa'' (Berkeley sedge)
*Buffalograss (drought tolerant)
The Levitts understood that landscaping could add to the appeal of their developments and claimed that, "increase in values are most often found in neighborhoods where lawns show as green carpets" and that, over the years, "lawns trees and shrubs become more valuable both esthetically and monetarily".
In the United States, lawn heights are generally maintained by gasoline-powered lawnmowers, which contribute to urban smog during the summer months.
This in combination with setback rules which required all homes to have a 30-foot gap between the structure and the sidewalk meant that the lawn had found a specific place in suburbia.
This situation is described in ''Water in Australia'' by David Ingle Smith, who observed in 1995 data that under extreme conditions during summer drought periods, up to 90% of the water used in Canberra, Australia was applied to lawns.
It took ten more years and further innovations, including the advent of the Bessemer process for the production of the much lighter alloy steel and advances in motorization such as the drive chain, for the lawnmower to become a practical proposition.
This term is uniquely Australian, alluding, perhaps, to man's desire to control nature.
With this legislation and the housing boom following the Second World War, managed grass spaces became more commonplace.
Thomas Jefferson has long been given credit for being the first person to attempt an English-style lawn at his estate, Monticello, in 1806, but many others had tried to emulate English landscaping before he did.
These lawns also reinforce class and societal norms by subtly excluding minorities who may not have been able to afford a house in the suburbs with a lawn that was the symbolic representation of safety and stability.
Medical and environmental groups support such a ban.
Such methods include the use of native grasses, sedges, and low herbs; higher mowing techniques; low volume irrigation, 'grasscycling' grass clippings in place; an integrated pest management program; exclusive organic fertilizer and compost use; and including a variety of trees, shrubs, perennials, and other plants surrounding the lawn.
The early lawns were not always distinguishable from pasture fields.
Various organic and inorganic or synthetic fertilizers are available, with instant or time-release applications.
These developments made owning your own home cheaper than renting, further enabling the spread of suburbia and its lawns.
Tied to suburban expansion and the creation of the household aesthetic, the lawn is an important aspect of the interaction between the natural environment and the constructed urban and suburban space.
Consideration for their effects on the lawn and garden ecosystem and via runoff and dispersion on the surrounding environment, can constrain their use.
pansa'' (meadow sedge)
Many property owners consider this "dead" appearance unacceptable, and therefore increase watering during the summer months.
Prior to European colonization, the grasses on the East Coast of North America were mostly broom straw, wild rye, and marsh grass.
This mixing is taken further by a form of grass breeding which produces what are known as cultivars.
A 2010 study seemed to show lawn care inputs were balanced by the carbon sequestration benefits of lawns, and they may not be contributors to anthropogenic global warming.
With the use of ecological techniques including organic lawn management, the impact of lawns can be reduced.
Seasonal lawn establishment and care varies depending on the climate zone and type of lawn grown.
This went hand-in-hand with a booming consumer market for lawns from the 1860s onward.
The image of the lawn changed from focusing on technology and manhood to emphasizing aesthetic pleasure and the health benefits derived from its maintenance; it was assumed that women would not respond positively to images of efficiency and power.
Following recent droughts, Australia has seen a change to predominately warm-season turfgrasses, particularly in the southern states like New South Wales and Victoria which are predominately temperate climates within urban regions.
Prior to the 1970s, all brush and native species were stripped from a development site and replaced with lawns that utilized imported plant species.
These areas quickly fell to erosion and were overrun with less favorable plant life.
Lawn monoculture was a reflection of more than an interest in offsetting depreciation, it propagated the homogeneity of the suburb itself.
*Centipedegrass (''Eremachloa'')
subfusca'' (mountain sedge)
Mild dormancy seems to be of little concern when high profile areas can be oversown for short periods or now days, turf colourants (fake green) are extremely popular.
This has the potential to greatly change cultural values attached to the lawn, as they are increasingly viewed as environmentally and economically unviable in the modern context.
During World War II, women became the focus of lawn-care companies in the absence of their husbands and sons.
Seeding is the least expensive, but may take longer for the lawn to be established.
Wealthy families in America during the late 18th century also began mimicking English landscaping styles.
During the war itself, homeowners were asked to maintain the appearances of the home front, likely as a show of strength, morale, and solidarity.
wildland habitat restoration projects and natural landscaping and gardens use them also for 'user-friendly' areas.
By the late 17th century, a new market in imported grass seed had begun in New England.
It is implied that a neighbor, whose lawn is not in pristine condition, is morally corrupt, emphasizing the role a well-kept lawn plays in neighborly and community relationships.
Most lawn care equipment over the decades has been advertised to men, and companies have long associated good lawn care with good citizenship in their marketing campaigns.
In some jurisdictions where there are water shortages, local government authorities are encouraging alternatives to lawns to reduce water use.
Budding had the idea for a lawnmower after seeing a machine in a local cloth mill which used a cutting cylinder (or bladed reel) mounted on a bench to trim the irregular nap from the surface of woollen cloth and give a smooth finish.
Maintaining a green lawn sometimes requires large amounts of water.
In most situations, they were also pasture land maintained through grazing by sheep or other livestock.
A pivotal factor in the spread of the lawn in America was the passage of legislation in 1938 of the 40-hour work week.
Lawns are also established in garden areas as well as used for the surface of sporting fields.
As more plants were introduced from Europe, lawns became smaller as they were filled with flower beds, perennials, sculptures, and water features.
In fact, once livestock brought overseas from Europe spread throughout the colonies, much of the native grasses of New England disappeared, and an inventory list from the 17th century noted supplies of clover and grass seed from England.
Early autumn, spring, and early summer are the primary seasons to seed, lay sod (turf), plant 'liners', or 'sprig' new lawns, when the soil is warmer and air cooler.
Farmers at first continued to harvest meadows and marshes composed of indigenous grasses until they became overgrazed.
His mower design was to be used primarily to cut the lawn on sports grounds and extensive gardens, as a superior alternative to the scythe, and he was granted a British patent on 31 August 1830.
*''Carex caryophyllea'' (cultivar 'The Beatles')
The Ontario legislation would also echo Massachusetts law requiring pesticide manufacturers to reduce the toxins they use in production.
praegracilis'' (dune sedge)
The more drought tolerant grasses have been chosen by councils and homeowners for the choice of using less water compared to cool-season turfgrasses like fescue and ryegrass.
In the early 18th century, landscape gardening for the aristocracy entered a golden age, under the direction of William Kent and Lancelot "Capability" Brown.
Since 1997, the EPA has mandated emissions controls on newer engines in an effort to reduce smog.
