The troops of Charles IX, commanded by Anne de Montmorency, attacked Le Havre and the English were finally expelled on 29 July 1563.
The ''Magic Mirrors'' offers many concerts managed by the city and leased to private organizers.
The pre-war shopping precinct of Rue de Paris was redesigned with wide footpaths.
Le Havre also has seven evangelical Protestant churches: ''Salvation Army'', ''Seventh Day Adventist'', ''Apostolic Church'', ''Assembly of God'', ''Baptist Church'', ''Good News Church'', et ''Church of Le Havre'' as well as several Protestant churches of African origin.
The city has 99 sports facilities including 46 gymnasiums, 23 sports fields, and 5 swimming pools.
The commune of Le Havre consists of two areas separated by a natural cliff edge: one part in the lower part of the town to the south including the harbour, the city centre and the suburbs.
An "expectation" outside the walls was held on the site of the fort during 2012 and early 2013.
The port expects 110 cuise ship calls in 2012.
The plot of ''Une maison soufflée aux vents'' (A house blown to the winds) by Emile Danoën, winner of the Popular Novel Prize in 1951, and its sequel ''Idylle dans un quartier muré'' (Idyll in a walled neighbourhood) were located in Le Havre during the Second World War.
* Collège Gérard Philipe
The months of June and July are marked by some thunderstorms on average 2 days per month.
Under the Empire Napoleon I came to Le Havre and ordered the construction of forts A Chamber of Commerce was founded in 1800 but, because of the war against Britain and the continental blockade, port activity was reduced and activity of pirates increased.
Popular alternative routes going to areas close to Le Havre include Newhaven to Dieppe, and Poole to Cherbourg.
The Channel maritime links with Portsmouth in southern England with P&O Ferries ended on 30 September 2005 to be taken over by LD Lines who have changed the configuration.
It was organized by the Coup de Bleu association whose former president was head of music Café ''L'Agora'' in the Niemeyer Centre which produced the new Le Havre scene.
The shipyards developed with Augustin Normand.
It meets on average once a month at the town hall.
Le Havre has been and is still the venue of major sports events: the Tour de France has passed a dozen times by the Ocean Gate, the last stage took place here in 2015.
New research however focuses on the fact that the term was attested very early (12th century) and in Norman texts in the forms ''Hable'', ''hafne'', ''havene'', ''havne'', and ''haule'' makes a Dutch origin unlikely.
Founded in 1871, the ''Ecole Superieure de Commerce du Havre'', one of the oldest in France, has merged with ''Sup Europe'' and ''l'IPER'' to create the ''Normandy Business School'' in 2006.
A new multimedia library at the "Volcano" is being refurbished for 2014.
Its location is favourable for several reasons: it is on the most frequented waterway in the world; it is the first and last port in the ''North Range'' of European ports – the largest in Europe which handles a quarter of all global maritime trade.
The population of workers is concentrated in the southern suburbs close to the port and the industrial zone.
The second cultural centre of the city is in the Eure district near the Basin Vauban.
Le Havre is dominated by three professional sports teams: the first is the Le Havre AC football team who played in Ligue 1 for the last time in 2008–2009 and is currently in Ligue 2.
A Roman road linked Lillebonne (Juliobona) at the mouth of the Seine through the current territory of the commune of Le Havre.
The department manages 16 colleges and the region of Haute-Normandie manages 9 schools.
Le Havre was affected by the Wars of Religion: On 8 May 1562 the reformers took the city, looted churches, and expelled Catholics.
Crossing times to Portsmouth vary from five hours and thirty minutes to eight hours.
A study by ''Aphekom'' comparing ten large French cities showed that Le Havre is the least polluted urban commune of France.
Administratively the commune is located in the Upper Normandy region and, with Dieppe, is one of the two sub-prefectures of the Seine-Maritime department.
Its training centre, which is well-reputed for having trained international French players Vikash Dhorasoo, Julien Faubert, Jean-Alain Boumsong, Lassana Diarra, and also Steve Mandanda who is consistently ranked in the top ten in France.
'''Private Vocational Schools'''
The Interwar period was marked by the cessation of population growth, social unrest, and economic crisis.
Its port is the second largest in France, after that of Marseille, for total traffic, and the largest French container port.
* Lycée professionnel Jeanne d'Arc
Epidemics of cholera, typhoid fever, and "fevers" caused hundreds of deaths in the years 1830–1850.
The population is mainly concentrated in the city centre and Côte-Ormeaux.
This area of 133 hectares is one of the few inscribed contemporary sites in Europe.
Other less important museums reflect the history of Le Havre and its maritime vocation.
The city acquired the status of sub-prefecture in the administrative reform of the ''Year VIII'' (1799–1800).
He then ordered the construction of a new citadel which was completed in 1574.
It served as a shelter for ships awaiting the tide to enter the port of Harfleur upstream.
The triangular axis of the Boulevard François I, the Avenue Foch and Rue de Paris led the traveller north, south, east and west of the town centre.
Founded in 1881 but heavily damaged during World War II, the Museum of Natural History is housed in Le Havre’s former law courts, built in the mid-18th century; the façade and monumental staircase are listed as historical monuments.
The Protestant Church of Le Havre was built in the city centre in 1862.
75 regular shipping lines serve 500 ports around the world.
In May there is the ''Fest Yves'', a Breton festival in the Saint-François district.
*1971: part of Harfleur (a district of Caucriauville)
Le Havre had a tramway system from 1894 until it closed in 1957.
In 1581 the construction began of a canal between Harfleur and the estuary of the Seine.
Le Havre experienced a population boom in the second half of the 19th century.
The plateau is covered with a layer of flinty clay and a fertile silt.
There were imports of exotic products from America (sugar, cotton, tobacco, coffee, and various spices).
The West Park Festival, after its inauguration in 2004, has been held in the park of the town hall of Harfleur.
'''Weather Data for Le Havre'''
Le Havre was not only an entry for American goods but also a transit point for migrants to the USA.
* Lycée professionnel Robert Schuman (Industry)
Le Havre suffered 132 bombings by the Allies during the war.
These groups were involved with British intelligence and with acts of sabotage preceding the landings of 6 June.
The same year Francis I entrusted the planning and fortification project with Italian architect Girolamo Bellarmato.
The slave trade enriched local traders especially in the 18th century.
The city operates 55 kindergartens (254 classes) and 49 communal primary schools (402 classes).
''La Bête humaine'' (The Human Beast) by Émile Zola evokes the world of the railway and runs along the Paris-Le Havre railway.
So, in the presidential election of 2007, the 7th electoral district elected Nicolas Sarkozy (UMP) by 55.05% against 44.95% for Ségolène Royal (PS) while the 8th electoral district preferred the Socialist candidate by 55.02%.
These new apartments possessed the latest innovations including central heating.
In the energy field, the ''EDF thermal power plant'' of Le Havre has an installed capacity of 1,450MW and operates using coal with 357 employees.
The museum houses some paintings of Claude Monet, Auguste Renoir, Raoul Dufy, Edgar Degas...
*The Town Hall: the modern belfry which now contains offices
* Collège Saint-Joseph
In spring a ''Children's Book Festival'' was recently created.
He also holds the presidency of the CODAH and has held a seat in the National Assembly for the 7th district of Seine-Maritime since 2012.
;Musée d'histoire naturelle (Museum of Natural History).
In 2011, 715,279 passengers passed through the port of Le Havre and there were 95 visits by cruise ships carrying 185,000 passengers.
which were spared the bombings of World War II.
In the first weekend of September the marine element is highlighted in the ''Festival of the Sea''.
The shops are concentrated along several major roads in the Rond-Point neighbourhood.
Thousands of American replacement troops poured in the Cigarette Camps i.e.
The village of Leure and its commercial port appear in the 11th century.
Finally, 340,500 vehicles passed through the Roll-on/roll-off terminal in 2010.
Apart from a few years of depression (the American Civil War, the Franco-Prussian War), trade exploded and the city was embellished with elegant new constructions (boulevards, city hall, courthouse, new stock exchange).
The bus station, certified ''NF'' since 2005, has been refurbished.
The lack of watercourses within the commune prevents flooding from overflows.
''Radio Albatros'' is a local station installed in the Sanvic du Havre district transmitting on FM frequency 88.2.
Later, the Norman writer Guy de Maupassant located several of his works at Le Havre such as ''Au muséum d'histoire naturelle'' (At the Museum of Natural History) a text published in ''Le Gaulois'' on 23 March 1881 and again in ''Pierre et Jean''.
The city also has seven Muslim places of worship: the socio-cultural association of Muslims in Upper Normandy, En-Nour Mosque on Rue Paul Claudel, El Fath Mosque on rue Victor Hugo, Bellevue mosque on rue Gustavus Brindeau, and three prayer rooms located on rue Audran, Boulevard Jules Durant, and rue Lodi.
The number of schools was inadequate even in the 1870s.
Only the travel industry was doing relatively well, with 500,000 passengers carried in 1930.
The Le Havre region has more than a third of French refining capacity.
Since 1998, Le Havre's beach has received the Blue Flag yearly thanks to its range of facilities, which extend over 30,000 Sq.
In 1536 the chapel was rebuilt in wood with stone pillars under the direction of Guillaume de Marceilles.
By mid-century the old ramparts had been razed and the surrounding communities annexed to the city so the population increased sharply.
It will consist of two halls with 800 and 200 seats, exhibition space, housing for artists in residence, a restaurant etc.
It was in Le Havre radio stations that the journalist and television host Laurent Ruquier, who was born in Le Havre in 1963, began his career.
;The Shipowner's house
* Lycée Saint-Joseph
He succeeded Antoine Rufenacht (UMP) as the head of the municipality who was mayor of Le Havre for fifteen years before resigning.
The ''Graduate School of Art of Le Havre'' (ESAH) offers several degrees and preparation for competition.
To achieve this solar panels have been installed on several municipal buildings (city hall, hanging gardens).
Most have North African (5060) or African (3114) origins.
With 399 slave trade expeditions in the 17th and 18th centuries, Le Havre was the third largest French slave trade port after Nantes and La Rochelle.
There are many growth factors in the tourist industry: blue flag rating, World Heritage status from UNESCO, the label ''French Towns and Lands of Art and History'', cruise ship development, a policy of value-creation from heritage, and the ''City of the Sea'' project.
In 2009 the city had a lower proportion of managers and intellectual occupations than the national average (4.2% against 6.7%).
The buildings, usually in brick, dated to the 19th and the first half of the 20th centuries.
The population of the commune of Le Havre was 191,000 inhabitants in 1999 which placed the city at 12th place among the most populated cities in France and in the first place in Normandy.
The destruction of the museum was so intense, that all the catalogues, lists of donations, lists of purchases and other archives prevented even a precise inventory of all that was lost."
Two famous historians, Gabriel Monod (1844–1912) and André Siegfried (1875–1959) were from the city.
'''List of Public Grammar Schools in Le Havre'''
The Avenue Foch stretched 80 metres wide, a little more than the Champs-Élysées in Paris.
Monseigneur Michel Saudreau, its first bishop, was ordained on 22 September 1974.
The ''National School of The Merchant Marine'' trains Officers of the First Class for the Merchant Marine: currently located at Sainte-Adresse, it will move to the ''Bassin Vauban'' in 2015 in a building that will house 1,000 students.
* Collège Marcel Pagnol
Two mystery novels take place in Le Havre: ''Le Bilan Maletras'' (The Maletras Balance) by Georges Simenon and ''Le Crime de Rouletabille'' (Crime at the Roulette table) by Gaston Leroux.
The right won the municipal elections and committed the city to the path of reconversion, seeking to develop the service sector and new industries (Aeronautics, Wind turbines).
Christine Lagarde (born 1956) did part of her studies in Le Havre before becoming Minister of the Economy and Director-General of the International Monetary Fund in 2011.
It was not until 1787 and the Edict of Toleration of King Louis XVI that Le Havre reopened a Protestant place of worship in the district of Saint-François.
'''Private Colleges'''
It was nominated three times for the 37th César Awards.
Most industries are located in the industrial-port area north of the estuary and east of the city of Le Havre.
12,148 immigrants live in Havre, or 6.8% of the urban population.
In 2009, the birth rate was 14.2 per thousand and the mortality rate was 9.4 per thousand: even though the Rate of natural increase is positive it does not compensate for the clearly negative Net migration rate.
The inclusion of  of green spaces with parks, gardens and woodlands added to the port’s urban renewal.
In addition there is a TGV daily service to Le Havre: it has connected the city to Marseille since December 2004 serving Rouen, Mantes-la-Jolie, Versailles, Massy, Lyon, Avignon, Aix-en-Provence, and Saint Charles station in Marseilles.
* Lycée professionnel Saint Vincent de Paul
The proportion of workers (15.9%) was one point higher than the national average.
''Le Havre Rugby athletic club'' plays in Fédérale 3 (equivalent to 5th division).
It was inspired by the games ''Caylus'' and ''Agricola'' and was developed in December 2007.
The University of Le Havre is also a research centre with nine laboratories.
The municipality has to attract some 300,000 visitors per year.
A ''boarding school of excellence'', the Claude Bernard college, opened in 2011.
The synagogue, located in the rebuilt central city, was visited by President Jacques Chirac in April 2002.
At the end of the 16th century trade expanded quickly and Le Havre saw the arrival of American products like leather, sugar, and tobacco.
The TER network was modernized with the creation of the LER line in 2001 and direct services to Fécamp in 2005.
The Hockey Club of Le Havre played at the fourth level nationally (Division 3) for the 2008–2009 season.
The museum houses mineralogy, zoology, ornithology, palaeontology and prehistory departments as well as 8,000 early 19th-century paintings from the collection of local naturalist and traveller Charles-Alexandre Lesueur (1778–1846).
The new prison for Le Havre was completed in 2010 at Saint-Aubin-Routot east of the Le Havre agglomeration.
The architecture of the area is characterized by the use of precast concrete using a system of a modular frame of 6.24 metres and straight lines.
The gardens of the Priory of Graville and the hanging gardens offer views of the lower city.
The Energy crisis precipitated an industry slump.
The casino Marie-Christine (1910) and the Palace of Regattas (1906) brought the Bourgeoisie and the first Beach huts were installed on the beach.
The marina can host deepwater vessels around the clock in any weather.
The streets are lined with 13,000 trees of 150 different varieties.
These are caused by the combination of strong winds, high waves and a large tidal range.
As a deepwater port, it is accessible to all types of ships whatever their size around the clock.
It was in the latter that Cardinal Mazarin imprisoned the Fronde princes, Longueville, Conti, and Condé.
With its annex, it includes a high court, a juvenile court, and a commercial court.
Of medieval manuscripts and Incunables are conserved at the public library.
The museum was destroyed during Allied bombings on 5 September 1944.
From January 2011 there has been a regular shuttle service specific to the Industrial Zone and Port of Le Havre, thus adding to the cross-estuary service of VTNI.
Diana Gabaldon set the second novel in her ''Outlander'' series, ''Dragonfly in Amber'' (1992), partly in Le Havre.
The most famous personality of Le Havre rock is ''Little Bob'' who began his career in the 1970s.
It was from the end of the 18th century that Le Havre started growing and the port took off first with the slave trade then other international trade.
The Le Havre Palace of Justice is located on the Boulevard de Strasbourg.
Sailing events are often held and the Transat Jacques Vabre transatlantic race has been held every two years since 1993 linking Le Havre to Latin America.
Canadian poet Octave Crémazie (1827–1879) died at Le Havre and was buried in Saint Marie Cemetery.
* Lycée professionnel Porte Océane (Accounting – Secretarial)
Le Havre is the seat of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Le Havre.
Beyond the concrete formations of the inner township stretched the Saint-Francois neighbourhood, made up of red-brick residences and slate rooflines.
At the request of Monsigneur André Mulch, Archbishop of Rouen, Pope Paul VI decided on 6 July 1974 through the papal bull ''Quae Sacrosanctum'' on the creation of the diocese of Le Havre (''Portus Gratiae'' in Latin meaning "Port of Grace").
It was built on former marshland and mudflats that were drained in the 16th century.
The most important of the five, Museum Malraux was built in 1955 by the Atelier LWD and was opened in 1961 by André Malraux.
Other cultural venues are scattered in the city centre: the cinema ''Le Studio'', the theatre of the City Hall (700 seats), the ''Little Theatre'' (450 seats), the ''Théâtre des Bains Douches'' (94 seats), ''Akté theatre'' (60 seats), and the ''Poulailler'' (Henhouse)) (associative theatre with 50 seats) host numerous shows each year.
Of the five swimming pools in the city, two are operated by the municipality: the CNH (which has an Olympic pool for competitions) and Les Bains Des Docks (which was designed by the architect Jean Nouvel).
To the east and north of the rebuilt central city are a stretch of old neighbourhoods (Danton, Saint-Vincent, Graville, Massillon, etc.)
* Collège Romain Rolland
;Museum of the Priory of Graville
Modern Le Havre remains deeply influenced by its employment and maritime traditions.
Among the legal services offered there are legal aid services and the application of penalties.
On the beach of Le Havre and Sainte-Adresse there is a jazz festival called ''Dixie Days'' in June.
The team won their first major national title, the Coupe de France for women's handball in 2006.
These are large housing estates in Caucriauville, Bois de Bleville, Mont-Gaillard, and Mare-rouge where a disadvantaged population is concentrated.
The city and port were founded by the King Francis I of France in 1517.
At the European level, it is 8th largest for container traffic and 6th largest for total traffic.
The ceremony was held at the City Hall on 15 November 2009, during a stopover at the Building.
However it explains why the complementary determinant ''-de-Grace'' was not restored.
The largest trading partner of the port of Le Havre is the Asian continent which alone accounts for 58% of imports by container and 39.6% of exports.
Twelve languages are taught and 17% of students are foreigners.
The prevailing winds are from the southwest sector for strong winds and north-north-east for breezes, snowstorms occur in winter, especially in January and February.
The context of new-found peace and economic growth led to a large influx of population.
The ''Hospital Group of Havre'' is a public health facility managed by a Supervisory Board chaired by the Mayor of Le Havre.
The average annual sunshine duration is 1,785.8 hours per year.
The city was originally named ''Franciscopolis'' after the king then subsequently became '''Le Havre-de-Grâce''' ("Harbour of Grace") after an existing chapel of ''Notre-Dame-de-Grâce'' ("our Lady of Grace").
Finally, there is a small fishing port in the Saint-François district and a Hawker centre.
Other industries are dispersed throughout the Le Havre agglomeration: the ''Brûlerie du Havre'', which belongs to Legal-Legoût, located in the district of Dollemard that roasts coffee, Sidel located both in the industrial area of Port of Le Havre and Octeville-sur-Mer designs and manufactures blow moulding machines and complete filling line machines for plastic bottles.
It manages the Le Havre Octeville Airport.
The main library is located in the city centre, named after the writer Armand Salacrou.
In revenge however, the results of the 2012 presidential elections gave the PS wins in both districts with a small difference in the 7th (Hollande: 51.71% / Sarkozy: 48.29%) than in the 8th (Hollande 64.21% / Sarkozy: 35.79%).
Other attractions include:
Perret wanted to make a clean sweep of the old structures and apply the theories of structural classicism.
The second major sports team is Saint Thomas Basketball who represent the city in LNB Pro A. Thirdly the HAC women's team who play in the first division with many international players in its ranks.
In 2009 INSEE counted 177,259 people lived in the commune of Le Havre while the urban area of Le Havre had 242,474 people (25th place nationally) and the Metropolitan area of Havre ahd 293,361 inhabitants.
The team is nicknamed the "Dock's du Havre".
The city hosted writers such as Emile Danoën (1920–1999) who grew up in the district of Saint-François, Yoland Simon (born 1941), and Philippe Huet (born 1955).
The philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) and Raymond Aron (1905–1983) taught there.
Among the Norman words most used in Le Havre there are: ''boujou'' (hello, goodbye), ''clenche'' (door handle), ''morveux (veuse)'' (child), and bezot (te) (last born).
The main destination is the Transport hub of Lyon.
The proportion Le Havre people in short-term employment (CDD and interim work) is higher than the national average.
'''Public Vocational Schools'''
Among the achievements by renowned architects are the Chamber of Commerce and Industry (René and Phine Weeke Dottelond), Les Bains Des Docks (Jean Nouvel).
The port tradition in many of the groups was repeated in the unused sheds of the port, such as Bovis hall which could hold 20,000 spectators.
