In the wake of the Renaissance, the printing press was invented, and lead served as a key material for its parts, starting with the Johannes Gutenberg's press; however, lead dust also was commonly inhaled by operators, causing lead poisoning.
For the same reason, it is used in scuba diving weight belts to counteract the diver's natural buoyancy and that of his equipment.
Refining of secondary lead is similar to that of primary lead; some refining processes may be skipped depending on the material recycled and its potential contamination, with bismuth and silver being skipped especially often of all major impurities.
Lead was mined in Ancient China before 1000 BCE.
The isotopes at the end of the chains make up around 98.02% lead in the universe, with non-radiogenic lead-204 making up slightly less than two percent.
Lead's abundance in the Earth's crust is 16 ppm.
The figures for electrode potential show that lead is only slightly easier to oxidize than hydrogen.
The fungus Aspergillus versicolor is both greatly effective and fast at removing lead ions.
The term comes from the Roman stylus, called the ''penicillus'', a small brush used for painting.
At levels of 100&nbsp;mg/m3, lead is immediately dangerous to life and health.
Lead(III) may be obtained under specific conditions as an intermediate between lead(II) and lead(IV), in larger organolead complexes rather than by itself.
Lead when mined contains an unstable isotope, lead-210, which has a half life of 22 years.
Hence, the amount of lead in the universe is still slowly increasing.
The r-process happens in mediums of great electron density.
This causes ineffective heme synthesis and subsequent microcytic anemia.
Per mass, lead's abundance is 10 ppb—the difference between the per-mass and per-particle abundances is justified by mass difference between lead isotopes and the most common elements: the most common nuclide in the Universe, hydrogen-1, has a mass of approximately one atomic mass unit, while those of lead isotopes have masses of over 200 atomic mass units.
Lead thus can dissolve in acids, but this is often impossible due to specific problems (such as the formation of insoluble salts).
Further captures result in lead-206, lead-207, and lead-208.
Lead(II) ions partially hydrolyze in aqueous solution to form Pb(OH)+ and finally Pb4(OH)4 (in which hydroxyls act as bridging ligands).
However, as the original concentrate was not pure lead sulfide, roasting does not yield pure oxide, producing primarily lead oxide and a mixture of sulfates and silicates of lead and other metals contained in the ore.
In Australia, mining was introduced by the colonists as well, and they opened the first mine on the continent—a lead mine—in 1841.
The four stable isotopes of lead could theoretically undergo alpha decay to isotopes of mercury with release of energy as well, but this has not been observed for any of them: accordingly, their predicted half-lives are extremely long, ranging up to over 10100 years.
Fish bones are being researched for their ability to bioremediate lead in contaminated soil.
Plumbane may be obtained in a reaction between metallic lead and atomic (not molecular) hydrogen.
Like lead monoxide, lead dioxide is capable of forming anions, plumbates.
Another hypothesis suggests it is borrowed Proto-Celtic ''*ɸloud-io-'' ("lead"), which is related to the Latin ''plumbum'', which gave the element its chemical symbol ''Pb''.
As lead paint deteriorates, it peels, is pulverized into dust and then enters the body through hand-to-mouth contact or through contaminated food, water or alcohol.
During the ancient and classical eras, (and even far beyond them, until the 17th century), tin was often not distinguished from lead or seen as a different kind of the metal that lead is: Romans called lead ''plumbum nigrum'' (literally, "black lead"), while tin was called ''plumbum candidum'' (literally, "bright lead").
Lead is frequently used in polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic, which coats electrical cords.
The component limit of lead (1.0 μg/g) is a test benchmark for pharmaceuticals, representing the maximum daily intake an individual should have.
From 1960 to 1990, lead output in the Western Bloc grew by 31%.
Lead metal has a number of mechanical properties that make using it advantageous in comparison with many alternatives: high density, low melting point, ductility, and relative inertness against oxygen attacks.
The practice eventually expanded to white wigs and eyeliners, and it only faded out with the French Revolution in the late 18th century; one effect of such prolonged contacts with lead was teeth rotting and teeth replacements often were also made of lead (which temporarily gave sweet breath), inducing further damage to the organism.
Almost all inhaled lead is absorbed into the body, the rate is 20–70% for ingested lead; children absorb more than adults.
Impurities in the resulting metal are still significant; these are mostly contaminants of arsenic, antimony, bismuth, zinc, copper, silver, and gold.
World resources of lead exceed 2 billion tons.
The reactions in the battery between lead, lead dioxide, and sulfuric acid provides a reliable source of voltage.
However, the first four ionization energies of lead combined ''exceed'' those of tin, opposite to what the periodic trends would predict.
The main lead mineral is galena (PbS).
Molten lead is used as a coolant (e.g., for lead cooled fast reactors).
The modern English word "lead" is of Germanic origin; it comes from the Middle English ''leed'' and Old English ''lēad'' (with the macron above the "e" signifying that the vowel sound of that letter is long).
The origin of the Proto-Germanic ''*lauda'' is not agreed on in the linguistical community.
World reserves—resources ready to be mined for which that would be economically feasible—totaled 89 million tons in 2015, of which Australia had 35 million, China had 15.8 million, and Russia had 9.2 million.
However, lead has to be treated carefully while being elongated into wire as its tensile strength is comparably low: 12–17 MPa (that of aluminium is 6 times higher; copper 10 times higher; mild steel 15 times higher); this value is easily improved by adding small concentrations of other metals (such as antimony or copper).
Lead is a malleable and ductile metal; however, its malleability exceeds its ductility.
Negative oxidation states can occur as Zintl phases, as either free lead anions, for example, in , with lead formally being lead(−IV), or in oxygen-sensitive cluster ions, for example, in a trigonal bipyramidal  ion, where two lead atoms are lead(−I) and three are lead(0): this illustrates lead's proclivity towards catenation, an ability shared with tin.
Additionally, 47 nuclear isomers (long-lived excited nuclear states), corresponding to 24 lead isotopes, have been characterized.
According to the linguistical hypothesis, this word bore descendants in most Germanic languages (with a major exception being German) of exactly the same meaning.
During the period, lead mining proved important; the Industrial Revolution was the first time to have greater lead production rates than those of Rome.
This property is one of the best-known characteristics of lead: for example, consider the idiom ''go down like a lead balloon''.
All previous elements in group 14 have a stable or metastable allotrope in which it crystallizes in the diamond cubic structure, involving covalent bonds.
However, centuries before the Europeans were able to start the colonization of Africa in the late 19th century, lead mining was known in the Benue Trough and the lower Congo basin, where lead was used for trade with the Europeans and as a currency.
It tarnishes on contact with air, forming a complex mixture of compounds whose color and composition depend on conditions, sometimes with significant amounts of carbonates and hydroxycarbonates; a common reaction chain is the initial formation of the oxide by corrosion by oxygen followed by reactions of the resulting oxide with carbon dioxide to yield lead carbonate.
: 2PbO + C → Pb + CO2↑
In pregnant women, high levels of exposure to lead may cause miscarriage.
That allowed for a consistent lead production in the industrialized countries.
Lead can form long singly- or multiply-bonded chains (catenas) and so shares some covalent chemistry with its lighter homolog carbon.
In this structure, each atom is tetrahedrally coordinated, indicating that all four bonds are equivalent, obtaining the lowest possible energy.
As time passes, relative amounts of lead-206 and lead-207 to that of lead-204 increase, since the former two are supplemented by radioactive decay of heavier elements and the latter is not; this allows for lead–lead dating.
Long-term exposure to lead or its salts (especially soluble salts or the strong oxidant PbO2) can cause nephropathy, and colic-like abdominal pains.
The resulting concentrate is then turned into (impure) lead metal.
Nuclides with mass numbers between 210 and 231 inclusive, as well as 233 and 234 (polonium through actinium, as well as protactinium), quickly undergo alpha and beta decay to stable lead and bismuth isotopes.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.050&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday, and recommends that workers' blood concentrations of lead stay below 0.060&nbsp;mg per 100&nbsp;g blood.
However, only about 32% of lead will be excreted by a child.
Lead is able to bind to and interact with many of the same enzymes as these metals but, due to its differing chemistry, does not properly function as a cofactor, thus interfering with the enzyme's ability to catalyze its normal reaction or reactions.
Acute lead poisoning is treated using disodium calcium edetate: the calcium chelate of the disodium salt of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA).
When the pencil originated as a wrapped graphite writing tool, the particular type of graphite being used was named ''plumbago'' (lit.
Lead also forms covalent bonds with carbon to produce organolead compounds similar to but generally less stable than typical organic compounds, because the Pb–C bond is rather weak.
Electrical resistivity of lead at 20&nbsp;°C is 208 nanoohm-meters, almost an order of magnitude higher than those of industrially applied metals (that of copper is 17.12&nbsp;nΩ·m; gold 22.55&nbsp;nΩ·m; aluminium 27.09&nbsp;nΩ·m).
Its high density allows it to counterbalance the heeling effect of wind on the sails while at the same time occupying a small volume and thus offering the least underwater resistance.
Ingesting certain home remedy medicines may also expose people to lead or lead compounds.
During initial ore processing, ores typically undergo crushing, dense-medium separation, grinding, froth flotation, and drying of the resulting concentrate.
Various civilizations of the Fertile Crescent used lead as a writing material, as currency, and for construction.
However, concerns have been raised over whether lead bullets used for hunting can damage the environment.
High blood levels are associated with delayed puberty in girls.
Lead mines were worked in 2000 BCE in the Iberian peninsula by the Phoenicians; and also in Athens, Carthage, and Sicily.
The difluoride was the first ionically conducting compound to have been discovered.
One hypothesis suggests it is derived from Proto-Indo-European ''*lAudh-''("lead"; capitalization of the vowel is equivalent to the macron).
Organic acids, such as acetic acid, also dissolve lead, but this reaction requires oxygen as well.
Lead-210 is particularly useful for helping to identify ages of samples containing it, which is performed by measuring lead-210 to lead-206 ratios (both isotopes are present in a single decay chain).
Scrap lead from the building trade is usually fairly clean and is re-melted without the need for smelting, though some refining operations may be necessary; as such, secondary lead is also cheaper to produce than primary in terms of energy spent on production, often twice or more so.
Among the essential metals with which lead interacts are calcium, iron, and zinc.
Exposure to lead and lead chemicals occurs primarily through ingestion, to a lesser extent through inhalation and occasionally by direct contact.
The Ancient Chinese used lead as a stimulant in the royal court, a currency, and a contraceptive; lead also had a few uses, such as making amulets, for the Indus Valley civilization and the Mesoamericans.
+'''World's largest mining countries of lead, 2015'''
Lead is a very soft material with a Mohs hardness of 1.5; it could be scratched with a fingernail.
Moreover, it exceeds those of many other common metals: iron (7.87&nbsp;g·cm−3), copper (8.93&nbsp;g·cm−3), zinc (7.14&nbsp;g·cm−3), and so on.
A few compounds exist in oxidation states other than +2 and +4, but they do not have a great impact on lead chemistry from either theoretical or industrial perspective.
This impure lead oxide reduced in a coke-fired blast furnace to the (again, impure) metal by a reaction with that very coke:
In such anions, each atom is at a polyhedral vertex and contributes two electrons to each covalent bond along an edge from their sp3 hybrid orbitals, the other two being an external lone pair.
It is a soft, malleable and heavy post-transition metal.
'''Lead''' () is a chemical element in the carbon group with symbol&nbsp;'''Pb''' (from ) and atomic number&nbsp;82.
Many pseudohalides are also known.
This reaction ''releases'' heat once it started.
The main route for doing so is the two-stage process: The sulfide concentrate is roasted in the air, the main reaction occurring is oxidation of lead sulfide with oxygen:
Peoples of eastern and southern Africa are known to exercise wire drawing.
Metallic silver as well as gold is removed and recovered economically by means of the Parkes process, in which zinc is added to lead and adsorbs silver, which dissolves in zinc many times more actively than in lead.
The Romans obtained lead mostly as a by-product of extensive silver smelting.
This results an extremely high density of free neutrons which cannot decay, and, correspondingly, a large neutron flux and high temperatures, which is the reason why neutron capture occurs much faster than beta decay.
Lead's pronounced chalcophilic character is close to those of zinc and copper; as such, it is usually found in ore and extracted together with these metals.
This is one of the mechanisms by which it interferes with cognition.
As with many metals, finely divided powdered lead exhibits pyrophoricity.
In 2013, 4.74&nbsp;million metric tons came from the primary production, and 5.74 million tons came from secondary production.
A great share of demand of lead came from plumbing and painting—lead paints had been invented and regularly used; with invention of gasoline in late 19th century, lead was extensively used as an additive.
Furthermore, lead-208 and bismuth-209 have a very low cross section towards neutron capture because of their closed neutron shell at neutron number 126.
Lead was used for making water pipes in the Roman empire and consequently the Latin word for the metal, ''plumbum'', was the origin of the English word "plumbing" and its derivatives—even though some Romans, such as Vitruvius, were able to recognize its danger for health.
This practice was declared forbidden in 1498 by a papal bull, but it continued long past the date, being a reason of various mass poisonings up to late 18th century.
Lead plumbing in Western Europe may have been continued beyond the fall of the Western Roman Empire into the medieval era, but lead mining in Europe in general fell into decline, and the largest lead production was conducted in South and East Asia, where lead output underwent a strong growth.
Lead has the highest atomic number of any non-radioactive element, although the next higher element, bismuth, has one isotope with a half-life that is long enough (over one billion times the estimated age of the universe) to be considered stable for practically all purposes.
It is unstable against heat, decaying in heated tubes, and thermodynamically; in general, little is known about chemistry of plumbane, as it is so unstable.
This makes lead slightly radioactive.
This is then excreted in the urine leaving behind harmless calcium.
The reaction with chlorine is similar, although it requires heating: the chloride layer diminishes the reactivity of the elements.
In particular, many lead(II) compounds are water-insoluble.
The shapes of such anions may be determined by Wade's rules.
Of the sources of lead for recycling, lead–acid batteries is the most important one; lead pipe, sheet and cable sheathing are also significant sources.
Lead also dissolves in quite concentrated alkalis (≥10%) because of the amphoteric character and solubility of plumbites.
Geminal diols are cleaved to a pair of carbonyl compounds by stoichiometric LTA.
(For comparison, that of aluminium is 75.2&nbsp;GPa; copper 137.8&nbsp;GPa; mild steel 160–169&nbsp;GPa.)
Lead(IV) selenide is also known.
By the mid-1980s, a significant shift in lead end-use patterns had taken place.
The name of the chemical element is not related to the verb of that same spelling, which is instead derived from (eventually) Proto-Germanic ''*laidijan-'' ("to lead").
''act for lead'', or ''lead mockup'').
The last major innovation to impose contact with lead on humans was adding tetraethyllead to gasoline, invented in the United States in 1921; it was phased out in the U.S. and the European Union by 2000.
Their association through history can also be seen in other languages: the word ''olovo'' in Czech translates to "lead", but in Russian the cognate ''олово'' (''olovo'') means "tin".
Thus high levels of calcium and iron tend to protect one somewhat from lead poisoning, while low levels of these metals render one more susceptible.
Several bacteria have been researched for their ability to reduce lead; including the sulfate reducing bacteria Desulfovibrio and Desulfotomaculum; which are highly effective in aqueous solutions.
Lead is still widely used in statues and sculptures.
An alternative gaining ground involves direct smelting without an intermediate compound involved; another promising alternative involves hydrometallurgical means (it is based on anodes of impure lead and cathodes of pure lead dissolved in an electrolyte).
Lead also damages nervous connections (especially in young children) and causes blood and brain disorders.
In the Netherlands, the use of lead shot for hunting and sport shooting was banned in 1993, which caused a large drop in lead emission, from 230 tonnes in 1990 to 47.5 tonnes in 1995, two years after the ban.
The Ancient Egyptians are thought to have used lead for sinkers in fishing nets, in glazes, glasses and enamels, and for ornaments; they also were the first to use lead for cosmetics, a use that would continue through millennia to Ancient Greece and far beyond.
This is because the expected PbCl4 that would be produced is unstable and spontaneously decomposes to PbCl2 and Cl2.
As such, lead is often quoted as the heaviest stable element.
The simplest lead analog of an organic compound is plumbane, the lead analog of methane.
Lead is a neurotoxin that accumulates both in soft tissues and the bones, damaging the nervous system and causing brain disorders.
Sulfide concentrate is more common for subsequent lead production than oxide concentrate; it commonly has a lead content fraction of 50%–60%, occasionally varying to up to 30% or 80%.
This marks the reversal of the trend of stability of the +4 oxidation state in group 14 down the group from increasing to decreasing; tin, for comparison, has electronegativities of 1.80 and 1.96 in the +2 and +4 oxidation states respectively.
It changes the optical characteristics of the glass and reduces the transmission of ionizing radiation.
Galena is mostly found with other minerals, mostly zinc ores.
Lead is a bright silvery metal with a very slight shade of blue in a dry atmosphere.
The practice has become less common, not for danger but for stylistic reasons.
Nevertheless, these findings are still uncertain, and even if lead does turn out to be beneficial in small quantities, the threshold of toxicity is so low that lead toxicity would remain a much higher priority to address than lead deficiency.
Lead shows two main oxidation states: +2 and +4.
Lead is likely to form minerals that do not sink into the core but that stay above on Earth in its crust.
The Old English word is derived from the Proto-Germanic ''*lauda-'' ("lead"); this word is not known in itself, but rather reconstructed, which is marked by an asterisk.
Apart from the s-process, the latter three isotopes have been synthesized as a result of the r-process (lead-204 is not produced in this manner because its isobar mercury-204 is stable, and it is not formed as a decay product of r-process products).
Bulk lead released to the air forms a protective layer of insoluble lead oxide, which covers the metal from undergoing further reactions.
(A similar fashion appeared in Japan in the 18th century with the emergence of the geishas, with the practice continuing long into the 20th century and the white face becoming a "symbol of a Japanese woman"; lead was commonly used as a face whitener.)
However, nuclides with mass numbers 232 as well as 235 and above soon decay to the extremely long-lived isotopes of thorium and uranium, which decay very slowly to lead.
Lead has many uses in the construction industry (e.g., lead sheets are used as architectural metals in roofing material, cladding, flashing, gutters and gutter joints, and on roof parapets).
Pliny declared stibnite would give lead on heating, whereas the mineral on heating actually produces antimony.
Given adequate techniques, secondary lead is indistinguishable from primary lead.
It is also used to form glazing bars for stained glass or other multi-lit windows.
Electronegativity, although often thought to be constant for each element, is a variable property; lead shows a high electronegativity difference between values for lead(II) and lead(IV)—1.87 and 2.33, accordingly.
Research on a process cheaper in terms of energy spent and pollution introduced into the environment than the described one continues, with some success; a major drawback is that the alternative results in either an exceedingly high sulfur content of the resulting lead metal or too much lead lost as waste.
As a result of lead's chemistry, it occurs in primary minerals exclusively as lead(II), unlike tin, which always occurs as tin(IV).
: 2PbS + 3O2 → 2PbO + 2SO2↑
Since then, the metal has been used by many ancient peoples.
In total, thirty-eight isotopes of lead have been synthesized, those with mass numbers of 178–215.
The concern about lead's role in cognitive deficits in children has brought about widespread reduction in its use (lead exposure has been linked to learning disabilities).
The resulting concentrate is the initial quantitative metric of mined lead.
Soil is contaminated through particulate accumulation from lead in pipes, lead paint and residual emissions from leaded gasoline that was used before the Environment Protection Agency issued the regulation in 1980.
In addition to that, lead also bore a close relation to antimony: Both elements commonly occur as sulfides (galena and stibnite), often together.
Lead salts are thus very quickly and efficiently absorbed by the body, accumulating in it and leading to both chronic and acute poisoning.
If ingested or inhaled, lead and its compounds are poisonous to animals and humans.
Additionally, firearms were invented approximately at the same time, and lead, despite its expense over iron, became a chief material for making bullets, because it made less damage to iron gun barrels, had a higher density (which allowed for better retention of velocity and energy), and its lower melting point made production much easier: bullets could be made on wooden fire.
Chronic, high-level exposure has been shown to reduce fertility in males.
Dermal exposure may be significant for a narrow category of people working with organic lead compounds, but is of little concern for general population, as most countries stopped using leaded gasoline by 2007.
It was easily available in the Roman society, and as such, its social status was low.
Lead was extensively used in cosmetics at the time in Western Europe by the aristocracy, as whitened faces were seen as a sign of modesty.
The use of lead for water pipes is problematic in areas with soft or (and) acidic water.
Ingestion of lead-based paint is the major source of lead exposure for children.
Lead is a highly poisonous metal (whether inhaled or swallowed), affecting almost every organ and system in the body.
However, in part similarly to the European industrialization, lead does have a negative effect on the global health in the country.
Lead poisoning has been documented since ancient Rome, ancient Greece, and ancient China.
One of them is lead-210; although it has a half-life of 22.3 years, a period too short to allow any primordial lead-210 to still exist, some small non-primordial quantities of it occur in nature, because lead-210 is found in the uranium series: thus, even though it constantly decays away, its amount is also constantly regenerated by decay of its parent, polonium-214, which, while also constantly decaying, is also supplied by decay of its parent, and so on, all the way up to original uranium-238, which has been present for billions of years on Earth.
Much of this is in more developed countries (20–150&nbsp;kg per capita) rather than less developed countries (1–4&nbsp;kg per capita).
It is also inexpensive and denser than other common metals.
Metallic lead beads dating back to 7000–6500 BCE, if not before that, have been found in Asia Minor; this indicates lead was the first metal ever to be smelted.
The boiling point of lead is 1749&nbsp;°C (3180&nbsp;°F).
Lead exposure also causes small increases in blood pressure, particularly in middle-aged and older people and can cause anemia.
Lead is often used to balance the wheels of a car; this use is being phased out in favor of other materials for environmental reasons.
This tendency is much lower for lead because the Pb–Pb bond energy (98&nbsp;kJ/mol) is much lower than for the C–C bond (356&nbsp;kJ/mol).
Production and consumption of lead is increasing worldwide.
People can be exposed to lead in the workplace by breathing it in, swallowing it, skin contact, and eye contact.
However, the r-process does not ''directly'' form as much lead as the s-process, because neutron-rich nuclei with mass numbers 206–208 that would decay to lead are not magic, unlike those that reach the closed neutron shell at neutron number 126 and decay to the platinum group metals around mass number 194.
This effect is nevertheless masked, because these lead isotopes are also located at the end of three major decay chains (see above), they are created by the decay of the heavier elements, which are also created by the r-process.
During the 20th century, the use of lead in paint pigments was sharply reduced because of the danger of lead poisoning, especially to children.
In European alchemy, lead continued its status of the oldest metal and its association with Saturn—this time, the planet named after the Roman god rather than the god himself.
This oxidation state is not specifically stable, as the lead(III) ion (as well as, consequently, larger complexes containing it) is a radical; the same applies for lead(I), which can also be found in such species.
Presence of carbonates or sulfates results in the formation of insoluble lead salts, which protect the metal from corrosion.
Processes of production of primary and secondary lead are similar, despite using different sources of lead—ores and scrap—and some primary production plants now also use scrap, and this trend is likely increase in the future.
Detailed lead moldings are used as decorative motifs used to fix lead sheet.
Despite the toxicity of lead in significant amounts, there is some evidence that trace amounts of lead are beneficial in pigs and rats, and that its absence causes deficiency signs including depressed growth, anemia, and disturbed iron metabolism.
Exposure to high lead levels can cause severe damage to the brain and kidneys in adults or children and ultimately cause death.
This is caused by the relativistic effects, more specifically, the inert pair effect, which manifests itself when a great difference in electronegativity between lead and the anions (oxide, halides, nitrides) is present, as this results in positive charge on lead and then leads to a stronger contraction of the 6s orbital than the 6p orbital, making the 6s orbital rather inert in ionic compounds.
Lead is also used as electrodes in the process of electrolysis.
While many metals are superior to lead in some of these aspects, lead is also more common than most of these metals; moreover, lead minerals are easier to mine  and then lead is easier to extract from its ores than many other metals, which makes the resulting metal relatively inexpensive.
Lead is used in some candles to treat the wick to ensure a longer, more even burn.
