*Beneath the palisade layer is the '''spongy layer'''.
The group of pinnules on each secondary vein forms a "pinna"; e.g., ''Albizia'' (silk tree).
;Rows: The term, ''distichous'', literally means ''two rows''.
In most leaves, the primary photosynthetic tissue, the (palisade mesophyll), is located on the upper side of the blade or lamina of the leaf but in some species, including the mature foliage of ''Eucalyptus'', palisade mesophyll is present on both sides and the leaves are said to be isobilateral.
The terminology associated with the description of leaf morphology is presented, in illustrated form, at  Wikibooks.
;Woolly: With long, soft and tortuous or matted hairs.
Chloroplasts are generally absent in epidermal cells, the exception being the guard cells of the stomata.
Plants that lack chlorophyll cannot photosynthesize.
"Hairs" on plants are properly called trichomes.
The term, ''2-ranked'', is equivalent.
Structures located there are called "axillary".
This assimilation tissue is the primary location of photosynthesis in the plant.
Other herbivores and their predators mimic the appearance of the leaf.
They grow to a specific pattern and shape and then stop.
;Arachnoid, or arachnose: With many fine, entangled hairs giving a cobwebby appearance.
;Glabrous: No hairs of any kind present.
;Pubescent: With soft, short and erect hairs.
Their surfaces are waterproofed by the plant cuticle and gas exchange between the mesophyll cells and the atmosphere is controlled by minute openings called stomata, about 10&nbsp;μm which open or close to regulate the rate exchange of carbon dioxide, oxygen, and water vapour into and out of the internal intercellular space system.
;Trifoliate (or trifoliolate): A pinnate leaf with just three leaflets; e.g., ''Trifolium'' (clover), ''Laburnum'' (laburnum).
In order to adapt to their different environment (such as sun or shade), plants had to adapt this structure to obtain optimal result.
In angiosperms the venation is typically parallel in monocotyledons and forms an interconnecting network in broad-leaved plants.
The products of photosynthesis are called "assimilates".
Specialised cells that differ markedly from surrounding cells, and which often synthesise specialised products such as crystals, are termed '''idioblasts'''.
There is a regularity in these angles and they follow the numbers in a Fibonacci sequence: 1/2, 2/3, 3/5, 5/8, 8/13, 13/21, 21/34, 34/55, 55/89.
These cells contain fewer chloroplasts than those of the palisade layer.
Simple, vascularised leaves (microphylls)  first evolved as enations, extensions of the stem, in clubmosses such as ''Baragwanathia'' during the Silurian period.
;Bipinnately compound: Leaves are twice divided: the leaflets are arranged along a secondary vein that is one of several branching off the rachis.
The tremendous variety shown in leaf structure (anatomy) from species to species is presented in detail below under morphology.
For example, the "leaves" (actually microphylls) of most species of ''Selaginella'' are tetrastichous, but not decussate.
Many structures of non-vascular plants, such as the phyllids of mosses and liverworts and even of some foliose lichens, which are not plants at all (in the sense of being members of the kingdom Plantae), look and function much like leaves.
A pseudo-reticulate venation that is actually a highly modified penniparallel one is an autapomorphy of some Melanthiaceae, which are monocots; e.g., ''Paris quadrifolia'' (True-lover's Knot).
These, in turn, form a complicated network.
Broad, flat leaves with complex venation are known as megaphylls and the species that bear them, the majority, as broad-leaved or megaphyllous plants.
;Pinnately compound: Leaves have the leaflets arranged along the main or mid-vein.
Stomata therefore play the important role in allowing photosynthesis without letting the leaf dry out.
The leaf surface is also host to a large variety of microorganisms; in this context it is referred to as the phyllosphere.
* A sheath of ground tissue made of lignin surrounding the vascular tissue.
;Canescent: Hoary with dense grayish-white pubescence.
A '''simple leaf''' has an undivided blade.
In a typical leaf, the stomata are more numerous over the abaxial (lower) epidermis than the adaxial (upper) epidermis and are more numerous in plants from cooler climates.
;Truncate: Ending abruptly with a flat end, that looks cut off.
The terms '''megaphyll''', '''macrophyll''', '''mesophyll''', '''notophyll''', '''microphyll''', '''nanophyll''' and '''leptophyll''' are used to describe leaf sizes (in descending order), in a classification devised in 1934 by Christen C. Raunkiær and since modified by others.
;Silky: With adpressed, soft and straight pubescence.
Reptiles such as some chameleons, and insects such as some katydids, also mimic the oscillating movements of leaves in the wind, moving from side to side or back and forth while evading a possible threat.
They were once thought to be typical examples of pattern formation through ramification, but they may instead exemplify a pattern formed in a stress tensor field.
Where leaves are basal, and lie on the ground, they are referred to as prostrate.
Females of the Attelabidae, so-called leaf-rolling weevils, lay their eggs into leaves that they then roll up as means of protection.
The cuticle is in some cases thinner on the lower epidermis than on the upper epidermis, and is generally thicker on leaves from dry climates as compared with those from wet climates.
;Strigose: With appressed, sharp, straight and stiff hairs.
distinct types of conducting cells:
However, the leaf shape may be formed of lobes, but the gaps between lobes do not reach to the main vein.
In ferns and most flowering plants, the mesophyll is divided into two layers:
The longest leaves are those of the Raffia palm, ''R.
Two basic forms of leaves can be described considering the way the blade (lamina) is divided.
Correspondingly, leaves represent heavy investment on the part of the plants bearing them, and their retention or disposition are the subject of elaborate strategies for dealing with pest pressures, seasonal conditions, and protective measures such as the growth of thorns and the production of phytoliths, lignins, tannins and poisons.
In any square centimeter of a plant leaf there may be from 1,000 to 100,000 stomata.
The '''veins''' are the vascular tissue of the leaf and are located in the spongy layer of the mesophyll.
;Hoary: With a fine, close grayish-white pubescence.
These are typically more elongated in the leaves of monocots than in those of dicots.
Leaves are normally green, due to chlorophyll in chloroplasts in the chlorenchyma cells.
*An upper '''palisade layer''' of vertically elongated cells, one to two cells thick, directly beneath the adaxial epidermis, with intercellular air spaces between them.
;Whorled, or verticillate: Three or more leaves, branches, or flower parts attach at each point or node on the stem.
;Pinnatifid: Pinnately dissected to the central vein, but with the leaflets not entirely separate; e.g., ''Polypodium'', some ''Sorbus'' (whitebeams).
In others, such as the clubmosses, with different evolutionary origins, the leaves are simple, with only a single vein and are known as microphylls.
The epidermal cells are the most numerous, largest, and least specialized and form the majority of the epidermis.
;Scabrous, or scabrid: Rough to the touch.
Many leaves are covered in trichomes (small hairs) which have diverse  structures and functions.
and ''Bulbine mesembryanthemoides''.
;Feather-veined, reticulate (also called pinnate-netted, penniribbed, penninerved, or penniveined): The veins arise pinnately from a single mid-vein and subdivide into veinlets.
As with opposite leaves, successive whorls may or may not be decussate, rotated by half the angle between the leaves in the whorl (i.e., successive whorls of three rotated 60°, whorls of four rotated 45°, etc.).
Functionally, in addition to photosynthesis the leaf is the principal site of transpiration and guttation.
The terms, ''tristichous'' and ''tetrastichous'', are sometimes encountered.
Some window plants such as ''Fenestraria'' species and some ''Haworthia'' species such as ''Haworthia tesselata'' and ''Haworthia truncata'' are examples of xerophytes.
This sheath has a mechanical role in strengthening the rigidity of the leaf.
Considerable changes in leaf type occur within species too, for example as a plant matures; as a case in point ''Eucalyptus'' species commonly have isobilateral, pendent leaves when mature and dominating their neighbours; however, such trees tend to have erect or horizontal dorsiventral leaves as seedlings, when their growth is limited by the available light.
A vein is made up of a vascular bundle.
The leaf is a vital source of energy production for the plant, and plants have evolved protection against animals that consume leaves, such as tannins, chemicals which hinder the digestion of proteins and have an unpleasant taste.
Deciduous plants in frigid or cold temperate regions typically shed their leaves in autumn, whereas in areas with a severe dry season, some plants may shed their leaves until the dry season ends.
These long cylindrical cells are regularly arranged in one to five rows.
A structurally complete leaf of an angiosperm consists of a petiole (leaf stalk), a lamina (leaf blade), and stipules (small structures located to either side of the base of the petiole).
Some species have cryptic adaptations by which they use leaves in avoiding predators.
The cells of the spongy layer are more branched and not so tightly packed, so that there are large intercellular air spaces between them for oxygen and carbon dioxide to diffuse in and out of during respiration and photosynthesis.
;Heteroblasty: Characteristic in which a plant has marked changes in leaf size, shape, and growth habit between juvenile and adult stages.
;Tomentose: Densely pubescent with matted, soft white woolly hairs.
The xylem typically lies on the adaxial side of the vascular bundle and the phloem typically lies on the abaxial side.
The pattern of the veins is called venation.
Cylindrical cells, with the ''chloroplasts'' close to the walls of the cell, can take optimal advantage of light.
Leaves are normally extensively vascularised and typically have networks of vascular bundles containing xylem, which supplies water for photosynthesis, and phloem, which transports the sugars produced by photosynthesis.
Nervure tertiaire reliant les nervures secondaires
In certain species, paired stipules are not obvious or are absent altogether.
Sun leaves have a multi-layered palisade layer, while shade leaves or older leaves closer to the soil are single-layered.
Its cells contain many more chloroplasts than the spongy layer.
Furthermore, several kinds of leaf-like structures found in vascular plants are not totally homologous with them.
;Palmately compound: Leaves have the leaflets radiating from the end of the petiole, like fingers of the palm of a hand; e.g., ''Cannabis'' (hemp) and ''Aesculus'' (buckeyes).
Although it is the more complex pattern, branching veins appear to be plesiomorphic and in some form were present in ancient seed plants as long as 250 million years ago.
The opening and closing of the stomatal aperture is controlled by the stomatal complex and regulates the exchange of gases and water vapor between the outside air and the interior of the leaf.
Leaves in temperate, boreal, and seasonally dry zones may be seasonally deciduous (falling off or dying for the inclement season).
In either case the shed leaves may be expected to contribute their retained nutrients to the soil where they fall.
Some sawflies similarly roll the leaves of their food plants into tubes.
;Dichotomous: There are no dominant bundles, with the veins forking regularly by pairs; found in ''Ginkgo'' and some pteridophytes.
;Hispidulous: Minutely hispid.
Optical masking of chlorophyll by anthocyanins reduces risk of photo-oxidative damage to leaf cells as they senesce, which otherwise may lower the efficiency of nutrient retrieval from senescing autumn leaves.
* Phloem: cells that usually move sap, with dissolved sucrose, produced by photosynthesis in the leaf, out of the leaf.
This mechanism to shed leaves is called abscission.
In contrast, many other non-seasonal plants, such as palms and conifers, retain their leaves for long periods; ''Welwitschia'' retains its two main leaves throughout a lifetime that may exceed a thousand years.
Euphylls are also referred to as macrophylls or megaphylls (large leaves).
When the leaf is shed, it leaves a leaf scar on the twig.
The petiole mechanically links the leaf to the plant and provides the route for transfer of water and sugars to and from the leaf.
The flat, or laminar, shape also maximises thermal contact with the surrounding air.
It is often the location of a bud.
Both are embedded in a dense parenchyma tissue, called the sheath, which usually includes some structural collenchyma tissue.
;Glandular: With a gland at the tip of the hair.
'''Foliage''' is a mass noun that refers to leaves collectively.
The type of leaf is usually characteristic of a species (monomorphic), although some species produce more than one type of leaf (dimorphic or polymorphic).
These three tissue systems typically form a regular organisation at the cellular scale.
;Hirsute: With rather rough or stiff hairs.
;Puberulent, or puberulous: With fine, minute hairs.
Leaves also function to store chemical energy and water (especially succulents) and may become specialised organs serving other functions.
;Hispid: With rigid, bristly hairs.
;Lanate, or lanose: With woolly hairs.
* 120° (or 1/3): 3 leaves in 1 circle
These are interpreted as reduced from megaphyllous leaves of their Devonian ancestors.
* 144° (or 2/5): 5 leaves in 2 gyres
Although not as nutritious as other organs such as fruit, leaves provide a food source for many organisms.
Most leaves have distinctive upper (adaxial) and lower (abaxial) surfaces that differ in colour, hairiness, the number of stomata (pores that intake and output gases), epicuticular wax amount and structure and other features.
Leaves can also store food and water, and are modified accordingly to meet these functions, for example in the leaves of succulent plants and in bulb scales.
True leaves or euphylls of larger size and with more complex venation did not become widespread in other groups until the Devonian period, by which time the carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere had dropped significantly.
In the series, the numerator indicates the number of complete turns or "gyres" until a leaf arrives at the initial position and the denominator indicates the number of leaves in the arrangement.
regalis'' which may be up to  long and  wide.
The leaf shape also minimises damage from wind, by creating turbulence rather than resistance.
Compound leaves are closer to shoots than simple leaves.
* Xylem: cells that bring water and minerals from the roots into the leaf.
Other factors include the need to balance water loss at high temperature and low humidity against the need to absorb atmospheric carbon dioxide.
A similar pattern (with 3-7 veins) is especially conspicuous in Melastomataceae.
The pores or ''stomata'' of the epidermis open into substomatal chambers, which are connected to the air spaces between the spongy layer cells.
This can be demonstrated by the following:
It is covered with a waxy cuticle which is impermeable to liquid water and water vapor and forms the boundary separating the plant's inner cells from the external world.
The epidermis is the outer layer of cells covering the leaf.
In essence, leaves form a helix pattern centered around the stem, either clockwise or counterclockwise, with (depending upon the species) the same angle of divergence.
The leaf-like organs of Bryophytes (e.g., mosses and liverworts), known as phyllids, differ morphologically from the leaves of vascular plants in that they lack vascular tissue, are usually only a single cell thick and have no cuticle stomata or internal system of intercellular spaces.
Not every species produces leaves with all of these structural components.
'''Pseudoverticillate''' describes an arrangement only appearing whorled, but not actually so.
This series tends to the golden angle, which is approximately 360° × 34/89 ≈ 137.52° ≈ 137°&nbsp;30′.
The concentration of photosynthetic structures in leaves requires that they be richer in protein, minerals, and sugars than, say, woody stem tissues.
;Floccose: With flocks of soft, woolly hairs, which tend to rub off.
Animals that are specialized to eat leaves are known as folivores.
The epidermis tissue includes several differentiated cell types; epidermal cells, epidermal hair cells (trichomes), cells in the stomatal complex; guard cells and subsidiary cells.
External leaf characteristics, such as shape, margin, hairs, the petiole, and the presence of stipules, are important for identifying plant species, and botanists have developed a rich terminology for describing leaf characteristics.
;Synanthous (synanthy): Developing at the same time as the flowers
Each leaflet is called a "pinnule".
Leaves have determinate growth.
;Tomentulose: Minutely or only slightly tomentose.
This separation must be minimal to afford capillary action for water distribution.
Typical for most monocotyledons, such as grasses.
The internal organisation of most kinds of leaves has evolved to maximise exposure of the photosynthetic organelles, the chloroplasts, to light and to increase the absorption of carbon dioxide.
Succulent plants often have thick juicy leaves, but some leaves are without major photosynthetic function and may be dead at maturity, as in some cataphylls, and spines).
;Plinervy: Three main veins branch at the base of the lamina and run essentially parallel subsequently, as in ''Ceanothus'' and in ''Celtis''.
Typically a leaf is a thin, dorsiventrally flattened organ, borne above ground and specialized for photosynthesis.
Examples include flattened plant stems called phylloclades and cladodes, and flattened leaf stems called phyllodes which differ from leaves both in their structure and origin.
The leaves and stem together form the shoot.
The middle vein of a compound leaf or a frond, when it is present, is called a rachis.
The lamina is typically the location of the majority of photosynthesis.
Typically leaves are broad, flat and thin (dorsiventrally flattened), thereby maximising the surface area directly exposed to light and enabling the light to penetrate the tissues and reach the chloroplasts, thus promoting photosynthesis.
In most plants leaves also are the primary organs responsible for transpiration and guttation (beads of fluid forming at leaf margins).
;Sericeous: Silky appearance through fine, straight and appressed (lying close and flat) hairs.
As a ''stem'' grows, leaves tend to appear arranged around the stem in a way that optimizes yield of light.
Compound leaves are a characteristic of some families of higher plants, such as the Fabaceae.
For example, the caterpillars of some leaf-roller moths will create a small home in the leaf by folding it over themselves.
On the basis of molecular genetics, Eckardt and Baum (2010) concluded that "it is now generally accepted that compound leaves express both leaf and shoot properties."
Other plant parts like stems or roots have non-determinate growth, and will usually continue to grow as long as they have the resources to do so.
The upper (adaxial) angle between a leaf and a stem is known as the axil of the leaf.
Many gymnosperms have thin needle-like or scale-like leaves that can be advantageous in cold climates with frequent snow and frost.
A petiole may be absent, or the blade may not be laminar (flattened).
The shape and structure of leaves vary considerably from species to species of plant, depending largely on their adaptation to climate and available light, but also to other factors such as grazing animals (such as deer), available nutrients, and ecological competition from other plants.
;Stellate, or stelliform: With star-shaped hairs.
The epidermis serves several functions: protection against water loss by way of transpiration, regulation of gas exchange, secretion of metabolic compounds, and (in some species) absorption of water.
The meaning of several of the following terms can overlap.
Opposite leaves may appear whorled near the tip of the stem.
This occurred independently in several separate lineages of vascular plants, in progymnosperms like ''Archaeopteris'', in Sphenopsida, ferns and later in the  gymnosperms and angiosperms.
;Barbellate: With finely barbed hairs (barbellae).
According to Agnes Arber's partial-shoot theory of the leaf, leaves are partial shoots, being derived from leaf primordia of the shoot apex.
A '''compound leaf''' has a fully subdivided blade, each leaflet of the blade being separated along a main or secondary vein.
In pinnately veined leaves the central vein in known as the ''midrib''.
;Bristly: With stiff hair-like prickles.
;Ciliate: Marginally fringed with short hairs (cilia).
;Truncate: Ending abruptly with a flat end, that looks cut off.
In cold autumns, they sometimes change color, and turn yellow, bright-orange, or red, as various accessory pigments (carotenoids and xanthophylls) are revealed when the tree responds to cold and reduced sunlight by curtailing chlorophyll production.
At the core of each bundle are clusters of two
For xerophytes the major constraint is not light flux or intensity, but drought.
Because each leaflet can appear to be a simple leaf, it is important to recognize where the petiole occurs to identify a compound leaf.
The stomatal pores perforate the epidermis and are surrounded on each side by chloroplast-containing guard cells, and two to four subsidiary cells that lack chloroplasts, forming a specialized cell group known as the stomatal complex.
Red anthocyanin pigments are now thought to be produced in the leaf as it dies, possibly to mask the yellow hue left when the chlorophyll is lost—yellow leaves appear to attract herbivores such as aphids.
Developmental studies have shown that compound leaves, like shoots, may branch in three dimensions.
A '''leaf''' is an organ of a vascular plant and is the principal lateral appendage of the stem.
;Palmate-netted, palmate-veined, fan-veined: Several main veins diverge from near the leaf base where the petiole attaches, and radiate toward the edge of the leaf; e.g., most ''Acer'' (maples).
This type of venation is typical for (but by no means limited to) dicotyledons.
Commissural veins (small veins) connect the major parallel veins.
Most of the interior of the leaf between the upper and lower layers of epidermis is a ''parenchyma'' (ground tissue)  or ''chlorenchyma'' tissue called the '''mesophyll''' (Greek for "middle leaf").
* Alternate leaves have an angle of 180° (or 1/2)
;Ciliolate: Minutely ciliate.
