A League of Nations Commission of Inquiry, with Belgian, Hungarian and Swedish members, was sent to the region in 1924; it found that the people of Mosul did not want to be part of either Turkey or Iraq, but if they had to choose, they would pick Iraq.
A provisional peace agreement, signed by both parties in May 1933, provided for the League to assume control of the disputed territory while bilateral negotiations proceeded.
When the referendum was held in 1935, 90.3 percent of voters supported becoming part of Germany, which was quickly approved by the League Council.
Werner Dankwort of Germany pushed for his country to join the League; joining in 1926, Germany became the fifth permanent member of the Council.
Without this guarantee, they would not reduce armaments because they felt the risk of attack from Germany was too great.
The British committee was finally appointed in February 1918.
Albert Thomas was its first director.
The French and Polish governments favoured turning Memel into an international city, while Lithuania wanted to annex the area.
After the First World War, Poland and Lithuania both regained their independence but soon became immersed in territorial disputes.
In expelling the Soviet Union, the League broke its own rule: only 7 of 15 members of the Council voted for expulsion (United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Bolivia, Egypt, South Africa, and the Dominican Republic), short of the majority required by the Covenant.
In 1921, Lord Robert Cecil proposed the introduction of Esperanto into state schools of member nations, and a report was commissioned.
Each organ's budget was allocated by the Assembly (the League was supported financially by its member states).
The British government referred the problem to the League's Council, but Finland would not let the League intervene, as they considered it an internal matter.
In 1939, a semi-official emblem for the League of Nations emerged: two five-pointed stars within a blue pentagon.
One proposed remedy was the creation of an international organisation whose aim was to prevent future war through disarmament, open diplomacy, international co-operation, restrictions on the right to wage war, and penalties that made war unattractive.
In November 1921, a conference was held in Geneva to negotiate a convention between Germany and Poland.
The League's collective security system required nations to act, if necessary, against states they considered friendly, and in a way that might endanger their national interests, to support states for which they had no normal affinity.
In 1925, the commission recommended that the region stay part of Iraq, under the condition that the British hold the mandate over Iraq for another 25 years, to ensure the autonomous rights of the Kurdish population.
The settlement produced peace in the area until the beginning of the Second World War.
This session concerned itself with liquidating the League: it transferred assets worth approximately $22,000,000 (U.S.) in 1946, (including the Palace of Peace and the League's archives) to the UN, returned reserve funds to the nations that had supplied them, and settled the debts of the League.
Soviet Russia was also initially excluded, as Communist regimes were not welcomed.
Member states were expected to "respect and preserve as against external aggression" the territorial integrity of other members and to disarm "to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety."
The Mukden Incident, also known as the "Manchurian Incident" or the "Far Eastern Crisis", was one of the League's major setbacks and acted as the catalyst for Japan's withdrawal from the organisation.
The League Covenant assigned the League the task of creating a disarmament plan for each state, but the Council devolved this responsibility to a special commission set up in 1926 to prepare for the 1932–34 World Disarmament Conference.
The conference accepted most of the League's recommendations, forcing Greece to pay fifty million lire to Italy, even though those who committed the crime were never discovered.
Mussolini was prepared to agree to the pact, but news of the deal leaked out.
The Assembly consisted of representatives of all members of the League, with each state allowed up to three representatives and one vote.
Unanimity was required for the decisions of both the Assembly and the Council, except in matters of procedure and some other specific cases such as the admission of new members.
The two principal drafters and architects of the covenant of the League of Nations were Lord Robert Cecil (a lawyer and diplomat) and Jan Smuts (a Commonwealth statesman).
Crowe went on to express scepticism of the planned "pledge of common action" against aggressors because he believed the actions of individual states would still be determined by national interests and the balance of power.
President Woodrow Wilson had been a driving force behind the League's formation and strongly influenced the form it took, but the US Senate voted not to join on 19 November 1919.
Three of these members had been made Council members the day before the vote (South Africa, Bolivia, and Egypt).
Its two most important members, Britain and France, were reluctant to use sanctions and even more reluctant to resort to military action on behalf of the League.
In 1932, Japanese air and sea forces bombarded the Chinese city of Shanghai, sparking the January 28 Incident.
The League sanctions were lifted on 4 July 1936, but by that point Italy had already gained control of the urban areas of Abyssinia.
Renamed Hatay, its parliament declared independence as the Republic of Hatay in September 1938, after elections the previous month.
These included the Disarmament Commission, the Health Organisation, the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the Mandates Commission, the International Commission on Intellectual Cooperation (precursor to UNESCO), the Permanent Central Opium Board, the Commission for Refugees, and the Slavery Commission.
The modern Italian Army defeated the poorly armed Abyssinians and captured Addis Ababa in May 1936, forcing Emperor of Ethiopia Haile Selassie to flee.
A final settlement was reached, after five meetings, in which most of the area was given to Germany, but with the Polish section containing the majority of the region's mineral resources and much of its industry.
The Fabians were the first to argue for a "Council" of states, necessarily the Great Powers, who would adjudicate world affairs, and for the creation of a permanent secretariat to enhance international co-operation across a range of activities.
Opposition in the Senate, particularly from two Republican politicians, Henry Cabot Lodge and William Borah, and especially in regard to Article X of the Covenant, ensured that the United States would not ratify the agreement.
The Japanese army claimed that Chinese soldiers had sabotaged the railway and in apparent retaliation (acting contrary to the civilian government's orders) occupied the entire region of Manchuria.
It established camps in Turkey in 1922 to aid the country with an ongoing refugee crisis, helping to prevent disease and hunger.
The League of Nations failed to prevent the secession of the Memel region to Germany.
Spain also began as a permanent member of the Council, but withdrew in 1939.
Following accusations of forced labour on the large American-owned Firestone rubber plantation and American accusations of slave trading, the Liberian government asked the League to launch an investigation.
Partly as a result of pressure brought by the League of Nations, Afghanistan abolished slavery in 1923, Iraq in 1924, Nepal in 1926, Transjordan and Persia in 1929, Bahrain in 1937, and Ethiopia in 1942.
In 1931 the staff numbered 707.
The number of non-permanent members was first increased to six on 22 September 1922 and to nine on 8 September 1926.
There were three mandate classifications: A, B and C.
Each body could deal with any matter within the sphere of competence of the League or affecting peace in the world.
Western countries were sympathetic to the Chinese in their struggle, particularly in their stubborn defence of Shanghai, a city with a substantial number of foreigners.
When this agreement became public in May 1922, bitter resentment was expressed in Germany, but the treaty was still ratified by both countries.
The proposals were approved by the British government, and much of the commission's results were later incorporated into the Covenant of the League of Nations.
This meant that, during the early interwar period, the League played little part in resolving the turmoil resulting from the war.
With League oversight, the Sanjak of Alexandretta in the French Mandate of Syria was given autonomy in 1937.
The outcome of House's work, and Wilson's own first draft, proposed the termination of "unethical" state behaviour, including forms of espionage and dishonesty.
After an incident involving sentries on the Greek-Bulgarian border in October 1925, fighting began between the two countries.
The Executive Council would create a Permanent Court of International Justice to make judgements on the disputes.
When the report was presented two years later, it recommended the adoption of Cecil's idea, a proposal that 11 delegates accepted.
The islands are almost exclusively Swedish-speaking, but in 1809, the Åland Islands, along with Finland, were taken by Imperial Russia.
The ILO, although having the same members as the League and being subject to the budget control of the Assembly, was an autonomous organisation with its own Governing Body, its own General Conference and its own Secretariat.
The French also drafted a much more far-reaching proposal in June of that year; they advocated annual meetings of a council to settle all disputes, as well as an "international army" to enforce its decisions.
In November 1921, the League decided that the frontiers of Albania should be the same as they had been in 1913, with three minor changes that favoured Yugoslavia.
When the British cabinet discussed the concept of the League during the First World War, Maurice Hankey, the Cabinet Secretary, circulated a memorandum on the subject.
In March 1921, the League abandoned plans for the plebiscite.
The largest number of member states was 58, between 28 September 1934 (when Ecuador joined) and 23 February 1935 (when Paraguay withdrew).
Although Turkey had accepted League of Nations' arbitration in the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923, it rejected the decision, questioning the Council's authority.
Ultimately, Britain and France both abandoned the concept of collective security in favour of appeasement in the face of growing German militarism under Hitler.
The result of this industrialised warfare, which provided modern weapons, coupled with outdated 19th century strategies, led to an unprecedented casualty level: eight and a half million soldiers killed, an estimated 21 million wounded, and approximately 10 million civilian deaths.
Its primary goals, as stated in its Covenant, included preventing wars through collective security and disarmament and settling international disputes through negotiation and arbitration.
The League condemned the Greek invasion, and called for both Greek withdrawal and compensation to Bulgaria.
Before the report could be voted on by the Assembly, Japan announced its intention to push further into China.
In 1939 Germany retook the region following the rise of the Nazis and an ultimatum to Lithuania, demanding the return of the region under threat of war.
Moreover, the League's advocacy of disarmament for Britain, France, and its other members, while at the same time advocating collective security, meant that the League was depriving itself of the only forceful means by which it could uphold its authority.
The French were reluctant to reduce their armaments without a guarantee of military help if they were attacked; Poland and Czechoslovakia felt vulnerable to attack from the west and wanted the League's response to aggression against its members to be strengthened before they disarmed.
Like its predecessor, the United Nations does not have its own standing armed forces, but calls on its members to contribute to armed interventions, such as during the Korean War and for the peacekeeping mission in the former Yugoslavia.
It also campaigned to end child labour, increase the rights of women in the workplace, and make shipowners liable for accidents involving seamen.
Paraguay appealed to the League of Nations, but the League did not take action when the Pan-American Conference offered to mediate instead.
One of its innovations in this latter area was the 1922 introduction of the Nansen passport, which was the first internationally recognised identity card for stateless refugees.
The territories were governed by mandatory powers, such as the United Kingdom in the case of the Mandate of Palestine, and the Union of South Africa in the case of South-West Africa, until the territories were deemed capable of self-government.
The board also established a system of import certificates and export authorisations for the legal international trade in narcotics.
The Allies, however, agreed (at Mussolini's insistence) that the Conference of Ambassadors should be responsible for resolving the dispute because it was the conference that had appointed General Tellini.
The Hoare–Laval Pact of December 1935 was an attempt by the British Foreign Secretary Samuel Hoare and the French Prime Minister Pierre Laval to end the conflict in Abyssinia by proposing to partition the country into an Italian sector and an Abyssinian sector.
The League lasted for 26 years; the United Nations (UN) replaced it after the end of the Second World War on 20 April 1946 and inherited a number of agencies and organisations founded by the League.
On 28 June 1919, 44 states signed the Covenant, including 31 states which had taken part in the war on the side of the Triple Entente or joined it during the conflict.
After more negotiation and compromise, the delegates finally approved of the proposal to create the League of Nations (, ) on 25 January 1919.
The Greeks said they would not pay unless it was proved that the crime was committed by Greeks.
It began with four permanent members (Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan) and four non-permanent members that were elected by the Assembly for a three-year term.
These were described as "peoples" that the League said were
Other issues in this and related treaties included labour conditions, just treatment of native inhabitants, human and drug trafficking, the arms trade, global health, prisoners of war, and protection of minorities in Europe.
The League also succeeded in reducing the death rate of workers constructing the Tanganyika railway from 55 to 4 percent.
The Soviet Union became a member on 18 September 1934, and was expelled on 14 December 1939 for invading Finland.
The B mandates were applied to the former German colonies that the League took responsibility for after the First World War.
After a number of notable successes and some early failures in the 1920s, the League ultimately proved incapable of preventing aggression by the Axis powers in the 1930s.
The origins of the League as an organisation created by the Allied powers as part of the peace settlement to end the First World War led to it being viewed as a "League of Victors".
At the acceptance for his Nobel Prize, Roosevelt said: "it would be a masterstroke if those great powers honestly bent on peace would form a League of Peace"
In January 1920, when the League was born, Germany was not permitted to join because it was seen as having been the aggressor in the First World War.
The threat of economic sanctions would have been almost useless because the United States, a non–League member, could continue trade with Japan.
In fact, League members themselves re-armed.
This problem mainly stemmed from the fact that the primary members of the League of Nations were not willing to accept the possibility of their fate being decided by other countries, and by enforcing unanimous voting had effectively given themselves veto power.
Professor David Kennedy portrays the League as a unique moment when international affairs were "institutionalised", as opposed to the pre–First World War methods of law and politics.
There were a variety of reasons for this failure, many connected to general weaknesses within the organisation.
The resulting commission was jointly appointed by the League, the United States, and Liberia.
Records were kept to control slavery, prostitution, and the trafficking of women and children.
During the Polish–Soviet War, Lithuania signed the Moscow Peace Treaty with the Soviet Union that laid out Lithuania's frontiers.
This requirement was a reflection of the League's belief in the sovereignty of its component nations; the League sought solution by consent, not by dictation.
Kant argued for the establishment of a peaceful world community, not in a sense of a global government, but in the hope that each state would declare itself a free state that respects its citizens and welcomes foreign visitors as fellow rational beings, thus promoting peaceful society worldwide.
In addition, there were a number of auxiliary agencies and commissions.
At the start of the 20th century, two power blocs emerged from alliances between the European Great Powers.
When they arrived, they were confronted with Chinese assertions that the Japanese had invaded unlawfully, while the Japanese claimed they were acting to keep peace in the area.
(In 1971 the People's Republic of China replaced the Republic of China (then only in control of Taiwan) as permanent member of the UN Security Council, and in 1991 the Russian Federation replaced the USSR.)
The American President Woodrow Wilson instructed Edward M. House to draft a US plan which reflected Wilson's own idealistic views (first articulated in the Fourteen Points of January 1918), as well as the work of the Phillimore Commission.
It required a unanimous vote of nine, later fifteen, Council members to enact a resolution; hence, conclusive and effective action was difficult, if not impossible.
Both the British and French public vehemently protested against it, describing it as a sell-out of Abyssinia.
In June 1921, the League announced its decision: the islands were to remain a part of Finland, but with guaranteed protection of the islanders, including demilitarisation.
This new entity was recognised only by the governments of Italy, Spain and Nazi Germany; the rest of the world still considered Manchuria legally part of China.
The commission chose to cede Memel to Lithuania and give the area autonomous rights.
Japan was therefore left in control of Manchuria until the Soviet Union's Red Army took over the area and returned it to China at the end of the Second World War.
Robert Cecil, addressing the final session, said:
Three of these institutions were transferred to the United Nations after the Second World War: the International Labour Organisation, the Permanent Court of International Justice (as the International Court of Justice), and the Health Organisation (restructured as the World Health Organisation).
The League of Nations lacked an armed force of its own and depended on the Great Powers to enforce its resolutions, which they were very unwilling to do.
By the time a ceasefire was negotiated on 12 June 1935, Paraguay had seized control of most of the region, as was later recognised by the 1938 truce.
Hoare and Laval were forced to resign, and the British and French governments dissociated themselves from the two men.
During the Second Italo-Abyssinian War, when the League accused Italian soldiers of targeting Red Cross medical tents, Benito Mussolini responded that "the League is very well when sparrows shout, but no good at all when eagles fall out."
The report passed 42–1 in the Assembly in 1933 (only Japan voting against), but instead of removing its troops from China, Japan withdrew from the League.
Despite Japan's high standing in the League, the subsequent Lytton Report declared Japan to be the aggressor and demanded Manchuria be returned to the Chinese.
Brazil was the first founding member to withdraw (14 June 1926), and Haiti the last (April 1942).
Its constitution differed from that of the League: representation had been accorded not only to governments but also to representatives of employers' and workers' organisations.
As the League developed, its role expanded, and by the middle of the 1920s it had become the centre of international activity.
Its structure consisted of a council headed by a president, which would later be reflected in the structure of the League.
It also brought both countries to the brink of economic disaster.
The League created a small panel to decide if it should investigate the matter and, with an affirmative response, a neutral commission was created.
This period also saw the development of international law, with the first Geneva Conventions establishing laws dealing with humanitarian relief during wartime, and the international Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 governing rules of war and the peaceful settlement of international disputes.
The League held its first council meeting in Paris on 16 January 1920, six days after the Versailles Treaty and the Covenant of the League of Nations came into force.
Nonetheless, Britain, Iraq and Turkey ratified a separate treaty on 5 June 1926 that mostly followed the decision of the League Council and also assigned Mosul to Iraq.
According to the British, who had been awarded a League of Nations mandate over Iraq in 1920 and therefore represented Iraq in its foreign affairs, Mosul belonged to Iraq; on the other hand, the new Turkish republic claimed the province as part of its historic heartland.
In October 1935, Italian dictator Benito Mussolini sent 400,000 troops to invade Abyssinia (Ethiopia).
The League of Nations had devoted serious attention to the question of international intellectual co-operation since its creation.
Japan began as a permanent member of the Council, but withdrew in 1933 after the League voiced opposition to its invasion of Manchuria.
Italian leader Benito Mussolini was incensed, and demanded that a commission investigate the incident within five days.
Adolf Hitler and Mussolini continued to aid General Francisco Franco's Nationalists, while the Soviet Union helped the Spanish Republic.
A bow at the top displayed the English name ("League of Nations"), while another at the bottom showed the French ("''Société des Nations''").
A plebiscite took place on 20 March 1921, with 59.6 percent (around 500,000) of the votes cast in favour of joining Germany, but Poland claimed the conditions surrounding it had been unfair.
Cecil focused on the administrative side, and proposed annual Council meetings and quadrennial meetings for the Assembly of all members.
The Slavery Commission sought to eradicate slavery and slave trading across the world, and fought forced prostitution.
International co-operation to promote collective security originated in the Concert of Europe that developed after the Napoleonic Wars in the 19th century in an attempt to maintain the ''status quo'' between European states and so avoid war.
The diplomatic philosophy behind the League represented a fundamental shift from the preceding hundred years.
The composition of the Council was changed a number of times.
The League oversaw the Permanent Court of International Justice and several other agencies and commissions created to deal with pressing international problems.
Led by Fridtjof Nansen, the Commission for Refugees was established on 27 June 1921 to look after the interests of refugees, including overseeing their repatriation and, when necessary, resettlement.
On 17 July 1936, the Spanish Army launched a coup d'état, leading to a prolonged armed conflict between Spanish Republicans (the elected leftist national government) and the Nationalists (conservative, anti-communist rebels who included most officers of the Spanish Army).
It was the first international organisation whose principal mission was to maintain world peace.
Smuts' proposals included the creation of a Council of the great powers as permanent members and a non-permanent selection of the minor states.
The Permanent Court of International Justice was provided for by the Covenant, but not established by it.
On 5 October and later on 29 February 1936, the United States endeavoured, with limited success, to limit its exports of oil and other materials to normal peacetime levels.
A significant amount of the League's time and energy was devoted to this goal, even though many member governments were uncertain that such extensive disarmament could be achieved or was even desirable.
Fourteen mandate territories were divided up among seven mandatory powers: the United Kingdom, the Union of South Africa, France, Belgium, New Zealand, Australia and Japan.
This plan, defined as the mandate system, was adopted by the "Council of Ten" (the heads of government and foreign ministers of the main Allied powers: Britain, France, the United States, Italy, Spain, and Japan) on 30 January 1919 and transmitted to the League of Nations.
Representation at the League was often a problem.
It was annexed by Turkey with French consent in mid-1939.
Article 8 of the Covenant gave the League the task of reducing "armaments to the lowest point consistent with national safety and the enforcement by common action of international obligations."
According to the Covenant, the League should have responded by enacting economic sanctions or declaring war; it did neither.
In addition to territorial disputes, the League also tried to intervene in other conflicts between and within nations.
The main constitutional organs of the League were the Assembly, the Council, and the Permanent Secretariat.
On 26 May 1937, Egypt became the last state to join the League.
Its judges were elected by the Council and the Assembly, and its budget was provided by the latter.
The British Foreign Secretary Lord Balfour commissioned the first official report into the matter in early 1918, under the initiative of Lord Robert Cecil.
He felt that the secret diplomacy of the early twentieth century had brought about war and thus could write that, "the impossibility of war, I believe, would be increased in proportion as the issues of foreign policy should be known to and controlled by public opinion."
The League members, however, would not intervene in the Spanish Civil War nor prevent foreign intervention in the conflict.
The special functions of the Assembly included the admission of new members, the periodical election of non-permanent members to the Council, the election with the Council of the judges of the Permanent Court, and control of the budget.
He also criticised the proposal for League economic sanctions because it would be ineffectual and that "It is all a question of real military preponderance".
As part of this treaty, the border town of Leticia and its surrounding area was ceded from Peru to Colombia, giving Colombia access to the Amazon River.
The International Labour Organisation was created in 1919 on the basis of Part XIII of the Treaty of Versailles.
South-West Africa and certain of the South Pacific Islands were administered by League members under C mandates.
These were classified as "territories"
In October 1935, the US President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, invoked the recently passed Neutrality Acts and placed an embargo on arms and munitions to both sides, but extended a further "moral embargo" to the belligerent Italians, including other trade items.
This result led to the Third Silesian Uprising in 1921.
The structure of the US federal government might also have made its membership problematic, as its representatives at the League could not have made decisions on behalf of the executive branch without having the prior approval of the legislative branch.
By 1920, the dispute had escalated to the point that there was danger of war.
This agreement gave Lithuanians control of the city of Vilnius (, ), the old Lithuanian capital, but a city with a majority Polish population.
Three days after the initial incident, Greek troops invaded Bulgaria.
However, the Finnish government considered the islands to be a part of their new nation, as the Russians had included Åland in the Grand Duchy of Finland, formed in 1809.
There were several border conflicts between Colombia and Peru in the early part of the 20th century, and in 1922, their governments signed the Salomón-Lozano Treaty in an attempt to resolve them.
Most of these questions were handled by the victorious Allied powers in bodies such as the Allied Supreme Council.
The relations between the Assembly and the Council and the competencies of each were for the most part not explicitly defined.
He also argued for a large and permanent secretariat to carry out the League's administrative duties.
During the second half of the 1920s, France, Britain and Germany were all using the League of Nations as the focus of their diplomatic activity, and each of their foreign secretaries attended League meetings at Geneva during this period.
This change can be seen in the relationship between the League and non-members.
Particular questions or tasks might be referred to either.
Under the terms of an agreed lease, the Japanese government had the right to station its troops in the area around the South Manchurian Railway, a major trade route between the two countries, in the Chinese region of Manchuria.
The League secured a commitment from Ethiopia to end slavery as a condition of membership in 1923, and worked with Liberia to abolish forced labour and intertribal slavery.
The Foreign Office minister Sir Eyre Crowe also wrote a memorandum to the British cabinet claiming that "a solemn league and covenant" would just be "a treaty, like other treaties".
The Disarmament Commission obtained initial agreement from France, Italy, Spain, Japan, and Britain to limit the size of their navies.
King and his vice-president.
The Court was to hear and decide any international dispute which the parties concerned submitted to it.
However, the League was unable to provide any practical measures; on 4 October, it turned the case over to the Nine Power Treaty Conference.
After lengthy negotiations between the delegates, the Hurst-Miller draft was finally produced as a basis for the Covenant.
The Committee's purpose was to conduct inquiries, oversee the operation of the League's health work, and prepare work to be presented to the Council.
However, the plan was met with resistance in Poland, Lithuania, and the Soviet Union, which opposed any international force in Lithuania.
