Lebanon has been a member of the Organisation internationale de la francophonie since 1973.
Agriculture contributed to 5.9% of the country's GDP in 2011.
The Lebanese government’s intervention in foreign trade is minimal.
public hospitals, with a total of 2,550 beds.
The monks who followed Maron spread his teachings among Lebanese in the region.
Evidence of an early settlement in Lebanon was found in Byblos, which is considered to be one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world.
In 2004, industry ranked second in workforce, with 26% of the Lebanese working population, and second in GDP contribution, with 21% of Lebanon's GDP.
The photographs can be viewed in a research center and various events and publications have been produced in Lebanon and worldwide to promote the collection.
Under political pressure from both inside and outside Lebanon, de Gaulle recognized the independence of Lebanon.
The country's surface area is  of which  is land.
A law determines the cases in which the French language is to be used".
The Lebanon national rugby league team participated in the 2000 Rugby League World Cup, and narrowly missed qualification for the 2008 and 2013 tournaments.
The Constitutional Council rules on constitutionality of laws and electoral frauds.
The financial constraints were also felt: the poverty rate increased with 170.000 Lebanese falling under the poverty threshold.
Prior to 1990, the ratio stood at 6:5 in favor of Christians; however, the Taif Agreement, which put an end to the 1975–1990 civil war, adjusted the ratio to grant equal representation to followers of the two religions.
Approximately 10,000 Christians were killed by the Druzes during inter-communal violence in 1860.
Under pressure from the West, Syria began withdrawing, and by 26 April 2005 all Syrian soldiers had returned to Syria.
Leaders of the March 14 Alliance accused Syria of the attack, while the March 8 Alliance and Syrian officials claimed that the Mossad was behind the assassination.
The valley is  long and  wide, its fertile soil is formed by alluvial deposits.
Other sources like Euronews or the Madrid-based diary ''La Razón'' estimate the percentage of Christians to be around 53%.
In 64 BC, the region came under the rule of the Roman Empire, and eventually became one of the Empire's leading centers of Christianity.
By 2009 the country had 28
In total, almost the entire population (96%) has been affected in
There also is a system of religious courts having jurisdiction over personal status matters within their own communities, with rules on matters such as marriage and inheritance.
Nearly 65% of the Lebanese workforce attain employment in the services sector.
Capital punishment is still de facto used to sanction certain crimes, but no longer enforced.
In February 2016 the government withdrew from negotiations after it was revealed that documents relating to the export of the trash to Russia were forgeries.
In the south of Lebanon, (Jabal Amel), Baalbek and the Beqaa Valley was ruled by Shia feudal families under the Mamluks and the Ottoman Empire.
When the last census was held in 1932, Christians made up 53% of Lebanon's population.
The relocation of Palestinian bases also led to increasing sectarian tensions between Palestinians versus the Maronites and other Lebanese factions.
Until 1975, Freedom House considered Lebanon to be one of only two (together with Israel) politically free countries in the Middle East and North Africa region.
In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 7.03% of the country's GDP.
The President, for example, has to be a Maronite Christian, the Prime Minister a Sunni Muslim, the Speaker of the Parliament a Shi’a Muslim, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament Eastern Orthodox.
Muslim holidays that are celebrated include Eid al-Fitr (the three-day feast at the end of the Ramadan month), Eid al-Adha (The Feast of the Sacrifice) which is celebrated during the annual pilgrimage to Mecca and also celebrates Abraham’s willingness to sacrifice his son to God, the Birth of the Prophet Muhammad, and Ashura (the Shiite Day of Mourning).
A study conducted by the Lebanese Information Center and based on voter registration numbers shows that by 2011 the Christian population was stable compared to that of previous years, making up 34.35% of the population; Muslims, the Druze included, were 65.47% of the population.
The Lebanese legal system is based on the French system, and is a civil law country, with the exception for matters related to personal status (succession, marriage, divorce, adoption, etc.
Lebanon's history since independence has been marked by alternating periods of political stability and turmoil interspersed with prosperity built on Beirut's position as a regional center for finance and trade.
In an unprecedented move, the Lebanese parliament has extended its own term twice amid protests, the last being on 5 November 2014.
A constitution was adopted on 25 May 1926 establishing a democratic republic with a parliamentary system of government.
In the first half of 1920, Lebanese territory was claimed as part of the Arab Kingdom of Syria, but shortly the Franco-Syrian War resulted in Arab defeat and capitulation of the Hashemites.
After the closure of the Bourj Hammoud dump in 1997, the al-Naameh dumpsite was opened by the government in 1998.
In southern Mount Lebanon in 1590, Fakhr-al-Din II became the successor to Korkmaz.
According to the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia of the United Nations, among the Syrian refugees, 71% live in poverty.
Following the fall of Roman Anatolia to the Muslim Turks, the Byzantines put out a call to the Pope in Rome for assistance in the 11th century.
In 1982, the PLO attacks from Lebanon on Israel led to an Israeli invasion.
The first eight years of education are, by law, compulsory.
Foreign troops withdrew completely from Lebanon on 31 December 1946.
Youssef Bey Karam, a Lebanese nationalist played an influential role in Lebanon's independence during this era.
Its 128 seats are divided equally between Christians and Muslims, proportionately between the 18 different denominations and proportionately between its 26 regions.
On 21 May 2008, the signing of the Doha Agreement ended the fighting.
Originally home to the Canaanite- Phoenicians, and then subsequently conquered and occupied by the Assyrians, the Persians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs, the Fatimids, the Crusaders, the Ottoman Turks and most recently the French, Lebanese culture has over the millennia evolved by borrowing from all of these groups.
The ties they established with the Latins have influenced the region into the modern era.
The 2010 public debt exceeded 150.7% of GDP, ranking fourth highest in the world as a percentage of GDP, though down from 154.8% in 2009.
The subsequent period of relative peace enabled the central government to restore control in Beirut, begin collecting taxes, and regain access to key port and government facilities.
Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah insists that Israel was responsible for the assassination of Hariri.
Some 1,191 Lebanese and 160 Israelis were killed in the conflict.
English is increasingly used in science and business interactions.
The Lebanese court system consists of three levels: courts of first instance, courts of appeal, and the court of cassation.
While some irregular forces crossed the border and carried out minor skirmishes against Israel, it was without the support of the Lebanese government, and Lebanese troops did not officially invade.
A loss of 14% of wages regarding the salary of less-skilled workers has also been registered.
A demographic study conducted by the research firm Statistics Lebanon found that approximately 27% of the population was Shia, 27% Sunni, 21% Maronite, 8% Greek Orthodox, 5% Druze, 5% Melkite, and 1% Protestant, with the remaining 6% mostly belonging to smaller non-native to Lebanon Christian denominations.
Armenian Apostolic Christians celebrate Christmas on 6 January, as they follow the Julian Calendar.
Oil has recently been discovered inland and in the seabed between Lebanon, Cyprus, Israel and Egypt and talks are underway between Cyprus and Egypt to reach an agreement regarding the exploration of these resources.
The new faith gained followers in the southern portion of Mount Lebanon.
Football is also one of the more popular sports in the country with the Lebanese Premier League, whose most successful clubs are the Al-Ansar Club and the Nejmeh SC, with notable players being Roda Antar and Youssef Mohamad, the first Arab to captain a European premier league team.
On 26 November 1941 General Georges Catroux announced that Lebanon would become independent under the authority of the Free French government.
Lebanon is a major recipient of foreign military aid.
The Banque du Liban projects real GDP growth could reach 4% in 2012, with 6% inflation (versus 4% in 2011).
The Arab League Summit of May 1989 led to the formation of a Saudi-Moroccan-Algerian committee to solve the crisis.
Formally trained in Rome and Paris, he exhibited in venues from Paris to New York to Beirut over his career.
The assassination triggered the Cedar Revolution, a series of demonstrations which demanded the withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon and the establishment of an international commission to investigate the assassination.
Water sports have also shown to be very active in the past years, in Lebanon.
Before the Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990), the country experienced a period of relative calm and renowned prosperity, driven by tourism, agriculture, commerce, and banking.
By the end of the civil war, only one third of the country’s public hospitals were operational, each with an average of only 20 beds.
Because the relative size of confessional groups remains a sensitive issue, a national census has not been conducted since 1932.
The contract was jointly signed with Howa International which has offices in Holland and Germany.
The Lebanon mountains peak at  above sea level in Qurnat as Sawda' in North Lebanon and gradually slope to the south before rising again to a height of  in Mount Sannine.
Lebanon's unwritten National Pact of 1943 required that its president be Maronite Christian, its speaker of the parliament to be a Shiite Muslim, its prime minister be Sunni Muslim, and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament and the Deputy Prime Minister be Greek Orthodox.
The Syrian crisis has significantly affected Lebanese economic and financial situation.
Australia is home to over 270,000 Lebanese (1999 est.).
Sixteen years later al-Naameh was still open and exceeded its capacity by 13 million tons.
Unlike most other Christian communities in the Eastern Mediterranean, who swore allegiance to Constantinople or other local patriarchs, the Maronites proclaimed allegiance to the Pope in Rome.
This over-reaching eventually became too much for Ottoman Sultan Murad IV, who sent a punitive expedition to capture him in 1633.
Despite its small population and geographic size, Lebanon plays an influential role in the production of information in the Arab world and is "at the core of a regional media network with global implications".
As the Arab Muslims conquered the region, the Maronites held onto their religion and identity.
The Lebanese state has created several nature reserves that contain cedars, including the Shouf Biosphere Reserve, the Jaj Cedar Reserve, the Tannourine Reserve, the Ammouaa and Karm Shbat Reserves in the Akkar district, and the Forest of the Cedars of God near Bsharri.
Archaeologists discovered remnants of prehistoric huts with crushed limestone floors, primitive weapons, and burial jars left by the Neolithic and Chalcolithic fishing communities who lived on the shore of the Mediterranean Sea over 7,000 years ago.
The UN International Independent Investigation Commission published its preliminary findings on 20 October 2005 in the Mehlis report, which cited indications that the assassination was organized by Syrian and Lebanese intelligence services.
, there were around 150,000 Armenians in Lebanon, or around 5% of the population.
The GDP contribution, accordingly, amounts to roughly 67.3% of the annual Lebanese GDP.
Lebanon’s economy follows a laissez-faire model.
The Maronite residents primarily live in Eastern Beirut and the mountains of Lebanon.
Some of the 1400 private schools offer IB programs, and may also add more courses to their curriculum with approval from the Ministry of Education.
The population of Lebanon was estimated to be 4,125,247 in July 2010, however no official census has been conducted since 1932 due to the sensitive confessional political balance between Lebanon's various religious groups.
Funds for the reconstruction of the area have been slow to materialize.
Lebanon has witnessed a series of migration waves: over 1,800,000 people emigrated from the country in the 1975–2011 period.
During the 11th century the Druze faith emerged from a branch of Shia Islam.
On 10 May 2013 the Lebanese minister of energy and water clarified that seismic images of the Lebanese's sea bed are undergoing detailed explanation of their contents and that up till now, approximately 10% have been covered.
For instance, the Islamic personal status laws are inspired by the Sharia law.
Lebanon's proportion of cultivable land is the highest in the Arab world, Major produce includes apples, peaches, oranges, and lemons.
Major contributors to the reconstruction of Lebanon include Saudi Arabia (with US$1.5&nbsp;billion pledged), the European Union (with about $1&nbsp;billion) and a few other Persian Gulf countries with contributions of up to $800&nbsp;million.
The UNSC Resolution 1595 called for an investigation into the assassination.
The latest estimates by the United Nations put the number of Syrian refugees at more than 1,250,000.
The Persians forced some of its population to migrate to Carthage, which remained a powerful nation until the Second Punic War.
Despite its small size, the country has developed a well-known culture and has been highly influential in the Arab world.
Chamoun requested assistance, and 5,000 United States Marines were briefly dispatched to Beirut on 15 July.
Initial reports that the waste was to be exported to Sierra Leone have been denied by diplomats.
Economic recovery has been helped by a financially sound banking system and resilient small- and medium-scale manufacturers, with family remittances, banking services, manufactured and farm exports, and international aid as the main sources of foreign exchange.
All Lebanese schools are required to follow a prescribed curriculum designed by the Ministry of Education.
Industry in Lebanon is mainly limited to small businesses that reassemble and package imported parts.
The Lebanese National Team qualified for the FIBA World Championship 3 times in a row.
As part of the accord, which ended 18 months of political paralysis, Michel Suleiman became president and a national unity government was established, granting a veto to the opposition.
Lebanon's history since independence has been marked by alternating periods of political stability and prosperity on Beirut's position as a regional center for finance and trade, interspersed with political turmoil and armed conflict  (1948 Arab–Israeli War, Lebanese Civil War 1975&ndash;1990, 2005 Cedar Revolution, 2006 Lebanon War, 2007 Lebanon conflict, 2006–08 Lebanese protests, 2008 conflict in Lebanon, and since 2011 Syrian Civil War spillover).
On 5–6 June 1948, the Lebanese army – led by the then Minister of National Defence, Emir Majid Arslan – captured Al-Malkiyya.
The al-Naameh dumpsite was planned to contain 2 million tons of waste for a limited period of six years at the most.
It is estimated that 150,000 people were killed and another 200,000 wounded.
A report leaked by the Al-Akhbar newspaper in November 2010 stated that Hezbollah has drafted plans for a takeover of the country in the event that the Special Tribunal for Lebanon issues an indictment against its members.
By comparison, English is used as a secondary language in 30% of Lebanon's secondary schools.
He immigrated to Sydney, Australia from Lebanon in 1988.
Canoeing, cycling, rafting, climbing, swimming, sailing and caving are among the other common leisure sports in Lebanon.
), which are governed by a separate set of laws designed for each sectarian community.
Identifying all Lebanese as ethnically Arab is a widely employed example of panethnicity since in reality, the Lebanese "are descended from many different peoples who have occupied, invaded, or settled this corner of the world," making Lebanon, "a mosaic of closely interrelated cultures".
Sukleen trucks began removing piled garbage from Karantina and heading to Naameh.
The life expectancy at birth was 72.59 years in 2011, or 70.48 years for males and 74.80 years for females.
Because of its financial power and diversity in its heyday, Lebanon was referred to as the "Switzerland of the East" during the 1960s, and its capital, Beirut, attracted so many tourists that it was known as "the Paris of the Middle East".
He soon established his authority as paramount prince of the Druze in the Shouf area of Mount Lebanon.
The Vichy authorities in 1941 allowed Germany to move aircraft and supplies through Syria to Iraq where they were used against British forces.
The agricultural sector employs 12% of the total workforce.
Music festivals, often hosted at historical sites, are a customary element of Lebanese culture.
The economy witnessed growth, with bank assets reaching over 75&nbsp;billion US dollars, Market capitalization was also at an all-time high, estimated at $10.9&nbsp;billion at the end of the second quarter of 2006.
Until July 2006, Lebanon enjoyed considerable stability, Beirut's reconstruction was almost complete, and increasing numbers of tourists poured into the nation's resorts.
The plan's execution is still ongoing.
Surviving members of Fakhr al-Din's family ruled a reduced area under closer Ottoman control until the end of the 17th century.
Lebanon concluded negotiations on an association agreement with the European Union in late 2001, and both sides initialed the accord in January 2002.
On 9 May 2008, Hezbollah and Amal forces, sparked by a government declaration that Hezbollah's communications network was illegal, seized western Beirut, leading to the 2008 conflict in Lebanon.
The Beirut Marathon is held every fall, drawing top runners from Lebanon and abroad.
The urban population in Lebanon is noted for its commercial enterprise.
In 2009, the New York Times ranked Beirut the No.&nbsp;1 travel destination worldwide due to its nightlife and hospitality.
Around 100,000 people in Beirut and Mount Lebanon died of starvation during World War I.
In more elevated areas, temperatures usually drop below freezing during the winter with heavy snow cover that remains until early summer on the higher mountaintops.
The Parliament is elected for a four-year term by popular vote on the basis of sectarian proportional representation.
Lebanon managed to attract around 1,333,000 tourists in 2008, thus placing it as rank 79 out of 191 countries.
He conquered what is now Lebanon and other nearby regions of the Eastern Mediterranean in 332 BCE.
Following the collapse of the empire after World War I, the five provinces that constitute modern Lebanon came under the French Mandate of Lebanon.
The cinema of Lebanon, according to film critic and historian, Roy Armes, was the only cinema in the Arabic-speaking region, other than Egypt's, that could amount to a national cinema.
In 1956, it was estimated that the population was 54% Christian and 44% Muslim.
However, a new religious group, the Druze, established themselves in Mount Lebanon as well, generating a religious divide that has lasted for centuries.
As of 6 August 2013, more than 677,702 Syrian refugees are in Lebanon.
The Taif Agreement has still not been implemented in full and Lebanon's political system continues to be divided along sectarian lines.
Although most of Lebanon receives a relatively large amount of rainfall, when measured annually in comparison to its arid surroundings, certain areas in north-eastern Lebanon receive little because of rain shadow created by the high peaks of the western mountain range.
After two centuries of Persian rule, Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great attacked and burned Tyre, the most prominent Phoenician city.
The Canaanite-Phoenicians are also known as the inventors of the alphabet, among many other things.
The contract is reported to cost $212 per ton.
More restaurants are seeking information and compliance with International Organization for Standardization.
It is bordered by Syria to the north and east and Israel to the south, whilst Cyprus is west across the Mediterranean Sea.
These festivals are promoted by Lebanon's Ministry of Tourism.
In visual arts, Moustafa Farroukh was one of Lebanon's most prominent painters of the 20th century.
The media of Lebanon is not only a regional center of production but also the most liberal and free in the Arab world.
One of the most lasting effects of the Crusades in this region was the contact between the Franks (i.e.
Rugby league is a relatively new but growing sport in Lebanon.
Lebanon was rated as "Partly Free" in 2013.
As a result of longstanding exploitation, few old cedar trees remain in pockets of forests in Lebanon, but there is an active program to conserve and regenerate the forests.
The plan, which was funded by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and implemented by the U.S. Forest Service (USFS), through the Lebanon Reforestation Initiative (LRI), was inaugurated in 2011 by planting cedar, pine, wild almond, juniper, fir, oak and other seedlings, in ten regions around Lebanon.
The agreement was a victory for opposition forces, as the government caved in to all their main demands.
The evidence dates back to earlier than 5000 BC.
The region eventually was ruled by the Ottoman Empire from 1516 to 1918.
the CIA World Factbook estimates the following: Muslim 54% (27% Shia Islam, 27% Sunni Islam), Christian 40.5% (includes 21% Maronite Catholic, 8% Greek Orthodox, 5% Melkite Catholic, 1% Protestant, 5.5% other Christian), Druze 5.6%, very small numbers of Jews, Baha'is, Buddhists, Hindus and Mormons.
Lebanon has forty-one nationally accredited universities, several of which are internationally recognized.
Christian holidays are celebrated following both the Gregorian Calendar and Julian Calendar.
Lebanese Sign Language is the language of the deaf community.
In the last three decades, lengthy and destructive armed conflicts have ravaged the country.
The multinational force was withdrawn in the spring of 1984, following a devastating bombing attack during the previous year.
So when the UN officially came into existence on 24 October 1945, after ratification of the United Nations Charter by the five permanent members, as both Syria and Lebanon were founding member states, the French mandate for both was legally terminated on that date and full independence attained.
Among the most famous are Baalbeck International Festival, Byblos International Festival, Beiteddine International Festival, Jounieh International Festival, Broumana Festival, Batroun International Festival, Ehmej Festival, Dhour Chwer Festival and Tyr Festival.
The Lebanese approach has emphasized natural regeneration over planting by creating the right conditions for germination and growth.
The First Crusade succeeded in temporarily establishing the Kingdom of Jerusalem and the County of Tripoli as Roman Catholic Christian states along the coast.
The mountain range varies in width between  and ; it is carved by narrow and deep gorges.
In 1958, during the last months of President Camille Chamoun's term, an insurrection broke out, instigated by Lebanese Muslims who wanted to make Lebanon a member of the United Arab Republic.
The plan also stipulates the establishment of landfills in Bourj Hammoud and Costa Brava, east and south of Beirut respectively.
In June 1976 Lebanese President Elias Sarkis asked for the Syrian Army to intervene on the side of the Christians and help restore peace.
Fertility rates vary considerably among the different religious groups: in 2004 it was 2.10 for Shiites, 1.76 Sunnis and 1.61 for Maronites.
The 1975–1990 civil war heavily damaged Lebanon's economic infrastructure, cut national output by half, and all but ended Lebanon's position as a West Asian entrepôt and banking hub.
In 2001, Investment Law No.360 was enacted to reinforce the organisation's mission.
In 2007, the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp became the center of the 2007 Lebanon conflict between the Lebanese Army and Fatah al-Islam.
Environment Minister Mohammad Machnouk announced during a chat with activists that more than 8,000 tons of garbage had been collected so far as part of the government’s trash plan in only 24 hours.
In October 1976 the Arab League agreed to establish a predominantly Syrian Arab Deterrent Force, which was charged with restoring calm.
He extended his control over a substantial part of Mount Lebanon and its coastal area, even building a fort as far inland as Palmyra.
In 2012, the Syrian civil war threatened to spill over in Lebanon, causing more incidents of sectarian violence and armed clashes between Sunnis and Alawites in Tripoli.
For Muslims, these tribunals deal with questions of marriage, divorce, custody, and inheritance and wills.
Lebanon gained independence in 1943, establishing a unique political systemconfessionalisma Consociationalism type of power-sharing mechanism based on religious communities.
Major cities on the coast, Acre, Beirut, and others, were directly administered by the Muslim Caliphs and the people became more fully absorbed by the Arab culture.
It is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
The recent influx of Japanese tourists has caused the recent rise in popularity of Japanese Cuisine in Lebanon.
'''Lebanon''' (;  ; Lebanese Arabic: ), officially the '''Lebanese Republic''' ( ; Lebanese Arabic: ), is a sovereign state in Western Asia.
Lebanon is the most religiously diverse country in the Middle East.
On 1 September 1920, France reestablished Greater Lebanon after the Moutasarrifiya rule removed several regions belonging to the Principality of Lebanon and gave them to Syria.
The Investment Development Authority of Lebanon was established with the aim of promoting investment in Lebanon.
The narrow and discontinuous coastal plain stretches from the Syrian border in the north where it widens to form the Akkar plain to Ras al-Naqoura at the border with Israel in the south.
In 2009, Lebanon hosted the largest number of tourists to date, eclipsing the previous record set before the Lebanese Civil War.
The Lebanon mountains rise steeply parallel to the Mediterranean coast and form a ridge of limestone and sandstone that runs for most of the country's length.
