Their conclusions were later published in the journal ''Science''.
Shoe store manager Johnny Brewer testified that he saw Oswald "ducking into" the entrance alcove of his store.
" Voebel said that "Oswald commonly read 'paperback trash.'"
When George's wife Jeanne was asked about Oswald's reaction, she said, "I didn't notice anything"; she continued, "we started laughing our heads off, big joke, big George's joke."
His level at the time was rated "poor."
However, he also said that some boxes in the southeast corner may have prevented him from seeing deep into the "sniper's nest."
Though the young Oswald had trouble spelling and may have had a "reading-spelling disability", he read voraciously.
Oswald received a government-subsidized, fully furnished studio apartment in a prestigious building and an additional supplement to his factory pay—all in all, an idyllic existence by working-class Soviet standards, though he was kept under constant surveillance.
He said that he then went to the second-floor lunchroom to buy a Coca-Cola from the soda machine there and was drinking it when he encountered Dallas motorcycle policeman Marrion L. Baker, who had entered the building with his gun drawn.
In 2009, after digitally analyzing the photograph of Oswald holding the rifle and paper, computer scientist Hany Farid concluded that the photo "almost certainly was not altered."
In March 1963, Oswald purchased a 6.5&nbsp;mm caliber Carcano rifle for $29.95 by mail-order, using the alias "A. Hidell", as well as a .38 Smith & Wesson Model 10 revolver by the same method.
He concluded with a 96.3 percent certainty that there were at least two gunmen firing at President Kennedy and that at least one shot came from the grassy knoll.
A scuffle ensued and Oswald, Bringuier, and two of Bringuier's friends were arrested for disturbing the peace.
G. Robert Blakey, chief counsel
However, the bullets taken from Tippit's body could not be positively identified as having been fired from Oswald's revolver as the bullets were too extensively damaged to make conclusive assessments.
Shortly afterwards, Oswald (who had never formally renounced his U.S. citizenship) wrote to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow requesting return of his American passport, and proposing to return to the U.S. if any charges against him would be dropped.
Although the Committee was "unable to identify the other gunman or the extent of the conspiracy," it made a number of further findings regarding the likelihood or unlikelihood that particular groups, named in the findings, were involved.
I have had enough."
Marina, meanwhile, befriended Ruth Paine, a Quaker who was trying to learn Russian, and her husband Michael Paine, who worked for Bell Helicopter.
Although the Russian émigrés eventually abandoned Marina when she made no sign of leaving Lee, Oswald found an unlikely friend in 51-year-old Russian émigré George de Mohrenschildt, a well-educated petroleum geologist with international business connections.
Oswald's supervisor, Roy Truly, later pointed out to officers that Oswald was the only employee that he was certain was missing.
In 1992 the American Bar Association conducted two mock Oswald trials.
The next morning (Friday) he returned to Dallas with Frazier; he left behind $170 and his wedding ring, but took with him a paper bag.
Despite forensic, ballistic, and eyewitness evidence supporting the lone gunman theory, public opinion polls taken over the years have shown that most Americans believe that Oswald did not act alone, but conspired with others to kill the president, and the assassination has spawned numerous conspiracy theories.
Frazier reported that Oswald told him the bag contained curtain rods, The evidence demonstrated that the package actually contained the rifle used by Oswald in the assassination.
Before the Kennedy assassination, Dallas police had no suspects in the Walker shooting,
The work is drab, the money I get has nowhere to be spent.
but Oswald's involvement was suspected within hours of his arrest following the assassination.
Oswald is believed to have left the Depository through the front entrance just before police sealed it off.
After an analysis by the firm Bolt, Beranek and Newman appeared to indicate more than three gunshots, the HSCA revised its findings to assert a "high probability that two gunmen fired" at Kennedy and that Kennedy "was probably assassinated as the result of a conspiracy."
Truly said that Oswald appeared "startled" when Baker aimed his gun at him.
Through Marguerite's first marriage to Edward John Pic, Jr., Lee and Robert Jr. were the half-brothers of Air Force veteran John Edward Pic (1932 – 2000).
He denied telling his co-worker he wanted a ride to Irving to get curtain rods for his apartment (he said that the package contained his lunch).
Will Fritz tried to imply wrongdoing at Oswald’s sudden departure from the building, saying to him: “This man (i.e.
Two days later, while being transferred from the city jail to the county jail, Oswald was shot and mortally wounded by Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby in full view of television cameras broadcasting live.
In August 1952, when Oswald was 12, his mother took him to New York City where they lived for a short time with Oswald's half-brother, John.
Oswald spent two days with his mother in Fort Worth, then embarked by ship from New Orleans on September 20 to Le Havre, France, and immediately proceeded to the United Kingdom.
Oswald stayed in New Orleans at least two more days to collect a $33 unemployment check.
Oswald did not drive, but commuted to and from Dallas on Mondays and Fridays with his co-worker Wesley Frazier.
On October 21, the day his visa was due to expire, he was told that his citizenship application had been refused, and that he had to leave the Soviet Union that evening.
Later, at an arranged press meeting, a reporter asked, "Did you kill the President?"
Bringuier would later tell the Warren Commission that he believed Oswald's visits were an attempt by Oswald to infiltrate his group.
"I have made up my mind," he said; "I'm through."
According to Oswald, he met with four more Soviet officials that same day, who asked if he wanted to return to the United States; he insisted to them that he wanted to live in the Soviet Union as a Soviet national.
and Oswald—who by that time had been advised of the charge of murdering Tippit, but had not yet been arraigned in Kennedy's death—answered, "No, I have not been charged with that.
Carolyn Arnold, the secretary to the Vice President of the TSBD, informed the FBI that as she left the building to watch the motorcade, she caught a glimpse of a man whom she believed to be Oswald standing in the first floor hallway of the building just prior to the assassination.
A note Oswald left for Marina on the night of the attempt, telling her what to do if he did not return, was not found until ten days after the Kennedy assassination.
After two original photos, one negative and one first-generation copy had been found, the Senate Intelligence Committee located (in 1976) a third backyard photo (CE 133-C) showing Oswald with newspapers held away from his body in his right hand.
Rose's examination found that Ruby's bullet entered Oswald's left side in the front part of the abdomen and caused damage to his spleen, stomach, aorta, vena cava, kidney, liver, diaphragm, and eleventh rib before coming to rest on his right side.
Oswald also named his mother and his half-brother John as beneficiaries.
When asked if anyone else was in the domino room, Norman testified that somebody else was there, but he could not remember who it was.
Oswald took an IQ test in the 4th grade and scored 103; "on achievement tests in grades 4 to 6, he twice did best in reading and twice did worst in spelling."
Oswald died at 1:07&nbsp;p.m. Oswald's death was announced on a TV news broadcast by Dallas police chief Jesse Curry.
The words "Hunter of fascists—ha ha ha!"
In fact, Oswald was the branch's only member and it had never been chartered by the national organization.
His primary training was radar operation, a position requiring a security clearance.
In 2010, the Fort Worth funeral home that held Oswald's original coffin employed a Los Angeles auction house to sell it to an undisclosed bidder for $87,468.
He was fired in July "because his work was not satisfactory and because he spent too much time loitering in Adrian Alba's garage next door, where he read rifle and hunting magazines."
In a follow-up letter, Oswald replied, "Against your advice, I have decided to take an office from the very beginning."
CE 133-A shows the rifle in Oswald's left hand and newspapers in front of his chest in the other, while the rifle is held with the right hand in CE 133-B.
A week later, on August 16, Oswald again passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets with two hired helpers, this time in front of the International Trade Mart.
As police arrived, the house lights were brought up and Brewer pointed out Oswald sitting near the rear of the theater.
The note allegedly contained some sort of threat, but accounts vary as to whether Oswald threatened to "blow up the FBI" or merely "report this to higher authorities".
Bringuier was the New Orleans delegate for the anti-Castro organization Directorio Revolucionario Estudantil (DRE).
Tippit pulled alongside Oswald and "apparently exchanged words with him through the right front or vent window."
In 1961, Walker had been relieved of his command of the 24th Division of the U.S. Army in West Germany for distributing right-wing literature to his troops.
Prior to leaving the police station, Oswald requested to speak with an FBI agent.
Some have suggested that Oswald might have used equipment at the firm to forge identification documents.
Mrs. Paine informed Oswald, who was interviewed at the Depository and was hired there on October 16 as a $1.25 an hour order filler.
However, Oswald denied killing Kennedy and Tippit, denied owning a rifle, and said two photographs of him holding a rifle and a pistol were fakes.
A Gallup Poll taken in mid-November 2013, showed 61% believed in a conspiracy, and only 30% thought Oswald acted alone.
Dental records positively identified the exhumed corpse as Oswald's, and the scar was present.
Walker's later actions in opposition to racial integration at the University of Mississippi led to his arrest on insurrection, seditious conspiracy, and other charges.
An autopsy on Oswald was performed in the Office of the County Medical Examiner at 2:45&nbsp;p.m. the same day.
He said he had seen the same man minutes earlier looking out the window.
If you don't cease bothering my wife, I will take the appropriate action and report this to the proper authorities."
A native of Russia, Mohrenschildt later was to tell the Warren Commission that Oswald had a "remarkable fluency in Russian."
At 16 he wrote to the Socialist Party of America for information on their Young People's Socialist League, saying he had been studying socialist principles for "well over fifteen months."
Both Oswald and Ruth Paine tried to reach Abt by telephone several times Saturday and Sunday, but Abt was away for the weekend.
These photos were labelled CE 133-A and CE 133-B.
He also denied carrying a long, bulky package to work the morning of the assassination.
Several films have fictionalized a trial of Oswald, depicting what may have happened had Ruby not killed Oswald.
A claim that a look-alike Russian agent was buried in place of Oswald led to his exhumation on October 4, 1981.
The Commission report stated that Oswald was not seen again "until after the shooting."
According to Craig, the real intonation was that of someone who had heretofore tried to conceal his identity as Deputy and that now it would be known to all; his reaction was that of dismay and disappointment at being exposed.
Lee"), but he spent his weekends with Marina at the Paine home in Irving.
Oswald entered the 1st grade in 1945 and over the next half-dozen years attended several different schools through the 6th grade in the Dallas and Fort Worth areas .
"Shortly after 1:15 p.m.", Tippit exited his car and was immediately struck and killed by four shots.
Jeanne told George that Oswald had a rifle, and George joked to Oswald, "Were you the one who took a pot-shot at General Walker?"
Oswald was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, on October 18, 1939, to World War I veteran Robert Edward Lee Oswald, Sr. (1896 – 1939) and Marguerite Frances Claverie (1907 – 1981).
About ninety seconds after the shooting, in the second-floor lunchroom, Oswald encountered police officer Marrion Baker accompanied by Oswald's supervisor Roy Truly; Baker let Oswald pass after Truly identified him as an employee.
A 2003 Gallup poll reported that 75% of Americans do not believe that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in assassinating President Kennedy.
Ruth Paine said that her neighbor told her, on October 14, that there was a job opening at the Texas School Book Depository, where her neighbor's brother, Wesley Frazier, worked.
Four cartridge cases found at the scene were identified by expert witnesses before the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee as having been fired from the revolver later found in Oswald's possession, to the exclusion of all other weapons.
While the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald had visited Mexico City and the Cuban and Soviet consulates, questions regarding whether someone posing as Oswald had appeared at the embassies were serious enough to be investigated by the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
In July 1956, Oswald's mother moved the family to Fort Worth, Texas, and Oswald re-enrolled in the 10th grade for the September session at Arlington Heights High School in Fort Worth.
But when H. Louis Nichols, President of the Dallas Bar Association met with him in his cell on Saturday, he declined their services, saying he wanted to be represented by John Abt, chief counsel to the Communist Party USA, or by lawyers associated with the American Civil Liberties Union.
In 1979, after a review of the evidence and of prior investigations, the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA) largely concurred with the Warren Commission and was preparing to issue a finding that Oswald had acted alone in killing Kennedy.
The Walker bullet was too damaged to run conclusive ballistics studies on it, but neutron activation analysis later showed that it was "extremely likely" that it was made by the same manufacturer and for the same rifle make as the two bullets which later struck Kennedy.
(Such statements led to Oswald's ''hardship/honorable'' military reserve discharge being changed to ''undesirable''.)
Oswald was interrogated several times during his two days at Dallas Police Headquarters.
During an interrogation with Captain Fritz, when asked, "Are you a communist?
Following Kennedy's assassination, Oswald was initially arrested for the murder of police officer J. D. Tippit, who was killed on a Dallas street approximately 45 minutes after President Kennedy was shot.
Oswald idolized his older brother Robert Jr.; a photograph taken after Lee Harvey's arrest by Dallas police shows him wearing his brother's Marine Corps ring.
The Oswalds also became acquainted with a number of anti-Communist Russian and East European émigrés in the area.
A May 1957 document states that he was "granted final clearance to handle classified matter up to and including CONFIDENTIAL after careful check of local records had disclosed no derogatory data."
On October 31, Oswald appeared at the United States embassy in Moscow, declaring a desire to renounce his U.S. citizenship.
Robert had died of a heart attack at age 43, two months prior to Lee's birth.
The Warren Commission concluded that at approximately 1:15&nbsp;p.m., Dallas Patrolman J. D. Tippit drove up in his patrol car alongside Oswald—presumably because Oswald resembled the police broadcast description of the man seen by witness Howard Brennan firing shots at the presidential motorcade.
However, on the same day, he flew to Helsinki, where he was issued a Soviet visa on October 14.
He also admitted that he changed his clothes and armed himself with a .38 revolver before leaving his house to go to the theater.
On April 10, 1963, Oswald attempted to kill retired U.S. Major General Edwin Walker, firing that rifle at Walker through a window, from less than  away, as Walker sat at a desk in his Dallas home; the bullet struck the window-frame and Walker's only injuries were bullet fragments to the forearm.
He was demoted from private first class to private and briefly imprisoned in the brig.
According to Lee Oswald's wife Marina, Lee told her to sign the name "A.J.
Thomas wrote that the NAS investigation was itself flawed.
The Oswalds soon settled in the Dallas/Fort Worth area, where Lee's mother and brother lived.
By the age of 17, he had resided at 22 different locations and attended 12 different schools.
On August 5 and 6, according to anti-Castro militant Carlos Bringuier, Oswald visited him at a store he owned in New Orleans.
Distraught, Oswald inflicted a minor but bloody wound to his left wrist in his hotel room bathtub soon before his Intourist guide was due to arrive to escort him from the country, according to his diary because he wished to kill himself in a way that would shock her.
Oswald asked for legal representation several times while being interrogated, as well as in encounters with reporters.
Oswald stated that he was a member of the New Orleans branch of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee which he claimed had 35 members and was led by A. J. Hidell.
On August 9, Oswald turned up in downtown New Orleans handing out pro-Castro leaflets.
At about 2 p.m., Oswald arrived at the Police Department building, where he was questioned by Detective Jim Leavelle about the shooting of Officer Tippit.
While in the Marines, Oswald made an effort to teach himself rudimentary Russian.
He was later punished for a third incident: while on night-time sentry duty in the Philippines, he inexplicably fired his rifle into the jungle.
Lee's elder brother Robert, Jr. (born 1934) was also a former Marine.
In January 1954, Oswald's mother returned to New Orleans, taking Oswald with her.
Lee began a manuscript on Soviet life, though he eventually gave up the project.
After five days of shuttling between consulates—that included a heated argument with an official at the Cuban consulate, impassioned pleas to KGB agents, and at least some CIA scrutiny—Oswald was told by a Cuban consular officer that he was disinclined to approve the visa, saying "a person like Oswald in place of aiding the Cuban Revolution, was doing it harm."
Oswald declared, "I didn't shoot anybody" and, "They've taken me in because of the fact that I lived in the Soviet Union.
On September 11, 1959, he received a hardship discharge from active service, claiming his mother needed care, and was put on reserve.
As Oswald's wife Marina was showing Jeanne around the apartment, they discovered Oswald's rifle standing upright, leaning against the wall inside a closet.
Although this was an unusual endeavor, in February 1959, he was invited to take a Marine proficiency exam in written and spoken Russian.
In March 1961, Oswald met Marina Prusakova, a 19-year-old pharmacology student; they married less than six weeks later in April.
According to Baker, Oswald did not appear to be nervous or out of breath.
As Oswald left, Roberts looked out of the window of her house and last saw him standing at the northbound Beckley Avenue bus stop in front of her house.
On May 24, 1962, Oswald and Marina applied at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow for documents enabling her to immigrate to the U.S. and, on June 1, the U.S. Embassy gave Oswald a repatriation loan of $435.71.
I will blow up the FBI and the Dallas Police Department if you don't stop bothering my wife" signed "Lee Harvey Oswald."
The HSCA obtained another first-generation print (from CE 133-A) on April 1, 1977, from the widow of George de Mohrenschildt.
FBI agents twice visited the Paine home in early November, when Oswald was not present, and spoke to Mrs. Paine.
In the days before Kennedy's arrival, several newspapers described the route of the presidential motorcade as passing the Book Depository.
although Oswald's behavior appeared to improve during his last months in New York.
The acoustical evidence has since been discredited.
Oswald visited the Dallas FBI office about 2 to 3 weeks before the assassination, asking to see Special Agent James P. Hosty.
His mother was buried beside him in 1981.
When Oswald was asked about the car he had gotten into, he replied: “That station wagon belongs to Mrs. Paine.
written in block Russian were on the back.
In October, he was hired by the graphic-arts firm of Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall as a photoprint trainee.
The first trial ended in a hung jury.
The Oswalds' first child, June, was born on February 15, 1962.
These photos, widely recognized as some of the most significant evidence against Oswald, have been subjected to rigorous analysis.
Marina Oswald testified that her husband told her that he traveled by bus to General Walker's house and shot at Walker with his rifle.
Oswald was fired during the first week of April 1963.
In May 1959 he scored 191, which reduced his rating to ''marksman''.
(The United States House Select Committee on Assassinations stated that the "evidence strongly suggested" that Oswald carried out the shooting.)
His visa, valid only for a week, was due to expire on October 21.
McLain, from whose motorcycle radio the HSCA acoustic experts said the Dictabelt evidence came, has repeatedly stated that he was not yet in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination.
Oswald left Helsinki by train on the following day, crossed the Soviet border at Vainikkala, and arrived in Moscow on October 16.
An officer there said that Oswald was a "very competent" crew chief and was "brighter than most people."
In fact, nobody has said that to me yet.
Ralph Linsker and several members of the original NAS team reanalyzed the timings of the recordings and reaffirmed the earlier conclusion of the NAS report that the alleged shot sounds were recorded approximately one minute after the assassination.
The next day, Oswald was interviewed by WDSU radio commentator William Stuckey, who probed Oswald's background.
Ruby later said he had been distraught over Kennedy's death and that his motive for killing Oswald was "saving Mrs. Kennedy the discomfiture of coming back to trial."
Thomas challenged in a book the 2005 ''Science & Justice'' article and restated his conclusion that there were at least two gunmen.
A fellow employee at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall testified that Oswald's rudeness at his new job was such that fights threatened to break out, and that he once saw Oswald reading a Russian-language publication.
Howard Brennan, a steamfitter who was sitting across the street from the Texas School Book Depository, notified police that as he watched the motorcade go by, he heard a shot come from above, and looked up to see a man with a rifle make another shot from a corner window on the sixth floor.
Oswald's fellow cadets recalled him attending C.A.P.
This conclusion was supported by previous investigations carried out by the FBI, the Secret Service, and the Dallas Police Department.
Oswald was later charged with the murder of Kennedy; he denied shooting anybody, saying that he was a patsy.
According to the investigations, after the attack, Oswald hid and covered the rifle with boxes and descended using the rear stairwell.
Handwriting experts for the HSCA concluded the English inscription and signature were by Oswald.
Still later, eleven days before the assassination of President Kennedy, Oswald wrote to the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C., saying, "Had I been able to reach the Soviet Embassy in Havana, as planned, the embassy there would have had time to complete our business."
At Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Mississippi, Oswald finished seventh in a class of thirty in the Aircraft Control and Warning Operator Course which "included instruction in aircraft surveillance and the use of radar."
Don't try to drag her into this.” At one point in the investigation, according to Craig, Oswald said in utter dismay, “Everybody will know who I am now.” The Warren Commission report, however, made it appear as though it was said in a dramatic tone, writing instead: “NOW everybody will know who I am,” transposing the now.
During the week, Oswald stayed in a Dallas rooming house (under the name "O.H.
In testimony to the Warren Commission, Alexander Kleinlerer said that the Russian émigrés sympathized with Marina, while merely tolerating Oswald, whom they regarded as rude and arrogant.
In 1964, Robert H. Jackson of the ''Dallas Times Herald'' was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Photography for his photograph of the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald by Jack Ruby.
The proceedings of the commission were closed, though not secret, and about 3% of its files have yet to be released to the public, which has continued to provoke speculation among researchers.
Three days later, the FPCC responded to Oswald's letter advising against opening a New Orleans office "at least not ... at the very beginning."
Reporters present to report on the burial were asked by officials to act as pallbearers.
Oswald enlisted in the United States Marine Corps on October 24, 1956, just after his seventeenth birthday.
Roberts said that Oswald left "a very few minutes" later, zipping up a jacket he was not wearing when he had entered earlier.
Oswald was formally arraigned for the murder of Officer Tippit at 7:10&nbsp;p.m., and by the end of the night (shortly after 1:30&nbsp;a.m.) he had been arraigned for the assassination of President Kennedy as well.
In September, 1964, the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in assassinating Kennedy by firing three shots from the Texas School Book Depository.
On May 29, Oswald ordered the following items from a local printer: 500 application forms, 300 membership cards, and 1,000 leaflets with the heading, "Hands Off Cuba."
According to Hosty, the note said, "If you have anything you want to learn about me, come talk to me directly.
Police Officer Nick McDonald testified that he was the first to reach Oswald and that Oswald seemed ready to surrender saying, "Well, it is all over now."
This location is about nine-tenths of a mile (1.4&nbsp;km) southeast of Oswald's rooming house—a distance that the Warren Commission concluded "Oswald could have easily walked."
Stanislau Shushkevich, who later became independent Belarus's first head of state, was also engaged by Gorizont at the time, and was assigned to teach Oswald Russian.
Jarman testified that Oswald was not in the domino room when he was there.
Oswald was then shown a forged Selective Service System card bearing his photograph and the alias, "Alek James Hidell" that he had in his possession at the time of his arrest.
Brennan gave a description of the shooter, and Dallas police subsequently broadcast descriptions at 12:45&nbsp;p.m., 12:48&nbsp;p.m., and 12:55&nbsp;p.m. After the second shot was fired, Brennan recalled, "This man I saw previous was aiming for his last shot&nbsp;... and maybe paused for another second as though to assure himself that he had hit his mark."
"; Oswald answered, "A policeman hit me."
Others have hypothesized that Ruby was part of a conspiracy.
Oswald attended the 7th grade in the Bronx, New York, but was often truant, which led to a psychiatric assessment at a juvenile reformatory.
A few days later, Oswald accepted Stuckey's invitation to take part in a radio debate with Carlos Bringuier and Bringuier's associate Edward Scannell Butler, head of the right-wing Information Council of the Americas (INCA).
for the House Select Committee on Assassinations from 1977 to 1979, said: "The most plausible explanation for the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby was that Ruby had stalked him on behalf of organized crime, trying to reach him on at least three occasions in the forty-eight hours before he silenced him forever."
Oswald's supervisor, Roy S. Truly (1907-1985), said that Oswald "did a good day's work" and was an above-average employee.
He was given the military occupational specialty of Aviation Electronics Operator.
He entered through the front door and, according to his housekeeper Earlene Roberts, immediately went to his room, "walking pretty fast".
