Strasberg eventually left the Clare Tree Major School to study with students of Stanislavski – Maria Ouspenskaya and Richard Boleslavsky – at the American Laboratory Theatre.
He would have claimed credit for the sun and the moon if he believed he could get away with it.
But he soon perceived that as a theoretician and teacher of this new 'system' it might become a major force in American theater.
Some people worshiped him, and I never knew why.
In 1909, the family was reunited on Manhattan's Lower East Side, where they lived until the early '20s.
He wrote, "They act from the inside out.
He must somehow be able to convince himself of the rightness of what he is doing in order to do things fully on the stage.According to film critic/author Mel Gussow, Strasberg required that an actor, when preparing for a role,  delve not only into the character's life in the play, but also, "Far more importantly, into the character's life before the curtain rises.
They communicate emotions they really feel.
Beginning in a small, private way, with a strictly off-limits-to-outsiders policy, the Studio quickly earned a high reputation in theatre circles.
They give you a sense of life."
*Marlon Brando: Movie stars spawned by Strasberg's Actors Studio were of a new type which is often labeled the "rebel hero", wrote Pamela Wojcik.
I sat next to him and we chatted a little.
It was a turning point in my life.
It was like the roof had come off my life!"
Everybody in the theater world came – actors, writers, directors, producers, and most, if not all, his students.
He was the center of the camp's activities that summer, the core of the vortex.
I had told myself that I must be prepared for this, but I was not prepared.
The actor becomes aware that he has emotional resources; that he can awaken, by this self-stimulation, a great number of very intense feelings; and that these emotions are the materials of his art.... Lee taught his actors to launch their work on every scene by taking a minute to remember the details surrounding the emotional experience in their lives that would correspond to the emotion of the scene they were about to play.
In Elia Kazan's autobiography, the Academy Award-winning director wrote about his earliest memories of Strasberg as teacher:He carried with him the aura of a prophet, a magician, a witch doctor, a psychoanalyst, and a feared father of a Jewish home.
I was afraid of him too.
(In the middle of his lecture on another topic) To hell with it!
"What stood out was how youthful he was.
She had become a disciple of Lee Strasberg.
The play became the climax of the character's existence."
Admission to the Actors Studio was usually by audition with more than a thousand actors auditioning each year and the directors usually conferring membership on only five or six each year.
He was interred at Westchester Hills Cemetery in Hastings-on-Hudson, New York.
Although the actor can do  things in life quite easily, when he has to do the same thing on the stage under fictitious conditions, he has difficulty because he is not equipped as a human being merely to playact at imitating life.
Lee was making an artistic revolution and knew it.
These were largely concerned with the actor's arousing his inner temperament.
The Studio helps actors to meet the enemy within... and contributes greatly to Strasberg's utterly pragmatic views on training the actor and solving his problems ... and is kept deliberately modest in its circumstances, its  essence being the private room where Lee Strasberg and some talented actors can work."
In 1925, Strasberg had his first professional appearance in ''Processional'', a play produced by the Theater Guild.
Although other highly regarded teachers also developed "the Method", Strasberg is often considered the "father of method acting in America", according to author Mel Gussow, and from the 1920s until his death in 1982, "he revolutionized the art of acting by having a profound influence on performance in American theater and movies".
That was a remarkable turning point in my life.
It's the best thing that can happen to an actor.
Finally, enough money was saved to bring over his wife and his two remaining sons.
Strasberg assumed  leadership of the studio in 1951 as its artistic director.
UCLA acting teacher Robert Hethmon writes, "The Actors Studio is a refuge.
He was a giant of the theater and was deeply mourned.
He reached over and patted me on the back, 'That's wonderful, dahling.
In 1999 she was ranked the sixth greatest female star of classic Hollywood cinema by the American Film Institute.
For a while it was literally the voice of Depression America".
His father emigrated to New York while his family remained in their home village with an uncle, a rabbinical teacher.
This was acting of a sort that one rarely saw on the American stage ... where there was little stress on the psychology of the characters or their interactions.... Strasberg was galvanized.
He was born in a part of Galicia, Austrian Poland, in what is now Ukraine.
*Jane Fonda: Jane Fonda recalled that at the age of five, her brother, actor Peter Fonda, and she acted out Western stories similar to those her father, Henry Fonda, played in the movies.
More important, every actor seemed to project some sort of unspoken, yet palpable, inner life for his or her character.
Actress Ellen Burstyn recalled that evening:Late in the evening, I wandered into the greenroom and saw Lee sitting next to Anna, watching the taping on the monitor.
The essential and rather simple technique, which has since then been complicated by teachers of acting who seek to make the Method more recondite for their commercial advantage, consists of recalling the circumstances, physical and personal, surrounding an intensely emotional experience in the actor’s past.
They worked on relaxation as well as concentration.
And then when it gets there, what the hell happens with it?
The actor must constantly respond to stimuli that are imaginary.
In her eyes, and in mine, her career was just beginning.... She had a luminous quality.
That was the thing that got me involved in The Actors Studio ... and now it becomes time to think a little bit more about our responsibility for that individual talent.
He enjoyed his eminence just as the admiral would.
Brustein, a critic, director, and producer, had previously made public his dislike of the method as a philosophy of acting.
'''Lee Strasberg''' (born '''Israel Strassberg'''; November 17, 1901February  17, 1982) was an American actor, director, and theatre practitioner.
To win his favor became everyone's goal.
The following are excerpts from a transcription of his recorded lecture:
"It became the place to be, the forum where all the most promising and unconventional young actors were being cultivated by sharp young directors..." Actors who have worked at the studio include Julie Harris, Paul Newman, Joanne Woodward, Geraldine Page, Maureen Stapleton, Anne Bancroft, Dustin Hoffman, Patricia Neal, Rod Steiger, Mildred Dunnock, Eva Marie Saint, Eli Wallach, Anne Jackson, Ben Gazzara, Sidney Poitier, Karl Malden, Gene Wilder, Shelley Winters, Dennis Hopper, and Sally Field.
I went to bed thinking about acting.
They were the parents of actress Susan Strasberg (1938–1999) and acting teacher John Strasberg (born 1941).
"It was so unexpected", Al Pacino said.
A day before his unexpected death, he was officially notified that he had been elected to the American Theatre Hall of Fame.
In 1955, Strasberg student James Dean died in a car accident, at age 24.
In Brando's autobiography, ''Songs My Mother Taught Me'', the actor claimed he learned nothing from Strasberg: "After I had some success, Lee Strasberg tried to take credit for teaching me how to act.
"Whether directly influenced by Strasberg or not", wrote acting author Pamela Wojcik, "the new male stars all to some degree or other adapted method techniques to support their identification as rebels...
I don't know what to do.
According to Schickel:What Strasberg... took away from the Actor's Lab was a belief that just as an actor could be prepared physically for his work with dance, movement, and fencing classes, he could be mentally prepared by resort to analogous mental exercises.
As a student, Dean wrote that Actors Studio was "the greatest school of the theater and the best thing that can happen to an actor".
In 1962, Marilyn Monroe died at age 36.
The roots are clearly in the intimate experience of a complex psychology, an acute awareness of human contradiction and suffering.
In an 80th birthday interview, he said that he was looking forward to his next 20 years in the theater.
The founders, including Strasberg, demanded total commitment and extreme talent from aspiring students.
Former student Elia Kazan directed James Dean in ''East of Eden'' (1955), for which Kazan and Dean were nominated for Academy Awards.
The play was produced by Brustein's American Repertory Theatre in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and was later presented in Singapore.
His teaching style owed much to the Russian practitioner, Konstantin Stanislavski, whose book, ''An Actor Prepares'' (published in English in 1936), dealt with the psychology of acting.
He recreates romance as a drama of male neuroticism and also invests his characterization 'with an unprecedented aura of verisimilitude'."
According to friends, he was healthy until the day he died.
Lee's coffin was brought down the aisle and placed center stage.
A relative introduced him to the theater by giving him a small part in a Yiddish-language production being performed by the Progressive Drama Club.
He tried to project himself as an acting oracle and guru.
Who would I go to when I was in trouble?....
Who would I work for when I was preparing for a role?
In rehearsal, the character's prehistory,  perhaps going back to childhood, is discussed and even acted out.
In short, Lee Strasberg transformed a socialistic, egalitarian theory of acting into a celebrity-making machine....
His first marriage was to Nora Krecaum on October 29, 1926, until her death three years later in 1929.
His explosions of temper maintained the discipline of this camp of high-strung people.
became the watchword of that summer, the phrase heard most often, just as this particular kind of inner concentration became the trademark of Lee's own work when he directed a production.
Verbally inarticulate, they were eloquent 'speakers' of emotion.
The institute's primary stated goal was "to reach a larger audience of eager and emerging talent" than was served by the Actors Studio's notoriously selective admission process, and as teachers of the method began to deploy their own personal interpretations of the discipline, "to dispel growing confusion and misrepresentation of the method, preserving what had by now become fundamental discoveries in actor training."
Historian Sam Staggs writes that "Marlon Brando was the hot, sleek engine on the Actors Studio express", and called him "the embodiment of method acting", but Brando was trained primarily by Stella Adler, a former member of the Group Theatre, who had a falling out with Strasberg over his interpretations of Stanislavsky's ideas."
Playwright Tennessee Williams, writer of ''A Streetcar Named Desire'', said of Strasberg's actors, "They act from the inside out.
But I saw Jimmy Dean in ''Giant'' the other night, and I must say that – He weeps You see, that's what I was afraid of.
The papers include 240 boxes containing correspondence, rehearsal notes, photographs, theatrical drawings and posters, sketches of stage designs, and more.
We shared her pain and difficulties, and some of her joys.
That is what got me into theatre in the first place.
Philip Loeb, casting director of the Theater Guild, sensed that Strasberg could act, although he was not yet thinking of a full-time acting career, and was still working as a shipping clerk and bookkeeper for a wig company.
Its privacy is guarded ferociously against the casual intruder, the seeker of curiousities, and the exploiter...
The only answer possibly is that we somehow here find a way, a means, an organization, a plan which should really contribute to the theatre, so that there should not only be the constant stimulus to your individual development, which I think we have provided, but also that once your individual development is established, it should then actually contribute to the theatre, rather than to an accidental succession of good, bad, or indifferent things.
Upon returning, she met Lee Strasberg and the meeting changed the course of her life, Fonda saying, "I went to the Actors Studio and Lee Strasberg told me I had talent.
It is difficult to accept the fact that her zest for life has been ended by this dreadful accident.
He once explained his approach in this way: The human being who acts is the human being who lives.
But before I got up, I said, 'Lee, I've been asked to run for president of Actors Equity.'
The method-trained performers in films of the '50s added an enhanced verbal and gesture naturalism and a more vivid inner life.
Today, Ellen Burstyn, Al Pacino, and Harvey Keitel lead this nonprofit studio dedicated to the development of actors, playwrights, and directors.
A combination of wistfulness, radiance, and yearning that set her apart and made everyone wish to be part of it – to share in the childish naivete which was at once so shy and yet so vibrant.
Along with Al Pacino and Robert De Niro, he danced in the chorus line with  the Rockettes.
... As soon as you grow up as actors, as soon as you reach a certain place, there it goes, the drunkenness and the rest of it, as if, now that you've really made it, the incentive goes, and something happens which to me is just terrifying.
The senseless destruction, the senseless waste, the hopping about from one thing to the next, the waste of the talent, the waste of your lives, the strange kind of behavior that not just Jimmy had, you see, but that a lot of you here have and a lot of other actors have that are going through exactly the same thing.
His memorial service was held at the Shubert Theater where ''A Chorus Line'' was playing.
In 1947, Elia Kazan, Robert Lewis, and Cheryl Crawford, also members of the Group Theatre, started the Actors Studio as a nonprofit workshop for professional and aspiring actors to concentrate on their craft away  from the pressures of the commercial theatre.
Young Strasberg took refuge in voracious reading and the companionship of his older brother, Zalmon, whose death in the 1918 influenza epidemic was so traumatic for the young Strasberg that, despite being a straight-A student, he dropped out of high school.
Despite the heights and brilliance she had attained on the screen, she was planning for the future.
The Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute has its own rigorous sets of entrance criteria required for admission into their program.
Strasberg gave the eulogy at her funeral.For us, Marilyn was a devoted and loyal friend – a colleague constantly reaching for perfection.
I woke up and saw my friend and assistant, Katherine Cortez, enter the room and walk toward me.... 'We just got a call.
No one questioned his dominance – he spoke holy writ – his leading role in that summer's activities, and his right to all power.
He was an inspiration."
"As a teacher and acting theorist,  he revolutionized American actor training and engaged such remarkable performers as Kim Hunter, Marilyn Monroe, Julie Harris, Paul Newman, Geraldine Page, Ellen Burstyn, and Al Pacino."
Actress Jane Fonda said after hearing of his death, "I'm not sure I even would have become an actress were it not for him.
She was reading good books."
He based his acting technique on the method, once stating, "It made me a real actor.
His actors often appeared to be in a state of self-hypnosis.
''Publishers Weekly'' wrote, "The Group Theatre... with its self-defined mission to reconnect theater to the world of ideas and actions, staged plays that confronted social and moral issues... with members Harold Clurman, Lee Strasberg, Stella and Luther Adler, Clifford Odets, Elia Kazan, and an ill-assorted band of idealistic actors living hand to mouth are seen welded in a collective of creativity that was also a tangle of jealousies, love affairs, and explosive feuds."
On February 17, 1982, Lee Strasberg suffered a fatal heart attack in New York City, aged 80.
It was the first time that anyone, except my father – who had to say so – told me I was good.
Cofounder Harold Clurman, in describing what Strasberg brought to the Group Theater, wrote: Lee Strasberg is one of the few artists among American theater directors.
His third wife was the former Anna Mizrahi (b. April 16, 1939) and the mother of his two youngest children, Adam Lee Strasberg and David Lee Israel Strasberg.
He has to be unswerving, uncompromising, and unadjustable.
He observed, first of all, that all the actors, whether they were playing leads or small parts, worked with the same commitment and intensity.
*Al Pacino: "The Actors Studio meant so much to me in my life.
Lee Strasberg hasn't been given the credit he deserves.
Actors are as self-favoring as the rest of humanity, and perhaps the only way they could be held together to do their work properly was by the threat of an authority they respected.
They give you a sense of  life."
Strasberg, Kazan, Clurman, and others with the Group Theater spent summers at Pine Brook Country Club located in the countryside of Nichols, Connecticut.
... To me that is the future of the Studio, that a unified body of people should somehow be connected with a tangible, consistent, and continuous effort.
That is the dream I have always had.
And this is really the problem of the Studio.
It does not matter who 'invented' Marlon Brando or how regularly or faithfully he, Dean, or Clift attended the Studio or studied the method at the feet of Lee Strasberg.
You learn how to dig into your unconscious and make use of every experience you've ever had."
He was the force that held the thirty-odd members of the theatre together, made them 'permanent'.
Strasberg, his wife Paula, his daughter Susan, and his son John, all appear as characters in Robert Brustein's 1998 play ''Nobody Dies on Friday'', which one critic called a "scathing portrait of Strasberg", but one which "can by no means be dismissed as a simple act of character assassination."
No, no, no, I wailed, over and over.
He must somehow believe.
Lee Strasberg was born Israel Strassberg in Budzanów in Austrian Poland (part of Austria-Hungary, now in Ukraine), to Jewish parents, Baruch Meyer Strassberg and his wife, Ida (born Chaia), née Diner, and was the youngest of three sons.
In the pauses between words, in the language 'spoken' by their eyes and faces, they gave psychological realism an unprecedented charge.
He was the force that held the thirty-odd members of the theatre together, and made them 'permanent'."
At the time of her death, she was at the height of her career.
In describing his teaching philosophy, Strasberg wrote, "The two areas of discovery that were of primary importance in my work at the Actors Studio and in my private classes were improvisation and affective memory.
Martin Landau and Steve McQueen were the only two students admitted one year, out of 2000 candidates who auditioned.
He never taught me anything.
Kazan biographer Richard Schickel described Strasberg's first experiences to the "art" of acting:He dropped out of high school, worked in a shop that made hairpieces, drifted into the theater via a settlement house company and ... had his life-shaping revelation when Stanislavski brought his Moscow Art Theatre to the United States in 1923.
She attended Vassar College and went to Paris for two years to study art.
There, he created a technique which became known as "the method" or "method acting."
From his base in New York, he trained several generations of theatre and film notables, including Anne Bancroft, Dustin Hoffman, Montgomery Clift, James Dean, Marilyn Monroe, Jane Fonda, Julie Harris, Paul Newman, Ellen Burstyn, Al Pacino, Geraldine Page, Eli Wallach, and director Elia Kazan.
He also appeared in ''...And Justice for All'' (1979).
Lee wasn't one for small talk, so I didn't stay long.
People are shocked how severe we are on each other."
Strasberg wrote: "At the studio, we do not sit around and feed each other's egos.
And yet this must happen not only just as it happens in life, but also actually more fully and more expressively.
He is the director of introverted feeling, of strong emotion curbed by ascetic control, sentiment of great intensity muted by delicacy, pride, fear, shame.
Pamela Wojcik adds: Because of their tendency to substitute their personal feelings for those of the characters they were playing, Actors Studio performers were well suited to become Hollywood stars....
A long pause When I got in the cab, I cried.... What I cried at was the waste, the waste....
They worked with nonexistent objects that helped prepare them for the exploration of equally ephemeral emotions.
Those were the last words he ever said to me.... Two days later, early in the morning, I was still asleep when the door to my bedroom opened.
Even as I admired him.
Directors such as Sidney Lumet, a former student, have intentionally used actors skilled in Strasberg's "method".
She had become one of the most celebrated personalities in the world.
Lee Strasberg died.'
He became a naturalized United States citizen on January 16, 1939, in New York City at the New York Southern District Court.
He gained a reputation with the Theater Guild of New York and helped form the Group Theater in New York in 1931.
In 2012, Strasberg's family donated his library of personal papers to the Library of Congress.
As an actor, Strasberg is probably best known for his supporting role as gangster Hyman Roth alongside his former student Pacino in ''The Godfather Part II'' (1974), a role he took at Pacino's suggestion after Kazan turned down the role, and which earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.
Acting teacher and author Alison Hodge explains: "Seemingly spontaneous, intuitive, brooding, 'private', lit with potent vibrations from an inner life of conflict and contradiction, their work exemplified the style of heightened naturalism which (whether Brando agrees or not) Lee Strasberg devoted his life to exploring and promoting."
I came to believe that without their fear of this man, the Group would fly apart, everyone going in different directions instead of to where he was pointing....
She was seriously studying acting.
'I'm not ready', and pulled the covers over my head.
He knew that his own future as an actor – he was a slight and unhandsome man – was limited.
Playwright Arthur Miller said "the Group Theatre was unique and probably will never be repeated.
"The Studio was, and is ''sui generis''", said Elia Kazan, proudly.
He later joined the Chrystie Street Settlement House's drama club.
She was a member of our family....
It was directly responsible for getting me to quit all those jobs and just stay acting."
He became a director more preoccupied with getting his actors to work in the “correct” way than he was in shaping the overall presentation.
He never seemed as old as his years.
The idea is you learn to use everything that happened in your life and you learn to use it in creating the character you're working on.
Far less protective of their masculinity than earlier film actors, they enacted emotionally wounded and vulnerable outsiders struggling for self-understanding, and their work shimmered with a mercurial neuroticism...
No actors idled about posing and preening (or thinking about where they might dine after the performance).
The Emmy Award-winning author of ''Inside Inside'', James Lipton, writes that the Actors Studio became "one of the most prestigious institutions in the world" as a result of its desire to set a higher "standard" in acting.
An organization such as the Group – then in its second year, which is to say still beginning, still being shaped – lives only by the will of a fanatic and the drive with which he propels his vision.
Called "America’s first true theatrical collective", the Lab immediately offered a few tuition-free scholarships for its three-year program to "promising students".
Very few get into it....
It houses great people like Marlon Brando, Julie Harris, Arthur Kennedy, Mildred Dunnock ...
His father, who worked as a presser in the garment industry, sent first for his eldest son and his daughter.
Strasberg demanded great discipline of his actors, as well as great depths of psychological truthfulness.
Those of us who had the great good fortune to be fertilized and quickened by his genius would feel the loss of him for the rest of our lives.
I sometimes went to the  Actors Studio on Saturday mornings because Elia Kazan was teaching, and there were usually a  lot of good-looking girls there, but Strasberg never taught me acting.
His last public appearance was on February 14, 1982, at ''Night of 100 Stars'' in the Radio City Music Hall, a benefit for the Actors Fund.
*James Dean: According to James Dean biographer W. Bast, "Proud of this accomplishment, Dean referred to the studio in a 1952 letter, when he was 21 years old, to his family as 'The greatest school of the theater.
He will be missed, but he leaves behind a great legacy."
