By 1957, she continued to create figurative abstract forms in her work, but they suggest more floral elements rather than anatomical.
To paint these large-scale images, Krasner would tack the canvas to a wall.
The act of tearing and cutting elements for the collage embodies Krasner's expression since these acts are aggressive.
After she saved a few of them, she decided to use the rest in a new series of collages.
Most of the collage paintings she created recall plant or organic forms but do not completely resemble a living organism.
In the summer of that year, they got married in a church with two witnesses present.
She was the only one of her siblings to be born in the United States.
After the exhibition, Krasner used the color field paintings to make her collage paintings.
Krasner was brought up in an orthodox Jewish home throughout her childhood and adolescence.
Others believe that she was creating a sense of intimacy between the two artists, which was lacking in their relationship by this time period, by combining their works together.
After she quit the Artists Union, she joined the American Abstract Artists.
These were the paintings that Betty Parsons saw when she visited The Springs that summer, causing Parsons to offer Krasner a show for the fall.
She began working on these collages after she was cleaning out her studio and discovered some charcoal drawings mostly of figure studies that she completed from 1937 to 1940.
Her interest in the self, nature, and modern life are themes which commonly surface in her works.
Her papers were donated to the Archives of American Art in 1985; they were digitized and posted on the web for researchers in 2009.
To make these images, she would pin the separate pieces to a canvas and modify the composition until she was satisfied.
Her parents fled to the United States to escape anti-Semitism and the Russo-Japanese War.
This initial investigation into modern art formed her work throughout the rest of her career.
In an interview later in her life, Krasner recalls reading a prayer translation and thinking it was "indeed a beautiful prayer in every sense except for the closing of it... if you are a male you say, 'Thank You, O Lord, for creating me in Your image'; and if you are a woman you say, 'Thank You, O Lord, for creating me as You saw fit.'"
By being part of this organization, she was able to meet more artists in New York City and enlarge her network.
This reevaluation is reflected in her first retrospective exhibition of her paintings which was held in London at the Whitechapel Gallery in 1965.
Since Pollock is such a large figure in the abstract expressionist movement, it is still often difficult for scholars to discuss her work without mentioning Pollock in some capacity.
Some scholars claim that these images were a critique of Greenberg's theory about the importance of the two-dimensional nature of the canvas.
She created around forty of these types of paintings until 1949.
She also became highly skilled in portraying anatomically correct figures.
From 1953 to 1954, she created smaller sized collage paintings that were composed of fragments of undesired works.
As a teenager, she grew critical of what she perceived as misogyny in orthodox Judaism.
She explored contrasts of light and dark colors, hard and soft lines, organic and geometric shapes, and structure and improvisation through these collages.
In 1976, she started working on her second series of collage images.
She used brighter colors which were more vibrant and commonly contrasted other colors in the composition.
In an interview later in her career, Krasner admitted to subconsciously working from right to left on her canvases, leading scholars to believe that her Jewish background affected the rendering of her work.
Here, she completed the course work required for a teaching certificate in art.
One of the images that still exists from this time period is her "Self Portrait" painted in 1930.
They have little variation of color but are very rich in texture due to the buildup of impasto and also suggest space continuing beyond the canvas.
Others have claimed that her work with the War Services project caused her to be interested in text and codes since cryptoanalysis was a main concern for winning the war.
A separate organization, the Pollock-Krasner Foundation, was established in 1985.
These were her first successful images she created while working from her own imagination rather than a model.
By ripping the paper instead of cutting it, the edges of the figures are much more soft in comparison to the geometric and hard-edged shapes in her previous works.
Her job was to enlarge other artists' designs for large-scaled public murals.
Krasner was highly influenced by the opening of the Museum of Modern Art in 1929.
She submitted it to the National Academy in order to enroll in a certain class, but the judges could not believe that the young artist produced a self-portrait en plein air.
By the second half of the 1960s, critics began reassessing Krasner's role in the New York School as a painter and critic who greatly influenced Pollock and Greenberg due to the rise of the feminism.
In articles about her work, Pollock is continually referred to.
While she was a member, she typically exhibited cubist still lifes in a black-gridded cloisonne style which were highly impastoed and  gestural.
In the 1930s, she began studying modern art through learning the components of composition, technique, and theory.
She also commonly revised or completely destroyed an entire series of works due to her critical nature.
Since she was working during the nighttime, she had to paint with artificial light rather than daylight, causing her palette to shift from bright, vibrant hues to dull, monochrome colors.
She specifically sought out enrollment at Washington Irving High School for Girls since they offered an art major.
Since murals were created to be easily understood and appreciated by the general public, the abstract art Krasner produced was undesirable for murals.
She continued working for War Services by creating collages for the war effort which were displayed in the windows of nineteen department stores in Brooklyn and Manhattan.> She was very involved with the Artists Union during her employment with the WPA but was one of the first to quit the organization when she realized the communists were taking it over.
These works are compositionally similar to her monochrome images due to their large size and rhythmic nature with no central focal point.
While the two lived in the farmhouse in The Springs, they both continued creating art.
She continued working in this style until she suffered an aneurysm, fell, and broke her right wrist in 1963, the wrist she used to paint with.
Because of her self-criticism, there are periods of time where little to none of her work exists, specifically the late 1940s and early 1950s.
By changing her work style often, she differed from other abstract expressionists since many of them adopted unchanging identities and modes of depiction.
From 1951 to 1953, most of her works are made from ripped drawings completed in black ink or wash in a figurative manner.
Typically in the 1940s and 1950s, she would not sign works at all, sign with the genderless initials "L.K.
He was therefore able to make works that were more organized and cosmopolitan.
Her changeable nature is reflected throughout her work, which has led critics and scholars to have very different conclusions about her and her work.
While she married Pollock in a church, Krasner continued to identify herself as Jewish but decided to not practice the religion.
Krasner learned from Hofmann the importance of the abstracting from nature and emphasizing the flat nature of the canvas while Pollock's training highlighted the importance of complex design from automatic drawing.
Krasner's Umber Series paintings were created during a time period when the artist was suffering from insomnia.
Her hieroglyph paintings are gridded and look like an unreadable, personal script of Krasner's creation.
By 1962, she begins using bright colors and allude to floral and plant-like shapes.
These works demonstrate her anti-figurative concerns, allover approach to the canvas, gestural brushwork, and disregard of naturalistic color.
Her identity as a Jewish woman has affected how scholars interpret the meaning of her art.
The gesture and the physicality of these works is more restrained since she is working with her left hand.
All of the collages' titles from this series are different verb tenses which is interpreted as a critique of Greenberg's and Michael Fried's insistence on the presentness of modern art.
Since she still wanted to work, she painted with her left hand instead.
Her father spent most of his time practicing Judaism while her mother upheld the household and the family business.
Between the summer and the fall, Krasner again had shifted her style to color field painting and destroyed the figurative automatic paintings she made.
She worked on the mural division as an assistant to Max Spivak.
This marks the end of her educational career.
The U.S. copyright representative for the Pollock-Krasner Foundation is the Artists Rights Society.
In John Updike's novel ''Seek My Face'' (2002), a significant portion of the main character's life is based on Krasner's.
By 1956, their relationship became strained as they faced certain issues.
Through these large-scale action paintings, she depicts hybridized figures that are made up of organic plant-like forms and anatomical parts, which often allude to both male and female body parts.
Krasner struggled with the public's reception of her identity, both as a woman and as the wife of Pollock.
She eventually would destroy these works, which is why there is only one painting that exists from this time period.
When they both exhibited their works at a show called "Artists: Man and Wife" in 1949, an ARTnews reviewer stated: "There is a tendency among some of these wives to 'tidy up' their husband's styles.
In the fall of 1945, Krasner destroyed many of her cubist works she created during her studies with Han Hofmann, although the majority of paintings created from 1938 to 1943 survived this reevaluation.
The Foundation functions as the official Estate for both Lee Krasner and Jackson Pollock, and also, under the terms of her will, serves "to assist individual working artists of merit with financial need."
The still lifes illustrated her interest in fauvism since she suspended brightly colored pigment on white backgrounds.
They are commonly categorized as mosaic, webbed, or hieroglyphs depending on the style of the image.
While Krasner was happy to have a job, she was dissatisfied since she did not like working with  figurative images created by other artists.
The palette of these images often contrast one another and allude to tropical landscapes or plants.
In order to provide for herself, she joined the Works Progress Administration's Federal Art Project in 1935.
Often, these images recall calligraphy or floral ornamentation which are not blatantly related to Krasner's emotional state.
These works are also considered as a statement about how artists need to reexamine and rework their style in order to stay relevant as they grow older.
As soon as one of her proposals for a mural was approved for the WYNC radio station, the Works Progress Administration turned into  War Services and all art had to be created for war propaganda.
Since she used a drip technique in creating her webbed images, many critics believed upon seeing this work for the first time that she copied and domesticated Pollock's chaotic paint splatters.
After her death, her East Hampton property became the Pollock-Krasner House and Studio, and is open to the public for tours.
There is evidence that she began experimenting with automatic painting and created black and white hybridized, monstrous figures on large canvases in 1950.
Her mother Chane changed her name to Anna once she arrived in America.
Pollock had begun struggling with his alcoholism again and was partaking in an extramarital affair with Ruth Kligman.
The Betty Parsons show was the first solo exhibition Krasner displayed her works at since 1945.
Since the figure studies are cut up and rearranged without consideration of their original intention or message, the differences between the old drawings and new structures is highly exaggerated.
These works were first exhibited by Eleanor Ward at the Stable Gallery in 1955, but they received little public acclaim apart from a good review from Greenberg.
By 1955, she made collage paintings on a larger scale and varied the material she used for the support, using either masonite, wood, or canvas.
Pollock also helped Krasner become less restrained when making her work.
She was highly affected by seeing Pollock's work for the first time in 1942, causing her to reject Hofmann's cubist style which required working from a human or still life model.
By 1945, they moved to The Springs on the outskirts of East Hampton.
By attending a technical art school, Krasner was able to gain an extensive and thorough artistic education as illustrated through her knowledge of the techniques of the Old Masters.
There are relatively few works that survive from this time period apart from a few self-portraits and still lifes since most of the works were burned in a fire.
Some scholars have interpreted these paintings to represent Krasner's reaction to the tragedy of The Holocaust.
She is one of the few female artists to have had a retrospective show at the Museum of Modern Art.
In 1969, Krasner mostly concentrated on creating works on paper with gouache.
From an early age, Krasner knew she wanted to pursue art as a career.
Here, she took a class led by George Bridgman who emphasized the human form.
She then would paste the fragments on the canvas and add color with a brush when desired.
Texture is induced through the contrast of the smooth paper and rough canvas.
The mosaic images were created through the thick buildup of paint while her webbed paintings were made through a drip technique in which the paintbrush was always close to the surface of the canvas.
To overcome working with her non-dominant hand, she often would directly apply paint from a tube to the canvas rather than using a brush, causing there to be large patches of white canvas on the surfaces of the images.
He emphasized the two-dimensional nature of the picture plane and usage color to create spatial illusion that was not representative of reality through his lessons.
Beginning in 1946, Krasner began working on her Little Image series.
After recovering from her broken arm, Krasner began working on bright and decorative allover painting which are less aggressive than her Earth Green Series and Umber Series paintings.
At a 2003 Christie's auction in New York, Lee Krasner's horizontal composition in oil on canvas, ''Celebration'' (1960), multiplied its presale estimate more than fourfold as it ended its upward course at $1.9 million.
Krasner was intrigued by his work and the fact she did not know who he was since she knew many abstract painters in New York.
Lee was the fourth of five children, including her sister, Ruth, and the first who was born in America.
She also briefly enrolled in the Art Students League of New York in 1928.
She lost interest in their usage of hard-edge geometric style after her relationship with Pollock began.
As a result, her surviving body of work is relatively small.
They worked in separate studio spaces on their property.
She worked in painting, collage painting, charcoal drawing, and occasionally mosaics.
Many scholars have expressed different interpretations about why she used Pollock's unwanted canvases.
She also was still dealing with the death of Pollock and the recent death of her mother, which caused her to use an aggressive style when creating these images.
Six months after her death, the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City held a retrospective exhibition of her work.
Krasner is identified as an abstract expressionist due to her abstract, gestural, and expressive works.
Evidence of her animated brushwork can be seen through the drips and splatters of paint on the canvas.
The hard-edged shapes of the cut drawings are reconstructed into curvilinear shapes that recall floral patterns.
Throughout her career, she refused to adopt a singular, recognizable style and instead embraced change through varying the mood, subject matter, texture, materials, and compositions of her work often.
As of 2008, Krasner is one of only four women artists to have had a retrospective show at the Museum of Modern Art.
This collage series was very well received by a large audience when they were exhibited in 1977 at the Pace Gallery.
Krasner pursued yet more art education at the illustrious National Academy of Design, completing her course load there in 1932.
Prior to this, her status as an artist was typically overlooked by critics and scholars due to her relationship with Pollock.
She began taking classes from Hans Hofmann in 1937, which modernized her approach to the nude and still life.
Her catalogue raisonné, published in 1995 by Abrams, lists 599 known pieces.
Krasner and Pollock both had an immense effect on each other's artistic styles and careers.
She tried out and rejected many new styles and eventually destroyed most of the work she made in the early 1950s.
She also began reading existentialist philosophies during this time period, causing her to turn away from Judaism even further.
Krasner is often reluctant to discuss the iconography of her work and instead emphasizes the importance of her biography since she claims her art is formed through her individual personality and her emotional state.
Despite these intense variations, her works can typically be recognized through their gestural style, texture, rhythm, and depiction of organic imagery.
These images no longer imply organic forms but instead are often interpreted as violent and turbulent landscapes.
By 1951, Krasner started her first series of collage paintings.
She created two collage maquettes which depicted floral motifs for two entryways of the building.
Krasner left in the summertime to visit friends in Europe but had to quickly return when Pollock died in a car crash while she was away.
Krasner was the daughter of Chane (née Weiss) and Joseph Krasner.
Additionally, Krasner was responsible for introducing Pollock to many artists, collectors, and critics who appreciated abstract art such as Willem de Kooning, Peggy Guggenheim, and Clement Greenberg.
Lee Krasner (Mrs. Jackson Pollock) takes her husband's paint and enamels and changes his unrestrained, sweeping lines into neat little squares and triangles."
Her style often goes back and forth between classic structure and baroque action, open form and hard-edge shape, and bright color and monochrome palette.
She typically illustrated female nudes in a cubist manner with tension achieved through the fragmentation of forms and the opposition of light and dark colors.
This exhibition was more well received by critics in comparison to her previous shows in New York.
In it, she depicts herself with a defiant expression surrounded by nature.
When she completed the Little Image series in 1949, Krasner again went through a critical phase with her work.
There is no central spot for the viewer to focus on in these works, making the composition highly dynamic and rhythmic.
Some of the discarded works she used were splatter paintings completed by Pollock.
", or blend her signature into the painting in order to not emphasize her status as a woman and as a wife to another painter.
From this period onwards, she created metaphorical and content-laden art which alludes to organic figures or landscapes.
She would create these paintings by working on a canvas for months, overpainting, scraping paint off, rubbing paint off, and adding more paint until the canvas was nearly monochrome from so much paint build up.
She also would dilute paint or use a dry brush to make the colors more transparent.
A review of the exhibition in the ''New York Times'' noted that it "clearly defines Krasner's place in the New York School" and that she "is a major, independent artist of the pioneer Abstract Expressionist generation, whose stirring work ranks high among that produced here in the last half-century."
Throughout the late 1930s and early 1940s, she created gouache sketches in the hopes of one day creating an  abstract mural.
In these collages, the black and gray shapes of the figure studies are juxtaposed against the blank canvas or the addition of brightly colored paint.
These works were named either earth, water, seed, or hieroglyphics and often looked similar to a Rorschach test.
Since Krasner had learned from Hans Hofmann while Pollock received training from Thomas Hart Benton, each artist took different approaches to their work.
These collage paintings represent Krasner's turn away from nonobjective abstraction.
Krasner appreciated aspects of Judaism like Hebrew script, prayers, and religious stories.
Throughout her career, she went through periods of struggle where she would experiment with new styles that would satisfy her means for expression and harshly critique, revise, or destroy the work she would produce.
She went to his apartment to meet him.
Floral or calligraphic shapes dominate the canvas, connecting variable brushwork into a single pattern.
Lee Krasner and Jackson Pollock established a relationship with one another in 1942 after they both exhibited at the McMillen Gallery.
By 1928, she enrolled in the National Academy of Design.
Krasner's extensive knowledge of cubism was the source of her creative problem since she needed her work to be more expressive and gestural to be considered contemporary and relevant.
She met future abstract expressionists Willem de Kooning, Arshile Gorky, Franz Kline, Adolph Gottlieb, Mark Rothko, Barnett Newman, Clyfford Still, and Bradley Walker Tomlin through this organization.
To create these images, Krasner pasted cut and torn shapes onto all but two of the large-scale color field paintings she created for the Betty Parson's exhibition in 1951.
Krasner was born as ''' Lena Krassner''' (outside the family she was known as '''Lenore Krasner''') on October 27, 1908 in Brooklyn, New York.
Throughout her classes with Hofmann, Krasner worked in an advanced style of cubism, also known as neo-cubism.
Throughout the first half of the 1940s, Krasner struggled with creating art that satisfied her critical nature.
Some assert that she simultaneously demonstrated her admiration for his art while also recontextualizing his aggressive physicality through manipulating his images into a collage format.
She was very affected by post-impressionism and grew critical of the academic notions of style she had learned at the National Academy.
Krasner was portrayed in an Academy Award-winning performance by Marcia Gay Harden in the 2000 film ''Pollock'', a drama about the life of her husband Jackson Pollock, directed by Ed Harris.
By using many different materials, she was able to create texture and prevent the image from being entirely flat.
Many scholars interpret these images as Krasner's reworking of Hebrew script.
In 1958, she was commissioned to create two abstract murals for an office building on Broadway.
He inspired her to stop painting from human and still life models in order to free her interior emotions and become more spontaneous and gestural through her work.
This intense emotion she felt during this time caused her art to develop into a more liberated form of her self-expression and pushed the boundaries of conventional, developed concepts of art.
They lived in Brownsville, Brooklyn which had a large population of poor Jewish immigrants.
While she started painting these images before Pollock's death, they are considered to reflect her feelings of anger, guilt, pain, and loss she experienced about their relationship before and after he died.
This period marks the time when Krasner stopped working on an easel since she created these works by lying the support on the floor.
The other three women artists are Louise Bourgeois (MoMA retrospective in 1982), Helen Frankenthaler (MoMA retrospective in 1989) and Elizabeth Murray (MoMA retrospective in 2004).
Later, these murals were destroyed in a fire.
These mural sized action paintings contrast dark and light severely since white, grays, black, and brown are the predominant colors used.
During the summer of 1956, Krasner started her Earth Green Series.
Her parents were Russian-Jewish immigrants, from Shpykiv, a Jewish community in what is now Ukraine.
Krasner's career as an artist began when she was a teenager.
Even after the rise of feminism in the 1960s and 1970s, her career as an artist was always put into relation to Pollock since remarks made about her work often commented on how she had become a successful artist by moving out of Pollock's shadow.
Although many people believe that Krasner stopped working in the 1940s in order to nurture Pollock's home life and career, she never stopped creating art.
When they were not working, the two spent their time cooking, baking, gardening, keeping the house organized, and entertaining friends.
Krasner's extensive knowledge of modern art helped Pollock since she brought him up to date with what contemporary art should be.
It eventually became too difficult for Krasner to support herself as a waitress due to the Great Depression.
