When pollution became a problem, the wealthier residents left the industrial conurbation to live in Headingley, Potternewton and Chapel Allerton which led to a 50% increase in the population of Headingley and Burley from 1851 to 1861.
The population density was , slightly higher than the rest of the West Yorkshire Urban Area.
The slums of Quarry Hill were replaced by the innovative Quarry Hill flats, which were demolished in 1975.
Humberside Airport is  east of Leeds.
The Chapel Allerton Arts Festival is a week-long music and arts event starting in 2008 and held the week after August Bank Holiday each year.
Garforth is host to the fortnight long festival The Garforth Arts Festival which has been an annual event since 2005.
Some stores have their only Leeds presence here and do not trade in Central Leeds, such as the Disney Store and Build-A-Bear workshop.
There are 130,100 jobs in the city centre, accounting for 31% of all jobs in the wider district.
The   tower of Bridgewater Place, also known as ''The Dalek'', is part of a major office and residential development and the region's tallest building; it can be seen for miles around.
Leeds City Council is responsible for over 50 public libraries across the whole city, including 5 mobile libraries.
Following the Leeds Waterworks Act of 1867 three reservoirs were built at Lindley Wood, Swinsty and Fewston in the Washburn Valley north of Leeds.
There is a direct rail service from Leeds to Manchester Airport however there isn't one to the nearby Leeds Bradford Airport.
The City of Leeds Synchronised Swimming Club train at the John Charles Centre for Sport and are represented by swimmers throughout the whole of the North East.
In 2009 they became first club to be Super League champions three seasons running, giving them their fourth Super League title.
The Leeds Country Way is a waymarked circular walk of  through the rural outskirts of the city, never more than  from City Square.
Stagecoach provides a service to Hull via Goole.
It also shows that Leeds will be the least affected major city by welfare cuts in 2014/2015, with welfare cuts of -£125 per capita predicted, compared to -£192 in Liverpool and -£175 in Glasgow.
There are connections to the rest of the world via London Heathrow Airport, Brussels Airport and Amsterdam Schiphol Airport.
70 stores such as Louis Vuitton, Vivienne Westwood, Paul Smith, Diesel and anchor Harvey Nichols are contained within two iron-wrought Victorian arcades, and a new arcade formed by arcading Queen Victoria Street with the largest expanse of stained glass in Britain.
Two private gas supply companies were taken over by the corporation in 1870 and the municipal supply provided street lighting and cheaper gas to homes.
The borough corporation was reformed under the provisions of Municipal Corporations Act 1835.
and the 13th most visited city by overseas visitors.
The built environment embraces edifices of civic pride like Morley Town Hall and the trio of buildings in Leeds, Leeds Town Hall, Corn Exchange and Leeds City Museum by the architect Cuthbert Brodrick.
It is housed in a former workhouse next to St James's Hospital.
Thwaite Mills Watermill Museum is a fully restored 1820s water-powered mill on the River Aire to the east of the city centre.
Many communities within Leeds now have their own local radio stations, such as East Leeds FM and Tempo FM for Wetherby and the surrounding areas.
The name ''Leeds'' derives from the old Brythonic word ''Ladenses'' meaning "people of the fast-flowing river", in reference to the River Aire which still flows through the city.
Notable churches are Leeds Minster (formerly Leeds Parish Church), St George's Church and Leeds Cathedral, in the city centre, and the Church of St John the Baptist, Adel and Bardsey Parish Church in quieter locations.
Leeds has a rich film exhibition culture.
Leeds is the UK's third largest manufacturing centre and 50% of the UK's manufacturing base is within a two-hour drive of Leeds.
The Bridge Inn and The New Penny, both on Call Lane, have long been gay night spots.
East Leeds and Oulton Raiders play in the National Conference League.
The square has many bars and restaurants and a large outdoor screen mounted on the side of the Civic Theatre.
The Otley Folk Festival (patron: Nic Jones), Walking Festival, Carnival and Victorian Christmas Fayre are annual events.
There are eight active synagogues in Leeds.
Alongside technological advances and industrial expansion, Leeds retained an interest in trading in agricultural commodities, with the Corn Exchange opening in 1864.
The proportion of Muslims in Leeds is average for the country.
Planning powers were restored to the local authority in 1995 when the development corporation was wound up.
Leeds has seen great expenditure on regenerating the city, attracting in investments and flagship projects, as found in Leeds city centre.
The White Rose Way walking trail to Scarborough begins at City Square.
Leeds was a manor and township in the large ancient parish of ''Leeds St Peter'', in the Skyrack wapentake of the West Riding of Yorkshire.
Historically in Yorkshire's West Riding, the history of Leeds can be traced to the 5th century when the name referred to a wooded area of the Kingdom of Elmet.
are a rugby union club based to the north of the city and compete in National League 2 North, whilst Morley R.F.C., located in Morley currently play in National Division Three North.
The name has been applied to many administrative entities over the centuries.
Armley Mills Industrial Museum is housed in what was once the world's largest woollen mill, and includes industrial machinery and railway locomotives.
The term ''Leodensian'' is also used, from the city's Latin name.
Leeds is also home to Phoenix Dance Theatre, who were formed in the Harehills area of the city in 1981, and Northern Ballet Theatre.
The Leeds Festival, featuring some of the biggest names in rock and indie music, takes place every year in Bramham Park.
Armley Mills, Tower Works, with its campanile-inspired towers, and the Egyptian-style Temple Works hark back to the city's industrial past, while the site and ruins of Kirkstall Abbey display the beauty and grandeur of Cistercian architecture.
There is also a colourful religious annual procession, called the Nagar Kirtan, into Millennium Square in the city centre on 13–14 April to celebrate Vaisakhi – the Sikh New Year and the birth of the religion.
LSRfm.com, is based in Leeds University Union, and regularly hosts outside broadcasts around the city.
Leeds is overall less deprived than other large UK cities and average income is above regional averages.
The Leeds Improvement Act 1866 sought to improve the quality of working class housing by restricting the number of homes that could be built in a single terrace.
The main Central Library is located on the Headrow in the city centre.
Residential growth occurred in Holbeck and Hunslet from 1801 to 1851, but, as these townships became industrialised new areas were favoured for middle class housing.
The largest sub-sectors are engineering, printing and publishing, food and drink, chemicals and medical technology.
However, by the 1970s the clothing industry was in irreversible decline, facing cheap foreign competition.
It attracts around 100,000 people over 2 days to the streets of Chapeltown and Harehills.
Otley, Wetherby, Tadcaster, Pudsey and Ilkley are separate post towns within the postcode area.
At the time of the 2001 census Leeds had a population of 183,000 young people aged 0–19 of whom 110,000 were attending local authority schools.
Other facilities include the Leeds Wall (climbing) and Yeadon Tarn sailing centre.
The introduction of the electric tramway led to intensification of development in Headingley and Potternewton and expansion outside the borough into Roundhay.
Leeds Carnival is Western Europe's oldest West Indian Carnival, and the UK's third largest after the Notting Hill and Nottingham Carnival.
The establishment of an Administrative Court in Leeds in April 2009 reinforced Leeds' position as one of the UK's key legal centres.
The city also hosts the only subsidiary office of the Bank of England in the UK.
Leeds Rhinos (Rugby League), Leeds Carnegie (Rugby Union) and Yorkshire County Cricket Club are also based in the city.
In 2008 Education Leeds, a non-profit company owned by Leeds City Council, provided for 220 primary schools, 39 secondary schools and 6 special inclusive learning centres.
The city was voted the Best UK University Destination by a survey in ''The Independent'' newspaper.
In addition to other national governmental offices, the city is home to a large Department for Work and Pensions office building located in Quarry Hill, notable for its imposing design.
There has been growth in the corporate and legal sectors and increased local affluence has led to an expanding retail sector, including the luxury goods market.
The Meanwood Valley Trail leads from Woodhouse Moor along Meanwood Beck to Golden Acre Park.
Leeds is served by four universities, and has the fourth largest student population in the country and has the country's fourth largest urban economy.
The centre of Leeds is part of a continuously built-up area extending to Pudsey, Bramley, Horsforth, Alwoodley, Seacroft, Middleton and Morley.
Leeds has become a hub of public-sector health bodies.
The modern and interactive retail space covers the old Burton Arcades and the former Leeds Shopping Plaza with its main entrance from Briggate.
Leeds Borough Police force was formed in 1836 and Leeds Town Hall was completed by the corporation in 1858.
Tourism is important to the Leeds economy, in 2009 Leeds was the 8th most visited city in England by UK visitors.
They play in the RFU Championship having been relegated from The Guinness Premiership at the end of the 2010–11 season.
Growth, initially in textiles, was accelerated by the building of the Aire and Calder Navigation in 1699 and the Leeds and Liverpool Canal in 1816.
Capita Group, KPMG, Direct Line, Aviva, Yorkshire Building Society, BT Group, Telefónica Europe (otherwise known as O2) and TD Waterhouse all also have a considerable presence in the city.
Leeds is home to the Grand Theatre where Opera North is based, this establishment seats 1,500 people and has recently undergone a £31.5m refurbishment.
Water supply and sewerage services in Leeds are provided by Yorkshire Water, part of the Kelda Group.
The University of Leeds was the ''alma mater'' of Herbert Read, one of the leading international theorists of modern art from the mid-twentieth century, and also the teaching base for the Marxist art historian Arnold Hauser from 1951 to 1985.
Yorkshire has a great history of real ale, but several bars near the railway station are fusing traditional beers with a modern bar.
Briggate, the principal north-south shopping street, is pedestrianised and Queen Victoria Street, a part of the Victoria Quarter, is enclosed under a glass roof.
Abbey House Museum is housed in the former gatehouse of Kirkstall Abbey, and includes walk-through Victorian streets and galleries describing the history of the abbey, childhood, and Victorian Leeds.
As is typical for many sprawling cities in areas of varying topography, temperatures can change depending on location.
The station itself has 17 platforms, making it the largest in England outside London.
The city has teams representing all the major national sports.
They play their home games at the Headingley Carnegie Stadium.
Holbeck and Leeds formed a continuous built-up area by 1858, with Hunslet nearly meeting them.
are the best-placed women's football team in Leeds, competing at the highest level in England, the FA Women's Premier League National Division.
From being a compact market town in the valley of the River Aire in the 16th century Leeds expanded and absorbed the surrounding villages to become a populous urban centre by the mid-20th century.
A new Leeds City Museum opened in 2008 in Millennium Square.
Leeds is the only city outside London to have hosted the Eurogamer Expo, although Birmingham will be a host in 2014.
In autumn 2010 the two companies moved into a purpose-built dance centre which is the largest space for dance outside London.
Many companies have several stores within Central Leeds and the wider city.
The areas of Alwoodley and Moortown contain sizeable Jewish populations.
Prior to 1973 it had been provided by the Leeds Corporation.
Millennium Square is a venue for large seasonal events such as a Christmas market, gigs and concerts, citywide parties and the Rhythms of the City Festival.
Leeds is represented by five MPs, for the constituencies of Leeds Central (Hilary Benn, Labour); Leeds East (Richard Burgon, Labour); Leeds North East (Fabian Hamilton, Labour); Leeds North West (Greg Mulholland, Lib Dem); and Leeds West (Rachel Reeves, Labour).
The main built-up area sub-division has a population of 474,632 (2011), and the City of Leeds metropolitan borough of which it is a part which has a population of around 757,700 (2011).
Natural landmarks include such diverse sites as the gritstone outcrop of Otley Chevin and the Fairburn Ings RSPB reserve.
At  (53.799°, −1.549°), and  north-northwest of central London, Leeds is located on the valley of the River Aire in the eastern foothills of the Pennines.
Light Night Leeds takes place each October, and many venues in the city are open to the public for Heritage Open Days in September.
The Sikh community is represented by gurudwaras (temples) spread across the city, the largest being in Chapeltown.
Four centuries later, the inhabitants petitioned Charles I for a charter of incorporation, which was granted in 1626.
The main reason for these problems is the fact that unlike other cities in the UK similar in size to Leeds, such as Manchester and Sheffield, Leeds does not have a rapid transport system (such as the Manchester Metrolink or Sheffield Supertram) and therefore commuters tend to either drive or use buses, which can be delayed when the roads are congested.
Key government departments and organisations in Leeds include the Department for Work and Pensions, with over 3,000 staff, the Department of Health, with over 800 staff, HMRC with over 1,200 staff and the British Library with 1,100 staff.
Among other Skyscrapers the 37-storey Sky Plaza to the north of the city centre stands on higher ground so that its  is higher than Bridgewater Place.
The Leeds site of the archives service is in the former public library at Sheepscar, Leeds.
The middle class flight from the industrial areas led to development beyond the borough at Roundhay and Adel.
The Leeds travel to work area in 2001 included all of the City of Leeds, a northern strip of the City of Bradford, the eastern part of Kirklees, and a section of southern North Yorkshire; it occupies .
It is adjacent to the Mandela Gardens, which were opened by Nelson Mandela in 2001.
Made in Leeds is a local television station which launched across the city in 2014.
An inhabitant of Leeds is locally known as a ''Loiner'', a word of uncertain origin.
After London, Leeds is the largest legal centre in the UK, and in 2011 its financial and insurance services industry was worth £2.1 billion, the 4th largest in the UK, with over 30 national and international banks located in the city.
'''Leeds'''  is a city in West Yorkshire, England.
The city and metropolitan borough of Leeds is served by 16 railway stations and there are plans to open a few more within the next 20 years.
The Hindu community in Leeds has a temple (mandir) at Hyde Park.
In 2010 ninety-six pedestrians were killed or seriously injured in road traffic accidents in Leeds.
As a result, it staged very early British exhibitions of work by European expressionist artists, such as Wassily Kandinsky, showing their work in the city as early as 1913, and produced its own English Expressionist artists, including Jacob Kramer and Bruce Turner.
The city's parks at Roundhay and Temple Newsam have long been owned and maintained by the council for the benefit of ratepayers and among the open spaces in the centre of Leeds are Millennium Square, City Square, Park Square and Victoria Gardens.
The Leeds International Concert Season, which includes orchestral and choral concerts in Leeds Town Hall and other events, is the largest local authority music programme in the UK.
Their attempts to redefine what art education should mean in the post-Second World War period led the artist Patrick Heron to claim in 1971 in ''The Guardian'' newspaper that 'Leeds is the most influential art school in Europe since the Bauhaus'.
The Leeds District Headquarters is located at Elland Road in the South of the City.
These include Leeds Hockey Club, Leeds Adel Carnegie Hockey Club, the University of Leeds Hockey Club and Leeds Beckett University Hockey Club.
Initially, local government services were provided by Leeds City Council and West Yorkshire County Council.
Additionally, there is an urban motorway network; the radial M621 takes traffic into central Leeds from the M62 and M1.
The club was founded in 2008 and only compete in National and International Competition.
The Buddhist community (sangha) comes together to celebrate the major festival of Wesak in May.
Popular bars such as this include The Hop, The Cross Keys and The Brewery Tap.
Other NHS hospitals are Chapel Allerton Hospital, Seacroft Hospital, Wharfedale Hospital in Otley, and Leeds Dental Institute.
Leeds displays a variety of natural and built landmarks.
Of the 40,000 people who work in retailing in Leeds 75% work in places which are not located in the city centre.
Keighley Bus Company provides a service to Shipley, Bingley and Keighley.
There are a large number of pubs, bars, nightclubs and restaurants, as well as a multitude of venues for live music.
There are a number of independent film production companies, including the not-for-profit cooperative Leeds Animation Workshop, founded in 1978; community video producers Vera Media and several small commercial production companies.
The city has a wealth of sports facilities including the Elland Road football stadium, a host stadium during the 1996 European Football Championship; the Headingley Carnegie Stadiums, adjacent stadia world-famous for both cricket and rugby league and the John Charles Centre for Sport with an Olympic sized pool in its Aquatics Centre and includes a multi-use stadium.
Its assigned role in the Leeds City Region partnership recognises the city's importance to regional economic development, and the second phase of High Speed 2 plans to connect Leeds to London via East Midlands Hub and Sheffield Meadowhall.
Leeds City Athletic Club competes in the British Athletics League and UK Women's League as well as the Northern Athletics League.
Land south of the river was developed primarily for industry and secondarily for back-to-back workers' dwellings.
Leeds Art Gallery reopened in June 2007 after a major renovation, and houses important collections of traditional and contemporary British art.
It is also the only space for dance to house a national classical and a national contemporary dance company alongside each another.
West Yorkshire Joint Services provides analytical, archaeological, archives, ecology, materials testing and trading standards services in Leeds and the other four districts of West Yorkshire.
Popular musical acts originating from Leeds include Soft Cell, Kaiser Chiefs, The Pigeon Detectives, The Wedding Present, The Sunshine Underground, The Sisters of Mercy, Hadouken!, Corinne Bailey Rae, Dinosaur Pile-Up, Gang of Four, Hood, The Rhythm Sisters, Utah Saints, Alt-J and Melanie B of the Spice Girls.
Leeds was one of a number of local authorities to try the three-tier system with first, middle and secondary schools.
Marshall's Mill was one of the first of many factories constructed in Leeds from around 1790 when the most significant were woollen finishing and flax mills.
The city has developed from the decay of the post-industrial era to become a telephone banking centre, connected to the electronic infrastructure of the modern global economy.
The main provider is First Leeds and Arriva Yorkshire serves routes to the south of the city.
The full range of music tastes is catered for in Leeds.
Leeds has a Roman Catholic Cathedral, the Episcopal seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Leeds.
It includes the original home of the club nights Back 2 Basics and Speedqueen.
The majority of people in Leeds identify themselves as Christian.
It changed from being the appellation of a small manorial borough in the 13th century, through several incarnations, to being the name attached to the present metropolitan borough.
The county borough was abolished on 1 April 1974 and its former area was combined with that of the municipal boroughs of Morley and Pudsey; the urban districts of Aireborough, Horsforth, Otley, Garforth and Rothwell; and parts of the rural districts of Tadcaster, Wetherby and Wharfedale.
Leeds Carnegie, formerly known as ''Leeds Tykes'', are the foremost rugby union team in Leeds and they play at Headingley Carnegie Stadium.
Although the centre is below the average typical size for out of town shopping malls like the Trafford Centre or Meadowhall in nearby Yorkshire city Sheffield, it remains popular with national and international chains.
The fire stations in Leeds are: Cookridge, Gipton, Hunslet, Stanks, Moortown, Stanningley and the "Leeds" fire station (near city centre, on Kirkstall Road).
Leeds has a number of large 'super-clubs' and there is a selection of independent clubs such as Club Mission and Mint Club, which is consistently ranked as one of the world's best clubs by DJ Magazine.
Temperatures at Leeds Bradford Airport fell to  in December 2010 and reached  at Leeds city centre in August 2003.
The borough became a county borough in 1889, giving it independence from the newly formed West Riding County Council and it gained city status in 1893.
Fire and rescue services are provided by the West Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service.
From 1988 two run-down and derelict areas close to the city centre were designated for regeneration and became the responsibility of Leeds Development Corporation, outside the planning remit of the city council.
Various Buddhist traditions are represented in Leeds, including: Soka Gakkai, Theravada, Tibetan, Triratna Buddhist Community and Zen.
Office developments, also traditionally located in the inner area, have expanded south of the River Aire and total  of space.
In 1904 the Leeds parish absorbed Beeston, Chapel Allerton, Farnley, Headingley cum Burley and Potternewton from within the borough.
There is a large procession that finishes at Potternewton Park, where there are stalls, entertainment and refreshments.
The city is also an important centre for equity, venture and risk finance.
Hopes were renewed with the proposal for a £250 million New Generation Transport Trolleybus service in 2007, however after a long wait and millions of pounds spent on inquiries, the plans were cancelled in May 2016 citing little value for money.
Elland Road (football) and Headingley Stadium (cricket and rugby) are well known to sports enthusiasts and the White Rose Centre is a well-known retail outlet.
The land use in the central areas of Leeds is overwhelmingly urban.
There are additional shopping centres located in the many villages that became part of the county borough and in the towns that were incorporated in the City of Leeds in 1974.
Towards Millennium Square and the Civic or Northern Quarter, is a growing entertainment district providing for both students and weekend visitors.
The Leeds extension of the Dales Way follows the Meanwood Valley Trail before it branches off to head towards Ilkley and Windermere.
Leeds has the fourth largest student population in the country (over 200,000), and is therefore one of the UK's hotspots for night-life.
The force has five policing districts covering the West Yorkshire area, one of which covers Leeds.
Measurements taken on some main roads in Leeds have revealed pollution levels over twice the legal limits.
It gained both borough and city status and is known as the City of Leeds.
Leeds has a climate that is oceanic, greatly influenced by the Atlantic and the Pennines.
Cholera outbreaks in 1832 and 1849 caused the authorities to address the problems of drainage, sanitation and water supply.
In one 2012 study of 31 European cities, Leeds-Bradford was rated as the seventh most grid-locked.
To the north parts are built on older sandstone and gritstones and to the east it extends into the magnesian limestone belt.
These short film clips can be found on YouTube.
In addition, there are many parks and public footpaths in both the urban and rural parts of Leeds, and the Ramblers' Association, YHA and other walking organisations offer sociable walks.
Leeds city centre is contained within the Leeds Inner Ring Road, formed from parts of the A58 road, A61 road, A64 road, A643 road and the M621 motorway.
There are around 150 law firms operating in Leeds, employing over 6,700 people.
The First Direct Arena opened in September 2013.
Of these 24.7% were in public administration, education and health, 23.9% were in banking, finance and insurance and 21.4% were in distribution, hotels and restaurants.
Millennium Square is a significant urban focal point.
It is estimated that around 3,000 Sikhs in Leeds take part in this annual event.
Leeds has over 30 national and international banks, many of whose northern or regional offices are based in the city.
In the latter half of the nineteenth century, population growth in Hunslet, Armley and Wortley outstripped that of Leeds.
Many other Christian denominations and new religious movements are established in Leeds, including Assemblies of God, Baptist, Christian Scientist, Latter-day Saints ("LDS" or "Mormon"), Community of Christ, Greek Orthodox, Jehovah's Witnesses, Jesus Army, Lutheran, Methodist, Moravian, Nazarene, Newfrontiers, Pentecostal, Salvation Army, Seventh-day Adventist, Society of Friends ("Quakers"), Unitarian, United Reformed, Vineyard, Wesleyan, an ecumenical Chinese church, Winners' Chapel and several independent churches.
Leeds is the starting-point of the A62, A63, A64, A65 and A660 roads, and is also situated on the A58 and A61.
At the time of the United Kingdom Census 2001, the Leeds urban subdivision occupied an area of  and had a population of&nbsp;443,247; making it the fourth most populous urban subdivision within England and the fifth largest within the United Kingdom.
Smaller museums in Leeds include Otley Museum; Horsforth Village Museum; ULITA, an Archive of International Textiles; and the museum at Fulneck Moravian Settlement.
Notable non-conformist chapels include the Salem Chapel, dating back to 1791 and notably the birthplace of Leeds United Football Club in 1919.
Slum clearance and rebuilding began in Leeds during the Inter-war period when over 18,000 houses were built by the council on 24 estates in Cross Gates, Middleton, Gipton, Belle Isle and Halton Moor.
In a 2010 index for sustainable cities, the city placed 6th for the second year running.
