After some debate, the city decided to establish a new, mainly secular building at the same location, called Paulinum, which was completed in 2012.
Many noted writers have graduated from this school, including Heinz Czechowski, Kurt Drawert, Adolf Endler, Ralph Giordano, Kerstin Hensel, Sarah and Rainer Kirsch, Angela Krauß, Erich Loest, Fred Wander.
The MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra is Leipzig's second large symphony orchestra.
The Leipzig rivers (White Elster, New Luppe, Pleisse, and Parthe) in the city have largely artificial river beds and are supplemented by some channels.
Leipzig was once one of the major European centers of learning and culture in fields such as music and publishing.
On its southeastern shore is Germany's only pump-powered artificial whitewater slalom course, Markkleeberg Canoe Park (Kanupark Markkleeberg), a venue which rivals the Eiskanal in Augsburg for training and international canoe/kayak competition.
(The pleasurable Pleiss-Athens, earns its fame above all, appealing to every one, too, for it is mightily beauteous.)
Several thousand forced laborers were stationed in Leipzig during World War&nbsp;II.
Leipzig has been a trade city since at least the time of the Holy Roman Empire.
*Blüthner: piano-manufacturing
As a university of applied sciences (German: ''Fachhochschule'') its status is slightly below that of a university, with more emphasis on the practical part of the education.
The Allied ground advance into Germany reached Leipzig in late April 1945.
Neuseenland is an area south of Leipzig where old open-cast mines are being converted into a huge lake district.
''Extra Lipsiam vivere est miserrime vivere.''
Companies with operations in or around Leipzig include:
The Lindenauer port was almost completed but not yet connected to the Elster-Saale and Karl-Heine canal respectively.
Winters are variably mild to cold, with an average of around .
Germany's chancellor since 2006, Angela Merkel, studied physics at Leipzig University.
and although some of these have been demolished and the numbers living in this type of accommodation have declined in recent years, at least 10% of Leipzig's population (50,000 people) are still living in Plattenbau accommodation.
In the 1990s the population decreased rather rapidly to 437,000 in 1998.
The U.S. turned the city over to the Red Army as it pulled back from the line of contact with Soviet forces in July 1945 to the predesignated occupation zone boundaries.
This reduction was mostly due to outward migration and suburbanization.
The site is characterized by swampy areas such as the Leipzig Riverside Forest, though there are also some limestone areas to the north of the city.
In recent years inward migration accelerated, reaching an increase of 12,917 in 2014.
Like most German cities, Leipzig has a traffic layout designed to be bicycle-friendly.
The  Bach Archive is an institution for the documentation and research of the life and work.
They finally promoted to Handball-Bundesliga as champions of 2.
The number of people with an immigrant background (immigrants and their children) grew from ~40,000 in 2010 to ~50,000 in 2012, making it 9.3% of the city's population.
The drama departments teach acting and scriptwriting.
File:J10077 Bf Stötteritz, 1442 109.jpg|Train of the S-Bahn Mitteldeutschland in Leipzig-Stötteritz
The city's tram and bus network is operated by the Leipziger Verkehrsbetriebe.
The train station has two grand entrance halls, the eastern one for the Royal Saxon State Railways and the western one for the Prussian state railways.
File:Ägyptisches Museum Leipzig 099.jpg|Exhibits of the Egyptian Museum
Grünau, for example, has approximately 40,000 people living in this sort of accommodation.
Leipzig Pop Up is an annual music trade fair for the independent music scene as well as a music festival taking place on Pentecost weekend.
It is a small Paris and educates its people.)
Several venues offer live music on a daily basis, including the Moritzbastei  which was once part of the city's fortifications, and is one of the oldest student clubs in Europe with concerts in various styles.
The city employed light guards who had to follow a specific schedule to ensure the punctual lighting of the 700 lanterns.
The private collection focuses on the so-called New Leipzig School.
Both the Gewandhausorchester and the MDR Leipzig Radio Symphony Orchestra reside in the Gewandhaus concert hall.
* Naturkundemuseum Leipzig is the natural history museum of the city.
The intended completion date has been postponed because of an unacceptable cost-benefit ratio.
Its current chief conductor is Kristjan Järvi.
File:Johann Sebastian Bach Denkmal Leipzig.jpg|Monument of Johann Sebastian Bach
In 2015/2016, Leipzig is the second-best city for students in Germany (after Munich).
Both battles resulted in victories for the Swedish-led side.
Leipzig Hauptbahnhof itself is the location of a shopping mall.
In 2010, Leipzig was included in the top 10 cities to visit by the ''New York Times'', and ranked 39th globally out of 289 cities for innovation in the 4th Innovation Cities Index published by Australian agency 2thinknow.
Nowadays, Leipzig is an economic center in eastern Germany.
As for contemporary music, Leipzig is known for its independent music scene and subcultural events.
* Johann Sebastian Bach lived from 1723 until his death in Leipzig.
(I'm coming to Leipzig, to the place where one can see the whole world in miniature.)
Since the reunification of Germany, Leipzig has undergone significant change with the restoration of some historical buildings, the demolition of others, and the development of a modern transport infrastructure.
Precipitation is around twice as small in winter than summer, however, winters aren't dry.
''Ich komme nach Leipzig, an den Ort, wo man die ganze Welt im Kleinen sehen kann.''
The university also runs the Museum of Antiquities.
*Future Electronics
In December 2013, according to a study by Marktforschungsinstituts GfK, Leipzig was ranked as the most livable city in Germany and is one of the three European cities with the highest quality of living (after Groningen and Kraków).
The growth of the past 10–15 years has mostly been due to inward migration.
* The Schillerhouse is the house where Schiller lived in Summer 1785.
Although there are some forest parks within the city limits, the area surrounding Leipzig is relatively unforested.
The HTWK offers many engineering courses, as well as courses in computer science, mathematics, business administration, librarianship, museum studies and social work.
Such a move would allow small boats to reach the Elbe from Leipzig.
- Benedikt Carpzov the Younger
File:Sonnenaufgang Rosental Leipzig.jpg|Rosental in the morning
However, the number of children born in Leipzig has risen since the late 1990s.
The Latin name '''Lipsia''' was also used.
Leipzig is located about  southwest of Berlin at the confluence of the White Elster, Pleisse, and Parthe rivers at the southern end of the North German Plain.
At this time, trade fairs were held at a site in the south of the city, near the Monument to the Battle of the Nations.
The Lutheran Theological Seminary is a seminary of the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church in Leipzig.
''Das angenehme Pleis-Athen, Behält den Ruhm vor allen, Auch allen zu gefallen, Denn es ist wunderschön.''
The Leipzig University of Applied Sciences (HTWK) has approximately 6,200 students () and is () the second biggest institution of higher education in Leipzig.
Leipzig´s first private museum dedicated to contemporary art in Leipzig after the turn of the millennium is located in the city centre close to the famous St. Thomas Church in the third floor of the former GDR processing centre.
(I praise my Leipzig!
Among the research institutes located in Leipzig, three belong to the Max Planck Society.
Since the reunification of Germany, Leipzig has undergone significant change with the restoration of some historical buildings, the demolition of others, and the development of a modern transport infrastructure.
Furthermore, there are eleven galleries in the so-called Spinnerei,.
Johann Sebastian Bach worked in Leipzig from 1723 to 1750, conducting the St. Thomas Church Choir, at the St. Thomas Church, the St. Nicholas Church and the Paulinerkirche, the university church of Leipzig (destroyed in 1968).
Its architecture alludes to the look of the former church and it includes a room for religious use.
A few cycle paths have been built or declared since 1990.
Leipzig is one of Germany's most visited citys with over 2,7 overnight stays in 2013.
The amount of sunshine differs quite between winter and summer, with around 51 hours of sunshine in December (1.7 hours a day) on average and 229 hours of sunshine in July (7.4 hours a day).
Two more are Fraunhofer Society institutes.
On 24 December 1701, an oil-fueled street lighting system was introduced.
The city of Leipzig is also the birthplace of Till Lindemann, best known as the lead vocalist of Rammstein, a band formed in 1994.
It is also Germanys fastest growing city.
More recently, the city is sometimes nicknamed "Boomtown of eastern Germany", "Hypezig" or "The new Berlin" for being celebrated by the media as a hip urban center for the vital lifestyle and creative scene with many startups.
The Leipzig region was the arena of the 1813 Battle of Leipzig between Napoleonic France and an allied coalition of Prussia, Russia, Austria, and Sweden.
More than 300 sport clubs in the city represent 78 different disciplines.
Robert Schumann was also active in Leipzig music, having been invited by Felix Mendelssohn when the latter established Germany's first musical conservatoire in the city in 1843.
There is an extensive cycle network.
– Gotthold Ephraim Lessing
File:Leipzig NGT12-LEI Waldplatz defekt.jpg|Tram of Leipziger Verkehrsbetriebe
Leipzig also benefits from world leading medical research (Leipzig Heart Centre) and a growing biotechnology industry.
Oper Leipzig is one of the most prominent opera houses in Germany, and Leipzig Zoological Garden is one of the most modern zoos in Europe and ranks first in Germany and second in Europe according to Anthony Sheridan.
Number of minorities (1st and 2nd generation) in Leipzig by country of origin in 2014
These are the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, and Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology.
The city sits at the intersection of the Via Regia and Via Imperii, two important Medieval trade routes.
Kirow Ardelt AG, the world market leader in breakdown cranes, is based in Leipzig.
Over 400 athletic facilities are available to citizens and club members.
Outside of Leipzig the Neuseenland district forms a huge lake area by approx .
A part of Leipzig University is the German Institute for Literature which was founded in 1955 under the name "Johannes R. Becher-Institut".
* The "Museum in der Runden Ecke" is the best known Museum in the city.
The first Battle of Breitenfeld took place in 1631 and the second in 1642.
The university has about 30,000 students.
Leipzig University, founded 1409, is one of Europe's oldest universities.
Leipzig is also situated at the intersection of the ancient roads known as the Via Regia (King's highway), which traversed Germanic lands in an east-west direction, and Via Imperii (Imperial Highway), a north-south road.
Since the beginning of the 20th century Ice hockey gained popularity and several local clubs established departments dedicated to that sport.
Since the 2010s, Leipzig is being celebrated by the media as a hip urban center with a very high quality of living.
*Johannapark and Clara-Zetkin-Park are the most prominent parks in Leipzig city centre.
Leipzig today is an economic center and the most livable city in Germany, according to the GfK marketing research institution.
Founded in March 2015, the G2 Kunsthalle houses the Hildebrand Collection.
There are also several baroque period trading houses and former residences of rich merchants.
In the mid-20th century, the city's trade fair assumed renewed importance as a point of contact with the Comecon Eastern Europe economic bloc, of which East Germany was a member.
File:Markkleeberger See Bootsanlegestelle.jpg|Tourism in and around Leipzig plays a significant role, the photo shows the Markkleeberger See
File:Leipzig Friedenspark.jpg|Friedenspark
File:Cospudener See (1) 2005-09-09.JPG|Cospudener See
It is planned to be finished in 2060.
- Frosch, a university student in Goethe's ''Faust, Part One''
The new city hall, completed in 1905, displays the same style.
, only 5.6% of the population were foreigners, compared to the German overall average of 7.7%.
Leipzig became a center of the German and Saxon liberal movements.
Huge ''Gründerzeit'' areas were built, which mostly survived both war and post-war demolition.
The competition is now held every two years in three changing categories.
The Bach-Archiv organizes the prestigious International Johann Sebastian Bach Competition, initiated in 1950 as part of a music festival marking the bicentennial of Bach's death.
The city commissioned planning for a link between Karl Heine Canal and the disused Lindenauer port in 2008.
File:Johannapark Leipzig.JPG|Johannapark
Handball-Club Leipzig is one of the most successful women's handball clubs in Germany, winning 20 domestic championships since 1956 and 3 Champions League titles.
During the Thirty Years' War, two battles took place in Breitenfeld, about five miles outside Leipzig city walls.
File:SDC11449 - Epipedobates anthonyi.JPG|Inside Leipzig Botanical Garden
In 2011 it reached 5,490 newborns resulting in a RNI of -17.7 (-393.7 in 1995).
For over 15 years "Tonelli's" has been offering free weekly concerts every day of the week, though door charges may apply Saturdays.
The Academy of Visual Arts (''Hochschule für Grafik und Buchkunst'') was established in 1764.
File:Löhrs Carré Leipzig.JPG|Headquarters of the Sparkasse Leipzig bank
In 2015, Leipzig have among the 30 largest German cities the third best prospects for the future.
It decreased steadily from 1950 until 1989 to about 530,000.
Leipzig has a population of about 570,000.
File:Leipzig Hauptbahnhof.jpg|Leipzig Hauptbahnhof is the main hub of tram and rail network and the world's largest railway station by floor area
SC DHfK Leipzig Handball is men's handball club in Leipzig were six times (1959, 1960, 1961, 1962, 1965 and 1966) champion of East Germany handball league and was winner of EHF Champions's League in 1966.
Leipzig was the German candidate for the 2012 Summer Olympics, but was unsuccessful.
Leipzig Rugby Club competes in the German Rugby Bundesliga but finished at the bottom of their group in 2013.
The common usage of this nickname for Leipzig up until the present is reflected, for example, in the name of a popular blog for local arts and culture, ''Heldenstadt.de''.
The building of the St. Paul's Church was destroyed by the communists in 1968 to make room for a new main building of the university.
Leipzig expanded rapidly to more than 700.000 inhabitants.
Leipzig/Halle Airport is the main airport in the vicinity of the city.
The city's mayor from 1930 to 1937, Carl Friedrich Goerdeler was a noted opponent of the Nazi regime in Germany.
The Rosental is a park in the north of the forest and borders Leipzig Zoo.
The city's musical tradition is also reflected in the worldwide fame of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra under the baton of chief conductor Riccardo Chailly and the Thomas Church Choir.
It deals with the operation of the Stasi State Security of former East Germany.
The tunnel links the main station in the north with the Bayrische Bahnhof in the south.
As Leipzig grew considerably during the economic boom of the late 19th century, the town has many buildings in the historicist style representative of the ''Gründerzeit'' era.
The landscape is mostly flat though there is also some evidence of moraine and drumlins.
Leipzig became a major urban center within the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) after World War II, but its cultural and economic importance declined despite East Germany being the richest economy in the Soviet Bloc.
The building complex of the Grassi Museum contains three more of Leipzig's major collections: the Ethnography Museum, Applied Arts Museum, and Musical Instrument Museum (the last of which is run by the University of Leipzig).
The philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was born in Leipzig in 1646, and attended the university from 1661 to 1666.
A terminus of the first German long distance railway to Dresden (the capital of Saxony) in 1839, Leipzig became a hub of Central European railway traffic, with Leipzig Hauptbahnhof the largest terminal station by area in Europe.
* The German Museum of Books and Writing is the world's oldest museum of its kind, founded in 1884.
File:Leipzig - Universitätsstraße - Moritzbastei 05 ies.jpg|The Moritzbastei is the largest student club in Germany and is famous for its atmosphere and large number of cultural and music events.
* The Egyptian Museum of the University of Leipzig comprises a collection of about 7,000 artefacts from several millennia.
The Bach-Archiv also organizes performances, especially the international festival Bachfest Leipzig (de) and runs the Bach-Museum.
Es ist ein klein Paris und bildet seine Leute.''
Markkleeberger See is a new lake next to Markkleeberg, a suburb on the south side of Leipzig.
The composer Richard Wagner was born in Leipzig in 1813, in the Brühl.
File:EAT LEJ Hangar.jpg|Leipzig is the hub of DHL
He resigned in 1937 when, in his absence, his Nazi deputy ordered the destruction of the city's statue of Felix Mendelssohn.
The seminary trains students to become pastors for the Evangelical Lutheran Free Church or for member church bodies of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference.
The city was also heavily damaged by Allied bombing during World War&nbsp;II.
The school also houses an Institute for Theory.
The unemployment rate decreased from 18.2% in 2003 to 9.8% in 2014 and 8,6% in August 2016.
*Leipzig Riverside Forest covers a total area of approx.
According to ''The New York Times'', this scene "has been the toast of the contemporary art world" in the past decade.
File: Museum der bildenden Künste.JPG|Museum of Fine Arts
- Johann Sigismund Scholze
* The Leipzig Panometer is a visual panorama displayed inside a former gasometer, accompanied by a thematic exhibition.
It was the largest battle in Europe prior to World War I and the coalition victory ended Napoleon's presence in Germany and would ultimately lead to his first exile on Elba.
Leipzig/Halle Airport offers a number of seasonal vacation charter flights as well as regular scheduled services.
In 1937 the Nazi government officially renamed the city ''Reichsmessestadt Leipzig'' (Imperial Trade Fair City Leipzig).
The University of Music and Theatre offers a broad range of subjects ranging from training in orchestral instruments, voice, interpretation, coaching, piano chamber music, orchestral conducting, choir conducting and musical composition to acting and scriptwriting.
In April 1945 the Deputy Mayor of Leipzig, Ernest Lisso, his wife, daughter and a Volkssturm Major Walter Dönicke committed suicide in the Leipzig City Hall.
An older spelling of the name in English is '''Leipsic'''.
Leipzig Hauptbahnhof, opened in 1915, is at a junction of important north-to-south and west-to-east railway lines.
Other former staff of faculty include mineralogist Georg Agricola, writer Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, philosopher Ernst Bloch, eccentric founder of psychophysics Gustav Theodor Fechner, and psychologist Wilhelm Wundt.
The outbreak of the Second World War stopped most of the work, though some may have continued through the use of forced labor.
After its closure in 1990 the institute was refounded in 1995 with new teachers.
Many commercial buildings were built in the 1990s as a result of tax breaks after German reunification.
In 1913 the Monument to the Battle of the Nations celebrating the centenary of this event was completed.
After almost doubling the city area by incorporation of surrounding towns in 1999, the number stabilized and started to rise again with an increase of 1,000 in 2000. , Leipzig is the fastest-growing city in Germany with over 500,000 inhabitants.
Nobel Prize laureate Werner Heisenberg worked here as a physics professor (from 1927 to 1942), as did Nobel Prize laureates Gustav Ludwig Hertz (physics), Wilhelm Ostwald (chemistry) and Theodor Mommsen (Nobel Prize in literature).
Approximately 35% of Leipzig's apartments are in buildings of this type.
During the 20th century, there were several open-cast mines in the region, many of which are being converted to use as lakes.
The percentage of the population with an immigrant background is quite low compared with other German cities.
File:AUGUSTUSPLATZ-014.jpg|View over Augustusplatz with the Gewandhaus.
The city is a location for automobile manufacturing by BMW and Porsche in large plants north of the city.
It was founded in 1992, merging several older schools.
This was a contributory factor to falling birth rates.
Some of the largest employers in the area (outside of manufacturing) include software companies such as Spreadshirt,  and the various schools and universities in and around the Leipzig/Halle region.
*Leipzig Botanical Garden is the oldest of its kind in Germany.
It is mainly located in the south of the city.
Summers are generally warm, averaging at  with daytime temperatures of .
Leipzig is home to one of the world's oldest schools ''Thomasschule zu Leipzig'' (St.&nbsp;Thomas' School, Leipzig), which gained fame for its long association with the Bach family of musicians and composers.
