Studies of their life-history traits, behavior and ecology help understanding of primate evolution, since they are thought to share similarities with ancestral primates.
Weaning occurs either before or shortly after the eruption of the first permanent molars in lemurs.
Other predators include native euplerids, such as the fossa, feral cats, domestic dogs, snakes, diurnal birds of prey, owls, and crocodiles.
Since ancestral lemurs are thought to have originated in Africa around 62 to 65&nbsp;mya, they must have crossed the Mozambique Channel, a deep channel between Africa and Madagascar with a minimum width of about 560&nbsp;km (350&nbsp;mi).
The most heavily studied cathemeral lemurs are the true lemurs.
Lemurs have low basal metabolic rates (BMR), which helps them to conserve energy during the dry season, when water and food are scarce.
The presence of lemurs in national parks helps drive ecotourism, which especially helps local communities living in the vicinity of the national parks, since it offers employment opportunities and the community receives half of the park entrance fees.
This may also relate to the relatively high mortality rate among adult females and the higher proportion of adult males in some lemur populations—both unusual traits among primates.
When females are dominant within a group, the way they maintain dominance varies.
mongoz'') is the best-documented example, every species in the genus studied has shown some degree of cathemeral behavior, although night activity is often restricted by light availability and moon periodicity.
This species has also been observed using yawns as threats.
Recent studies have shown that lemurs exhibit levels of technical intelligence on par with many other primates, although they manipulate objects less often.
***** Family Palaeopropithecidae
Around 1703 merchants and sailors began bringing lemurs back to Europe, at which time James Petiver, an apothecary in London, described and illustrated the mongoose lemur.
The most studied lemur, the ring-tailed lemur, has been shown to have blue-yellow vision, but lacks the ability to distinguish red and green hues.
One of the greatest challenges has been the classification of the aye-aye, which has been a topic of debate up until very recently.
***** Family Palaeopropithecidae
Indriids also have a specialized digestive system for folivory, exhibiting enlarged salivary glands, a spacious stomach, and an elongated caecum (lower gut) that facilitates fermentation.
Some protected areas were set aside because they were naturally protected by their remote, isolated location, often on steep cliffs.
Sifakas have been observed eating soil from termite mounds, possibly adding beneficial intestinal flora to aid the digestion of cellulose from their folivorous diet.
Each utilizes either different species of bamboo, different parts of the plant, or different layers in the forest.
However, some species tend towards having larger females, and two species of true lemur (genus ''Eulemur''), the gray-headed lemur (''E.
The country is also burdened with high levels of debt and limited resources.
Over time, these dyads may have allied themselves with other neighboring mother-daughter dyads in order to defend more distributed resources in a wide home range.
Starting in 1751, the London illustrator George Edwards began describing and illustrating some lemur species, of which a few were included in various editions of ''Systema Naturae'' by Carl Linnaeus.
Now represented only by recent or subfossil remains, they were modern forms that were once part of the rich lemur diversity that has evolved in isolation.
In  in Durban, South Africa, Madagascar's former president Marc Ravalomanana promised to triple the size of the island's protected areas in five years.
The intelligence, aggression, and deceptiveness of monkeys gave them an advantage over other primates in exploiting the environment.
Nocturnal lemurs are mostly solitary but social, foraging alone at night but often nesting in groups during the day.
Even though hunting has been a threat to lemur populations in the past, it has recently become a more serious threat as socioeconomic conditions deteriorate.
***** Family Lepilemuridae
These indicate a mating system known as scramble competition polygyny, where males cannot defend females or the resources that might attract them.
Indeed, female dominance has been shown to be linked to increased maternal investment.
Collectively, lemurs have been documented consuming leaves from at least 82 native plant families and 15 alien plant families.
Some lemurs defecate in specific areas, otherwise known as latrine behavior.
Some lemur species have extensive vocal repertoires, including the ring-tailed lemur and ruffed lemurs.
They include the smallest primates in the world and, until recently, also included some of the largest.
The classification of lemurs within the suborder Strepsirrhini is equally controversial, although the most experts agree on the same phylogenetic tree.
Lemurs are unusual since they have great variability in their social structure, yet generally lack sexual dimorphism in size and canine tooth morphology.
At the Duke Lemur Center (DLC) in the United States, lemurs that roam the outdoor enclosures have been observed eating poison ivy (''Taxicodendron radicans''), yet have shown no ill effects.
Some lemurs, such as the sportive lemurs and indriids, have longer hind limbs than forelimbs, making them excellent leapers.
***** Family Cheirogaleidae
Despite their adaptations for weathering extreme adversity, habitat destruction and hunting have resulted in lemur populations declining sharply, and their diversity has diminished, with the recent extinction of at least 17&nbsp;species in eight genera, known collectively as the subfossil lemurs.
The strepsirrhine choroidal tapetum is unique among mammals because it is made up of crystalline riboflavin, and the resulting optical scattering is what limits visual acuity.
Visual signals are probably the least used by lemurs, since they lack many of the muscles used in common primate facial expressions.
The original 2005 animated film ''Madagascar'' was seen by an estimated 100&nbsp;million people in theaters and 200–300&nbsp;million people on DVD worldwide.
Unlike anthropoid primates, lemur grooming seems to be more intimate and mutual, often directly reciprocated.
This is supported by comparative studies of the cytochrome&nbsp;b gene and the presence of the strepsirrhine toothcomb in both groups.
Most rural Malagasy do not understand what "endangered" means, nor do they know that hunting lemurs is illegal or that lemurs are found only in Madagascar.
Bark and plant exudates such as tree sap are consumed by a few lemur species.
As with other strepsirrhine primates, such as lorises, pottos, and galagos (bush babies), lemurs share resemblance with basal primates.
According to Russell Mittermeier, the president of Conservation International (CI), taxonomist Colin Groves, and others, there are nearly 100&nbsp;recognized species or subspecies of extant (or living) lemur, divided into five families and 15&nbsp;genera.
For example, efforts to sequence the genome of the gray mouse lemur will help researchers understand which genetic traits set primates apart from other mammals and will ultimately help understand what genomic traits set humans apart from other primates.
It was argued that when two individuals were equally matched in fighting capacity, the one with the most need would win the conflict since it would have the most to lose.
Female aggression is often associated with, but not limited to, feeding.
The aye-aye is almost universally viewed unfavorably across Madagascar, though the tales vary from village to village and region to region.
Tool use has not been witnessed by lemurs in the wild, although in captivity the common brown lemur and the ring-tailed lemur have been demonstrated to be able to understand and use tools.
Locomotor postures and behaviors have included vertical clinging and leaping (including saltatory behavior), seen in indriids and bamboo lemurs; slow (loris-like) arboreal quadrupedal locomotion, once exhibited by ''Mesopropithecus''; fast arboreal quadrupedal locomotion, seen in true lemurs and ruffed lemurs; partially terrestrial quadrupedal locomotion, seen in the ring-tailed lemur; highly terrestrial quadrupedal locomotion, once exhibited by monkey lemurs such as ''Hadropithecus''; and sloth-like suspensory locomotion, once exhibited by many of the sloth lemurs, such as ''Palaeopropithecus''.
The ring-tailed lemur and a few other species have different calls and reactions to specific types of predators.
However, Dunkel ''et al.''
Instead, they evolved independently in isolation on Madagascar.
Different types of lemurs have evolved unique combinations of unusual traits to cope with Madagascar's harsh, seasonal climate.
Research facilities like the Duke Lemur Center have provided research opportunities under more controlled settings.
Reaching out and touching another individual in this species has been shown to be a submissive behavior, done by younger or submissive animals towards older and more dominant members of the troop.
In the toothcomb of most lemurs, the bottom incisors and canine teeth are procumbent (face forward rather than up) and finely spaced, thus providing a tool for either grooming or feeding.
The fovea on the retina; which yields higher visual acuity, is not well-developed.
It is most useful for communication between animals that rarely encounter each other.
Likewise, the red-bellied lemur (''Eulemur rubriventer'') has a feathery brush-shaped tongue, also uniquely adapted to feed on nectar and pollen.
***** Family Megaladapidae
True lemurs and ruffed lemurs are frugivorous, indriids are folivorous, and bamboo lemurs specialize in bamboo and other grasses.
Dwarf and mouse lemurs have up to four offspring, but both average only two.
Infants are protected while foraging by either leaving them in the nest or by stashing them in a hidden location, where the infant remains immobile in the absence of the parent.
They are often protected from hunting and consumption because of their resemblance to humans and their ancestors, mostly due to their large size and upright or orthograde posture.
Anthropoids, on the other hand, use allogrooming to manage agonistic interactions.
Woolly lemurs are unusual for nocturnal lemurs because they live in cohesive family groups and carry their single offspring with them rather than parking them.
** Suborder Haplorrhini
Like other strepsirrhine primates, such as lorises, pottos, and galagos, they share ancestral (or plesiomorphic) traits with early primates.
Economic hardships have caused people to move around the country in search of employment, leading local traditions to break down.
Long-term research focused on identified individuals is in its infancy and has only been started for a few populations.
In this capacity, they act as flagship species, the most notable of which is the ring-tailed lemur, which is considered an icon of the country.
Most lemur species, including most of the smallest lemurs and excluding some of the indriids, predominantly eat fruit (frugivory) when available.
However, the oldest lemur fossils on Madagascar are actually subfossils dating to the Late Pleistocene.
Multiple births in lemurs are normally fraternal, and are known to occur in every five to six births in species such as the ring-tailed lemur and some ''Eulemur''.
Other lemurs that do not exhibit dormancy conserve energy by selecting thermoregulated microhabitats (such as tree holes), sharing nests, and reducing exposed body surfaces, such as by hunched sitting and group huddling.
Using their long, powerful back legs, they catapult themselves into the air and land in an upright posture on a nearby tree, with both hands and feet tightly gripping the trunk.
Diurnal lemurs exhibit many of the social systems seen in monkeys and apes, living in relatively permanent and cohesive social groups.
Deforestation takes the form of local subsistence use, such as slash and burn agriculture (referred to as ''tavy'' in Malagasy), the creation of pasture for cattle through burning, and legal and illegal gathering of wood for firewood or charcoal production; commercial mining; and the illegal logging of precious hardwoods for foreign markets.
In this regard, lemurs are often confused with ancestral primates, when in actuality, lemurs did not give rise to monkeys and apes, but evolved independently.
If this is true, then multi-male groups in lemurs may differ fundamentally in their internal structure from those in catarrhine primates (Old World monkeys and apes).
In mouse lemurs, males utilize sperm plugs, developed enlarged testes during the mating season, and develop size dimorphism (likely due to the enlarged testes).
***** Family Megaladapidae
Isolated on Madagascar with only a limited number of mammalian competitors, the lemurs did not have to compete with other evolving arboreal mammalian groups, such as squirrels.
Likewise, mangroves appear to be rarely exploited by lemurs due to their high tannin content.
Even the higher-level taxonomy is disputed, with some experts preferring to place most lemurs within the infraorder Lemuriformes, while others prefer Lemuriformes to contain all living strepsirrhines, placing all lemurs in superfamily '''Lemuroidea''' and all lorises and galagos in the superfamily Lorisoidea.
A common assumption in mammalogy is that small mammals cannot subsist entirely on plant material and must have a high-calorie diet in order to survive.
Nutrient and toxin content (such as cyanide) help regulate food selection, though seasonal food preferences are also known to play a role.
The dominant view in the literature states that female dominance is an advantageous trait given the high costs of reproduction and the scarcity of resources available.
*** Infraorder Adapiformes
Many lemurs, including the ring-tailed lemur, have adapted to a highly seasonal environment, which has affected their birthrate, maturation, and twinning rate (r-selection).
captive breeding), and public education.
Although many animals exhibit this behavior, it is a rare trait among primates.
At the end of the dry season, their body mass may fall to half of what it was prior to the dry season.
*** '''Infraorder Lemuriformes'''
In other ways, ''fady'' does not protect all lemurs equally.
Lemurs generally have thin tooth enamel compared to anthropoid primates.
While Madagascar is rich in fern diversity, these plants are rarely eaten by lemurs.
In the decades that followed, huge strides have been made in lemur studies and many new species have been discovered.
Since the arrival of humans on the island approximately 2000&nbsp;years ago, all endemic Malagasy vertebrates over 10&nbsp;kg (22&nbsp;lb) have disappeared, including 17&nbsp;species, 8&nbsp;genera, and 3&nbsp;families of lemurs.
There are indications that deforestation and forest fragmentation are accelerating this gradual desiccation.
During this time, professional collectors gathered specimens for museums, menageries, and cabinets.
For example, indriids have relatively slow body growth but extremely fast tooth formation and eruption.
Inflorescences (clusters of flowers) of at least 60&nbsp;plant families are eaten by lemurs ranging in size from the tiny mouse lemurs to the relatively large ruffed lemurs.
Because of this, no one was allowed to mock, kill, or eat one.
Although it is generally agreed that the aye-aye is the most basal member of the lemur clade, the relationship between the other four families is less clear since they diverged during a narrow 10 to 12&nbsp;million-year window between the Late Eocene (42&nbsp;mya) and into the Oligocene (30&nbsp;mya).
From these collections, as well as increasing observations of lemurs in their natural habitats, museum systematists including Albert Günther and John Edward Gray continued to contribute new names for new lemur species.
For the last 1000 years, western and highland regions have been growing significantly drier, but in the past few decades, severe drought has become much more frequent.
In the case of Ranomafana National Park, job opportunities and other revenue from long-term research can rival that of ecotourism.
The other two species, the gray mouse lemur and the fat-tailed dwarf lemur (''Cheirogaleus medius''), avoid competition through reduced activity.
In fact, several unrelated Malagasy flowering plants demonstrate lemur-specific pollination traits, and studies indicate that some diurnal species, such as the red-bellied lemur and the ruffed lemurs, act as major pollinators.
Because their thumbs are only pseudo-opposable, making their movement less independent of the other fingers, their hands are less than perfect at grasping and manipulating objects.
Under the guidance of John Buettner-Janusch, who founded the Duke Lemur Center in 1966, Alison Jolly traveled to Madagascar in 1962 to study the diet and social behavior of the ring-tailed lemur and Verreaux's sifaka at Berenty Private Reserve.
Daily torpor constitutes less than 24 hours of dormancy, whereas prolonged torpor averages two weeks in duration and signals hibernation.
*** Infraorder Lorisiformes
A few lemurs have been noted to have relatively large brains.
In general, ''fady'' extend beyond a sense of the forbidden, but can include events that bring bad luck.
Prior to this movie, ''Zoboomafoo'', a Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) children's television series from 1999 to 2001, helped to popularize sifakas by featuring a live Coquerel's sifaka from the Duke Lemur Center as well as a puppet.
Ruffed lemurs use several loud calls that can be heard up to 1&nbsp;km (0.62&nbsp;mi) away on a clear, calm day.
These comparisons may not be fair since lemurs prefer to manipulate objects with their mouths (rather than their hands) and only take interest in objects when in captivity.
The following year, a new hypothesis was proposed to explain monomorphism, stating that because most female lemurs are only sexually receptive for a day or two each year, males can utilize a more passive form of mate guarding: copulatory plugs, which block the female reproductive tract, preventing other males from successfully mating with her, and thus reducing the need for aggression and the evolutionary drive for sexual dimorphism.
***** Family Archaeolemuridae
Scent factors heavily into lemur reproduction.
Lemurs time their mating and birth seasons so that all weaning periods are synchronized to match the time of highest food availability.
*** Infraorder Lorisiformes
With only a postorbital bar, lemurs have been unable to develop a fovea.
They accumulate fat reserves in their hind legs and the base of their tail before the dry winter season, when food and water are scarce, and can exhibit daily and prolonged torpor during the dry season.
The extinct ''Hadropithecus'' was as large as a large male baboon and had a comparably sized brain, giving it the largest brain size relative to body size among all prosimians.
However, the rapid increase in the number of recognized species has had its critics among taxonomists and lemur researchers.
Field studies have given insights on population dynamics and evolutionary ecology of most genera and many species.
As with most tropical fruit eaters, the lemur diet is dominated by fruit from ''Ficus'' (fig) species.
The ring-tailed lemur, for instance, seems to be less prone to the disorder than other lemur species.
As of 2005, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) listed 16% of all lemur species as critically endangered, 23% as endangered, 25% as vulnerable, 28% as "data deficient", and only 8% as least concern.
Instead, the long snouts may facilitate better chewing.
More taxonomic changes have occurred at the genus level, although these revisions have proven more conclusive, often supported by genetic and molecular analysis.
With mating calls, it has been shown that mouse lemurs that cannot be discerned visually respond more strongly to the calls of their own species, particularly when exposed to the calls of other mouse lemurs that they would encounter normally within their home range.
ravelobensis''), and Goodman's mouse lemur (''M.
This type of behavior was first documented in the 1960s in true lemur species as well as other Lemuridae species, such as ruffed lemurs and bamboo lemurs.
Lemurs are primates belonging to the suborder Strepsirrhini.
In many nocturnal species, for instance, the females, along with their young, will share nests with other females and possibly one male, whose larger home range happens to overlap one or more female nesting groups.
Multi-male groups are the most common, just as they are in most anthropoid primates.
Ranging in weight from the  mouse lemur to the  indri, lemurs share many common, basal primate traits, such as divergent digits on their hands and feet and nails instead of claws (in most species).
Before dry season, they will accumulate fat in white adipose tissue located at the base of the tail and hind legs, doubling their weight.
For instance, indri use their toothcomb not only for grooming, but also to pry out the large seeds from the tough epicarp of ''Beilschmiedia'' fruits, while fork-marked lemurs use their relatively long toothcomb to cut through tree bark to induce the flow of tree sap.
Small, isolated populations also risk extirpation by natural disasters and disease outbreaks (epizootics).
Although trends frequently distinguish the smaller, nocturnal lemurs from the larger, diurnal lemurs, there are often exceptions that help exemplify the unique and diverse nature of these Malagasy primates.
The IUCN Species Survival Commission (IUCN/SSC), the International Primatological Society (IPS), and Conservation International (CI) have included as many as five lemurs in their biennial "Top 25 Most Endangered Primates".
Lemur research focused on taxonomy and specimen collection during the 18th and 19th centuries.
Similarities that lemurs share with anthropoid primates, such as diet and social organization, along with their own unique traits, have made lemurs the most heavily studied of all mammal groups on Madagascar.
As a result, the father declared that anyone who tortures lemurs for fun shall "be destroyed and have no descendants."
***** Family Daubentoniidae
mongoz''), although the mongoose lemur has been observed mating outside of its pair bond.
As annual rainfall decreases, the larger trees that make up the high canopy suffer increased mortality, failure to fruit, and decreased production of new leaves, which folivorous lemurs prefer.
Bark has never been reported as an important food item in lemur diets, but at least four species eat it: the aye-aye, the red-tailed sportive lemur (''Lepilemur ruficaudatus''), the common brown lemur (''Eulemur fulvus''), and Verreaux's sifaka (''Propithecus verreauxi'').
Alternatively, the animal may appear as a benefactor.
These socioeconomic issues have complicated conservation efforts, even though the island of Madagascar has been recognized by IUCN/SSC as a critical primate region for over 20&nbsp;years.
The wet nose, or rhinarium, is a trait shared with other strepsirrhines and many other mammals, but not with haplorrhine primates.
Lastly, ferns have an unpleasant taste due to the high content of tannins in their fronds.
This trait is absent in haplorrhine primates, and its presence further limits the visual acuity in lemurs.
Captive lemur populations are maintained locally and outside of Madagascar in many zoos, although the diversity of species is limited.
The most noticeable revisions included the gradual split of a broadly defined genus ''Lemur'' into separate genera for the ring-tailed lemur, ruffed lemurs, and brown lemurs due to a host of morphological differences.
True lemurs show sexual dichromatism (sexual differences in fur coloration), but the difference between the genders varies from strikingly obvious, as in the blue-eyed black lemur (''E.
Molecular tests have now shown Daubentoniidae is basal to all Lemuriformes, and in 2008, Russell Mittermeier, Colin Groves, and others ignored addressing higher-level taxonomy by defining lemurs as monophyletic and containing five living families, including Daubentoniidae.
Known locally as ''babakoto'' ("Ancestor of Man"), the indri is sometimes seen as the progenitor of the family or clan.
Lemurs exhibit behavioral adaptations to complement this trait, including sunning behaviors, hunched sitting, group huddling, and nest sharing, in order to reduce heat loss and conserve energy.
One example of lemur ''fady'' told around 1970 comes from Ambatofinandrahana in the Fianarantsoa Province.
However, few species have been thoroughly studied to date, and most research has been preliminary and restricted to a single locality.
In 2008, a new hypothesis revised this model using simple game theory.
Olfaction can communicate information about age, sex, reproductive status, as well as demarcate the boundaries of a territory.
Once again, this suggests lower visual acuity in lemurs than in anthropoids.
Cyclones can defoliate an area, knock down canopy trees, and create landslides and flooding.
If people move to a new village or region, their ''fady'' may not apply to the lemur species that are locally present, making them available for consumption.
***** Family Indriidae
Although all studies place Cheirogaleidae and Lepilemuridae as a sister clade to Indriidae and Lemuridae, some suggest that Cheirogaleidae and Lepilemuridae diverged first, while others suggest that Indriidae and Lemuridae were the first to branch off.
Monogamous lemurs include the red-bellied lemur (''Eulemur rubriventer'') and the mongoose lemur (''E.
As of 1970, the people of the Marolambo District in the Toamasina Province feared the aye-aye because they believed it had supernatural powers.
As a result, it was thought that the diet of tiny primates must be high in protein-containing insects (insectivory).
Over the next five years, at least 28&nbsp;species were newly identified, none of which have had their conservation status assessed.
Their survival has required the ability to endure the persistent extremes, not yearly averages.
Rafting has since been the most accepted explanation for the lemur colonization of Madagascar, but until recently this trip was thought to be very unlikely because strong ocean currents flow away from the island.
Lemurs are hunted for food by the local Malagasy, either for local subsistence or to supply a luxury meat market in the larger cities.
Others favor a more thorough analysis.
Plant material makes up the majority of most lemur diets.
Differences in diet, social systems, activity patterns, locomotion, communication, predator avoidance tactics, breeding systems, and intelligence levels help define lemur taxa and set individual species apart from the rest.
However, when reproductive costs and extreme seasonality of resources were compared across primates, other primates demonstrated male dominance under conditions that were similar to or more challenging than those faced by lemurs.
Used together with the toothcomb on the mandible (lower jaw), this complex is reminiscent of an ungulate browsing pad.
Most lemurs, therefore, are either monochromats or dichromats.
During the 19th century, there was an explosion of new lemur descriptions and names, which later took decades to sort out.
All other lemurs have single births.
Male ring-tailed lemurs also have scent glands on the inside of their forearms, adjacent to a thorn-like spur, which they use to gouge, and simultaneously, scent-mark tree branches.
The ring-tailed lemur engages in "stink fights" by rubbing its tail across scent glands on its wrists, and then flicking its tail at other male opponents.
Soil consumption (geophagy) has also been reported and likely helps with digestion, provides minerals and salts, and helps absorb toxins.
