The Soviet Government had no effective counter-measure because of the country's lack of unemployment.
Holders of attractive positions clung to them as long as possible; mere incompetence was not seen as a good reason to dismiss anyone.
In 1973, the process of catching up with the rest of the West came to an abrupt end, and 1973 was seen by some scholars as the start of the Era of Stagnation.
National and international statesmen from around the globe attended his funeral.
In spite of this, opinion polls in Russia show Brezhnev to be the most popular Russian leader of the 20th century.
When Ukraine was occupied by the Germans in 1942, Brezhnev was sent to the Caucasus as deputy head of political administration of the Transcaucasian Front.
Anastas Mikoyan visited Khrushchev, hinting that he should not be too complacent about his present situation.
The state usually moved workers from one job to another, which ultimately became an ineradicable feature in Soviet industry.
With Kosygin's death in 1980, and due to his successor Nikolai Tikhonov's conservative approach to economics, very little of the reform was actually carried out.
By 1977, oil cost 84% more than it did in the late 1960s.
The last years of Brezhnev's rule were marked by a growing personality cult.
He had spent the entire war as a political commissar rather than a military commander.
He also conferred upon himself the rare Order of Victory in 1978 — the only time the decoration was ever awarded outside of World War II.
He had a daughter, Galina, and a son, Yuri.
He was buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis in Red Square.
These improved results were not encouraging.
While at the helm of the USSR, Brezhnev pushed for détente between the Eastern and Western countries.
Brezhnev was adept at the politics within the Soviet power structure.
By the mid-1970s, it had become clear that Henry Kissinger's policy of détente towards the Soviet Union had failed.
Experimentation with "links" was not disallowed on a local basis, with Mikhail Gorbachev, the then First Secretary of the Stavropol Regional Committee, experimenting with links in his region.
Brezhnev was born on 19 December 1906 in Kamianske in Ukraine), to metalworker Ilya Yakovlevich Brezhnev and his wife, Natalia Denisovna Mazalova.
Defence spending under Brezhnev between 1965 and 1970 increased by 40%, and annual increases continued thereafter.
Most of the increase in consumer production in the early Brezhnev era can be attributed to the Kosygin reform.
Nikita Khrushchev had initially supported North Vietnam out of "fraternal solidarity", but as the war escalated he had urged the North Vietnamese leadership to give up the quest of ''liberating'' South Vietnam.
The conditions given to the Soviets by the Chinese were the reduction of Soviet military presence in the Sino–Soviet border and the withdrawal of Soviets troops in Afghanistan and the Mongolian People's Republic and to end their support for the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.
Over the years he had become overweight.
Brezhnev's stabilisation policy included ending the liberalising reforms of Khrushchev, and clamping down on cultural freedom.
In 1964, a plenum of the Central Committee forbade any single individual to hold the two most powerful posts of the country (the office of the General Secretary and the Premier).
This led to an increase, though a minor one, in public support.
As a leader, Brezhnev took care to consult his colleagues before acting, but his attempt to govern without meaningful economic reforms led to a national decline by the mid-1970s, a period referred to as the Era of Stagnation.
The Soviet government claimed that Brezhnev was not seriously ill, but admitted that he was surrounded by doctors.
The harvest in the years following the Virgin Lands Campaign was disappointing, which would have hurt his political career had he remained in Kazakhstan.
Brezhnev's personality cult was growing outrageously at a time when his health was in rapid decline.
In Brezhnev's defence, it can be said that the Soviet Union reached unprecedented and never-repeated levels of power, prestige, and internal calm under his rule.
In 1935 and 1936, Brezhnev served his compulsory military service, and after taking courses at a tank school, he served as a political commissar in a tank factory.
The Soviet leadership gave its approval for this, as the Soviet Union could not afford to maintain its massive subsidy for the Eastern Bloc in the form of cheap oil and gas exports.
His eighteen-year term as General Secretary was second only to that of Joseph Stalin in duration.
The first crisis for Brezhnev's regime came in 1968, with the attempt by the Communist leadership in Czechoslovakia, under Alexander Dubček, to liberalise the Communist system (Prague Spring).
When the situation in Czechoslovakia was discussed with the Politburo, Brezhnev was not the one pushing hardest for the use of military force.
In an opinion poll by VTsIOM in 2007 the majority of Russians chose to live during the Brezhnev era rather than any other period of 20th century Soviet history.
Despite the apparent weaknesses of his memoirs, they were awarded the Lenin Prize for Literature and were met with critical acclaim by the Soviet press.
He continued by rejecting an offer of assistance made by the North Vietnamese government, and instead told them to enter negotiations in the United Nations Security Council.
Many of these prisoners were considered by the Soviet state to be mentally unfit and were hospitalised in mental asylums across the Soviet Union.
The first was that it was more comprehensive and wide-ranging in its aims, and included signing agreements on arms control, crisis prevention, East–West trade, European security and human rights.
He, with the help of fellow KGB associates, started circulating rumours that political corruption had become worse during Brezhnev's tenure as leader, in an attempt to create an environment hostile to Brezhnev in the Politburo.
The Eleventh Five-Year Plan of the Soviet Union delivered a disappointing result: a change in growth from 5 to 4%.
The most notable candidates were Suslov and Andrei Kirilenko, who were both older than Brezhnev, and Fyodor Kulakov and Konstantin Chernenko, who were younger; Kulakov died of natural causes in 1978.
After working on reconstruction projects in Ukraine, he again became General Secretary in Dnipropetrovsk.
Over the eighteen years that Brezhnev ruled the Soviet Union, average income per head increased by half; three-quarters of this growth came in the 1960s and early 1970s.
He was now a senior member of Khrushchev's entourage, and in June 1957, he backed Khrushchev in his struggle with Malenkov's Stalinist old guard in the Party leadership, the so-called "Anti-Party Group".
At this time, most senior officers of the CPSU wanted to keep Brezhnev alive, even if such men as Mikhail Suslov, Dmitriy Ustinov and Andrei Gromyko, among others, were growing increasingly frustrated with his policies.
Khrushchev's policy of amalgamating farms was continued by Brezhnev, because he shared Khrushchev's belief that bigger kolkhozes would increase productivity.
While at first standing for a decrease in all defense initiatives, the later years of Carter's presidency would increase spending on the U.S. military.
One of these reforms was the economic reform of 1965, initiated by Kosygin, though its origins are often traced back to the Khrushchev Era.
In 1936, he was transferred to the regional center of Dnipropetrovsk and, in 1939, he became Party Secretary in Dnipropetrovsk, in charge of the city's important defence industries.
In a Levada Center poll conducted in 2013, Brezhnev beat Vladimir Lenin as Russia's favourite leader in the 20th century with 56% approval.
In the 1970s, the Soviet Union reached the peak of its political and strategic power in relation to the United States.
Despite some increased tension under Khrushchev, East–West relations had generally improved, as evidenced by the Partial Test Ban Treaty, and the installation of the red telephone line between the White House and the Kremlin.
His physical condition was deteriorating; he was a lifelong heavy smoker, he had become addicted to sleeping pills, and had begun drinking to excess.
They did not want to risk a new period of domestic turmoil that might be caused by his death.
The intervention in Afghanistan, which was one of the major decisions of his career, also significantly undermined both the international standing and the internal strength of the Soviet Union.
His opponents then flocked to Brezhnev, and they helped him in his task of strengthening his position within the Soviet system.
The Era of Stagnation, a term coined by Mikhail Gorbachev, was seen as the result of a compilation of factors, including the ongoing "arms race" between the two superpowers, the Soviet Union and the United States; the decision of the Soviet Union to participate in international trade (thus abandoning the idea of economic isolation) while ignoring the changes occurring in Western societies; the increasing harshness of its policies, such as sending Soviet tanks to crush the Prague Spring in 1968; the intervention in Afghanistan; the stifling domestic bureaucracy overseen by a cadre of elderly men; the lack of economic reform; the political corruption, supply bottlenecks, and other unaddressed structural problems with the economy under Brezhnev's rule.
After years of declining health, Brezhnev died on 10 November 1982 and was quickly succeeded in his post as General Secretary by Yuri Andropov.
''Pravda'', a newspaper in the Soviet Union, wrote of new enduring themes such as collective leadership, scientific planning, consultation with experts, organisational regularity and the ending of schemes.
He was drafted into immediate military service during World War II and left the army in 1946 with the rank of major general.
During vacations, he lived in his Gosdacha in Zavidovo.
For the last two years Brezhnev was only a figurehead.
A significant increase in military expenditure, which by the time of Brezhnev's death stood at approximately 12.5% of the country's GNP, and an aging and ineffective leadership set the stage for a dwindling GNP compared to Western nations.
'''Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev''' (; ; , 19 December 1906 (O.S.
When the USSR's economic growth stalled in the 1970s, the standard of living and housing quality improved significantly.
Influenced by the Brezhnev allies, Politburo members voted to remove Khrushchev from office.
While some areas improved during the Brezhnev era, the majority of civilian services deteriorated and living conditions for Soviet citizens fell rapidly.
Until about 1962, Khrushchev's position as Party leader was secure; but as the leader aged, he grew more erratic and his performance undermined the confidence of his fellow leaders.
Brezhnev's vanity became a problem during his reign.
Brezhnev pushed for an increase in state investments in farming, which mounted to an all-time high in the 1970s of 27% of all state investment&nbsp;– this figure did not include investments in farm equipment.
When Brezhnev consolidated his power base in the 1960s, China was descending into crisis because of Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution, which led to the decimation of the Communist Party of China and other ruling offices.
In 1980 a political crisis emerged in Poland with the emergence of the Solidarity mass movement.
Finally Khrushchev understood what was happening, and said to Mikoyan, "If it's me who is the question, I will not make a fight of it."
The Soviet Union still out-produced the United States in the heavy industry sector during the Brezhnev era.
This program had been proposed to Joseph Stalin by Andrey Andreyev in the 1940s, and had been opposed by Khrushchev before and after Stalin's death.
He is often criticised for the prolonged Era of Stagnation, in which fundamental economic problems were ignored and the Soviet political system was allowed to decline.
Brezhnev lived at 26 Kutuzovsky Prospekt, Moscow.
The invasion led to public protests by dissidents in various Eastern Bloc countries.
Brezhnev became Second Secretary of the Central Committee in 1959, and in May 1960 was promoted to the post of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, making him the nominal head of state, although the real power resided with Khrushchev as First Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party.
trade would stop the aggressive growth of communism in the third world.
In the meantime, Kosygin was in charge of economic administration in his role as Chairman of the Council of Ministers.
The Gorbachevian discourse blamed Brezhnev for failing to modernise the country and to change with the times, although in a later statement Gorbachev made assurances that Brezhnev was not as bad as he was made out to be, saying, "Brezhnev was nothing like the cartoon figure that is made of him now."
During the earlier Tenth Five-Year Plan, they had tried to meet the target of 6.1% growth, but failed.
Full Sino–Soviet normalisations of relations would prove to take years, until the last Soviet ruler, Mikhail Gorbachev came to power.
However, in December 1981 he decided not to militarily intervene in Poland, instead allowing the country's government to impose martial law, and effectively marking the end of the Brezhnev Doctrine.
The summit was marked by a friendly atmosphere, but there were no concrete breakthroughs by either side.
Early policy reforms were seen as predictable.
Under Brezhnev's rule, the KGB infiltrated most, if not all, anti-government organisations, which ensured that there was little to no opposition against him or his power base.
During the Khrushchev years, Brezhnev had supported the leader's denunciations of Stalin's arbitrary rule, the rehabilitation of many of the victims of Stalin's purges, and the cautious liberalisation of Soviet intellectual and cultural policy.
In 1977, he forced the retirement of Podgorny and became once again Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, making this position equivalent to that of an executive president.
In 1973, the Soviet economy slowed, and began to lag behind that of the West due to the high level of expenditure on the armed forces and too little spending on light industry and consumer goods.
The beginning of the stagnation coincided with a financial crisis in Western Europe and the U.S. By the early 1970s, the Soviet Union had the world's second largest industrial capacity, and produced more steel, oil, pig-iron, cement and tractors than any other country.
The détente had rested on the assumption that a "linkage" of some type could be found between the two countries, with the U.S. hoping that the signing of SALT I and an increase in Soviet–U.S.
Brezhnev was interested in this offer initially, but after being told by Andrei Gromyko that the North Vietnamese government was not interested in a diplomatic solution to the war, Brezhnev rejected the offer.
In the year of Brezhnev's death in 1982, 15% of GNP was spent on the military.
Diseases were on the rise because of the decaying healthcare system.
With the Polish leadership split on what to do, the majority did not want to impose martial law, as suggested by Wojciech Jaruzelski.
In another poll in 2013, Brezhnev was voted the best Russian leader of the 20th century.
Former Chairman of the State Committee for State Security (KGB) Alexander Shelepin disliked the new collective leadership and its reforms.
Rigby argued that by the end of the 1960s, a stable oligarchic system had emerged in the Soviet Union, with most power vested around Brezhnev, Kosygin and Podgorny.
On his 70th birthday he was awarded the rank of Marshal of the Soviet Union&nbsp;– the highest military honour in the Soviet Union.
His tenure as leader was marked by the beginning of an era of economic and social stagnation in the Soviet Union.
In the meantime, Richard Nixon had been elected President of the United States.
At the same time he presided over the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia to stop the Prague Spring, and he sent the Soviet military to Afghanistan in an attempt to save the fragile regime, which was fighting a war against the CIA-backed mujahideen.
In February 1965, Kosygin travelled to Hanoi with a dozen Soviet air force generals and economic experts.
In the first half of the Brezhnev period, income per head increased by 3.5% per annum; slightly less growth than what it had been the previous years.
The only way he thought this was possible was by improving relations with both Communist China and the USSR.
In the aftermath of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, the Soviet leadership proclaimed the Brezhnev doctrine, which said the USSR had the right to intervene in any fraternal communist state that did not follow the Soviet model.
He was a team player and never acted rashly or hastily; unlike Khrushchev, he did not make decisions without substantial consultation from his colleagues, and was always willing to hear their opinions.
While the assessment was true at the time, it coincided with Brezhnev's strengthening of power by means of an apparent clash with Central Committee Secretariat Mikhail Suslov.
The import of cereal, which began under Khrushchev, had in fact become a normal phenomenon by Soviet standards.
Later that year he was appointed Party First Secretary in the Moldavian SSR.
Brezhnev's answer to these problems was to issue two decrees, one in 1977 and one in 1981, which called for an increase in the maximum size of privately owned plots within the Soviet Union to half a hectare.
Later that year, the 18th Army became part of the 1st Ukrainian Front, as the Red Army regained the initiative and advanced westward through Ukraine.
In October, Brezhnev was made deputy of political administration for the Southern Front, with the rank of Brigade-Commissar (Colonel).
However, Brezhnev refrained from the all-out violence seen under the rule of Stalin.
Andropov's actions showed that he was not afraid of Brezhnev's wrath.
The plan still left the bulk of the state's investment in industrial capital-goods production.
Brezhnev responded in his March 1982 speech in Tashkent where he called for the normalisation of relations.
During Brezhnev's rule, the global influence of the Soviet Union grew dramatically, in part because of the expansion of the Soviet military during this time.
Before 1973, the Soviet economy was expanding at a rate faster, by a small margin, than that of the United States.
Archival evidence suggests that Brezhnev was one of the few who was looking for a temporary compromise with the reform-friendly Czechoslovak government when their relationship was at the brink.
This was seen by some as proof that de-collectivisation was necessary to prevent Soviet agriculture from collapsing, but leading Soviet politicians shrank from supporting such drastic measures due to ideological and political interests.
The last significant reform undertaken by the Kosygin government, and some believe the pre-''perestroika'' era, was a joint decision of the Central Committee and the Council of Ministers named "Improving planning and reinforcing the effects of the economic mechanism on raising the effectiveness in production and improving the quality of work", more commonly known as the 1979 reform.
During Mikhail Gorbachev's tenure as leader there was an increase in criticism of the Brezhnev years, such as claims that Brezhnev followed "a fierce neo-Stalinist line".
Brezhnev temporarily left the Soviet Army with the rank of Major General in August 1946.
Brezhnev rarely appeared in public during 1982.
He worked to evacuate Dnipropetrovsk's industries to the east of the Soviet Union before the city fell to the Germans on 26 August, and then was assigned as a political commissar.
She had suffered for a long time from diabetes and was nearly blind in her last years.
6 December)&nbsp;– 10 November 1982) was the General Secretary of the Central Committee (CC) of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), presiding over the country from 1964 until his death in 1982.
While Brezhnev, albeit "sporadically", through Alexei Kosygin, attempted to reform the economy in the late 1960s and 1970s, he ultimately failed to produce any positive results.
In 1980-81 representatives from the Eastern Bloc nations met at the Kremlin to discuss the Polish situation.
In 1977 American intelligence officials publicly suggested that Brezhnev had also been suffering from gout, leukemia and emphysema.
He made a bid for the supreme leadership in 1965 by calling for restoration of "obedience and order".
Government industries such as factories, mines and offices were staffed by undisciplined personnel who put a great effort into not doing their jobs; this ultimately led, according to Robert Service, to a "work-shy workforce".
Brezhnev was born in Kamenskoye (now Kamianske, Ukraine) into a Russian worker's family.
Brezhnev and his companions supported the general party line taken after Joseph Stalin's death, but felt that Khrushchev's reforms had removed much of the Soviet Union's stability.
In the meantime, the country was governed by Andrei Gromyko, Dmitriy Ustinov, Mikhail Suslov and Yuri Andropov while crucial Politburo decisions were made in his absence.
By the end of October, Solidarity had 3 million members, and by December, had 9 million.
Outwardly, Brezhnev remained loyal to Khrushchev, but became involved in a 1963 plot to remove the leader from power, possibly playing a leading role.
The consensus within the party was that the collective leadership prevailed over the supreme leadership of one individual.
In 1950, he became a deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union's highest legislative body.
Agricultural output in 1980 was 21% higher than the average production rate between 1966 and 1970.
The reform led to a backlash, and party conservatives continued to oppose Kosygin after witnessing the results of reforms leading up to the Prague Spring.
Brezhnev was recalled to Moscow in 1956.
The U.S. ended the Vietnam War in a stalemate and lost Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam to communism.
During his eighteen years as Leader of the USSR, Brezhnev's only major foreign policy innovation was détente.
He suffered a severe stroke in May 1982, but refused to relinquish office.
The Johnson administration responded to this rejection by expanding the American presence in Vietnam, but later invited the USSR to negotiate a treaty concerning arms control.
After Gerald Ford lost the presidential election to Jimmy Carter, American foreign policies became more hostile towards the Soviet Union and the communist world, though attempts were also made to stop funding for some repressive anti-communist governments the United States supported.
Another sector that was hitting the wall was the sugar beet harvest, which had declined by 2% in the 1970s.
Also in 1963, Brezhnev succeeded Frol Kozlov, another Khrushchev protégé, as Secretary of the Central Committee, positioning him as Khrushchev's likely successor.
American Henry A. Kissinger, in the 1960s, mistakenly believed Kosygin to be the dominant leader of Soviet foreign policy in the Politburo.
A CIA report suggested the Soviet military were mobilising for an invasion.
Alexei Kosygin was appointed head of government, and Mikoyan was retained as head of state.
Output quotas continued to be imposed centrally.
Cereal crop output increased by 18%.
When Khrushchev left the public spotlight, there was no popular commotion, as most Soviet citizens, including the intelligentsia, anticipated a period of stabilisation, steady development of Soviet society and continuing economic growth in the years ahead.
Thousands of Moscow inhabitants became homeless, most of them living in shacks, doorways and parked trams.
The state provided recreation facilities and annual holidays for hard-working citizens.
Brezhnev eventually concluded on 10 December 1981 that it would be better to leave the domestic matters of Poland alone, reassuring the Polish delegates that the USSR would intervene only if asked to.
In addition, some members of the Central Committee wanted him to undergo punishment of some kind.
At the same time, Brezhnev had problems of his own, the Czechoslovakian leadership were also deviating from the Soviet model.
One of the most prominent critics of Brezhnev's economical policies was Mikhail Gorbachev who, when leader, called the economy under Brezhnev's rule "the lowest stage of socialism".
President Carter, following the advice of his National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, denounced the intervention, describing it as the "most serious danger to peace since 1945".
In February 1956, Brezhnev returned to Moscow, was made candidate member of the Politburo assigned in control of the defense industry, the space program including the Baykonur Cosmodrome, heavy industry, and capital construction.
Nikolai Podgorny warned him of this, but Brezhnev replied, "If they are poking fun at me, it means they like me."
During this period, Brezhnev was gathering enough support to strengthen his position within Soviet politics.
His love of medals (he received over 100) was well known, so in December 1966, on his 60th birthday, he was awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union.
He was honoured with a state funeral, which was followed with a five-day period of nationwide mourning.
Brezhnev and Nikolai Podgorny appealed to the Central Committee, blaming Khrushchev for economic failures, and accusing him of voluntarism and immodest behavior.
The book was followed by two other books, one on the Virgin Lands Campaign.
In the West he is most commonly remembered for starting the economic stagnation that triggered the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union extended its diplomatic and political influence in the Middle East and Africa.
Brezhnev's way of resolving these issues was to increase state investment.
The Ninth Five-Year Plan delivered a change: for the first time industrial consumer products out-produced industrial capital goods.
According to one American intelligence expert, United States officials knew for several years that Brezhnev had suffered from severe arteriosclerosis and believed he had suffered from other unspecified ailments as well.
While a minority headed by Mikoyan wanted to remove Khrushchev from the office of First Secretary but retain him as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, the majority, headed by Brezhnev, wanted to remove him from active politics altogether.
Instead of paying more attention to the economy, the Soviet leadership under Brezhnev tried to improve the living standard in the Soviet Union by extending social benefits.
On the surface, his brief was simple: to make the new lands agriculturally productive.
Vladimir Semichastny, head of the KGB, was a crucial part of the conspiracy, as it was his duty to inform Khrushchev if anyone was plotting against his leadership.
The USSR also kept a steady pace with the economies of Western Europe.
Brezhnev soon would maximize his grip on power and would be the dominating authority in the collective leadership.
In 1962, Brezhnev became an honorary citizen of Belgrade.
While having been known for his anti-communist rhetoric, Nixon said in 1971 that the U.S. "''must'' have relations with Communist China".
Shelepin failed to gather support in the Presidium and Brezhnev's position was fairly secure; he was able to remove Shelepin from office in 1967.
Brezhnev's main passion was driving foreign cars given to him by leaders of state from across the world.
Galina in her later life became an alcoholic who together with a circus director started a gold-bullion fraud gang in the later years of the Soviet Union.
During the Stalin era in the 1930s and 1940s, a common labourer could expect promotion to a white-collar job if he studied and obeyed Soviet authorities.
At about this time First World commentators started guessing Brezhnev's heirs apparent.
By the mid-1970s, there were an estimated 1,000  to 10,000 political and religious prisoners across the Soviet Union, living in grievous conditions and suffering from malnutrition.
After Khrushchev's ousting, Brezhnev resumed aiding the communist resistance in Vietnam.
In 1952, he had a meeting with Stalin after which Stalin promoted Brezhnev to the Communist Party's Central Committee as a candidate member of the Presidium (formerly the Politburo).
The second part of the policy was based on the importance of equalising the military strength of the United States and the Soviet Union.
