Other students in the class included Lukas Foss, who also became a lifelong friend.
During this period in New York City, Bernstein enjoyed an exuberant social life that included relationships with both men and women.
In 1958, Bernstein and Mitropoulos took the New York Philharmonic on tour to South America.
Shirley Rhoades Perle, another friend of Bernstein, said that she thought "he required men sexually and women emotionally."
He had conducted the same work in West Berlin the previous day.
Part of the rehearsal for the concert was released on CD by the orchestra.
Bernstein served as artistic director and taught conducting there until 1984.
The concert was later issued on CD as ''Leonard Bernstein – The Final Concert'' by Deutsche Grammophon (catalog number 431 768).
After two decades of research and implementation across the United States, Artful Learning Schools demonstrate that Units of Study that utilize rigor, cognitive complexity and deep understanding through a commitment to collaborative and independent learning demonstrate high levels of student engagement and academic achievement.
Some of his recordings of works by these composers would likely appear on many music critics' lists of recommended recordings.
The full reasons will probably never be known&nbsp;– reports suggest they were on friendly terms when they met, but sometimes practiced a little mutual one-upmanship.
That same year, he produced his score to the musical ''Wonderful Town'' at very short notice, working again with his old friends Comden and Green, who wrote the lyrics.
In a 1990 Rolling Stone interview Bernstein outlined his conception of a school called  The Academy for the Love of Learning.
The second was Bernstein's collaboration with the choreographer Jerome Robbins, the writer Arthur Laurents, and the lyricist Stephen Sondheim to produce the musical ''West Side Story''.
Unlike his studio recordings for Columbia Masterworks, most of his later Deutsche Grammophon recordings were taken from live concerts (or edited together from several concerts with additional sessions to correct errors).
Bernstein's final farewell to the State Opera happened accidentally in 1989: following a performance of Modest Mussorgsky's ''Khovanshchina'', he unexpectedly entered the stage and embraced conductor Claudio Abbado in front of a cheering audience.
In 1967, he conducted a concert on Mt.
Bernstein himself said his main motivation for composing was "to communicate" and that all his pieces, including his symphonies and concert works, "could in some sense be thought of as 'theatre' pieces."
Perhaps the closest are composers like John Adams, who from the 1970s onwards indirectly adopted elements of his eclectic, theatrical style.
This was the first time Bernstein had conducted the orchestra in subscription concerts since 1951.
As the first American-born music director of the New York Philharmonic, his rise to prominence was a factor in overcoming the perception of the time that the top conductors were necessarily trained in Europe.
It featured parts of Bernstein's rehearsals and performance for the Otto Schenk production of ''Fidelio'', Bernstein playing the 1st piano concerto and the Ninth Symphony with the Vienna Philharmonic and the young Plácido Domingo amongst the soloists.
He became instantly famous because the concert was nationally broadcast on CBS Radio, and afterwards Bernstein started to appear as a guest conductor with many U.S. orchestras.
Mitropoulos was not stylistically that similar to Bernstein, but he probably influenced some of Bernstein's later habits such as his conducting from the keyboard, his initial practice of conducting without a baton and perhaps his interest in Mahler.
Partly due to these appearances, Bernstein was named the music director of the New York Philharmonic in 1957, replacing Dimitri Mitropoulos.
Bernstein wrote and conducted the musical score for the production Davidson mounted of Aristophanes' play ''The Birds'' in the original Greek.
Schonberg was often (though not always) harshly critical of Bernstein as a conductor during his tenure as Music Director.
His first aspirations for social change were made apparent in his producing (as a student) a recently banned opera, ''The Cradle Will Rock'', by Marc Blitzstein, about the disparity between the working and upper class.
He officially changed his name to ''Leonard'' when he was fifteen, shortly after his grandmother's death.
''The New York Times'' initially covered the gathering as a lifestyle item, but later posted an editorial harshly unfavorable to Bernstein following generally negative reaction to the widely publicized story.
Throughout his life, he professed admiration and friendship for Gould.
His political life received substantial press coverage though in 1970, due to a gathering hosted at his Manhattan apartment on January 14, 1970.
All of these were filmed for Unitel with the exception of the 1967 Mahler 2nd, which instead Bernstein filmed with the London Symphony Orchestra in Ely Cathedral in 1973.
When he won the Japan Arts Association award for lifetime achievement, he used the $100,000 that came with the award to build such a school in Nashville, that would strive to teach teachers how to better integrate music, dance, and theater into the school system which was "not working".
However, his public standing and many of his close friendships appear to have remained unaffected, and he resumed his busy schedule of musical activity.
Perhaps the harshest criticism he received from some critics in his lifetime though was directed at works like his ''Kaddish Symphony'', his ''MASS'' and the opera ''A Quiet Place'', where they found the underlying message of the piece or the text as either mildly embarrassing, clichéd or offensive.
Bernstein received the Kennedy Center Honors award in 1980.
He wasn't conflicted about it at all.
During his time in Vienna he also recorded the opera for Columbia Records and conducted his first subscription concert with the Vienna Philharmonic (which is made up of players from the Vienna State Opera) featuring Mahler's ''Das Lied von der Erde'' with Fischer-Dieskau and James King.
In any case, reports also differ on Ives's exact reaction, but some suggest he was thrilled and danced a little jig.
In 1966 he made his debut at the Vienna State Opera conducting Luchino Visconti's production of the same opera with Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau as Falstaff.
For the occasion, Bernstein reworded Friedrich Schiller's text of the ''Ode to Joy'', substituting the word ''Freiheit'' (freedom) for  ''Freude'' (joy).
Bernstein recorded extensively from the mid-1940s until just a few months before his death.
During his many years of teaching at Tanglewood and elsewhere, he directly taught or mentored many conductors who are performing now, including John Mauceri, Marin Alsop, Herbert Blomstedt, Edo de Waart, Alexander Frey, Paavo Järvi, Eiji Oue, Maurice Peress, Seiji Ozawa (who made his American TV debut as the guest conductor on one of the ''Young People's Concerts''), Carl St.Clair, Helmuth Rilling, Michael Tilson Thomas, and Jaap van Zweden.
He recorded it for a second time with the orchestra on tour in Japan in 1979.
In 1988 Bernstein's 70th birthday was celebrated by a lavish televised gala at Tanglewood featuring many performers who had worked with him over the years.
'', originally published in ''The New York Times'' and later reprinted in his 1959 book ''The Joy of Music.''
In 1985, he conducted a recording of ''West Side Story'', the first time he had conducted the entire work.
Bernstein was also at the time a committed supporter of nuclear disarmament.
He was probably the main conductor from the 1960s onwards who acquired a sort of superstar status similar to that of Herbert von Karajan, although unlike Karajan he conducted relatively little opera and part of Bernstein's fame was based on his role as a composer.
Since his death many of his works have been commercially recorded by artists other than himself.
His fame derived from his long tenure as the music director of the New York Philharmonic, from his conducting of concerts with most of the world's leading orchestras, and from his music for ''West Side Story'', ''Peter Pan'', ''Candide'', ''Wonderful Town'', ''On the Town'', ''On the Waterfront'', his ''Mass'', and a range of other compositions, including three symphonies and many shorter chamber and solo works.
In total Bernstein was awarded 16 Grammys for his recordings in various categories, including several for posthumously released recordings.
Leonard Bernstein is also a member of both the American Theater Hall of Fame, and the Television Hall of Fame.
A TV documentary showing the making of the recording was made at the same time and is available on DVD.
In 2010 many of these recordings were repackaged in a 60 CD "Bernstein Symphony Edition".
The other important influence that Bernstein first met during his Harvard years was composer Aaron Copland, whom he met at a concert and then at a party afterwards on Copland's birthday in 1938.
Bernstein also mounted a student production of ''The Cradle Will Rock'', directing its action from the piano as the composer Marc Blitzstein had done at the premiere.
In his first season in sole charge, Bernstein included a season-long survey of American classical music.
In the late 1960s, Bernstein himself reflected that his eclecticism was in part due to his lack of lengthy periods devoted to composition, and that he was still seeking to enrich his own personal musical language in the manner of the great composers of the past, all of whom had borrowed elements from others.
There are reports, though, that Bernstein did sometimes have brief extramarital liaisons with young men, which several family friends have said his wife knew about.
This included a complete cycle of the Mahler symphonies (with the Vienna Philharmonic and London Symphony Orchestra), as well as complete cycles of the Beethoven, Brahms and Schumann symphonies recorded at the same series of concerts as the audio recordings by Deutsche Grammophon.
Although he never taught Bernstein, Mitropoulos's charisma and power as a musician was a major influence on Bernstein's eventual decision to take up conducting.
He became as famous for his educational work in those concerts as for his conducting.
Bernstein recorded the 2nd symphony with the orchestra in 1958 for Columbia and 1987 for Deutsche Grammophon.
His most popular pieces were the ''Overture to Candide'', the ''Symphonic Dances from West Side Story'', the ''Serenade for Violin, Strings, Harp and Percussion'' and the ''Three Dance Episodes from On the Town''.
He was born '''Louis Bernstein''' in Lawrence, Massachusetts, the son of Ukrainian-Jewish parents Jennie (née Resnick) and Samuel Joseph Bernstein, a hairdressing supplies wholesaler originating from Rovno (now Ukraine).
Bernstein was the first conductor to give numerous television lectures on classical music, starting in 1954 and continuing until his death.
Bernstein also collaborated with the experimental jazz pianist and composer Dave Brubeck resulting in the recording "Bernstein Plays Brubeck Plays Bernstein" (1961).
In the summer of 1990, Bernstein and Michael Tilson Thomas founded the Pacific Music Festival in Sapporo, Japan.
He shared an apartment with his friend Adolph Green and often accompanied Green, Betty Comden and Judy Holliday in a comedy troupe called The Revuers who performed in Greenwich Village.
This Opera had been virtually abandoned in the performance archive and the two of them learnt in a week.
In his opening address Bernstein said that he had decided to devote what time he had left to education.
He had for a long time wanted to develop an international school to help promote the integration of arts into education.
Extreme examples of this style can be found in his Deutsche Grammophon recordings of Nimrod from Elgar's ''Enigma Variations'' (1982), the end of Mahler's 9th Symphony (1985), and the finale of Tchaikovsky's ''Pathetique Symphony'' (1986), where in each case the tempos are well below those typically chosen.
'''Leonard Bernstein''' (; August 25, 1918&nbsp;– October 14, 1990) was an American composer, conductor, author, music lecturer, and pianist.
Hastily written in places, the work represented a fusion not only of different religious traditions (Latin liturgy, Hebrew prayer, and plenty of contemporary English lyrics) but also of different musical styles, including classical and rock music.
''cum laude''), he enrolled at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia.
''Candide'' had had a troubled history, with many rewrites and writers involved.
He also strengthened his relationship with the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra&nbsp;– he conducted all nine completed Mahler symphonies with them (plus the adagio from the 10th) in the period from 1967 to 1976.
His music was rooted in tonality but in some works like his ''Kaddish Symphony'' and the opera ''A Quiet Place'' he mixed in 12-tone elements.
While Bernstein was very well known for his music compositions and conducting, he was also known for his outspoken political views and his strong desire to further social change.
A longtime heavy smoker, he had battled emphysema from his mid-50s.
As he got older his performances tended to be overlaid to a greater extent with a personal expressiveness which often divided critical opinion.
Bernstein's concert and recording were based on a "final" version that had been first performed by Scottish Opera in 1988.
The success of these recordings, along with Bernstein's concert performances and television talks, was an important, if not vital, part of the revival of interest in Mahler in the 1960s, especially in the U.S.
His grandmother insisted that his first name be ''Louis'', but his parents always called him ''Leonard'', which they preferred.
His score to the ballet ''Fancy Free'' choreographed by Jerome Robbins opened in New York in April 1944 and this was later developed into the musical ''On the Town'' with lyrics by Comden and Green that opened on Broadway in December 1944.
Bernstein was one of the major figures in orchestral conducting in the second half of the 20th century.
Most biographies of Bernstein state that his lifestyle became more excessive and his personal behavior sometimes cruder after her death.
It led to the popularization of "radical chic" as a critical term.
However, the pitch involved a Bernstein-conducted SNL version of West Side Story, and Bernstein was uninterested.
He began his tenure in that position in 1958, having held the post jointly with Mitropoulos from 1957 to 1958.
As a child, Bernstein attended the Garrison Grammar School and Boston Latin School.
Sam initially opposed young Leonard's interest in music.
Bernstein is reported to have often spoken of his terrible guilt over his wife's death.
The next year she was diagnosed with lung cancer and eventually Bernstein moved back in with her and cared for her until she died on June 16, 1978.
Professional criticism of Bernstein's music often involves discussing the degree to which he created something new as art versus simply skillfully borrowing and fusing together elements from others.
His typical pattern of recording at that time was to record major works in the studio immediately after they were presented in the orchestra's subscription concerts or on one of the ''Young People's Concerts'', with any spare time used to record short orchestral showpieces and similar works.
Like his earlier activity in Los Angeles, this was a summer training school for musicians modeled on Tanglewood, and is still in existence.
It was to prove a unique collaboration and Callas and Bernstein went on to perform together many times – he found her vocal reach and dramatic powers of interpretation inspiring; they developed a very close musical relationship which enhanced both their careers.
Bernstein added, "I'm sure that Beethoven would have given us his blessing."
Themed programming of this sort was fairly novel at that time compared to the present day.
(The 1949 film version only contains four of Bernstein's original numbers.)
A video showing Bernstein speaking and rehearsing at the first Festival is available on DVD in Japan.
In 1954 Bernstein made the first of his television lectures for the CBS arts program Omnibus.
Bernstein was already at this time suffering from the lung disease that would lead to his death.
The show, originally entitled ''Beethoven's Birthday: A Celebration in Vienna'', won an Emmy and was issued on DVD in 2005.
Bernstein eventually recorded a complete cycle in New York of Sibelius's symphonies and three of Nielsen's symphonies (Nos.
As a composer he wrote in many styles encompassing symphonic and orchestral music, ballet, film and theatre music, choral works, opera, chamber music and pieces for the piano.
The program included works by Schumann, Miklós Rózsa, Wagner and Richard Strauss's ''Don Quixote'' with soloist Joseph Schuster, solo cellist of the orchestra.
On December 25, 1989, Bernstein conducted Beethoven's Symphony No.
In addition to conducting in New York, Vienna and Israel, Bernstein was a regular guest conductor of other orchestras in the 1980s.
For the rest of the 1980s he continued to conduct, teach, compose, and produce the occasional TV documentary.
His family spent their summers at their vacation home in Sharon, Massachusetts.
Bernstein is buried in Green-Wood Cemetery, Brooklyn, New York, next to his wife and with a copy of Mahler's Fifth lying across his heart.
Both Bernstein and his wife Felicia responded to the criticism, arguing that they were motivated not by a shallow desire to express fashionable sympathy but by their concern for civil liberties.
In 1960 Bernstein also made his first commercial recording of a Mahler symphony (the fourth) and over the next seven years he made the first complete cycle of recordings of all nine of Mahler's completed symphonies.
On November 14, 1943, having recently been appointed assistant conductor to Artur Rodziński of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, he made his major conducting debut at sudden notice—and without any rehearsal—after guest conductor Bruno Walter came down with the flu.
One oddity of the recording is that the trombone section fails to enter at the climax of the finale, as a result of an audience member fainting just behind the trombones a few seconds earlier.
He returned to the State Opera in 1968 for a production of ''Der Rosenkavalier'' and in 1970 for Otto Schenk's production of Beethoven's ''Fidelio''.
In the book ''Dinner with Lenny'', published in October 2013, author Jonathan Cott provided a thorough debunking, in the conductor's own words, of the legend which Bernstein himself described in the book as "one&nbsp;... that won't go away".
Koussevitsky perhaps did not teach Bernstein much basic conducting technique (which he had already developed under Reiner) but instead became a sort of father figure to him and was perhaps the major influence on Bernstein's emotional way of interpreting music.
Throughout his career, Bernstein often talked about the music of Ives, who died in 1954.
We haven't done too much with the idea yet, but it's registered as a nonprofit corporation, and besides the obvious attempts to get music and kids together, there will be the overriding goal of teaching teachers to discover their own love of learning.''
His later recordings (starting with Bizet's Carmen in 1972) were mostly made for Deutsche Grammophon, though he would occasionally return to the Columbia Masterworks label.
The festival was named after him in 2005, becoming the Leonard Bernstein Festival of the Creative Arts.
Despite the fact that he was a popular success as a composer, Bernstein himself is reported to have been disillusioned that some of his more serious works were not rated more highly by critics, and that he himself had not been able to devote more time to composing because of his conducting and other activities.
After World War II, Bernstein's career on the international stage began to flourish.
He also conducted an LP of his 1944 musical ''On The Town'', the first (almost) complete recording of the original featuring several members of the original Broadway cast, including Betty Comden and Adolph Green.
Commissioned by Jacqueline Kennedy for the opening of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C., it was partly intended as an anti-war statement.
(Karajan did conduct the New York Philharmonic during Bernstein's tenure.)
He announced his retirement from conducting on October 9, 1990, and died of a heart attack five days later.
His first Young People's Concert was televised a few weeks after his tenure began as principal conductor of the New York Philharmonic.
Bernstein later became Koussevitzky's conducting assistant and would later dedicate his Symphony No.
These included the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra in Amsterdam, with whom he recorded Mahler's First, Fourth, and Ninth Symphonies amongst other works; the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra in Munich, with whom he recorded Wagner's ''Tristan und Isolde''; Haydn's ''Creation''; Mozart's ''Requiem'' and ''Great Mass in C minor''; and the orchestra of Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia in Rome, with whom he recorded some Debussy and Puccini's ''La bohème''.
Bernstein conducted the gala opening concert featuring vocal works by Mahler, Beethoven and Vaughan Williams, and the premiere of Aaron Copland's ''Connotations'', a serial-work that was merely politely received.
Artful Learning is based on Bernstein's philosophy that the arts can strengthen learning and be incorporated in all academic subjects.
''Red Channels'' was issued by the right-wing journal ''Counterattack'' and was edited by Vincent Hartnett, who was later found to have libeled and defamed the noted radio personality John Henry Faulk.
His recordings of ''Rhapsody in Blue'' (full-orchestra version) and ''An American in Paris'' for Columbia Records, released in 1959, are considered definitive by many, although Bernstein cut the ''Rhapsody'' slightly, and his more 'symphonic' approach with slower tempi is quite far from Gershwin's own conception of the piece, evident from his two recordings.
In 1949, he conducted the world première of the ''Turangalîla-Symphonie'' by Olivier Messiaen, with the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
Further Omnibus lectures followed from 1955 to 1958 (later on ABC and then NBC) covering jazz, conducting, American musical comedy, modern music, J.S.
He was among the first conductors born and educated in the US to receive worldwide acclaim.
In a book released in October 2013, ''The Leonard Bernstein Letters'', his wife reveals his homosexuality.
He also undoubtedly influenced the career choices of many American musicians who grew up watching his television programmes in the 1950s and 60s.
After much personal struggle and a turbulent on-off engagement, he married the Chilean-born American actress Felicia Cohn Montealegre on September 10, 1951.
The ''Serenade'', which has been recorded more than 10 times, is probably his most recorded work not taken from an actual theatre piece.
The lectures are presently available in both book and DVD form.
During his time at Curtis, Bernstein studied conducting with Fritz Reiner (who anecdotally is said to have given Bernstein the only "A grade" he ever awarded), piano with Isabelle Vengerova, orchestration with Randall Thompson, counterpoint with Richard Stöhr, and score reading with Renée Longy Miquelle.
Bernstein reused some of this music in the ballet ''Fancy Free''.
The move was not without controversy because of acoustic problems with the new hall.
One suggestion is that he chose to marry partly to dispel rumors about his private life to help secure a major conducting appointment, following advice from his mentor Dimitri Mitropoulos about the conservative nature of orchestra boards.
In 1961 Bernstein had conducted at President John F. Kennedy's pre-inaugural gala, and he was an occasional guest in the Kennedy White House.
Other non-U.S. composers that Bernstein championed to some extent at the time include the Danish composer Carl Nielsen (who was then only little known in the U.S.) and Jean Sibelius, whose popularity had by then started to fade.
He took jobs with a music publisher, transcribing music or producing arrangements under the pseudonym Lenny Amber.
In 1978, Bernstein returned to the Vienna State Opera to conduct a revival of the Otto Schenk production of ''Fidelio'', now featuring Gundula Janowitz and Rene Kollo in the lead roles.
The recording was Bernstein's first for Deutsche Grammophon and won a Grammy.
The article contrasted the Bernsteins' comfortable lifestyle in one of the world's most expensive neighborhoods with the anti-establishment politics of the Black Panthers.
In 1959, he took the New York Philharmonic on a tour of Europe and the Soviet Union, portions of which were filmed by CBS Television.
The Leonard Bernstein Center was established in April 1992, and initiated extensive school-based research, resulting in the Bernstein Model, the Leonard Bernstein Artful Learning Program.
In January 1944 he conducted the premiere of his ''Jeremiah Symphony'' in Pittsburgh.
The recording, featuring what some critics felt were miscast opera singers such as Kiri Te Kanawa, José Carreras, and Tatiana Troyanos in the leading roles, was nevertheless an international bestseller.
2, ''The Age of Anxiety'', to him.
Although he was not formally Copland's student as such, Bernstein would regularly seek advice from Copland in the following years about his own compositions and would often cite him as "his only real composition teacher".
This included his three symphonies, his ballets, and the ''Symphonic Dances'' from ''West Side Story'' with the New York Philharmonic.
In addition to being an active conductor, Bernstein was an influential teacher of conducting.
''I and a musician friend named Aaron Stern have conceived of an institution called the Academy for the Love of Learning.
Within the world of professional music, they were distinguished from each other by the use of the nicknames ''Bernstein West'' (Elmer) and ''Bernstein East'' (Leonard).
Other orchestras he conducted on numerous occasions in the 1970s include the Israel Philharmonic, the Orchestre National de France, and the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
That same year, Arturo Toscanini invited Bernstein to guest conduct two concerts with the NBC Symphony Orchestra, one of which again featured Bernstein as soloist in the Ravel concerto.
In addition to becoming known as a conductor, Bernstein also emerged as a composer in the same period.
After stepping down from the New York Philharmonic, Bernstein continued to appear with them in most years until his death, and he toured with them to Europe in 1976 and to Asia in 1979.
Bernstein also continued to make his own TV documentaries during the 1980s, including ''The Little Drummer Boy'', in which he discussed the music of Gustav Mahler, perhaps the composer he was most passionately interested in, and ''The Love of Three Orchestras'', in which he discussed his work in New York, Vienna, and Israel.
3, "Kaddish" excerpt) in the Sala Nervi at the Vatican.
The program was first telecast in 1970 on Austrian and British television, and then on CBS in the U.S. on Christmas Eve 1971.
Some of Bernstein's music lectures were released on records; a recording of ''Humor in Music'' was awarded a Grammy award for Best Documentary or Spoken Word Recording (other than comedy) in 1961.
Notable exceptions include recordings of Gustav Mahler's ''Song of the Earth'' and Mozart's 15th piano concerto and "Linz" symphony with the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra for Decca Records (1966); Berlioz's ''Symphonie fantastique'' and ''Harold in Italy'' (1976) for EMI; and Wagner's ''Tristan und Isolde'' (1981) for Philips Records, a label that like Deutsche Grammophon was part of PolyGram at that time.
He also conducted at the funeral mass in 1968 for the late President Kennedy's brother Robert Kennedy.
This reaction culminated in June 1970 with the appearance of "Radical Chic: That Party at Lenny's", an essay by satirist Tom Wolfe featured on the cover of ''New York'' Magazine.
The Israel Philharmonic celebrated his involvement with them at Festivals in Israel and Austria in 1977.
At the party Bernstein played Copland's ''Piano Variations'', a thorny work Bernstein loved without knowing anything about its composer until that evening.
In 1946, he made his overseas debut with the Czech Philharmonic in Prague.
The composer's widow, Alma, attended some of Bernstein's rehearsals.
Before the concert Bernstein briefly spoke to Bruno Walter, who discussed particular difficulties in the works he was to perform.
During the intermission Bernstein kissed the cheek of the President's wife Jacqueline Kennedy, a break with protocol that was commented on at the time.
One of the concerts was broadcast on radio and was posthumously released on CD by Deutsche Grammophon.
The recording was one of the first in stereo to use the original spoken dialogue between the sung portions of the opera, rather than the musical recitatives that were composed by Ernest Guiraud after Bizet's death.
In 1982, he and Ernest Fleischmann founded the Los Angeles Philharmonic Institute as a summer training academy along the lines of Tanglewood.
Bach, and grand opera.
The composer, old and frail, was unable (some reports say unwilling) to attend the concert, but his wife did.
All of them were released on DVD by Kultur Video (half of them in 2013).
As he went on in his career Bernstein would go on to fight for everything from the influences of "American Music" to the disarming of western nuclear weapons.
Many of these films appeared on Laserdisc and are now on DVD.
Noam Chomsky wrote in 2007 on the Znet forums about the linguistic aspects of the lecture: "I spent some time with Bernstein during the preparation and performance of the lectures.
The next year he conducted an open-air concert for troops at Beersheba in the middle of the desert during the Arab-Israeli war.
Chase was seated next to Bernstein at a birthday party for Kurt Vonnegut and made the request in person.
After he left Curtis, Bernstein lived in New York.
Taking the title from a Charles Ives work, he called the series ''The Unanswered Question''; it was a set of interdisciplinary lectures in which he borrowed terminology from contemporary linguistics to analyze and compare musical construction to language.
His shows ''West Side Story'', ''On the Town'', ''Wonderful Town'' and ''Candide'' are regularly performed, and his symphonies and concert works are programmed from time to time by orchestras around the world.
With his commitment to the New York Philharmonic and his many other activities, Bernstein had little time for composition during the 1960s.
