Leonardo worked in Milan from 1482 until 1499.
On close examination, the painting reveals much that has been painted or touched-up over the tempera using the new technique of oil paint, with the landscape, the rocks that can be seen through the brown mountain stream and much of the figure of Jesus bearing witness to the hand of Leonardo.
There are numerous studies of beautiful young men, often associated with Salai, with the rare and much admired facial feature, the so-called "Grecian profile".
All these qualities come together in his most famous painted works, the ''Mona Lisa'', the ''Last Supper'', and the ''Virgin of the Rocks''.
He travelled to France with Leonardo and remained with him until Leonardo's death.
It is a complex composition, of about 250 x 250 centimetres.
At this time Leonardo wrote an often-quoted letter describing the many marvellous and diverse things that he could achieve in the field of engineering and informing Ludovico that he could also paint.
It is thought that Leonardo never made a painting from it, the closest similarity being to ''The Virgin and Child with St. Anne'' in the Louvre.
The ''Codex Leicester'' is the only major scientific work of Leonardo in private hands; it is owned by Bill Gates and is displayed once a year in different cities around the world.
By the 1490s Leonardo had already been described as a "Divine" painter.
In this painting, the young Leonardo presents the humanist face of the Virgin Mary, recognising humanity's role in God's incarnation.
Leonardo's early Madonnas such as ''The Madonna with a carnation'' and the ''Benois Madonna'' followed this tradition while showing idiosyncratic departures, particularly in the case of the Benois Madonna in which the Virgin is set at an oblique angle to the picture space with the Christ Child at the opposite angle.
Leonardo's approach to science was observational: he tried to understand a phenomenon by describing and depicting it in utmost detail and did not emphasise experiments or theoretical explanation.
He later worked in Rome, Bologna and Venice, and he spent his last years in France at the home awarded to him by Francis I of France.
Across the foreground sprawls his symbol, a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space.
He found it difficult to incorporate the prevailing system and theories of bodily humours, but eventually he abandoned these physiological explanations of bodily functions.
These studies were recorded in 13,000 pages of notes and drawings, which fuse art and natural philosophy (the forerunner of modern science).
Among his works, the ''Mona Lisa'' is the most famous and most parodied portrait and ''The Last Supper'' the most reproduced religious painting of all time, their fame approached only by Michelangelo's ''The Creation of Adam''.
Leonardo began making detailed plans for its casting; however, Michelangelo insulted Leonardo by implying that he was unable to cast it.
Some of those designs proved successful, whilst others fared less well when practically tested.
His kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape, with one arm stretched to the outer edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction.
Other famous painters apprenticed or associated with the workshop include Domenico Ghirlandaio, Perugino, Botticelli, and Lorenzo di Credi.
But in 1482 Leonardo went off to Milan at the behest of Lorenzo de' Medici in order to win favour with Ludovico il Moro, and the painting was abandoned.
From September 1513 to 1516, under Pope Leo X, Leonardo spent much of his time living in the Belvedere in the Vatican in Rome, where Raphael and Michelangelo were both active at the time.
Davinciite, a recently described mineral recognised in 2011 by the International Mineralogical Association, is named in honour of the artist.
In 1502, Leonardo produced a drawing of a single span  bridge as part of a civil engineering project for Ottoman Sultan Beyazid II of Constantinople.
Leonardo was also later to visit Venice.
Sometimes credited with the inventions of the parachute, helicopter and tank, he epitomised the Renaissance humanist ideal.
By 1508 Leonardo was back in Milan, living in his own house in Porta Orientale in the parish of Santa Babila.
Massaccio's "Expulsion from the Garden of Eden" depicting the naked and distraught Adam and Eve created a powerfully expressive image of the human form, cast into three dimensions by the use of light and shade, which was to be developed in the works of Leonardo in a way that was to be influential in the course of painting.
Giorgio Vasari, in the enlarged edition of ''Lives of the Artists'', 1568, introduced his chapter on Leonardo da Vinci with the following words:
When he fled to Venice in 1499, he found employment as an engineer and devised a system of moveable barricades to protect the city from attack.
Another often-reproduced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by Leonardo in Florence in 1479 showing the body of Bernardo Baroncelli, hanged in connection with the murder of Giuliano, brother of Lorenzo de' Medici, in the Pazzi conspiracy.
Leonardo appears to have had no close relationships with women except for his friendship with Cecilia Gallerani and the two Este sisters, Beatrice and Isabella.
Other characteristics of the painting are the unadorned dress, in which the eyes and hands have no competition from other details, the dramatic landscape background in which the world seems to be in a state of flux, the subdued colouring, and the extremely smooth nature of the painterly technique, employing oils laid on much like tempera and blended on the surface so that the brushstrokes are indistinguishable.
He studied the mechanical functions of the skeleton and the muscular forces that are applied to it in a manner that prefigured the modern science of biomechanics.
In 1492, the clay model of the horse was completed.
He has been variously called the father of palaeontology, ichnology, and architecture, and is widely considered one of the greatest painters of all time.
Jerome in the Wilderness'', which Bortolon associates with a difficult period of Leonardo's life, as evidenced in his diary: "I thought I was learning to live; I was only learning to die."
Leonardo, instead of using the reliable technique of fresco, had used tempera over a ground that was mainly gesso, resulting in a surface subject to mould and to flaking.
Vasari records that the king held Leonardo's head in his arms as he died, although this story, beloved by the French and portrayed in romantic paintings by Ingres, Ménageot and other French artists, as well as by Angelica Kauffman, may be legend rather than fact.
One, which he regarded as an omen, was when a kite dropped from the sky and hovered over his cradle, its tail feathers brushing his face.
He attempted to identify the source of 'emotions' and their expression.
Beyazid did not pursue the project because he believed that such a construction was impossible.
Some of his smaller inventions, however, such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire, entered the world of manufacturing unheralded.
Vasari describes how Leonardo, troubled over his ability to adequately depict the faces of Christ and the traitor Judas, told the Duke that he might be obliged to use the prior as his model.
Lorenzo de' Medici sent Leonardo to Milan, bearing the lyre as a gift, to secure peace with Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan.
Piero's legitimate heirs were born from his third wife Margherita di Guglielmo (who gave birth to six children: Antonio, Giulian, Maddalena, Lorenzo, Violante and Domenico) and his fourth and final wife, Lucrezia Cortigiani (who bore him another six children: Margherita, Benedetto, Pandolfo, Guglielmo, Bartolomeo and Giovanni).
It is a "predella" to go at the base of a larger composition, a painting by Lorenzo di Credi from which it has become separated.
Leonardo's youth was spent in a Florence that was ornamented by the works of these artists and by Donatello's contemporaries, Masaccio, whose figurative frescoes were imbued with realism and emotion, and Ghiberti, whose ''Gates of Paradise'', gleaming with gold leaf, displayed the art of combining complex figure compositions with detailed architectural backgrounds.
Among the works created by Leonardo in the 16th century is the small portrait known as the ''Mona Lisa'' or "la Gioconda", the laughing one.
The second occurred while he was exploring in the mountains: he discovered a cave and was both terrified that some great monster might lurk there and driven by curiosity to find out what was inside.
Little is known about Leonardo's early life.
Leonardo did not stay in Milan for long because his father had died in 1504, and in 1507 he was back in Florence trying to sort out problems with his brothers over his father's estate.
Leonardo was sent as an ambassador by the Medici court to Ludovico il Moro, who ruled Milan between 1479 and 1499.
A wax model survives and, if genuine, is the only extant example of Leonardo's sculpture.
The bridge was intended to span an inlet at the mouth of the Bosporus known as the Golden Horn.
Jerome, as a penitent, occupies the middle of the picture, set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above.
Leonardo tells the story of the consternation that this statement caused to the twelve followers of Jesus.
At this time he may have commenced a project for an equestrian figure of Charles II d'Amboise, the acting French governor of Milan.
Neither commission was completed, the second being interrupted when Leonardo went to Milan.
On 19 December, Leonardo was present at the meeting of Francis I and Pope Leo X, which took place in Bologna.
The other is a much larger work,  long.
He would have met them at the workshop of Verrocchio, with whom they had associations, and at the Academy of the Medici.
Much of the painted production of Verrocchio's workshop was done by his employees.
Despite the recent awareness and admiration of Leonardo as a scientist and inventor, for the better part of four hundred years his fame rested on his achievements as a painter.
All that remains is a copy by Rubens, but Maurizio Seracini is convinced it can still be found and has spent a lifetime searching for it.
The inclusion of the title "ser" indicated that Leonardo's father was a gentleman.
In this scene, as painted by Leonardo, John recognises and worships Jesus as the Christ.
Two other paintings appear to date from his time at Verrocchio's workshop, both of which are Annunciations.
Leonardo returned to Florence, where he rejoined the Guild of Saint Luke on 18 October 1503.
When finished, the painting was acclaimed as a masterpiece of design and characterisation, but it deteriorated rapidly, so that within a hundred years it was described by one viewer as "completely ruined".
He also made a number of studies of horses.
With Ludovico Sforza overthrown, Leonardo, with his assistant Salai and friend, the mathematician Luca Pacioli, fled Milan for Venice, where he was employed as a military architect and engineer, devising methods to defend the city from naval attack.
In October 1515, King Francis I of France recaptured Milan.
Five centuries have passed, yet we still view Leonardo with awe."
By 1472, at the age of twenty, Leonardo qualified as a master in the Guild of Saint Luke, the guild of artists and doctors of medicine, but even after his father set him up in his own workshop, his attachment to Verrocchio was such that he continued to collaborate with him.
This drawing employs the subtle ''sfumato'' technique of shading, in the manner of the ''Mona Lisa''.
He drew the heart and vascular system, the sex organs and other internal organs, making one of the first scientific drawings of a fetus ''in utero''.
Florentine court records of 1476 show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy but acquitted; homosexual acts were illegal in Renaissance Florence.
The British television station Channel Four commissioned a 2003 documentary, ''Leonardo's Dream Machines'', in which various designs by Leonardo, such as a parachute and a giant crossbow, were interpreted, constructed and tested.
In Cesena in 1502, Leonardo entered the service of Cesare Borgia, the son of Pope Alexander VI, acting as a military architect and engineer and travelling throughout Italy with his patron.
Some 20 years after Leonardo's death, Francis was reported by the goldsmith and sculptor Benvenuto Cellini as saying: "There had never been another man born in the world who knew as much as Leonardo, not so much about painting, sculpture and architecture, as that he was a very great philosopher."
The novelist Matteo Bandello observed Leonardo at work and wrote that some days he would paint from dawn till dusk without stopping to eat and then not paint for three or four days at a time.
The drawings and notation are far ahead of their time, and if published would undoubtedly have made a major contribution to medical science.
Leonardo's ''The Battle of Anghiara'' was commissioned in 1505, but was lost.
He was the first to define atherosclerosis and liver cirrhosis.
Today, Leonardo is widely considered one of the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived.
These papers were left to his heir, Francesco Melzi, for publication, a task of overwhelming difficulty because of its scope and Leonardo's idiosyncratic writing.
While secrecy is often suggested as the reason for this style of writing, it may have been more of a practical expediency.
In both Annunciations, Leonardo used a formal arrangement, like two well-known pictures by Fra Angelico of the same subject, of the Virgin Mary sitting or kneeling to the right of the picture, approached from the left by an angel in profile, with a rich flowing garment, raised wings and bearing a lily.
His first significant commission, The ''Adoration of the Magi'' for the Monks of Scopeto, was never completed.
In the spring of 1485, Leonardo travelled to Hungary on behalf of Ludovico to meet Matthias Corvinus, for whom he is believed to have painted a Holy Family.
Liana Bortolon, writing in 1967, said: "Because of the multiplicity of interests that spurred him to pursue every field of knowledge&nbsp;... Leonardo can be considered, quite rightly, to have been the universal genius par excellence, and with all the disquieting overtones inherent in that term.
Leonardo's notes and drawings display an enormous range of interests and preoccupations, some as mundane as lists of groceries and people who owed him money and some as intriguing as designs for wings and shoes for walking on water.
While it was through the action of Lorenzo that Leonardo received his employment at the court of Milan, it is not known exactly what Leonardo meant by this cryptic comment.
He apprenticed as a ''garzone'' (studio boy) to Andrea del Verrocchio, the leading Florentine painter and sculptor of his day.
She leans forward to restrain the Christ Child as he plays roughly with a lamb, the sign of his own impending sacrifice.
A marked development in Leonardo's ability to draw drapery occurred in his early works.
The 19th century brought a particular admiration for Leonardo's genius, causing Henry Fuseli to write in 1801: "Such was the dawn of modern art, when Leonardo da Vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence: made up of all the elements that constitute the essence of genius..." This is echoed by A. E. Rio who wrote in 1861: "He towered above all other artists through the strength and the nobility of his talents."
The painting, to be done with the assistance of the de Predis brothers, was to fill a large complex altarpiece, already constructed.
The third important work of this period is the ''Virgin of the Rocks'', commissioned in Milan for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception.
'''Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci''' (), more commonly '''Leonardo da Vinci''' or simply '''Leonardo''' (15 April 14522 May 1519), was an Italian polymath whose areas of interest included invention, painting, sculpting, architecture, science, music, mathematics, engineering, literature, anatomy, geology, astronomy, botany, writing, history, and cartography.
Leonardo's drawing of the ''Vitruvian Man'' is also regarded as a cultural icon, being reproduced on items as varied as the euro coin, textbooks, and T-shirts.
He was commissioned to paint the ''Virgin of the Rocks'' for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception and ''The Last Supper'' for the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie.
In 1506, Leonardo took on another pupil, Count Francesco Melzi, the son of a Lombard aristocrat, who is considered to have been his favourite student.
Leonardo was commissioned to make for Francis a mechanical lion that could walk forward then open its chest to reveal a cluster of lilies.
Although usually named together as the three giants of the High Renaissance, Leonardo, Michelangelo and Raphael were not of the same generation.
His sexuality has been the subject of satire, analysis, and speculation.
Salai executed a number of paintings under the name of Andrea Salai, but although Vasari claims that Leonardo "taught him a great deal about painting", his work is generally considered to be of less artistic merit than others among Leonardo's pupils, such as Marco d'Oggiono and Boltraffio.
Why they were not published during Leonardo's lifetime is unknown.
In 1516, he entered Francis' service, being given the use of the manor house Clos Lucé, now a public museum, near the king's residence at the royal Château d'Amboise.
He spent the last three years of his life here, accompanied by his friend and apprentice, Count Francesco Melzi, and supported by a pension totalling 10,000&nbsp;scudi.
This trend began in the mid-16th century and was revived in the 19th and 20th centuries, most notably by Sigmund Freud.
Court records of 1476, when he was aged twenty-four, show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy in an incident involving a well-known male prostitute.
Vasari relates that if Leonardo saw a person with an interesting face he would follow them around all day observing them.
Maps were extremely rare at the time and it would have seemed like a new concept.
The Brothers did not get their painting, however, nor the de Predis their payment, until the next century.
One is small,  long and  high.
Leonardo had no surname in the modern sense – "da Vinci" simply meaning "of Vinci"; his full birth name was "Lionardo di ser Piero da Vinci", meaning "Leonardo, (son) of (Mes)ser Piero from Vinci".
Leonardo's notes appear to have been intended for publication because many of the sheets have a form and order that would facilitate this.
Leonardo commenced his apprenticeship with Verrocchio in 1466, the year that Verrocchio's master, the great sculptor Donatello, died.
Leonardo's most intimate relationships were perhaps with his pupils Salai and Melzi.
Leonardo's dissections and documentation of muscles, nerves, and vessels helped to describe the physiology and mechanics of movement.
During his lifetime, Leonardo was valued as an engineer.
Leonardo's journals include a vast number of inventions, both practical and impractical.
Since he lacked formal education in Latin and mathematics, contemporary scholars mostly ignored Leonardo the scientist, although he did teach himself Latin.
Although the painting is barely begun, the composition can be seen and is very unusual.
He also had a scheme for diverting the flow of the Arno river, a project on which Niccolò Machiavelli also worked.
After only a year, Leonardo made a list of his misdemeanours, calling him "a thief, a liar, stubborn, and a glutton", after he had made off with money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes.
Leonardo is revered for his technological ingenuity.
Francis I had become a close friend.
Piero della Francesca had made a detailed study of perspective, and was the first painter to make a scientific study of light.
A prevalent tradition in Florence was the small altarpiece of the Virgin and Child.
This painting, which was copied many times, influenced Michelangelo, Raphael, and Andrea del Sarto, and through them Pontormo and Correggio.
The painting represents the last meal shared by Jesus with his disciples before his capture and death.
The monument remained unfinished for several years, which was not unusual for Leonardo.
While Leonardo's experimentation followed clear scientific methods, a recent and exhaustive analysis of Leonardo as a scientist by Frtijof Capra argues that Leonardo was a fundamentally different kind of scientist from Galileo, Newton and other scientists who followed him in that, as a Renaissance Man, his theorising and hypothesising integrated the arts and particularly painting.
They competently delivered commissions to well-satisfied patrons who appreciated Ghirlandaio's ability to portray the wealthy citizens of Florence within large religious frescoes, and Perugino's ability to deliver a multitude of saints and angels of unfailing sweetness and innocence.
Leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 13,000 words towards a treatise on anatomy.
Since Leonardo wrote with his left hand, it was probably easier for him to write from right to left.
In the smaller painting, Mary averts her eyes and folds her hands in a gesture that symbolised submission to God's will.
Beyond friendship, Leonardo kept his private life secret.
Nevertheless, Leonardo treated him with great indulgence, and he remained in Leonardo's household for the next thirty years.
This compositional theme was to emerge in Leonardo's later paintings such as ''The Virgin and Child with St. Anne''.
Leonardo created a map of Cesare Borgia's stronghold, a town plan of Imola in order to win his patronage.
Whether it be the cross section of a skull, the structure of a weed, or a study of muscles, he, with his feeling for line and for light and shade, forever transmuted it into life-communicating values."
He made the observations that humours were not located in cerebral spaces or ventricles.
Despite this, the painting remains one of the most reproduced works of art; countless copies have been made in every medium from carpets to cameos.
Leonardo was a contemporary of Botticelli, Domenico Ghirlandaio and Perugino, who were all slightly older than he was.
The humanist influence of Donatello's "David" can be seen in Leonardo's late paintings, particularly ''John the Baptist''.
It surpassed in size the only two large equestrian statues of the Renaissance, Donatello's ''Gattamelata'' in Padua and Verrocchio's ''Bartolomeo Colleoni'' in Venice, and became known as the "''Gran Cavallo''".
These studies and Alberti's treatise ''De Pictura'' were to have a profound effect on younger artists and in particular on Leonardo's own observations and artworks.
The project was left incomplete at the time of Melzi's death more than 50 years later, with only a small amount of the material on anatomy included in Leonardo's ''Treatise on painting'', published in France in 1632.
Vesalius published his work on anatomy and physiology in ''De humani corporis fabrica'' in 1543.
Leonardo's early life has been the subject of historical conjecture.
Leonardo may have been the model for two works by Verrocchio: the bronze statue of ''David'' in the Bargello and the Archangel Raphael in ''Tobias and the Angel''.
Leonardo responded with a painting of a monster spitting fire that was so terrifying that Ser Piero sold it to a Florentine art dealer, who sold it to the Duke of Milan.
In January 1478, he received an independent commission to paint an altarpiece for the Chapel of St. Bernard in the Palazzo Vecchio; in March 1481, he received a second independent commission for ''The Adoration of the Magi'' for the monks of San Donato a Scopeto.
The charges were dismissed for lack of evidence, and there is speculation that since one of the accused, Lionardo de Tornabuoni, was related to Lorenzo de' Medici, the family exerted its influence to secure the dismissal.
Leonardo was twenty-three when Michelangelo was born and thirty-one when Raphael was born.
Hippolyte Taine wrote in 1866: "There may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal, so incapable of fulfilment, so full of yearning for the infinite, so naturally refined, so far ahead of his own century and the following centuries."
He was allowed to drill some pilot holes in a mural in the Salone dei Cinquecento, Palazzo Vecchio, Florence, and his team did find evidence of an oil painting underneath.
The shadowy quality for which the work is renowned came to be called "sfumato", or Leonardo's smoke.
This was beyond the comprehension of the prior of the convent, who hounded him until Leonardo asked Ludovico to intervene.
Leonardo's vision was resurrected in 2001 when a smaller bridge based on his design was constructed in Norway.
Melzi was the principal heir and executor, receiving, as well as money, Leonardo's paintings, tools, library and personal effects.
Meanwhile, having made a profit, Ser Piero bought a shield decorated with a heart pierced by an arrow, which he gave to the peasant.
The girl, interrupted in her reading by this unexpected messenger, puts a finger in her bible to mark the place and raises her hand in a formal gesture of greeting or surprise.
Many historians and scholars regard Leonardo as the prime exemplar of the "Universal Genius" or "Renaissance Man", an individual of "unquenchable curiosity" and "feverishly inventive imagination".
In the present era it is arguably the most famous painting in the world.
As a successful artist, Leonardo was given permission to dissect human corpses at the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence and later at hospitals in Milan and Rome.
One writer, the "Anonimo" Gaddiano, claims that in 1480 Leonardo was living with the Medici and working in the Garden of the Piazza San Marco in Florence, a Neo-Platonic academy of artists, poets and philosophers that the Medici had established.
In 1482, Leonardo, who according to Vasari was a talented musician, created a silver lyre in the shape of a horse's head.
Leonardo's political contemporaries were Lorenzo Medici (il Magnifico), who was three years older, and his younger brother Giuliano, who was slain in the Pazzi conspiracy in 1478.
Leonardo also studied and drew the anatomy of many animals, dissecting cows, birds, monkeys, bears, and frogs, and comparing in his drawings their anatomical structure with that of humans.
While on a journey that took him through Mantua, he drew a portrait of Isabella that appears to have been used to create a painted portrait, now lost.
This calm young woman appears to accept her role as the Mother of God, not with resignation but with confidence.
The interest in Leonardo's genius has continued unabated; experts study and translate his writings, analyse his paintings using scientific techniques, argue over attributions and search for works which have been recorded but never found.
In later life, Leonardo recorded only two childhood incidents.
Other drawings of interest include numerous studies generally referred to as "caricatures" because, although exaggerated, they appear to be based upon observation of live models.
Botticelli was a particular favourite of the Medici family, and thus his success as a painter was assured.
J. Wasserman points out the link between this painting and Leonardo's anatomical studies.
Baldassare Castiglione, author of ''Il Cortegiano'' ("The Courtier"), wrote in 1528: "...&nbsp;Another of the greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled&nbsp;..." while the biographer known as "Anonimo Gaddiano" wrote, : "His genius was so rare and universal that it can be said that nature worked a miracle on his behalf...".
Many of his most prominent pupils or followers in painting either knew or worked with him in Milan, including Bernardino Luini, Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio and Marco d'Oggiono.
When she died in 1495, the list of funeral expenditures suggests that she was his mother.
Seventy tons of bronze were set aside for casting it.
Leonardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment of the infancy of Christ when the infant John the Baptist, in protection of an angel, met the Holy Family on the road to Egypt.
One of these paintings was ''St.
Salai owned the ''Mona Lisa'' at the time of his death in 1525, and in his will it was assessed at 505 lire, an exceptionally high valuation for a small panel portrait.
Most of Leonardo's writings are in mirror-image cursive.
Nevertheless, these few works, together with his notebooks, which contain drawings, scientific diagrams, and his thoughts on the nature of painting, compose a contribution to later generations of artists rivalled only by that of his contemporary, Michelangelo.
Although previously attributed to Ghirlandaio, the larger work is now generally attributed to Leonardo.
Vasari expressed the opinion that the manner of painting would make even "the most confident master... despair and lose heart."
He documented that the humours were not contained in the heart or the liver, and that it was the heart that defined the circulatory system.
Leonardo is known to have designed sets for pageants with which these may be associated.
In all Leonardo had twelve half-siblings, who were much younger than him (the last was born when Leonardo was forty years old) and with whom he had very few contacts, but they caused him difficulty after his father's death in the dispute over the inheritance.
Leonardo was employed on many different projects for Ludovico, including the preparation of floats and pageants for special occasions, designs for a dome for Milan Cathedral and a model for a huge equestrian monument to Francesco Sforza, Ludovico's predecessor.
Leonardo later wrote in the margin of a journal, "The Medici made me and the Medici destroyed me."
In 1515, he painted a nude version of the ''Mona Lisa'', known as ''Monna Vanna''.
