In May–June 1918, the Czechoslovak Legions ''en route'' from European Russia to Vladivostok rose against the Soviet government.
Smaller, more radical factions like the Workers' Opposition (headed by Alexander Shlyapnikov) and the Group of Democratic Centralism were particularly active.
When he could no longer delay the negotiations, he withdrew from the talks on 10 February 1918, refusing to sign on Germany's harsh terms.
Some Trotskyists, most notably Abbie Bakan, have argued that the claim that the Kronstadt rebels were "counterrevolutionary" has been supported by evidence of White Army and French government support for the Kronstadt sailors' March rebellion.
Both daughters married and Zinaida had children, but the daughters died before their parents.
Their leading supporters, from Kamenev down, were expelled in December 1927 by the XVth Party Congress, which paved the way for mass expulsions of rank and file oppositionists as well as internal exile of opposition leaders in early 1928.
He considered himself an advocate of orthodox Marxism.
In the Moscow prison he came into contact with other revolutionaries.
Although most closely associated with Leon Trotsky, the call for Permanent Revolution is first found in the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in March 1850, in the aftermath of the 1848 Revolution, in their  Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League:
Celebrated and feared Baltic Fleet sailors, one of the bastions of the new regime led by Pavel Dybenko, fled from the German army at Narva.
When the XVth Party Congress made Opposition views incompatible with membership in the Communist Party, Zinoviev, Kamenev and their supporters capitulated and renounced their alliance with the Left Opposition.
Shortly thereafter, the pro-''Iskra'' delegates split into two factions.
The entire Bolshevik leadership of the Red Army, including People's Commissar (defense minister) Nikolai Podvoisky and commander-in-chief Nikolai Krylenko, protested vigorously and eventually resigned.
Lenin decided that since it was more important to defend Moscow, Petrograd would have to be abandoned.
Lenin and the Bolshevik Central Committee agreed on 4 March to create the Supreme Military Council, headed by former chief of the imperial General Staff Mikhail Bonch-Bruevich.
Zinaida Volkova died after following her father into exile in Berlin with her son by her second marriage, leaving her daughter in Russia.
Trotsky's plan was rejected and he was much criticized for various alleged shortcomings in his leadership style, much of it of a personal nature.
The following day, the Soviet was surrounded by troops loyal to the government and the deputies were arrested.
Trotsky appointed former imperial general Pavel Pavlovich Sytin to command the Southern Front, but in early October 1918 Stalin refused to accept him and so he was recalled from the front.
He was one of the few Soviet political figures who were not rehabilitated by the government under Nikita Khrushchev in the 1950s.
At the trial on 4 October 1906, Trotsky delivered one of the best speeches of his life.
Spanish authorities did not want him and deported him to the United States on 25 December 1916.
Members of the new guard were in their early 30s and had only recently come from Russia.
By the time of Trotsky's arrival, the Saint Petersburg Soviet was already functioning headed by Khrustalyev-Nosar (Georgy Nosar, alias Pyotr Khrustalyov).
After the bruising ''Literary Discussion'' and losing his Red Army posts, he was effectively unemployed throughout the winter and spring.
:The Bolsheviks triumphed in the Civil War because of Trotsky's ability to work with military specialists, because of the style of work he introduced where widescale consultation was followed through by swift and determined action.
Those who opposed the Central Committee's position in the debate were thereafter referred to as members of the Left Opposition.
Trotsky temporarily joined the Mezhraiontsy, a regional social democratic organization in Saint Petersburg, and became one of its leaders.
On the surface, he weathered them successfully and was elected one of only five full members of the first Politburo after the Congress.
The response arrived on 21 February, but the proposed terms were so harsh that even Lenin briefly thought that the Soviet government had no choice but to fight.
These ideological divisions provided much of the intellectual basis for the political divide between Trotsky and the Left Opposition on the one hand and Stalin and his allies on the other.
The proletarian, socialist October Revolution took place precisely because the bourgeoisie, which took power in February, had not been able to solve any of the tasks of the bourgeois-democratic revolution.
In case of a German ultimatum, they advocated proclaiming a revolutionary war against Germany in order to inspire Russian and European workers to fight for socialism.
At a meeting of his faction at the Tenth Party Congress in March 1921, Lenin's faction won a decisive victory and a number of Trotsky's supporters (including all three secretaries of the Central Committee) lost their leadership positions.
Above all, beginning in 1989, Trotsky's books, forbidden until 1987, were finally published in the Soviet Union.
Unknown to Trotsky, the six editors of ''Iskra'' were evenly split between the "old guard" led by Plekhanov and the "new guard" led by Lenin and Martov.
Lenin, who was trying to establish a permanent majority against Plekhanov within ''Iskra'', expected Trotsky, then 23, to side with the new guard and wrote in March 1903:
Two secret groups within the Communist Party, “Workers' Truth” and “Workers' Group”, were uncovered and suppressed by the Soviet secret police.
However, the paper avoided factional politics and proved popular with Russian industrial workers.
Trotsky's control over the military was undermined by reassigning his deputy, Ephraim Sklyansky, and appointing Mikhail Frunze, who was being groomed to take Trotsky's place.
The peaceful demonstration was fired upon by the Palace Guard resulting in the death of 1,000 demonstrators.
Thus, Sunday 9 January 1905 became known as Bloody Sunday.
Trotsky defended his position in a series of seven letters which were collected as ''The New Course'' in January 1924.
Christian Rakovsky, who had inspired Trotsky between 1929 and 1934 from his Siberian exile, was the last prominent Trotskyist to capitulate.
Trotsky approached the Russian Central Committee to seek financial backing for the newspaper throughout 1909.
In the meantime, the Left Opposition, which had coagulated somewhat unexpectedly in late 1923 and lacked a definite platform aside from general dissatisfaction with the intra-Party "regime", began to crystallize.
Trotsky's position was between these two Bolshevik factions.
Much of China was divided between various regional warlords.
Thus, Lenin agreed to the financing of ''Pravda'', but required a Bolshevik be appointed as co-editor of the paper.
Lenin advocated Russia's defeat in the war and demanded a complete break with the Second International.
Who will execute this?
As Isaac Deutscher notes in his biography of Trotsky, Odessa was then a bustling cosmopolitan port city, very unlike the typical Russian city of the time.
The findings were published in the book ''Not Guilty''.
Before Christmas 1936 he and his wife were deported to Mexico, on a freighter under guard by Jonas Lie.
He was released 40 days later in the aftermath of the failed counter-revolutionary uprising by Lavr Kornilov.
Bukharin and Rykov sided with Stalin while Krupskaya and Soviet Commissar of Finance Grigory Sokolnikov aligned with Zinoviev and Kamenev.
In Vienna, Trotsky continuously published articles in radical Russian and Ukrainian newspapers, such as ''Kievskaya Mysl,'' under a variety of pseudonyms, often using "Antid Oto".
Trotsky spent the winter of 1919–1920 in the Urals region trying to restart its economy.
The resolution was later published and used by Stalin against Trotsky and other opponents.
Their criticism of Trotsky was concentrated in three areas:
Trotsky was exiled to Alma Ata in Kazakhstan on 31 January 1928.
However, Chiang quickly reversed the tables in the Shanghai massacre of 1927 by massacring the Communist party in Shanghai midway through the Northern Expedition.
In late 1902, Trotsky met Natalia Ivanovna Sedova, who soon became his companion and, from 1903 until his death, his wife.
He sided with Lenin against Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev when the Bolshevik Central Committee discussed staging an armed uprising, and he led the efforts to overthrow the Provisional Government headed by Aleksandr Kerensky.
That put them at odds with Bukharin and Rykov, the "Right" group within the Party, who supported the ''troika'' at the time.
On 13 March 1918, Trotsky's resignation as Commissar for Foreign Affairs was officially accepted and he was appointed People's Commissar of Army and Navy Affairs – in place of Podvoisky – and chairman of the Supreme Military Council.
Since the ''troika'' controlled the Party apparatus through Stalin's Secretariat and ''Pravda'' through its editor Bukharin, it was able to direct the discussion and the process of delegate selection.
He wrote prolifically in exile, penning several key works, including his ''History of the Russian Revolution'' (1930) and ''The Revolution Betrayed'' (1936), a critique of the Soviet Union under Stalinism.
The first draft of the resolution was rejected by Trotsky, which led to the formation of a special group consisting of Stalin, Trotsky and Kamenev, which was charged with drafting a mutually acceptable compromise.
Supporters of the Fourth International echo Trotsky's opposition to Stalinist totalitarianism, advocating political revolution, arguing that socialism cannot sustain itself without democracy.
He was not allowed in Paris, though he did visit the city in secret during December 1933, to meet with various political allies.
On his way, he learned about Lenin's death on 21 January 1924.
Trotsky later maintained that he had been wrong in opposing Lenin on the issue of the party.
Mercader later testified at his trial:  According to James P. Cannon, the secretary of the Socialist Workers Party (USA), Trotsky's last words were "I will not survive this attack.
Because of the marriage, Trotsky and his new wife were allowed to be exiled to the same location in Siberia.
Like Lenin, he admitted that the old Russian military, inherited from the monarchy and the Provisional Government and in advanced stages of decomposition, was unable to fight:
In it, he described Zinoviev's and Kamenev's opposition to the Bolshevik seizure of power in 1917, something that the two would have preferred left unmentioned.
After weighing alternatives, he moved to Norway.
He reached Russia on 4 May.
Others argued that overthrowing the monarchy was more important and that a well-organized and disciplined revolutionary party was essential.
His first station in exile was at Büyükada off the coast of Istanbul, Turkey, where he stayed for the next four years.
But the leadership of the Eastern Front, including its commander Sergey Kamenev (a former colonel of the Imperial army), and Eastern Front Revolutionary Military Council members Ivar Smilga, Mikhail Lashevich and Sergey Gusev vigorously protested and wanted to keep the emphasis on the Eastern Front.
At that point Lenin amended his Testament suggesting that Stalin should be replaced as the party's general secretary, although the thrust of his argument was somewhat weakened by the fact that he also mildly criticized other Bolshevik leaders, including Trotsky.
Trotsky joined the Soviet under the name "Yanovsky" (after the village he was born in, Yanovka) and was elected vice-Chairman.
1925 was a difficult year for Trotsky.
He stayed first at Royan, then at Barbizon.
Trotsky and most of his followers, on the other hand, refused to surrender and stayed the course.
Trotsky's position formed while he led a special commission on the Soviet transportation system, Tsektran.
Instead of pursuing a mathematics degree, Trotsky helped organize the South Russian Workers' Union in Nikolayev in early 1897.
Trotsky also co-founded, together with Parvus and Julius Martov and other Mensheviks, ''Nachalo'' ("The Beginning"), which also proved to be a very successful newspaper in the revolutionary atmosphere of Saint Petersburg in 1905.
The ''troika'' was further infuriated by Karl Radek's article ''Leon Trotsky – Organizer of Victory'' published in ''Pravda'' on 14 March 1923.
He overshadowed the ambitious Zinoviev, who had been Lenin's top lieutenant over the previous decade, but whose star appeared to be fading.
The language they spoke at home was Surzhyk, a mixture of Russian and Ukrainian.
He was expelled from the Soviet Union to Turkey in February 1929, accompanied by his wife Natalia Sedova and his son Lev Sedov.
He adopted the slogan of "peace without indemnities or annexations, peace without conquerors or conquered."
Germany did not respond for three days, and continued its offensive encountering little resistance.
It lost some less dedicated members to the harassment by the ''troika'', but it also began formulating a program.
Politburo meetings were pure formalities since all key decisions were made ahead of time by the ''troika'' and its supporters.
Other historians, most notably Paul Avrich, claimed the evidence did not point towards this conclusion, and saw the Kronstadt Rebellion as spontaneous.
They had two children together, Lev Sedov (1906 – 16 February 1938) and Sergei Sedov (21 March 1908 – 29 October 1937), both of whom would predecease their parents.
This was a period of heightened tension within the RSDLP, leading to numerous frictions between Trotsky, the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks.
Throughout November, the ''troika'' tried to come up with a compromise to placate, or at least temporarily neutralize, Trotsky and his supporters.
On 24 May 1940, Trotsky survived a raid on his villa by armed assassins led by the NKVD agent Iosif Grigulevich and Mexican painter David Alfaro Siqueiros.
At first he wrote leaflets for an underground printing press in Kiev, but soon moved to the capital, Saint Petersburg, where he worked with both Bolsheviks, such as Central Committee member Leonid Krasin, and the local Menshevik committee, which he pushed in a more radical direction.
On 5 December, the Politburo and the Central Control Commission unanimously adopted the group's final draft as its resolution.
Trotsky's conception of Permanent Revolution is based on his understanding, drawing on the work of the founder of Russian Marxism Georgy Plekhanov, that in 'backward' countries the tasks of the Bourgeois Democratic Revolution could not be achieved by the bourgeoisie itself.
However, some significant changes to the leadership of the Red Army were made.
During the trial, Zinoviev, Kamenev and 14 other accused, most of them prominent Old Bolsheviks, confessed to having plotted with Trotsky to kill Stalin and other members of the Soviet leadership.
Jukums Vācietis), who had formerly led the Eastern Front against the Czechoslovak Legions.
There he worked on fleshing out his theory of permanent revolution.
He immediately went to Petrograd, whose leadership headed by Zinoviev he found demoralized, and organized its defense, sometimes personally stopping fleeing soldiers.
(Their task was made easier by the fact that Trotsky was sick in November and December.)
He did much of the actual work at the Soviet and, after Khrustalev-Nosar's arrest on 26 November 1905, was elected its chairman.
At first opposed, in the end Lenin voted for Trotsky's resolution to avoid a split among anti-war socialists.
As the head of the Fourth International, Trotsky continued to oppose the Stalinist bureaucracy in the Soviet Union from exile.
Lenin commented on this:
The military situation soon tested Trotsky's managerial and organization-building skills.
In one of the few political developments that affected Trotsky in 1925, the circumstances surrounding the controversy around Lenin's Testament were described by American Marxist Max Eastman in his book ''Since Lenin Died'' (1925).
When regional Party secretaries in Ukraine protested against Rakovsky's reassignment, they too were reassigned to various posts all over the Soviet Union.
They believed that the Red Army should consist only of dedicated revolutionaries, rely on propaganda and force, and have elected officers.
Trotsky was taken to a hospital, operated on, and survived for more than a day, dying at the age of 60 on 21 August 1940 as a result of loss of blood and shock.
But he agreed with the Left Communists that a separate peace treaty with an imperialist power would be a terrible morale and material blow to the Soviet government, negate all its military and political successes of 1917 and 1918, resurrect the notion that the Bolsheviks secretly allied with the German government, and cause an upsurge of internal resistance.
The reorganization caused yet another conflict between Trotsky and Stalin in late September.
The alliance proved effective on the issue of foreign trade, but it was complicated by Lenin's progressing illness.
Trotsky's grave is located on its grounds.
The post of commander-in-chief was abolished, and Trotsky gained full control of the Red Army, responsible only to the Communist Party leadership, whose Left Socialist Revolutionary allies had left the government over Brest-Litovsk.
For fear of splitting the Communist movement, Trotsky initially opposed the idea of establishing parallel Communist parties or a parallel international Communist organization that would compete with the Third International.
The most serious disagreement that Trotsky and the Mensheviks had with Lenin at the time was over the issue of "expropriations", i.e., armed robbery of banks and other companies by Bolshevik groups to procure money for the Party.
The Mexican president Lázaro Cárdenas welcomed Trotsky and arranged for a special train to bring him to Mexico City from the port of Tampico.
Still committed to War Communism, Lenin rejected his proposal.
to share power with other socialist parties.
Germany resumed military operations on 18 February.
Though he quickly got over the disagreement, the letter was intercepted by the police, and a copy was put into their archives.
When the United Opposition tried to organize independent demonstrations commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Bolshevik seizure of power in November 1927, the demonstrators were dispersed by force and Trotsky and Zinoviev were expelled from the Communist Party on 12 November.
Trotsky was again sick and unable to respond while his opponents mobilized all of their resources to denounce him.
The attempt was generally unsuccessful.
In mid-1933, he changed his mind after the Nazi takeover in Germany and the Comintern's response to it.
After his return, Trotsky substantively agreed with the Bolshevik position, but did not join them right away.
Because of Plekhanov's opposition, Trotsky did not become a full member of the board.
In October 1908 he was asked to join the editorial staff of ''Pravda'' ("Truth"), a bi-weekly, Russian-language social democratic paper for Russian workers, which he co-edited with Joffe, Matvey Skobelev and Victor Kopp.
Trotsky was one of the first Bolshevik leaders to recognize the problem and he pushed for the formation of a military council of former Russian generals that would function as an advisory body.
Yet in October 1924, Trotsky published ''Lessons of October,'' an extensive summary of the events of the 1917 revolution.
With the defeat of Denikin and Yudenich in late 1919, the Soviet government's emphasis shifted to the economy.
Since Trotsky was so closely associated with the policy previously followed by the Soviet delegation at Brest-Litovsk, he resigned from his position as Commissar for Foreign Affairs in order to remove a potential obstacle to the new policy.
They succeeded in damaging his military reputation so much that he was forced to resign as People's Commissar of Army and Fleet Affairs and Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Council on 6 January 1925.
Then the congress discussed the position of the Jewish Bund, which had co-founded the RSDLP in 1898 but wanted to remain autonomous within the party.
At the XVth Party Conference in October 1926 Trotsky could barely speak because of interruptions and catcalls, and at the end of the Conference he lost his Politburo seat.
Stalin countered Trotskyist criticism by making a secret speech in which he said that Chiang's right wing Kuomintang were the only ones capable of defeating the imperialists, that Chiang Kai-shek had funding from the rich merchants, and that his forces were to be utilized until squeezed for all usefulness like a lemon before being discarded.
Just before Trotsky's return, the Mensheviks had independently come up with the same idea that Trotsky had: an elected non-party revolutionary organization representing the capital's workers, the first Soviet ("Council") of Workers.
Using the name 'Lvov', he wrote and printed leaflets and proclamations, distributed revolutionary pamphlets, and popularized socialist ideas among industrial workers and revolutionary students.
During their split, Lenin referred to Trotsky as a "Judas", a "scoundrel" and a "swine".
In dealing with deserters, Trotsky often appealed to them politically, arousing them with the ideas of the Revolution.
In mid-1919 the dissatisfied had an opportunity to mount a serious challenge to Trotsky's leadership: the Red Army grew from 800,000 to 3,000,000, and fought simultaneously on sixteen fronts.
Trotsky initially supported the Menshevik Internationalists faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party.
He was an ideologist and practitioner of the Red Terror.
In the run-up and during the war, Trotsky argued that the Red Army was exhausted and the Soviet government should sign a peace treaty with Poland as soon as possible.
In 1927 Stalin started using the GPU (Soviet secret police) to infiltrate and discredit the opposition.
Trotsky was temporarily sent to the Southern Front, while the work in Moscow was informally coordinated by Smilga.
Suffering also from tuberculosis, then a fatal disease, and depression, Volkova committed suicide.
Zinoviev demanded Trotsky's expulsion from the Communist Party, but Stalin refused to go along and played the role of a moderate.
This conception was first developed by Trotsky in collaboration with Alexander Parvus in late 1904–1905.
Almost all of them were executed in the Great Purges of 1937–1938.
At this point Lenin again argued that the Soviet government had done all it could to explain its position to Western workers and that it was time to accept the terms.
When the committee learned the nature of the testimony Trotsky intended to present, it refused to hear him, and he was denied a visa to enter the United States.
After forcefully denying Stalin's accusations that he had betrayed the working class, he thanked his friends, and above all his wife and dear companion, Natalia Sedova, for their loyal support:
The second show trial, of Karl Radek, Grigory Sokolnikov, Yuri Pyatakov and 14 others, took place in January 1937, during which more alleged conspiracies and crimes were linked to Trotsky.
From then on Trotsky identified as a member of the party.
Hearing the commotion, Trotsky's bodyguards burst into the room and nearly killed Mercader, but Trotsky stopped them, laboriously stating that the assassin should be made to answer questions.
In 1900 he was sentenced to four years in exile.
He was the fifth of eight children of well-to-do farmers, David Leontyevich Bronstein (1847–1922) and his wife Anna Lvovna (née Zhivotovskaya) (1850–1910).
The methods used by the Stalinists against the Opposition became more and more extreme.
The Bolsheviks started a new workers-oriented newspaper in Saint Petersburg on 22 April 1912, and also called it ''Pravda''.
There he became aware of the differences within the party, which had been decimated by arrests in 1898 and 1899.
Krestinsky's place in the secretariat was taken by Vyacheslav Molotov.
This cannot be achieved by bureaucratic methods and orders from above."
The notion that the Soviet state could have an effective voluntary or militia type military was seriously undermined.
Behind the scenes, he was completely cut off from the decision making process.
The following summary of Trotsky's role in 1917 was written by Stalin in ''Pravda'', 10 November 1918.
Throughout late 1918 and early 1919, there were a number of attacks on Trotsky's leadership of the Red Army, including veiled accusations in newspaper articles inspired by Stalin and a direct attack by the Military Opposition at the VIIIth Party Congress in March 1919.
It is said he adopted the name of a jailer of the Odessa prison in which he had earlier been held, which became his primary revolutionary pseudonym.
During these years Trotsky began developing his theory of permanent revolution, which led to a close working relationship with Alexander Parvus in 1904–1907.
* Trotsky's alleged distortion of the events of 1917 in order to emphasize his role and diminish the roles played by other Bolsheviks.
As part of this effort, on 11 September 1922 Lenin proposed that Trotsky become his deputy at the Council of People's Commissars (Sovnarkom).
The conference adopted the middle line proposed by Trotsky.
In 1938, Trotsky and his supporters founded the Fourth International, which was intended to be a revolutionary and internationalist alternative to the Stalinist Comintern.
Among his other supporters was Chen Duxiu, founder of the Chinese Communist Party.
He despised 'bourgeois democracy'; he believed that spinelessness and soft-heartedness would destroy the revolution, and that the suppression of the propertied classes and political opponents would clear the historical arena for socialism.
Their children were later raised by Trotsky's parents.
He joined the Bolsheviks immediately prior to the 1917 October Revolution, and eventually became a leader within the Communist Party.
: Trotsky bears a great deal of responsibility both for the victory of the Red Army in the civil war, and for the establishment of a one-party authoritarian state with its apparatus for ruthlessly suppressing dissent....
He even prepared himself for the possibility of ending his life through suicide.
Trotsky's great-granddaughter, Mexican-born Nora Volkow (Volkov's daughter), is currently head of the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Years later, anarchist Emma Goldman and others criticized Trotsky's actions as Commissar for War for his role in the suppression of the rebellion, and argued that he ordered unjustified incarcerations and executions of political opponents such as anarchists, although Trotsky did not participate in the actual suppression.
His son, Sergei Sedov, killed in 1937, was rehabilitated in 1988, as was Nikolai Bukharin.
Trotsky spent much of his time between 1904 and 1917 trying to reconcile different groups within the party, which resulted in many clashes with Lenin and other prominent party members.
He put Trotsky in charge of the country's railroads (while retaining overall control of the Red Army), which he directed should be militarized in the spirit of War Communism.
On the surface, Trotsky remained the most prominent and popular Bolshevik leader, although his "mistakes" were often alluded to by ''troika'' partisans.
His final move was a few blocks away to a residence on Avenida Viena in May 1939, following a break with Rivera.
On 2 December, the Soviet issued a proclamation which included the following statement about the Tsarist government and its foreign debts:
On 3 August 1914, at the outbreak of World War I, in which Austria-Hungary fought against the Russian empire, Trotsky was forced to flee Vienna for neutral Switzerland to avoid arrest as a Russian émigré.
