dardi'') - forms the subfamily Pantherinae of the Felidae.
Because of limited sampling of African leopards, this number might be an underestimation.
It is the most critically endangered leopard subspecies, and one of the most endangered animals in the world.
onca''), the lion (''P.
+ Subspecies of leopard
Man-eating leopards are considered bold and difficult to track by feline standards and may enter human settlements for prey, more so than lions and tigers.
A study of leopards in the southern Kalahari showed that water requirements are met by the bodily fluids of the prey, succulent plants and water bodies; they drink water every two to three days, and feed infrequently on moisture-rich plants such as gemsbok cucumbers (''Acanthosicyos naudinianus''), tsamma melon (''Citrullus lanatus'') and Kalahari sour grass (''Schmidtia kalahariensis'').
In areas with high tiger populations, such as in the central parts of India's Kanha National Park, leopards are not permanent residents, but transients.
p. orientalis''), also known as '''Far Eastern leopard''' or '''Siberian leopard'''
It is the largest leopard subspecies.
Cubs are born with closed eyes, which open four to nine days after birth.
The term "panther", whose first recorded use dates back to the 13th century AD, generally refers to the leopard, and less often to the cougar and the jaguar.
A few instances of cannibalism have been reported.
In the tropical forests of India's Nagarhole National Park, tigers selected prey weighing more than , whereas leopards selected prey in the  range.
The average typical life span of a leopard is between 12 and 17 years.
'''Amur leopard''' (''P.
The modern leopard is suggested to have evolved in Africa 0.5 to 0.8 million years ago and to have radiated across Asia 0.2 to 0.3 million years ago.
Author and big game hunter Kenneth Anderson had first-hand experience with many man-eating leopards, and described them as far more threatening than tigers:
This lineage comprises the species of ''Panthera'' and ''Neofelis''.
In South Africa, safaris are offered in the Sabi Sand Game Reserve.
Results of a 2001 phylogenetic analysis of chemical secretions amongst cats suggested, however, that the leopard is closely related to the lion.
It is not clear if male territories tend to overlap among themselves as much as those of females do.
She died in December 2010 at the age of 24.
Data on their distribution in Asia are not consistent.
Fossil records found in Italy suggest that in the Pleistocene it ranged as far as Europe and Japan.
In protected areas of several countries, wildlife touring programs and safari ventures offer sightings of leopards in their natural habitat.
Two cases of leopards killing cheetahs have been reported in 2014.
Leopards have been known to humans throughout history, and have featured in the art, mythology, and folklore of many countries where they have historically occurred, such as ancient Greece, Persia, and Rome, as well as some where they have not existed for several millennia, such as England.
Leopard were also kept and paraded as mascots and sacrificed to deities.
*Central Asia: Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan
p. spelaea''), appeared at the beginning of the Late Pleistocene and survived until about 24,000 years ago in several parts of Europe.
The nine subspecies recognised by IUCN are:
A study noted that prey animals in this weight range tend to occur in dense habitat, form small herds and can be easily captured by the leopard; on the other hand, animals that prefer open areas and have developed significant anti-predator strategies are hardly preferred.
In 1816, Lorenz Oken proposed a definition of the genus ''Panthera'', with a subgenus Panthera using ''F.
The diploid number of chromosomes in the leopard is 38, the same as in any other felid, save for the ocelot and the margay, whose diploid number of chromosomes is 36.
This genus, along with the genus ''Neofelis'' - which consists of the clouded leopard (''N.
Since 1996, only eight subspecies have been considered valid on the basis of mitochondrial analysis.
*West Africa: Benin, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo
There, the two species have high dietary overlap, and an increase in the tiger population resulted in a sharp decrease in the leopard population and a shift in the leopard diet to small prey (from 9% to 36%) and domestic prey (from 6.8% to 31.8%).
In tropical forest they do not always avoid the larger cats by hunting at different times.
Found today only in the cold regions of Russian Far East and Northeast China.
Prey as heavy as  (such as greater kudu and giraffe) may be hunted if larger carnivores such as lions are absent; the largest prey killed by a leopard was reportedly a  male eland.
The modern use of the leopard as an emblem for sport or a coat of arms is much more restricted to Africa, though numerous products worldwide have used the name.
*South Asia: Afghanistan and Pakistan
A similar hybrid in the Berlin Zoo purchased from Hagenbeck was a cross between a male leopard and a female puma.
Fossils of ancestors of the leopard have been found in East Africa and South Asia, dating back to the Pleistocene between 2 and 3.5 million years ago.
Hunting is primarily a nocturnal activity in most areas, though leopards in western African forests and Tsavo have been observed hunting by the day.
It is listed as vulnerable on the IUCN Red List because leopard populations are declining in large parts of their range.
Basically pale yellow to yellowish brown or golden (except for the melanistic forms), the coat is spotted and rosetted; spots fade toward the white underbelly and the insides and lower parts of the legs.
Later analysis revealed a ninth valid subspecies, the Arabian leopard.
In Europe, the leopard is known at least since the Pleistocene.
In the Russian Far East, they inhabit temperate forests where winter temperatures reach a low of .
In Sri Lanka's Yala National Park, leopards have been ranked by visitors to be among the least visible of all animals in the park despite their high concentration in the reserve.
It is similar in appearance to the jaguar, but has a smaller, lighter physique.
Such larger leopards inhabit areas which lack tigers and lions, so that leopards are at the top of the food chain with no competitive restriction from large prey.
She died August 8, 2014 at the age of 24 years, 2 months and 13 days.
The guard hairs (the layer of hairs that protect the basal hairs) are the shortest () on the face and the head, and increase in length toward the flanks and the underparts ().
Depending on the region, leopards may mate all year round.
In Manchuria and Siberia, they mate during January and February.
Males stand  at the shoulder, while females are  tall.
*East Africa: Burundi, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Rwanda, Uganda
A radio-collar analysis in the Ivory Coast found a female home range completely enclosed within a male's.
Pleistocene fossils have also been excavated in Japanese Archipelago.
The leopard was first described by Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus in the 10th edition of ''Systema Naturae'' (1758).
They are equally adept surviving in some of the world's most humid rainforests and even semi-arid desert edges.
The way the kill is stored to be consumed later depends on the local topography and individual preferences; while trees are preferred in Kruger National Park, bushes are preferred in the plain terrain of the Kalahari.
The last common ancestor of the ''Panthera'' and ''Neofelis'' species is believed to have occurred about 6.37 million years ago.
Occasionally, Nile crocodiles may prey on leopards of any age.
Although lions and leopards may come into contact in sub-Saharan Africa, they are generally not known to interbreed naturally.
Although they are smaller than most other members of its genus, leopards are able to take large prey due to their massive skulls that facilitate powerful jaw muscles.
Its fur is marked with rosettes similar to those of the jaguar, but the leopard's rosettes are smaller and more densely packed, and do not usually have central spots as the jaguar's do.
It lives in arid areas of Saudi Arabia, Israel, Jordan, and the United Arab Emirates.
Cubs are usually born in a litter of 2–4 cubs.
Males occupy territories that often overlap with a few smaller female territories, probably as a strategy to enhance access to females.
Moreover, the jaguar has larger and rounder foot pads and a larger and stronger skull.
The oldest recorded male leopard was Cezar, who reached the age of 23.
The head-and-body length is typically between .
They produce a number of vocalisations, including grunts, roars, growls, meows, and purrs.
Rosettes are most prominent on the back, flanks and hindquarters.
This animal, known as the marozi and by several other names, is covered with grayish spots or rosettes on the back, the flanks and the legs.
Here leopards killed prey ranging from less than  to  in weight with most kills in the  range; tigers killed more prey in the  range.
The leopard is distinguished by its well-camouflaged fur, opportunistic hunting behaviour, broad diet, and strength (which it uses to move heavy carcasses into trees), as well as its ability to adapt to various habitats ranging from rainforest to steppe, including arid and montane areas, and its ability to run at speeds of up to .
A study estimated average daily consumption rates at  for males and  for females.
Leopards tend to take smaller prey, usually less than , where tigers are present.
It is a member of the family Felidae with a wide range in sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia.
Leopards in forests tend to be darker than those in deserts; the fur tends to grow longer in populations living in colder climates.
'''Arabian leopard''' (''P.
Populations in North Africa may be extinct.
*Southeast Asia: Indonesia
Populations thrive anywhere in the species range where grasslands, woodlands, and riverine forests remain largely undisturbed.
Another litter was born in 1961, in which all the offspring were spotted and bigger than juvenile leopard.
Although usually slightly smaller than humans, an adult leopard is much more powerful and easily capable of killing them.
Mothers primarily target smaller prey.
Female live with their cubs in territories that overlap extensivelyprobably due to the association between mothers and their offspring.
Small kills are eaten immediately, while larger carcasses are dragged over several hundred metres and safely cached to be consumed later on trees, in bushes or even caves.
Fathers may interact with their partners and cubs at times.
p. nimr''), also known as '''Erythrean leopard'''
Mothers have been observed sharing kills with their offspring when they can not obtain any meal.
The fur of the young tends to be longer and thicker than that of adults.
They are threatened by habitat loss and pest control.
Large subspecies, in which males weigh up to , are the Sri Lankan leopard and the Persian leopard.
p. jarvasi'') (Pocock, 1932)
This was seconded by a 2009 study by Lars Werdelin and colleagues.
It will stalk the prey and try to approach as close as possible (typically within ) to the target, and finally pounce on it with its forepaws (unlike the lion, that pounces as the prey starts escaping) and kill it by suffocation.
As many as 27 leopard subspecies were subsequently described by naturalists from 1794 to 1956.
Gestation lasts for 90 to 105 days.
The leopard is part of the ''Panthera'' lineage, one of the eight lineages of Felidae.
Lives in Sub-Saharan Africa.
In Kruger National Park, most leopards tend to keep  apart.
Leopards generally are active mainly from dusk till dawn, and rest for most of the day and for some hours at night in thickets, among rocks or over tree branches.
While males weigh , females weigh ; these measurements vary geographically.
Johnson and colleagues suggest that the leopard diverged next, and followed by the lion-jaguar clade.
Juveniles have woolly fur, and appear dark due to the densely arranged spots.
Most healthy leopards prefer wild prey to humans, but injured, sickly, or struggling cats or those with a shortage of regular prey may resort to hunting humans and become habituated to it.
The chromosomes include four acrocentric, five metacentric, seven submetacentric and two telocentric pairs.
Of the 445 photographs of melanistic leopards, 410 came from study sites south of the Kra Isthmus, where the non-melanistic morph was never photographed.
p. tulliana'') (Valenciennes, 1856) inhabits Western Turkey
The jaguar has rosettes that typically have spots within them, while those of leopards often do not.
However, in the Chitwan National Park in Nepal, both species coexist because there is a large prey biomass, a large proportion of prey is of the smaller sizes, and dense vegetation exists.
However, leopards in western African forests have been observed to be largely diurnal and hunt during twilight, when their prey animals are active; activity patterns may even vary by season.
The leopard is a big cat distinguished by its robust build and muscular but relatively shorter limbs, a broad head and a coat covered by spots arranged in rosettes.
The smallest leopard subspecies is the Arabian leopard.
*Balochistan leopard (''P.
Leopards are strong enough to drag carcasses heavier than themselves up trees; an individual was seen to haul a young giraffe, nearly , up  into a tree.
Inhabits the Caucasus, Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, and northern Iran.
'''Sri Lankan leopard''' (''P.
Mortality of cubs is estimated at 41–50% during the first year.
The tiger-snow leopard clade diverged from the rest of ''Panthera'' around 2.9 million years ago.
In Sanskrit, this could have been derived from पाण्डर ''pāṇḍara'' ("tiger"), which in turn comes from पुण्डरीक ''puṇḍárīka'' (with the same meaning).
In 1953, a lioness and a male leopard were mated in the Hanshin Park in Nishinomiya, Japan.
*Sinai leopard (''P.
The rosettes, circular in eastern African populations, tend to be squarish in southern Africa and larger in Asian populations.
A few geographical variations have been noted in the colour and texture of the fur.
In the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia, and China, leopards are still relatively abundant.
In some areas of Africa, troops of large baboon species (potential leopard prey themselves) will kill and sometimes eat leopard young if they discover them.
Both were killed by the renowned hunter Jim Corbett.
These traditional lions passant guardant appear in the coat of arms of England and many of its former colonies; more modern naturalistic (leopard-like) depictions appear on the coat of arms of several African nations including Benin, Malawi, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Gabon, which uses a black panther.
Burmese pythons have been known to prey on leopards, with an adult cat having been recovered from the stomach of a  specimen.
In Sri Lanka, wildlife tours are available in the Yala and Wilpattu National Parks.
The pumapard is characterised by a long body like the puma's, but with shorter legs.
*South Asia: Sri Lanka
In India, leopard populations sometimes live quite close to human settlements and even in semi-developed areas.
Fossil bones and teeth dating from the Pliocene were found in Perrier in France, northeast of London, and in Valdarno (Italy).
'''Indian leopard''' (''P.
Single brown hyenas have been observed charging at and displacing male leopards from kills.
'''African leopard''' (''P.
It is among the most critically endangered leopard subspecies.
Leopard domestication has also been recorded—several leopards were kept in a menagerie established by King John at the Tower of London in the 13th century; around 1235, three of these animals were given to Henry III by Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II.
For example, one large adult leopard was grabbed and consumed by a large crocodile while attempting to hunt along a bank in Kruger National Park.
Their pelage is also more gray in colour with less defined spots.
Other similar species are the clouded leopard and jaguar.
The white-tipped tail,  long, white underneath, displays rosettes except toward the end, where the spots form incomplete bands.
Leopards can feed on a broad variety of prey, mainly antelopes, deer and rodents; these include: cattle, chital, duiker, dung beetle, hartebeest, hyrax, impala, muntjac, nyala, porcupine, primates, rat, reedbuck, springbok, squirrel, waterbuck, warthog and wildebeest.
*Barbary leopard (''P.
Oken's classification, however, was not widely accepted, and until the early 20th century continued using ''Felis'' or ''Leopardus'' when describing leopard subspecies.
The leopard is often confused with the cheetah; however, the cheetah is marked with small round spots instead of the larger rosettes.
Other vernacular names for the leopard include graupanther, panther and several regional names such as ''tendwa'' in India.
The leopard is a carnivore that prefers medium-sized prey with a body mass ranging from .
The fur is generally soft and thick; the fur on the underparts is notably softer than that on the back.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, most naturalists and taxonomists followed his example.
Of the species as a whole, its numbers are greater than those of other ''Panthera'' species, all of which face more acute conservation concerns.
At one year of age, leopard young can probably fend for themselves, but remain with the mother for 18–24&nbsp;months.
The following African leopard populations used to be considered subspecies until 1996:
Leopards must compete for food and shelter with other large predators such as tigers, lions, spotted hyenas, striped hyenas, brown hyenas, up to five species of bear and both African and Asiatic wild dogs.
In a South African reserve, a male was wounded in a male–male territorial battle over a carcass.
Their yellow coat tends to be more pale and cream coloured in desert populations, more gray in colder climates, and of a darker golden hue in rainforest habitats.
'''North-Chinese leopard''' (''P.
Leopards are known for their ability to climb and have been observed resting on tree branches during the day, dragging their kills up trees and hanging them there, and descending from trees headfirst.
With relatively abundant prey and differences in the size of prey selected, tigers and leopards seem to successfully coexist without competitive exclusion or inter-species dominance hierarchies that may be more common to the leopard's co-existence with the lion in savanna habitats.
The only subspecies native to Indonesia.
The maximum recorded weight for a leopard is .
The clouded leopard diverged first from the lineage, followed by the snow leopard.
The estrous cycle lasts about 46&nbsp;days and the female usually is in heat for 6–7&nbsp;days.
uncia''; sometimes placed in ''Uncia'', a separate genus of its own) and the tiger (''P.
Native to the Indian Subcontinent.
It is among the medium-sized leopard subspecies.
They are very agile, and can run at over , leap over  horizontally, and jump up to  vertically.
A morphological analysis of characters of leopard skulls implies the validity of two more subspecies:
Crossbreeding between the leopard and the other members of the ''Panthera'' has been documented.
He also lived at Warsaw Zoo and was Bertie's lifelong companion.
The oldest recorded spotted leopard was a female named Roxanne living in captivity at McCarthy's Wildlife Sanctuary in The Acreage, Palm Beach County, Florida.
leo''), the snow leopard (''P.
This condition was probably caused by erythrism, a little-understood genetic condition that causes either an overproduction of red pigments or an underproduction of dark pigments.
A rare "strawberry" leopard was photographed in South Africa's Madikwe Game Reserve.
*West Asia: Israel, Kuwait, Lebanon, Jordan, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Syria, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen; extinct in the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt
The texture and colour of the fur varies by climate and geography; leopards in forests are observed to be darker than those in deserts.
p. saxicolor''), also known as '''Central Asian leopard''' or '''Caucasian leopard'''
The leopard depends mainly on its acute sense of hearing and vision for hunting.
Subsequent branching began two to three million years ago, but the details of this are disputed.
They were common near villages at the periphery of the park and outside the park.
Mugger crocodiles may also on rare occasions kill an adult leopard in India.
It is currently extinct in the Korean Peninsula.
In 1916, British zoologist Reginald Innes Pocock accorded ''Panthera'' generic rank defining ''Panthera pardus'' as species.
The coat is variously described as sandy, tawny or greyish with brown, chestnut or faded rosettes.
p. begoueni'' is known from the beginning of the early Pleistocene and was replaced about 0.6 million years ago by ''P.
Previously, the oldest recorded leopard was a female named Bertie living in captivity in Warsaw Zoo.
Due to the leopard's superlative stealthiness, people often remain unaware that big cats live in nearby areas.
The leopard is solitary and territorial, as are several other felids; individuals associate appreciably only in the mating season, though mothers may continue to interact with their offspring even after weaning.
Linnaeus named the leopard as ''Felis pardus'', placing it in the genus ''Felis'' along with the domestic cat, the jaguar, the Eurasian lynx, the lion, the ocelot and the tiger.
The clouded leopard can be told apart by the diffuse "clouds" of spots compared to the smaller and distinct rosettes of the leopard, longer legs and thinner tail.
