Micropterigidae, Agathiphagidae and Heterobathmiidae are the oldest and most basal lineages of Lepidoptera.
The abdomen of the caterpillar has four pairs of prolegs, normally located on the third to sixth segments of the abdomen, and a separate pair of prolegs by the anus, which have a pair of tiny hooks called crotchets.
Only two more sets of Jurassic lepidopteran fossils have been found, as well as 13 sets from the Cretaceous, which all belong to primitive moth-like families.
In many cultures the soul of a dead person is associated with the butterfly, for example in Ancient Greece, where the word for butterfly ψυχή (psyche) also means ''soul'' and ''breath''.
Their main predators are bats.
An egg can only be 1/1000 the mass of the female, yet she may lay up to her own mass in eggs.
Sexual dimorphism is the occurrence of differences between males and females in a species.
Usually, the pheromones are produced by either the male or the female and detected by members of the opposite sex with their antennae.
Like most other insects, butterflies and moths are holometabolous, meaning they undergo complete metamorphosis.
For example, ''Sarcophaga aldrichi'', a fly which deposited larvae feed upon the pupae of the Forest Tent Caterpillar Moth.
The close association of butterflies to fire and warfare persisted through to the Aztec civilization and evidence of similar jaguar-butterfly images has been found among the Zapotec, and Maya civilizations.
Apart from color variation, which may differ from slight to completely different color-pattern combinations, secondary sexual characteristics may also be present.
The larvae of some species, such as the common Mormon (''Papilio polytes'') and the western tiger swallowtail look like bird droppings.
Two species of ''Tinea'' moths have been recorded as feeding on horny tissue and have been bred from the horns of cattle.
Most lepidopterans that migrate are butterflies, and the distance travelled varies.
In the more recent genera, the wings of the second segment are much more pronounced, although some more primitive forms have similarly sized wings of both segments.
(In more basal lineages there is one cloaca, or later, two openings and an external sperm canal.)
Bombycoidea plus Lasiocampidae plus Mimallonoidea may be a monophyletic group.
The moth has been prominently featured in art and movies such as '''' (by Buñuel and Dalí) and ''The Silence of the Lambs'', and in the artwork of the Japanese metal band Sigh's album ''Hail Horror Hail''.
They have a toughened (sclerotised) head capsule with an adfrontal suture formed by medial fusion of the sclerites, mandibles (mouthparts) for chewing, and a soft tubular, segmented body, that may have hair-like or other projections, three pairs of true legs, and additional prolegs (up to five pairs).
Most lepidopterans in temperate climates are univoltine, while in tropical climates most have two seasonal broods.
Species of Lepidoptera undergo holometabolism or "complete metamorphosis".
Mating begins with an adult (female or male) attracting a mate, normally using visual stimuli, especially in diurnal species like most butterflies.
The most distinct case of sexual dimorphism is that of adult females of many Psychidae species which have only vestigial wings, legs, and mouthparts as compared to the adult males that are strong fliers with well-developed wings and feathery antennae.
Males usually start eclosion (emergence) earlier than females and peak in numbers before females.
In the Agathiphagidae, larvae live inside kauri pines and feed on seeds.
Different genotypes maintained by natural selection may also be expressed at the same time.
In reverse, moths and butterflies may be subject to parasitic wasps and flies, which may lay eggs on the caterpillars, which hatch and feed inside its body, resulting in death.
In Heterobathmiidae the larvae feed on the leaves of ''Nothofagus'', the southern beech tree.
The first segment contains the first pair of legs.
rect 779 541 963 564 Cotesia melanoscelus
More recently, findings of new taxa, larvae and pupa have aided in detailing the relationships of primitive taxa, phylogenetic analysis showing the primitive lineages to be paraphyletic compared to the rest of Lepidoptera lineages.
Caterpillars can exhibit shades of green that match its host plant.
Some larvae of both moths and butterflies have a form of hair that has been known to be a cause of human health problems.
Linnaeus in ''Systema Naturae'' (1758) recognized three divisions of the Lepidoptera: ''Papilio'', ''Sphinx'' and ''Phalaena'', with seven subgroups in ''Phalaena''.
Most larvae are herbivores, but a few are carnivores (some eat ants or other caterpillars) and detritivores.
Only a few birds, such as the nightjars, hunt nocturnal lepidopterans.
A predator which has previously eaten a poisonous lepidopteran may avoid other species with similar markings in the future, thus saving many other species, as well.
This group probably evolved in the Jurassic, having split from the now extinct order Necrotaulidae.
In some cases, phytophagous larvae can lead to the destruction of entire trees in relatively short periods of time.
Host plants often have toxic substances in them and caterpillars are able to sequester these substances and retain them into the adult stage.
The toxic chemicals in plants are often evolved specifically to prevent them from being eaten by insects.
These mouthparts, called mandibles, are used to chew up the plant matter that the larvae eat.
In butterflies, the spots are composed of concentric rings of scales in different colors.
Lepidopteran species are characterized by more than three derived features, some of the most apparent being the scales covering their bodies and wings, and a proboscis.
rect 783 619 961 637 Phobocampe disparis
Yet there are fossils, some preserved in amber and some in very fine sediments.
The two pairs of wings are found on the middle and third segments, or mesothorax and metathorax, respectively.
This "arms race" has led to the coevolution of insects and their host plants.
Breeding butterflies and moths, or butterfly gardening/rearing, has become an ecologically viable process of introducing species into the ecosystem to benefit it.
Lethality ranging up to 20% with death caused most often by intracranial hemorrhage.
The heat generated by the flight muscles warms the thorax while the temperature of the abdomen is unimportant for flight.
Even though most butterflies and moths affect the economy negatively, some species are a valuable economic resource.
Glossata also contains the division Ditrysia, which contains 98% of all described species in Lepidoptera.
In Lepidoptera, it is widespread and almost completely set by genetic determination.
The fossil record for Lepidoptera is lacking in comparison to other winged species, and tending not to be as common as some other insects in the habitats that are most conducive to fossilization, such as lakes and ponds, and their juvenile stage has only the head capsule as a hard part that might be preserved.
Putative fossil stem group representatives of Amphiesmenoptera (the clade comprising Trichoptera and Lepidoptera) are known from the Triassic.
A pheromone trap is a type of insect trap that uses pheromones to lure insects.
Many moth and butterfly species are of economic interest by virtue of their role as pollinators, the silk they produce, or as pest species.
The length of time before the pupa ecloses (emerges) varies greatly.
Other butterflies may lay their eggs in the spring and have them hatch in the summer.
These hairs have also been known to cause kerato-conjunctivitis.
Some butterflies that migrate include the mourning cloak, painted lady, American lady, red admiral, and the common buckeye.
The larvae cut a trapdoor in the bean (species of ''Sebastiania'') and use the bean as a shelter.
Lepidopteran eggs are also preyed upon.
These species are important to ecosystems as they remove substances that would otherwise take a long time to decompose.
''Lonomia'' is a frequent cause of envenomation in humans in Brazil, with 354 cases reported between 1989 and 2005.
When they fly, each down stroke of the wing creates a brief flash of ultraviolet light which the males apparently recognize as the flight signature of a potential mate.
The larvae of many Lepidopteran species are major pests in agriculture.
These parasites live inside the host caterpillar throughout its lifecycle, or may affect it later on as an adult.
The eggs are derived from materials ingested as a larvae and in some species, from the spermataphores received from males during mating.
Agathiphagidae only contains about 2 species in its genus Agathiphaga.
Many more fossils are found from the Tertiary, and particularly the Eocene Baltic amber.
In the Carnia region of Italy, children catch and eat ingluvies of the toxic ''Zygaena'' moths in early summer.
''Urania fulgens'' undergoes population explosions and massive migrations that may be not surpassed by any other insect in the Neotropics.
The abdomen, which is less sclerotized than the thorax, consists of 10 segments with membranes in between, allowing for articulated movement.
Features of the imago are externally recognizable in the pupa.
Moving may help the pupa, for example, escape the sun, which would otherwise kill it.
Most of these non-ditrysian families, are primarily leaf miners in the larval stage.
Caterpillars, are "characteristic polypod larvae with cylindrical bodies, short thoracic legs, and abdominal prolegs (pseudopods)".
Thus, both insect and plant benefit, forming a highly mutualistic relationship.
The mandibles found in the most primitive moth families are used to escape from their cocoon (e. g., Micropterigoidea).
To avoid overheating, some moths rely on hairy scales, internal air sacs, and other structures to separate the thorax and abdomen and keep the abdomen cooler.
The antennae have a wide variation in form among species and even between different sexes.
One Japanese superstition says that if a butterfly enters your guestroom and perches behind the bamboo screen, the person whom you most love is coming to see you.
Another species of the Pyralidae, called the alligator weed stem borer (''Arcola malloi''), was used to control the aquatic plant known as alligator weed (''Alternanthera philoxeroides'') in conjunction with the alligator weed flea beetle; in this case, the two insects work in synergy and the weed rarely recovers.
One study showed that many moths may use the Earth's magnetic field to navigate, as a study of the moth heart and dart suggests.
The monarch butterfly may stay in its chrysalis for two weeks, while other species may need to stay for more than 10 months in diapause.
Other theories include the use of landscapes.
Other well-known migratory species include the painted lady and several of the danaine butterflies.
Lepidopteran species have to be warm, about , to fly.
Eyespots are a type of automimicry used by some butterflies and moths.
Sphingidae) can generate their own heat to a limited degree by vibrating their wings.
In Müllerian mimicry, inedible species, usually within a taxonomic order, find it advantageous to resemble each other so as to reduce the sampling rate by predators that need to learn about the insects' inedibility.
The larvae of the Noctuidae genus ''Spodoptera'' (armyworms), ''Helicoverpa'' (corn earworm), or ''Pieris brassicae'' can cause extensive damage to certain crops.
Lepidoptera descend from a diurnal moth-like common ancestor that either fed on dead or living plants.
The location and abundance of the most common moth species are indicative that mass migrations of moths occurred over the Palaeogene North Sea, which is why there is a serious lack of moth fossils.
Some reports estimate that there have been over 80,000 caterpillars of several different taxa feeding on a single oak tree.
Another good biological pest control method is the use of pheromone traps.
Flowers pollinated by butterflies tend to be large and flamboyant, pink or lavender in color, frequently having a landing area, and usually scented, as butterflies are typically day-flying.
In response to a parsitoid egg or larva in the caterpillar's body, the plasmatocytes, or simply the host's cells can form a multilayered capsule that eventually causes the endoparasite to asphyxiate.
Some lycaenid species such as ''Maculinea rebeli'' are social parasites of ''Myrmica'' ants nests.
The butterfly was sometimes depicted with the maw of a jaguar and some species were considered to be the reincarnations of the souls of dead warriors.
The Lepidoptera show many variations of the basic body structure that have evolved to gain advantages in lifestyle and distribution.
The skull-like marking on the thorax of the Death's-head Hawkmoth has helped these moths, particularly ''A.
This phenomenon is known as aposematism.
The earliest known fossil lepidopteran is ''Archaeolepis mane'' from the Jurassic, about  in Dorset, UK.
Although, in a form of parasitism called idiobiont, the adult paralyzes the host, so as not to kill it but for it to live as long as possible, for the parasitic larvae to benefit the most.
Wing disks develop in association with a trachea that runs along the base of the wing, and are surrounded by a thin peripodial membrane, which is linked to the outer epidermis of the larva by a tiny duct.
The wings are covered in scales arranged like shingles, which form an extraordinary variety of colors and patterns.
The pupa stays attached to the leaf by silk spun by the caterpillar before it spins the silk for the full pupa.
Mutualism is a form of biological interaction wherein each individual involved benefits in some way.
These organs evolved eight times, at least, because they occur on different body parts and have structural differences.
The process, called encapsulation, is one of the caterpillar's only means of defense against parasitoids.
The females of both butterflies and moths select the host plant instinctively, and primarily, by chemical cues.
Of the early lineages of Ditrysia, Gracillarioidea and Gelechioidea are mostly leaf miners, but more recent lineages feed externally.
Predators that eat poisonous butterflies and moths may become sick and vomit violently, learning not to eat those species.
The proposed role of the eyespots is to deflect attention of predators.
They depend on their body temperature being sufficiently high and since they cannot regulate it themselves, this is dependent on their environment.
This accumulation increases the risk of human contact in indoor environments.
Most hawk moths are nocturnal or crepuscular, so moth-pollinated flowers (e.g., ''Silene latifolia'' ) tend to be white, night-opening, large, and showy with tubular corollae and a strong, sweet scent produced in the evening, night, or early morning.
Lepidopterans undergo a four-stage lifecycle: egg; larva or caterpillar; pupa or chrysalis; and imago (plural: imagines) / adult and show many variations of the basic body structure, which have evolved to gain advantages in lifestyle and distribution.
Sexual dimorphism is present in all families of the Papilionoidea and more prominent in the Lycaenidae, Pieridae, and certain taxa of the Nymphalidae.
The pupa of the Mexican jumping bean moth (''Cydia deshaisiana'') does this.
Agathiphagidae and Heterobathmiidae are the only families in Aglossata.
Lepidoptera also have olfactory organs on their feet, which aid the butterfly in "tasting" or "smelling" out its food.
Butterflies such as ''Thymelicus flavus'' have been observed to engage in flower constancy, which means they are more likely to transfer pollen to other conspecific plants.
The species of Heterocera are commonly called moths.
Flight is an important aspect of the lives of butterflies and moths, and is used for evading predators, searching for food, and finding mates in a timely manner, as lepidopteran species do not live long after eclosion.
In hotter climates butterflies can easily overheat, so they are usually active only during the cooler parts of the day, early morning, late afternoon or early evening.
Butterflies and moths are one of the largest taxa to solely feed and be dependent on living plants, in terms of the number of species, and they are in many ecosystems, making up the largest biomass to do so.
Moths evidently are able to hear the range emitted by bats, which in effect causes flying moths to make evasive maneuvers because bats are a main predator of moths.
The proboscis consists of one to five segments, usually kept coiled up under the head by small muscles when it is not being used to suck up nectar from flowers or other liquids.
The preference of the larvae of most Lepidopteran species to feed on a single species or limited range of plants is used as a mechanism for biological control of weeds in place of herbicides.
The genitalia of Lepidoptera are highly varied and are often the only means of differentiating between species.
The main lineages in the Macrolepidoptera are the Noctuoidea, Bombycoidea, Lasiocampidae, Mimallonoidea, Geometroidea and Rhopalocera.
He stated that they fly towards the darkest part of the sky in pursuit of safety, thus are inclined to circle ambient objects in the Mach band region.
The head is where many sensing organs and the mouth parts are found.
The adult emerges from the pupa either by using abdominal hooks or from projections located on the head.
* Aglossata it is the second most primitive lineage of lepidoptera; being first described in 1952 by Lionel Jack Dumbleton.
The number of eggs laid may vary from only a few to several thousand.
This can create many problems for agriculture, where many caterpillars can affect acres of vegetation.
In females the three types of genitalia are based on the relating taxa: 'monotrysian', 'exoporian', and 'ditrysian'.
These families also have mandibles in the pupal stage, which help the pupa emerge from the seed or cocoon after metamorphosis.
Northumbrian dialect '''') from Common Germanic (compare Old Norse '''', Dutch '''' and German '''' all meaning "moth").
Taxa from the toxic genus ''Heliconius'' form one of the most well-known Müllerian complexes.
The antennae of butterflies are usually filiform and shaped like clubs, those of the skippers are hooked, while those of moths have flagellar segments variously enlarged or branched.
The last two or three segments form the external parts of the species' sex organs.
''Agathiphaga queenslandensis'' and ''Agathiphaga vitiensis'', being found along the north-eastern coast of Queensland, Australia, and in Fiji to Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands, respectively.
These flashes from the wings may attract several males that engage in aerial courtship displays.
In many species, the female may produce anywhere from 200 to 600 eggs, while in some others it may go as high as 30,000 eggs in one day.
These were described in some newspaper articles as examples of a naturally occurring genetically engineered insects.
A variety of differences in egg-laying and the number of eggs laid occur.
This can be beneficial for the plants being pollinated, as flower constancy prevents the loss of pollen during different flights and the pollinators from clogging stigmas with pollen of other flower species.
The sperm of the male that mated most recently with the female is most likely to have fertilized the eggs, but the sperm from a prior mating may still prevail.
The moth instinctively attempts to correct by turning toward the light, causing airborne moths to come plummeting downwards, and at close range, which results in a spiral flight path that gets closer and closer to the light source.
Parasitoid and parasitic wasps and flies may lay eggs in the caterpillar, which eventually kill it as they hatch inside its body and eat its tissues.
Once fully matured, the larva develops into a pupa, referred to as a chrysalis in the case of butterflies and a cocoon in the case of moths.
The Lepidoptera have, over millions of years, evolved a wide range of wing patterns and coloration ranging from drab moths akin to the related order Trichoptera, to the brightly colored and complex-patterned butterflies.
Some caterpillars, especially members of Papilionidae, contain an osmeterium, a Y-shaped protrusible gland found in the prothoracic segment of the larvae.
In some areas in southern England, as much as 80% of nests can be destroyed.
The larvae of both butterflies and moths exhibit mimicry to deter potential predators.
By maintaining a constant angular relationship to a bright celestial light, such as the Moon, they can fly in a straight line.
The species ''Bombyx mori'' has been domesticated to the point where it is completely dependent on mankind for survival.
Lepidopteran migration is typically seasonal, as the insects moving to escape dry seasons or other disadvantageous conditions.
The hairs easily enter buildings through ventilation systems and accumulate in indoor environments because of their small size, which makes it difficult for them to be vented out.
With the evolution of the Ditrysia in the mid-Cretaceous, there was a major reproductive change.
The basal clades still retaining some of the ancestral features of the wings such as similarly shaped fore- and hindwings with relatively complete venation.
Caterpillars lack the proboscis and have separate chewing mouthparts.
A lot of nectar is produced to fuel the high metabolic rates needed to power their flight.
The larvae develop rapidly with several generations in a year; however, some species may take up to 3 years to develop, and exceptional examples like ''Gynaephora groenlandica'' take as long as seven years.
Coprophagous pyralid moth species, called sloth moths, such as ''Bradipodicola hahneli'' and ''Cryptoses choloepi'', are unusual in that they are exclusively found inhabiting the fur of sloths, mammals found in Central and South America.
The thorax usually has a pair of legs on each segment.
rect 3 194 664 669 Compsilura concinnata
bisselliella'', ''T.
Polyphenism also occurs in caterpillars, an example being the peppered moth, ''Biston betularia''.
They do not require as much nectar as the fast-flying hawk moths, and the flowers tend to be small (though they may be aggregated in heads).
Butterflies, which have more species that migrate, have been shown to navigate using time-compensated sun compasses.
Many lepidopteran species, after mating and laying their eggs, die shortly afterwards, having only lived for a few days after eclosion.
They evolved about the time that flowering plants underwent an expansive adaptive radiation in the mid-Cretaceous, and the Gelechioidea that evolved at this time also have great diversity.
The adults are included in food webs in a much broader range of consumers (including birds, small mammals, reptiles, etc.
Others may remain active for a longer period (from one to several weeks), or go through diapause and overwintering as monarch butterflies do, or waiting out environmental stress.
Some adult species of Microlepidoptera go through a stage where no reproductive-related activity occurs, lasting through summer and winter, followed by mating and oviposition in the early spring.
Their resemblance to eyes provokes the predator's instinct to attack these wing patterns.
The mesothorax is designed to have more powerful muscles to propel the moth or butterfly through the air, with the wing of this segment (fore wing) having a stronger vein structure.
''Helicoverpa zea'' larvae (cotton bollworms or tomato fruitworms) are polyphagous, meaning they eat a variety of crops, including tomatoes and cotton.
Many attempts have been made to group the superfamilies of the Lepidoptera into natural groups, most of which fail because one of the two groups is not monophyletic: Microlepidotera and Macrolepidoptera, Heterocera and Rhopalocera, Jugatae and Frenatae, Monotrysia and Ditrysia.
In the process, the adults brush against the flowers' stamens, on which the reproductive pollen is made and stored.
Genetic polymorphism and natural selection give rise to otherwise edible species (the mimic) gaining a survival advantage by resembling inedible species (the model).
The larvae are commonly called caterpillars, and are completely different from their adult moth or butterfly forms, having a cylindrical body with a well-developed head, mandible mouth parts, three pairs of thoracic legs and from none up to five pairs of prolegs.
Other explanations have been suggested, such as the idea that moths may be impaired with a visual distortion called a Mach band by Henry Hsiao in 1972.
The egg is covered by a hard-ridged protective outer layer of shell, called the chorion.
Some moths have enlarged antennae or ones that are tapered and hooked at the ends.
Female cabbage butterflies, for example, use ultraviolet light to communicate, with scales colored in this range on the dorsal wing surface.
Some species engage in a form of acoustic courtship, or attract mates using sound or vibration such as the polka-dot wasp moth, ''Syntomeida epilais''.
While it is often found that DNA-based phylogenies differ from those based on morphology, this has not been the case for the Lepidoptera; DNA phylogenies correspond to a large extent to morphology-based phylogenies.
Indo-Australian(comprising Indomalayan and Australian regions)
However, the females of most nocturnal species, including almost all moth species, use pheromones to attract males, sometimes from long distances.
Some others may take advantage of any opportunity they can get, and mate continuously throughout the year.
rect 231 756 401 774 Blepharipa pratensis
