Both Lister and Eleanor Butler were considered masculine by contemporary news reports, and though there were suspicions that these relationships were sapphist in nature, they were nonetheless praised in literature.
The use of ''lesbian'' in medical literature became prominent; by 1925, the word was recorded as a noun to mean the female equivalent of a sodomite.
In South Africa, lesbians are raped by heterosexual men with a goal of punishment of "abnormal" behavior and reinforcement of societal norms.
A resurgence of lesbian visibility and sexual fluidity was noted in 2009 with celebrities such as Cynthia Nixon and Lindsay Lohan commenting openly on their relationships with women, and reality television addressing same-sex relationships.
All the attention on feminine and glamorous women created what culture analyst Rodger Streitmatter characterizes as an unrealistic image of lesbians packaged by heterosexual men; the trend influenced an increase in the inclusion of lesbian material in pornography aimed at men.
As a result, homosexuality—particularly dealing with women—has been excluded because of symbolic annihilation.
Female sexuality is often not adequately represented in texts and documents.
Fifty-one percent of women reporting homosexual experience had only one partner.
British lesbians followed with the publication of ''Arena Three'' beginning in 1964, with a similar mission.
They found that children's mental health, happiness, and overall adjustment is similar to children of divorced women who are not lesbians.
In 1928, Radclyffe Hall published a novel titled ''The Well of Loneliness''.
In Latin America, lesbian consciousness and associations appeared in the 1970s, increasing while several countries transitioned to or reformed democratic governments.
Corrective rape is on the rise in South Africa.
Patricia Highsmith, writing as Claire Morgan, wrote ''The Price of Salt'' in 1951 and refused to follow this directive, but instead used a pseudonym.
However, postwar masculinization of women's clothing became associated with lesbians.
The work of Krafft-Ebing and Ellis was widely read, and helped to create public consciousness of female homosexuality.
What followed was a movement characterized by a surge of gay activism and feminist consciousness that further transformed the definition of lesbian.
Researchers state that there is no standard definition of ''lesbian'' because "the term has been used to describe women who have sex with women, either exclusively or in addition to sex with men (i.e., ''behavior''); women who self-identify as lesbian (i.e., ''identity''); and women whose sexual preference is for women (i.e., ''desire'' or ''attraction'')" and that "the lack of a standard definition of lesbian and of standard questions to assess who is lesbian has made it difficult to clearly define a population of lesbian women".
This did not mean that women could not pursue sexual relationships with other women, but that such associations could not impose upon women's relationships to men.
Butch and femme were considered coarse by American lesbians of higher social standing during this period.
Studies show that lesbians have a higher body mass and are generally less concerned about weight issues than heterosexual women, and lesbians consider women with higher body masses to be more attractive than heterosexual women do.
Most of the women who reported homosexual activity had not experienced it more than ten times.
These sex changes were later thought to be cases of hermaphrodites, and hermaphroditism became synonymous with female same-sex desire.
The liberty of being employed in silk factories starting in 1865 allowed some women to style themselves ''tzu-shu nii'' (never to marry) and live in communes with other women.
An era of independent filmmaking brought different stories, writers, and directors to films.
Near the Congo River a female who participates in strong emotional or sexual relationships with another female among the Nkundo people is known as ''yaikya bonsángo'' (a woman who presses against another woman).
Specifically, Faderman connects the growth of women's independence and their beginning to reject strictly prescribed roles in the Victorian era to the scientific designation of lesbianism as a type of aberrant sexual behavior.
A paperback book titled ''Women's Barracks'' describing a woman's experiences in the Free French Forces was published in 1950.
In 1980, poet and essayist Adrienne Rich expanded upon the political meaning of lesbian by proposing a continuum of lesbian existence based on "woman-identified experience".
Krafft-Ebing, who considered lesbianism (what he termed "Uranism") a neurological disease, and Ellis, who was influenced by Krafft-Ebing's writings, disagreed about whether sexual inversion was generally a lifelong condition.
Homosexuality was illegal in Germany, though sometimes tolerated, as some functions were allowed by the police who took the opportunity to register the names of homosexuals for future reference.
Lack of differentiation between homosexual and heterosexual women in medical studies that concentrate on health issues for women skews results for lesbians and non-lesbian women.
Aristophanes, in Plato's ''Symposium'', mentions women who love women, but uses the term ''trepesthai'' (to be focused on) instead of ''eros'', which was applied to other erotic relationships between men, and between men and women.
As lesbian-feminists asserted, a sexual component was unnecessary in declaring oneself a lesbian if the primary and closest relationships were with women.
Class distinction, however, became linked as the fashion of female homoeroticism passed.
Single women had the highest prevalence of homosexual activity, followed by women who were widowed, divorced, or separated.
A population-based study completed by the National Alcohol Research Center found that women who identify as lesbian or bisexual are less likely to abstain from alcohol.
Homosexuals began to draw comparisons between their newly recognized minority status and that of African Americans.
The episode was instead the week's highest rated.
Deborah Sampson fought in the American Revolution as a man named Robert Shurtlieff, and pursued relationships with women.
Many women took advantage of their new social freedom to try new experiences.
What our critics want is incontrovertible evidence of sexual activity between women.
Penetration was the focus of concern in all sexual acts, and a woman who was thought to have uncontrollable desires because of her engorged clitoris was called a "tribade" (literally, one who rubs).
No historical documentation exists of women who had other women as sex partners.
Such a perception of women relating to each other connects them through time and across cultures, and Rich considered heterosexuality a condition forced upon women by men.
Lesbians were included as villains, motivated to murder by their desires, internalized homophobia, or fear of being exposed as homosexual.
One such relationship was between Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who wrote to Anne Wortley in 1709: "Nobody was so entirely, so faithfully yours ...
Other women, however, embraced the distinction and used their uniqueness to set themselves apart from heterosexual women and gay men.
Women were also accepted into the military in the U.S. Women's Army Corps (WACs) and U.S. Navy's Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service (WAVES).
Forty days' penance was demanded of nuns who "rode" each other or were discovered to have touched each other's breasts.
When a woman realizes her romantic and sexual attraction to another woman, it may cause an "existential crisis"; many who go through this adopt the identity of a lesbian, challenging what society has offered in stereotypes about homosexuals, to learn how to function within a homosexual subculture.
The most extensive early study of female homosexuality was provided by the Institute for Sex Research, who published an in-depth report of the sexual experiences of American women in 1953.
Regardless of the lack of information about homosexuality in scholarly texts, another forum for learning about lesbianism was growing.
Since Hite performed her study during the popularity of feminism in the 1970s, she also acknowledged that women may have chosen the political identity of a lesbian.
However, the development of the Hays Code in 1930 censored most references to homosexuality from film under the umbrella term "sex perversion".
When she realizes this, however, she is able to pursue healthy heterosexual relationships.
The government of the United Kingdom does not ask citizens to define their sexuality.
The vagina was considered an inward version of the penis; where nature's perfection created a man, often nature was thought to be trying to right itself by prolapsing the vagina to form a penis in some women.
This is almost impossible to find.
Freud's theories were much more pervasive in the U.S. than in Europe.
Before the late 19th century, the word ''lesbian'' referred to any derivative or aspect of Lesbos, including a type of wine.
''Ayuquelén'' worked with the International Lesbian Information Service, the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association, and the Chilean gay rights group ''Movimiento de Integración y Liberación Homosexual'' (Movement to Integrate and Liberate Homosexuals) to remove the sodomy law still in force in Chile.
Further changing values are evident in the writings of Dorothy Allison, who focuses on child sexual abuse and deliberately provocative lesbian sadomasochism themes.
Women who had the option of a career instead of marriage labeled themselves New Women, and took their new opportunities very seriously.
Clubs varied between large establishments so popular that they were tourist attractions to small neighborhood cafes where only local women went to find other women.
As a result, pulp fiction helped to proliferate a lesbian identity simultaneously to lesbians and heterosexual readers.
Invisibility for lesbians continued in the 1970s when homosexuality became the subject of dramatic portrayals, first with medical dramas (''The Bold Ones'', ''Marcus Welby, M.D.
A "two-spirit" woman who has a relationship with a non cross-gender woman is thought to be a "hetero-gender" relationship.
Hite found the two most significant differences between respondents' experience with men and women were the focus on clitoral stimulation, and more emotional involvement and orgasmic responses.
Sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex roles of children who grow up with lesbian mothers are unaffected.
The tenor was different in Greenwich Village than Harlem, however.
Many of the books used cultural references: naming places, terms, describing modes of dress and other codes to isolated women.
Physical relationships between women were often encouraged; men felt no threat as they viewed sexual acts between women to be accepted when men were not available, and not comparable to fulfillment that could be achieved by sexual acts between men and women.
Women who appear on Greek pottery are depicted with affection, and in instances where women appear only with other women, their images are eroticized: bathing, touching one another, with dildos placed in and around such scenes, and sometimes with imagery also seen in depictions of heterosexual marriage or pederastic seduction.
Although men participated in pederastic relationships outside of marriage, there is no clear evidence that women were allowed or encouraged to have same-sex relationships before or during marriage as long as their marital obligations were met.
''Invert'' described the opposite gender roles, and also the related attraction to women instead of men; since women in the Victorian period were considered unable to initiate sexual encounters, women who did so with other women were thought of as possessing masculine sexual desires.
She characterized herself as Inanna's spouse.
Lesbian rights groups have gradually formed since 1986 to build a cohesive community that works to overcome philosophical differences with heterosexual women.
Westernization brought more independence for women and allowed some Japanese women to wear pants.
Factors that add to risk of heart disease include obesity and smoking, both of which are more prevalent in lesbians.
Often artistic representations of female sexuality suggest trends or ideas on broad scales, giving historians clues as to how widespread or accepted erotic relationships between women were.
Rare references to lesbianism were written by Ying Shao, who identified same-sex relationships between women in imperial courts who behaved as husband and wife as ''dui shi'' (paired eating).
Transmission of specific sexually transmitted diseases among women who have sex with women depends on the sexual practices women engage in.
Women in Ancient Rome were similarly subject to men's definitions of sexuality.
In 2004, Showtime introduced ''The L Word'', a dramatic series devoted to a group of lesbian and bisexual women, running its final season in 2009.
NBC edited the episode because of the protests, but a sit-in was staged in the head of NBC's offices.
Their story was considered "the epitome of virtuous romantic friendship" and inspired poetry by Anna Seward and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
Actresses appeared as men in male roles because of plot devices as early as 1914 in ''A Florida Enchantment'' featuring Edith Storey.
Following World War II, a nationwide movement pressed to return to pre-war society as quickly as possible in the U.S.
Queen Anne was rumored to have a passionate relationship with Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough, her closest adviser and confidante.
Women may marry other women, raise their children, and be generally thought of as men in societies in Nigeria, Cameroon, and Kenya.
Anthon broke off their relationship the same month Dickinson entered self-imposed lifelong seclusion.
Up to this study, only physicians and psychiatrists studied sexual behavior, and almost always the results were interpreted with a moral view.
Schwartz found that long-term lesbian couples report having less sexual contact than heterosexual or homosexual male couples, calling this lesbian bed death.
Several years earlier, DOB founders Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon similarly relegated sexual acts as unnecessary in determining what a lesbian is, by providing their definition: "a woman whose primary erotic, psychological, emotional and social interest is in a member of her own sex, even though that interest may not be overtly expressed".
Sexual desire was not the defining characteristic of a lesbian-feminist, but rather her focus on politics.
Homosexuals were predominantly male, although figures such as poet Edna St. Vincent Millay and social host Mabel Dodge were known for their affairs with women and promotion of tolerance of homosexuality.
Some sexually transmitted diseases are communicable between women, including human papillomavirus (HPV)—specifically genital warts—squamous intraepithelial lesions, trichomoniasis, syphilis, and herpes simplex virus (HSV).
In the fourth season of ''Buffy'', Tara and Willow admit their love for each other without any special fanfare and the relationship is treated as are the other romantic relationships on the show.
Realism in films depicting lesbians developed further to include romance stories such as ''The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love'' and ''When Night Is Falling'', both in 1995, ''Better Than Chocolate'' (1999), and the social satire ''But I'm A Cheerleader'' in 2001.
Reflecting French society, as well as employing stock character associations, many of the lesbian characters in 19th-century French literature were prostitutes or courtesans: personifications of vice who died early, violent deaths in moral endings.
Others wore traditionally feminine clothing and assumed a more diminutive role as femmes.
It received mixed critical commentary, but earned positive reviews from the gay press.
Lesbians are not included in a category of frequency of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transmission, although transmission is possible through vaginal and cervical secretions.
The sexologists' claims that homosexuality was a congenital anomaly were generally well-accepted by homosexual men; it indicated that their behavior was not inspired by nor should be considered a criminal vice, as was widely acknowledged.
Hite's conclusions are more based on respondents' comments than quantifiable data.
Charlotte Brontë's ''Villette'' in 1853 initiated a genre of boarding school stories with homoerotic themes.
The invisibility of lesbians has gradually eroded since the early 1980s.
Havelock Ellis used literary examples from Balzac and several French poets and writers to develop his framework to identify sexual inversion in women.
The United Nations estimate for the number of honor killings in the world is 5000 per year.
Of women who had sexual contact with another female, half to two-thirds of them had orgasmed.
As a reflection of categories of sexuality so sharply defined by the government and society at large, lesbian subculture developed extremely rigid gender roles between women, particularly among the working class in the U.S. and Canada.
The late 1980s and early 1990s ushered in a series of films treating gay and lesbian issues seriously, made by gays and lesbians, nicknamed New Queer Cinema.
Bacterial vaginosis (BV) occurs more often in lesbians, but it is unclear if BV is transmitted by sexual contact; it occurs in celibate as well as sexually active women.
In the mid-1980s through the 1990s, sitcoms frequently employed a "coming out" episode, where a friend of one of the stars admits she is a lesbian, forcing the cast to deal with the issue.
With the well-publicized notion that sexual acts were a part of lesbianism and their relationships, sexual experimentation was widespread.
Gradually, women began to author their own thoughts and literary works about lesbian relationships.
In fact, these relationships were promoted as alternatives to and practice for a woman's marriage to a man.
As in many Asian countries, open homosexuality is discouraged in many social levels, so many Malaysians lead double lives.
The Caliphal court in Baghdad featured women who dressed as men, including false facial hair, but they competed with other women for the attentions of men.
Some of it was written in code, detailing her sexual relationships with Marianna Belcombe and Maria Barlow.
Although lesbian-feminism was a significant shift, not all lesbians agreed with it.
By far the sitcom with the most significant impact to the image of lesbians was ''Ellen''.
These communes passed because of the Great Depression and were subsequently discouraged by the communist government for being a relic of feudal China.
''Desert Hearts'' arrived in 1985, to be one of the most successful.
In the 20th century, Katherine Mansfield, Amy Lowell, Gertrude Stein, H.D., Vita Sackville-West, Virginia Woolf, and Gale Wilhelm wrote popular works that had same-sex relationships or gender transformations as themes.
Similarly, English poet Anna Seward had a devoted friendship to Honora Sneyd, who was the subject of many of Seward's sonnets and poems.
It told of a lesbian relationship the author had witnessed.
In the film, a lesbian actress named Valerie, who was killed in such a manner, serves as inspiration for the masked rebel V and his ally Evey Hammond, who set out to overthrow the dictatorship.
During the 17th through 19th centuries, a woman expressing passionate love for another woman was fashionable, accepted, and encouraged.
In a recent study of 2,345 lesbian and bisexual women, only 9.3% had claimed they had ever been asked their sexual orientation by a physician.
The sexual revolution in the 1970s introduced the differentiation between identity and sexual behavior for women.
When Sneyd married despite Seward's protest, Seward's poems became angry.
Law'' shared the first significant lesbian kiss on primetime television with Michele Greene, stirring a controversy despite being labeled "chaste" by ''The Hollywood Reporter''.
Many lesbian communities are centered in bars, and drinking is an activity that correlates to community participation for lesbians and bisexual women.
She was brought up as a male and there was speculation at the time that she was a hermaphrodite.
This is in part due to public figures who have caused speculation and comment in the press about their sexuality and lesbianism in general.
How and where study samples were obtained can also affect the definition.
The primary figure earning this attention was Martina Navratilova, who served as tabloid fodder for years as she denied being lesbian, admitted to being bisexual, had very public relationships with Rita Mae Brown and Judy Nelson, and acquired as much press about her sexuality as she did her athletic achievements.
A 2001 article on differentiating lesbians for medical studies and health research suggested identifying lesbians using the three characteristics of identity only, sexual behavior only, or both combined.
Argentina was the first Latin American country with a gay rights group, ''Nuestro Mundo'' (NM, or Our World), created in 1969.
Writing to another woman by whom she had recently felt betrayed, Wollstonecraft declared, "The roses will bloom when there's peace in the breast, and the prospect of living with my Fanny gladdens my heart:—You know not how I love her."
, ten countries and six U.S. states offer same-sex marriage; civil unions are offered as an option in some European countries, U.S. states and individual municipalities.
These relationships were termed romantic friendships, Boston marriages, or "sentimental friends", and were common in the U.S., Europe, and especially in England.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge's 1816 poem "Christabel" and the novella ''Carmilla'' (1872) by Sheridan Le Fanu both present lesbianism associated with vampirism.
Sociologists credit the high number of paired women to gender role socialization: the inclination for women to commit to relationships doubles in a lesbian union.
The image "became an internationally recognized symbol of the phenomenon of lesbian chic", according to Hamer.
The same indicator is not necessary to identify a woman as heterosexual, however.
In Lesotho, females engage in what is commonly considered sexual behavior to the Western world: they kiss, sleep together, rub genitals, participate in cunnilingus, and maintain their relationships with other females vigilantly.
Although homosexuality among females has taken place in many cultures in history, a recent phenomenon is the development of family among same-sex partners.
Poet Audre Lorde confronts homophobia and racism in her works, and Cherríe Moraga is credited with being primarily responsible for bringing Latina perspectives to lesbian literature.
Lesbians as predators were presented in ''Rebecca'' (1940), women's prison films like ''Caged'' (1950), or in the character Rosa Klebb in ''From Russia with Love'' (1963).
Even still, "The Puppy Episode" won an Emmy for writing, but as the show began to deal with Ellen Morgan's sexuality each week, network executives grew uncomfortable with the direction the show took and canceled it.
''Basic Instinct'' (1992) featured a bisexual murderer played by Sharon Stone; it was one of several films that set off a storm of protests about the depiction of gays as predators.
Across town, Greenwich Village also saw a growing homosexual community; both Harlem and Greenwich Village provided furnished rooms for single men and women, which was a major factor in their development as centers for homosexual communities.
Lesbian-feminists eschewed gender role play that had been pervasive in bars, as well as the perceived chauvinism of gay men; many lesbian-feminists refused to work with gay men, or take up their causes.
China before westernization was another society that segregated men from women.
BV often occurs in both partners in a lesbian relationship; a recent study of women with BV found that 81% had partners with BV.
In this homosocial environment, erotic and sexual relationships between males were common and recorded in literature, art, and philosophy.
Historian Nancy Rabinowitz argues that ancient Greek red vase images portraying women with their arms around another woman's waist, or leaning on a woman's shoulders can be construed as expressions of romantic desire.
Twenty-three years later, in 1976, sexologist Shere Hite published a report on the sexual encounters of 3,019 women who had responded to questionnaires, under the title ''The Hite Report''.
If found, punishments ranged from death, to time in the pillory, to being ordered never to dress as a man again.
The article declined to include desire or attraction as it rarely has bearing on measurable health or psychosocial issues.
Some women staged lavish wedding ceremonies, even filing licenses using masculine names with New York City.
Male intervention into relationships between women was necessary only when women acted as men and demanded the same social privileges.
As a young woman, writer and philosopher Mary Wollstonecraft was attached to a woman named Fanny Blood.
Some women who engage in same-sex sexual activity may reject not only identifying as lesbians but as bisexual as well, while other women's self-identification as lesbian may not align with their sexual orientation or sexual behavior; sexual identity is not necessarily the same as one's sexual orientation or sexual behavior, due to various reasons, such as the fear of identifying their sexual orientation in a homophobic setting.
These included Zelda from ''The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis'', Miss Hathaway from ''The Beverly Hillbillies'', and Jo from ''The Facts of Life''.
But this sort of evidence is not 'proof'.
Ultimately, however, lesbian associations have had little influence both on the homosexual and feminist movements.
A push for same-sex marriage or civil unions in western countries has replaced other political objectives.
Similar examples were procured of Catharine Linck in Prussia in 1717, executed in 1721; Swiss Anne Grandjean married and relocated with her wife to Lyons, but was exposed by a woman with whom she had had a previous affair and sentenced to time in the stocks and prison.
As equality was a priority for lesbian-feminists, disparity of roles between men and women or butch and femme were viewed as patriarchal.
In Chile, the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet forbade the creation of lesbian groups until 1984, when ''Ayuquelén'' ("joy of being" in Mapuche) was first founded, prompted by the very public beating death of a woman amid shouts of "Damned lesbian!"
Legally, South Africa protects gay rights extensively, but the government does not do anything to prevent corrective rape, and women do not have much faith in the police and their investigations.
However, a survey by the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) in 2010 found that 1.5% of Britons identified themselves as gay or bisexual, and the ONS suggests that this is in line with other surveys showing the number between 0.3% and 3%.
The presence of sexual activity between women as necessary to define a lesbian or a relationship continues to be debated.
However, polls in Australia have recorded a range of self-identified lesbian or bisexual women from 1.3% to 2.2% of the total population.
Many of the pulp novels typically presented very unhappy women, or relationships that ended tragically.
Bisexuality became chic, particularly in America's first gay neighborhoods.
Between 1992 and 1994, ''Mademoiselle'', ''Vogue'', ''Cosmopolitan'', ''Glamour'', ''Newsweek'', and ''New York'' magazines featured stories about women who admitted sexual histories with other women.
The onset of World War II caused a massive upheaval in people's lives as military mobilization engaged millions of men.
A twist on the lesbian-as-predator theme was the added complexity of motivations of some lesbian characters in Peter Jackson's ''Heavenly Creatures'' (1994), the Oscar-winning biopic of Aileen Wuornos, ''Monster'' (2003), and the exploration of fluent sexuality and gender in ''Chasing Amy'' (1997), ''Kissing Jessica Stein'' (2001), and ''Boys Don't Cry'' (1999).
This was heavily influenced by the writings of Sigmund Freud, who theorized that sexual desire would be sated unconsciously, despite an individual's wish to ignore it.
Lesbian relationships are also known in matrilineal societies in Ghana among the Akan people.
The novel included a foreword by Havelock Ellis and was intended to be a call for tolerance for inverts by publicizing their disadvantages and accidents of being born inverted.
Modern scholarship indicates that men viewed female homosexuality with hostility.
However, lesbians dispute the study's definition of sexual contact, and introduced other factors such as deeper connections existing between women that make frequent sexual relations redundant, greater sexual fluidity in women causing them to move from heterosexual to bisexual to lesbian numerous times through their lives—or reject the labels entirely.
"Corrective rape" is not recognized by the South African legal system as a hate crime despite the fact that the South African Constitution states that no person shall be discriminated against based on their social status and identity, including sexual orientation.
While groups try to promote lesbian issues and concerns, they also face misogynistic attitudes from gay men and homophobic views from heterosexual women.
State persecution prevented the formation of associations until AIDS became a concern, when educational efforts forced sexual minorities to band together.
Women in many cultures throughout history have had sexual relations with other women, but they rarely were designated as part of a group of people based on who they had physical relations with.
Unlike ''The Well of Loneliness'', none of these novels were banned.
The lesbian movement has been closely associated with the feminist movement in Chile, although the relationship has been sometimes strained.
Another stock plot device in the 1970s was the gay character in a police drama.
Attitudes and practices to ferret out homosexuals in public service positions extended to Australia and Canada.
In Spain, Italy, and the Holy Roman Empire, sodomy between women was included in acts considered unnatural and punishable by burning to death, although few instances are recorded of this taking place.
In 1977, ''Lesbos'', the first lesbian organization for Mexicans, was formed.
For women who subscribed to this philosophy—dubbing themselves lesbian-feminists—lesbian was a term chosen by women to describe any woman who dedicated her approach to social interaction and political motivation to the welfare of women.
''Lesbianism'', to describe erotic relationships between women, had been documented in 1870.
