Slaveholders wanted to get free people of color out of the South, where they were thought to threaten the stability of the slave societies.
In 2012 President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf granted licenses to companies to cut down 58% of all the primary rainforest left in Liberia.
The National Police Training Academy is in Montserrado County in Paynesville City.
According to an Overseas Development Institute report, private health expenditure accounts for 64.1% of total spending on health.
The religious practices, social customs and cultural standards of the Americo-Liberians had their roots in the antebellum American South.
It has 3500 vessels registered under its flag accounting for 11% of ships worldwide.
Liberia's main northwestern boundary is traversed by the Mano River while its southeast limits are bounded by the Cavalla River.
Americo-Liberians, who are descendants of African American and West Indian, mostly Barbadian settlers, make up 2.5%.
Government repression intensified in response, as Doe's troops retaliated by executing members of the Gio and Mano ethnic groups in Nimba County.
Many were of mixed race and educated in American culture; they did not identify with the indigenous natives of the tribes they encountered.
Similar state-based organizations established colonies in Mississippi-in-Africa and the Republic of Maryland, which were later annexed by Liberia.
European traders would barter commodities and goods with local people.
Liberia's highest judicial authority is the Supreme Court, made up of five members and headed by the Chief Justice of Liberia.
Liberia gained observer status with the World Trade Organization in 2010 and is in the process of acquiring full member status.
Species hunted for food in Liberia include elephants, pygmy hippopotamus, chimpanzees, leopards, duikers, and other monkeys.
The 16 officially recognized ethnic groups include the Kpelle, Bassa, Mano, Gio or Dan, Kru, Grebo, Krahn, Vai, Gola, Mandingo or Mandinka, Mende, Kissi, Gbandi, Loma, Fante, Dei or Dewoin, Belleh, and Americo-Liberians or Congo people.
Today, over 20 political parties are registered in the country, based largely around personalities and ethnic groups.
In March 2003, a second rebel group, Movement for Democracy in Liberia, began launching attacks against Taylor from the southeast.
In 2010 some 43.5% of Liberians were below the age of 15.
Of households where bushmeat was served, 80% of residents said they cooked it "once in a while," while 13% cooked it once a week and 7% cooked bushmeat daily.
Formal electricity services are provided solely by the state-owned Liberia Electricity Corporation, which operates a small grid almost exclusively in the Greater Monrovia District.
Pressure from the United Kingdom, which controlled Sierra Leone to the west, and France with its interests in the north and east led to a loss of Liberia's claims to extensive territories.
The population of Liberia was 1,016,443 in 1962 and increased to 1,503,368 in 1974. , Liberia has the highest population growth rate in the world (4.50% per annum).
Competition for office was usually contained within the party; a party nomination virtually ensured election.
Political tensions from the rule of William R. Tolbert resulted in a military coup in 1980 that overthrew his leadership soon after his death, marking the beginning of years-long political instability.
After the war, President William Tubman encouraged foreign investment in the country.
They knew nothing of their cultures, languages or animist religion.
Liberia is a global biodiversity hotspot – a significant reservoir of biodiversity that is under threat from humans.
The Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) are the armed forces of the Republic of Liberia.
Under Taylor's leadership, Liberia became internationally known as a pariah state due to its use of blood diamonds and illegal timber exports to fund the Revolutionary United Front in the Sierra Leone Civil War.
The country acted as a major trader in Sierra Leonian blood diamonds, exporting over US$300 million in diamonds in 1999.
The Liberian constitution and flag were modeled after those of the United States.
While official commodity exports declined during the 1990s as many investors fled the civil war, Liberia's wartime economy featured the exploitation of the region's diamond wealth.
Between January 7, 1822, and the American Civil War, more than 15,000 freed and free-born black Americans from United States and 3,198 Afro-Caribbeans relocated to the settlement.
A strategic Cold War ally of the West, Doe received significant financial backing from the United States while critics condemned the PRC for corruption and political repression.
Most Americo-Liberian men were members of the Masonic Order of Liberia, which became heavily involved in the nation's politics.
In 2008, Liberia had only one doctor and 27 nurses per 100,000 people.
There is a high percentage of interracial marriage between ethnic Liberians and the Lebanese, resulting in a significant mixed-race population especially in and around Monrovia.
Customary law allows men to have up to four wives.
As of November 17, 2014, there were 2,812 confirmed deaths from the ongoing outbreak.
As revealed in the 2008 census, Monrovia is more than four times more populous than all the county capitals combined.
The Economic Community Monitoring Group under the Economic Community of West African States organized a military task force to intervene in the crisis.
Both Sierra Leone and the Ivory Coast annexed some territories.
Liberia's economic main links to the outside world come through Monrovia, via the port and airport in the capital.
The Dei, Bassa, Kru, Gola and Kissi were some of the earliest documented peoples in the area.
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, a Harvard-trained economist and former Minister of Finance, was elected as the first female president in Africa.
Nimba County is the next most populous county, with 462,026 residents.
The Greater Monrovia District has 970,824 residents.
By 1877, the Americo-Liberian True Whig Party was the most powerful political power in the country.
For most of the 1941–89 period, training was largely provided by U.S. advisers.
Under heavy pressure from the international community and the domestic Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace movement, Taylor resigned in August 2003 and went into exile in Nigeria.
After Liberia adopted a new constitution in 1985, Doe was elected president in subsequent elections, which were internationally condemned as fraudulent.
Current impediments to growth include a small domestic market, lack of adequate infrastructure, high transportation costs, poor trade links with neighboring countries and the high dollarization of the economy.
Hospitals in Liberia include the John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Monrovia and several others.
The survey was conducted during the last civil war, and bushmeat consumption is now believed to be far higher.
Due in large part to foreign aid and investment inflow following the end of the war, Liberia maintains a large account deficit, which peaked at nearly 60% in 2008.
Most African-Americans, who were native-born by this time, wanted to improve conditions in the United States rather than emigrate.
In the United States, there was a movement to resettle American free blacks and freed slaves in Africa.
The Legislature is composed of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Civil war ended in 2003 after destroying approximately 95% of the country's healthcare facilities.
Illegal logging has increased in Liberia since the end of the Second Civil War in 2003.
The United States did not recognize Liberia's independence until during the American Civil War on February 5, 1862.
Liberia is one of only three countries that have not officially adopted the International System of Units (metric system).
The ACS, the private organization supported by prominent American politicians such as Abraham Lincoln, Henry Clay, and James Monroe, believed repatriation of free blacks was preferable to widespread emancipation of slaves.
In Liberia, the Samuel Kanyon Doe Sports Complex serves as a multi-purpose stadium and hosts sporting events.
The Kpelle comprise more than 20% of the population and are the largest ethnic group in Liberia, residing mostly in Bong County and adjacent areas in central Liberia.
Liberians also speak a variety of creolized dialects collectively known as Liberian English.
Moore's novella ''Murder in the Cassava Patch'' is considered Liberia's most celebrated novel.
Liberia is the only African republic to have self-proclaimed independence without gaining independence through revolt from any other nation, being Africa's first and oldest republic.
Together with the vice president, the president is elected to a six-year term by majority vote in a two-round system and can serve up to two terms in office.
'''Liberia''' , officially the '''Republic of Liberia''', is a country on the West African coast.
Liberia maintained and kept its independence during the European colonial era.
The government divided its offshore waters into 17 blocks and began auctioning off exploration licenses for the blocks in 2004, with further auctions in 2007 and 2009.
It was made up primarily of people from the Americo-Liberian ethnic group, who maintained social, economic and political dominance well into the 20th century, repeating patterns of European colonists in other nations in Africa.
On average, children attain 10 years of education (11 for boys and 8 for girls).
Life expectancy in Liberia is estimated to be 57.4 years in 2012.
Liberia contains a significant portion of West Africa's remaining rainforest, with about 43% of the Upper Guinean forest – an important forest that spans several West African nations.
Liberia struggled to attract investment in order to develop infrastructure and a larger, industrial economy.
Liberia has a long, rich history in textile arts and quilting, as the settlers brought with them their sewing and quilting skills.
Following a decrease in inflation beginning in 2003, inflation spiked in 2008 as a result of worldwide food and energy crises, reaching 17.5% before declining to 7.4% in 2009.
The Americo-Liberian settlers did not identify with the indigenous peoples they encountered, especially those in communities of the more isolated "bush."
A peace deal was signed later that month.
A small number of people are Bahá'í, Hindu, Sikh, or Buddhist.
These free African-Americans and their descendants married within their community and came to identify as Americo-Liberians.
Of those, 1,118,241 lived in Montserrado County, the most populous county in the country and home to the capital of Monrovia.
The settlers wore top hat and tails and modeled their homes on those of Southern slaveowners.
The president serves as head of government, head of state and the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of Liberia.
On May 9, 2015 Liberia was declared Ebola free after six weeks with no new cases.
A 2004 public opinion survey found that bushmeat ranked second behind fish amongst residents of the capital Monrovia as a preferred source of protein.
The subsequent 2005 elections were internationally regarded as the most free and fair in Liberian history.
Following the inauguration of the Sirleaf administration in 2006, Liberia signed several multibillion-dollar concession agreements in the iron ore and palm oil industries with numerous multinational corporations, including BHP Billiton, ArcelorMittal, and Sime Darby.
Today it has six colleges, including a medical school and the nation's only law school, Louis Arthur Grimes School of Law.
English is the official language and over 20 indigenous languages are spoken, representing the numerous tribes who make up more than 95% of the population.
In 2009, government expenditure on health care per capita was US$22, accounting for 10.6% of total GDP.
They intermarried largely within the colonial community, developing an ethnic group that had a cultural tradition infused with American notions of political republicanism and Protestant Christianity.
Much of Liberia's communications infrastructure was destroyed or plundered during the two civil wars (1989–1996 and 1999–2003).
Among the companies to have won licenses are Repsol, Chevron, Anadarko and Woodside Petroleum.
Five years of military rule by the People's Redemption Council and five years of civilian rule by the National Democratic Party of Liberia were followed by the First and Second Liberian Civil Wars.
A peace agreement in 2003 led to democratic elections in 2005.
The National Patriotic Front of Liberia, a rebel group led by Charles Taylor, launched an insurrection in December 1989 against Doe's government with the backing of neighboring countries such as Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast.
Congo people, descendants of repatriated Congo and Afro-Caribbean slaves who arrived in 1825, make up an estimated 2.5%.
The government does not require businesses or schools to excuse Muslims for Friday prayers.
An informal system of traditional courts still exists within the rural areas of the country, with trial by ordeal remaining common despite being officially outlawed.
The highest point wholly within Liberia is Mount Wuteve at  above sea level in the northwestern Liberia range of the West Africa Mountains and the Guinea Highlands.
In 2013, Liberia began importing power from neighboring Ivory Coast and Guinea through the West African Power Pool.
After international protests, many of those logging permits were canceled.
The country's education sector is hampered by inadequate schools and supplies, as well as a lack of qualified teachers.
Adolescent girls are the most frequently assaulted, and almost 40% of perpetrators are adult men known to victims.
Members are nominated to the court by the president and are confirmed by the Senate, serving until the age of 70.
These latter two groups established political control in the 19th century which they kept well into the 20th century.
The population includes 16 indigenous ethnic groups and various foreign minorities.
The United Nations Mission in Liberia began arriving in September 2003 to provide security and monitor the peace accord, and an interim government took power the following October.
Liberia's economic and political stability was threatened in the 2010s by an Ebola virus epidemic; it originated in Guinea in December 2013, entered Liberia in March 2014, and was declared officially ended on May 8, 2015.
A rich literary tradition has existed in Liberia for over a century.
Bushmeat is often exported to neighboring Sierra Leone and Ivory Coast, despite a ban on the cross-border sale of wild animals.
The Liberian National Police are the national police force of the country.
The country has one of the highest incidences of sexual violence against women in the world.
But its membership grew to include mostly people who supported abolition of slavery.
Upon the end of the war in 2003, GDP growth began to accelerate, reaching 9.4% in 2007.
Encounters with tribal Africans in the bush often developed as violent confrontations.
Among the other duties of the president are to sign or veto legislative bills, grant pardons, and appoint Cabinet members, judges and other public officials.
Edward Wilmot Blyden, Bai T. Moore, Roland T. Dempster and Wilton G. S. Sankawulo are among Liberia's more prominent authors.
Approximately 58.2% – 66% of women are estimated to have undergone female genital mutilation.
Liberia's watershed tends to move in a southwestern pattern towards the sea as new rains move down the forested plateau off the inland mountain range of Guinée Forestière, in Guinea.
Because of feeling set apart and superior by their culture and education to the indigenous peoples, the Americo-Liberians developed as a small elite that held on to political power.
Liberia had the second-highest rate of economic growth in the world during the 1950s.
This led to a United Nations ban on Liberian diamond exports in 2001, which was lifted in 2007 following Liberia's accession to the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.
One of the most well-known Liberian quilters was Martha Ann Ricks, who presented a quilt featuring the famed Liberian coffee tree to Queen Victoria in 1892.
Liberia imports 90% of its rice, a staple food, and is extremely vulnerable to food shortages.
A 2004 UN report estimated that 99 per cent of Liberians burnt charcoal and fuel wood for cooking and heating, resulting in deforestation.
Liberia has begun exploration for offshore oil; unproven oil reserves may be in excess of one billion barrels.
Liberia scored a 3.3 on a scale from 10 (highly clean) to 0 (highly corrupt) on the 2010 Corruption Perceptions Index.
Especially palm oil companies like Sime Darby (Malaysia) and Golden Veroleum (USA) are being accused by critics of the destruction of livelihoods and the displacement of local communities, enabled through government concessions.
The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the government generally respects this right.
A peace deal between warring parties was reached in 1995, leading to Taylor's election as president in 1997.
Commerce is prohibited by law on Sundays and major Christian holidays.
Pollution is a significant issue in Liberia's capital city Monrovia.
The Second Liberian Civil War began in 1999 when Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy, a rebel group based in the northwest of the country, launched an armed insurrection against Taylor.
In 2007, the HIV infection rates stood at 2% of the population aged 15–49  whereas the incidence of tuberculosis was 420 per 100,000 people in 2008.
In 2014 the US ambassador to Liberia stated that corruption there was harming people through "unnecessary costs to products and services that are already difficult for many Liberians to afford".
Due to its status as a flag of convenience, Liberia has the second-largest maritime registry in the world behind Panama.
As of the 2008 national census, Liberia was home to 3,476,608 people.
In 2011, the country's nominal GDP was US$1.154 billion, while nominal GDP per capita stood at US$297, the third-lowest in the world.
While separation of church and state is mandated by the Constitution, Liberia is considered a Christian state in practice.
They encouraged religious organizations to set up missions and schools to educate the indigenous peoples.
Rape and sexual assault are frequent in the post-conflict era in Liberia.
This influx was compounded by the decline of the Western Sudanic Mali Empire in 1375 and the Songhai Empire in 1591.
In early August 2014 Guinea closed its borders to Liberia to help contain the spread of the virus, as more new cases were being reported in Liberia than in Guinea.
Leading activists in the North strongly opposed the ACS, but some free blacks were ready to try a different environment.
In some areas primary and secondary education is free and compulsory from the ages of 6 to 16, though enforcement of attendance is lax.
Liberia also has a tradition of baking imported from the United States that is unique in West Africa.
The equatorial climate is hot year-round with heavy rainfall from May to October with a short interlude in mid-July to August.
The Liberian constitution  restricts citizenship to people of Black African descent.
Liberia hosts the last remaining viable populations of certain species including western chimpanzees, forest elephants and leopards.
In 1822, the American Colonization Society began sending African-American volunteers to the Pepper Coast to establish a colony for freed African-Americans.
Other ingredients include cassava, fish, bananas, citrus fruit, plantains, coconut, okra and sweet potatoes.
The University of Liberia is the country's largest and oldest university.
The Republic of Liberia, beginning as a settlement of the American Colonization Society (ACS), declared its independence on July 26, 1847.
According to the 2008 National Census, 85.5% of the population practices Christianity.
When President Sirleaf took office in 2006, she announced that corruption was "the major public enemy."
It covers an area of  and has a population of 4,503,000 people.
In the mid-20th century, Liberia gradually began to modernize with American assistance.
The all-female Sande society practices female circumcision.
Between 1461 and the late 17th century, Portuguese, Dutch and British traders had contacts and trading posts in the region.
It is the nation's oldest private university.
When dealing with public-facing government functionaries 89% of Liberians say they have had to pay a bribe, the highest national percentage in the world according to the organization's 2010 Global Corruption Barometer.
It was an important producer of rubber in the early 20th century.
A number of highly communicable diseases are widespread, including tuberculosis, diarrheal diseases and malaria.
Located in Monrovia, the university opened in 1862.
Sunnis, Shias, Ahmadiyyas, Sufis, and non-denominational Muslims constitute the bulk of the Liberian Muslims.
Some abolitionists collaborated on relocation of free blacks, as they were discouraged by discrimination against them in the North and believed they would never be accepted in the larger society.
In other areas children are required to pay a tuition fee to attend school.
The Firestone Tire and Rubber Company has operated the world's largest rubber plantation in Liberia since 1926.
At $0.54 per kWh, the electricity tariff in Liberia is among the highest in the world.
Most parties suffer from poor organizational capacity.
Prior to the 2008 census, the last census had been held in 1984 and listed the country's population as 2,101,628.
With a fertility rate of 5.9 births per woman, the maternal mortality rate stood at 990 per 100,000 births in 2010.
It excluded the indigenous tribesmen from birthright citizenship in their own lands until 1904, in a repetition of the United States' treatment of Native Americans.
Liberia and Norway struck an agreement in September 2014 whereby Liberia ceases all logging in exchange for $150 million in development aid.
A 2008 report from the University of Tennessee stated that the changeover from imperial to metric measures was confusing to coffee and cocoa farmers.
Muslims comprise 12.2% of the population, largely represented by the Mandingo and Vai ethnic groups.
Liberia possesses about forty percent of the remaining Upper Guinean rainforest.
In 2010, the literacy rate of Liberia was estimated at 60.8% (64.8% for males and 56.8% for females).
GDP per capita peaked in 1980 at US$496, when it was comparable to Egypt's (at the time).
Heavy stews spiced with habanero and scotch bonnet chillies are popular and eaten with fufu.
On April 12, 1980, a military coup led by Master Sergeant Samuel Doe of the Krahn ethnic group overthrew and killed President William R. Tolbert, Jr.. Doe and the other plotters later executed a majority of Tolbert's cabinet and other Americo-Liberian government officials and True Whig Party members.
Higher education is provided by a number of public and private universities.
Liberia used the United States dollar as its currency from 1943 until 1982 and continues to use the U.S. dollar alongside the Liberian dollar.
The Senate is made up of two senators from each county for a total of 30 senators.
Liberia's three largest rivers are St. Paul exiting near Monrovia, the river St. John at Buchanan and the Cestos River, all of which flow into the Atlantic.
The American Colonization Society was founded in 1816 in Washington, DC for this purpose, by a group of prominent politicians and slaveholders.
Because of ethnocentrism and the cultural gap, the Americo-Liberians envisioned creating a western-style state to which the tribesmen should assimilate.
Since 2006, the government has also opened community colleges in Buchanan, Sanniquellie, and Voinjama.
Slash-and-burn agriculture is one of the human activities eroding Liberia's natural forests.
Construction of three new heavy fuel oil power plants is expected to boost electrical capacity by 38 MW.
Shortly after the Mane conquered the region, the Vai people of the former Mali Empire immigrated into the Grand Cape Mount County region.
The rebels soon split into various factions fighting one another.
However, Mount Nimba near Yekepa, is higher at  above sea level but is not wholly within Liberia as Nimba shares a border with Guinea and Ivory Coast and is their tallest mountain as well.
With low rates of adult literacy and high poverty rates, television and newspaper use is limited, leaving radio as the predominant means of communicating with the public.
The Portuguese named the area ''Costa da Pimenta'' ("Pepper Coast") but it later came to be known as the Grain Coast, due to the abundance of melegueta pepper grains.
