All forms of liberalism assume, in some basic sense, that individuals are equal.
Liberalism is frequently cited as the dominant ideology of modern times.
Before they could establish markets, however, liberals had to destroy the old economic structures of the world.
Following the general election of 2010, the Liberal Democrats formed a coalition government with the Conservatives, resulting in party leader Nick Clegg becoming the Deputy Prime minister and many other members becoming ministers.
Liberal parties can be centre-left, centrist, or centre-right depending on their location.
A famous struggle led by the INC eventually earned India's independence from Britain.
These ideas were first unified as a distinct ideology by the English philosopher John Locke, generally regarded as the father of modern liberalism.
Some, such as the Slovenian Liberal Democrats or the Lithuanian Social Liberals, have been characterised as centre-left.
In Latin America, liberal unrest dates back to the 19th century, when liberal groups frequently fought against and violently overthrew conservative regimes in several countries across the region.
However, a few variations of conservatism, like liberal conservativism, expound some of the same ideas and principles championed by classical liberalism, including "small government and thriving capitalism".
The Liberals were disbanded in 1968 after the government passed a law that prohibited parties from having multiracial membership.
Both thinkers believed that society will contain different conceptions of a good ethical life and that people should be allowed to make their own choices without interference from the state or other individuals.
Beyond identifying a clear role for government in modern society, liberals also have obsessed over the meaning and nature of the most important principle in liberal philosophy: liberty.
"Wherever liberalism has flourished domestically, it has been accompanied by visions of liberal internationalism," one historian wrote.
The early waves of liberalism popularised economic individualism while expanding constitutional government and parliamentary authority.
Governments had to realise, liberals maintained, that poor and improper governance gave the people authority to overthrow the ruling order through any and all possible means, even through outright violence and revolution, if needed.
Scholars often split those traditions into British and French versions, with the former version of liberalism emphasising the expansion of democratic values and constitutional reform and the latter rejecting authoritarian political and economic structures, as well as being involved with nation-building.
Likewise in Switzerland the long-term impact of the French Revolution has been assessed by Martin:
Another early liberal convert to greater government intervention was Thomas Hill Green.
Recently, however, liberal parties and institutions have made a major push for political power.
The dominant Canadian and American parties, the Liberal Party and the Democratic Party, are frequently identified as being modern liberal or centre-left organisations in the academic literature.
The expansion and promotion of free markets was another major liberal achievement.
Marx rejected the foundational aspects of liberal theory, hoping to destroy both the state and the liberal distinction between society and the individual while fusing the two into a collective whole designed to overthrow the developing capitalist order of the 19th century.
The Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius praised "the idea of a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed".
Their rise in 1939 culminated in the Second World War.
Following the Reform Act the mainly aristocratic Whigs in the House of Commons were joined by a small number of parliamentary Radicals, as well as an increased number of middle class Whigs.
They can further be divided based on their adherence to social liberalism or classical liberalism, although all liberal parties and individuals share basic similarities, including the support for civil rights and democratic institutions.
Most of the world's richest and most powerful nations are liberal democracies with extensive social welfare programmes.
The New Liberals, which included intellectuals like L.T.
In particular, the Levellers, a radical political movement, published their manifesto ''Agreement of the People'', in which they advocated for popular sovereignty, for extended voting suffrage, religious tolerance and equality before the law.
After the war, there was a falling out between Russia and the West, and the Cold War opened in 1947 between the Communist Eastern Bloc and the liberal Western Alliance.
The Wafd Party ("Delegation Party") was a nationalist liberal political party in Egypt.
The American Enlightenment is a period of intellectual ferment in the thirteen American colonies in the period 1714–1818, which led to the American Revolution, and the creation of the American Republic.
A prolific writer, among many other works, he had begun a theoretical work examining the relationship between unemployment, money and prices back in the 1920s.
A second republic was proclaimed in France.
Foreshadowing the new liberty as the freedom to act rather than to avoid suffering from the acts of others, Green wrote the following:
It is precisely with these plants and these men that we shall afford them."
In maintaining that people are ''naturally'' equal, liberals assume that they all possess the same right to liberty.
Liberal parties, think tanks, and other institutions are common in many nations, although they advocate for different causes based on their ideological orientation.
The fortunes of liberal parties since World War II have been mixed, with some gaining strength while others suffered from continuous declines.
In nations such as Myanmar, however, liberal democracy has been replaced by military dictatorship.
By the end of the nineteenth century, the principles of classical liberalism were being increasingly challenged by downturns in economic growth, a growing perception of the evils of poverty, unemployment and relative deprivation present within modern industrial cities, and the agitation of organised labour.
He introduced a number of different concepts of the form tyranny can take, referred to as social tyranny, and tyranny of the majority respectively.
In Europe, liberalism has a long tradition dating back to 17th century.
In a natural state of affairs, liberals argued, humans were driven by the instincts of survival and self-preservation, and the only way to escape from such a dangerous existence was to form a common and supreme power capable of arbitrating between competing human desires.
Some confusion remains about the relationship between social liberalism and socialism, despite the fact that many variants of socialism distinguish themselves markedly from liberalism by opposing capitalism, hierarchy, and private property.
By 1839 they were informally being called "the Liberal Party".
Later waves of modern liberal thought and struggle were strongly influenced by the need to expand civil rights.
Although British classical liberals aspired to a minimum of state activity, the passage of the Factory Acts in the early 19th century, which involved government interference in the economy, met with their approval.
The objectives of liberal theorists and philosophers have differed across various times, cultures, and continents.
"Let us be up and doing, using our idle resources to increase our wealth," he wrote in 1928.
Building on John Locke's ''Second Treatise of Government'', he advocated that the executive, legislative, and judicial functions of government should be assigned to different bodies.
The gains of liberalism have been significant.
The Liberals formed a multiracial party that originally drew considerable support from urban Blacks and college-educated Whites.
His ''The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money'' was published in 1936, and served as a theoretical justification for the interventionist policies Keynes favoured for tackling a recession.
This brand of conservatism primarily reacted against the civil unrest and the cultural changes that transpired during the 1960s.
The Purple Coalition, one of the most consequential in Dutch history, brought together the progressive left-liberal D66, the economic liberal and centre-right VVD, and the social democratic Labour Party – an unusual combination that ultimately legalised same-sex marriage, euthanasia, and prostitution while also instituting a non-enforcement policy on marijuana.
The Allied victory in the First World War and the collapse of four empires seemed to mark the triumph of liberalism across the European continent, not just among the victorious allies, but also in Germany and the newly created states of Eastern Europe.
In the context of the times, the Constitution was a republican and liberal document.
Liberals sought and established a constitutional order that prized important individual freedoms, such as the freedom of speech and of association, an independent judiciary and public trial by jury, and the abolition of aristocratic privileges.
The Reform Act 1832 was put through with the support of public outcry, mass meetings of "political unions" and riots in some cities.
In the middle of the 20th century, the Liberal Party and the Progressive Party were formed to oppose the apartheid policies of the government.
Despite much persecution, Voltaire remained a courageous polemicist who indefatigably fought for civil rights – the right to a fair trial and freedom of religion – and who denounced the hypocrisies and injustices of the ''Ancien Régime''.
It established a strong national government and provided clear Separation of powers between the branches of government (executive, legislative, and judicial) to limit any one branch from exercising the core functions of another.
Today, liberal parties continue to wield power and influence throughout the world.
He concluded that the people have a right to overthrow a tyrant.
From 1820 to 1823, during the ''Trienio Liberal'', King Ferdinand VII was compelled by the ''liberales'' to swear to uphold the Constitution.
Liberal nationalists demanded written constitutions, representative assemblies, greater suffrage rights, and freedom of the press.
Mill's 1859 ''On Liberty'' addressed the nature and limits of the power that can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual.
Enlightenment philosophers are given credit for shaping liberal ideas.
"With men and plants unemployed, it is ridiculous to say that we cannot afford these new developments.
Today, liberalism in South Africa is represented by the Democratic Alliance, the official opposition party to the ruling African National Congress.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the cause of Second Wave feminism in the United States was advanced in large part by liberal feminist organisations such as the National Organization for Women.
Classical liberals were committed to individualism, liberty and equal rights.
The Allies, which included most of the important liberal nations as well as communist Russia, won World War II, defeating Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and militarist Japan.
Politically, liberals have organised extensively throughout the world.
The ensuing Revolution Controversy featured, among others, Mary Wollstonecraft, who followed with an early feminist tract ''A Vindication of the Rights of Woman''.
Liberal socialism is a socialist political philosophy that includes liberal principles within it.
The comprehensive welfare state was built in the UK after the Second World War.
Since individuals will hold diverging viewpoints, liberals argue, they ought to uphold and respect the right of one another to disagree.
The party produced some of the most influential prime ministers in Canadian history, including Pierre Trudeau, Lester B. Pearson and Jean Chrétien, and has been primarily responsible for the development of the Canadian welfare state.
The Bill made royal interference with the law and with elections to parliament illegal, made the agreement of parliament necessary for the implementation of any new taxes and outlawed the maintenance of a standing army during peacetime without parliament's consent.
The period produced a significant amount of political and philosophical commentary.
In Africa, liberalism is comparatively weak.
The state should intervene only where there is a clear, proven and strong tendency of a liberty to enslave the individual.
Liberals espouse a wide array of views depending on their understanding of these principles, but generally they support ideas and programmes such as freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, free markets, civil rights, democratic societies, secular governments, gender equality and international cooperation.
The moral and political suppositions of liberalism have been based on traditions such as natural rights and utilitarian theory, although sometimes liberals even requested support from scientific and religious circles.
Liberal socialism does not have the goal of abolishing capitalism with a socialist economy; instead, it supports a mixed economy that includes both public and private property in capital goods.
Principles that can be described as "liberal socialist" have been based upon or developed by the following philosophers: John Stuart Mill, Eduard Bernstein, John Dewey, Carlo Rosselli, Norberto Bobbio and Chantal Mouffe.
In the same vein, conservatives have also attacked what they perceive to be the reckless liberal pursuit of progress and material gains, arguing that such preoccupations undermine traditional social values rooted in community and continuity.
The individualist element avers the ethical primacy of the human being against the pressures of social collectivism, the egalitarian element assigns the same moral worth and status to all individuals, the meliorist element asserts that successive generations can improve their sociopolitical arrangements, and the universalist element affirms the moral unity of the human species and marginalises local cultural differences.
The early roots of Christian democracy developed as a reaction against the industrialisation and urbanisation associated with ''laissez-faire'' liberalism in the 19th century.
In the United Kingdom, the Liberal Party was founded in 1859 and was one of two major parties in British politics for that century, the other being the Conservative Party.
In this period, the dominant ideological opponent of classical liberalism was conservatism, but liberalism later survived major ideological challenges from new opponents, such as fascism and communism.
To these early enlightenment thinkers securing the most essential amenities of life – liberty and private property among them – required the formation of a "sovereign" authority with universal jurisdiction.
Mill's ''On Liberty'' (1859), one of the classic texts in liberal philosophy, proclaimed, "the only freedom which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our own way."
Despite these variations, liberal thought does exhibit a few definite and fundamental conceptions.
The meliorist element has been the subject of much controversy, defended by thinkers such as Immanuel Kant, who believed in human progress, while suffering from attacks by thinkers such as Rousseau, who believed that human attempts to improve themselves through social cooperation would fail.
Before World War I, liberal parties dominated the European political scene, but they were gradually displaced by socialists and social democrats in the early 20th century.
In its ''2009 Manifesto'', the INC praised a "secular and liberal" Indian nationalism against the nativist, communal, and conservative ideological tendencies it claims are espoused by the right.
In France, the July Revolution of 1830, orchestrated by liberal politicians and journalists, removed the Bourbon monarchy and inspired similar uprisings elsewhere in Europe.
Libertarian thinker Robert Nozick disagreed with Rawls, championing the former version of Lockean equality instead.
Artz emphasises the benefits the Italians gained from the French Revolution:
With the rise of the Enlightenment, the word acquired decisively more positive undertones, being defined as "free from narrow prejudice" in 1781 and "free from bigotry" in 1823.
Liberal agitation in Latin America led to independence from the imperial power of Spain and Portugal.
Thomas Hobbes attempted to determine the purpose and the justification of governing authority in a post-civil war England.
It helped launch into power such presidents as Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and George W. Bush.
The Sardinian Prime Minister, Camillo di Cavour, was a shrewd liberal who understood that the only effective way for the Italians to gain independence was if the French were on their side.
As part of the project to limit the powers of government, various liberal theorists such as James Madison and the Baron de Montesquieu conceived the notion of separation of powers, a system designed to equally distribute governmental authority among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches.
The Inquisition ended as did the Holy Roman Empire.
Liberal philosophy symbolises an extensive intellectual tradition that has examined and popularised some of the most important and controversial principles of the modern world.
However, the Liberal Democrats lost 49 of their 56 seats in the 2015 general election, with their review of the result concluding that a number of policy reversals were responsible for their poor electoral performance.
Ideas that challenged the status quo were often harshly repressed.
As heirs of the Enlightenment, liberals believed that any given social and political order emanated from human interactions, not from divine will.
The 19th century saw liberal governments established in nations across Europe, South America, and North America.
Milton argued for disestablishment as the only effective way of achieving broad toleration.
Among African nations, South Africa stands out for having a notable liberal tradition that other countries on the continent lack.
Though all liberal doctrines possess a common heritage, scholars frequently assume that those doctrines contain "separate and often contradictory streams of thought".
In that vein, liberals ended mercantilist policies, royal monopolies, and various other restraints on economic activities.
The continental French version was deeply divided between ''moderates'' and ''progressives'', with the moderates tending to elitism and the progressives supporting the universalisation of fundamental institutions, such as universal suffrage, universal education, and the expansion of property rights.
The party had 7,000 members at its height, although its appeal to the White population as a whole was too small to make any meaningful political changes.
Another important figure of the French Enlightenment was Voltaire.
Today, socialist parties and ideas remain a political force with varying degrees of power and influence on all continents leading national governments in many countries.
In Spain, the ''Liberales'', the first group to use the ''liberal'' label in a political context, fought for the implementation of the 1812 Constitution for decades.
It remains the oldest liberal governing document in effect worldwide.
The French Revolution began in 1789 with the convocation of the Estates-General in May.
Significant legislative milestones in this period included the Habeas Corpus Act of 1679, which strengthened the convention that forbade detention lacking sufficient cause or evidence.
In their view, the poverty, squalor, and ignorance in which many people lived made it impossible for freedom and individuality to flourish.
Everywhere old physical, economic, and intellectual barriers had been thrown down and the Italians had begun to be aware of a common nationality.
Liberals opposed traditional conservatism and sought to replace absolutism in government with representative democracy and the rule of law.
Serfdom was abolished in Prussia, Galicia, Bohemia, and Hungary.
Some parties in the LI are among the most famous in the world, such as the Liberal Party of Canada, while others are among the smallest, such as the Gibraltar Liberal Party.
Some Victorian writers – including Charles Dickens, Thomas Carlyle, and Matthew Arnold – became early influential critics of social injustice.
This strand began to coalesce into the social liberalism movement at the turn of the twentieth century in Britain.
Liberal revolutions in countries such as Mexico and Ecuador ushered in the modern world for much of Latin America.
This provided a moral justification for the accumulation of wealth, which had previously been viewed by some as sinful.
By placing life, liberty and property as the supreme value of law and authority, Locke formulated the basis of liberalism based on social contract theory.
Smith was one of the progenitors of the idea, which was long central to classical liberalism and has resurfaced in the globalisation literature of the later 20th and early 21st centuries, that free trade promotes peace.
Where the market failed to properly allocate resources, the government was required to stimulate the economy until private funds could start flowing again – a "prime the pump" strategy designed to boost industrial production.
Eventually, however, the success of the revolutionaries petered out.
This was followed a year later with the Act of Toleration, which drew its ideological content from John Locke's four letters advocating religious toleration.
The idea of exporting liberalism worldwide and constructing a harmonious and liberal internationalist order has dominated the thinking of liberals since the 18th century.
Continentally, liberals are organised through the Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats, which includes powerful parties such the Liberal Party in the Philippines, the Democratic Progressive Party in Taiwan, and the Democrat Party in Thailand.
It was the first budget with the expressed intent of redistributing wealth among the public.
Through all these strands and traditions, scholars have identified the following major common facets of liberal thought: believing in equality and individual liberty, supporting private property and individual rights, supporting the idea of limited constitutional government, and recognising the importance of related values such as pluralism, toleration, autonomy, bodily integrity, and consent.
In a very profound step for the future of modern liberalism, he also tasked society and political institutions with the enhancement of individual freedom and identity and the development of moral character, will and reason.
The first year of the Revolution witnessed members of the Third Estate proclaiming the Tennis Court Oath in June, the Storming of the Bastille in July.
Additionally, the first ten amendments to the Constitution, known collectively as the Bill of Rights, placed restrictions on the powers of government and offered specific protections of several of the natural rights liberal thinkers used to justify the Revolution.
Social democracy, an ideology advocating progressive modification of capitalism, emerged in the 20th century and was influenced by socialism.
During the 20th century, liberal ideas spread even further as liberal democracies found themselves on the winning side in both world wars.
The right to petition the monarch was granted to everyone and "cruel and unusual punishments" were made illegal under all circumstances.
While this could be interpreted as a justification for state action to reduce poverty, it was used by classical liberals to justify inaction with the argument that the net benefit to all individuals would be higher.
To contribute to the development of liberty, liberals also have promoted concepts like pluralism and toleration.
One of the most outspoken critics of liberalism was the Roman Catholic Church, which resulted in lengthy power struggles between national governments and the Church.
Abolitionist and suffrage movements spread, along with representative and democratic ideals.
Over time, the moderates displaced the progressives as the main guardians of continental European liberalism.
In addition to supporting gender equality, liberals also have advocated for racial equality in their drive to promote civil rights, and a global civil rights movement in the 20th century achieved several objectives towards both goals.
With some luck and skill, Austria also managed to contain the bubbling nationalist sentiments in Germany and Hungary, helped along by the failure of the Frankfurt Assembly to unify the German states into a single nation.
Seeing the effects of alcohol, he believed that the state should foster and protect the social, political and economic environments in which individuals will have the best chance of acting according to their consciences.
Economic woes prompted widespread unrest in the European political world, leading to the strengthening of fascism and communism.
William Ewart Gladstone of the Liberals was Prime Minister four times.
The social liberal programme launched by President Roosevelt in the United States in 1933, reduced the unemployment rate from roughly 25 percent to about 15 percent by 1940.
Some major liberal parties in the region continue, however, to align themselves with social liberal ideas and policies – a notable case being the Colombian Liberal Party, which is a member of the Socialist International.
The worldwide Great Depression, starting in 1929, hastened the discrediting of liberal economics and strengthened calls for state control over economic affairs.
Support for ''laissez-faire'' capitalism is often associated with this principle, with Friedrich Hayek arguing in ''The Road to Serfdom'' (1944) that reliance on free markets would preclude totalitarian control by the state.
In the late 20th century, a conservative backlash against the kind of liberalism championed by Roosevelt and Kennedy developed in the Republican Party.
Liberalism has drawn both criticism and support in its history from various ideological groups.
Others, such as the Romanian National Liberal Party, have been classified as centre-right.
Mill defined "social liberty" as protection from "the tyranny of political rulers".
For liberal philosophy, pluralism leads easily to toleration.
In particular, he argued that political liberty required the separation of the powers of government.
Two decades later, however, the Italians and the Germans realised their dreams for unification and independence.
Broadly defined as a project that aims to correct, through government reformism, what it regards as the intrinsic defects of capitalism by reducing inequalities, social democracy was also not against the state.
According to the ''Encyclopedia Britannica'', "In the United States, liberalism is associated with the welfare-state policies of the New Deal programme of the Democratic administration of Pres.
In 1815, the first use of the word ''liberalism'' appeared in English.
Locke argued that each man has a natural right to life, liberty and property, while adding that governments must not violate these rights based on the social contract.
Unlike many of their competitors and predecessors, liberals do not seek conformity and homogeneity in the way that people think; in fact, their efforts have been geared towards establishing a governing framework that harmonises and minimises conflicting views, but still allows those views to exist and flourish.
Revolutions spread throughout the Austrian Empire, the German states, and the Italian states.
Liberalism was defeated in Russia when the Communists came to power under Vladimir Lenin in October 1917, in Italy when Mussolini set up his dictatorship in 1922, in Poland in 1926 under Józef Piłsudski, and in Spain in 1939 after the Spanish Civil War.
British philosopher Mary Wollstonecraft is widely regarded as the pioneer of liberal feminism, with ''A Vindication of the Rights of Woman'' (1792) expanding the boundaries of liberalism to include women in the political structure of liberal society.
In a few years, this ''New Liberalism'' had become the essential social and political programme of the Liberal Party in Britain, and it would encircle much of the world in the 20th century.
Liberalism gained momentum in the beginning of the 20th century.
Prominent revolutionaries in the Glorious Revolution, the American Revolution, and the French Revolution used liberal philosophy to justify the armed overthrow of what they saw as tyrannical rule.
The bastion of autocracy, the Russian Tsar, was overthrown in the first phase of the Russian Revolution.
Napoleon III agreed to Cavour's request for assistance and France defeated Austria in the Franco-Austrian War of 1859, setting the stage for Italian independence.
Meanwhile, the definitive liberal response to the Great Depression was given by the English economist John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946).
Despite these complex relationships, some scholars have argued that liberalism actually "rejects ideological thinking" altogether, largely because such thinking could lead to unrealistic expectations for human society.
Liberalism first became a distinct political movement during the Age of Enlightenment, when it became popular among philosophers and economists in the Western world.
Several commentators have noted strong similarities between social liberalism and social democracy, with one political scientist even calling American liberalism "bootleg social democracy" due to the absence of a significant social democratic tradition in the United States that liberals have tried to rectify.
Meanwhile, a mixture of liberal and nationalist sentiment in Italy and Germany brought about the unification of the two countries in the late 19th century.
In general, the major theme of Asian liberalism in the past few decades has been the rise of democratisation as a method facilitate the rapid economic modernisation of the continent.
Liberalism still faces challenges, especially with the phenomenal growth of China as a model combination of authoritarian government and economic liberalism.
In 1695, the Commons refused to renew the Licensing of the Press Act 1662, leading to a continuous period of unprecedented freedom of the press.
The Great Recession, which began around 2007, prompted a resurgence in Keynesian economic thought.
Among the various regional and national movements, the civil rights movement in the United States during the 1960s strongly highlighted the liberal efforts for equal rights.
The Liberals produced one of the greatest British prime ministers – William Gladstone, who was also known as the ''Grand Old Man'' and was the towering political figure of liberalism in the 19th century.
The enormous success of the Liberals – virtually unmatched in any other liberal democracy – has prompted many political commentators over time to identify them as the nation's ''natural governing party''.
After the war, the leaders debated about how to move forward.
The fundamental elements of contemporary society have liberal roots.
The two key events that marked the triumph of liberalism were the Abolition of feudalism in France on the night of 4 August 1789, which marked the collapse of feudal and old traditional rights and privileges and restrictions, and the passage of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in August.
