In 2002, the LTTE dropped its demand for a separate state, instead demanding a form of regional autonomy.
Microlight aircraft
The fighting briefly halted in 1994 following the election of Chandrika Kumaratunga as President of Sri Lanka and the onset of peace talks, but fighting resumed after LTTE sank two Sri Lanka Navy boats in April 1995.
By August 2011, government had released more than 8,000 cadres, and 2,879 remained.
During that period, 32 camps were set up in India to train these 495 LTTE insurgents, including 90 women who were trained in 10 batches.
Some of these cadres were integrated into State Intelligence Services to tackle the internal and external networks of LTTE.
The LTTE carried out low-key attacks against various government targets, including policemen and local politicians.
These attacks included throwing bombs at the residence and the car of SLFP Jaffna Mayor, Alfred Duraiyappah, placing a bomb at a carnival held in the stadium of Jaffna city (now "Duraiyappah stadium") and Neervely bank robbery.
According to the International Crisis Group, the Sri Lankan government implemented the military-led settlements of Sinhalese community in Tamil areas in order to create "a buffer to the expansion of LTTE control" and to "undermine Tamil nationalist claims on a contiguous north-eastern Tamil homeland."
The LTTE was the only militant group to assassinate two world leaders: former Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1991 and Sri Lankan President Ranasinghe Premadasa in 1993.
Sporadic fighting had been happening in the North for months, but the intensity of the clashes increased after September 2007.
The 1974 Tamil conference incident also sparked the anger of these militant groups.
Voter turnout became as low as 10%.
During this period of time several other insurgent groups came into the arena, such as EROS (1975), TELO (1979), PLOTE (1980), EPRLF (1980) and TELA (1982).
At the same time, Nadarajah Thangathurai and Selvarajah Yogachandran (better known by his ''nom de guerre'' Kuttimani) were also involved in discussions about an insurgency.
Suicide attacks, military skirmishes, and air raids took place during the latter part of 2006.
Each member carried a cyanide capsule with orders to use if  captured.
None of the allegations have since been verified.
From 1983 to 1987, LTTE acquired a substantial amount of weapons from RAW and from Lebanon, Cyprus, Singapore, and Malaysia-based arms dealers.
Maheswaran was the secretary of TULF Tamil Youth Forum, Colombo branch.
The LTTE attacked training camps of the EPRLF a few months later, forcing it to withdraw from the Jaffna peninsula.
Following 9/11, in an effort to distance his organization from the "real terrorists", the LTTE leader expressed sympathy to the Western powers engaged in a war against international terrorism and urged them to provide "a clear and comprehensive definition of the concept of terrorism that would distinguish between freedom struggles based on the right to self-determination and blind terrorist acts based on fanaticism."
These include investment in real estate, shipping, grocery stores, gold and jewellery stores, gas stations, restaurants, production of films, mass media organisations (TV, radio, print), and industries.
LTTE rejected the accord because they opposed EPRLF's Varadaraja Perumal as the chief ministerial candidate for the merged North Eastern Province.
The ruthlessness of this campaign, and the Indian army's subsequent anti-LTTE operations, made it extremely unpopular among many Tamils in Sri Lanka.
Prabhakaran was seriously injured during air strikes carried out by the Sri Lanka Air Force on a bunker complex in Jayanthinagar on 26 November 2007.
Thus it dumped the weapons in the sea.
Karen Parker, an attorney specializing in human rights and humanitarian law, argued that the LTTE was not a terrorist organization but "an armed force in a war against the government of Sri Lanka."
From 1998 onward, the LTTE regained control of these areas, which culminated in the capture in April 2000 of the strategically important Elephant Pass base complex, located at the entrance of the Jaffna Peninsula, after prolonged fighting against the Sri Lanka Army.
15 days after the announcement, on 5 August 2009, a Sri Lankan military intelligence unit, with the collaboration of local authorities, captured Pathmanathan in the Tune Hotel, Downtown Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
According to the proposal, this LTTE administration intended to be a secular one with principal emphasis on prohibition of discrimination and protection of all communities.
With the major groups including the TELO and EPRLF eliminated, the remaining twenty or so Tamil insurgent group were then absorbed into the LTTE, making Jaffna an LTTE-dominated city.
In a series of military operations that followed, the Sri Lanka Army recaptured the Jaffna Peninsula.
It consisted of around 40 Tamil youth, including Ponnuthurai Sivakumaran (later, the leader of the Sivakumaran group), K. Pathmanaba (one of the founder members of EROS) and Velupillai Prabhakaran, an 18-year-old youth from single caste-oriented  Valvettithurai (VVT).
Though the conflict was between the Tamil and Sinhalese people, India and Sri Lanka signed the peace accord instead of India influencing both parties to sign a peace accord among themselves.
Thus the TULF and other Tamil political parties were steadily marginalised and insurgent groups emerged as the major force in the north.
As a result, almost the entire TELO leadership and at least 400 TELO militants were killed by the LTTE.
As armed Sinhalese villages were established in Tamil areas, many Tamil families were forcibly displaced by the army from their traditional villages and the LTTE retaliated by attacking the settlers.
It was suspected that the vessel was hijacked by the LTTE to be used as a phantom vessel.
The LTTE was founded on 5 May 1976 as the successor to the Tamil New Tigers.
After the breakdown of the peace process in 2006, the Sri Lankan military launched a major offensive against the Tigers, defeating the LTTE militarily and bringing the entire country under its control.
During its active years, the LTTE had established and administered a de facto state under its control, named Tamil Eelam with Kilinochchi as its administrative capital, and had managed a government in its territory, providing state functions such as courts, a police force, a human rights organization, and a humanitarian assistance board.
On 25 January 2009, SLA troops "completely captured" Mullaitivu town, the last major LTTE stronghold.
They would later (in 1979) create a separate organisation named Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization (TELO) to campaign for the establishment of an independent Tamil Eelam.
LTTE denounced the TELO view and claimed that India was only acting on its own interest.
LTTE is also known to use the internet for criminal profit.
LTTE sympathisers justify some of the assassinations by arguing that the people attacked were combatants or persons closely associated with Sri Lankan military intelligence.
It has been stated that Prabhakaran sought to "refashion the old TNT/new LTTE into an elite, ruthlessly efficient, and highly professional fighting force", by the terrorism expert Rohan Gunaratna.
Heroic martyrdom was glorified in ancient Tamil literature.
A new crisis leading to the first large-scale fighting since signing of the ceasefire occurred when the LTTE closed the sluice gates of the Mavil Oya (Mavil Aru) reservoir on 21 July 2006, and cut the water supply to 15,000 villages in government controlled areas.
Historical inter-ethnic imbalances between majority Sinhalese and minority Tamil populations are alleged to have created the background for the origin of the LTTE.
President Premadasa ordered the Sri Lanka Army to clandestine handed over arms consignments to the LTTE to fight the IPKF and its proxy, the Tamil National Army (TNA).
It was later revealed that UNP Member of Parliament Seyed Ali Zahir Moulana had played an important role in the defection of Colonel Karuna from the LTTE to the Government.
After he was killed, Prabhakaran took over.
The first batch of Tigers were trained in Establishment 22 based in Chakrata, Uttarakhand.
Despite the allegations of human rights abuses, LTTE has been noted for its lack of use of sexualized violence or rape as a tactic.
Initially LTTE members were prohibited from having love affairs or sexual relationships as it could deter their prime motive, but this policy changed after Prabhakaran married Mathivathani Erambu in October 1984.
Founded in May 1976 by Velupillai Prabhakaran, it waged a  secessionist nationalist insurgency to create an independent state of Tamil Eelam in the north and east of Sri Lanka for Tamil people.
LTTE received its first consignment of arms from Singapore in 1984 on board the MV ''Cholan'', the first ship owned by the organisation.
The Indian Government extended the ban on LTTE considering their strong anti-India posture and threat to the security of Indian nationals.
LTTE is the only terrorist-proscribed organisation to acquire aircraft.
As part of the agreement, Norway and other Nordic countries agreed to jointly monitor the ceasefire through the Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission.
The fate of the ship's crew of 15 is unknown.
At its peak in 2000, the LTTE was in control of 76% of the landmass in the Northern and Eastern provinces of Sri Lanka.
In the most significant show of dissent from within the organisation, a senior LTTE commander named Colonel Karuna (''nom de guerre'' of Vinayagamoorthi Muralitharan) broke away from the LTTE in March 2004 and formed the TamilEela Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal (later Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal), amid allegations that the northern commanders were overlooking the needs of the eastern Tamils.
The first country to ban the LTTE was its brief one-time ally, India.
The advancing military confined the LTTE into rapidly diminishing areas in the North.
The Indian Army launched assaults on the LTTE, including a month-long campaign, ''Operation Pawan'' to win control of the Jaffna Peninsula.
In 1987 LTTE established the Black Tigers, a unit responsible for conducting suicide attacks against political, economic, and military targets, and launched its first suicide attack against a Sri Lankan Army camp, killing 40 soldiers.
The LTTE has been accused of recruiting and using child soldiers to fight against Sri Lankan government forces.
He tried to take control of the eastern province from the LTTE, which caused clashes between the LTTE and TMVP.
At the start of the final round of peace talks in 2002, the Tamil Tigers controlled a 15,000&nbsp;km2 area.
Many of these attacks have involved military objectives in the north and east of the country, although civilians have been targeted on numerous occasions, including during a high-profile attack on Colombo International Airport in 2001 that caused damage to several commercial airliners and military jets, killing 16 people.
The United States condemned this.
Gradually, the defence lines of the LTTE began to fall.
At the height of its power, LTTE had 42 offices worldwide.
The drugs were then transported to coastal towns in Tamil Nadu such as Tuticorin, Rameswaram, Ramanathapuram, Nagapattinam and Kochi, in Kerala State.
Sporadic violence had continued and on 25 April 2006, LTTE tried to assassinate Sri Lankan Army Commander Lieutenant General Sarath Fonseka.
The Indian change of policy came gradually, starting with the IPKF-LTTE conflict, and culminating with the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi.
Explosives were purchased from commercial markets in India.
Subsequently, in May 2011, Nediyavan, who advocates an armed struggle against the Sri Lankan state, was arrested and released on bail in Norway, pending further investigation.
The LTTE leadership accused him of mishandling funds and questioned him about his recent personal behaviour.
Eelam War IV had commenced in the East.
She characterized the war waged by the LTTE as "a war of national liberation in the exercise of the right of self-determination."
Other Buddhist shrines have been attacked, notably the Sambuddhaloka Temple in Colombo, in which nine worshippers were killed.
In 2003, the LTTE issued a proposal to establish an Interim Self Governing Authority in the 8 districts of the North and East which it controlled.
Illicit sex was also prohibited.
Among the apprehended cadres, there had been about 700 hardcore members.
On 27 July 1975, Prabhakaran assassinated Duraiyappah, who was branded as a "traitor" by TULF and the insurgents alike.
The LTTE was accused of having up to 5,794 child soldiers in its ranks since 2001.
LTTE was also involved in credit card fraud, in the United Kingdom.
Payments for the explosives were made from a Citibank account in Singapore held by Selvarasa Pathmanathan.
Mavil Aru came under the control of the Sri Lanka Army by 15 August 2006.
After a brief period of negotiations, LTTE pulled out of peace talks indefinitely.
Uma Maheswaran was found to be having a love affair with Urmila Kandiah, which was against the code of conduct of LTTE.
Those cadres were given a chance to have his/her last supper with the LTTE leader Prabhakaran, which was a rare honour one would get in the LTTE controlled area.
In 2005, the International Federation of Tamils claimed that the Sri Lankan military purposefully stoked tensions between Tamils and Muslims, in an attempt to undermine Tamil security.
In 2010, citing Royal Canadian Mounted Police sources, ''Jane's Intelligence Review'' said the LTTE controls a portion of the one billion dollar drug market in the Canadian city of Montreal.
The LTTE has launched attacks on civilian targets several times.
According to the information published by the LTTE, the Black Tigers carried out 378 suicide attacks between 5 July 1987, and 20 November 2008.
As Tamils turned to the LTTE for support, the Muslims were left with the Sri Lankan state as their sole defender, and so to the LTTE, the Muslims had legitimised the role of the state, and were thus viewed as Sri Lankans.
Out of the deceased, 274 were male and 104 were female.
LTTE later undertook its anti-Muslim campaigns as it began to view Muslims as outsiders, rather than a part of the Tamil nation.
With the end of the hostilities, 11,664 LTTE members, including 595 child soldiers surrendered to the Sri Lankan military.
LTTE members were required to avoid their family members and avoid communication with them.
This, in turn motivated LTTE cadres to join the Black Tiger wing.
From ancient times, the Tamil civilization saw War as an honorable sacrifice and fallen heroes and kings were worshiped in the form of a Hero stone.
Thus, he provided letters of reference to the LTTE and to other Tamil insurgent groups to raise funds.
Politically the LTTE was never serious about a political solution, it operated a systematic and powerful political wing, which functioned like a separate state in the LTTE controlled area.
It was also in control of numerous charitable organisations including Tamils Rehabilitation Organisation, which was banned and had its funds frozen by the United States Treasury in 2007 for covertly financing terrorism.
Mahinda Rajapaksa was elected as the president of Sri Lanka in 2005.
By the 1970s, initial non violent political struggle for an independent mono-ethnic Tamil state was used as justification for a violent secessionist insurgency led by the LTTE.
LTTE had cloned credit cards using PIN and card numbers obtained from unsuspecting card holders in the United Kingdom, and funds were later transferred out of their accounts.
LTTE acquired its first light aircraft in the late 1990s.
Selvarasa Pathmanathan succeeded Prabhakaran as leader of the LTTE, but he was later arrested in Malaysia and handed over to the Sri Lankan government in August 2009.
Initially young Muslims joined the Tamil militant groups in the early years of Tamil militancy.
The last members of the IPKF, which was estimated to have had a strength of well over 100,000 at its peak, left the country in March 1990 upon the request of President Premadasa.
It had successfully targeted three world leaders, the only insurgent group to do so.
Since late 1997, North Korea became the principal country to provide arms, ammunition, and explosives to the LTTE.
This was a prerequisite set by the LTTE for the signing of the agreement.
Unmanned aerial vehicles
It was involved in four unsuccessful rounds of peace talks with the Sri Lankan government over the course of the conflict.
LTTE used female cadres for military engagements.
By this time, LTTE and other insurgent groups wanted a separate state.
The LTTE is also accused of having pioneered online fund raising through solicitation and various cyber crimes including identity theft and credit card fraud.
The attack was symbolic in that the shrine, which houses a tooth of the Buddha, is the holiest Buddhist shrine in Sri Lanka.
Later, S. P. Thamilselvan was appointed the head of the political wing.
The FBI has described the LTTE as "amongst the most dangerous and deadly extremist outfits in the world".
While LTTE claimed that the people under its control were free to vote, it is alleged that they used threats to prevent the population from voting.
+ Aircraft in LTTE possession
They were divided into three categories; hardcore, non-combatants, and those who were forcibly recruited (including child soldiers).
The eviction of Muslim residents happened in the north in 1990, and the east in 1992.
As of 8 January 2009, the LTTE abandoned its positions on the Jaffna peninsula to make a last stand in the jungles of Mullaitivu, their last main base.
In January 2011, Swiss authorities arrested several LTTE members on money laundering.
Earlier, on 2 November 2007, S. P. Thamilselvan, who was the head of the rebels' political wing, was killed during another government air raid.
In the late 1970s, TULF parliamentarian and opposition leader A. Amirthalingam provided letters of reference for fundraising, and V. N. Navaratnam, who was an executive committee member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), introduced many influential and wealthy Tamils living overseas to Tamil insurgent leaders.
After being elected, in April 1989, he started negotiations with LTTE.
The ISGA was to be entrusted with powers such as the right to impose law, collect taxes and oversee the rehabilitation process until a favorable solution was reached after which elections would be held.
There were three types of organisations that engage in propaganda and fund raising—Front, Cover, and Sympathetic.
The group's global network owned numerous business ventures in various countries.
The LTTE has suggested that TMVP was backed by the government, and the Nordic SLMM monitors corroborated this.
Sri Lanka itself lifted the ban on the LTTE before signing the ceasefire agreement in 2002.
The LTTE was influenced by Indian freedom fighters such as Subhas Chandra Bose.
Then on board merchant tankers, weapons were transferred to the sea of Alampil, just outside the territorial waters in Sri Lanka's Exclusive Economic Zone.
This gives a semblance of illusion that the whole society is behind the LTTE."
On 28 November 2007, an LTTE suicide bomber named Sujatha Vagawanam detonated a bomb hidden inside her brassiere in an attempt to kill Sri Lankan minister Douglas Devananda.
A report released by the LTTE's Child Protection Authority (CPA) in 2008 stated that less than 40 soldiers under age 18 remained in its forces.
After that, small teams of Sea Tigers brought the cargo ashore.
The '''Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam''' ( ''Tamiḻīḻa viṭutalaip pulikaḷ'',  ''Dhemala īlām vimukthi koti'', commonly known as the '''LTTE''' or the '''Tamil Tigers''') was a militant organisation that was based in northern Sri Lanka.
This move was approved of by the international community but rejected by the Sri Lankan President.
The specialised unit that carried out suicide attacks was named the Black Tigers.
LTTE ordered civilians to boycott the local government elections of 1983 in which TULF contested.
Civilians have also been killed in attacks on economic targets, such as the Central Bank bombing.
Six rounds of peace talks between the Government of Sri Lanka and LTTE were held, but they were temporarily suspended after the LTTE pulled out of the talks in 2003 claiming "certain critical issues relating to the ongoing peace process".
Unstable peace initially held between the government and the LTTE, and peace talks progressed towards providing devolution for Tamils in the north and east of the country.
They were all later released.
The Jaffna Peninsula was captured by the Sri Lankan Army by 14 January.
Later, in March 2015, the EU reimposed the sanctions and restrictions.
The government took action to rehabilitate the surrendered cadres under a National Action Plan for the Re-integration of Ex-combatants while allegations of torture, rape, and murder were reported by international human rights bodies.
Moreover, millions of dollars was also passed on to the LTTE.
Amirthalingam introduced Prabhakaran to N. S. Krishnan, who later became the first international representative of LTTE.
LTTE's people smuggling ships included ''MV Ocean Lady'', which appeared in October 2009 off Canada's British Columbia coast with 76 Tamil asylum seekers; ''MV Sun Sea'', arrived in August 2010 off British Columbia, with 492 asylum seekers and ''MV Alicia'', carrying 80 illegal immigrants, but was intercepted by Indonesian authorities in July 2011, allegedly heading towards Canada or New Zealand.
The LTTE boycotted the presidential election in December 2005.
India was to send a peacekeeping force, named the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF), part of the Indian Army, to Sri Lanka to enforce the disarmament and to watch over the regional council.
The government of India stated that the IPKF should disarm the LTTE by force.
As the armed conflict evolved and voluntary donations lessened, LTTE used force and threats to collect money.
Following the attack, the European Union proscribed the LTTE as a terrorist organisation.
It also claims that the most expertly executed operation of the KP Branch was the theft of 32,400 rounds of 81&nbsp;mm mortar ammunition purchased from Tanzania destined for the Sri Lanka Army.
Local Tamil leaders were disturbed by the LTTE's call for the eviction of Muslims in 1970.
After three months of tensions, LTTE declared war on IPKF on 7 October 1987.
Although the Tamil militant organisations did not have a role in the Indo-Lanka agreement, most groups, including EPRLF, TELO, EROS, and PLOTE, accepted it.
The prices charged by LTTE to go to countries such as Canada was significantly higher than the normal cost to travel.
Despite most Tigers being Hindus, the LTTE was an avowedly secular organization hence religion did not play any significant part in their ideology.
It was the mass exodus of Tamil civilians to India and western countries following the Black July ethnic riots, which made this possible.
In August 1997, an organisation calling themselves the Internet Black Tigers claimed responsibility for the E-mail harassment of various Sri Lankan networks around the world.
Uma Maheswaran became its leader, and Prabhakaran its military commander.
In 1972, Prabhakaran teamed up with Chetti Thanabalasingam, Jaffna to form the Tamil New Tigers (TNT), with Thanabalasingham as its leader.
On 18 June 2007, the LTTE released 135 children under 18 years of age.
It  ran a bank (Bank of Tamil Eelam), a radio station (Voice of Tigers) and a television station (National Television of Tamil Eelam).
That includes the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, the former Prime Minister of India on 21 May 1991, the assassination of Ranasinghe Premadasa, the President of Sri Lanka on 1 May 1993, and the failed assassination attempt of Chandrika Kumaratunga, the Sri Lankan President on 18 December 1999, which resulted in the loss of her right eye.
The LTTE argues that instances of child recruitment occurred mostly in the east, under the purview of former LTTE regional commander Colonel Karuna.
The ISGA would consist of members representing the LTTE, GoSL and the Muslim community.
In a statement, the European Parliament said that the LTTE did not represent all Tamils and called on it to "allow for political pluralism and alternate democratic voices in the northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka".
A student named Satiyaseelan formed ''Tamil Manavar Peravai'' (Tamil Students League) to counter this.
These allegations and a suspicion from within the Sri Lankan armed forces, that LTTE had considerable connections and assets in Eritrea and that its leader Prabhakaran may try to flee to Eritrea in the final stages of war, prompted the Sri Lankan government to establish diplomatic relations with Eritrea in 2009.
Prabhakaran ordered him to leave the organisation.
Prior to the ethnic riots of 1983, attempts to raise funds for a sustaining military campaign were not realised.
He overtook the responsibilities of arms smuggling and related activities from Pathmanathan.
By 2 August 2008, LTTE lost the Mannar District following the fall of Vellankulam town.
The court noted that the basis of proscribing the LTTE had been based on "imputations derived from the press and the Internet" rather than on direct investigation of the group's actions, as required by law.
In 1989, it established a political party named People's Front of Liberation Tigers, under Gopalaswamy Mahendraraja ''alias'' Mahattaya.
In November 1994, the LTTE was able to purchase 60 tonnes of explosives (50 tonnes of TNT and 10 tonnes of RDX) from Rubezone Chemical plant in Ukraine, providing a forged Bangladeshi Ministry of Defense end-user certificate.
The panel has called on the UNSG to conduct an independent international inquiry into the alleged violations of international law.
Both Sivakumaran and Prabhakaran attempted to assassinate Duraiyappah in revenge for the incident.
Prabhakaran shot and killed the Mayor when he was visiting the Krishnan temple at Ponnalai.
Post independent Sri Lankan governments attempted to rectify the disproportionate favouring and empowerment of Tamil minority by the colonial rulers, which led to exclusivist ethnic policies including the ″Sinhala Only Act″ and gave rise to separatist ideologies among many Tamil leaders.
Merchant vessel ''Princess Iswari'' went from Indonesia to North Korea under captain Kamalraj Kandasamy ''alias'' Vinod, loaded the weapons and came back to international waters beyond Sri Lanka.
It was forbidden for the LTTE members to consume tobacco and alcohol.
Indian authorities accused LTTE operatives of previously bringing narcotics to Mumbai from Mandsaur District of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Punjab border.
These consignments include RPG guns, mortars, self-loading rifles, T81 automatic rifles, T56 automatic rifles, pistols, hand grenades, ammunition, and communications sets.
