Traditionally, a librarian is associated with collections of books, as demonstrated by the etymology of the word "librarian" (from the Latin ''liber'', "book").
Their duties vary, from planning summer reading programs to weekly story hour programs.
Public library staffing is structured in response to community needs.
The program was created in 1979 in response to information accessibility issues for the Deaf in the Nashville area.
In the Doe v. Gonzales case, these librarians challenged the constitutionality of the nondisclosure provisions of the National Security Letters issued by the government under the USA Patriot Act in terrorist or other investigations.
*Answering incoming reference questions via telephone, postal mail, email, fax, and chat
They are usually required to hold a graduate degree from a library school such as a Master's degree in Library Science or Library and Information Studies.
The ALA also has the Women & Gender Studies Section (WGSS) of its Division "Association of College & Research Libraries"; this section was formed to discuss, promote, and support women's studies collections and services in academic and research libraries.
Library associates, library technicians, and library assistants often have college diplomas but usually do not hold library-related degrees.
*Referring patrons to other community organizations and government offices.
Recently over 100 libraries in the United States have begun adding 3D printers to their collections in an effort to expose the public to cutting edge technology.
Gabriel Naude published ''Avis pour dresser une bibliothèque'', the first printed monograph on librarianship.
The factors accounting for the transition included the demographic losses of the First World War,  the provisions of the Public Libraries Act of 1919, the library-building activity of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, and the library employment advocacy of the Central Bureau for the Employment of Women.
Olivia Crosby described librarians as "Information experts in the information age".
In smaller or specialized libraries, librarians typically perform a wide range of the different duties.
They often call themselves information brokers, research specialists, knowledge management, competitive intelligence, or independent information professionals.
FTF was the first ALA group to focus on women's issues.
At the same time royalty, nobles and jurists began to establish libraries of their own as status symbols.
These examples illustrate some of the ways in which librarians are using technology to fulfill and expand upon their historical roles.
The library at Gallaudet University, the only Deaf liberal arts university in the United States, was founded in 1876.
Large libraries often use approval plans, which involve the librarian for a specific subject creating a profile that allows publishers to send relevant books to the library without any additional vetting.
*Researching topics of interest for their constituencies.
The pinakes contained 120 scrolls arranged into ten subject classes; each class was then subdivided, listing authors alphabetically by titles.
In 1911, Theresa Elmendorf became the first woman elected president of the American Library Association (which was founded in 1876); she was also the first woman ever to be nominated for this position.
The library also houses the university’s archives, which holds some of the oldest deaf-related books and documents in the world.
*Building collections to respond to changing community needs or demands
Experienced librarians may take administrative positions such as library or information center director.
Out of this action came the implementation of the concept of modern library service: the democratic extension of library services to the general public, regardless of wealth or education.
Increasing technological advance has presented the possibility of automating some aspects of traditional libraries.
Hagemeyer also constructed a manual of resources for Deaf people and those associated with them called  The Red Notebook, which is now online at the website of the Friends of Libraries for Deaf Action.
Women, however, have made continuous progress toward equality.
They instruct library users on how to find, evaluate, and use information effectively.
Librarians had to develop software and the MARC standards for cataloguing records electronically.
With the approach of ''Bibliotheca Universalis'', libraries changed; the content of libraries became less selective, to include literature of entertainment as well as academic value.
traditional divisions between technical and public services positions by adopting new technologies such as mobile library services and reconfigure organizations depending on the local situation.
*Reviewing books and journal databases
This is especially true of four-year colleges.
The Association also encourages librarians to proactively support the First Amendment rights of all library users, regardless of sex, sexual orientation, or gender identity or expression.
Originally, the only service provided was the news via a teletypewriter or TTY, but today, the program has expanded to serving the entire state of Tennessee by providing all different types of information and material on deafness, Deaf culture, and information for family members of Deaf people, as well as a historical and reference collection.
*Facilitating and promoting reading clubs.
It was also in part thanks to Naude that some libraries began to lend books outside of the precincts of the library.
She was ALA president from May 24, 1911, until July 2, 1912.
Often, teacher-librarians are qualified teachers who take academic courses for school library certification or earn a master's degree in Library Science.
Archivists can be specialized librarians who deal with archival materials, such as manuscripts, documents and records, though this varies from country to country, and there are other routes to the archival profession.
Representative examples of librarian responsibilities:
These scholars contributed significantly to the collection and cataloging of the wide variety of scrolls in the library's collection.
The collection is so large that the library had to create a hybrid classification system based on the Dewey Decimal Classification System in order to make cataloging and location within the library much easier for both library staff and users.
Near the end of the Roman Republic and the beginning of the Roman Empire, it was common for Roman aristocrats to hold private libraries in their home.
Professional Australian teacher-librarians require slightly different qualifications.
In working with the library, Stambler was able to help the community reach out to its deaf neighbors, and helped other deaf people become more active in their outside community.
The Progressive Librarians Guild covers the actions of union library workers in its journal and blog,  Library Workers''.
(In larger libraries, some specialize in teen services, periodicals, or other special collections.)
The same could be said of other technology developments, from electronic databases (including the Internet), to logistical functions such as bar codes (or in the near future RFID).
Licensing for library/media teacher includes a Bachelor or Master of Arts in Teaching and additional higher-level course work in library science.
The four librarians responsible for establishing the ''Bibliotheca Universalis'' are important figures in librarianship.
YA librarians who work in public libraries are expected to have a master's degree in Library and Information Science (MLIS), relevant work experience, or a related credential.
All of these tablets were cataloged and arranged in logical order by subject or type, each having an identification tag.
New technologies are dramatically increasing the accessibility of information, and librarians are adapting to the evolving needs of users that emerge from the adoption of these new technologies.
The first doctoral degree in library science was offered by the University of Chicago Graduate Library School (GLS) beginning in 1928 until the GLS closure in 1989.
Many, if not most, academic librarians also have a second, subject-based master's degree.
Accordingly, they are given certain benefits, such as taxpayer funding, but must adhere to service standards and meet a wide group of client needs.
A Youth Services librarian, or children's librarian, is in charge of serving young patrons from infancy all the way to young adulthood.
Later in the period, individuals known as ''librarius'' began more formal cataloguing, inventory, and classification.
In addition to library administration, certificated teacher-librarians instruct individual students, groups and classes, and faculty in effective research methods, often referred to as information literacy skills.
In the 14th century, universities began to reemerge which had libraries and employed librarians.
However, in the last few decades, libraries across the United States have made great strides in the mission of making libraries more accessible to disabilities in general and to the Deaf community specifically.
Young adults are those patrons that look to library services to give them direction and guidance toward recreation, education, and emancipation.
It is also possible to earn a doctorate in library and information science.
These services are sometimes provided by other library staff that have been given a certain amount of special training; some have criticized this trend.
The American Library Association's Social Responsibilities Round Table Feminist Task Force (FTF) was founded in 1970 by women who wished to address sexism in libraries and librarianship.
One of the most significant examples of how technology has changed the role of librarians in the last 50 years has been the move from traditional card catalogs to online public access catalogs (OPACs).
It is during this time that the first book (as opposed to scroll) enters popularity: the parchment codex.
While there were full-time librarians in the 18th century, the professionalization of the library role was a 19th-century development, as shown by its first training school, its first university school, and its first professional associations and licensing procedures.
Technical service librarians work "behind the scenes" ordering library materials and database subscriptions, computers and other equipment, and supervise the cataloging and physical processing of new materials.
Most librarians spend their time working in one of the following areas of a library:
*Making and enforcing computer appointments on the public access Internet computers.
*Managing access to electronic information resources.
Others, such as Lucullus, took on the role of lending librarian by sharing scrolls in their collection.
These workers, sometimes referred to as para-professionals, perform duties such as database management, library cataloging, ready reference, and serials and monograph processing.
Systems librarians develop, troubleshoot and maintain library systems, including the library catalog and related systems.
These degrees are accredited by the American Library Association and can have specializations within fields such as archival studies, records management, information architecture, public librarianship, medical librarianship, law librarianship, special librarianship, academic librarianship, or school (K-12) librarianship.
Australian librarian Karen McQuigg states that “even ten years ago, when I was involved in a project looking at what public libraries could offer the deaf, it seemed as if the gap between the requirements of this group and what public libraries could offer was too great for public libraries to be able to serve them effectively.” Clearly, not even so long ago, there was quite a dearth of information for or about the Deaf community available in libraries across the nation and around the globe.
Instruction librarians teach information literacy skills in face-to-face classes or through the creation of online learning objects.
They are multitaskers, as the children's section of a library may act as its own separate library within the same building.
In academic libraries, outreach librarians might focus on high school students, transfer students, first-generation college students, and minorities.
Other advanced degrees often taken in conjunction with a degree in librarianship are law, management, health administration, or public administration.
While materials in these libraries were mostly restricted, the libraries were open to the public.
They are usually overseen by a board of directors or library commission from the community.
Classification and organization of books during this period was generally done by subject and alphabetically, with materials inventoried using basic check lists.
A monk named Anastasias  who took on the title of ''Bibliothecarius'' (literally "librarian") following his successful translations of the Greek classicists.
While  the ratio of female to male librarians remains roughly 4:1, top positions are more often held by men; for example, the position of Librarian of Congress has been held, mostly, by men since the establishment of the Library of Congress.
The ALA Policy Manual states under ''B.2.1.15 Access to Library Resources and Services Regardless of Sex, Gender Identity, Gender Expression, or Sexual Orientation (Old Number 53.1.15):'' "The American Library Association stringently and unequivocally maintains that libraries and librarians have an obligation to resist efforts that systematically exclude materials dealing with any subject matter, including sex, gender identity or expression, or sexual orientation.
Women have also been largely left out of standard histories of U.S. librarianship, but Suzanne Hildenbrand's scholarly assessment of the work done by women has expanded the historical record.
Below are the basic differences between the types of libraries.
By 1920, women and men were equally numerous in the library profession, but women pulled ahead by 1930 and comprised 80% by 1960.
In addition to having a degree that meets ALIA's accreditation process, teacher librarians must also hold recognized teaching qualifications.
Most notably, Callimachus created what is considered to be the first subject catalogue of the library holdings, called the pinakes.
In this monograph, Naude advocated collecting all kinds of books, old and new, of famous, more obscure, and heretical authors.
The four received the Roger Baldwin Medal of Liberty from the American Civil Liberties Union in June 2007.
In 18th-century France, two librarians, Hubert-Pascal Ameilhon and Joseph Van Praet, selected and identified over 300,000 books and manuscripts that became the property of the people in the ''Bibliothèque Nationale''.
On July 13, 2016 Carla Hayden became the first female, and the first African American, to become Librarian of Congress.
In Germany and some other countries, the first step for an academic librarian is a PhD in a subject field, followed by additional training in librarianship.
Collection development or acquisitions librarians monitor the selection of books and electronic resources.
Some librarians  join activist organizations like the UK-based Information for Social Change and the North American-based Progressive Librarians Guild.
Adopted 2005, Amended 2009, 2010."
Librarians in some types of special libraries may be required to have additional training, such as a law degree for a librarian in an academic law library or appropriate subject degrees for subject specialties such as chemistry, engineering, etc.
Funding for special libraries varies widely.
In the UK and some other countries, a librarian can have a three- or four-year bachelor's degree in library and information studies or information science; separate master's degrees in librarianship, archive management, and records management are also available.
When disabled communities began demanding equality in the 1970s, Hagemeyer decided to go back to school for her master's degree in library science.
There are also more specific associations such as the American Association of Law Libraries, Art Libraries Society of North America,  the American Theological Library Association, the Medical Library Association, or the Visual Resources Association.
A young adult librarian could work in several different institutions; one might be a school library/media teacher, a member of a public library team, or a librarian in a penal institution.
D degrees in subject fields.
New guidelines from library organizations such as International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) and the ALA were written in order to help libraries make their information more accessible to people with disabilities, and in some cases, specifically the Deaf community.
He held that librarians should not only care for the books, but should also be well educated and accomplished to raise the standards of librarianship.
They also must help YAs find relevant and authoritative Internet resources.
They are charged with the task of creating a safe and fun learning environment outside of school and the home.
Threats to Library Materials Related to Sex, Gender Identity, or Sexual Orientation (Old Number 53.12)'', "The American Library Association supports the inclusion in library collections of materials that reflect the diversity of our society, including those related to sex, sexual orientation, and gender identity or expression.
In an increasingly global and virtual workplace, many special librarians may not even work in a library at all but instead manage and facilitate the use of electronic collections.
There are three ways in which these requirements can be met: the individual must obtain an ALIA-recognized bachelor's degree in library and information studies, complete a first degree in any discipline followed by an ALIA-recognized postgraduate diploma or masters course, or gain an ALIA-recognized library technician qualifications (undertaken at a Technical and Further Education(TAFE) college/institute followed by an ALIA-recognized bachelor's degree in library and information studies.
Reference or research librarians help people doing research to find the information they need, through a structured conversation called a reference interview.
Many different types, sizes, and collections are found in academic libraries and some academic librarians are specialists in these collections and archives.
In England in the 1870s, a new employment role opened for women in libraries; it was said that the tasks were "Eminently Suited to Girls and Women."
Librarians in the United States who as political actors in our times provide examples of a commitment to equality, the right to know or social justice include Peter Chase, George Christian, Janet Nocek, and Barbara Bailey.
They are most common in academic libraries.
He is credited as creating the first functional library of modern times.
Academic librarians administer various levels of service and privilege to faculty, students, alumni, and the public.
SRRT came into being amid the social ferment of the 1960s and is often critical of the American Library Association for not living up to its professed ideals.
During this period, great private libraries were developed in Europe by figures such as Petrarch and Boccaccio.
The International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) represents the interests of libraries and librarians internationally.
The Canadian Library Association serves Canada and there are provincial associations as well, such as the Ontario Library Association.
The American Library Association readily admits that disabled people belong to a minority that is often overlooked and underrepresented by people in the library, and the Deaf community belongs in this minority group.
See also: ''Role of Women in Librarianship, 1876–1976: The Advancement and Struggle for Equalization'', by Kathleen Weibel (Author, Editor), Kathleen de la Pena McCook (Editor), and Dianne J. Ellsworth (Editor), published 1978.
A cybrarian- the term being used first by Michel Bauwens, who is the Information Officer at BP Nutrition in Antwerp, Belgium- is someone who concerns themselves primarily with the role that technology plays in a traditional library setting.
The Renaissance is considered to be a time of aristocratic enthusiasm for libraries.
Occasionally they also hold undergraduate or graduate degrees in other disciplines.
A tool to achieve these organizational goals, the first library catalog, appeared in 1595.
The help may take the form of research on a specific question, providing direction on the use of databases and other electronic information resources; obtaining specialized materials from other sources; or providing access to and care of delicate or expensive materials.
It is common in academic and other research libraries to require the librarians to obtain   master's degrees in some academic subject, sometimes but not necessarily related to their professional responsibilities; in major research libraries, some of the librarians will hold Ph.
While she was studying there, she realized that there was not very much information about the Deaf community at her library or at the libraries of any of her classmates.
Those undertaking research at the doctoral level can pursue a very wide range of interests including information technology, government information policy, social research into information use among particular segments of society, information in organizations and corporate settings, and the history of books and printing.
At this time, libraries also became fully open to the public, with access no longer restricted to a small circle of readers.
A modern librarian may deal with provision and maintenance of information in many formats, including: books; electronic resources; magazines; newspapers; audio and video recordings; maps; manuscripts; photographs and other graphic material; bibliographic databases; and web-based and digital resources.
The Great Library of Alexandria, created by Ptolemy I after the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC, was created to house the entirety of Greek literature.
The increasing role of technology in libraries has a significant impact on the changing roles of librarians.
It also states under ''B.2.12
IFLA’s ''Guidelines for Library Services to Deaf People'' is one such set of guidelines, and it was published to inform libraries of the services that should be provided for Deaf patrons.
Appreciation for librarians is often included by authors and scholars in the acknowledgment sections of books.
The librarians at Alexandria were considered the "custodians of learning".
The bibliographic history of women in U.S. librarianship and women librarians developing services for women has been well-documented in the series of publications initially issued by the Social Responsibilities Round Table Task Force on Women and later continued by COSWL.
As a result, Renaissance libraries were filled with a wealth of texts.
Many of these aristocrats, such as Cicero, kept the contents of their private libraries to themselves, only boasting of the enormity of his collection.
School librarians work in school libraries and perform duties as teachers, information technology specialists, and advocates for literacy.
A young adult or YA librarian specifically serves patrons who are between 12 and 18 years old.
In addition, librarians provide instruction on information literacy.
He also contributed to the idea of organization and administration of libraries which led to the development of library collections.
In the United States, public librarians and public libraries are represented by the Public Library Association.
''For history in North America, see Librarians in North America''.
*Publishing articles in library science journals
Over the years, library services have begun to evolve in order to accommodate the needs and desires of local Deaf communities.
Audio-visual equipment service and/or textbook circulation may also be included in a school librarian's responsibilities.
Both library media teachers (LMTs) and young adult public librarians order books and other materials that will interest their young adult patrons.
During this period, the lectern system, in which books were chained to desks for security, was also introduced.
Dr. Hayden was nominated by President Barack Obama in February 2016 as the 14th Librarian of Congress.
The first doctoral degree in library science was offered by the Graduate Library School, University of Chicago, 1928-1989.Graduates with PhDs usually become teaching faculty in schools of library and information science, or sometimes occupy the directorship or deanship of university libraries.
In Nashville, Tennessee, Sandy Cohen manages the Library Services for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (LSDHH).
In the United Kingdom, the professional body for Librarians is the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (formerly known as the Library Association).
Subsequent librarians following Bodley were called ''Protobibliothecarius Bodleianus'', Bodley's Librarian.
Children's librarians must be knowledgeable of popular books for school-aged children and other library items, such as e-books and audiobooks.
Within the American Library Association (ALA), some also join the Social Responsibilities Round Table (SRRT).
Public service librarians work with the public, frequently at the reference desk of lending libraries.
In 2004 a group of researchers in Spain developed the UJI Online Robot.
John Dury is considered to be the first English library theorist.
ALIA is responsible for accreditation of library specific qualifications for both librarians and library technicians.
*Writing grants to gain funding for expanded program or collections
A university librarian, or chief librarian, is responsible for the library within the college structure, and may also be called the Dean of Libraries.
Many Roman emperors included public libraries into their political propaganda to win favor from citizens.
Many librarians provide virtual reference services (via web-based chat, instant messaging, text messaging, and e-mail), work in digitizing initiatives for works in the public domain, teach information literacy and technology classes to their users, and work on the development of information architectures for improving access and search functionality.
Within the monasteries, the role of librarian was often filled by an overseer of the scriptorium where monks would copy out books cover to cover.
In the United States, the professional association for academic libraries and librarians is the Association of College and Research Libraries.
Librarians were needed to plan and organize libraries to meet public needs.
Librarians may also join such organizations as the Association of College and Research Libraries and the Public Library Association and the Art Libraries Society.
Librarianship manifests a dual career structure for men and women in the United States.
Digital librarians have become ubiquitous in the Information Age, so much so that a new word has been coined for such digital curators: Cybrarian, which is a portmontau of the words cyber (Internet) and librarian.
Librarians can then see those books when they arrive and decide if they will become part of the collection or not.
The role of a librarian is continually evolving to meet social and technological needs.
He is credited as including science texts in addition to conventional literature within library collections.
In the United States and Canada, a librarian generally has a one or two-year (more common) master's degree in library and information science, library science, or information science (called an MI, MLS, MALIS, MSLS, MIS, MSIS, MS-LIS, MISt, MLIS, or MILS) from an accredited university.
The primary purpose is to support the students, teachers, and curriculum of the school or school district.
They would earn £40 a year.
A librarian may also provide other information services, including: information literacy instruction; computer provision and training; coordination with community groups to host public programs; assistive technology for people with disabilities; and assistance locating community resources.
Similar to the management of any other organization, they are concerned with the long-term planning of the library, and its relationship with its parent organization (the city or county for a public library, the college/university for an academic library, or the organization served by a special library).
All collections librarians also have a certain amount of funding to allow them to purchase books and materials that don't arrive via approval.
These activist organizations are viewed as controversial by some librarians, while others view them as a natural extension and outgrowth of their own deeply held library ethics.
Some post-secondary institutions treat librarians as faculty, and they may be called professor or other academic ranks, which may or may not increase their salary and benefits.
Basic categories of workplace settings for librarians are routinely classified around the world as: public, academic, school, and special.
*Digitizing collections for online access
One of the first activists in the library community working toward accessibility for the Deaf was Alice Hagemeyer.
YALSA The Young Adult Library Services Association serves Young Adult librarians, and is part of the American Library Association.
King Charles V of France began his own library, and he kept his collection as a ''bibliophile'', an attribute that is closely connected to librarians of this time.
Occasionally, private lending libraries serve the public in the manner of public libraries.
