At its height in the 5th century, the Imperial Library of Constantinople had 120,000 volumes and was the largest library in Europe.
As each generation becomes more in tune with the Internet, their desire to retrieve information as quickly and easily as possible has increased.
The library in Campfield, Manchester was the first library to operate a ''free'' lending library without subscription in 1852.
In 1212, the council of Paris condemned those monasteries that still forbade loaning books, reminding them that lending is "one of the chief works of mercy."
The academic library provides a quiet study space for students on campus; it may also provide group study space, such as meeting rooms.
Libraries were filled with parchment scrolls as at Library of Pergamum and on papyrus scrolls as at Alexandria: the export of prepared writing materials was a staple of commerce.
The British Museum Act 1753 also incorporated the Cotton library and the Harleian library.
This was prompted more by Victorian middle class paternalism rather than by demand from the lower social orders.
An analysis of the registers for the first twelve years provides glimpses of middle-class reading habits in a mercantile community at this period.
However, marketing of services has to be adequately supported financially in order to be successful.
word processing and spreadsheet software).
Moreover, the library was not open to browsing.
Also, increasingly, digital collections enable broader access to material that may not circulate in print, and enables libraries to expand their collections even without building a larger facility.
Many private businesses and public organizations, including hospitals, churches, museums, research laboratories, law firms, and many government departments and agencies, maintain their own libraries for the use of their employees in doing specialized research related to their work.
As its unofficial librarian, Cassiodorus not only collected as many manuscripts as he could, he also wrote treatises aimed at instructing his monks in the proper uses of reading and methods for copying texts accurately.
Library scholars have acknowledged that libraries need to address the ways that they market their services if they are to compete with the Internet and mitigate the risk of losing users.
The library was built to store 12,000 scrolls and to serve as a monumental tomb for Celsus.
An antiquated or clumsy search system, or staff unwilling or untrained to engage their patrons, will limit a library's usefulness.
The 18th century saw the switch from closed parochial libraries to lending libraries.
Unlike the Greek libraries, readers had direct access to the scrolls, which were kept on shelves built into the walls of a large room.
Once a pass to the library had been issued, the reader was taken on a tour of the library.
William Bathoe claimed that his commercial venture was ‘the Original Circulating library’, opening doors at two locations in London in 1737.
Academic institutions are subscribing to electronic journals databases, providing research and scholarly writing software, and usually provide computer workstations or computer labs for students to access journals, library search databases and portals, institutional electronic resources, Internet access, and course- or task-related software (i.e.
Over 30,000 clay tablets from the Library of Ashurbanipal have been discovered at Nineveh, providing modern scholars with an amazing wealth of Mesopotamian literary, religious and administrative work.
There are wider definitions of a national library, putting less emphasis on the repository character.
During the post-Civil War years, there was a rise in the establishment of public libraries, a movement led chiefly by newly formed women's clubs.
Many proprietors pandered to the most fashionable clientele, making much ado about the sort of shop they offered, the lush interiors, plenty of room and long hours of service.
The books selected for the collection were chosen because they would be mutually beneficial to the shareholders.
Typically, such libraries are used for research purposes, for example at a university.
Also, evidence of catalogues found in some destroyed ancient libraries illustrates the presence of librarians.
From there they eventually made their way into other parts of Christian Europe.
* ISO 11620:1998 Information and documentation—Library performance indicators
In Latin and Greek, the idea of a bookcase is represented by ''Bibliotheca'' and ''Bibliothēkē'' (Greek: βιβλιοθήκη): derivatives of these mean ''library'' in many modern languages, e.g.
In the mid-2000s, Swedish company Distec invented a library book vending machine known as the GoLibrary, that offers library books to people where there is no branch, limited hours, or high traffic locations such as El Cerrito del Norte BART station in California.
For example, the University of California Library System saw a 54% decline in circulation between 1991 and 2001 of 8,377,000 books to 3,832,000.
A library may make use of the Internet in a number of ways, from creating their own library website to making the contents of its catalogues searchable online.
At the start of the 19th century, there were virtually no public libraries in the sense in which we now understand the term i.e.
They contributed their own collections of books, conducted lengthy fund raising campaigns for buildings, and lobbied within their communities for financial support for libraries, as well as with legislatures and the Carnegie Library Endowment founded in the 20th century.
Han Chinese scholar Liu Xiang established the first library classification system during the Han dynasty, and the first book notation system.
The buildings were topped with domes, and comprised an upper and a lower story with a total, according to the chief official, of 360 rooms....
The Online Computer Library Center allows library records to be searched online through its WorldCat database.
Thus, in the 6th century, at the close of the Classical period, the great libraries of the Mediterranean world remained those of Constantinople and Alexandria.
Larger libraries are often divided into departments staffed by both paraprofessionals and professional librarians.
Depending on the particular library and the clientele it serves, special libraries may offer services similar to research, reference, public, academic, or children's libraries, often with restrictions such as only lending books to patients at a hospital or restricting the public from parts of a military collection.
The first was the library of the Temple of Apollo on the Palatine, often called the Palatine library, and the second was the library of the ''Porticus of Octaviae''.
Academic libraries offer workshops and courses outside of formal, graded coursework, which are meant to provide students with the tools necessary to succeed in their programs.
In the East, however, this was not the case as many of these classical Greek and Roman texts were copied.
A library is organized for use and maintained by a public body, an institution, a corporation, or a private individual.
All these libraries were Greek; the cultivated Hellenized diners in ''Deipnosophistae'' pass over the libraries of Rome in silence.
Libraries are trying to keep up with the digital world and the new generation of students that are used to having information just one click away.
In this period, books were organized by subject.
In Milan, Cardinal Federico Borromeo founded the Biblioteca Ambrosiana.
The structure was approximately fifty feet high with the peak of the roof reaching almost seventy feet.
In addition to providing materials, libraries also provide the services of librarians who are experts at finding and organizing information and at interpreting information needs.
Although most of these texts that were produced were Christian in nature, many monastic leaders saw common virtues in the Greek classics.
“In 1899, Pennsylvania State College became the first college to receive Carnegie funding ($150,000) and their library was constructed in 1903.”
Public library advocacy is support given to a public library for its financial and philosophical goals or needs.
Like the Christian libraries, they mostly contained books which were made of paper, and took a codex or modern form instead of scrolls; they could be found in mosques, private homes, and universities, from Timbuktu to Afghanistan and modern day Pakistan.
After the death of Constantius II, Julian the Apostate, a bibliophile intellectual, ruled briefly for less than three years.
One of the early leaders was John Cotton Dana.
As more space was needed, a method of moving shelves on tracks (compact shelving) was introduced to cut down on otherwise wasted aisle space.
According to a study by the Pennsylvania Library Association, public library services play a major role in fighting rising illiteracy rates among youths.
This "wall system" was first introduced on a large scale in Spain's El Escorial.
After the establishment of the French First Republic in September 1792, "the Assembly declared the ''Bibliotheque du Roi'' to be national property and the institution was renamed the ''Bibliothèque Nationale''.
The Bill passed through Parliament as most MPs felt that public libraries would provide facilities for self-improvement through books and reading for all classes, and that the greater levels of education attained by providing public libraries would result in lower crime rates.
The appointment of Jacques Auguste de Thou as librarian in the 17th century, initiated a period of development that made it the largest and richest collection of books in the world.
With such production, medieval monasteries began to accumulate large libraries.
Some of the aspects of Library 2.0 include, commenting, tagging, bookmarking, discussions, use of online social networks by libraries, plug-ins, and widgets.
Through Origen and especially the scholarly presbyter Pamphilus of Caesarea, an avid collector of books of Scripture, the theological school of Caesarea won a reputation for having the most extensive ecclesiastical library of the time, containing more than 30,000 manuscripts: Gregory of Nazianzus, Basil the Great, Jerome, and others came and studied there.
After four centuries of control by the Crown, this great library now became the property of the French people."
The use of glass floors was largely discontinued, though floors were still often composed of metal grating to allow air to circulate in multi-story stacks.
Some of the earliest such institutions were founded in late 17th century England, such as Chetham's Library in 1653, Innerpeffray Library in 1680, and Thomas Plume's Library in 1704.
Digitization of books, particularly those that are out-of-print, in projects such as Google Books provides resources for library and other online users.
This became the Museums Act 1845.
Pollio was a lieutenant of Julius Caesar and one of his most ardent supporters.
The first libraries consisted of archives of the earliest form of writing—the clay tablets in cuneiform script discovered in Sumer, some dating back to 2600 BC.
The shift to digital libraries has greatly impacted the way people use physical libraries.
Many small, private book clubs evolved into subscription libraries, charging high annual fees or requiring subscribing members to purchase shares in the libraries.
Book stacks quickly evolved into a fairly standard form in which the cast iron and steel frameworks supporting the bookshelves also supported the floors, which often were built of translucent blocks to permit the passage of light (but were not transparent, for reasons of modesty).
Buckingham introduced to Parliament a Public Institution Bill allowing boroughs to charge a tax to set up libraries and museums, the first of its kind.
Library 2.0, a term coined in 2005, is the library's response to the challenge of Google and an attempt to meet the changing needs of users by using web 2.0 technology.
The privacy aspect of library usage in the Internet age is a matter of growing concern and advocacy; privacy workshops are run by the Library Freedom Project which teach librarians about digital tools (such as the Tor Project) to thwart mass surveillance.
A fire in 477 consumed the entire library but it was rebuilt only to be burned again in 726, 1204, and in 1453 when Constantinople fell to the Ottoman Turks.
The following is a partial list of some of them:
A '''library''' is a collection of sources of information and similar resources, made accessible to a defined community for reference or borrowing.
Libraries often provide quiet areas for studying, and they also often offer common areas to facilitate group study and collaboration.
The introduction of electrical lighting had a huge impact on how the library operated.
Within the subject, the materials were further organized by when the libraries gained the item, not by last name of the author or the title of the book.
Some specialised search engines such as Google Scholar offer a way to facilitate searching for academic resources such as journal articles and research papers.
A national or state library serves as a national repository of information, and has the right of legal deposit, which is a legal requirement that publishers in the country need to deposit a copy of each publication with the library.
Another example of the shift to digital libraries can be seen in Cushing Academy’s decision to dispense with its library of printed books—more than 20,000 volumes in all—and switch over entirely to digital media resources.
The subscription was 1 shilling 6 pence per quarter.
Thomas Bodley founded the Bodleian Library, which was open to the "whole republic of the learned", Norwich City library was established in 1608, and the British Library was established in 1753.
These facts might be a consequence of the increased availability of e-resources.
These reference stacks may be open to selected members of the public.
Even though the British Museum existed at this time and contained over 50,000 books, the national library was not open to the public, or even to a majority of the population.
In the United Kingdom, they may be members of Research Libraries UK (RLUK).
More long-term issues include the planning of the construction of new libraries or extensions to existing ones, and the development and implementation of outreach services and reading-enhancement services (such as adult literacy and children's programming).
Many public libraries also serve as community organizations that provide free services and events to the public, such as reading groups and toddler story time.
There were a few institutional or royal libraries which were open to an educated public (such as the Serapeum collection of the Library of Alexandria, once the largest library in the ancient world), but on the whole collections were private.
A library's collection can include books, periodicals, newspapers, manuscripts, films, maps, prints, documents, microform, CDs, cassettes, videotapes, DVDs, Blu-ray Discs, e-books, audiobooks, databases, and other formats.
Barren and sun-lit rooms (because candles were a source of fire) were major features of the scriptorium that was both a model of production and monastic piety.
At this time, the library catalogue was written on scrolls of fine silk and stored in silk bags.
The increase in secular literature at this time encouraged the spread of lending libraries, especially the commercial subscription libraries.
Lending was a means by which books could be copied and spread.
The ''stack system'' involves keeping a library's collection of books in a space separate from the reading room.
Basic tasks in library management include the planning of acquisitions (which materials the library should acquire, by purchase or otherwise), library classification of acquired materials, preservation of materials (especially rare and fragile archival materials such as manuscripts), the deaccessioning of materials, patron borrowing of materials, and developing and administering library computer systems.
A research library is a collection of materials on one or more subjects.
The most important of them were the ones in the monasteries of Mount Athos for Orthodox Christians, and the library of the Saint Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula, Egypt for the Coptic Church.
The collections increased steadily by purchase and gift to the outbreak of the French Revolution, at which time it was in grave danger of partial or total destruction, but owing to the activities of Antoine-Augustin Renouard and Joseph Van Praet it suffered no injury.
The beginning of the modern, free, open access libraries really got its start in the UK in 1847.
Tianyi Chamber, founded in 1561 by Fan Qin during the Ming dynasty, is the oldest existing library in China.
In a large library, the card catalogue often filled a large room.
Some special libraries, such as governmental law libraries, hospital libraries, and military base libraries commonly are open to public visitors to the institution in question.
Most often this takes the form of monetary or material donations or campaigning to the institutions which oversee the library, sometimes by advocacy groups such as Friends of Libraries and community members.
In each department, catalogues were placed on a shelf... the rooms were furnished with carpets".
As such, many classical Greek works, written on scrolls, were left to decay as only Christian texts were thought fit for preservation in a codex, the progenitor of the modern book.
Modern Islamic libraries for the most part do not hold these antique books; many were lost, destroyed by Mongols, or removed to European libraries and museums during the colonial period.
In North America, Europe, and other parts of the world, academic libraries are becoming increasingly digitally oriented.
Buddhist scriptures, educational materials, and histories were stored in libraries in pre-modern Southeast Asia.
The potential decline in library usage, particularly reference services, puts the necessity for these services in doubt.
In 1797, there was established at Kendal what was known as the Economical Library, "designed principally for the use and instruction of the working classes."
* Technical Services – Works behind the scenes cataloging and processing new materials and deaccessioning weeded materials.
Instead of only societies most elite, such as caliphs and princes, information was something that was offered to everyone.
In more specialized institutions such as law firms and research laboratories, librarians employed in special libraries are commonly specialists in the institution's field rather than generally trained librarians, and often are not required to have advanced degrees in specifically library-related field due to the specialized content and clientele of the library.
Some libraries have additional galleries beyond the public ones, where reference materials are stored.
In France, the first national library was the Bibliothèque Mazarine, which evolved from its origin as a royal library founded at the Louvre Palace by Charles V in 1368.
Cosimo de' Medici in Florence established his own collection, which formed the basis of the Laurentian Library.
However, they keep many valuable manuscripts of Greek, Latin, and Biblical works.
Their main function are to provide support in research and resource linkage for students and faculty of the educational institution.
There was also the Artizans' library established at Birmingham in 1799.
Finland has the highest number of registered book borrowers per capita in the world.
At the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum, apparently the villa of Caesar's father-in-law, the Greek library has been partly preserved in volcanic ash; archaeologists speculate that a Latin library, kept separate from the Greek one, may await discovery at the site.
Things were much the same in the government and temple records on papyrus of Ancient Egypt.
Sloane's collection included some 40,000 printed books and 7,000 manuscripts, as well as prints and drawings.
Originally, library advocacy was centered on the library itself, but current trends show libraries positioning themselves to demonstrate they provide "economic value to the community" in means that are not directly related to the checking out of books and other media.
Before the computer age, this was accomplished by the card catalogue—a cabinet (or multiple cabinets) containing many drawers filled with index cards that identified books and other materials.
Online information access is particularly attractive to younger library users.
Inspired by web 2.0, it is an attempt to make the library a more user-driven institution.
Libraries provide computers and Internet access to allow people to search for information online.
Library materials like books, magazines, periodicals, CDs, etc.
Parliament appointed a committee, led by William Ewart, on Public Libraries to consider the necessity of establishing libraries through the nation: In 1849, their report noted the poor condition of library service, it recommended the establishment of free public libraries all over the country, and it led to the Public Libraries Act in 1850, which allowed all cities with populations exceeding 10,000 to levy taxes for the support of public libraries.
Completed in 112/113, the Ulpian Library was part of Trajan’s Forum built on the Capitoline Hill.
* Reference – Staffs a reference desk answering questions from users (using structured reference interviews), instructing users, and developing library programming.
These copies joined works that had been preserved directly by Christian monks from Greek and Roman originals, as well as copies Western Christian monks made of Byzantine works.
However, a few examples of these medieval libraries, such as the libraries of Chinguetti in West Africa, remain intact and relatively unchanged.
The 9th-century Abbasid Caliph al-Mutawakkil of Iraq, ordered the construction of a "zawiyat qurra"&nbsp;– an enclosure for readers which was "lavishly furnished and equipped".
These workshops provide students with skills that can help them achieve success in their academic careers (and often, in their future occupations), which they may not learn inside the classroom.
Malatesta Novello, lord of Cesena, founded the Malatestiana Library.
The chain was attached at the fore-edge of a book rather than to its spine.
In Rome, the papal collections were brought together by Pope Nicholas V, in separate Greek and Latin libraries, and housed by Pope Sixtus IV, who consigned the Bibliotheca Apostolica Vaticana to the care of his librarian, the humanist Bartolomeo Platina in February 1475.
Libraries also were not uniformly open to the public.
It was the first to employ an architectural design that separated works into Greek and Latin.
In the American colonies, the Library Company of Philadelphia was started in 1731 by Benjamin Franklin in Philadelphia.
Classical authors such as Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Thucydides, Homer, and Zeno were sought.
Websites such as LibraryThing and Amazon provide abstracts, reviews, and recommendations of books.
Large libraries may be scattered within multiple buildings across a town, each having multiple floors, with multiple rooms housing the resources across a series of shelves.
Many of these were owned by church members and the aristocracy.
Francis Trigge Chained Library of St. Wulfram's Church, Grantham, Lincolnshire was founded in 1598 by the rector of nearby Welbourne.
This finally marks the start of the public library as we know it.
Ibn al-Nadim's bibliography ''Fihrist'' demonstrates the devotion of medieval Muslim scholars to books and reliable sources; it contains a description of thousands of books circulating in the Islamic world circa 1000, including an entire section for books about the doctrines of other religions.
Despite the importance of public libraries, they are routinely having their budgets cut by state legislature.
In Byzantium, much of this work devoted to preserving Hellenistic thought in codex form was performed in scriptoriums by monks.
Modern libraries are often a mixture of both, containing a general collection for circulation, and a reference collection which is restricted to the library premises.
In the US, public library users have borrowed on average roughly 15 books per user per year from 1856 to 1978.
libraries provided from public funds and freely accessible to all.
Private or personal libraries made up of written books (as opposed to the state or institutional records kept in archives) appeared in classical Greece in the 5th century BC.
Public libraries were very popular along with mosque, private, and academic libraries.
By the 8th century, first Iranians and then Arabs had imported the craft of papermaking from China, with a paper mill already at work in Baghdad in 794.
Abbé Louvois was succeeded by the Abbé Bignon, or Bignon II as he was termed, who instituted a complete reform of the library's system.
* ISO 2789:2006 Information and documentation—International library statistics
It was said that the rooms had carpets for sitting and reading comfortably.
An early organization system was in effect at Alexandria.
Many national libraries cooperate within the National Libraries Section of the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) to discuss their common tasks, define and promote common standards, and carry out projects helping them to fulfil their duties.
While libraries have been accused of precipitously throwing out valuable information in card catalogues, most modern ones have nonetheless made the move to electronic catalogue databases.
Another important act was the Education Act 1870, which increased literacy and thereby the demand for libraries.
A research library can be either a reference library, which does not lend its holdings, or a lending library, which does lend all or some of its holdings.
The Liverpool Subscription Library was a gentlemen only library.
In the end, however, the library at Vivarium was dispersed and lost within a century.
Given the highly individual nature of special libraries, visitors to a special library are often advised to check what services and restrictions apply at that particular library.
During this period, small '''private libraries''' existed.
Philanthropists and businessmen, including John Passmore Edwards, Henry Tate and Andrew Carnegie, helped to increase the number of public libraries from the late 19th century.
Ways in which a library's content is displayed or accessed may have the most impact on use.
Their work supplements that of the public schools.
Rome’s first public library was established by Asinius Pollio.
Also, openings such as doors and windows were secured closed as to protect patrons against cold drafts.
The content of a bookshelf was recorded on paper and attached to the end of shelf.
This can be due to some individuals' unease in approaching a staff member.
The late 18th century saw a rise in subscription libraries intended for the use of tradesmen.
* ISO/TR 20983:2003 Information and documentation—Performance indicators for electronic library services
Libraries should inform their users of what materials are available in their collections and how to access that information.
Many lending libraries contain a "reference section", which holds books, such as dictionaries, which are common reference books, and are therefore not lent out.
The earliest example in England of a library to be endowed for the benefit of users who were not members of an institution such as a cathedral or college was the Francis Trigge Chained Library in Grantham, Lincolnshire, established in 1598.
Libraries were amenities suited to a villa, such as Cicero's at Tusculum, Maecenas's several villas, or Pliny the Younger's, all described in surviving letters.
Special libraries are distinguished from special collections, which are branches or parts of a library intended for rare books, manuscripts, and other special materials, though some special libraries have special collections of their own, typically related to the library's specialized subject area.
This argument is analogous to the debate over paper books and e-books.
Funding has dwindled so badly that many public libraries have been forced to cut their hours and release employees.
One of the most popular programs offered in public libraries are summer reading programs for children, families, and adults.
Even though the subscription libraries were often founded by reading societies, committees, elected by the subscribers, chose books for the collection that were general, rather than aimed at a particular religious, political or professional group.
This was a library of general literature.
