On 7 July 2012, Libyans voted in parliamentary elections, the first free elections in almost 40 years.
There are few theaters or art galleries due to the decades of cultural repression under the Qaddafi regime and lack of infrastructure development under the regime of dictatorship.
Libya has high levels of social inequality, high rates of youth unemployment and regional economic disparities.
Since 2007, Libya has been divided into 22 districts (baladiyat):
Dates are harvested, dried and can be eaten as they are, made into syrup or slightly fried and eaten with bsisa and milk.
Libya's system of governance during the ''Jamahiriya'' era was based on Gaddafi's theories outlined in his ''The Green Book'', published in 1975.
The two most important Deys were Mehmed Saqizli (r. 1631–49) and Osman Saqizli (r. 1649–72), both also Pasha, who ruled effectively the region.
In early 2015, neighbouring Egypt launched airstrikes against ISIL in support of the Tobruk government.
In the sixteenth century, the Spanish Empire and the Knights of St John occupied Tripoli, until Ottoman rule began in 1551.
At least two political bodies claim to be the government of Libya.
By 1948, about 38,000 Jews remained in the country.
Meanwhile, the 2014 General National Congress purports to be the legal continuation of the General National Congress, elected in the 2012 Libyan General National Congress election and dissolved following the June 2014 elections but then reconvened by a minority of its members.
In February 1977, Libya started delivering military supplies to Goukouni Oueddei and the People's Armed Forces in Chad.
By the end of the 9th century, the Shiite Fatimids controlled Western Libya, and ruled the entire region in 972 and appointed Bologhine ibn Ziri as governor.
Substantial revenues from the energy sector, coupled with a small population, give Libya one of the highest per capita GDPs in Africa.
Cyrenaica, which had remained an outpost of the Byzantine Empire during the Vandal period, also took on the characteristics of an armed camp.
The Phoenicians were the first to establish trading posts in Libya.
Armed supporters of the General National Congress occupied Tripoli, forcing the newly elected parliament to flee to Tobruk.
As Yusuf weakened, factions sprung up around his three sons.
Under the ''Jamahiriya'' system, political issues for debate were raised at local level around the country, convened by any one of about 2,000 local "people's committees".
Congress had not yet decided whether the members of the body would be elected or appointed.
The European Union is involved in an operation to disrupt human trafficking networks exploiting refugees fleeing from wars in Africa for Europe.
Libya is a large country with a relatively small population, with the population is concentrated very narrowly along the coast.
The name ''Libya'' ( or ;  '''' ; Libyan Arabic: ) was introduced in 1934 for Italian Libya, reviving the historical name for Northwest Africa, from the ancient Greek  ('''').
Order was not recovered easily, and the revolt of the Libyan under Abd-El-Gelil and Gûma ben Khalifa lasted until the death of the latter in 1858.
The Berber tribes of the hinterland accepted Islam, however they resisted Arab political rule.
Unemployment has risen from 8% in 2008 to 21%, according to the latest census figures.
In addition, financial support was provided for university scholarships and employment programs.
The number of Asian migrants before the revolution were roughly 100,000 (60,000 Bangladeshis, 18,000 Indians, 10,000 Pakistanis, 8000 Filipinos as well as Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, Thai and other workers).
President el-Megarif also ordered that all of the country's militias must come under government authority or disband.
Early results of the vote showed the National Forces Alliance, led by former interim Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril, as front runner.
Civil war soon resulted.
On 2 March 1977, Libya officially became the "Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya".
This is normally repeated a second time (for the second glass of tea), and in the third round of tea, it is served with roasted peanuts or roasted almonds known as ''shay bi'l-luz'' (mixed with the tea in the same glass).
Libya was once the home of one of the oldest Jewish communities in the world, dating back to at least 300 BC.
At , Libya's coastline is the longest of any African country bordering the Mediterranean.
In retaliation, the Fatimids brought about the migration of thousands from two troublesome Arab Bedouin tribes, the Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal to North Africa.
After the 1969 coup, Muammar Gaddafi closed American and British bases and partly nationalized foreign oil and commercial interests in Libya.
From 1912 to 1927, the territory of Libya was known as Italian North Africa.
Most notably, radical Islamist fighters seized Derna in 2014 and Sirte in 2015 in the name of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
Even before the 2011 war, Libya's infrastructure was in a poor state due to "utter neglect" by Gaddafi's administration, according to the NTC.
Idris al-Mahdi as-Senussi (later King Idris I), Emir of Cyrenaica, led the Libyan resistance to Italian occupation between the two world wars.
The earliest known name of such a tribe is that of the Garamantes, who were based in Germa.
By 1565, administrative authority as regent in Tripoli was vested in a ''pasha'' appointed directly by the ''sultan'' in Constantinople/Istanbul.
On 20 October 2011 the last heavy fighting of the uprising came to an end in the city of Sirte, where Gaddafi was captured and killed.
The terrorist attack against the Bardo Museum on 18 March 2015, was reportedly carried on by two Libyan-trained militants.
Libya was an early center of Christianity.
As of January 2013, there was mounting public pressure on the National Congress to set up a drafting body to create a new constitution.
Libya became the setting for the hard-fought North African Campaign that ultimately ended in defeat for Italy and its German ally in 1943.
The Phoenicians established trading posts in western Libya, and Ancient Greek colonists established city-states in eastern Libya.
After the Italo-Turkish War (1911–1912), Italy simultaneously turned the three regions into colonies.
Shurba is a red tomato sauce-based soup, usually served with small grains of pasta.
Another favorite way to serve Asida is with rub (fresh date syrup) and olive oil.
According to CAF; In a typical month, almost three quarters (72%) of all Libyans helped somebody they did not know&nbsp;– the third highest level across all 135 countries surveyed.
At a meeting of the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs on 2 December 2014, UN Special Representative Bernardino León described Libya as a non-state.
For the next 50 years, Tripolitania was the scene of numerous battles among Ayyubids, the Almohad rulers and insurgents of the Banu Ghaniya.
Today, the majority of Libyans are Arab mainly from Banu Sulaym trip, beside Turkish and Berber ethnicities.
At Uweinat,  the last recorded rainfall was in September 1998.
In 1942, Jews who were not in the concentration camps were heavily restricted in their economic activity and all men between 18 and 45 years were drafted for forced labor.
Tribal militias and jihadist groups have taken advantage of the power vacuum.
An unknown small number of Libyans still live in the desert as their families have done for centuries.
Hamet's brother Yusuf (r. 1795–1832) reestablished Tripolitania's independence.
Libya's foreign policies have fluctuated since 1951.
The tradition of folk culture is still alive and well, with troupes performing music and dance at frequent festivals, both in Libya and abroad.
Lacking direction from the Ottoman government, Tripoli lapsed into a period of military anarchy during which coup followed coup and few deys survived in office more than a year.
Laws regarding personal status are derived from Islamic law.
On 14 October 2012, the General National Congress elected former GNC member and human rights lawyer Ali Zeidan as prime minister-designate.
In August 2011 it was estimated that it would take at least 10 years to rebuild Libya's infrastructure.
Within 200 years, four more important Greek cities were established in the area that became known as Cyrenaica.
On the Eastern side, Cyrenaica's first Christian communities were established by the time of the Emperor Claudius but was heavily devastated during the Kitos War and almost depopulated of Greeks and Jews alike, and, although repopulated by Trajan with military colonies, from then started its decadence.
Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II sent in troops ostensibly to restore order, marking the end of both the Karamanli dynasty and an independent Tripolitania.
Many of these militias are disciplined, but the most powerful of them answer only to the executive councils of various Libyan cities.
Libya has been riven by conflict between the rival parliaments since mid-2014.
Libya is one of the sunniest and driest countries in the world due to prevailing presence of desert environment.
In November 2011, the ISO 3166-1 was altered to reflect the new country name "Libya" in English, "Libye (la)" in French.
This dish is commonly served at traditional weddings or festivities.
In the mid-2000s, the government employed about 70% of all national employees.
The plain to the north of Uweinat is dotted with eroded volcanic features.
During the 2011 revolution, 768,362 immigrants fled Libya as calculated by the IOM, around 13% of the population at the time, although many more stayed on in the country.
There are no railway services in Libya, but these are planned for construction in the near future (see rail transport in Libya).
A gathering of more than 200 African kings and traditional rulers, meeting on 27 August 2008 in the Libyan town of  Benghazi, conferred on Colonel Gaddafi the title "King of Kings of Africa".
The World Bank defines Libya as an 'Upper Middle Income Economy', along with only seven other African countries.
The Great Manmade River was also built to allow free access to fresh water across large parts of the country.
Libya has been inhabited by Berbers since the late Bronze Age.
The SRSG praised the participants for achieving agreement, stating that "The Libyan people have unequivocally expressed themselves in favour of peace."
There are a few scattered uninhabited small oases, usually linked to the major depressions, where water can be found by digging to a few feet in depth.
Libya's capital, Tripoli, has many museums and archives.
The official name was "Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" from 1977 to 1986, and "Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" ( '''' ) from 1986 to 2011.
After the Arab Spring movements overturned the rulers of Tunisia and Egypt, Libya experienced a full-scale revolt beginning on 17 February 2011.
Dissidence against the new system was not tolerated.
European slaves and large numbers of enslaved Blacks transported from Sudan were also a feature of everyday life in Tripoli.
With the discovery of oil in 1958, the size of the agriculture sector declined rapidly, comprising less than 5% GDP by 2005.
When the Empire returned (now as East Romans) as part of Justinian's reconquests of the 6th century, efforts were made to strengthen the old cities, but it was only a last gasp before they collapsed into disuse.
An agreement to form a unified interim government was signed on 17 December 2015.
On 25 March 2014, in the face of mounting instability, al-Thani's government briefly explored the possibility of the restoration of the Libyan monarchy.
A 1996 analysis by the Committee to Protect Journalists found Libya’s media was the most tightly controlled in the Arab world during the country's dictatorship.
On 7 July 2012, Libyans held their first parliamentary elections since the end of the former regime.
UN sanctions were lifted in September 2003, and Libya announced in December 2003 that it would abandon programs to build weapons of mass destruction.
During the Second World War Libya was an important area of warfare in the North African Campaign.
It was intended to supplant terms applied to Ottoman Tripolitania, the coastal region of what is today Libya having been ruled by the Ottoman Empire from 1551 to 1911, as the Eyalet of Tripolitania.
After sanctions were lifted there was a gradual increase of air traffic, and by 2005 there were 1.5 million yearly air travellers.
Bazeen, a dish made from barley flour and served with red tomato sauce, is customarily eaten communally, with several people sharing the same dish, usually by hand.
Population density is about 50 persons per km² (130/sq.
Libya faces many structural problems including a lack of institutions, weak governance, and chronic structural unemployment.
Ptolemy Apion, the last Greek ruler, bequeathed Cyrenaica to Rome, which formally annexed the region in 74 BC and joined it to Crete as a Roman province.
It won 17 out of 80 seats that were contested by parties, but about 60 independents have since joined its caucus.
The largest city and capital, Tripoli, is located in western Libya and contains over one million of Libya's six million people.
The Hafsids ruled Tripolitania for nearly 300 years.
There are small foreign communities of Christians.
The most common form of public transport between cities is the bus, though many people travel by automobile.
Grains are roasted, ground, sieved and used for making bread, cakes, soups and bazeen.
Libya was finally put under United Nations sanctions after the bombing of a commercial flight killed hundreds of travellers.
Coptic Orthodox Christianity, which is the Christian Church of Egypt, is the largest and most historical Christian denomination in Libya.
In time, real power came to rest with the pasha’s corps of janissaries.
The coastal plain of Libya was inhabited by Neolithic peoples from as early as 8000 BC.
Usban is animal tripe stitched and stuffed with rice and vegetables cooked in tomato based soup or steamed.
The new "''jamahiriya''" governance structure he established was officially referred to as "direct democracy", though the government refused to publish election results.
Christians have also faced the threat of violence from radical Islamists in some parts of the country, with a well-publicised video released by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in February 2015 depicting the mass beheading of Christian Copts.
The latter conquered also Cyrenaica.
On 8 August 2012, the National Transitional Council officially handed power over to the wholly elected General National Congress, which was then tasked with the formation of an interim government and the drafting of a new Libyan Constitution to be approved in a general referendum.
Libya has a population of about 6.5 million, 27.7% of whom are under the age of 15.
The Kingdom was noted for its close association with the West, while it steered a conservative course at home.
More than 8,000 American personnel in warships and aircraft were deployed in the area.
After a successful invasion of Tripoli by Habsburg Spain in 1510, and its handover to the Knights of St. John, the Ottoman admiral Sinan Pasha took control of Libya in 1551.
There are also dust storms and sandstorms.
The decline of the Roman Empire saw the classical cities fall into ruin, a process hastened by the Vandals' destructive sweep through North Africa in the 5th century.
The Libyan National Army comprises a ground army, an air force and a navy.
In 1942, the Italian Fascist authorities set up forced labor camps south of Tripoli for the Jews, including Giado (about 3,000 Jews) and Gharyan, Jeren, and Tigrinna.
For the next hundred years, a series of ''deys'' effectively ruled Tripolitania.
By the 5th century BC, the greatest of the Phoenician colonies, Carthage, had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa, where a distinctive civilization, known as Punic, came into being.
As a Kingdom, Libya maintained a definitively pro-Western stance, and was recognized as belonging to the conservative traditionalist bloc in the League of Arab States (the present-day Arab League), of which it became a member in 1953.
By 22 August 2011, rebel fighters had entered Tripoli and occupied Green Square, which they renamed Martyrs' Square in honour of those killed since 17 February 2011.
Numerous acts of Vandalism and destruction of heritage have been carried out by suspected Islamist militias with the removal of the Nude Gazelle Statue as an example, Other notorious cases of vandalism were carried out such as the destruction and desecration of the second world war British grave sites near Benghazi.
Zirid rule in Tripolitania was short-lived though, and already in 1001 the Berbers of the Banu Khazrun broke away.
Additionally, 47,000 Libyan nationals were internally displaced and 46,570 were internally displaced returnees.
Eastern Uweinat (the highest point in the Libyan Desert) is a raised sandstone plateau adjacent to the granite part further west.
Since 1975 the number of universities has grown from two to nine and after their introduction in 1980, the number of higher technical and vocational institutes currently stands at 84 (with 12 public universities).
In 630 BC, the Ancient Greeks colonized Eastern Libya and founded the city of Cyrene.
Since the defeat of loyalist forces, Libya has been torn among numerous rival, armed militias affiliated with distinct regions, cities and tribes, while the central government has been weak and unable effectively to exert its authority over the country.
Water supply is also a problem, with some 28% of the population not having access to safe drinking water in 2000.
There is also a small Anglican community, made up mostly of African immigrant workers in Tripoli; it is part of the Anglican Diocese of Egypt.
Arkenu and Western Uweinat are ring complexes very similar to those in the Aïr Mountains.
A military coup in 1969 overthrew King Idris I, beginning a period of sweeping social reform.
There are about 140 tribes and clans in Libya.
After eating, Libyans often drink black tea.
A large number of Libyan television stations are devoted to political review, Islamic topics and cultural phenomena.
The climate is mostly extremely dry and desertlike in nature.
In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 3.88% of the country's GDP.
If consular records prior to the revolution are used to estimate the immigrant population, as many as 2 million Egyptian migrants were recorded by the Egyptian embassy in Tripoli in 2009, followed by 87200 Tunisians, and 68,200 Moroccans by their respective embassies.
On 30 March 2014 General National Congress voted to replace itself with new Council of Deputies.
These include the Government Library, the Ethnographic Museum, the Archaeological Museum, the National Archives, the Epigraphy Museum and the Islamic Museum.
Libya extends over , making it the 17th largest nation in the world by size.
These granite mountains are ancient, having formed long before the sandstones surrounding them.
On 11 September 2012, Islamist militants mounted a surprise attack on the American consulate in Benghazi, killing the U.S. ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens, and three others.
The Turkish minority are often called "Kouloughlis" and are concentrated in and around villages and towns.
Tripolitania remained under their control until 1146, when the region was overtaken by the Normans of Sicily.
Libya is not a WTO member, but negotiations for its accession started in 2004.
By October 2012, the average oil production has surpassed 1.4 million bpd.
While the dialect and language is Arabic, there are words that retain the Italian colonial period and are still used widely today.
His face is currently printed on the Libyan ten dinar note in memory and recognition of his patriotism.
By the beginning of the 7th century, Byzantine control over the region was weak, Berber rebellions were becoming more frequent, and there was little to oppose Muslim invasion.
In the early 19th century war broke out between the United States and Tripolitania, and a series of battles ensued in what came to be known as the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War.
On 10 March 2011, France became the first state to officially recognise the council as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people.
In 1944, Idris returned from exile in Cairo but declined to resume permanent residence in Cyrenaica until the removal of some aspects of foreign control in 1947.
On 1 September 1969, a small group of military officers led by 27-year-old army officer Muammar Gaddafi staged a coup d'état against King Idris, launching the Al Fateh Revolution.
In 2007 Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the second-eldest son of Muammar Gaddafi, was involved in a green development project called the Green Mountain Sustainable Development Area, which sought to bring tourism to Cyrene and to preserve Greek ruins in the area.
Relations with the West were strained by a series of incidents for most of Gaddafi's rule, including the killing of London policewoman Yvonne Fletcher, the bombing of a West Berlin nightclub frequented by U.S. servicemen, and the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which led to UN sanctions in the 1990s, though by the late 2000s, the United States and other Western powers had normalised relations with Libya.
Under the command of 'Amr ibn al-'As, the Rashidun army conquered Cyrenaica.
However, the GNC actually never participated, a sign that internal division not only affected the "Tobruk Camp", but also the "Tripoli Camp".
An agreement to form a unified interim government was signed on 17 December 2015.
Libya holds the largest proven oil reserves in Africa and is an important contributor to the global supply of light, sweet crude.
The town of Zawiya,  from Tripoli, was bombarded by air force planes and army tanks and seized by Jamahiriya troops, "exercising a level of brutality not yet seen in the conflict."
Libya has traditionally relied on unsustainably high levels of public sector hiring to create employment.
In the 1975–76 academic year the number of university students was estimated to be 13,418. , this number has increased to more than 200,000, with an extra 70,000 enrolled in the higher technical and vocational sector.
The Italian population then went into decline.
Later, a general of the Almohads, Muhammad ibn Abu Hafs, ruled Libya from 1207 to 1221 before the later establishment of a Tunisian Hafsid dynasty independent from the Almohads.
In 1984 the population was 3.6 million, an increase from the 1.54 million reported in 1964.
Libya had long been a notoriously difficult country for Western tourists to visit due to stringent visa requirements.
This is a southern wind blowing from one to four days in spring and autumn.
By October 2012, the economy had recovered from the 2011 conflict, with oil production returning to near normal levels.
The British military administered the two former Italian Libyan provinces of Tripolitana and Cyrenaïca, while the French administered the province of Fezzan.
Likewise, the temperature in the Libyan Desert can be extreme; on 13 September 1922 the town of 'Aziziya, which is located southwest of Tripoli, recorded an air temperature of , considered to be a world record.
Talks, negotiations and dialogue continued on during mid-2015 at various international locations, culminating at Skhirat in Morocco in early September.
According to an Arab League report, based on data from 2010, unemployment for women stands at 18% while for the figure for men is 21%, making Libya the only Arab country where there are more unemployed men than women.
In the west there is a widely dispersed group of oases in unconnected shallow depressions, the Kufra group, consisting of Tazerbo, Rebianae and Kufra.
Additionally, there are some Libyan ethnic minorities, such as the Berber-speaking Tuareg and the Tebou.
The National Transitional Council, established in 2011, referred to the state as simply "Libya".
Secularists and liberals did well in the elections, to the consternation of Islamist lawmakers in the GNC, who reconvened and declared a continuing mandate for the GNC, refusing to recognise the new Council of Deputies.
Gaddafi merged civil and sharia courts in 1973.
UN support for the SRSG-led process of dialogue carried on in addition to the usual work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
The defeat of loyalist forces was celebrated on 23 October 2011, three days after the fall of Sirte.
The discovery of significant oil reserves in 1959 and the subsequent income from petroleum sales enabled one of the world's poorest nations to establish an extremely wealthy state.
By 20 February, the unrest had spread to Tripoli.
In January 2015, meetings were held with the aim to find a peaceful agreement between the rival parties in Libya.
Much of Libya's income from oil, which soared in the 1970s, was spent on arms purchases and on sponsoring dozens of paramilitaries and terrorist groups around the world.
Many other cases of Heritage vandalism were carried out and were reported to be carried out by Islamist related radical militias and mobs that either destroyed, robbed, or looted a number of Historic sites which remain in danger at present.
Some 150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting roughly 20% of the total population.
Although the Libyan Arabs traditionally lived nomadic lifestyles in tents, they have now settled in various towns and cities.
This allowed the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya state to provide an extensive level of social security, particularly in the fields of housing and education.
In September 2012, however, the world record figure of 58&nbsp;°C was overturned by the World Meteorological Organization.
