Parliament may also pass votes of no confidence in the entire government or individual members.
At the moment, 1FLTV is not a member of the European Broadcasting Union.
The tax ranges between 0.5% and 0.75% for spouses and children and 18% to 27% for non-related recipients.
A Roman road ran through the territory.
Recently, Liechtenstein has displayed a stronger determination to prosecute international money-launderers and has worked to promote the country's image as a legitimate finance center.
In 1396 Vaduz (the southern region of Liechtenstein) was raised to the status of "imperial immediacy" and as such made subject to the Holy Roman Emperor alone.
Music and theatre are an important part of the culture.
Fifteen members are elected from the "Oberland" (Upper Country or region) and ten members are elected from the "Unterland" (Lower Country or region).
Even though several Liechtenstein princes served several Habsburg rulers as close advisers, without any territory held directly from the Imperial throne, they held little power in the Holy Roman Empire.
A parliamentary system had been established, although the reigning Prince retained substantial political authority.
The 2008 Liechtenstein tax affair is a series of tax investigations in numerous countries whose governments suspect that some of their citizens have evaded tax obligations by using banks and trusts in Liechtenstein; the affair broke open with the biggest complex of investigations ever initiated for tax evasion in the Federal Republic of Germany.
Currently, there is only one hospital in Liechtenstein, the Liechtensteinisches Landesspital in Vaduz.
It uses Switzerland's callsign prefixes (typically "HB") followed by a zero.
Liechtenstein also generates revenue from ''Stiftungen'' ("foundations"), which are financial entities created to hide the true owner of nonresident foreigners' financial holdings.
Liechtensteiners have an average life expectancy at birth of 80.31 years, male: 76.86 years, female: 83.77 years (2011 est.).
Liechtenstein was integrated into the Roman province of Raetia.
The princely family and the Prince enjoy tremendous public support inside the nation, and the resolution passed with about 64% in favour.
Foreign-born people make up two-thirds of the country's workforce.
In 58 BC, at the Battle of Bibracte, Julius Caesar defeated the Alpine tribes, bringing the region under closer control of the Roman Empire.
There are four stations in Liechtenstein, namely Schaan-Vaduz, Forst Hilti, Nendeln and Schaanwald, served by an irregularly stopping train service that runs between Feldkirch and Buchs provided by the Austrian Federal Rail Service.
The Liechtensteins acquired land, predominantly in Moravia, Lower Austria, Silesia, and Styria.
Soon afterward, Liechtenstein joined the German Confederation (20 June 181524 August 1866), which was presided over by the Emperor of Austria.
The infant mortality rate is 4.64 deaths per 1,000 live births, according to recent estimates.
The state ceased to owe an obligation to any feudal lord beyond its borders.
The last soldier to serve under the colours of Liechtenstein died in 1939 at age 95.
The demise of the German Confederation in that war freed Liechtenstein from its international obligation to maintain an army, and parliament seized this opportunity and refused to provide funding for one.
Parliament can call for referenda on proposed legislation.
However, Swiss Standard German is understood and spoken by most people within the country.
However, it was revealed in 2005 that Jewish labourers from the Strasshof concentration camp, provided by the ''SS'', had worked on estates in Austria owned by Liechtenstein's Princely House.
The nearest small airport is St. Gallen Airport (50&nbsp;km/30&nbsp;mi).
In Triesenberg, a dialect promoted by the municipality is spoken.
The primary internet service provider and mobile network operator of Liechtenstein is Telecom Liechtenstein, located in Schaan.
Liechtenstein has been a member of the European Economic Area (an organization serving as a bridge between the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the European Union) since May 1995.
The principality of Liechtenstein is divided into 11 communes called ''Gemeinden'' (singular ''Gemeinde'').
In the Early Middle Ages, the Alemanni had settled the eastern Swiss plateau by the 5th century and the valleys of the Alps by the end of the 8th century.
In a national referendum in March 2003, nearly two-thirds of the electorate voted in support of Hans-Adam II's proposed new constitution to replace the 1921 version.
On 23 January 1719, after the lands had been purchased, Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor, decreed that Vaduz and Schellenberg were united and elevated the newly formed territory to the dignity of  ''Fürstentum'' (''principality'') with the name "Liechtenstein" in honour of "his true servant, Anton Florian of Liechtenstein".
Liechtenstein is situated in the Upper Rhine valley of the European Alps and is bordered to the east by Austria and to the south and west by Switzerland.
Buses also run to the Austrian town of Feldkirch.
Very low business taxes (lowest in Europe after Andorra's 10% maximum tax rate)—the corporate tax rate is a flat 12.5%—as well as easy Rules of Incorporation have induced about 73,700 holding (or so-called "letter-box") companies to establish registered offices in Liechtenstein - or twice as numerous as its 36,000 residents.
The country imports about 85% of its energy.
The museum collection is also the national art collection of Liechtenstein.
The proposed constitution was criticised by many, including the Council of Europe, as expanding the powers of the monarchy (continuing the power to veto any law, and allowing the Prince to dismiss the government or any minister).
On the country's national holiday all subjects are invited to the castle of the head of state.
Population-wise, Liechtenstein is the fourth smallest country of Europe; only Vatican City, San Marino, and Monaco have fewer residents.
Liechtenstein Bus is a subsidiary of the Swiss Postbus system, but separately run, and connects to the Swiss bus network at Buchs and at Sargans.
There is only one television channel in the country, the private channel 1FLTV created in 2008.
Other industries include electronics, textiles, precision instruments, metal manufacturing, power tools, anchor bolts, calculators, pharmaceuticals, and food products.
More recently the diplomatic conflict revolving around the controversial post-war Beneš decrees resulted in Liechtenstein not sharing international relations with the Czech Republic or Slovakia.
It is believed that up to 5,000 British investors have roughly £3 billion deposited in accounts and trusts in the country.
The foundation is registered in the name of a Liechtensteiner, often a lawyer.
In March 1938, just after the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany, Prince Franz named as regent his 31-year-old first cousin twice removed and heir-presumptive, Prince Franz Joseph.
The reigning Prince is the head of state and represents Liechtenstein in its international relations (although Switzerland has taken responsibility for much of Liechtenstein's diplomatic relations).
In 259/60 Brigantium was destroyed by the Alemanni, a Germanic people who settled in the area in around 450.
The nearest large airport is Zürich Airport near Zürich, Switzerland (130&nbsp;km/80&nbsp;mi by road).
Its most recognizable international company and largest employer is Hilti, a manufacturer of direct fastening systems and other high-end power tools.
Since 2002, Liechtenstein's rate of unemployment has doubled.
One of the most important tribal groups in the Alpine region were the Helvetii.
At the close of the conflict, Czechoslovakia and Poland, acting to seize what they considered to be German possessions, expropriated the entirety of the Liechtenstein dynasty's properties in those three regions.
Although Liechtenstein had no official Nazi party, a Nazi sympathy movement arose within its National Union party.
Balzers Heliport is available for chartered helicopter flights.
Liechtenstein is a large producer of ceramics and is the largest producer of false teeth in the world.
In one surprising week during autumn 2004, however, the team managed a 2–2 draw with Portugal, who only a few months earlier had been the losing finalists in the European Championships.
However, the United States Senate's subcommittee on tax haven banks said that the LGT bank, which is owned by the princely family, and on whose board they serve, "is a willing partner, and an aider and abettor to clients trying to evade taxes, dodge creditors or defy court orders".
All officers are equipped with small arms.
Divided into 11 municipalities, its capital is Vaduz and its largest municipality is Schaan.
In 1929, 75-year-old Prince Franz I succeeded to the throne.
During the 1980s the Swiss army fired off shells during an exercise and mistakenly burned a patch of forest inside Liechtenstein.
Economically, Liechtenstein has the third highest gross domestic product per person in the world when adjusted for purchasing power parity, after Qatar and Luxembourg, and the highest when not adjusted by purchasing power parity.
Liechtenstein follows a policy of neutrality and is one of the few countries in the world that maintain no military.
L-Radio has a listener base of 50,000 and began as "air Radio Liechtenstein" on 15 October 1938.
Modern publications generally attribute Liechtenstein's sovereignty to these events.
The accidental invasion ended when the unit realized their mistake and turned back.
They went on to beat Iceland 3–0 on 17 October 2007, which is considered one of the most dramatic losses of the Icelandic national football team.
The expropriations (subject to modern legal dispute at the International Court of Justice) included over  of agricultural and forest land (most notably UNESCO listed Lednice–Valtice Cultural Landscape), and several family castles and palaces.
A proposal to revoke the Prince's veto powers was rejected by 76% of voters in a 2012 referendum.
The next visit would not occur until 1842.
This region was enfeoffed to the Counts of Hohenems until the creation of the Liechtenstein dynasty in 1699.
Few national constitutions provide a right of secession, but municipalities in Liechtenstein are entitled to secede from the union by majority vote.
It has an area of just over  and an estimated population of 37,000.
The building by the Swiss architects Morger, Degelo, and Kerez is a landmark in Vaduz.
Parliament proposes and approves a government, which is formally appointed by the Prince.
Franz died in July that year, and Franz Joseph succeeded to the throne.
Five of them (Eschen, Gamprin, Mauren, Ruggell, and Schellenberg) fall within the electoral district ''Unterland'' (the lower county), and the remainder (Balzers, Planken, Schaan, Triesen, Triesenberg, and Vaduz) within ''Oberland'' (the upper county).
Liechtenstein is also the home country of Stephanie Vogt, a professional women's tennis player.
The Prince may veto laws adopted by parliament.
Its prince ceased to owe an obligation to any suzerain.
Legislative authority is vested in the unicameral Landtag made up of 25 members elected for maximum four-year terms according to a proportional representation formula.
*1836, the first factory, for making ceramics, was opened.
L-Radio, which was established in 2004, serves as Liechtenstein's radio station and is based in Triesen.
In August 2009, the British government department HM Revenue & Customs agreed with Liechtenstein to start exchanging information.
The area that later became Liechtenstein remained under Frankish hegemony (Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties) until the empire was divided by the Treaty of Verdun in 843&nbsp;AD following the death of Charlemagne.
Hans-Adam I was allowed to purchase the minuscule ''Herrschaft'' ("Lordship") of Schellenberg and county of Vaduz (in 1699 and 1712 respectively) from the Hohenems.
The entire western border of Liechtenstein is formed by the Rhine.
Hanni Wenzel won two gold medals and one silver medal in the 1980 Winter Olympics (she won bronze in 1976), and her brother Andreas won one silver medal in 1980 and one bronze medal in 1984 in the giant slalom event.
The Prince objected, as such a move would leave the country defenceless, but relented on 12 February 1868 and disbanded the force.
The head of government and the other ministers are appointed by the Prince upon the proposal and concurrence of parliament, thus reflecting the partisan balance of parliament.
On 1 July 1984, Liechtenstein became the last country in Europe to grant women the right to vote.
Liechtenstein participates in a customs union with Switzerland and employs the Swiss franc as the national currency.
Hallstatt and La Tène cultures flourished during the late Iron Age from around 450 BC possibly under some influence from the Greek and Etruscan civilisations.
Liechtenstein competes in the Switzerland U16 Cup Tournament, which offers young players an opportunity to play against top football clubs.
Liechtenstein is bordered by Switzerland to the west and south and Austria to the east and north.
Local Liechtenstein Nazis identified Elisabeth as their Jewish "problem".
The country has one of the world's lowest crime rates.
In February 2008, the country's LGT Bank was implicated in a tax-fraud scandal in Germany, which strained the ruling family's relationship with the German government.
The other important museum is the Liechtenstein National Museum (''Liechtensteinisches Landesmuseum'') showing permanent exhibition on the cultural and natural history of Liechtenstein as well as special exhibitions.
*1868, the Liechtenstein Army was disbanded for financial reasons.
It was on this date that Liechtenstein became a sovereign member state of the Holy Roman Empire.
An alpine country, Liechtenstein is mainly mountainous, making it a winter sport destination.
In winter, the mountain slopes are well suited to winter sports.
Crown Prince Alois has accused the German government of trafficking in stolen goods, referring to its $7.3 million purchase of private banking information offered by a former employee of LGT Group.
Liechtenstein is one of only two doubly landlocked countries in the world—being a landlocked country wholly surrounded by other landlocked countries (the other is Uzbekistan).
Napoleon reorganized much of the Empire into the Confederation of the Rhine.
In the 21st century, the mountain village of Triesenberg still preserves features of Walser dialect.
The referendum on women's suffrage, in which only men were allowed to participate, passed with 51.3% in favor.
The country's railways are administered by the Austrian Federal Railways as part of the route between Feldkirch, Austria, and Buchs, Switzerland.
*1886, two bridges over the Rhine to Switzerland were built.
Franz Joseph II first moved to Liechtenstein in 1938, a few days after Austria's annexation.
The Prince of Liechtenstein is the world's sixth wealthiest monarch with an estimated wealth of 5 billion USD.
There is also a stamp museum, ski museum, and a 500-year-old Rural Lifestyle Museum.
The family, from which the principality takes its name, originally came from Liechtenstein Castle in Lower Austria which they had possessed from at least 1140 until the 13th century (and again from 1807 onwards).
For this reason, the family sought to acquire lands that would be classed as ''unmittelbar'' ("unintermediated"), or held without any intermediate feudal tenure, directly from the Holy Roman Emperor.
A significant portion of the population attends the national celebration at the castle where speeches are made and complimentary beer is served.
In March 2007, a 170-person Swiss infantry unit got lost during a training exercise and inadvertently crossed  into Liechtenstein.
Liechtenstein is the sixth-smallest independent nation in the world by land area.
The State Court rules on the conformity of laws with the constitution and has five members elected by parliament.
The National Committee is charged with performing parliamentary oversight functions.
Until about 1100, the predominant language of the area was Romansch, but thereafter German gained ground, and in 1300 an Alemannic population called the Walsers (originating in Valais) entered the region.
Other regions were accorded the Imperial immediacy that granted the empire direct control over the mountain passes.
The government is working to harmonize its economic policies with those of an integrated Europe.
Amateur radio is a hobby of some nationals and visitors.
This set of laws makes Liechtenstein a popular tax haven for extremely wealthy individuals and businesses attempting to avoid or evade taxes in their home countries.
Developments during the 19th century included:
It was also seen as an attempt to put pressure on Liechtenstein, then one of the remaining uncooperative tax havens—along with Andorra and Monaco—as identified by the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in 2007.
With nine medals overall (all in alpine skiing), Liechtenstein has won more Olympic medals per capita than any other nation.
On 27 May 2009 the OECD removed Liechtenstein from the blacklist of uncooperative countries.
In the qualification stage of the European Championship 2008, Liechtenstein beat Latvia 1–0, a result which prompted the resignation of the Latvian coach.
An additional income tax of 4.3% is levied on all employees under the country's social security programme.
The government of Liechtenstein taxes personal, business income, and principal (wealth).
The area was maintained by the Roman military, which maintained a large legionary camp called Brigantium (Austria) near Lake Constance and at Magia (Swiss).
The basic rate of personal income tax is 1.2%.
It is also a direct democracy, where voters can propose and enact constitutional amendments and legislation independent of the legislature.
Despite its Alpine location, prevailing southerly winds make the climate of Liechtenstein comparatively mild.
*1872, a railway line between Switzerland and the Austro-Hungarian Empire was constructed through Liechtenstein.
The army was abolished soon after the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, in which Liechtenstein fielded an army of 80 men, although they were not involved in any fighting.
The incident was said to have been resolved "over a case of white wine".
Franz had just married Elisabeth von Gutmann, a woman from Vienna, who was wealthy because her father was a Jewish businessman from Moravia.
Many cultivated fields and small farms are found both in the south (Oberland, ''upper land'') and north (Unterland, ''lower land'').
It was completed in November 2000 and forms a "black box" of tinted concrete and black basalt stone.
In that same year Prince Aloys became the first member of the House of Liechtenstein to set foot in the principality that bore their name.
This political restructuring had broad consequences for Liechtenstein: the historical imperial, legal, and political institutions had been dissolved.
Liechtenstein has no airport.
Liechtenstein's gift and estate taxes vary depending on the relationship the recipient has to the giver and the amount of the inheritance.
The Gemeinden mostly consist only of a single town or village.
The Prince threatened that if the constitution failed, he would, among other things, convert some of the royal property for commercial use and move to Austria.
Measured south to north the country is about  long.
Liechtenstein produces wheat, barley, corn, potatoes, dairy products, livestock, and wine.
Emperor Francis II abdicated, ending more than 960 years of feudal government.
The Liechtenstein National Police is responsible for keeping order within the country.
The  unemployment rate is one of the lowest in the world at 1.5%.
This rate is higher for the self-employed, up to a maximum of 11%, making the maximum income tax rate about 29% in total.
From 25 July 1806, when the Confederation of the Rhine was founded, the Prince of Liechtenstein was a member, in fact, a vassal, of its hegemon, styled ''protector'', the French Emperor Napoleon I, until the dissolution of the confederation on 19 October 1813.
enough for 2 seats in the 25-seat legislature.
The basic tax rate on wealth is 0.06% per annum, and the combined total rate is 0.89%.
Liechtenstein is nominally within the Austrian Verkehrsverbund Vorarlberg tariff region.
On 15 November 2014, Liechtenstein defeated Moldova 0-1 with Franz Burgmeier's late free kick goal in Chișinău.
It is a testament to the pure political expediency of the purchase that the Princes of Liechtenstein never visited their new principality for almost 100 years.
On 3 June 2011, Liechtenstein defeated Lithuania 2–0.
In 2008, it stood at 1.5%.
Its highest point, the Grauspitz, is .
The Swiss army later informed Liechtenstein of the incursion and offered official apologies.
While EuroCity and other long distance international trains also travel along the route, they do not normally stop at the stations within the borders of Liechtenstein.
Diplomatic relations were established between Liechtenstein and the Czech Republic on 13 July 2009, and with Slovakia on 9 December 2009.
Parties must receive at least 8% of the national vote to win seats in parliament, i.e.
The country's population enjoys one of the world's highest standards of living.
Its population is primarily Alemannic-speaking, although one third is foreign-born, primarily German speakers from Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, other Swiss, Italians, and Turks.
By the early 19th century, as a result of the Napoleonic Wars in Europe, the Holy Roman Empire came under the effective control of France, following the crushing defeat at Austerlitz by Napoleon in 1805.
The estate tax is progressive.
It consists of 87 field officers and 38 civilian staff, totaling 125 employees.
In 1818, Prince Johann I granted the territory a limited constitution.
On 7 September 2010, they came within seconds of a 1–1 draw against Scotland in Glasgow, having led 1–0 earlier in the second half, but Liechtenstein lost 2–1 thanks to a goal by Stephen McManus in the 97th minute.
The constitution stipulates that at least two members of the government be chosen from each of the two regions.
The territory of present-day Liechtenstein belonged to East Francia until it was reunified with Middle Francia under the Holy Roman Empire around 1000&nbsp;AD.
Tourism accounts for a large portion of the country's economy.
By 15 BC, Tiberius, who was destined to be the second Roman emperor, and his brother Drusus conquered the entire Alpine area.
The members of the government are collectively and individually responsible to parliament; parliament may ask the Prince to remove an individual minister or the entire government.
The gross domestic product (GDP) on a purchasing power parity basis is $5.028 billion, or $89,400 per capita, which is the second highest in the world.
In the 6th century, the entire region became part of the Frankish Empire following Clovis I's victory over the Alemanni at Tolbiac in 504.
The Private Art Collection of the Prince of Liechtenstein, one of the world's leading private art collections, is shown at the Liechtenstein Museum in Vienna.
During World War II, Liechtenstein remained officially neutral, looking to neighboring Switzerland for assistance and guidance, while family treasures from dynastic lands and possessions in Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia were taken to Liechtenstein for safekeeping.
*1861, the Savings and Loans Bank was founded along with the first cotton-weaving mill.
As an alpine country, the main sporting opportunity for Liechtensteiners to excel is in winter sports such as downhill skiing: the country's single ski area is Malbun.
Other notable skiers from Liechtenstein are Marco Büchel, Tina Weirather, Willi Frommelt, Paul Frommelt and Ursula Konzett.
This provides about 30% of Liechtenstein's state revenue.
The primary multimedia company in Liechtenstein is ManaMedia, located in Vaduz.
The largest museum is the Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein, an international museum of modern and contemporary art with an important international art collection.
Liechtenstein is a member of the European Free Trade Association, and while not being a member of the European Union, the country participates in both the Schengen Area and European Economic Area.
Liechtenstein has a constitutional monarch as Head of State, and an elected parliament which enacts the law.
Executive authority is vested in a collegiate government comprising the head of government (prime minister) and four government councilors (ministers).
Parliament shares the authority to propose new legislation with the Prince and with the number of citizens required for an initiative referendum.
