Similarly, designing lighting systems that maximize the right amount of light at the appropriate time of day for the elderly may help relieve symptoms of Alzheimer's Disease.
Polluting light is often wasted light involving unnecessary energy costs and carbon dioxide emissions.
High Pressure Sodium, PC amber LEDs, and low CCT LEDs).
Prehistoric people used primitive oil lamps to illuminate surroundings.
This can save energy in place of using artificial lighting, which represents a major component of energy consumption in buildings.
Indoor lighting is usually accomplished using light fixtures, and is a key part of interior design.
Magnifier lamps are also task lighting.
This uses diffuser panels hung like a suspended ceiling below fluorescent lights, and is considered general lighting.
Lighting of structures considers aesthetic elements as well as practical considerations of quantity of light required, occupants of the structure, energy efficiency and cost.
A sconce is a wall-mounted fixture, particularly one that shines up and sometimes down as well.
* Neon: A low pressure gas contained within a glass tube; the color emitted depends on the gas.
Many times, rapid and frequent switching of the lights on and off can occur, particularly during unstable weather conditions or when daylight levels are changing around the switching illuminance.
Nearly any material can be used, so long as it can tolerate the excess heat and is in keeping with safety codes.
Many newer control systems are using wireless mesh open standards (such as ZigBee), which provides benefits including easier installation (no need to run control wires) and interoperability with other standards-based building control systems (e.g.
In many situations, controlling the light emission of LEDs may be done most effectively by using the principles of nonimaging optics.
Soffit or close to wall lighting can be general or a decorative wall-wash, sometimes used to bring out texture (like stucco or plaster) on a wall, though this may also show its defects as well.
For example, a lighting level of 400 lux might be chosen for a work environment involving meeting rooms and conferences, whereas a level of 80 lux could be selected for building hallways.
It has regained some popularity recently in low-voltage tracks, which often look nothing like their predecessors because they do not have the safety issues that line-voltage systems have, and are therefore less bulky and more ornamental in themselves.
Candles and glass and pottery lamps were also invented.
Its members include manufacturers and distributors of stage and entertainment lighting, sound, rigging and similar products and services, and affiliated professionals in the area.
Rating and marketing emphasis is shifting away from wattage and towards lumen output, to give the purchaser a directly applicable basis upon which to select a lamp.
Doors, partitions, stairways, etc.
A major reduction in the cost of lighting occurred with the discovery of whale oil.
By the end of the decade there were 30 kerosene plants operating in the United States.
As a result, light sources which balance both CRI and GAI are generally preferred over ones that have only high CRI or only high GAI.
The control must have an unobstructed view of the building area being scanned.
The standard lamp and shade that sits on a table is general lighting, while the desk lamp is considered task lighting.
Daylighting (using windows, skylights, or light shelves) is sometimes used as the main source of light during daytime in buildings.
A study conducted in 1972 and 1981, documented by Robert Ulrich, surveyed 23 surgical patients assigned to rooms looking out on a natural scene.
Some systems also support demand response and will automatically dim or turn off lights to take advantage of utility incentives.
When motion can no longer be detected, the lights shut off.
Lighting fixtures come in a wide variety of styles for various functions.
The ecologic effects of artificial light have been documented.
The American Medical Association in 2012 issued a warning that extended exposure to light at night increases the risk of some cancers.
The SI unit of illuminance and luminous emittance, being the luminous power per area, is measured in Lux.
Lower color temperature lamps have relatively more energy in the yellow and red part of the visible spectrum, while high color temperatures correspond to lamps with more of a blue-white appearance.
There are also downlights with internal reflectors designed to accept common 'A' lamps (light bulbs) which are generally less costly than reflector lamps.
As early as 400,000 BCE, fire was kindled in the caves of Peking Man.
This data is typically expressed in standardized form defined by the IESNA.
Well-designed lighting sends light only where it is needed without scattering it elsewhere.
Gesner's kerosene was cheap, easy to produce, could be burned in existing lamps, and did not produce an offensive odor as did most whale oil.
Some occupancy sensors utilize both passive infrared and ultrasonic technology, but are usually more expensive.
GAI represents the relative separation of object colors illuminated by a light source; the greater the GAI, the greater the apparent saturation or vividness of the object colors.
Proper lighting can enhance task performance, improve the appearance of an area, or have positive psychological effects on occupants.
In 1849, Dr. Abraham Gesner, a Canadian geologist, devised a method where kerosene could be distilled from petroleum.
Oily animals (birds and fish) were also used as lamps after being threaded with a wick.
Fireflies have been used as lighting sources.
The Unified Glare Rating (UGR), the Visual Comfort Probability, and the Daylight Glare Index are some of the most well-known methods of measurement.
A fixture using replaceable light sources can also have its efficiency quoted as the percentage of light passed from the "bulb" to the surroundings.
The Professional Lighting And Sound Association (PLASA) is a UK-based trade organisation representing the 500+ individual and corporate members drawn from the technical services sector.
There are traditional spots and floods, as well as other small hanging fixtures.
Some electric utilities and local governments have subsidized CFLs or provided them free to customers as a means of reducing electricity demand.
Due to a lack of information that indicate the likely energy savings, daylighting schemes are not yet popular among most buildings.
Flares can also be used by the military to mark positions, usually for targeting, but laser-guided and GPS weapons have eliminated this need for the most part.
The portable or table lamp is probably the most common fixture, found in many homes and offices.
They publish a monthly newsletter and organise different events throughout the world.
Headlamps are white or selective yellow lights placed in the front of the vehicle, designed to illuminate the upcoming road and to make the vehicle more visible.
Those fully independent designers who meet the requirements for professional membership in the association typically append the abbreviation IALD to their name.
Segmented sleep patterns disappeared, improved nighttime lighting made more activities possible at night, and more street lights reduced urban crime.
The researchers asked participants to rate a number of things such as: the spiciness of chicken-wing sauce, the aggressiveness of a fictional character, how attractive someone was, their feelings about specific words, and the taste of two juices–all under different lighting conditions.
Lighting control systems reduce energy usage and cost by helping to provide light only when and where it is needed.
Example subjects of this representation include the ongoing review of radio frequencies (which may or may not affect the radio bands in which wireless microphones and other devices use) and engaging with the issues surrounding the introduction of the RoHS (Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive) regulations.
Lighting can also be an intrinsic component of landscape projects.
Forms of lighting include alcove lighting, which like most other uplighting is indirect.
The small, head-mounted device measures an individual's daily rest and activity patterns, as well as exposure to short-wavelength light that stimulates the circadian system.
* Compact fluorescent lamps: CFLs are designed to replace incandescent lamps in existing and new installations.
* fluorescent light: A tube coated with phosphor containing low pressure mercury vapor that produces white light.
Daylighting has also been proven to have positive effects on patients in hospitals as well as work and school performance.
These lamps were made from naturally occurring materials such as rocks, shells, horns and stones, were filled with grease, and had a fiber wick.
Two studies in Israel from 2008 have yielded some additional findings about a possible correlation between artificial light at night and certain cancers.
Due to the ability to reduce electricity consumption, many organizations encourage the adoption of CFLs.
The best applications for passive infrared occupancy sensors are open spaces with a clear view of the area being scanned.
However the use of light may disclose your own hidden position and modern warfare have seen increased use of night vision through the use of infrared cameras and image intensifiers.
Several measurement methods have been developed to control glare resulting from indoor lighting design.
* Light emitting diodes: Light emitting diodes (LED) are solid state devices that emit light by dint of the movement of electrons in a semiconductor material.
A variation of this technology is the 'differential switching or dead-band' photoelectric control which has multiple illuminances it switches from so as not to disturb occupants as much.
The National Council on Qualifications for the Lighting Professions (NCQLP) offers the Lighting Certification Examination which tests rudimentary lighting design principles.
White rear-facing reversing lamps indicate that the vehicle's transmission has been placed in the reverse gear, warning anyone behind the vehicle that it is moving backwards, or about to do so.
Many manufactures are turning to LED headlights as an energy-efficient alternative to traditional headlamps.
Daylighting is simply designing a space to use as much natural light as possible.
In their study, they found that both positive and negative human emotions are felt more intensely in bright light.
* Halogen: Incandescent lamps containing halogen gases such as iodine or bromine, increasing the efficacy of the lamp versus a plain incandescent lamp.
Gas lighting was economical enough to power street lights in major cities starting in the early 1800s, and was also used in some commercial buildings and in the homes of wealthy people.
Artificial lighting takes into account the amount of daylight received in an internal space by using Daylight factor calculation.
Not all CFLs are suitable for dimming.
For simple installations, hand-calculations based on tabular data are used to provide an acceptable lighting design.
will block motion detection and reduce its effectiveness.
Vehicles typically include headlamps and tail lights.
These lights are installed for safety, security, and for decoration.
A wax candle produces on the close order of 13 lumens, a 60 watt incandescent lamp makes around 700 lumens, and a 15-watt compact fluorescent lamp produces about 800 lumens, but actual output varies by specific design.
This would probably fall under accent lighting, though in a dark nightclub it could be considered general lighting.
In some design instances, materials used on walls and furniture play a key role in the lighting effect2).
Alison Jing Xu, assistant professor of management at the University of Toronto Scarborough and Aparna Labroo of Northwestern University conducted a series of studies analyzing the correlation between lighting and human emotion.
Lighting control systems are sometimes incorporated into larger building automation systems.
Track lighting, invented by Lightolier, was popular at one period of time because it was much easier to install than recessed lighting, and individual fixtures are decorative and can be easily aimed at a wall.
The next major drop in price came about in the 1880s with the introduction of electric lighting in the form of arc lights for large space and street lighting followed on by incandescent light bulb based utilities for indoor and outdoor lighting.
Unlike incandescent lamps CFLs need a little time to warm up and reach full brightness.
Over time, electric lighting became ubiquitous in developed countries.
The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA), in conjunction with organizations like ANSI and ASHRAE, publishes guidelines, standards, and handbooks that allow categorization of the illumination needs of different built environments.
A break in the pattern caused by any motion in the area triggers the control.
* Ballast: A ballast is an auxiliary piece of equipment designed to start and properly control the flow of power to discharge light sources such as fluorescent and high intensity discharge (HID) lamps.
In English, "lux" is used in both singular and plural.
The color temperature of a white light source is the temperature in Kelvin of a theoretical black body emitter that most closely matches the spectral characteristics  of the lamp.
Clearly, much less light is required to illuminate a hallway compared to that needed for a word processing work station.
'''Lighting''' or '''illumination''' is the deliberate use of light to achieve a practical or aesthetic effect.
The more transparent the lighting fixture is, the higher efficacy.
This unit only quantifies the visible radiation, and excludes invisible infrared and ultraviolet light.
In the dark, emotions are slightly suppressed.
He set up a network of kerosene distilleries which would later become Standard Oil, thus completely abolishing the need for whale-oil lamps.
In addition to these new methods, four main factors influence the degree of discomfort glare; the luminance of the glare source, the solid angle of the glare source, the background luminance, and the position of the glare source in the field of view must all be taken into account.
This certification process is one of three national (U.S.) examinations (the others are CLEP and CLMC) in the lighting industry and is open not only to designers, but to lighting equipment manufacturers, electric utility employees, etc.
A torchiere is an uplight intended for ambient lighting.
This study suggests that due to the nature of the scenery and daylight exposure was indeed healthier for patients as opposed to those exposed to little light from the brick wall.
LED lamps have been advocated as the newest and best environmental lighting method.
From a military standpoint, lighting is a critical part of the battlefield conditions.
Color temperature for white light sources also affects their use for certain applications.
The study concluded that patients assigned to rooms with windows allowing lots of natural light had shorter postoperative hospital stays, received fewer negative evaluative comments in nurses’ notes, and took fewer potent analegesics than 23 matched patients in similar rooms with windows facing a brick wall.
It is analogous to the radiometric unit watts per square metre, but with the power at each wavelength weighted according to the luminosity function, a standardized model of human visual brightness perception.
With the discovery of fire, the earliest form of artificial lighting used to illuminate an area were campfires or torches.
An important property of light fixtures is the luminous efficacy or wall-plug efficiency, meaning the amount of usable light emanating from the fixture per used energy, usually measured in lumen per watt.
The International Association of Lighting Designers (IALD) is an organization which focuses on the advancement of lighting design education and the recognition of independent professional lighting designers.
The wide-scale adoption of LEDs will reap energy savings but the energy savings may be compromising human health and ecosystems.
Underwater accent lighting is also used for koi ponds, fountains, swimming pools and the like.
The Professional Lighting Designers Association (PLDA), formerly known as ELDA is an organisation focusing on the promotion of the profession of Architectural Lighting Design.
Shading the light will normally decrease efficacy but increase the directionality and the visual comfort probability.
A master transformer feeds all of the fixtures on the track or rod with 12 or 24 volts, instead of each light fixture having its own line-to-low voltage transformer.
This is often done with fluorescent lighting (first available at the 1939 World's Fair) or rope light, occasionally with neon lighting, and recently with LED strip lighting.
When those patterns are disrupted, they disrupt the natural circadian cycle.
Ultrasonic sensors transmit sound above the range of human hearing and monitor the time it takes for the sound waves to return.
Manufacturers of lighting equipment publish photometric data for their products, which defines the distribution of light released by a specific luminaire.
Generally speaking, the energy expended is proportional to the design illumination level.
Individuals who pass this exam become ‘Lighting Certified’ and may append the abbreviation LC to their name.
The lifetime is also much longer&nbsp;— up to 50,000 hours.
This decreases energy consumption and costs, and requires less heating and cooling from the building.
According to the Energy Saving Trust, LED lamps use only 10% power compared to a standard incandescent bulb, where compact fluorescent lamps use 20% and energy saving halogen lamps 70%.
In response to daylighting technology, daylight harvesting systems have been developed to further reduce energy consumption.
Entry lights can be used outside to illuminate and signal the entrance to a property.
The American petroleum boom began in the 1850s.
Compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) use less power than an incandescent lamp to supply the same amount of light, however they contain mercury which is a disposal hazard.
Security lights may include floodlights.
John D. Rockefeller was most responsible for the commercial success of kerosene.
Commonly called 'light bulbs', lamps are the removable and replaceable part of a light fixture, which converts electrical energy into electromagnetic radiation.
Downlights can be incandescent, fluorescent, HID (high intensity discharge) or LED.
For example, a 60&nbsp;W incandescent light bulb produces about the same amount of light as a 13&nbsp;W compact fluorescent lamp.
In the late 1950s, some automakers began to use electroluminescent technology to backlight their cars' speedometers and other gauges or to draw attention to logos or other decorative elements.
Recessed lighting (often called "pot lights" in Canada, "can lights" or 'high hats" in the US) is popular, with fixtures mounted into the ceiling structure so as to appear flush with it.
New studies have shown that the performance of students is influenced by the time and duration of daylight in their regular schedules.
However, emotions are intensified in the bright light.
Specification of illumination requirements is the basic concept of deciding how much illumination is required for a given task.
More critical or optimized designs now routinely use mathematical modeling on a computer using software such as Radiance which can allow an Architect to quickly undertake complex calculations to review the benefit of a particular design.
Lighting includes the use of both artificial light sources like lamps and light fixtures, as well as natural illumination by capturing daylight.
While lamps have traditionally been rated and marketed primarily in terms of their power consumption, expressed in watts, proliferation of lighting technology beyond the incandescent light bulb has eliminated the correspondence of wattage to the amount of light produced.
Some lamps require the ballast to have thermal protection.
Hundreds of these lamps (hollow worked stones) have been found in the Lascaux caves in modern-day France, dating to about 15,000 years ago.
The CGS unit of luminance is the stilb, which is equal to one candela per square centimetre or 10&nbsp;kcd/m2.
Professor Xu stated, "we found that on sunny days depression-prone people actually become more depressed."
Traditionally made up of small low wattage, low voltage lamps in a track or translucent tube, these are rapidly being replaced with LED based versions.
It is used in photometry as a measure of the intensity, as perceived by the human eye, of light that hits or passes through a surface.
Tail and brake lights are red and emit light to the rear so as to reveal the vehicle's direction of travel to following drivers.
It is often beneficial to fight with the Sun or other light source behind you, giving your enemy disturbing visual glare and partially hiding your own movements in backlight.
Not only will greater reliance on natural light reduce energy consumption, but will favorably impact human health and performance.
The World Health Organization in 2007  issued a report that noted the effects of bright light on flora and fauna, sea turtle hatchlings, frogs during mating season and the migratory patterns of birds.
Light pollution is a growing problem in reaction to excess light being given off by numerous signs, houses, and buildings.
The American Medical Association warned on the use of high blue content white LEDs in street lighting, due to their higher impact on human health and environment, compared to low blue content light sources (e.g.
Sometimes security lighting can be used along roadways in urban areas, or behind homes or commercial facilities.
For a given light output, CFLs use between one fifth and one quarter the power of an equivalent incandescent lamp.
They can be used to control one lamp, one fixture or many fixtures.
For example, glare creates safety issues around buildings by causing very sharp shadows, temporarily blinding passersby making them vulnerable to would-be assailants.
Lamp types include:
The device measures activity and light together at regular time intervals and electronically stores and logs its operating temperature.
Circadian disruption may lead to numerous health problems including breast cancer, seasonal affective disorder, delayed sleep phase syndrome, and other ailments.
The gas mantle boosted the luminosity of utility lighting and of kerosene lanterns.
Daylighting is the oldest method of interior lighting.
In recent years light emitting diodes (LEDs) are becoming increasingly efficient leading to an extraordinary increase in the use of solid state lighting.
It is typically a floor lamp but may be wall-mounted like a sconce.
The most important functions are as a holder for the light source, to provide directed light and to avoid visual glare.
Designing school facilities to incorporate the right types of light at the right time of day for the right duration may improve student performance and well-being.
Chandeliers were an early form of "light fixture".
For critical inspection or color matching tasks, or for retail displays of food and clothing, the color temperature of the lamps will be selected for the best overall lighting effect.
Other forms include neon, which is not usually intended to illuminate anything else, but to actually be an artwork in itself.
The effect depends heavily on the exact type of lighting source used.
Not only does this disturb occupants, it can also reduce lamp life.
A downside is still the initial cost, which is higher than that of compact fluorescent lamps.
An incandescent bulb has a color temperature around 2800 to 3000 Kelvin; daylight is around 6400 Kelvin.
Visible light output is typically measured in lumens.
In a movie theater, steps in the aisles are usually marked with a row of small lights for convenience and safety, when the film has started and the other lights are off.
The illuminated ceiling was once popular in the 1960s and 1970s but fell out of favor after the 1980s.
The amount of useful light emitted from a source or the luminous flux is measured in lumen (lm).
Some are very plain and functional, while some are pieces of art in themselves.
If natural light is not present searchlights and flares can be used.
The cheaper, more efficient fuel began to drive whale oil out of the market.
It could be stored indefinitely unlike whale oil, which would eventually spoil.
These are extremely bright lights used to deter crime.
In addition to increased work performance, proper usage of windows and daylighting crosses the boundaries between pure aesthetics and overall health.
The Daysimeter can gather data for up to 30 days for analysis.
They lobby for and represent the interests of the industry at various levels, interacting with government and regulating bodies and presenting the case for the entertainment industry.
These technologies are helpful, but they do have their downfalls.
The human circadian system is entrained to a 24-hour light-dark pattern that mimics the earth’s natural light/dark pattern.
Each of these technologies has a different efficacy in converting electrical energy to visible light.
For example, in order to meet the expectations for good color rendering in retail applications, research suggests using the well-established CRI along with another metric called gamut area index (GAI).
