Dahlgren (1985) suggested there were in fact forty – not one – families distributed over three orders (predominantly Liliales and Asparagales).
''Fritillaria'' in particular contains steroidal alkaloids of the cevanine and solanum type.
''Gagea''  (including ''Lloydia'' ) – yellow star-of-Bethlehem
The seeds may be flat, oblong, angular, discoid, ellipsoid or globose (spherical), or compressed with a well developed epidermis.
Other leading producers include Japan, France and Poland.
The Netherland produces about 2,200 million lily bulbs annually, of which 96% is used domestically and the remainder exported, principally within the European Union.
Breeding programs have produced a wide range of tulip types, enabling blooming through a much longer season by creating early, mid- and late spring varieties.
The Liliaceae family are characterised as monocotyledonous, perennial, herbaceous, bulbous (or rhizomatous in the case of Medeoleae) flowering plants with simple trichomes (root hairs) and contractile roots.
it was during this period that the tulipiere, a ceramic vase for growing tulips indoors was devised, and the Golden Age of Dutch Painting was replete with images of tulips.
In Arabic letters, ''lale'' is written with the same letters as ''Allah'', and is used to denote God symbolically.
By the time of the next major British classification – that of Bentham and Hooker in 1883 (published in Latin) – several of Lindley's other families had already been absorbed into the Liliaceae.
''Fritillaria imperialis'', ''Fritillaria meleagris'') bulbs contain poisonous neurotoxic alkaloids such as imperialin (peiminine), which may be deadly if ingested in quantity, while other species such as Fritillaria camschatcensis and ''Fritillaria affinis'' are edible.
''Clintonia''  - bead lilies
''Erythronium'' is less common but a popular cultivar is 'Pagoda' with its sulphur yellow flowers.
By 1845, John Lindley, the first English systematist unhappily acknowledged the great diversity in the circumscription of the family, and that it had expanded vastly, with many subdivisions.
Bulb offsets and tissue culture produce genetic clones of the parent plant and thus maintaining genetic integrity of the cultivars.
; Flowers : Hermaphroditic, actinomorphic (radially symmetric) or slightly zygomorphic (bilaterally symmetric), pedicellate (on a short secondary stem), generally large and showy but may be inconspicuous : (Medeoleae).
Many of these countries export bulbs as well as supplying the domestic market.
However, the name 'lily' has historically been applied to a wide variety of plants other than the ''Lilium'' genus.
Cronquist merged the Liliaceae with the Amaryllidaceae, making this one of the largest monocotyledon families.
In modern times it appears in many forms, symbolic and decorative, and can be used on compasses to indicate the direction north, as well as the Scouting movement.
They also form a significant part of the cut flower market, in particular ''Tulipa'' and ''Lilium''.
Of the fifteen genera within the Liliaceae, the ten genera of the Lilioideae subfamily form one morphological group that is characterised by contractile bulbs and roots, and a Fritillaria-type embryo-sac (megagametophyte with four megaspores).
Many other botanists echoed Lindley's earlier concerns about the phylogeny of the Liliaceae, but various schemes to divide the family gained little traction.
The exterior may be smooth or roughened, with a wing or raphe (ridge), aril or one to two tails, rarely hairy, but may be dull or shiny and the lack of a black integument distinguishes them from related taxa such as Allioideae that were previously included in this family, and striate (parallel longitudinally ridged) in the Steptopoideae.
Tulips first appeared in the decorative arts in Turkey in the thirteenth century and flourished under the Ottomans, in particular in the royal palaces, and was adopted by the Osmans as their symbol.
to denote the broader or stricter sense of the circumscription respectively, e.g.
Nectar is produced in perigonal nectaries at the base of the tepals.
Bulb offsets usually require at least a year before flowering.
During World War II, starvation conditions in the Netherlands (''Hongerwinter'', hunger winter 1944) led to using ''Tulipa'' bulbs as food.
It has also been associated with the head of a spear.
Approximately ten countries produce lilies commercially altogether.
Another modern variety is 'Princess Irene'.
The aerial stem is unbranched.
The Liliaceae probably arose as shade plants, with subsequent evolution to open areas including deciduous forest in the more open autumnal period, but then a return of some species (e.g.
The latter are used, in turn, to meet the demand for bulbs for parks, gardens and home use and, secondly, to provide the necessary bulbs for cut flower production.
Their distribution is diverse, mainly in plains, steppes, and alpine meadows, but also in deciduous forests, Mediterranean scrub and arctic tundra.
Dogs may develop less serious effects such as gastrointestinal problems and central nervous system depression.
Artistic representations can be found as far back as frescos from the second century BC, at Amnisos and Knossos.
''Tulipa''  (including ''Amana'' ) – tulip
A major pest of Tulips is the fungus, ''Botrytis tulipae''.
One particularly important crop is the production of ''Lilium longiflorum'', whose white flowers are associated with purity and Easter.
Nevertheless, since then the tulip has become indelibly associated with the Netherlands and all things Dutch.
''Tulipa'' and ''Gagea'' provide examples of ornamental geophyte biomorphological types representing continental thermoperiodic zones (Irano-Turanian region), characterised by cessation of underground growth at high temperatures in early summer and requiring low winter temperatures for spring flowering.
The leaves are linear in shape, with their veins usually arranged parallel to the edges, single and arranged alternating on the stem, or in a rosette at the base.
''Calochortus'') and may be united into a tube.
Considerable progress in plant phylogeny and phylogenetic theory enabled a phylogenetic tree to be constructed for all of the flowering plants, as elaborated by the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (1998).
In addition to a very wide variety of heights, lilies can be obtained in many colours and combinations of colours, and if properly selected can produce an extensive blooming season from early summer to autumn.
Both the petals and sepals are usually similar and appear as two concentric groups (whorls) of 'petals', that are often striped or multi-coloured, and produce nectar at their bases.
The stamens are usually in two groups of three (trimerous) and the pollen has a single groove (monosulcate).
For instance ''Amana'' is still listed separately in WCSP.
There is a single style and a three lobed stigma or three stigmata more or less elongated along the style.
The diversity is also of considerable evolutionary significance, as some members emerged from shaded areas and adapted to a more open environment (see Evolution).
Contemporary tulip owners commonly had Rembrandt and other artists paint their flowers to preserve them for posterity, hence the 'broken' tulips were known as Rembrandt tulips at that time.
The stylised lily, or ''fleur-de-lis'' (lily flower) has long been associated with royalty, although it may originally have been derived from the form of an iris.
Chromosome numbers vary by genus.
; Androecium : Six stamens  in two trimerous whorls, with free filaments, usually epiphyllous (fused to tepals) and diplostemonous (outer whorl of stamens opposite outer tepals and the inner whorl opposite inner tepals), although ''Scoliopus'' has three stamens opposite the outer tepals.
''Calochortus nuttallii'', the sego lily, is the official state flower of Utah.
''Medeola''  - Indian cucumber-root
''Fritillaria'') or dichlamydeous (two separate and different whorls, e.g.
Although many ''Lilium'' species such as ''Lilium martagon'' and ''Lilium candidum'' can be obtained commercially, the majority of commercially available lilies represent the products of a very diverse hybridisation program, which has resulted in a separate horticultural classification, including such groupings as Asian, Oriental and Orienpet.
The development of a phylogenetic approach to taxonomy suggested the Liliales formed some of the earliest monocots.
As he saw it, the Liliaceae were already paraphyletic ("catch-all"), being all Liliales not included in the other orders, but hoped that the future would reveal some characteristic that would group them better.
The embryo is small (usually less than one quarter of seed volume), axile (radially sectioned), linear (longer than broad) or rarely rudimentary (tiny relative to endosperm) depending on placentation type, and straight, bent, curved or curled at the upper end.
Its cells are polyploid (triploid or pentaploid, depending on the embryo sac type).
The Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) made rapid progress in establishing a modern monophyletic classification of the flowering plants by 2009.
They are generally used in outdoor gardens and other displays, although in common with many bulbous flowering plants they are often induced to bloom indoors, particularly during the winter months.
Tulips spread rapidly across Europe in the seventeenth century, and became an important trading item, initially in France before concentrating in the Netherlands.
Today there are a number of places in Turkey called ''Laleli'' (‘with tulips’).
Lilieae  (synonyms: Erythroniaceae , Fritillariaceae , Liriaceae , Tulipaceae )
About half of the commercial production is for cut flowers.
Streptopoideae (synonym: Scoliopaceae )
Tulips were an essential part of the gardens of Persia, having been cultivated from the Steppes.
The tepals are usually petaloid (apotepalous) with lines (striate) or marks in other colors or shades.
While members of the Liliaceae ''s.s.''
; Leaves : Simple, entire (smooth and even), linear, oval to filiform (thread-like), mostly with parallel veins, but occasionally net-veined.
''Erythronium''  – trout lily
'', but generally there are about fifteen to sixteen genera, depending on whether or not ''Amana'' is included in ''Tulipa'' and ''Lloydia'' in ''Gagea''.
''Calochortus''   - mariposa, globe lilies
In the context of a general review of the classification of angiosperms, the Liliaceae were subjected to more intense scrutiny.
A number of Liliaceae genera are popular cultivated plants in private and public spaces.
The cultivation of lilies has been described since at least the ninth century, when Charlemagne ordered it to be grown at his imperial palaces.
Also fungi, viruses and vertebrate animals such as mice and deer.
These are referred to as species, or botanical, tulips, and tend to be smaller plants but better at naturalising than the cultivated forms.
Characteristics often vary by habitat, between shade-dwelling genera (such as ''Prosartes'', ''Tricyrtis'', ''Cardiocrinum'', ''Clintonia'', ''Medeola'', ''Prosartes'', and ''Scoliopus'') and sun loving genera.
First described in 1789, the lily family became a paraphyletic "catch-all" group of petaloid monocots that did not fit into other families and included a great number of genera now included in other families and in some cases in other orders.
The ovary is placed above the attachment of the other parts (superior).
Fourteen distinct types are available in addition to botanical tulips, including Lily-flowered, Fringed, Viridiflora and Rembrandt.
While some genera are shade-dwelling, such as the Medeoleae, and  Streptopoideae, ''Tricyrtis'', and ''Cardiocrinum'', others prefer a more open habitat.
Early Christian churches, such as that of the Basilica of Sant' Apollinare in Classe were sometimes decorated with lilies.
One of these varieties is known as 'Rembrandt', after the Dutch artist of that name.
''Scoliopus'', ''Erythronium and Gagea'') have seeds with an aril structure that are dispersed by ants (myrmecochory).
Shade-dwelling genera usually have broader leaves with smooth edges and net venation, and fleshy fruits (berries) with animal-dispersed seeds, rhizomes, and small, inconspicuous flowers while genera native to sunny habitats usually have narrow, parallel-veined leaves, capsular fruits with wind-dispersed seeds, bulbs, and large, visually conspicuous flowers.
Most species are grown from bulbs, although some have rhizomes.
The main producer of tulip bulbs is the Netherlands, a country that accounts for 87% of the global cultivated area, with approximately 12,000 hectares.
In addition to blooming season, tulip varieties differ in shape, and height, and exhibit a wide range of colours, both pure and in combination.
Original ''Tulipa'' species can be obtained for ornamental purposes, such as ''Tulipa tarda'' and ''Tulipa turkestanica''.
The Persian word for tulips, ''lâleh'' (), was borrowed into Turkish and Arabic as  ''lale''.
Various authorities (e.g.
The bulbs of ''Fritillaria roylei'' have been used as antipyretics and expectorants.
Lilies and tulips in particular have had considerable symbolic and decorative value, and appear frequently in paintings and the decorative arts.
Other members of the family used for food include ''Clintonia'' (leaves), ''Medeola'' (roots), ''Erythronium'' (corms), and ''Fritillaria'' (bulbs).
They are also an economically important product.
The lily family, '''Liliaceae''', consists of fifteen genera and about 705 known species (Christenhusz & Byng 2016 ) of flowering plants within the order Liliales.
have been used as food sources in humans, the bulbs of some species are poisonous to household pets (bulb toxicosis) if eaten and may cause serious complications, such as renal failure in cats from Lilies, particularly ''Lilium longiflorum'' (Easter Lily).
Liliaceae are widely distributed, mainly in temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere and the flowers are insect pollinated.
Within these genera a wide range of cultivars have been developed by breeding and hybridisation.
The lily appears in ancient literature associated with both sovereignty and virginal innocence, and is mentioned on a number of occasions in the Bible, such as the description in Solomon's Song of Songs (2, 1–2) "''I am a rose of Sharon, a lily of the valleys.
; Fruit : A capsule that is usually loculicidal (splitting along the locules) as in the Lilioideae, but occasionally septicidal (splitting between them, along the separating septa) in the Calachortoideae and wind dispersed, although the Medeoleae form berries (baccate).
While predominantly depicted as white, those seen at Akrotiri are red lilies.
''Lilium'' bulbs, particularly Lanzhou lily (''Lilium davidii'') are used as food in China and other parts of Asia.
Since interspecific cross-pollination occurs, overlapping wild populations can create natural hybrids.
The other major grouping consists of the five genera constituting the Streptopoideae (including ''Scoliopus'') and Calochortoideae (including  ''Tricyrtis'') subfamilies characterised by creeping rhizomes, styles which are divided at their apices, and by megagametophyte development of the ''Polygonum''-type (a simple megaspore and triploid endosperm) embryo-sac.
Major evolutionary clades include the Lilieae (''Lilium, Fritillaria, Nomocharis, Cardiocrinum, Notholirion'') from the Himalayas about 12&nbsp;mya and the Tulipeae (''Erythronium'', ''Tulipa'', ''Gagea'') from East Asia at about the same time.
Liliaceae fossils have been dated to the Paleogene and Cretaceous eras in the Antarctic.
subfamilies and tribes.
The family evolved approximately 52 million years ago during the Late Cretaceous to Early Paleogene eras.
He recognized  133 genera and 1200 species.
Seeds can be used for propagation of the plant or to create hybrids and can take five to eight years to produce flowering plants.
The genus name comes from the Classical Latin word ''lilium'', "lily", which in turn came from the Greek '''' ().
Tulips became widely used in decorative motifs on tiles, fabrics, and ceramics in Islamic art and the Ottoman Empire in particular, and were revered in poetry, such as that of Omar Khayan in the twelfth century.
By the sixteenth century it was a national symbol, hence the designation "Tulip era", by which time they were becoming of economic importance.
Methods of propagation include both sexual and asexual reproduction.
Other symbolic meanings include glory, love and birth.
Because of the history of Liliaceae, many species such as Watsonia (bugle lily) that were previously classified in this family bear the name 'lily' but are neither part of the genus ''Lilium'', or the Liliaceae family.
Currently the APWeb lists fifteen genera, arranged as shown in this table :
An important horticultural and garden pest is the scarlet lily beetle (Japanese red lily beetle, ''Lilioceris lilii'') and other Lilioceris species which attack ''Fritillaria'' and ''Lilium''.
The Liliaceae are ecologically diverse.
The Angiosperm Phylogeny Website (APweb) recognizes three subfamilies, one of which is divided into two tribes.
Due to the diversity of the originally broadly defined Liliaceae ''s.l.
Of the cut flowers, 57% are used for the domestic market in the Netherlands and the remainder exported.
Whatever its exact derivation, it has come to be associated with France and the French monarchy since the earliest Frankish kings.
These are also toxic to a variety of animals.
Although tulip festivals are held around the world in the spring, the most famous of these is the display at Keukenhof.
The closest sister family to the Liliaceae are the Smilacaceae with the Liliaceae separating 52 million years ago.
Tulip production has two main markets: cut flowers and bulb.
''Cardiocrinum''  - giant lilies
The viruses are transmitted by aphids.
They are alternate (single and alternating direction) and spiral, but may be whorled (three or more attached at one node, e.g.
Tulips (''Tulipa'') also have a long cultural tradition, particularly in the Islamic world.
''Fritillaria'' are also often used as floral emblems, for instance as the county flower of Oxfordshire, UK.
Particularly enigmatic were ''Clintonia'', ''Medeola'', ''Scoliopus'', and ''Tricyrtis''.
There are three fused carpels (syncarpus) with one to three chambers (locules), a single style and a three-lobed stigma.
To distinguish between them, the Latin terms ''sensu lato'' and ''sensu stricto'' are frequently used (together with their abbreviations, ''s.l.''
Common characteristics include large flowers with parts arranged in threes: with six colored or patterned petaloid tepals (undifferentiated petals and sepals) arranged in two whorls, six stamens and a superior ovary.
''Scoliopus''  – fetid adder's tongue
The embryo sac (megagametophyte) varies by genera, but is mainly tetrasporic (e.g.
Tulips can cause skin irritation due to the presence of tuliposides and tulipalins, which are also found in the flowers, leaves and stems of ''Fritillaria''.
This breaking effect was of economic importance during the tulip mania of the seventeenth century, because it appeared to be producing new varieties.
''Tricyrtis''  – toad lily
Its three parts have been associated with the three classes of mediaeval society, or alternatively faith, wisdom and chivalry.
The diversity of characteristics complicates any description of the Liliaceae morphology, and confused taxonomic classification for centuries.
The embryo sac is of the Fritillaria type.
The pollen is usually monosulcate (single groove), but may be inaperturate (lacking aperture: ''Clintonia'', some ''Tulipa'' spp.)
''Calochortus'' bulbs were eaten by Native Americans and  by the Mormon settlers in Utah during starvation.
The Liliaceae are widely distributed, but mainly in the temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere.
They are rarely petiolate (stem attached before apex), and lack stipules.
The type genus, Lily (''Lilium''), has a long history in literature and art, and a tradition of symbolism as well as becoming a popular female name, and a floral emblem, particularly of France (fleur-de-lis).
The leaves are generally simple and elongated with veins parallel to the edges, arranged singly and alternating on the stem, but may form a rosette at the base of the stem.
Most Fritillaria (e.g.
The centre of diversity is from southwest Asia to China.
Like a lily among thorns is my darling among the young women''" or the Gospel of Mathew (6, 28) "''Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin''" to represent beauty.
The hilum (scar) is generally inconspicuous.
''Calochortus'' (mariposa lily) may be sold as a mixture or as cultivars.
Embryo sacs in which three of the four megaspores fuse to form a triploid nucleus, are referred to as ''Fritillaria-type'', a characteristic shared by all the core Liliales.
''Streptopus''  – twistedstalk
Many Liliaceae are important ornamental plants, widely grown for their attractive flowers and involved in a major floriculture of cut flowers and dry bulbs.
Despite establishing this relative degree of monophyly (genetic homogeneity) for the Liliaceae family, their morphology remains diverse and there exists within the Liliaceae clade or grouping, a number of subclades (subgroups).
By contrast, the Netherlands is the leading international producer, to the extent of 4 billion bulbs per annum.
Molecular analysis indicates that divergence amongst the Liliales probably occurred around 82 million years ago.
Fritillaria extracts are used in traditional Chinese medicine under the name ''chuan bei mu'', and in Latin, ''bulbus fritillariae cirrhosae''.
The attachment of the anthers to the filaments may be either peltate (to the surface) or pseudo-basifixed (surrounding the filament tip, but not adnate, that is not fused) and dehisce longitudinally and are extrorse (dehiscing away from center).
The Liliaceae family was described by Michel Adanson in 1763 and formally named by Antoine Laurent de Jussieu in 1789.
), and reticulate (net patterned: ''Erythronium'', ''Fritillaria'', ''Gagea'', ''Lilium'', ''Tulipa'').
Liliaceae are subject to a wide variety of diseases and pests, including insects, such as thrips, aphids, beetles and flies.
Over time the Liliaceae became increasingly broadly, and somewhat arbitrarily defined as all species of plants with six tepals and a superior ovary, eventually coming to encompass about 300 genera and 4,500 species, within the order Liliales in the Cronquist system (1981).
''Lilium'' species may be food plants for the Cosmia trapezina moth.
'', many attempts have been made to form suprageneric classifications, e.g.
or operculate (lidded: ''Fritillaria'', some ''Tulipa'' spp.
Species of Liliaceae bloom at various times from spring to late summer.
Calochortoideae  (synonyms: Calochortaceae , Compsoaceae , Tricyrtidaceae )
The perianth is undifferentiated (perigonium) and biseriate (two whorled), formed from six tepals arranged into two separate whorls of three parts (trimerous) each, although ''Scoliopus'' has only three petals, free from the other parts, but overlapping.
The colorful flowers produce large amounts of nectar and pollen that attract insects which pollinate them (entomophily), particularly bees and wasps (hymenopterophily), butterflies (psychophily) and moths (phalaenophily).
Some species are poisonous if eaten and can have adverse health effects in humans and household pets.
There are numerous anatropous (curved) ovules which display axile placentation (parietal in ''Scoliopus'' and ''Medeola''), usually with an integument and thinner megasporangium.
The taxonomy of the Liliaceae has a very complex history.
Bracts may (bracteate) or may not (ebracteate) be present.
Modern taxonomic systems, such as the APG which is based on phylogenetic principles using molecular biology, have redistributed many of these genera resulting in the relatively small family that is currently recognised.
Plants in this family have evolved with a fair amount of morphological diversity despite genetic similarity.
Eventually speculative trading in tulips became so intense as to cause a financial bubble which eventually collapsed, a period known as tulip mania (tulipomania), from 1634 to 1637, similar to the Ottoman Empire's Tulip era.
Commercial cultivars are usually sterile.
The family was first described in the eighteenth century, and over time many other genera were added until it became one of the largest of the monocotyledon families, and also extremely diverse.
The perianth is either homochlamydeous (all tepals equal, e.g.
Approximately ten other countries produce commercial tulips, largely for the domestic market.
The name "Liliaceae" () comes to international scientific vocabulary from New Latin, from ''Lilium'', the type genus, + ''-aceae'', a standardized suffix for plant family names in modern taxonomy.
By 1562 the tulip trade had reached Europe with the first shipment to Antwerp, where they were mistaken for vegetables,  although they had been cultivated in Portugal since 1530, and first appeared in illustration in 1559, and the first tulip flowers were seen in the Netherlands in 1625.
A well-known example is Leonardo da Vinci's ''Annunciation'' (1472–1475) in which the archangel Gabriel bears a Madonna lily.
''Tulipa '' contains Tulipanin, an anthrocyanin.
They are monocotyledonous, perennial, herbaceous, often bulbous geophytes.
The largest genera are ''Gagea'' (200), ''Fritillaria'' (130), ''Lilium'' (110), and ''Tulipa'' (75 species), all within the Lilieae tribe.
