With the withdrawal of royal favour, creditors closed in.
Langtry is a featured character in the play ''Sherlock Holmes and the Case of the Jersey Lily'' by Katie Forgette.
In 1881, Lillie was in need of money.
The two saw one another at social gatherings or in brief private encounters.
He died a few months later in an asylum, after being found in a demented condition at a railway station.
While the critics generally condemned her interpretations of roles such as Pauline in ''The Lady of Lyons'' or Rosalind in ''As You Like It,'' the public loved her.
He owned it until his death on board in Cannes, France in 1900.
Today the buildings retain their period appearance, but modifications and additions have been made, and the complex is now multi-occupancy.
Although remaining friends with the Prince, Lillie Langtry's physical relationship with him ended when she became pregnant, probably by her old friend Arthur Jones with whom she went to Paris for the birth of the child, Jeanne Marie, in March 1881.
Langtry was a cousin of local politician Philip Le Breton, pioneer for the preservation of Hampstead Heath.
She moved her training to Sam Pickering’s stables at Kentford House and took Regal Lodge as a residence in the village of Kentford, near Newmarket.
She arrived by ship in October 1882 to be met by the press and Oscar Wilde, who was in New York on a lecture tour.
Langtry died in Monaco at dawn 12 February 1929.
Annis had previously played Langtry in two episodes of ATV's ''Edward the Seventh''.
Following favorable reviews of this first attempt at the stage, and with further coaching, Langtry made her debut before the London public, playing Kate Hardcastle in ''She Stoops to Conquer'' at the Haymarket Theatre in December 1881.
Langtry found mentors in Captain James Octavius Machell and Joe Thompson, who provided guidance on all matters related to the turf.
Their father was the Dean of Jersey, but he earned an unsavoury reputation because of several extramarital affairs.
She sold it in 1906.
Lillie Langtry lived at 21 Pont Street, London from 1892 to 1897.
She died on 13 October 2010 at the age of 92.
An imported horse from New Zealand called Uniform, won the Lewes Handicap for her.
Langtry had a dwelling in Alexandra Road called Leighton House, possibly demolished in the 1970s to make way for the Alexandra Road Estate.
During her travels in the United States, Langtry became an American citizen and on May 13, 1897, divorced her husband, Edward Langtry, in Lakeport, California.
She first tried out for an amateur production in the Twickenham Town Hall on 19 November 1881.
File:Woodend photograph.jpg|De Bathe property sale 1919 Woodend photograph
They divorced in the late 1930's.
The affair lasted from late 1877 to June 1880.
Gebhard's father died when he was 5 years old and his mother died when he was about 10.
“It was through Lord Raneleigh sic and the painter Frank Miles that I was first introduced to London society...
She became much sought-after in London society, and invitations flooded in.
She at first demurred, but others at the table advised her to accept, as this horse was a very fine prospect.
After a few years, she gave up attempts to breed blood-stock.
Due to blizzards, transport was delayed.
She also sat for Sir Edward Poynter and is depicted in works by Sir Edward Burne-Jones.
He was named for St. Saviour's Church in Jersey.
From about 1886 to 1894 she owned a house in New York at 362 West 23rd Street, a gift from Frederick Gebhard.
Although from 1895 the building was operated as the Cadogan Hotel, she would stay in her former bedroom there.
In April 1879, Langtry had an affair with Prince Louis of Battenberg, while she was involved with Arthur Clarence Jones (1854–1930), an old friend.
She is remembered in the area in the name of Langtry Walk and a local pub.
On 6 March 1874, 20-year-old Lillie married 30-year-old Irish landowner Edward Langtry, a widower, who had been married to Jane Frances Price.
Eventually, they rented an apartment in Eaton Place, Belgravia, London before moving to 17 Norfolk Street off Park Lane.
Then Mr Miles came and begged me to sit for my portrait.
A blue plaque (which erroneously states that she was born in 1852) on the hotel commemorates this, and the hotel's restaurant is named 'Langtry's' in her honour.
Later that year, she made her final appearance in the theatre in London.
The building is a short distance from Baird's original race horse breeding establishment, which has since been renamed Meddler Stud.
The Prince of Wales, Albert Edward ("Bertie", later Edward VII), arranged to sit next to Langtry at a dinner party given by Sir Allen Young on May 24, 1877.
In this work, she is blackmailed over her past relationship with the Prince of Wales, with intimate letters as proof.
In 1903, she starred in the US in ''The Crossways,'' written by her in collaboration with J. Hartley Manners.
Jean (Barbara Stanwyck) begins to describe, comment, and anticipate the events that we see reflected in her hand mirror.
She was also known for her relationships with noblemen, including the Prince of Wales, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Prince Louis of Battenberg.
They married after the death of Sir Henry's father in 1870, and Hugo was their first son born in wedlock – making him heir to the baronetcy.
Langtry was wealthy enough to own a yacht, and Lillie insisted that he take her away from the Channel Islands.
They eloped to Gretna Green and, in 1842, married at Chelsea.
In June of that year Edward Langtry issued a statement giving his side of the story, which was published in the ''New York Journal.''
Pictures of the funeral may be viewed at http://www.theislandwiki.org/index.php/Lillie_Langtry
I learned afterwards that he saw me one evening at the theatre, and tried in vain to discover who I was.
The Prince of Wales gave her a sum of money, and Langtry went into her confinement in Paris, accompanied by Arthur Jones.
In July 1879, Langtry began an affair with the Earl of Shrewsbury; in January 1880, Langtry and the earl were planning to run away together.
Critical opinion was mixed, but she was a success with the public.
During her final years, Langtry, as Lady de Bathe, resided in Monaco whilst her husband, Sir Hugo de Bathe, lived in Vence, Alpes Maritimes.
Her husband was not the father; she led Prince Louis to believe that he was.
She had asked to be buried in her parents' tomb at St. Saviour's Church in Jersey.
In later life she performed "dramatic sketches" in vaudeville.
Langtry later had a second Cesarewitch winner with Yentoi, and a third place with Raytoi.
There are a pair of bars in New York City devoted to the memory of Lillie Langtry, operating under the title Lillie's Victorian Establishment.
Her first appearance was eagerly anticipated, but the theatre burnt down the night before the opening; the show moved to another venue and opened the following week.
The Langtrys' finances were not equal to their lifestyle.
Another guest, Sir John Everett Millais, also a Jersey native, eventually painted her portrait.
She was the sister of Elizabeth Frances Price, who had married Lillie's brother William.
In 1902/3 the yacht was recorded in the Lloyd's Yacht Register as being owned by shipbuilder William Cresswell Gray, Tunstall Manor, West Hartlepool, and remained so until 1915.
Langtry is used as a touchstone for old-fashioned manners in Preston Sturges's comedy ''The Lady Eve'' (1941), in a scene where a corpulent woman drops a handkerchief on the floor and the hero ignores it.
One of the houses on the site is named ''Langtry'' and another ''Hardy.''
In the autumn of 1879, rumours were published in ''Town Talk'' that her husband would divorce her and cite, among others, the Prince of Wales as co-respondent.
He went to his clubs and among his artist friends declaring he had seen a beauty, and he described me to everybody he knew, until one day one of his friends met me and he was duly introduced.
Rolling down an  embankment, it burst into flames.
Langtry is a featured character in the "tongue-in-cheek" western novel, ''Slocum and the Jersey Lily'' by Jake Logan.
In 1902, Jeanne Marie married the Scottish politician, Sir Ian Malcolm at St Margaret's, Westminster.
Langtry and Baird met at a race course when he gave her a betting tip and the stake money to place on the horse.
In her memoirs Langtry says that she first met Gladstone when she was posing for her portrait at Millais' studio.
When Baird died, Langtry purchased two of his horses, Lady Rosebery and Studley Royal, at the estate dispersal sale.
Eventually, a cordial relationship developed between Langtry and Princess Alexandra.
Gladstone’s son Herbert Gladstone wrote a letter calling Wright a liar, a coward and a fool; Wright sued him.
He and his sister, Isabelle, were raised by a guardian, paternal uncle William H Gebhard.
These were compulsory purchased from her in 1928 under the Northern Ireland Land Act, 1925.
Baird’s father had died when he was a young boy, leaving him a fortune in trust.
In her will, Langtry left £2,000 to a young man that she had become fond of in later life named Charles Louis D'Albani; the son of a Newmarket solicitor, he was born in about 1891.
When Hugo de Bathe became the 5th Baronet, he inherited properties in Sussex, Devon and Ireland; those in Sussex were in the hamlet of West Stoke near Chichester.
In 1925, Captain Peter Emmanuel Wright published a book called ''Portraits and Criticisms''.
In 1911 he had been engaged to author Katherine Cecil Thurston, who died before they could marry; she had already changed her will in favour of Bulkeley Gavin.
Told of a good horse for sale in Australia called Merman, she purchased it and had it shipped to England; such shipments were risky and she had a previous bad experience with a horse arriving injured (Maluma).
File:Woodend details.jpg|De Bathe property sale 1919 Woodend details
Among the most enthusiastic of these was Mr Frank Miles, the artist.
In December of that year de Bathe volunteered to join the British forces fighting the Boer War in South Africa, and he was assigned to the Robert’s Horse mounted brigade as a lieutenant.
Other trainers used by Langtry were Jack Robinson,  who trained at Foxhill in Wiltshire, and a very young Fred Darling whose first big success was Yentoi's 1908 Caesarwitch.
Langtry is a featured character in the fictional ''The Flashman Papers'' novels of acclaimed writer George Macdonald Fraser, in which she is noted as a former lover of arch cad Harry Flashman.
She was presented to the Prince's mother, Queen Victoria.
The de Bathe properties were all sold in 1919, the same year that Lady de Bathe sold ''Regal Lodge''.
Prince Louis' son, Earl Mountbatten of Burma, had always maintained that his father was the father of Jeanne Marie.
Although the Prince was married to Princess Alexandra and had six children, he was a well-known philanderer.
In contrast to most women's more elaborate clothing, she wore a simple black dress (which was to become her trademark) and no jewellery.
His paternal grandfather, Dutchman Frederick Gebhard, came to New York in 1800 and developed a mercantile business that expanded into banking and railroad stocks.
In an interview published in several newspapers (including the ''Brisbane Herald'') in 1882, Lillie Langtry said:
From 1900 to 1903, with financial support from Edgar Cohen, Langtry became the lessee and manager of London's Imperial Theatre, opening on the 21 April 1901 after an extensive refit.
When she died, William was her last surviving brother.
Her close friend Oscar Wilde suggested she try the stage, and Lillie embarked upon a theatre career.
In 1888, Langtry became a property owner in America when she purchased a winery with an area of  in Lake County, California, which produced red wine.
William Corbet Le Breton and his wife Emilie Davis (née Martin), who was known for her beauty.
When the prince told his parents, they had him assigned to the warship HMS ''Inconstant''.
After her return from New York in 1883, Langtry registered at the Conservatoire in Paris for six weeks' intensive training to improve her acting technique.
Malcolm remarried in 1942 to an American, Mary Ellery Channing.
In October 1880, Langtry sold many of her possessions to meet her debts, allowing Edward Langtry to avoid a declaration of bankruptcy.
Eventually, her production company started a coast-to-coast tour of the USA, ending in May 1883 with a “fat profit.” Before leaving New York, she had an acrimonious break with Henrietta Labouchere  over Langtry's relationship with Frederick Gebhard, a wealthy young American.
Langtry's closest companion during her time in Monaco was her friend, Mathilde Marie Peate, the widow of her butler.
One of their ancestors was Richard le Breton, one of the reputed assassins in 1170 of Thomas Becket.
A verdict of accidental death was returned at the inquest.
They divorced in 1901.
A letter of condolence later written by Langtry to another widow reads in part, "I too have lost a husband, but alas!
These were: ''Woodend'', 17 bedrooms set in 71 acres; ''Hollandsfield'', 10 bedrooms set in 52 acres and ''Balsom’s Farm'' of 206 acres.
Langtry's nickname, the "Jersey Lily," was taken from the Jersey lily flower (''Amaryllis belladonna''), a symbol of Jersey.
She figures prominently in ''Death at Epsom Downs'' by Robin Paige, the pseudonym of Bill and Susan Wittig Albert, who wrote a series of Victorian novels based on historic people.
For some time, the Prince saw little of Langtry.
Cause of death was probably due to a brain haemorrhage after a fall during on a steamer crossing from Belfast to Liverpool.
She was still under the tutelage of Henrietta Labouchere.
She, along with friend Oscar Wilde, employ Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson to investigate the matter.
She also left £1,000 to Dr A. T. Bulkeley Gavin of 5 Berkeley Square, London, a physician and surgeon who treated wealthy patients.
After the divorce from her husband, Langtry was linked in the popular press to Prince Louis Esterhazy; they shared time together and both had an interest in horse racing.
Labouchere had been a professional actress (Henrietta Hodson) before she met and married Liberal MP Henry Labouchere.
In addition, he inherited the estates of two equally wealthy uncles who had died childless.
She had originally been named ''Ladye Mabel''.
Although her affair with the Prince of Wales was over, he supported her new venture by attending several of her performances and helping attract an audience.
In 1905 he married Marie Wilson; he died in 1910.
She next performed in ''Ours'' at the same theatre.
Bearing the Langtry Farms name, the winery and vineyard are still in operation in Middletown, California.
(According to tradition, the two Jersey natives spoke Jèrriais to each other during the sittings.)
Her first tour of the United States (accompanied by Gebhard) was an enormous success, which she repeated in subsequent years.
The song "Lily Langtry" is included in a few albums by the folk group, New Christy Minstrels.
For nearly a decade, from 1882 to 1891, Langtry had a relationship with the American Frederick Gebhard, described as a young clubman, sportsman, horse owner, and admirer of feminine beauty, both on and off the stage.
The horse won several races under Langtry’s colours; he was registered to “Mr Jersey” (women were excluded from registering horses at this time).
Another railcar was transporting 17 of their horses when it derailed at Shohola, Pennsylvania at 1:40 am.
By 1881, she had become an actress and starred in many plays, including ''She Stoops to Conquer'', ''The Lady of Lyons'', and ''As You Like It'', eventually running her own stage production company.
One person died in the fire, along with Gebhard's champion runner Eole and 14 racehorses belonging to him and Langtry.
The wedding between Langtry and de Bathe took place in St Saviour’s Church, Jersey, on July 27, 1899, with Langtry's daughter being the only other person present, apart from the officials.
The nickname was popularised by Millais' portrait, entitled ''A Jersey Lily''.
He told her, "In your professional career, you will receive attacks, personal and critical, just and unjust.
In 1889, she took on the part of Lady Macbeth in Shakespeare's ''Macbeth.''
Judge Roy Bean, a famous American frontier admirer, was played by Walter Brennan in the former and Paul Newman in the latter film, both times as a man with a lifelong obsession with the beauty.
When Gebhard began his relationship with Langtry, he was 22 and she was 29.
Merman was regarded as one of the best “stayers”; he eventually went on to win the Lewes Handicap, the Cesarewitch, Jockey Club Cup, Goodwood Stakes, Goodwood Cup, and Ascot Gold Cup (with Tod Sloan up).
He inherited wealth from his grandfather, who with seven of his sons, had developed and prospered from coal and iron workings.
Following this the Lloyd's Register records that she became adapted as French trawler ''La Champagne'' based in Fécamp; she was broken up in 1935.
After Langtry's death, he remarried on November 26, 1931 in Corsica, to Deborah Warschowsk Henius, a Danish lady.
Langtry was portrayed holding a Guernsey lily (''Nerine sarniensis'') in the painting rather than a Jersey lily, as none of the latter was available during the sittings.
Langtry owned a stud at Gazely, Newmarket.
Born in 1853 as '''Emilie Charlotte Le Breton,''' Langtry was the only daughter of Rev.
''Woodend'' was retained as the de Bathe residence whilst the smaller ''Hollandsfield'' was let.
They were later friends and he became a mentor to her.
In it, he claimed that Gladstone had numerous extramarital affairs, including one with Langtry.
From that time I was invited everywhere and made a great deal of by many members of the royal family and nobility.
The horse won and, at a later luncheon party, Baird also offered her the gift of a horse named Milford.
On August 13, 1888, Langtry and Gebhard traveled in her private car attached to an Erie Railroad express train bound for Chicago.
It was a comedy two-hander called ''A Fair Encounter,'' with Henrietta Labouchere taking the other role and coaching Langtry in her acting.
Flashman describes her as one of his few true loves.
He remained fond of her and spoke well of her in her later career as a theatre actress; he used his power to help and encourage her.
This was where Langtry's father had been rector and where she chose to be buried at her death.
Regal Lodge had been her home for twenty-three years and received many celebrated guests, not least the Prince of Wales.
Jenny Seagrove played her in the 1991 made-for-television film ''Incident at Victoria Falls''.
Bear them, never reply, and, above all, never rush into print to explain or defend yourself".
Jeanne Marie's second son, Victor Neill Malcolm, married English actress Ann Todd.
Langtry's life story has been portrayed in film numerous times.
They lived together and seven of their children were born out of wedlock.
Langtry left Peate £10,000, the Monaco property known as ''Villa le Lys'', clothes, and Langtry's motor car.
American impresario Henry Abbey arranged a tour in the United States for Langtry.
He wrote separately about Mrs Cornwallis-West, which resulted in her husband suing him for libel.
Lord Raneleigh, a friend of her father and her sister-in-law, invited Lillie Langtry to a high-society reception, at which she attracted notice for her beauty and wit.
Two horses survived the wreck, including  St. Saviour, full brother to Eole.
Her coffin lay in St. Saviour's overnight surrounded by flowers, and she was buried on the afternoon of 23 February.
It was sold at auction to John Lawson Johnston, the creator of Bovril.
I went to London and was brought out by my friends.
Langtry owned a luxury steam auxiliary yacht called ''White Ladye'' from 1891 to 1897.
Lillian Bond played her in ''The Westerner'' (1940), and Ava Gardner in ''The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean'' (1972).
File:Hollandsfield Details.jpg|De Bathe property sale 1919 Hollandsfield details
The painting caused great interest when exhibited at the Royal Academy.
Langtry became involved in a relationship with Baird, from 1891 until his death in March 1893.
Her daughter Mary Malcolm was one of the first two female announcers on the BBC Television Service (now BBC One) from 1948 to 1956.
After Frank Miles I sat for portraits to Millais and Burne-Jones and now Frith is putting my face in one of his great pictures."
In June 1880, she became pregnant.
Despite speculation, Langtry and Gebhard never married.
When his wife Emilie finally left him in 1880, he left Jersey.
The discovery in 1978 of Langtry's passionate letters to Arthur Jones and their publication by Laura Beatty in 1999 support the idea that Jones was the father of her daughter.
This was passed after the Partition of Ireland, with the purpose of the government taking ownership of property from the landlords and transferring it to tenants.
Gebhard's wealth was inherited; his maternal grandfather Thomas E. Davis was one of the wealthiest New York real estate owners of the period.
File:De Bathe property sale.jpg|De Bathe property sale 1919 - Sussex properties
He became infatuated with Langtry, and she soon became his semi-official mistress.
File:Hollandsfield.jpg|De Bathe property sale 1919  Hollandsfield photograph
I consented, and when the portrait was finished he sold it to Prince Leopold.
She had 3 masts, was 204 feet in length and 27 in breadth and was powered by a 142&nbsp;hp steam engine.
Langtry continued to have involvement with her husband's Irish properties after his death.
Her French governess was unable to manage her, so Lillie was educated by her brothers' tutor.
She was the subject of widespread public and media interest.
Her ownership of land in America was introduced in evidence at her divorce to help demonstrate to the judge that she was a citizen of the country.
