Barranco, which borders Miraflores by the Pacific Ocean, is the city's bohemian district, home or once home of writers and intellectuals including Mario Vargas Llosa, Chabuca Granda and Alfredo Bryce Echenique.
In Lima, the dropout rate in elementary is 1.3% and 5.7% in high school, while the national average is 1.2% in elementary and 8.3% in high school.
The financial district is in San Isidro, while much of the industrial activity takes place west of downtown, extending to the airport in Callao.
After independence, Lima became the capital of the Republic of Peru but economic stagnation and political turmoil brought urban development to a halt.
The  Proyecto Especial Metropolitano de Transporte No Motorizado (PEMTNM) estimates that more than a million and a half people used the bike lanes in 2012.
Each wagon has the capacity to transport 233 people.
Scores are grouped in three levels: Below level 1 means that students were not able to respond to even the most simple questions; level 1 means the students did not achieve the expected level in skills but could respond to simple questions; and level 2 means they achieved/exceeded the expected skills for their grade level.
Larcomar, a popular shopping mall and entertainment center built on cliffs overlooking the Pacific Ocean, featuring bars, dance clubs, movie theaters, cafes, shops, boutiques and galleries, is also located in this district.
Callao hosts nearly all maritime transport for the metropolitan area.
Modern scholars speculate that the word "Lima" originated as the Spanish pronunciation of the native name Limaq.
27867 of the Law of Regional Governments enacted on 16 November 2002, 87 The previous political organization remains in the sense that a Governor is the political authority for the department and the city.
Pachacútec in Villa María del Triunfo and then to Av.
During the 1960s, the brutalist style began appearing in Lima due to the military government of Juan Velasco Alvarado.
This is because ''voseo'' was primarily used by Spain's lower socioeconomic classes, a social group that did not begin to appear in Lima until the late colonial era.
The system is unorganized and is characterized by its informality.
The city performs much better than the national average in both disciplines.
In 2006, the Lima Stock Exchange was the world's most profitable.
Lima suffers most from air pollution.
Even though the results for Math are lower than for reading, in both subject areas performance increased in 2012 over 2011.
Most foreign companies in Peru settled in Lima.
The average years of schooling in the city is 11.1 years (11.4 for men and 10.9 for women).
The recommended limit of these particles by the World Health Organization is 5 tons/km2/month.
Lima has only 1284 hours of sunshine a year, 28.6 hours in July and 184 hours in April, which is exceptionally little for the latitude.
Limean Spanish is distinguished by its clarity in comparison to other Latin American accents and has been influenced by immigrant groups including Italians, Andalusians, West Africans, Chinese and Japanese.
Insurance corporations based in Lima include Rimac Seguros, Mapfre Peru, Interseguro, Pacifico, Protecta and La Positiva.
Lima has one of the country's highest levels of enrollment in high school and preschool.
In February 2014, Lima recorded an average of 15.2 tons/km2.
Following the Peruvian War of Independence, it became the capital of the Republic of Peru.
Lima has, by far, the largest ethnic Chinese community in Latin America.
The Callao seaport is one of the main fishing and commerce ports in South America, covering over  and shipping 20.7 million metric tons of cargo in 2007.
*The Central Highway () connects the eastern districts and with cities in central Peru.
The five districts with the lowest perception of insecurity are San Isidro, San Borja, Miraflores, La Molina and Jesus Maria.
In 2012, each resident produced  of solid waste.
It begins in the Industrial Park of Villa El Salvador, south of the city, continuing on to Av.
The first phase of this project has  of line (north) to Chorrillos (south).
The functions of this authority are mostly police and military.
Lima is home to the headquarters of the Andean Community of Nations, along with other regional and international organizations.
The city and (metropolitan area) represents around 29% of the national population.
The new migrants, at first confined to slums in downtown Lima, led this expansion through large-scale land invasions, which evolved into shanty towns, known as ''pueblos jóvenes''.
The highway extends  to the border with Chile.
In the 21st century, its restaurants became recognized internationally.
Throughout the colonial era, most of the Spanish nobility based in Lima were originally from Castile.
The upscale San Isidro District is the city's financial center.
The number of private schools is much greater than public schools (6,242 vs 1,805) while the average size of private schools is 100 for elementary and 130 for high school.
The test assesses skills in reading comprehension and math.
A trip through the central district visits churches dating from the 16th and 17th centuries, the most noteworthy of which are the Cathedral and the Monastery of San Francisco, said to be connected by subterranean catacombs.
The city center is located  inland at the shore of the Rímac River, a vital resource for the city, since it carries what will become drinking water for its inhabitants and fuels the hydroelectric dams that provide electricity to the area.
Temperatures rarely fall below  or rise above .
The Judicial branch is headquartered in the Palace of Justice and is home to the Supreme Court of Peru.
It is a regional headquarters to Standard Chartered.
Los Héroes in San Juan de Miraflores.
Products include textiles, clothing and food.
With a municipal population of 8,852,000 and 9,752,000 for the metropolitan area and a population density of  .
Lima possesses five other airports: the Las Palmas Air Force Base, Collique Airport and runways in Santa María del Mar, San Bartolo and Chilca.
The Palace of Justice in Lima is seat of the Supreme Court of Justice the highest judicial court in Peru with jurisdiction over the entire territory of Peru.
While the Police force is nationally controlled and funded, each district in Lima has a community policing structure called Serenazgo.
According to INEI, by mid 2014 the age distribution in Lima was: 24.3% between 0 and 14, 27.2% between 15 and 29, 22.5% between 30 and 44, 15.4% between 45 and 59 and 10.6% above 60.
The society, called APEGA, gathered chefs, nutritionists, institutes for gastronomical training, restaurant owners, chefs and cooks, researchers and journalists.
However, the city was not free from dangers; the presence of pirates and privateers in the Pacific Ocean lead to the building of the Walls of Lima between 1684 and 1687.
It is heavily influenced by Castilian Spanish.
Both  contain paintings, Sevilian tile and sculpted wood furnishings.
Asians, especially of Chinese (Cantonese) and Japanese descent, came mostly in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
Lima is headquarters to banks such as Banco de Crédito del Perú, Scotiabank Perú, Interbank, Bank of the Nation, Banco Continental, MiBanco, Banco Interamericano de Finanzas, Banco Finaciero, Banco de Comercio and CrediScotia.
For example, Villa Maria del Triunfo has 5,785 citizens per official.
The largest areas are Lima Norte with 2,475,432 people and Lima Este with 2,619,814 people, including the largest single district San Juan de Lurigancho, which hosts 1 million people.
Two distinct seasons can be identified: summer, from December through April; and winter from June through October.
Metropolitana is the first BRT system to operate with natural gas, seeking to reduce air pollution.
Many government buildings and major cultural institutions were constructed in this period.
The dropout rate for Lima is lower than the national average, except for elementary school, which is higher.
These are locally called 'garúa', 'llovizna' or 'camanchacas'.
Lima has high traffic congestion, especially at peak hours.
In 2007, the Peruvian economy grew 9%, the largest growth rate in South America.
The region operates 65.3% of the cars in the country.
Lima is a major stop on the Pan-American Highway.
A combined expedition of Argentine and Chilean patriots under General José de San Martín landed south of Lima in 1820 but did not attack the city.
*The Southern Panamerican Highway connects the southern districts and to cities on the southern coast.
Lima was founded by Spanish conquistador Francisco Pizarro on January 18, 1535, as ''Ciudad de los Reyes''.
Examples of early colonial architecture include the Monastery of San Francisco, the Cathedral and and the Torre Tagle Palace.
Immigrants influenced Peruvian cuisine, with Italians in particular exerting a strong influence in the Miraflores and San Isidro areas with their ''trattorias''.
A small port in Lurín serves oil tankers due to a nearby refinery.
Another inactive line runs from Lima northwards to the city of Huacho.
Fares average one sol or .
The most densely populated districts lie in the northern and southern ends of the city (Spanish: Cono Norte and Cono Sur, respectively) and they are mostly composed of Andean immigrants who arrived during the mid- and late- 20th century looking for a better life and economic opportunity, or as refugees of the country's internal conflict with the Shining Path during the late 1980s and early 1990s.
UGEL 07 had 60.8% students achieving level 2 in reading comprehension and 28.6% students achieving level 2 in Math.
In early childhood, the enrollment level in Lima is 84.7%, while the national average is 74.5%.
Lima has a vibrant and active theater scene, including classic theater, cultural presentations, modern theater, experimental theater, dramas, dance performances and theater for children.
Air temperatures rise accordingly.
Because they are located at a higher elevation than Lima, they receive more sunshine in winter months, something that the city and frequently lacks under seasonal fog.
This district has acclaimed restaurants, music venues called "peñas" featuring the traditional folk music of coastal Peru (in Spanish, "música criolla") and beautiful Victorian-style chalets.
This system links the principal points of the Lima Metropolitan Area.
Lima cuisines include Creole food, Chifas, Cebicherias and Pollerias.
Recreational bike lanes can be found in 39 districts.
The three regions that supply most of the migrants are Junin, Ancash and Ayacucho.
In many cases they are just a private car with a taxi sticker on the windshield.
Since 2014, Lima Council operates the "Sistema Integrado de Transporte Urbano" (Urban integrated transport system), which comprises buses over Avenida Arequipa.
The Museum of Italian Art shows European art.
Lima Sur is the area in Lima with the highest proportion of poverty (17.7%), followed by Lima Este (14.5%), Lima Norte (14.1%) and Lima Centro (6.2%).
At the same time, angry mobs attacked wealthy citizens and the Asian population; sacking their properties and businesses.
Weekday use averages 437,148 passengers.
Due to the judicial organization of Peru, the highest concentration of courts is located in Lima despite the fact that its judicial district has jurisdiction over only 35 of the 43 districts.
*The Northern Panamerican Highway extends more than  to the border with Ecuador connecting the northern districts and with many major cities along the northern Peruvian coast.
The districts with the highest perception of insecurity are Rimac, San Juan de Miraflores, La Victoria, Comas and Ate.
Such was the case when Lima hit its all-time record high of .
Its population features a complex mix of racial and ethnic groups.
These values increased 15.9% and 33.3% in iron and cadmium with respect to January 2013 and a decrease of 16.7% and 12.4% in lead and aluminum.
99.6% of homes have grid electric service.
In 2014, the National Institute for Statistics and Information (Instituto Nacional de Estadistica e Informatica) reported that the population in Lima's 49 districts was 9,752,000 people, including the Constitutional Province of Callao.
However, the war was not over; in the next two years the city changed hands several times.
This judicial district has jurisdiction over the remaining eight districts, all located in northern Lima.
The highest satisfaction rates can be found in San Isidro (88.3%), Miraflores (81.6%), San Borja (77%) and Surco (75%).
At the start of this period, the urban area was confined to a triangular area bounded by the city's historic centre, Callao and Chorrillos; in the following decades settlements spread to the north, beyond the Rímac River, to the east, along the Central Highway and to the south.
The Lima Stock Exchange rose 185.24% in 2006 and in 2007 by another 168.3%, making it then one of the fastest growing stock exchanges in the world.
The two districts with the highest concentration of sedimentary dust are El Agustino (46.1 tons/km2) and Independencia (25.5 tons/km2) in February 2014.
By contrast only 390,000 emigrated from Lima to other regions.
The goal is to reduce passengers' commute times, protect the environment, provide improved security and overall quality of service.
In October 2013 Lima was chosen to host the 2019 Pan American Games.
In Metropolitan Lima in 2013, the percentage of the population living in households in poverty was 12.8%.
Many of these works were influenced by French architectural styles.
The export-led expansion also widened the gap between rich and poor, fostering social unrest.
Since 2011, several Lima restaurants have been recognized as among The World’s 50 Best Restaurants.
Linguistic evidence seems to support this theory as spoken Spanish consistently rejects stop consonants in word-final position.
Nowadays, Spanish-speaking locals do not see the connection between the name of their city and the name of the river that runs through it.
The lack of heavy rainfall arises from high atmospheric stability caused, in turn, by the combination of cool waters from semi-permanent coastal upwelling and the presence of the cold Humboldt Current and warm air aloft associated with the South Pacific anticyclone.
Summer rain, on the other hand, is infrequent and occurs in the form of isolated light and brief showers.
San Isidro has parks, including Parque El Olivar, which is home to olive trees imported from Spain during the seventeenth century.
Coastal waters usually average around , but get much warmer (as in 1998 when the water reached ).
The Lima Metro has twenty six passenger stations, located at an average distance of .
The first and oldest Superior Court in Lima is the ''Superior Court of Justice,'' belonging to the Judicial District and.
Afterwards, it continues through Av.
It also has been influenced by anglicisms as a result of globalization, as well as by Andean Spanish and Quechua, due to migration from the Andean highlands.
While relative humidity is high, rainfall is very low due to strong atmospheric stability.
Lima residents refer to their Chinatown as ''Calle Capon'' and the city's ubiquitous Chifa restaurantssmall, sit-down, usually Chinese-run restaurants serving the Peruvian spin on Chinese cuisinecan be found by the dozens in this enclave.
The early 21st century added glass skyscrapers, particularly around the financial district.
In 2016, Central was awarded #4 (chefs Virgilio Martinez and Pia Leon), Maido was awarded #13 (chef Mitsuharu Tsumura) and Astrid & Gaston was awarded #30 (chef Diego Muñoz and owned by chef Gaston Acurio).
High humidity produces brief morning fog in the early summer and a usually persistent low cloud deck during the winter (generally developing in May and persisting into late November or even early December).
In math, only 19.3% students achieved level 2, with 46.4% at level 1 and 34.2% less than level 1.
The predominantly onshore flow makes the Lima area one of the cloudiest among the entire Peruvian coast.
Inland districts receive anywhere between 1 and  of rainfall per year, which accumulates mainly during the winter months.
The main export goods are commodities: oil, steel, silver, zinc, cotton, sugar and coffee.
During the early 20th century, thousands of immigrants came to the city, including people of German, French, Italian and British descent.
In 2012, 48.7% of students in Lima achieved level 2 in reading comprehension compared to 45.3% in 2011.
Lima is seat of two of the 28 second highest or Superior Courts of Justice.
In 1746, another powerful earthquake severely damaged Lima and destroyed Callao, forcing a massive rebuilding effort under Viceroy José Antonio Manso de Velasco.
Tomás Marsano in Surco to reach Ov.
Examples are The American-Peruvian school, the Alianza Francesa de Lima, the Lycée Franco-Péruvien and the hospital Maison de Sante; Markham College, the British-Peruvian school in Monterrico, Antonio Raymondi District Italian School, the Pestalozzi Swiss School and also, several German-Peruvian schools.
They account for a large part of the car stock.
Later, as the original inhabitants died out and the local Quechua became extinct, the Cuzco pronunciation prevailed.
They often assume that the valley is named after the river; however, Spanish documents from the colonial period show the opposite to be true.
They estimate that the use of the bike lanes prevented the emission of 526 tons of carbon dioxide in 2012.
The lowest achieving UGELs are UGEL 01, 04 and 05.
The 49 districts in Metropolitan Lima are divided into 5 areas: Cono Norte (North Lima), Lima Este (East Lima), Constitutional Province of Callao, Lima Centro (Central Lima) and Lima Sur (South Lima).
Despite its location in the tropics and in a desert, Lima's proximity to the cool waters of the Pacific Ocean leads to temperatures much cooler than those expected for a tropical desert and can be classified as a mild desert climate (Köppen: ''BWn'').
While no official administrative definition for the city exists, it is usually considered to be composed of the central 30 of 43 districts of Lima Province, corresponding to an urban area centered around the historic Cercado de Lima district.
The quantity of Serenazgos officials and resources varies by district.
Lima has the largest export industry in South America and is a regional hub for the cargo industry.
Many large parks lie outside the city center, including Reducto Park, Pantanos de Villa Wildlife Refuge, El Golf (San Isidro), Parque de las Leyendas (Lima Zoo), El Malecon de Miraflores and the Golf Los Incas.
This name is an innovation arising from an effort by the Cuzco nobility in colonial times to standardize the toponym so that it would conform to the phonology of Cuzco Quechua.
These museums focus on art, pre-Columbian cultures, natural history, science and religion.
It is located in the valleys of the Chillón, Rímac and Lurín rivers, in the central coastal part of the country, overlooking the Pacific Ocean.
Lima's climate is between mild and warm.
The lowest satisfaction rates can be found in Villa Maria del Triunfo (11%), San Juan de Miraflores (14.8%), Rimac (16.3%) and La Victoria (20%).
Lima is the world's second largest desert city, after Cairo, Egypt.
The Lima Golf Club, a prominent golf club, is located within the district.
Each of the 43 districts has their own distrital municipality that is in charge of its own district and coordinate with the metropolitan municipality.
The Metropolitan Municipality has authority over the entire city, while each district has its own local government.
San Borja district was the first to implement a bike-share program called  San Borja en Bici.
The cost is generally higher than public transport; however, they cover greater distances at greater speeds due to the lack of stops.
The minorities in Lima include Amerindians (mostly Aymara and Quechua) and Afro-Peruvians, whose African ancestors were initially brought to the region as slaves.
In the late 1950s, up to 70% of consumer goods were manufactured in factories located in Lima.
The Metropolitan Transport System or El Metropolitano is a new, integrated system, consisting of a network of buses that run in exclusive corridors under the Bus Rapid Transit system (BST).
The values are within the recommended limits.
The amount of solid waste produced per capita in Lima is about  per day.
It began commercial operations on July 28, 2010.
They worked with universities, food producers, artisanal fishermen and sellers in food markets.
May and November are generally transition months, with a more dramatic warm-to-cool weather transition.
Another upscale district is Miraflores, which has luxury hotels, shops and restaurants.
Lima's climate (like that of most of coastal Peru) gets severely disrupted in El Niño events.
The fine particles are the most dangerous given that they are able to damage human respiratory systems.
It supplied 200 bicycles and six stations across the district (two of them connecting with the Metro).
These examples of medieval Spanish fortifications were built to defend the city from attacks by pirates and privateers.
Three municipalities recycle 20% or more of their waste.
The severely low rainfall impacts on water supply in the city, which originates from wells and from rivers that flow from the Andes.
According to early Spanish articles the Lima area was once called ''Itchyma'', after its original inhabitants.
For example, San Juan de Lurigancho, San Martin de Porres, Ate, Comas, Villa El Salvador and Villa Maria del Triunfo host more than 400,000, while San Luis, San Isidro, Magdalena del Mar, Lince and Barrancohave have less than 60,000 residents.
By December 2012, the program had 2,776 subscribers.
Peruvian coffee and chocolate have also won international awards.
The city's economic decline left its elite dependent on royal and ecclesiastical appointment and thus, reluctant to advocate independence.
As previously mentioned, winter precipitation occurs in the form of persistent morning drizzle events.
In 1562, another district was built across the Rímac River and in 1610, the first stone bridge was built.
In 2007, the Peruvian Society for Gastronomy was born with the objective of uniting Peruvian gastronomy to put together activities that would promote Peruvian food and reinforce the Peruvian national identity.
The fair congregates restaurants, food producers, bakers, chefs, street vendors and cooking institutes from for ten days to celebrate excellent food.
A center of immigration and the center of the Spanish Viceroyalty, chefs incorporated dishes brought by the conquistadors and waves of immigrants: African, European, Chinese and Japanese.
Other salient differences between socioeconomic levels include levels of higher education, car ownership and home size.
This hiatus ended in the 1850s, when increased public and private revenues from guano exports led to a rapid development of the city.
The annual population growth rate is 1.57%.
They organized social clubs and built their own schools.
The number of attendees has grown from 30,000 to 600,000 in 2014.
Migration to Lima from the rest of Peru is substantial.
However, the original inhabitants of the valley were not Incas.
Along with Miraflores it serves as the home to the foreign nightlife scene.
