Their most successful period was from the 1960s to the 1980s when they won 2 League of Ireland championships and two FAI Cups.
The City Metropolitan Area however excludes city suburbs located within County Clare.
In the mid-1970s it was incorporated as The Limerick College of Art, Commerce & Technology (CoACT) and achieved the designation of a Regional Technical College (RTC) in 1993 and finally an Institute of Technology in 1997.
The word Thomond is synonymous with the region and is retained in place names such as Thomondgate, Thomond Bridge & Thomond Park.
Munster recorded a famous 12 – 0 victory against the New Zealand All Blacks in 1978 at Thomond Park.
Buses run every 2 hours to Tralee & Killarney.
On October 2012 the Government of Ireland published Putting People First- Action Programme for Effective Local Government which set out Government policy for reforms across all the main areas of local government in Ireland.
The college runs full-time and part-time courses in accountancy, business, law, engineering, computing and IT and has a range of part-time courses available.
From 2011, the constituency boundaries changed in accordance with the proposals of the Constituency Commission and the subsequent Electoral (Amendment) Act 2009.
It also includes part of south County Clare.
During the strike a special strike committee was set up to print their own money, control food prices and publish newspapers.
This changed the electoral boundaries from Limerick East and Limerick West to Limerick City and Limerick.
Limerick's climate is classified as temperate oceanic (Köppen ''Cfb'').
The school is affiliated to Old Crescent RFC.
As of 2012 unemployment has become a major problem across the city with the unemployment rate in the city at 28.6% which is almost twice the national average.
It is a general purpose facility port.
Fianna Fáil is the largest party on the united authority with 13 seats followed by Fine Gael with 12, Sinn Féin have 6, Anti-Austerity Alliance, Labour & Independents have 3 seats each.
A limerick is a type of humorous verse of five lines with an AABBA rhyme scheme: the poem's connection with the city is obscure, but the name is generally taken to be a reference to Limerick city or County Limerick, sometimes particularly to the Maigue Poets, and may derive from an earlier form of nonsense verse parlour game that traditionally included a refrain that included "Will or won't you come (up) to Limerick?"
RTÉ lyric fm, a state-run classical music radio station and part of RTÉ, broadcasts nationally from studios in the city centre.
In early medieval times Limerick was at the centre of the Kingdom of Thomond which corresponds to the present day Mid West Region however, the Kingdom also included North Kerry and parts of South Offaly.
The city centre also has a large retail district which includes a mix of more traditional type of shops as well as some modern high street stores.
Since then, the game has lived mostly in the shadow of hurling but a resurgence in 2000 saw the county win its first Munster Under-21 title and has since reached three Munster Senior finals.
It is open on Friday, Saturday and Sunday with the Saturday market acting as the flagship and is the most popular market.
Limerick Golf Club was host to the JP McManus Invitational Pro Am, one of the largest pro-am events of its kind in the world.
The M7 (Dublin), N/M18 (Galway, Ennis, Shannon), N/M20 (Cork), N21 (Tralee) and N24 (Waterford) routes all start/terminate in or near the city.
Limerick has a large stock of local authority housing.
There are several seasonal tours (Angela's Ashes walking tour of Limerick City, historical walking tour and boat tours along the River Shannon).
The Georgian core of the city, with fine Georgian architecture in the Newtown Pery, was developed from the mid 18th century.
The Mayoral position is largely ceremonial and has much reduced responsibility following the merger of the Limerick local authorities.
World-renowned electronic musician Richard D. James, more commonly known as Aphex Twin, was born in Limerick in 1971.
Limerick has a mild climate, with the average daily maximum in July of  and the average daily minimum in January of .
The Metropolitan District includes the city urban area and extends outwards towards Patrickswell in the west and Castleconnell in the east.
It is home to a permanent collection of Irish art, which shows works from the early 18th to 20th century.
Unfinished retail centres include the Coonagh Cross retail development and the Parkway Valley Shopping Centre on the Dublin Road.
Coonagh airfield, is a few kilometres west of Caherdavin, serving small private aircraft.
The fishing industry in Limerick, based on Clancy's Strand opposite King John's Castle and at Coonagh nearby,  once employed hundreds of men.
Work has completed on pedestrianising Bedford Row, Thomas Street & parts of Catherine Street as well as widening footpaths on William Street.
Student radio station, Wired FM, broadcasts on 99.9FM from Mary Immaculate College.
The club played at The Market's Field until the mid-1980s when they controversially moved to a new venue.
Throughout most of the city's history; from 1197 when it gained its first charter, Limerick City had its own local government authority, Limerick Corporation later known as Limerick City Council.
The highest temperature recorded was  in 1995, and the lowest  in 2010.
It is hoped the work will make the city centre more attractive for shoppers & visitors which has seen some serious decline over the past decade as the retail offering in the city centre has consistently lagged behind that of the suburban shopping centres.
Thomond College of Education, Limerick was a successful teacher training college for secondary level and was integrated into the university in 1991.
The Institute has a strong sporting ethos, which is not surprising given its location adjacent to Thomond Park and the Gaelic Grounds.
The Limerick Youth Theatre provides young people with an opening into acting and production.
In County Limerick, Adare village and the Foynes Flying Boat Museum, approximately 35&nbsp;km (22 miles/30 minutes) from Limerick City along the scenic coastal N69 route from Limerick to Tralee, are also popular attractions.
The other senior clubs in the city are Old Crescent, Thomond, and UL Bohemians.
The local government area of Limerick city is under the jurisdiction of Limerick City and County Council.
Ireland's first Polish bank opened in 2007.
The Limerick county constituency takes in most of the rest of the county.
Several local newspapers are published in the city, including ''The Limerick Post'' and ''The Limerick Leader'' and magazines include the ''Limerick Event Guide'', ''Business Limerick'' and ''Limerick Now''.
Limerick is also well catered for when it comes to literature.
It is also an established venue for traditional Irish music.
Limerick is currently represented in the National Leagues by the men's UL Eagles team and the women's UL Aughinish team.
The city's secondary schools compete in the Munster Senior and Junior Cups and a number of schools have had notable success at both levels.
The council was one of the oldest in Ireland and was only exceeded in age by Dublin City Council.
In 1959, Shannon Airport enabled the opening of the Shannon Free Zone which attracted a large number of multinational companies to the region.
There is no rail link to the airport.
It is the setting for the contemporary coming-of-age drama ''Cowboys & Angels'' and Robert Cunningham's ''Somebody's Daughter'', which was shot in various locations around the city and had its premiere in King John's Castle in July 2004.
The articles of the Treaty protecting Catholic rights were not passed by the Protestant Irish Parliament which rather updated the Penal Laws against Catholics which had major implications for Irish history.
Na Piarsaigh is the only city club playing hurling at senior level.
The City of Limerick Vocational Education Committee (CLVEC) provides education services for over 10,000 learners in the city at secondary and further education levels.
It was established as the National Institute for Higher Education (NIHE) in 1972, and in 1989 was the first university to be established since the foundation of the State in 1922.
The population of the Limerick Larger Urban Zone as defined by the EU is 162,413.
The city and suburbs also has many tennis, athletics, cricket and golf clubs.
The closure of the Dell manufacturing facility amounted to 2% of Ireland's national GDP.
It is located in the Mid-West Region and is also part of the province of Munster.
Primary and secondary education in the city is organised in a similar fashion to the rest of Ireland.
It is Vistakon's only production facility outside the United States and one of the largest contact-lens manufacturing plants in the world.
Riverfest is an annual summer festival held in Limerick.
Regular bus services run from the city centre to the Crescent Shopping Centre.
The earliest known use of the name "Limerick" for this type poem is an 1880 reference, in a Saint John, New Brunswick newspaper, to an apparently well-known tune.
St John's Cathedral, whilst more modern, has Ireland's tallest spire at 94&nbsp;m (308&nbsp;ft).
During the civil wars of the 17th century the city played a pivotal role, besieged by Oliver Cromwell in 1651 and twice by the Williamites in the 1690s.
It has contributed over €95m to local charities since its inception in 1990.
The city centre has seen major works on remodelling & pedestrianisation in recent years to improve its appearance.
The main campus is located at Moylish Park, about 3 kilometres north-west of the city centre, and the School of Art & Design is located on campuses at Clare Street and George's Quay.
Three rowing clubs are located in the city, namely Shannon Rowing Club, Saint Michaels Rowing Club and Athlunkard Boat Club.
Saint Munchin, the first bishop of Limerick died in 652, indicating the city was a place of some note.
The museum was established to house an internationally important collection of approximately 2000 works of art and antiquities formed by John and Gertrude Hunt during their lifetimes.
It has a strong focus on business incubation, having operations in several enterprise centres:  The National Franchise Centre; Croom Community Enterprise Centre; Thurles Chamber Enterprise Centre (TCEC);  The Hartnett Enterprise Acceleration Centre (HEAC).
This figure is however no longer accurate given the larger metropolitan district of the city.
Rugby, Gaelic football, hurling and association football are popular sporting pastimes in Limerick.
The main street O'Connell Street was crowded for the 2006 match.
By 2006, most fishermen had relinquished their drift net licences and the industry can now be said to be dormant.
The city is the setting for Frank McCourt's memoir ''Angela's Ashes'' and the film adaptation.
The city dates from 812 which is the earliest probable settlement; however, history suggests the presence of earlier settlements in the area surrounding King's Island, the island at the historical city centre.
History also records an important battle involving Cormac mac Airt in 221 and a visit by St. Patrick in 434 to baptise an Eóganachta king, Carthann the Fair.
Kerry and Cork Airports are around 1 hour 30 minutes and 2 hours drive away, respectively.
For European parliament elections Limerick is in South Ireland.
Following the merger of the two authorities in 2014 a new Metropolitan District of Limerick City was set up that included the city urban area and also settlements close to the city such as Patrickswell and Castleconnell.
Spin South West, owned by Communicorp, broadcasts to Counties Kerry, Clare, Limerick, Tipperary and southwest Laois from its studios at Landmark Buildings in the Raheen Industrial Estate.
The Belltable Arts Centre on O'Connell Street (in liquidation as of February 2013) hosts for local playwriting and drama.
Historically Limerick was an agricultural commodity-driven economy, due to its position as the first major port along the River Shannon.
The school also won the Dr. Croke Cup, the All-Ireland Colleges Hurling Championship, on two occasions, in 1964 and 1966.
The region encompasses County Limerick, County Clare, North County Tipperary, Northwest County Kerry and south Offaly, with its focal point centered on Limerick and its environs within an  radius.
Football is very popular in the city and has more players involved than in any other sport.
Dell had its main European Manufacturing Facility at the Raheen Business Park however in January 2009 Dell announced that it would close its Limerick computer manufacturing plant and move the production lines to Poland.
Newtown Pery was built in the late 18th century before the Act of Union and, unusually for an Irish city and unique in Limerick, is laid out on a grid plan.
These were formerly the campuses of the Tipperary Institute which merged with LIT in 2011.
Claughaun (Clochán), Monaleen (Móin a'Lín) and Mungret (Mungairit) compete at intermediate level and Old Christians (Sean-Chríostaithe), Milford (Áth an Mhuilinn), Saint Patrick's (Naomh Pádraig) and Abbey Sarsfields (Sáirséalaigh na Mainistreach) compete at junior level.
The service industry is an important employer in the city.
Although Limerick CBS is more noted for hurling success, it won the Senior Cup on four occasions in the 1920s and 30s and the Junior Cup in 1932.
The Limerick Art Gallery and the Art College cater for painting, sculpture and performance art of all styles.
Bunratty Castle in Co. Clare is another local attraction of national significance.
The main clubs in the city were St. Colm's and Marathon with St. Colm's in particular having a long history in the National Leagues.
It is the largest shopping centre in Ireland (outside of Dublin) and the largest in the province of Munster.
The city lies on the River Shannon, with the historic core of the city located on King's Island, which is bounded by the Shannon and the Abbey River.
Reputedly the Treaty was signed on the Treaty Stone, an irregular block of limestone which once served as a mounting block for horses.
During the Celtic Tiger years a number of shopping centres & retail parks opened in suburban areas of Limerick.
Limerick Golf Club was founded in 1891 and is located at Ballyclough,  due south of the city centre.
1900 jobs were lost at Dell and it is believed that for every job that was lost at Dell at least another 4 to 5 were at risk.
Limerick's local radio station is Live 95FM, broadcasting from 'Radio House', near the waterfront at Steamboat Quay.
Limerick is one of the constituent cities of the Cork–Limerick–Galway corridor which has a population of 1 million people.
The Treaty of Limerick ended the Williamite war in Ireland which was fought between supporters of the Catholic King James II (Jacobites) and the Protestant King William of Orange (Williamites).
Castletroy has won the Irish Senior Cup once.
The work involved constructing a large canopy over the existing market premises and was officially re-opened in June 2010.
The county won successive All-Ireland Under-21 titles in 2000, 2001 and 2002.
Work is due to begin shortly on the pedestrianisation of O'Connell Street between William Street & Roches Street.
Limerick is also the home of street theatre companies, including "The Umbrella Project".
In 1942 Shannon International Airport (located 20&nbsp;km west of the city) opened for the first time offering transatlantic flights.
The opening of a number of secondary railways in the subsequent decades developed Limerick as a regional centre of communications.
Prior to the merger of Limerick City and County Council 41% of all housing within the old Limerick City Council boundary was local authority, which was the highest in Ireland.
The Limerick Writers' Centre  was established in 2008 and is responsible for a broad range writing activities in the city.
There are three golf clubs associated with Limerick city.
It was instigated in 1904 by a Redemptorist priest, Father John Creagh.
The Waterford and Limerick Railway linked the city to the Dublin–Cork railway line in 1848 and to Waterford in 1853.
The peace times that followed the turmoil of the late 17th Century allowed the city to prosper through trade in the late 18th century.
The city is represented in the League of Ireland by Limerick FC.
The Frank McCourt Museum situated in Frank's former school on Hartsonge Street opened in 2011 and contains many artefacts from the book, it also houses Frank's Ashes.
The previous boundary, encompassing 2,086 hectares, was delineated in 1950.
For national Dáil elections Limerick City is in the Limerick City constituency.
It is situated 15.4&nbsp;km north of the city.
There are also a number of disused canals in the vicinity of the city including the Park Canal & the Passey – Errina Canal on the old Limerick navigation.
The university has a thousand-seat state-of-the-art concert hall that frequently hosts visiting performers.
Former well-known mayors include TDs Donogh O'Malley, Stephen Coughlan, Michael Lipper, Jim Kemmy and Jan O'Sullivan.
Also known as the "Shannon Region", this is primarily an economic and social concept.
Limerick has been designated as a European City of Sport for 2011 by the European Capitals of Sport Association (ACES).
All Munster European Heineken Cup matches are played at Thomond Park Stadium, where the Munster team held a record of being unbeaten in the Heineken Cup for 26 consecutive games until the 16–9 defeat by Leicester in January 2007.
The name is recorded in Viking sources as ''Hlymrekr''.
The recent economic recession in Ireland has had a profound effect on Limerick.
The Lime Tree Theatre officially opened at the Mary Immaculate College campus on 30 October 2012.
This increase in trade and wealth, particularly amongst the city's merchant classes saw a rapid expansion of the city as Georgian Limerick began to take shape.
'''Limerick''' (;  ) is a city in county Limerick, Ireland.
Limerick's Gaelic Grounds (Páirc na nGael), on the Ennis Road, is the county team's home venue for both sports and has a current capacity of 49,000 following reconstruction in 2004.
Limerick's central location in the mid – west of Ireland means many important national primary routes converge on the city.
The modern venue is able to host theatre, music, comedy, traditional arts, schools' performances and conferences.
However, there were some success stories.
These include hourly services to Dublin, Cork & Galway.
The Normans redesigned the city in the 12th century and added much of the most notable architecture, such as King John's Castle and St Mary's Cathedral.
There are a number of other teams at school and club level, including St. Colm's, Limerick Lakers, Taste of Europe, Limerick Celtic and Limerick Lions.
It is notable for its programs of engineering, information technology, materials science, sports science, humanities, teacher education, social sciences and music.
The suburban areas, where the majority of the population now live, have grown out from the centre along the main roads to Ennis (North Circular and Ennis Road areas/Caherdavin), Dublin (Castletroy and the University) and Cork (Ballinacurra/Dooradoyle/Raheen).
During the Irish War of Independence, the Limerick Soviet was a self-declared soviet that existed from 15 to 27 April 1919.
Similar to the rest of Ireland, basketball was a very popular sport in Limerick during the 1970s and 1980s, with up to four divisions in the men's and women's local leagues.
Griffith College Limerick (GCL) is a private college in Limerick.
The 21 Councillors from the 3 electoral districts in the City Metropolitan Area also elect a mayor to represent the city.
Bus Éireann have also commenced the 'X51' Limerick to Galway Express travelling on the M18 in addition to the regular service.
Additional facilities and outreach centres are located at O'Connell Street and in Ennis, Co. Clare and LIT has two campuses in Co. Tipperary, LIT Thurles and LIT Clonmel.
Newer suburban districts such as Dooradoyle, Castletroy – including the University, Gouldavoher, and Raheen were continually administered to by Limerick County Council until the merger of the two authorities in June 2014.
The Railway Procurement Agency has suggested that a tram system should be built in the city.
Recent examples include the 2008 and 2009 Irish Open Golf Championships, the 2010 Irish Special Olympics, the All-Ireland Corporate Games and the World Baton twirling Championships.
In 812 the Vikings sailed up the Shannon and pillaged the city, burned the monastery of Mungret but were forced to flee when the Irish attacked and killed many of their number.
Monaleen (Móin a'Lín) are the only city club to play football at the senior grade.
It also runs Gaelcholáiste Luimnigh, an all Irish language secondary school.
The city is host to many large sporting events.
Two further enterprise centres, the Enterprise and Research Centre, Clonmel and the Irish Fashion Incubator Limited (IFIL) will be added to its unique "Enterprise Ladder" in 2013.
St Michael's member and Limerick native Sam Lynch won the World Championship gold medal in the Men's Lightweight Single Skulls in Lucerne in 2001, defending his title to take the gold again in Seville in 2002.
LIT's two wins came in 2005 and 2007.
Ardscoil Rís, St. Clements Redemptorist College, CBS Sexton Street and St Munchin's College are boys-only schools and Laurel Hill, The Presentation, Ard Scoil Mhuire and Scoil Carmel are girls-only schools.
Dublin Coach provide the M7 express service which operates every hour from Arthur's Quay which goes to Dublin or Ennis.
Waterway transport on the Shannon was regularly used to transport goods from Limerick to Dublin and vice versa however this mode of transport fell into decline in the 20th century.
There are also regular daily services to Waterford & Athlone and a daily service to London via the ferry from Rosslare Europort.
Analog Devices has its European manufacturing base in Raheen, 3&nbsp;km south-west of the city centre.
It has scheduled flights to European and North American destinations.
Citylink run a number of services from Limerick to Galway & Cork and operate from Henry Street.
Although the Mayor is the city's first citizen, within the council the position is below that of the Cathaoirleach.
Cruises Street is one of the main shopping streets.
The National Elite Swimming Club is based in The University of Limerick Arena.
In 2013, a new energy strategy was launched for the region of Limerick and Clare.
The city provides visitors with "Street Ambassadors", people designated to help others around and make their stay more enjoyable.
Ardscoil Rís has won the Junior Cup twice, in 2003 and 2005 and Castletroy College won both senior and junior competitions in 2008.
Limerick is often referred to as the home of Irish rugby.
This was enabled by ease of access from the facilitated by the opening of canals but most importantly to the River Shannon.
Suburban houses are generally two-floor semi-detached homes for single families.
The Milk Market Project won the 2011 Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland (RIAI) 'Peoples Choice Award'.
LIT is also home to the Millennium Theatre, a popular northside venue for shows and concerts.
The Opera Centre was also a retail development for the city centre but is unlikely to go ahead.
Currently tourism is growing, with over 1,000 new beds being opened in the city in 2006 thanks to the opening of five new hotels.
Because of the treaty, Limerick is sometimes known as the Treaty City.
Limerick city centre changed significantly with the construction of several modern high-rise buildings in the early 2000s, in particular as part of the regeneration of the former docks area along the Dock Road.
A number of secondary school's compete in the Dr. Harty Cup, which is the Munster Colleges Hurling Championship.
Munster is the only Irish team to have beaten the All Blacks, and came close a second time when the teams met again in 2008, losing 18–16.
By the 1960s onwards the city had outgrown its boundary considerably; however, the city boundary was only altered slightly but still never reflected the overall city urban area.
EVA International (formerly EV+A – Exhibition of Visual+ Art) is curated by a new guest curator every two years and includes contemporary artworks by both international and Irish artists.
Antiquity's map-maker, Ptolemy, produced in 150 the earliest map of Ireland, showing a place called "Regia" at the same site as King's Island.
These were built from the 1950s onwards in large estates by government projects and commercial developments, although there are many examples of Edwardian and older 1930s suburban homes on the main suburban thoroughfares leading towards the city (North & South Circular, Ballinacurra Road, O'Connell Avenue).
Its economic success has been driven in part by the University of Limerick, Limerick Institute of Technology, Shannon Airport in Co. Clare and Shannon Development (an economic development agency), whose precursor was SFADCO (Shannon Free Airport Development Company), an economic agency that provided tax incentives to companies locating in the area surrounding Shannon Airport.
To the south of the city is the Golden Vale, an area of rich pastureland.
LIT was originally established in 1852 as a School of Ornamental Art.
