In the late 1920s, Pauling began publishing papers on the nature of the chemical bond.
On the day that the treaty went into force, October 10, 1963, the Nobel Prize Committee awarded Pauling the Nobel Peace Prize for 1962.
Part of Pauling's work on the nature of the chemical bond led to his introduction of the concept of orbital hybridization.
He launched his faculty career with a very productive five years, continuing with his X-ray crystal studies and also performing quantum mechanical calculations on atoms and molecules.
He was first introduced to the concept of high-dose vitamin C by biochemist Irwin Stone in 1966.
None of the latter have gained acceptance in the mainstream scientific community.
He went on to graduate school at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in Pasadena, California, under the guidance of Roscoe Dickinson and Richard Tolman.
Lucy stayed with her husband's parents in Lake Oswego until Herman brought the family to Salem, where he worked briefly as a traveling salesman for the Skidmore Drug Company.
In 1942, Pauling successfully submitted a proposal on "The Chemical Treatment of Protein Solutions in the Attempt to Find a Substitute for Human Serum for Transfusions".
He was also among the first scientists to postulate that the binding of antibodies to antigens would be due to a complementarity between their structures.
In 1951, Pauling gave a lecture entitled "Molecular Medicine".
He later wrote: "I was simply entranced by chemical phenomena, by the reactions in which substances, often with strikingly different properties, appear; and I hoped to learn more and more about this aspect of the world."
At Caltech, Pauling struck up a close friendship with theoretical physicist Robert Oppenheimer, who was spending part of his research and teaching schedule away from U.C.
Denied, he left Washington High School in June without a diploma.
After returning, he built an electron diffraction instrument at Caltech with a student of his, Lawrence Olin Brockway, and used it to study the molecular structure of a large number of chemical substances.
All three were experts in the new field of quantum mechanics and other branches of physics.
This was made clear in the model of the structure of DNA that Watson and Crick discovered.
Pauling denounced the conclusions of these studies and handling of the final study as "fraud and deliberate misrepresentation", and criticized the studies for using oral, rather than intravenous vitamin C (which was the dosing method used for the first ten days of Pauling's original study).
In response Pauling designed the Pauling oxygen meter, which was developed and manufactured by Arnold O. Beckman, Inc.. After the war, Beckman adapted the oxygen analyzers for use in incubators for premature babies.
Pauling showed that a proper description based on quantum mechanics was an intermediate structure which was a blend of each.
Two years before his death, in a published dialogue with Buddhist philosopher Daisaku Ikeda, Pauling publicly declared his atheism.
In 1958, the Caltech Board of Trustees demanded that Pauling step down as chairman of the Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Division.
On January 15, 1958, Pauling and his wife presented a petition to United Nations Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld calling for an end to the testing of nuclear weapons.
During the time Pauling was researching the problem, Rosalind Franklin in England was creating the world's best images.
Pauling then proposed that deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was a triple helix; his model contained several basic mistakes, including a proposal of neutral phosphate groups, an idea that conflicted with the acidity of DNA.
By 1906, Herman Pauling was suffering from recurrent abdominal pain.
The marriage lasted until Ava Pauling's death in 1981.
They approached local dairies offering to perform butterfat samplings at cheap prices but dairymen were wary of trusting two boys with the task, and the business ended in failure.
In the late 1950s, Pauling worked on the role of enzymes in brain function, believing that mental illness may be partly caused by enzyme dysfunction.
Nobel laureate Peter Agre has said that Linus Pauling inspired him.
Pauling held a number of jobs to earn money for his future college expenses, including working part-time at a grocery store for $8 per week.
Pauling introduced the concept of electronegativity in 1932.
He made speeches, signed protest letters and communicated personally with the North Vietnamese leader, Ho Chi Minh, and gave the lengthy written response to President Johnson.
The school awarded him a diploma 45 years later, after he had won two Nobel Prizes.
Later in 1958, Pauling published ''No more war!
In an article entitled "The Collaborators" in the magazine's July 17, 1962 issue, Pauling was referred to not only as a collaborator, but as a "fellow traveler" of proponents of Soviet-style communism.
During the 1990s Pauling put forward a comprehensive plan for the treatment of heart disease using lysine and vitamin C. In 1996 a website was created expounding Pauling's treatment which it referred to as Pauling Therapy.
In 1973, with Arthur B. Robinson and another colleague, Pauling founded the Institute of Orthomolecular Medicine in Menlo Park, California, which was soon renamed the Linus Pauling Institute of Science and Medicine.
His efforts were ignored by the American government.
The Committee for Nuclear Information is frequently credited for its significant contribution to supporting the test ban, as is the ground-breaking research conducted by Dr. Reiss and the "Baby Tooth Survey".
''The Nature of the Chemical Bond'' was the standard work for many years, and concepts like hybridization and electronegativity remain part of standard chemistry textbooks.
Using the various properties of molecules, such as the energy required to break bonds and the dipole moments of molecules, he established a scale and an associated numerical value for most of the elements – the Pauling Electronegativity Scale – which is useful in predicting the nature of bonds between atoms in molecules.
He spent the next three years at the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions (1963–1967).
He was president of the scientific advisory board of the World Union for Protection of Life and also one of the signatories of the Dubrovnik-Philadelphia Statement of 1974/1976.
This work exemplified Pauling's ability to think unconventionally; central to the structure was the unorthodox assumption that one turn of the helix may well contain a non-integer number of amino acid residues; for the alpha helix it is 3.7 amino acid residues per turn.
The citation credits him for his "imaginative mind", "brilliant success", and "exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services.
John Kitzhaber in the state of Oregon, February 28 has been named "Linus Pauling Day".
A 2009 review also noted differences between the studies, such as the Mayo clinic not using intravenous Vitamin C, and suggested further studies into the role of vitamin C when given intravenously.
The asteroid 4674 Pauling in the inner asteroid belt, discovered by Eleanor F. Helin, was named after Linus Pauling in 1991, on his 90th birthday.
The results were publicly debated at length with considerable acrimony between Pauling and Cameron, and Moertel (the lead author of the Mayo Clinic studies), with accusations of misconduct and scientific incompetence on both sides.
Pauling is also one of only two people to be awarded Nobel Prizes in different fields, the other being Marie Curie.
He died of a perforated ulcer on June 11, 1910, leaving Lucy to care for Linus, Lucile and Pauline.
In November 1949, Pauling, Harvey Itano, S. J.
Pauling did not see them before devising his mistaken DNA structure, although his assistant Robert Corey did see at least some of them, while taking Pauling's place at a summer 1952 protein conference in England.
He published seven papers on the crystal structure of minerals while he was at Caltech.
In 1941, at age 40, Pauling was diagnosed with Bright's disease, a renal disease.
It was in one of these classes that Pauling met his future wife, Ava Helen Miller.
He moved his family to Condon, Oregon in 1905.
Pauling directed research on vitamin C, but also continued his theoretical work in chemistry and physics until his death.
After his second year, he planned to take a job in Portland to help support his mother.
In 1965 Pauling read ''Niacin Therapy in Psychiatry'' by Abram Hoffer and theorized vitamins might have important biochemical effects unrelated to their prevention of associated deficiency diseases.
Pauling attributes his interest in becoming a chemist to being amazed by experiments conducted by a friend, Lloyd A. Jeffress, who had a small chemistry lab kit.
Francis Crick acknowledged Pauling as the "father of molecular biology".
'', in which he not only called for an end to the testing of nuclear weapons but also an end to war itself.
'''Linus Carl Pauling''' (February 28, 1901 – August 19, 1994) was an American chemist, biochemist, peace activist, author, and educator.
In his last two years at school, Pauling became aware of the work of Gilbert N. Lewis and Irving Langmuir on the electronic structure of atoms and their bonding to form molecules.
In an interview given in 1990 Pauling commented on his model:
He published approximately fifty papers in those five years, and created the five rules now known as Pauling's rules.
While it is normal to think of the electrons in an atom as being described by orbitals of types such as ''s'' and ''p'', it turns out that in describing the bonding in molecules, it is better to construct functions that partake of some of the properties of each.
The best X-ray pictures of proteins in the 1930s had been made by the British crystallographer William Astbury, but when Pauling tried, in 1937, to account for Astbury's observations quantum mechanically, he could not.
Early in 1953 Watson and Crick proposed a correct structure for the DNA double helix.
Pauling's son was asked to accept the honor in his place.
Proponents of Pauling Therapy believe that  heart disease can be treated and even cured using only Lysine and Vitamin C and without drugs or heart operations.
Oppenheimer even gave Pauling a stunning personal collection of minerals.
Along the same lines, with the physicist turned biologist Max Delbrück, he wrote an early paper arguing that DNA replication was likely to be due to complementarity, rather than similarity, as suggested by a few researchers.
In February 1958, Pauling participated in a publicly televised debate with the atomic physicist Edward Teller about the actual probability of fallout causing mutations.
Engineering professor Samuel Graf selected Pauling to be his teaching assistant in a mechanics and materials course.
Thus Pauling's initial – and intensely personal – exposure to the idea of treating disease with vitamin supplements was positive.
''New Scientist'' called him one of the 20 greatest scientists of all time, and as of 2000, he was rated the 16th most important scientist in history.
Pauling himself acknowledged his wife Ava's deep involvement in peace work, and regretted that she was not awarded the Nobel Peace Prize with him.
On September 16, 1952, Pauling opened a new research notebook with the words "I have decided to attack the problem of the structure of nuclei."
He became one of the first scientists in the field of quantum chemistry and a pioneer in the application of quantum theory to the structure of molecules.
This group, headed by Barry Commoner, Eric Reiss,  M. W. Friedlander and John Fowler, organized a longtudinal study to measure radioactive strontium-90 in the baby teeth of children across North America.
It was signed by 11,021 scientists representing fifty countries.
In Zürich, Pauling was also exposed to one of the first quantum mechanical analyses of bonding in the hydrogen molecule, done by Walter Heitler and Fritz London.
Despite this, Pauling continued to promote vitamin C for treating cancer and the common cold, working with The Institutes for the Achievement of Human Potential to use vitamin C in the treatment of brain-injured children.
They were key to Watson's and Crick's success.
Pauling devoted the two years of his European trip to this work and decided to make it the focus of his future research.
In 1931, the American Chemical Society awarded Pauling the Langmuir Prize for the most significant work in pure science by a person 30 years of age or younger.
Lacking two American history courses required for his high school diploma, Pauling asked the school principal if he could take the courses concurrently during the spring semester.
A headline in ''Life'' magazine characterized his 1962 Nobel Prize as "A Weird Insult from Norway".
Pauling showed that these were merely extremes, between which most actual cases of bonding fall.
Not only did Corey see the images at the time, but Pauling himself regained his passport within a few weeks and toured English laboratories well before writing his DNA paper.
In 1967 he moved to the University of California at San Diego, but remained there only briefly, leaving in 1969 in part because of political tensions with the Reagan-era board of regents.
The third of the topics that Pauling attacked under the overall heading of "the nature of the chemical bond" was the accounting of the structure of aromatic hydrocarbons, particularly the prototype, benzene.
(No prize had previously been awarded for that year.)
In the 30 years after its first edition was published in 1939, the book was cited more than 16,000 times.
Pauling was a frequent target of ''The National Review'' magazine.
His early work in this area included studies of the structure of hemoglobin with his student Charles D. Coryell.
Other places named after Pauling include Pauling Street in Foothill Ranch, California; Linus Pauling Drive in Hercules, California; Linus and Ava Helen Pauling Hall at Soka University of America in Aliso Viejo, California; Linus Pauling Middle School in Corvallis, Oregon; and Pauling Field, a small airfield located in Condon, Oregon, where Pauling spent his youth.
In October 1948 Pauling was awarded a Presidential Medal for Merit by President Harry S. Truman.
Singer and Ibert Wells published "Sickle Cell Anemia, a Molecular Disease" in the journal ''Science''.
He and his wife Ava helped to found the International League of Humanists in 1974.
In September 1917, Pauling finally received a letter of admission from Oregon State University.
His work in establishing the field of molecular biology; his studies of hemoglobin led to the classification of sickle cell anemia as a molecular disease."
The college offered him a position teaching quantitative analysis, a course he had just finished taking himself.
In 1949, he served as president of the American Chemical Society.
A grave marker for Pauling was placed in Oswego Pioneer Cemetery in Lake Oswego, Oregon by his sister Pauline, but Pauling’s ashes, along with those of his wife, were not buried there until 2005.
In 1901, after his sister Pauline was born, Pauling's parents decided to move out of Portland, to find more affordable and spacious living quarters than their one-room apartment.
In a sense, this phenomenon resembles that of hybridization, described earlier, because it involves combining more than one electronic structure to achieve an intermediate result.
The basic nucleon clusters include the deuteron np, helion pnp, and triton npn.
Pauling died of prostate cancer on August 19, 1994, at 19:20 at home in Big Sur, California.
His ideas formed the basis of orthomolecular medicine, which is not generally practiced by conventional medical professionals and has been strongly criticized.
In the mid-1930s, Pauling, strongly influenced by the biologically oriented funding priorities of the Rockefeller Foundation's Warren Weaver, decided to strike out into new areas of interest.
He began a long clinical collaboration with the British cancer surgeon Ewan Cameron in 1971 on the use of intravenous and oral vitamin C as cancer therapy for terminal patients.
He was a principal investigator on 14 OSRD contracts.
When it was learned at the Cavendish Laboratory that Pauling was working on molecular models of the structure of DNA, James Watson and Francis Crick were allowed to make a molecular model of DNA.
At age 15, the high school senior had enough credits to enter Oregon State University (OSU), known then as Oregon Agricultural College.
Pauling was raised as a member of the Lutheran Church, but later joined the Unitarian Universalist Church.
In his last years, he became especially interested in the possible role of vitamin C in preventing atherosclerosis and published three case reports on the use of lysine and vitamin C to relieve angina pectoris.
He is one of only four individuals to have won more than one Nobel Prize (the others being Marie Curie, John Bardeen, and Frederick Sanger).
In a 2013 article in ''The Atlantic'', pediatrician Paul Offit wrote that although Pauling was "so spectacularly right" that he won two Nobel Prizes, Pauling's late-career assertions about the benefits of dietary supplements were "so spectacularly wrong that he was arguably the world's greatest quack."
Excited by his own perceived results, he researched the clinical literature and published ''Vitamin C and the Common Cold'' in 1970.
He had ample opportunity to visit Franklin's lab and see her work, but chose not to.
He received his PhD in physical chemistry and mathematical physics, ''summa cum laude,'' in 1925.
Although he had retained tenure as a full professor, Pauling chose to resign from Caltech after he received the Nobel peace prize money.
It is based primarily on his work in this area that he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1954 "for his research into the nature of the chemical bond and its application to the elucidation of the structure of complex substances".
His political activism prompted the U.S. State Department to deny him a passport in 1952, when he was invited to speak at a scientific conference in London.
His discovery of sickle cell anemia as a "molecular disease" opened the way toward examining genetically acquired mutations at a molecular level.
Linus Carl Jr. (born 1925) became a psychiatrist; Peter Jeffress  (1931–2003) a crystallographer; Edward Crellin (1937–1997) a biologist; and Linda Helen (born 1932) married noted Caltech geologist and glaciologist Barclay Kamb.
He lost both his suit and the 1968 appeal.
He published more than 1,200 papers and books, of which about 850 dealt with scientific topics.
In 1960 he was ordered to appear before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, which termed him "the number one scientific name in virtually every major activity of the Communist peace offensive in this country."
A re-evaluation of the claims in 1982 found that the patient groups were not actually comparable, with the vitamin C group being less sick on entry to the study, and judged to be "terminal" much earlier than the comparison group.
His discovery of the alpha helix and beta sheet is a fundamental foundation for the study of protein structure.
By proclamation of Gov.
Pauling was awarded the International Lenin Peace Prize by the USSR in 1970.
In his later years he promoted nuclear disarmament, as well as orthomolecular medicine, megavitamin therapy,  and dietary supplements.
This was soon raised to $50 per month.
Pauling also supported the work of the St. Louis Citizen's Committee for Nuclear Information (CNI).
Pauling also criticised the Mayo clinic studies because the controls were taking vitamin C during the trial, and because the duration of the treatment with vitamin C was short; Pauling advocated continued high-dose vitamin C for the rest of the cancer patient's life whereas the Mayo clinic patients in the second trial were treated with vitamin C for a median of 2.5 months.
In 1926 he was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship to travel to Europe, to study under German physicist Arnold Sommerfeld in Munich, Danish physicist Niels Bohr in Copenhagen and Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger in Zürich.
His success with sickle cell anemia led Pauling to speculate that a number of other diseases, including mental illnesses such as schizophrenia, might result from flawed genetics.
He would hold both positions until 1958.
Linus Karl Pauling was a Honorary President and Member of the International Academy of Science, Munich until the end of his life.
The two men planned to mount a joint attack on the nature of the chemical bond: apparently Oppenheimer would supply the mathematics and Pauling would interpret the results.
Pauling married Ava Helen Miller on June 17, 1923.
But protein structures were far less amenable to this technique than the crystalline minerals of his former work.
Linus Torvalds, developer of the Linux kernel, is named after Pauling.
As a result of this observation, he decided to conduct a more thorough study of protein structure in general.
California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver announced on May 28, 2008 that Pauling would be inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.
The name "resonance" was later applied to this phenomenon.
Within a year of Lucile's birth in 1904, Herman Pauling moved his family to Oswego, where he opened his own drugstore.
This was the first demonstration causally linking an abnormal protein to a disease, and also the first demonstration that Mendelian inheritance determined the specific physical properties of proteins, not simply their presence or absence – the dawn of molecular genetics.
During the 1960s, President Lyndon Johnson’s policy of increasing America’s involvement in the Vietnam War caused an antiwar movement that the Paulings joined with enthusiasm.
They described him as "Linus Carl Pauling, who ever since 1946 has campaigned ceaselessly, not only against nuclear weapons tests, not only against the spread of these armaments, not only against their very use, but against all warfare as a means of solving international conflicts."
His passport was restored in 1954, shortly before the ceremony in Stockholm where he received his first Nobel Prize.
In the summer of 1930, Pauling made another European trip, during which he learned about gas-phase electron diffraction from Herman Francis Mark.
Pauling became interested in how quantum mechanics might be applied in his chosen field of interest, the electronic structure of atoms and molecules.
Thus the one 2s and three 2p orbitals in a carbon atom can be combined to make four equivalent orbitals (called sp3 hybrid orbitals), which would be the appropriate orbitals to describe carbon compounds such as methane, or the 2s orbital may be combined with two of the 2p orbitals to make three equivalent orbitals (called sp2 hybrid orbitals), with the remaining 2p orbital unhybridized, which would be the appropriate orbitals to describe certain unsaturated carbon compounds such as ethylene.
While his Valence bond approach fell short of accounting quantitatively for some of the characteristics of molecules, such as the color of organometallic complexes, and would later be eclipsed by the molecular orbital theory of Robert Mulliken, Valence Bond Theory still competes, in its modern form, with Molecular Orbital Theory and density functional theory (DFT) as a way of describing the chemical phenomena.
Its mission was to warn the public of the dangers associated with the development of nuclear weapons.
He had treated it as a rapid interconversion between two structures, each with alternating single and double bonds, but with the double bonds of one structure in the locations where the single bonds were in the other.
Berkeley at Caltech every year.
The Linus Pauling Institute still exists, but moved in 1996 from Palo Alto, California, to Corvallis, Oregon, where it is part of the Linus Pauling Science Center at Oregon State University.
The Pauling Lecture series at Caltech began in 1989 with a lecture by Pauling himself.
It was the first proof of a human disease caused by an abnormal protein, and sickle cell anemia became the first disease understood at the molecular level.
Even–even nuclei are described as being composed of clusters of alpha particles, as has often been done for light nuclei.
Politics did not play a critical role.
In 1927, Pauling took a new position as an assistant professor at Caltech in theoretical chemistry.
In 1962, for his peace activism, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
Following the recommendations of Thomas Addis, who actively recruited Ava Helen Pauling as "nutritionist, cook, and eventually as deputy 'doctor'", Pauling was able to control the disease with Addis' then-unusual low-protein salt-free diet and vitamin supplements.
As chairman of the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and director of the Gates and Crellin Chemical Laboratories, he encouraged the hiring of researchers with a chemical-biomedical approach to mental illness, a direction that was not always popular with established Caltech chemists.
Pauling did, however, work on research for the military.
Ultimately the negative findings of the Mayo Clinic studies ended general interest in vitamin C as a treatment for cancer.
In his first semester, Pauling registered for two courses in chemistry, two in mathematics, mechanical drawing, introduction to mining and use of explosives, modern English prose, gymnastics and military drill.
Bragg's team had made a fundamental error in making their models of protein by not recognizing the planar nature of the peptide bond.
In 1951, based on the structures of amino acids and peptides and the planar nature of the peptide bond, Pauling, Robert Corey and Herman Branson correctly proposed the alpha helix and beta sheet as the primary structural motifs in protein secondary structure.
He continued his peace activism in the following years.
Pauling made vitamin C popular with the public and eventually published two studies of a group of 100 allegedly terminal patients that claimed vitamin C increased survival by as much as four times compared to untreated patients.
He immediately cut off his relationship with Oppenheimer.
He was active in campus life and founded the school's chapter of the Delta Upsilon fraternity.
He decided to focus his research on how the physical and chemical properties of substances are related to the structure of the atoms of which they are composed, becoming one of the founders of the new science of quantum chemistry.
After becoming convinced of its worth, Pauling took 3&nbsp;grams of vitamin C every day to prevent colds.
Their relationship soured when Oppenheimer tried to pursue Pauling's wife, Ava Helen.
In a speech before the US Senate on June 6 of the same year, Senator Wayne Morse publicly denounced the action of the State Department, and urged the Passport Division to reverse its decision.
His work on chemical bonding marks him as one of the founders of modern quantum chemistry.
In 1922, Pauling graduated from Oregon State University (known then as Oregon Agricultural College) with a degree in chemical engineering.
They had four children.
On March 6, 2008, the United States Postal Service released a 41 cent stamp honoring Pauling designed by artist Victor Stabin.
In 1946, he joined the Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists, chaired by Albert Einstein.
He also supported the Mainau Declaration  of July 15, 1955, signed by 52 Nobel Prize laureates.
Pauling also set up a photography laboratory with two friends.
The structure was a superposition of structures rather than a rapid interconversion between them.
This led to the legend that Pauling missed the structure of DNA because of the politics of the day (this was at the start of the McCarthy period in the United States).
From 1969 to 1974 he accepted a position as Professor of Chemistry at Stanford University.
On October 15, 1965, Pauling published his Close-Packed Spheron Model of the atomic nucleus in two well respected journals, ''Science'' and the ''Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences''.
In 1965, Pauling sued the magazine, its publisher William Rusher, and its editor William F. Buckley, Jr for $1 million.
Pauling interacted with such great biologists as Thomas Hunt Morgan, Theodosius Dobzhanski, Calvin Bridges and Alfred Sturtevant.
He later collaborated with the Canadian physician Abram Hoffer on a micronutrient regime, including high-dose vitamin C, as adjunctive cancer therapy.
