Typically, several work together and encircle the herd from different points.
Note that a lion may switch lifestyles; nomads may become residents and vice versa.
Lions were kept and bred by Assyrian kings as early as 850 BC, and Alexander the Great was said to have been presented with tame lions by the Malhi of northern India.
He had analysed 58 lion skulls in three European museums.
Packer and Ikanda are among the few conservationists who believe western conservation efforts must take account of these matters not just because of ethical concerns about human life, but also for the long term success of conservation efforts and lion preservation.
They are not albinos, having normal pigmentation in the eyes and skin.
Head rubbing – nuzzling one's forehead, face and neck against another lion – appears to be a form of greeting, as it is seen often after an animal has been apart from others, or after a fight or confrontation.
Membership only changes with the births and deaths of lionesses, although some females do leave and become nomadic.
Lions are major killers of cheetah cubs, up to 90% of which are lost in their first weeks of life due to attacks by other predators.
The less common '''tiglon''' or '''tigon''' is a cross between a lioness and a male tiger.
In the East, lions were tamed by Indian princes, and Marco Polo reported that Kublai Khan kept lions inside.
l. roosevelti''), also known as '''Addis Ababa lion'''
The marozi is reputedly a spotted lion or a naturally occurring leopon, while the Congolese spotted lion is a complex lion-jaguar-leopard hybrid called a lijagulep.
They act as a coordinated group with members who perform the same role consistently in order to stalk and bring down the prey successfully.
Lions have been known to kill crocodiles venturing onto land, while the reverse is true for lions entering waterways, as evidenced by the occasional lion claw found in crocodile stomachs.
The lion is the only felid to have a tufted tail – the function of the tuft and spine are unknown.
Even the remaining seven subspecies might be too many.
In Africa, wildebeest rank at the top of preferred prey (making nearly half of the lion prey in the Serengeti) followed by zebra.
Some lions are ''residents,'' living in groups of related lionesses, their mates, and offspring.
In much of West Africa, to be compared to a lion was considered to be one of the greatest compliments.
Cave paintings of extinct European cave lions almost exclusively show animals with no manes, suggesting that either they were maneless, or that the paintings depict lionesses as seen hunting in a group.
They soon begin to immerse themselves in the pride life, however, playing among themselves or attempting to initiate play with the adults.
Weaning occurs after six to seven months.
Most lionesses will have reproduced by the time they are four years of age.
It is among the smallest of the Sub-Saharan African lions.
Seraglios served as expressions of the nobility's power and wealth.
She will often hunt by herself while the cubs are still helpless, staying relatively close to the thicket or den where the cubs are kept.
Morphology was used to identify subspecies such as the Barbary lion and Cape lion.
The sculpture has been interpreted as anthropomorphic, giving human characteristics to an animal, however, it also may represent a deity.
Primary causes of the decline include disease and human interference.
The lionesses do most of the hunting for the pride.
The lion's proclivity for man-eating has been systematically examined.
Females form the stable social unit in a pride and do not tolerate outside females.
The "All-Africa" record of man-eating generally is considered to be not Tsavo, but incidents in the early 1930s through the late 1940s in what was then Tanganyika (now Tanzania).
He begs the rabbi to send it back.
The most distinctive characteristic shared by both females and males is that the tail ends in a hairy tuft.
Their repertoire of vocalizations is also large; variations in intensity and pitch, rather than discrete signals, appear central to communication.
In their analysis of Tsavo and general man-eating, Kerbis Peterhans and Gnoske acknowledge that sick or injured animals may be more prone to man-eating, but that the behaviour is "not unusual, nor necessarily 'aberrant'" where the opportunity exists; if inducements such as access to livestock or human corpses are present, lions will regularly prey upon human beings.
They also have been crossed with leopards to produce leopons, and jaguars to produce jaglions.
Records indicate they were kept in poor conditions there in the seventeenth century, in contrast to more open conditions in Florence at the time.
When first introduced to the rest of the pride, the cubs initially lack confidence when confronted with adult lions other than their mother.
An alternative hypothesis is that there is some reward associated with being a leader who fends off intruders, and the rank of lionesses in the pride is reflected in these responses.
Another population in northwestern Africa is found in Waza National Park, where approximately 14–21 animals persist.
A lioness often will attempt to defend her cubs fiercely from a usurping male, but such actions are rarely successful.
Although lions can be active at any time, their activity generally peaks after dusk with a period of socialising, grooming, and defecating.
The social hierarchies of their societies where connected to the animal kingdom and the lion represented the top class.
'''West African lion''' (''P.
The now iconic lion tamer's chair was possibly first used by American Clyde Beatty (1903–1965).
It is currently listed as critically endangered in 2015.
This population may possibly number up to 200 animals.
Explorers and hunters exploited a popular Manichean division of animals into "good" and "evil" to add thrilling value to their adventures, casting themselves as heroic figures.
FIV, which is similar to HIV while not known to adversely affect lions, is worrisome enough in its effect in domestic cats that the Species Survival Plan recommends systematic testing in captive lions.
Males have about a 50% chance of having a mane, but if they grow them, their manes will be modest: around 50% the size of a pure lion mane.
The prey also may be killed by the lion enclosing the animal's mouth and nostrils in its jaws (which would also result in asphyxia).
Ancient Egypt venerated the lioness (the fierce hunter) as their war deities and among those in the Egyptian pantheon are, Bast, Mafdet, Menhit, Pakhet, Sekhmet, Tefnut, and the Sphinx; The Nemean lion was symbolic in Ancient Greece and Rome, represented as the constellation and zodiac sign Leo, and described in mythology, where its skin was borne by the hero Heracles.
Giraffes and buffaloes are almost invulnerable to a solitary lion as well.
At a distance of 400 parasangs from Rome it roars, and all pregnant women miscarry and all the walls of Rome fall down.
Two lions were depicted mating in the Chamber of Felines in 15,000-year-old Paleolithic cave paintings in the Lascaux caves.
The Tower menagerie was closed down by William IV, and animals transferred to the London Zoo, which opened its gates to the public on 27 April 1828.
A common depiction is their representation as "king of the jungle" or "king of beasts"; hence, the lion has been a popular symbol of royalty and stateliness, as well as a symbol of bravery; it is featured in several fables of the sixth century BC Greek storyteller Aesop.
Southern Europe: (Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia)
Lion populations are untenable outside designated reserves and national parks.
In captivity they can live more than 20 years.
South Asia: (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan)
l. senegalensis''), also known as '''Senegal lion'''
The subspecies now survives only in and around the Gir Forest of northwestern India.
Representations of lions date back to the early Upper Paleolithic.
Other benefits include possible kin selection (better to share food with a related lion than with a stranger), protection of the young, maintenance of territory, and individual insurance against injury and hunger.
The presence, absence, colour, and size of the mane is associated with genetic precondition, sexual maturity, climate, and testosterone production; the rule of thumb is the darker and fuller the mane, the healthier the lion.
l. krugeri''), also known as '''Southeast African lion'''
They determined that these lions are genetically unique and presumably that "their wild source population is similarly unique."
They were first used in art during the late Spring and Autumn Period (fifth or sixth century BC), and became much more popular during the Han Dynasty (206 BC – AD 220), when imperial guardian lions started to be placed in front of imperial palaces for protection.
Lions often inflict serious injuries on each other, either members of different prides encountering each other in territorial disputes, or members of the same pride fighting at a kill.
Aristotle considered them rare by 300 BC.
The lion is classified as a vulnerable species by the IUCN, having seen a major population decline in its African range of 30–50% per two decades during the second half of the twentieth century.
Ligers are much bigger than normal lions, typically  in length, and can weigh up to .
It is in Babylon that the biblical Daniel is said to have been delivered from the lion's den.
By the late nineteenth century, the lion had disappeared from Turkey and most of northern India, while the last sighting of a live Asiatic lion in Iran was in 1941 (between Shiraz and Jahrom, Fars Province), although the corpse of a lioness was found on the banks of the Karun river, Khūzestān Province in 1944.
Northeastern Africa: (Ethiopia)
The prey usually is killed by strangulation, which can cause cerebral ischemia or asphyxia (which results in hypoxemic, or "general", hypoxia).
Genetic evidence suggests its ancestors split from the ancestors of sub-Saharan African lions between 203 and 74 thousand years ago.
Sleeping mainly during the day, lions are active primarily at night (nocturnal), although sometimes at twilight (crepuscular).
Lions and spotted hyenas occupy the same ecological niche, meaning they compete for prey and carrion in the areas where they coexist.
Traditionally, 12 recent subspecies of lion were recognised, distinguished by mane appearance, size, and distribution.
Mitochondrial variation in living African lions seemed to be modest according to some newer studies; therefore, all sub-Saharan lions have sometimes been considered a single subspecies.
Reported body measurements in males are head-body lengths ranging from , tail lengths of .
On a hot day, the pride may retreat to shade leaving a male or two to stand guard.
Both males and females can defend the pride against intruders, but the male lion is better-suited for this purpose due to its stockier, more powerful build.
The male lion associated with the pride usually stays and watches over young cubs until the lionesses return from the hunt.
Adult forms of several species of the tapeworm genus ''Taenia'' have been isolated from intestines, the lions having ingested larval forms from antelope meat.
The lion has been an icon for humanity for thousands of years, appearing in cultures across Europe, Asia, and Africa.
In contrast to ligers, tigons are often relatively small in comparison to their parents, because of reciprocal gene effects.
A pride of lions consists of related females and offspring and a small number of adult males.
Cheetahs avoid competition by hunting at different times of the day and hide their cubs in thick brush.
Male ligers are sterile, but female ligers often are fertile.
Reportedly, they have been bred in camps in South Africa for use as trophies to be killed during canned hunts.
The '''lion''' (''Panthera leo'') is one of the big cats in the genus ''Panthera'' and a member of the family Felidae.
When confronted on a kill by lions, spotted hyenas may either leave or wait patiently at a distance of  until the lions have finished, but they are also bold enough to feed alongside lions, and even force the lions off a kill.
His two sisters, born in 1986, were still alive in August 2007.
Near the conclusion of the hunt, males have a tendency to dominate the kill once the lionesses have succeeded.
It was one of the species originally described by Linnaeus, who gave it the name ''Felis leo'', in his eighteenth-century work, ''Systema Naturae''.
Conservation of both African and Asian lions has required the setup and maintenance of national parks and game reserves; among the best known are Etosha National Park in Namibia, Serengeti National Park in Tanzania, and Kruger National Park in eastern South Africa.
The incidents occurred near Selous National Park in Rufiji District and in Lindi Province near the Mozambican border.
Lions typically ignore spotted hyenas unless the lions are on a kill or are being harassed by the hyenas, while the latter tend to visibly react to the presence of lions whether there is food or not.
Lions do not prey on fully grown adult elephants; most adult hippopotamuses, rhinoceroses, and smaller gazelles, impala, and other agile antelopes are generally excluded.
In some lions, the tuft conceals a hard "spine" or "spur", approximately 5&nbsp;mm long, formed of the final sections of tail bone fused together.
The lion's name, similar in many Romance languages, is derived from the Latin '''', and the Ancient Greek  ('''').
A man-eating lion was killed by game scouts in Southern Tanzania in April 2004.
A lion may gorge itself and eat up to  in one sitting; if it is unable to consume all the kill it will rest for a few hours before consuming more.
A review of data across several studies indicates a dietary overlap of 58.6%.
White Transvaal lion (''Panthera leo krugeri'') individuals occasionally have been encountered in and around Kruger National Park and the adjacent Timbavati Private Game Reserve in eastern South Africa, but are more commonly found in captivity, where breeders deliberately select them.
In some cultures, the lion symbolises power and royalty and some powerful rulers had the word "lion" in their nickname.
Found in the northeastern parts of the Congo.
In typical hunts, each lioness has a favoured position in the group, either stalking prey on the "wing" then attacking, or moving a smaller distance in the centre of the group and capturing prey in flight from other lionesses.
Record measurements from hunting records are supposedly a total length of nearly  for a male shot near Mucsso, southern Angola in October 1973 and a weight of  for a male shot outside Hectorspruit in eastern Transvaal, South Africa in 1936.
These findings might be explained by a late Pleistocene extinction event of lions in western and central Africa, and a subsequent recolonisation of these parts from Asia.
The testosterone hormone has been linked to mane growth; therefore, castrated lions often have minimal to no mane, as the removal of the gonads inhibits testosterone production.
Its skull is very similar to that of the tiger, although the frontal region is usually more depressed and flattened, with a slightly shorter postorbital region and broader nasal openings than that of a tiger.
Further changes took place in the early twentieth century, when Carl Hagenbeck designed enclosures more closely resembling a natural habitat, with concrete 'rocks', more open space and a moat instead of bars.
The lion population in the region of West Africa is isolated from lion populations of Central Africa, with little or no exchange of breeding individuals.
Lions were considered fairly common and inexpensive.
Although many modern zoos are more selective about their exhibits, there are more than 1,000 African and 100 Asiatic lions in zoos and wildlife parks around the world.
In India, the last refuge of the Asiatic lion is the  Gir Forest National Park in western India, which had approximately 180&nbsp;lions in 1974 and about 400 in 2010.
Scientists once believed that the distinct status of some subspecies could be justified by morphology, including the size of the mane.
The Asiatic lion ''persica'' was the most distinctive, and the Cape lion had characteristics allying it more with ''P.
Lions have the loudest roar of any big cat.
They sneak up to the victim until they reach a distance of approximately  or less.
The Greeks called the city Leontopolis, the "City of Lions" and documented that practice.
Furthermore, when a new male lion takes over the pride, subadult lions, both male and female, may be evicted.
Another eleven animals believed to be Barbary lions were found in Addis Ababa zoo, descendants of animals owned by Emperor Haile Selassie.
Outside these areas, the issues arising from lions' interaction with livestock and people usually results in the elimination of the lions.
Animals such as big cats and elephants, in particular, symbolised power, and would be pitted in fights against each other or domesticated animals.
George Rushby, game warden and professional hunter, eventually dispatched the pride, which over three generations is thought to have killed and eaten 1,500 to 2,000 people in what is now Njombe district.
The African lion plan started in 1993, focusing especially on the South African subspecies, although there are difficulties in assessing the genetic diversity of captive lions, since most individuals are of unknown origin, making maintenance of genetic diversity a problem.
'''Asiatic lion''' (''P.
Although these fade as lions reach adulthood, faint spots often may still be seen on the legs and underparts, particularly on lionesses.
Another study of 1,000 people attacked by lions in southern Tanzania between 1988 and 2009 found that the weeks following the full moon (when there was less moonlight) were a strong indicator of increased night attacks on people.
A lioness is weaker and much lighter than a male; success is more likely when a group of three or four mothers within a pride join forces against one male.
Leopards also use such tactics, but have the advantage of being able to subsist much better on small prey than either lions or cheetahs.
Records of it exist in ancient times through until the seventeenth century.
Most lions now live in eastern and southern Africa, and their numbers there are rapidly decreasing, with an estimated 30–50% decline per 20 years in the late half of the twentieth century.
The '''liger''' is a cross between a male lion and a tigress.
The two species may attack one another even when there is no food involved for no apparent reason.
Male lions reach maturity at about 3 years of age and, at 4–5 years of age, are capable of challenging and displacing the adult male(s) associated with another pride.
Packer has documented that between 1990 and 2004, lions attacked 815 people in Tanzania, killing 563.
The number of mature individuals in West Africa is estimated by two separate recent surveys at 850–1,160 (2002/2004).
It is believed that those lions, imported to Europe before the middle of the nineteenth century, were mainly either Barbary lions from North Africa or lions from the Cape.
For example, Marijata of the Mali Empire (c. 1235–c.
Eastern Africa: (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda)
He reluctantly agrees.
They begin to hunt effectively when nearing the age of two.
Many other species are hunted, based on availability, mainly ungulates weighing between  such as kudu, hartebeest, gemsbok, and eland.
The name of the nomadic Hadendoa people, inhabiting parts of Sudan, Egypt, and Eritrea, is made up of ''haɖa'' 'lion' and (''n)ɖiwa'' 'clan'.
The lions of Savuti, Botswana, have adapted to hunting young elephants during the dry season, and a pride of 30 lions has been recorded killing individuals between the ages of four and eleven years.
Such descriptions specified whether lions or other creatures were "rampant" or "passant", that is whether they were rearing or crouching.
The lion is used as a symbol of sporting teams, from national association football teams such as England, Scotland and Singapore to famous clubs such as the Detroit Lions of the NFL, Chelsea and Aston Villa of the English Premier League, (and the Premiership itself), Eintracht Braunschweig of the Bundesliga, and to a host of smaller clubs around the world.
Lions have an array of facial expressions and body postures that serve as visual gestures.
The Ewaso Lions Project protects lions in the Samburu National Reserve, Buffalo Springs National Reserve and Shaba National Reserve of the Ewaso Ng'iro ecosystem in Northern Kenya.
Lions tend to roar in a very characteristic manner, starting with a few deep, long roars that trail off into a series of shorter ones.
Darker-maned individuals may have longer reproductive lives and higher offspring survival, although they suffer in the hottest months of the year.
After the birth of the Khalsa brotherhood in 1699, the Sikhs also adopted the name "Singh" due to the wishes of Guru Gobind Singh.
A number of animals in captivity are likely to be Barbary lions, particularly the 90 animals descended from the Moroccan Royal collection at Rabat Zoo.
There are no subsequent reliable reports from Iran.
The lion's role as king of the beasts has been used in cartoons, such as the 1994 Disney animated feature film ''The Lion King''.
They are considered an ambassador species and are kept for tourism, education and conservation purposes.
Later in Roman times, lions were kept by emperors to take part in the gladiator arenas or for executions (see bestiarii, damnatio ad bestias, and venatio).
Depending on the size of the crocodile and the lion, either can lose kills or carrion to the other.
Even buffaloes, should they catch the scent of lion cubs, often stampede toward the thicket or den where they are being kept, doing their best to trample the cubs to death while warding off the lioness.
Contrary to popular belief, it is not only males that are ousted from their pride to become nomads, although most females certainly do remain with their birth pride.
l. persica'' than the other sub-Saharan lions.
Within Africa, the West African lion population is particularly endangered.
The tradition of keeping big cats as pets would last into the nineteenth century, at which time it was seen as highly eccentric.
In the Talmud, ''Chullin'' 59b, Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah tells Emperor Hadrian about the giant lion of the forest of Bei Ilai called the ''Tigris'', a lion so huge that the space between its ears measures 9 cubits.
The cheetah has a 50% chance of losing its kill to lions or other predators.
Spotted hyenas have adapted by frequently mobbing lions that enter their territories.
Lion sounds include snarling, hissing, coughing, miaowing, woofing, and roaring.
Cave lions also are depicted in the Chauvet Cave, discovered in 1994; this has been dated at 32,000&nbsp;years of age, though it may be of similar or younger age to Lascaux.
The size of adult lions varies across their range with those from the southern African populations in Zimbabwe, the Kalahari and Kruger Park averaging around  and  in males and females respectively compared to  and  of male and female lions from East Africa.
Despite incidents of attacks on humans, lions have enjoyed a positive depiction in culture as strong and noble.
The number of adult males in a coalition is usually two but may increase to as many as four before decreasing again over time.
By 100 AD they were extirpated.
Although adult lions have no natural predators, evidence suggests that the majority die violently from humans or other lions.
They begin to age and weaken between 10 and 15 years of age at the latest, if they have not already been critically injured while defending the pride (once ousted from a pride by rival males, male lions rarely manage a second take-over).
As in Africa, numerous human habitations are close by with the resultant problems between lions, livestock, locals and wildlife officials.
They spread from France and Italy during the Renaissance to the rest of Europe.
Because lions have never been native to China, early depictions were somewhat unrealistic; after the introduction of Buddhist art to China in the Tang Dynasty (after the sixth century AD), lions usually were wingless, with shorter, thicker bodies, and curly manes.
These acts eclipsed equestrianism acts as the central display of circus shows, but truly entered public consciousness in the early twentieth century with cinema.
The term is also often used for the taming and display of other big cats such as tigers, leopards, and cougars.
Lions also attack domestic livestock and in India cattle contribute significantly to their diet.
The cubs themselves are born blind – their eyes do not open until roughly a week after birth.
Farther south on the Indian subcontinent, the Asiatic lion is symbolic for the Sinhalese, Sri Lanka's ethnic majority; the term derived from the Indo-Aryan ''Sinhala'', meaning the "lion people" or "people with lion blood", while a sword-wielding lion is the central figure on the national flag of Sri Lanka.
They also have specialised roles that each gender plays in the pride.
They typically inhabit savanna and grassland, although they may take to bush and forest.
The infirmity theory, including tooth decay, is not favoured by all researchers; an analysis of teeth and jaws of man-eating lions in museum collections suggests that while tooth decay may explain some incidents, prey depletion in human-dominated areas is a more likely cause of lion predation on humans.
For instance, the lioness, the hunter, lacks the male's thick mane.
Lions are one species included in the Species Survival Plan, a coordinated attempt by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums to increase its chances of survival.
Research has suggested, however, that environmental factors such as average ambient temperature influence the colour and size of a lion's mane.
In England, although the seraglio tradition was less developed, lions were kept at the Tower of London in a seraglio established by King John in the thirteenth century, probably stocked with animals from an earlier menagerie started in 1125 by Henry I at his hunting lodge in Woodstock, near Oxford; where lions had been stocked according to William of Malmesbury.
Cases in Lindi have been documented where lions seize humans from the center of substantial villages.
The wild animals trade flourished alongside improved colonial trade of the nineteenth century.
