To describe this anisotropic structure, a dimensionless unit vector '''''n''''' called the ''director'', is introduced to represent the direction of preferred orientation of molecules in the neighborhood of any point.
That work with Ken Harrison and the UK MOD (RRE Malvern), in 1973, led to design of new materials resulting in rapid adoption of small area LCDs within electronic products.
At slightly higher (but still low) concentration, amphiphilic molecules will spontaneously assemble into micelles or vesicles.
The content of water or other solvent molecules changes the self-assembled structures.
In May 2008, the first Blue Phase Mode LCD panel had been developed.
The distortions of the liquid crystal are commonly described by the Frank free energy density.
The anisotropic attraction stabilizes parallel alignment of neighboring molecules, and the theory then considers a mean-field average of the interaction.
This anisotropy makes flows of liquid crystals behave more differentially than those of ordinary fluids.
At higher concentration, the assemblies will become ordered.
A generic progression of phases, going from low to high amphiphile concentration, is:
Bowl-shaped LC molecules, like in discotics, can form columnar phases.
After World War II work on the synthesis of liquid crystals was restarted at university research laboratories in Europe.
For example, many proteins and cell membranes are liquid crystals.
The finite twist angle between adjacent molecules is due to their asymmetric packing, which results in longer-range chiral order.
All three of these types of distortions incur an energy penalty.
In a nematic phase, the ''calamitic'' or rod-shaped organic molecules have no positional order, but they self-align to have long-range directional order with their long axes roughly parallel.
One can identify three types of distortions that could occur in an oriented sample: (1) '''twists''' of the material, where neighboring molecules are forced to be angled with respect to one another, rather than aligned; (2) '''splay''' of the material, where bending occurs perpendicular to the director; and (3) '''bend''' of the material, where the distortion is parallel to the director and molecular axis.
Other well-known examples of liquid crystals are solutions of soap and various related detergents, as well as the tobacco mosaic virus, and some clays.
For instance, on heating a particular type of LC molecule (called mesogen) may exhibit various smectic phases followed by the nematic phase and finally the isotropic phase as temperature is increased.
* Bicontinuous cubic phase
Although this model is conceptually helpful, its mathematical formulation makes several assumptions that limit its applicability to real systems.
Even within the same phases, their self-assembled structures are tunable by the concentration: for example, in lamellar phases, the layer distances increase with the solvent volume.
For instance, the concentrated protein solution that is extruded by a spider to generate silk is, in fact, a liquid crystal phase.
When an electric field is applied to the LC layer, the long molecular axes tend to align parallel to the electric field thus gradually untwisting in the center of the liquid crystal layer.
Liquid crystals find wide use in liquid crystal displays, which rely on the optical properties of certain liquid crystalline substances in the presence or absence of an electric field.
Many common fluids, such as soapy water, are in fact liquid crystals.
In the absence of an external field, the director of a liquid crystal is free to point in any direction.
Blue phases stabilized at room temperature allow electro-optical switching with response times of the order of 10−4&nbsp;s.
After his accidental discovery, Reinitzer did not pursue studying liquid crystals further.
This order extends up to the entire domain size, which may be on the order of micrometers, but usually does not extend to the macroscopic scale as often occurs in classical crystalline solids.
Lipid molecules can flip from one side of the membrane to the other, this process being catalyzed by flippases and floppases (depending on the direction of movement).
These spherical objects do not order themselves in solution, however.
An example of a compound displaying thermotropic LC behavior is para-azoxyanisole.
The complex positional order parameter is defined as  and  the average density.
The various liquid-crystal phases (called mesophases) can be characterized by the type of ordering.
Chiral phases usually have a helical twisting of the molecules.
This conference marked the beginning of a worldwide effort to perform research in this field, which soon led to the development of practical applications for these unique materials.
This term originates from the thread-like topological defects observed in nematics, which are formally called 'disclinations'.
A material that could be operated at room temperature was clearly needed.
During phase transitions, the heat flow required to maintain this heating or cooling rate will change.
In DSC, a small sample is heated in a way that generates a very precise change in temperature with respect to time.
There are many different smectic phases, all characterized by different types and degrees of positional and orientational order.
The columns themselves may be organized into rectangular or hexagonal arrays.
Thus in some case greater positional order will be entropically favorable.
The existence of a true nematic phase in the case of the smectic clays family was raised by Langmuir in 1938, but remained open for a very long time and was only solved recently.
This is called the middle soap phase.
It was theoretically predicted in 1981 that these phases can possess icosahedral symmetry similar to quasicrystals.
A typical phase is a hexagonal columnar phase, where the amphiphiles form long cylinders (again with a hydrophilic surface) that arrange themselves into a roughly hexagonal lattice.
A lamellar phase was even discovered, H3Sb3P2O14, which exhibits hyperswelling up to ~250&nbsp;nm for the interlamellar distance.
Nematics have fluidity similar to that of ordinary (isotropic) liquids but they can be easily aligned by an external magnetic or electric field.
In particular, a sharp drop of the order parameter to 0 is observed when the system undergoes a phase transition from an LC phase into the isotropic phase.
Elastic continuum theory is a particularly powerful tool for modeling liquid crystal devices  and lipid bilayers.
The postulated potential energy of a single molecule is given by:
These molecules are rod-shaped, some created in the lab and some appearing spontaneously in nature.
Reinitzer perceived that color changes in a derivative cholesteryl benzoate were not the most peculiar feature.s.
The next step to commercialization of liquid crystal displays was the synthesis of further chemically stable substances (cyanobiphenyls) with low melting temperatures by George Gray.
Under other conditions (for instance, lower temperature), a LC might inhabit one or more phases with significant  anisotropic orientational structure and short-range orientational order while still having an ability to flow.
The response of the material can then be decomposed into terms based on the elastic constants corresponding to the three types of distortions.
But the para-Azoxyanisole that Williams and Heilmeier used exhibits the nematic liquid crystal state only above 116&nbsp;°C, which made it impractical to use in a commercial display product.
The contrasting areas in the textures correspond to domains where the liquid-crystal molecules are oriented in different directions.
This technique of mixing nematic compounds to obtain wide operating temperature range eventually became the industry standard and is used to this very day to tailor materials to meet specific applications.
It is possible, however, to force the director to point in a specific direction by introducing an outside agent to the system.
These changes can be observed and attributed to various phase transitions, such as key liquid crystal transitions.
Similar phases and characteristics can be observed in immiscible diblock copolymers.
The first discovered was Vanadium(V) oxide, by Zocher in 1925.
The model utilizes two order parameters that describe the orientational and positional order of the liquid crystal.
This method allows for the characterization of the particular phase, as the different phases are defined by their particular order, which must be observed.
The smectics are thus positionally ordered along one direction.
There are three types of thermotropic liquid crystals: discotics, bowlics and rod-shaped molecules.
* Discontinuous cubic phase (micellar cubic phase)
This anisotropy is also manifested in the interfacial energy (surface tension) between different liquid crystal phases.
The fundamental insight here is that, whilst parallel arrangements of anisotropic objects lead to a decrease in orientational entropy, there is an increase in positional entropy.
Most contemporary  electronic displays use liquid crystals.
Despite significant differences in chemical composition, these molecules have some common features in chemical and physical properties.
'''Liquid crystals (LCs)''' are matter in a state which has properties between those of conventional liquids and those of solid crystals.
This means that the molecule must possess some form of asymmetry, usually a stereogenic center.
There are many different types of liquid-crystal phases, which can be distinguished by their different optical properties (such as birefringence).
At first, as the electric field increases in magnitude, no change in alignment occurs.
Typically only the first two terms are kept and higher order terms are ignored since most phases can be described adequately using sinusoidal functions.
One can distinguish positional order (whether molecules are arranged in any sort of ordered lattice) and orientational order (whether molecules are mostly pointing in the same direction), and moreover order can be either short-range (only between molecules close to each other) or long-range (extending to larger, sometimes macroscopic, dimensions).
Thermotropic phases are those that occur in a certain temperature range.
An additional requirement is that the system not be racemic: a mixture of right- and left-handed molecules will cancel the chiral effect.
Liquid crystal tunable filters are used as electrooptical devices, e.g., in hyperspectral imaging.
By the end of August 1889 he had published his results in the Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie.
This anisotropy determines the equilibrium shape at the coexistence temperature, and is so strong that usually facets appear.
Specifically, if the cylinders are oriented parallel to one another, there is very little volume that is excluded from the center-of-mass of the approaching cylinder (it can come quite close to the other cylinder).
The constituent molecules can inter-mingle easily, but tend not to leave the membrane due to the high energy requirement of this process.
The occurrence of such a change from an aligned to a deformed state is called a Fredericks transition and can also be produced by the application of a magnetic field of sufficient strength.
Liquid crystal materials became a focus of research in the development of flat panel electronic displays beginning in 1962 at RCA Laboratories.
For some systems, a cubic (also called viscous isotropic) phase may exist between the hexagonal and lamellar phases, wherein spheres are formed that create a dense cubic lattice.
It is characterized by the variation of the density of the center of mass of the liquid crystal molecules along a given vector.
• A low melting point is preferable in order to avoid metastable, monotropic liquid crystalline phases.
* Inverse cubic phase (Inverse micellar phase)
Emission at a photonic bandgap created by the periodic dielectric structure of the liquid crystal gives a low-threshold high-output device with stable monochromatic emission.
* Hexagonal phase (hexagonal columnar phase) (middle phase)
Even if a molecule does not form a permanent dipole, it can still be influenced by an electric field.
Low-temperature mesomorphic behavior in general is technologically more useful, and alkyl terminal groups promote this.
LC materials may not always be in a liquid-crystal phase (just as water may turn into ice or steam).
Lehmann's work was continued and significantly expanded by the German chemist Daniel Vorländer, who from the beginning of 20th century until his retirement in 1935, had synthesized most of the liquid crystals known.
For example, injection of a flux of a liquid crystal between two close parallel plates (viscous fingering) causes orientation of the molecules to couple with the flow, with the resulting emergence of dendritic patterns.
The first is simply the average of the second Legendre polynomial and the second order parameter is given by:
Since lyotropic liquid crystals rely on a subtle balance of intermolecular interactions, it is more difficult to analyze their structures and properties than those of thermotropic liquid crystals.
The effects of magnetic fields on liquid crystal molecules are analogous to electric fields.
Both electric and magnetic fields can be used to induce these changes.
In the Smectic A phase, the molecules are oriented along the layer normal, while in the Smectic C phase they are tilted away from it.
However, some liquid crystals are biaxial nematics, meaning that in addition to orienting their long axis, they also orient along a secondary axis.
These phases are liquid-like within the layers.
One of the first U.S. chemists to study liquid crystals was Glenn H. Brown, starting in 1953 at the University of Cincinnati and later at Kent State University.
This phase is often called the ''cholesteric'' phase because it was first observed for cholesterol derivatives.
These spheres may also be connected to one another, forming a bicontinuous cubic phase.
An interesting recent observation is of the formation of chiral mesophases from achiral LC molecules.
For a typical liquid crystal sample, S is on the order of 0.3 to 0.8, and generally decreases as the temperature is raised.
Only chiral molecules (i.e., those that have no internal planes of symmetry) can give rise to such a phase.
Soap is an everyday example of a lyotropic liquid crystal.
In 1991, when liquid crystal displays were already well established, Pierre-Gilles de Gennes working at the Université Paris-Sud received the Nobel Prize in physics "for discovering that methods developed for studying order phenomena in simple systems can be generalized to more complex forms of matter, in particular to liquid crystals and polymers".
Lyotropic liquid-crystalline phases are abundant in living systems but can also be found in the mineral world.
Thermotropic LCs exhibit a phase transition into the liquid-crystal phase as temperature is changed.
A lyotropic liquid crystal consists of two or more components that exhibit liquid-crystalline properties in certain concentration ranges.
Examples of liquid crystals can also be found in the mineral world, most of them being lyotropics.
• The structure should not be branched or angular, except for the bowlics.
The ''chiral pitch'', p, refers to the distance over which the LC molecules undergo a full 360° twist (but note that the structure of the chiral nematic phase repeats itself every half-pitch, since in this phase directors at 0° and ±180° are equivalent).
While not as strong as permanent dipoles, orientation with the external field still occurs.
Liquid crystal in fluid form is used to detect electrically generated hot spots for failure analysis in the semiconductor industry.
• The molecular length should be at least 1.3&nbsp;nm, consistent with the presence of long alkyl group on many room-temperature liquid crystals.
It results in two self-consistency equations that must be solved numerically, the solutions of which are the three stable phases of the liquid crystal.
In this formalism, a liquid crystal material is treated as a continuum; molecular details are entirely ignored.
'''Blue phases''' are liquid crystal phases that appear in the temperature range between a chiral nematic phase and an isotropic liquid phase.
In 1969, Hans Kelker succeeded in synthesizing a substance that had a nematic phase at room temperature, MBBA, which is one of the most popular subjects of liquid crystal research.
Because there is no physical polarity along the director axis, '''''n''''' and '''''-n''''' are fully equivalent.
Other phases, such as nonpolar nematic, polar nematic, stringbean, donut and onion phases, have been predicted.
This allows for two dimensional columnar ordering, for both discotics and bowlics.
Polymer Dispersed Liquid Crystal (PDLC) sheets and rolls are available as adhesive backed Smart film which can be applied to windows and electrically switched between transparent and opaque to provide privacy.
Aligned nematics have the optical properties of uniaxial crystals and this makes them extremely useful in liquid crystal displays (LCD).
Previously, other researchers had observed distinct color effects when cooling cholesterol derivatives just above the freezing point, but had not associated it with a new phenomenon.
Bowlic columns could be used for fast switches.
If the temperature rise is too high, thermal motion will destroy the delicate cooperative ordering of the LC phase, pushing the material into a conventional isotropic liquid phase.
Since then, two new types of LC molecules have been discovered, both man-made: disc-shaped (created by S. Chandrasekhar's group in India, 1977) and bowl-shaped (invented by Lui Lam in China, 1982, and synthesized in Europe three years later).
For instance, in certain ranges of concentration and molecular weight, DNA will form an achiral line hexatic phase.
Lehmann started a systematic study, first of cholesteryl benzoate, and then of related compounds which exhibited the double-melting phenomenon.
Lyotropic mesophases are analyzed in a similar fashion, though these experiments are somewhat more complex, as the concentration of mesogen is a key factor.
The competition between orientation produced by surface anchoring and by electric field effects is often exploited in liquid crystal devices.
Recently the stabilization of blue phases over a temperature range of more than 60&nbsp;K including room temperature (260–326&nbsp;K) has been demonstrated.
Scientists and engineers are able to use liquid crystals in a variety of applications because external perturbation can cause significant changes in the macroscopic properties of the liquid crystal system.
For the case of Bragg reflection only the lowest-order reflection is allowed if the light is incident along the helical axis, whereas for oblique incidence higher-order reflections become permitted.
A ternary mixture of Schiff base compounds resulted in a material that had a nematic range of 22–105&nbsp;°C.
Liquid crystal lasers use a liquid crystal in the lasing medium as a distributed feedback mechanism instead of external mirrors.
Specifically, bent-core molecules (sometimes called banana liquid crystals) have been shown to form liquid crystal phases that are chiral.
They are distortions that are induced by the boundary conditions at domain walls or the enclosing container.
Anisotropy of liquid crystals is a property not observed in other fluids.
The currently accepted mechanism for this is believed to be an epitaxial growth of the liquid crystal layers on the partially aligned polymer chains in the near surface layers of the polyimide.
Since then, few others have been discovered and studied in detail.
These anisotropic self-assembled nano-structures can then order themselves in much the same way as thermotropic liquid crystals do, forming large-scale versions of all the thermotropic phases (such as a nematic phase of rod-shaped micelles).
An extended, structurally rigid, highly anisotropic shape seems to be the main criterion for liquid crystalline behavior, and as a result many liquid crystalline materials are based on benzene rings.
However at a threshold magnitude of electric field, deformation occurs.
It appears that the molecules stack in layers and orient themselves in a tilted fashion inside the layers.
For instance, a liquid crystal may flow like a liquid, but its molecules may be oriented in a crystal-like way.
The liquid crystal alignment is chosen so that its relaxed phase is a twisted one (see Twisted nematic field effect).
However, liquid crystals were not popular among scientists and the material remained a pure scientific curiosity for about 80 years.
Since growth is controlled by heat diffusion, anisotropy in thermal conductivity favors growth in specific directions, which has also an effect on the final shape.
For some systems, at high concentrations, inverse phases are observed.
As a result, it allows for a triple critical point where the nematic, isotropic, and smectic A phase meet.
Accordingly, lyotropic liquid crystals attract particular attention in the field of biomimetic chemistry.
A large number of chemical compounds are known to exhibit one or several liquid crystalline phases.
Reinitzer's Viennese colleague von Zepharovich also indicated that the intermediate "fluid" was crystalline.
His group synthesized many new materials that exhibited the liquid crystalline state and developed a better understanding of how to design molecules that exhibit the state.
In the case of liquid crystals, anisotropy in all of these interactions further complicates analysis.
In 1965, he organized the first international conference on liquid crystals, in Kent, Ohio, with about 100 of the world’s top liquid crystal scientists in attendance.
By that time, Reinitzer had discovered and described three important features of cholesteric liquid crystals (the name coined by Otto Lehmann in 1904): the existence of two melting points, the reflection of circularly polarized light, and the ability to rotate the polarization direction of light.
Many thermotropic LCs exhibit a variety of phases as temperature is changed.
The Fredericks transition is fundamental to the operation of many liquid crystal displays because the director orientation (and thus the properties) can be controlled easily by the application of a field.
The word ''nematic'' comes from the Greek  (''''), which means "thread".
The precise ordering of molecules in silk is critical to its renowned strength.
When viewed under a microscope using a polarized light source, different liquid crystal phases will appear to have distinct textures.
In a typical device, a liquid crystal layer (typically 4 μm thick) sits between two polarizers that are crossed (oriented at 90° to one another).
Microscopic theoretical treatment of fluid phases can become quite complicated, owing to the high material density, meaning that strong interactions, hard-core repulsions, and many-body correlations cannot be ignored.
Liquid crystals can be divided into thermotropic, lyotropic and metallotropic phases.
The device thus appears transparent.
These higher-order averages are more difficult to measure, but can yield additional information about molecular ordering.
These lipids vary in shape (see page on lipid polymorphism).
Similar principles can be used to make other liquid crystal based optical devices.
It predicts that the phase transition can be either continuous or discontinuous depending on the strength of the short-range interaction between the molecules.
Thus, this angular arrangement sees a ''decrease'' in the net positional entropy of the approaching cylinder (there are fewer states available to it).
A positional order parameter is also used to describe the ordering of a liquid crystal.
Lyotropic LCs exhibit phase transitions as a function of both temperature and concentration of the liquid-crystal molecules in a solvent (typically water).
This definition is convenient, since for a completely random and isotropic sample, S=0, whereas for a perfectly aligned sample S=1.
These structures are formed through the micro-phase segregation of two incompatible components on a nanometer scale.
This class of materials has been named metallotropic.
The intermediate cloudy phase clearly sustained flow, but other features, particularly the signature under a microscope, convinced Lehmann that he was dealing with a solid.
The values ''zi, θi'', and ''d'' are the position of the molecule, the angle between the molecular axis and director, and the layer spacing.
This causes these systems to exhibit unique optical properties, such as Bragg reflection and low-threshold laser emission, and these properties are exploited in a number of optical applications.
When a magnetic field is applied, the molecules will tend to align with or against the field.
This led his colleague George H. Heilmeier to perform research on a liquid crystal-based flat panel display to replace the cathode ray vacuum tube used in televisions.
Liquid crystal color transitions are used on many aquarium and pool thermometers as well as on thermometers for infants or baths.
In the lyotropic phases, solvent molecules fill the space around the compounds to provide fluidity to the system.
Due to the cooperative nature of liquid crystal ordering, however, a small amount of chiral dopant in an otherwise achiral mesophase is often enough to select out one domain handedness, making the system overall chiral.
Lyotropic liquid-crystalline phases are abundant in living systems, the study of which is referred to as lipid polymorphism.
In some liquid crystal systems, the pitch is of the same order as the wavelength of visible light.
Rod-shaped molecules have an elongated, anisotropic geometry which allows for preferential alignment along one spatial direction.
Nematics also exhibit so-called "hedgehog" topological defects.
The team then proceeded to prepare numerous mixtures of nematic compounds many of which had much lower melting points.
