Modernising trends have invigorated the district: old houses have been re-purposed or remodelled, while new buildings have been constructed.
It is also a former royal residence and features the 17th–18th century Belém Palace, a former royal residence now occupied by the President of Portugal, and the Ajuda Palace, begun in 1802 but never completed.
During the 19th century, the Liberal movement introduced new changes into the urban landscape.
The city prospered as piracy was eliminated and technological advances were introduced, consequently ''Felicitas Julia'' became a centre of trade with the Roman provinces of Britannia (particularly Cornwall) and the Rhine.
Lisbon enjoys a Mediterranean climate.
Originally named ''Parque da Liberdade'', it was renamed in honour of Edward VII of England who visited Lisbon in 1903.
The Tagus settlement was an important centre of commercial trade with the inland tribes, providing an outlet for the valuable metals, salt and salted-fish they collected, and for the sale of the Lusitanian horses renowned in antiquity.
It is an historical quarter of mixed-use buildings occupied by Fado bars, restaurants, and homes with small shops downstairs.
Demographic evolution of Lisbon administrative center
The typical summer season lasts about six months, from May to October, although also in April temperatures sometimes reach around .
Other than on the modern Line 15, the Lisbon tramway system still employs small (four wheel) vehicles of a design dating from the early twentieth century.
Cascais Aerodrome, 20&nbsp;km West of the city centre, in Cascais, offers commercial domestic flights.
Lisbon's Portela Airport is located within the city limits.
The period from 1640 to 1668 was marked by periodic skirmishes between Portugal and Spain, as well as short episodes of more serious warfare, until the Treaty of Lisbon was signed in 1668.
Eduardo VII Park, the second largest park in the city following the ''Parque Florestal de Monsanto'' (Monsanto Forest Park), extends down the main avenue (Avenida da Liberdade), with many flowering plants and greenspaces, that includes the permanent collection of subtropical and tropical plants in the winter garden ().
In 1384, the city was besieged by King Juan I of Castille, as a part of the ongoing 1383–1385 Crisis.
In the 16th century, there was a brook there which the nobles used to promenade in their boats.
In October 2007 Lisbon hosted the 2007 EU Summit, where agreement was reached regarding a new EU governance model.
The major railway stations are Santa Apolónia, Rossio, Gare do Oriente, Entrecampos, and Cais do Sodré.
Several buildings of the Chiado were destroyed in a fire in 1988, an event that deeply shocked the country.
The Lisbon region contributes with a higher GDP PPP per capita than any other region in Portugal.
In the 1990s, many of the districts were renovated and projects in the historic quarters were established to modernise those areas; architectural and patrimonial buildings were renovated; the northern margin of the Tagus was re-purposed for leisure and residential use; the Vasco da Gama Bridge was constructed; and the eastern part of the municipality was re-purposed for Expo '98, to commemorate the 500th anniversary of Vasco da Gama's sea voyage to India, a voyage that would bring immense riches to Lisbon and cause many of Lisbon's landmarks to be built.
Lisbon Portela Airport serves over 20 million passengers annually, as of 2015, and the motorway network and the high-speed rail system of Alfa Pendular link the main cities of Portugal.
New residential and public developments were constructed; the zone of Belém was modified for the 1940 Portuguese Exhibition, while along the periphery new districts appeared to house the growing population.
Belém's most notable modern feature is the Padrão dos Descobrimentos (Monument to the Discoveries) built for the Portuguese World Fair in 1940.
The Lisbon Metropolitan Area is heavily industrialized, especially the south bank of the Tagus river (Rio Tejo).
Generally, a summer season lasts about 6 months, from May to October.
On 7 July 2007, Lisbon held the ceremony of the "New 7 Wonders Of The World" election, in the Luz Stadium, with live transmission for millions of people all over the world.
The defeat of Carthaginian forces by Scipio Africanus in Eastern Hispania allowed the pacification of the west, led by Consul Decimus Junius Brutus Callaicus.
Lisbon was the site of the regicide of Carlos I of Portugal in 1908, an event which culminated two years later in the First Republic.
140,000 in 1600 AD, and almost 200,000 in 1700 AD.
Perhaps Belém's most famous feature is its tower, Torre de Belém, whose image is much used by Lisbon's tourist board.
'''Bairro Alto''' (literally ''the upper quarter'' in Portuguese) is an area of central Lisbon that functions as a residential, shopping and entertainment district; it is the centre of the Portuguese capital's nightlife, attracting hipster youth and members of various music subcultures.
It takes its name from the fact that after the reconquest of Lisbon, the Muslims who remained were confined to this part of the city.
Following the disintegration of the Roman Empire there were barbarian invasions; between 409 and 429 the city was occupied successively by Sarmatians, Alans and Vandals.
Most of the Portuguese expeditions of the Age of Discovery left Lisbon during the period from the end of the 15th century to the beginning of the 17th century, including Vasco da Gama's expedition to India in 1498.
Every two years, Lisbon hosts the Rock in Rio Lisboa Music Festival, one of the largest in the world.
In the coldest month – January – the high temperature during the day typically ranges from , the low temperature at night ranges from  and the average sea temperature is .
Seating 20,000, it has staged events from concerts to basketball tournaments.
Lisbon hosted the ''NATO summit'' (19–20 November 2010), a summit meeting that is regarded as a periodic opportunity for Heads of State and Heads of Government of NATO member states to evaluate and provide strategic direction for Alliance activities.
In the early 18th century, gold from Brazil allowed King John V to sponsor the building of several Baroque churches and theatres in the city.
It hosted several matches, including the final, of the UEFA Euro 2004 championship.
The average annual temperature is  during the day and  at night.
Although modern archaeological excavations show a Phoenician presence at this location since 1200 BC, neither of these folk etymologies has any historical credibility.
Lisbon has 552,700 inhabitants within the administrative center on the area of only 100.05&nbsp;km².
Furthermore, in 1994, Lisbon was the European Capital of Culture and in 1998 organised the Expo '98 (''1998 Lisbon World Exposition'').
Around 80 BC, the Roman Quintus Sertorius led a rebellion against the dictator Sulla.
Its first attested Bishop was Potamius (c. 356), and there were several martyrs during the period of persecution of the Christians: Maxima, Verissimus and Eulalia of Mérida are the most significant examples.
In 1988, a fire in the historical district of Chiado saw the destruction of many 18th century Pombaline style buildings.
In coastal areas, such as Peniche, situated about  north of Lisbon, many people were killed by the following tsunami.
The area suffered massive changes giving Parque das Nações a futuristic look.
Unlike most capital cities, Lisbon's status as the capital of Portugal has never been granted or confirmed officially – by statute or in written form.
During Augustus' reign, the Romans also built a great theatre; the Cassian Baths (underneath ''Rua da Prata''); temples to Jupiter, Diana, Cybele, Tethys and Idea Phrygiae (an uncommon cult from Asia Minor), in addition to temples to the Emperor; a large necropolis under ''Praça da Figueira''; a large forum and other buildings such as insulae (multi-storied apartment buildings) in the area between the Castle Hill and the historic city core.
The city remains one of the most expansive examples of the technique, nearly all walkways and even many streets being created and maintained in this style.
A long lasting legacy of the same, the area has become another commercial and higher end residential area for the city.
Average annual temperature of the sea is .
Lisbon is recognised as a global city because of its importance in finance, commerce, media, entertainment, arts, international trade, education and tourism.
The heart of the city is the ''Baixa'' or city centre; the Pombaline Baixa is an elegant district, primarily constructed after the 1755 Lisbon earthquake, taking its name from its benefactor, 1st Marquess of Pombal, Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo, who was the minister of Joseph I of Portugal (1750–1777) and a key figure during the Portuguese Enlightenment.
13 June is Lisbon´s holiday in honour of the city's saint, Anthony of Lisbon ().
It is the headquarters and hub for TAP Portugal as well as a hub for Easyjet, SATA International, Ryanair, EuroAtlantic Airways, Portugália, White Airways, and Hi Fly.
Here is located the Estádio do Restelo, house of Belenenses.
To the west of the gardens lies the ''Centro Cultural de Belém''.
It held the 1967 European Cup Final.
'''Lisbon''' (; , ) is the capital and the largest city of Portugal, with a population of 552,700 within its administrative limits in an area of 100.05&nbsp;km².
As a result of the end of Muslim rule, spoken Arabic gradually lost its place in the everyday life of the city and disappeared altogether.
It was designed by the architect Santiago Calatrava from Valencia, Spain.
A traditional form of public transport in Lisbon is the tram.
During this period, he organised the tribes of Lusitania and Hispania and was on the verge of forming an independent province in the Sertorian War when he was assassinated.
It is continental Europe's westernmost capital city and the only one along the Atlantic coast.
The city hosted the 2014 UEFA Champions League Final.
These communities have no clearly defined boundaries and represent distinctive quarters of the city that have in common a historical culture, similar living standards, and identifiable architectural landmarks, as exemplified by the ''Bairro Alto'', ''Alfama'', ''Chiado'', and so forth.
The resulting Treaty of Lisbon was signed on 13 December 2007 and came into force on 1 December 2009.
Introduced in the 19th century, the trams were originally imported from the USA, and called the ''americanos''.
Between 1528-1590 the population went from 70,000 to 120,000.
Lisbon has been the site for many international events and programmes.
Several expansion projects have been proposed.
Lisbon has two UEFA category four stadiums; Benfica's Estádio da Luz (''Stadium of Light''), with a capacity of over 65,000 and Sporting's Estádio José Alvalade, with a capacity of over 50,000.
Today there are two public universities in the city (University of Lisbon and New University of Lisbon), a public university institute  (ISCTE - Lisbon University Institute) and a polytechnic institute (IPL – Instituto Politécnico de Lisboa).
In particular, it is the place from which Vasco da Gama departed for India in 1497 and Pedro Álvares Cabral departed for Brazil in 1499.
Ruled by a series of Germanic tribes from the 5th century, it was captured by the Moors in the 8th century.
Other sports, such as indoor football, handball, basketball, roller hockey and rugby football are also popular; the latter's national stadium is in Lisbon.
Fado, the typically Portuguese style of melancholy music, is common (but not obligatory) in the restaurants of the district.
Lusitanian raids and rebellions during Roman occupation necessitated the construction of a wall around the settlement.
According to legend, the location was named for the mythical Ulysses, who founded the settlement after he left Troy to escape the Greek coalition.
Later, the Greek name appeared in Vulgar Latin in the form ''Olissipona''.
As a result, the Pombaline Baixa is one of the first examples of earthquake-resistant construction.
These distinctive yellow trams are one of the tourist icons of modern Lisbon, and their size is well suited to the steep hills and narrow streets of the central city.
The whole metropolis of Lisbon (metropolitan area) has about 2.8 million inhabitants.
In 585, the Suebi Kingdom was integrated into the Germanic Visigothic Kingdom of Toledo, which comprised all of the Iberian Peninsula: Lisbon was then called ''Ulishbona''.
Lisbon has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: ''Csa'') with mild winters and hot summers.
Locally, Lisbon's inhabitants may more commonly refer to the spaces of Lisbon in terms of historic ''bairros'' (neighbourhoods).
Other sources also show a similar number, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development - 2,797,612 inhabitants; according to the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations - 2,890,000; according to the European Statistical Office Eurostat - 2,839,908; according to the Brookings Institution has 2,968,600 inhabitants.
Belém is one of the most visited Lisbon districts.
Following the 1755 disaster, Pombal took the lead in rebuilding Lisbon, imposing strict conditions and guidelines on the construction of the city, and transforming the organic street plan that characterised the district before the earthquake into its current grid pattern.
Lisbon was the site of three revolutions in the 20th century.
By the time of the Fall of Rome, Olissipo had become a notable Christian centre.
The area is commonly known as ''docas'' (docks), since most of the clubs and bars are housed in converted dock warehouses.
The country's chief seaport, featuring one of the largest and most sophisticated regional markets on the Iberian Peninsula, Lisbon and its heavily populated surroundings are also developing as an important financial centre and a dynamic technological hub.
Portugal lost its independence to Spain after the succession crisis of 1580, initiating a sixty-year period of dual monarchy in Portugal and Spain under the Spanish Habsburgs.
Sport Lisboa e Benfica, commonly known as just ''Benfica'', has won 35 league titles in addition to two European Cups.
Lisbon is also home to the Lisbon Architecture Triennial, the Moda Lisboa (Fashion Lisbon), ExperimentaDesign – Biennial of Design and LuzBoa – Biennial of Light.
The historical population of the city was around 35,000 in 1300 AD.
Lisbon's economy is based primarily on the tertiary sector.
Most of the headquarters of multinationals operating in Portugal are concentrated in the Grande Lisboa Subregion, specially in the Oeiras municipality.
Os Belenenses (commonly ''Belenenses'' or ''Belenenses Lisbon''), based in the Belém quarter, has solely won one league title.
Lisbon's second-most successful club is Sporting Clube de Portugal (commonly known as ''Sporting'' or in the English-speaking world as ''Sporting Lisbon''), winner of 18 league titles and the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup.
The style is similar to that of the Mafra National Palace, late baroque and neoclassical.
For a brief time, Lisbon was an independent Muslim kingdom known as the Taifa of Lisbon, before being conquered by the larger Taifa of Badajoz in 1094.
The inauguration of the bridge over the Tagus allowed rapid connection between both sides of the river.
During World War II, Lisbon was one of the very few neutral, open European Atlantic ports, a major gateway for refugees to the U.S. and a haven for spies.
Although the first fortifications on Lisbon's Castelo hill are known to be no older than the 2nd century BC, recent archaeological finds have shown that iron age people occupied the site from the 8th to 6th centuries BC.
The 16th century was Lisbon's golden era: the city was the European hub of commerce between Africa, India, the Far East and later, Brazil, and acquired great riches by exploiting the trade in spices, slaves, sugar, textiles and other goods.
All mosques were either destroyed or converted into churches.
The sheltered harbour in the Tagus River estuary was an ideal spot for an Iberian settlement and would have provided a secure harbour for unloading and provisioning Phoenician ships.
The Portuguese Restoration War, which began with a coup d'état organised by the nobility and bourgeoisie in Lisbon and executed on 1 December 1640, restored Portuguese independence.
The Lisbon metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $96.3 billion, and $32,434 per capita.
The total number of enrolled students in higher education in Lisbon was, for the 2007–2008 school year, of 125,867 students, of whom 81,507 in the Lisbon's public institutions.
Among metropolises in Europe (along with Valencia), Lisbon has the warmest winters, and the mildest night time temperatures, from an average of  in the coldest month, and  in the warmest month.
Another way of crossing the river is by taking the ferry.
On 3 November 2005, Lisbon hosted the MTV European Music Awards.
The Germanic Suebi, who established a kingdom in Gallaecia (modern Galicia and northern Portugal), with its capital in ''Bracara Augusta'', also controlled the region of Lisbon until 585.
São Bento Palace, the seat of the Portuguese parliament and the official residences of the Prime Minister of Portugal and the President of the Assembly of the Republic of Portugal, are in this district.
There are four commuter train lines departing from Lisbon: the Cascais, Sintra and Azambuja lines (operated by CP – Comboios de Portugal), as well as a fourth line to Setúbal (operated by Fertagus) crossing the Tagus river, over the 25 de Abril Bridge.
In the meantime, some of these areas began to become gentrified, attracting loft developments and new flats, which have profited from its river views and central location.
Instead of rebuilding the medieval town, Pombal decided to demolish what remained after the earthquake and rebuild the city centre in accordance with principles of modern urban design.
Economically strong, Olissipo was known for its garum (a fish sauce highly prized by the elites of the empire and exported in amphorae to Rome), wine, salt and horse-breeding, while Roman culture permeated the hinterland.
Notable features of Pombaline structures include the ''Pombaline cage'', a symmetrical wood-lattice framework aimed at distributing earthquake forces, and inter-terrace walls that were built higher than roof timbers to inhibit the spread of fires.
Up to 60,000 in 1400 AD, and rising to 70,000 in 1500 AD.
Lisbon lies in the western Iberian Peninsula on the Atlantic Ocean and the River Tagus.
During the last centuries of the Middle Ages, the city expanded substantially and became an important trading post with both Northern European and Mediterranean cities.
This period saw the rise of the exuberant Manueline style in architecture, which left its mark in many 16th century monuments (including Lisbon's Belém Tower and Jerónimos Monastery, which were declared UNESCO World Heritage Sites).
The city was connected by a broad road to Western Hispania's two other large cities, Bracara Augusta in the province of Tarraconensis (Portuguese Braga), and Emerita Augusta, the capital of Lusitania (Mérida, Spain).
The city also played host to the final of the 2001 IAAF World Indoor Championships and the European Fencing Championships in 1983 and 1992, as well as the 2003 World Men's Handball Championship, and the 2008 European Judo Championships.
Parque das Nações (Park of Nations) is the newest district in Lisbon, having emerged from an urban renewal programme leading to the World Exhibition of Lisbon 1998, also known as Expo'98.
The ''Mouraria'', or Moorish quarter, is one of the most traditional neighborhoods of Lisbon, although most of its old buildings were demolished by the Estado Novo between the 1930s and the 1970s.
A series of restoration works has brought the area back to its former self and made it a high-scale shopping district.
Administratively defined cities that exist in the vicinity of the capital are in fact part of the metropolitan perimeter of Lisbon.
Prior to the 18th century, Lisbon had experienced several significant earthquakes – eight in the 14th century, five in the 16th century (including the 1531 earthquake that destroyed 1,500 houses and the 1597 earthquake in which three streets vanished), and three in the 17th century.
The city refounded its university in 1911 after centuries of inactivity in Lisbon, incorporating reformed former colleges and other non-university higher education schools of the city (such as the ''Escola Politécnica'' – now ''Faculdade de Ciências'').
The art has since spread to the rest of the Portuguese Speaking world.
Automobile manufacturers have erected factories in the suburbs, for example, AutoEuropa.
Lisbon is connected to its suburbs as well as throughout Portugal by an extensive motorway network.
This was mainly due to its outer area of mostly commercial buildings, which acted as barriers to the noise-generating nightlife (which acted as a buffer to the residential communities surrounding it).
Although today it is quite central, it was once a mere suburb of Lisbon, comprising mostly farms and country estates of the nobility with their palaces.
The city occupies an area of , and its city boundaries, unlike those of most major cities, coincide with those of the municipality.
The first Portuguese university was founded in Lisbon in 1290 by King Denis I; for many years the ''Studium Generale'' (''General Study'') was transferred intermittently to Coimbra, where it was installed permanently in the 16th century as the University of Coimbra.
The city was ruled by an oligarchical council dominated by two families, the Julii and the Cassiae, although regional authority was administered by the Roman Governor of Emerita or directly by Emperor Tiberius.
The Chiado is also an important cultural area, with several museums and theatres, including the opera.
Lisboa and Troia golf course are two of many stunning golf courses located in Lisbon.
Following the defeat of Hannibal during the Punic wars, the Romans determined to deprive Carthage of its most valuable possession: Hispania (the Iberian Peninsula).
In 2008 and 2016, the city hosted the European Triathlon Championships.
A New Lisbon Airport has been proposed, but the project has been put on hold because of the Portuguese and European economic crisis, and also because of the long discussion on whether a new airport is needed.
The city hosts three association football clubs in Portugal's highest league, the Primeira Liga.
More than 100,000 refugees were able to flee Nazi Germany via Lisbon.
After the 1755 earthquake, the city was rebuilt largely according to the plans of Prime Minister Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo, the 1st Marquess of Pombal; the lower town began to be known as the ''Baixa Pombalina'' (Pombaline central district).
Lisbon has the largest and most developed mass media sector of Portugal, and is home to several related companies ranging from leading television networks and radio stations to major newspapers.
There are exotic plants and trees, a duck pond, various sculptures, a children's playground, and many cultural events going on through the year, including outdoor cinema, markets, and music festivals.
While the 1755 Lisbon earthquake caused considerable damage throughout the capital, the Alfama survived with little damage, thanks to its compact labyrinth of narrow streets and small squares.
The first, the central commercial district, is the traditional gathering place of the city and the location of the older cafés, theatres and restaurants; the second became the city's main access to the River Tagus and point of departure and arrival for seagoing vessels, adorned by a triumphal arch (1873) and monument to King Joseph I.
Lisbon is one of the oldest cities in the world, and the oldest in Western Europe, predating other modern European capitals such as London, Paris and Rome by centuries.
The development of industry and commerce determined the growth of the city, seeing the transformation of the Passeio Público, a Pombaline era park, into the Avenida da Liberdade, as the city grew farther from the Tagus.
The urban area has a population of 2,666,000 inhabitants, being the eleventh largest urban area in the European Union after Paris, London, Ruhr area, Madrid, Milan, Barcelona, Berlin, Rome, Naples and Athens.
The first, the 5 October 1910 revolution, brought an end to the Portuguese monarchy and established the highly unstable and corrupt Portuguese First Republic.
In 1147, the Crusaders under Afonso Henriques reconquered the city and since then it has been a major political, economic and cultural centre of Portugal.
The façade has twin bell towers and includes statues of saints and some allegorical figures.
From 2006 to 2008, Lisbon was the starting point for the Dakar Rally.
Its urban area extends beyond the city's administrative limits with a population of around 2.7 million people, being the 11th-most populous urban area in the European Union.
In 1506, 3,000 Jews were massacred in Lisbon.
About 2.8 million people live in the Lisbon Metropolitan Area (which represents approximately 27% of the country's population).
The result of the siege was a victory for the Portuguese led by Nuno Álvares Pereira.
Also in this district is Estrela Park, a favorite with families.
Increasingly, the Alfama became inhabited by fishermen and the poor: its fame as a poor neighbourhood continues to this day.
Its name, derived from the Arabic ''Al-hamma'', means fountains or baths.
Thanks to a renovation project that lasted more than 10 years, coordinated by celebrated architect Siza Vieira, the affected area has now virtually recovered.
The city occupies 32nd place of highest gross earnings in the world.
Before Portugal's sovereign debt crisis and an EU-IMF rescue plan, for the decade of 2010 Lisbon was expecting to receive many state funded investments, including building a new airport, a new bridge, an expansion of  underground, the construction of a mega-hospital (or central hospital), the creation of two lines of a TGV to join Madrid, Porto, Vigo and the rest of Europe, the restoration of the main part of the town (between the Marquês de Pombal roundabout and Terreiro do Paço), the creation of a large number of bike lanes, as well as modernization and renovation of various facilities.
The oldest district of Lisbon, it spreads down the southern slope from the Castle of São Jorge to the River Tagus.
The principal areas were in the ''Baixa'' and along the ''Chiado'' district, where shops, tobacconists shops, cafés, bookstores, clubs and theatres proliferated.
Among the majority of Latin speakers lived a large minority of Greek traders and slaves.
There are many other sport facilities in Lisbon, ranging from athletics to sailing to golf to mountain-biking.
The population density of the city itself is .
According to official government data, the Lisbon Metropolitan Area has 2,821,876 inhabitants.
The Lisbon Metropolitan Area incorporates two NUTS III (European statistical subdivisions): ''Grande Lisboa'' (Greater Lisbon), along the northern bank of the Tagus River, and ''Península de Setúbal'' (Setúbal Peninsula), along the southern bank (these two subdivisions make for the ''Região de Lisboa'' (Lisbon Region).
The riverfront of Alcântara is known for its clubs and bars.
With its central location, Lisbon became the capital city of the new Portuguese territory in 1255.
It stood on a little island in right side of the Tagus, surrounded by water.
Archaeological excavations made near the Castle of São Jorge (''Castelo de São Jorge'') and Lisbon Cathedral indicate a Phoenician presence at this location since 1200 BC, and it can be stated with confidence that a Phoenician trading post stood on a site now the centre of the present city, on the southern slope of the Castle hill.
Across the street, through Vasco da Gama Mall, is Parque das Nações (Park of the Nations), site of the 1998 World Expo.
During the Estado Novo regime (1926–1974), Lisbon was expanded at the cost of other districts within the country, resulting in nationalist and monumental projects.
During the Islamic invasion of Iberia, the Alfama constituted the largest part of the city, extending west to the Baixa neighbourhood.
Every March the city hosts the Lisbon Half Marathon, while in September the Portugal Half Marathon.
The final revolution, the Carnation Revolution, would take place on 25 April 1974 and would end the right-wing Estado Novo and reform the country as the current Portuguese Third Republic.
In the heart of Belém is the ''Praça do Império'': gardens centred upon a large fountain, laid out during World War II.
The city has several private and public secondary schools, primary schools as well as Kindergartens.
Julius Caesar made it a municipium called ''Felicitas Julia'', adding to the name ''Olissipo''.
Local authorities were granted self-rule over a territory that extended ; exempt from taxes, its citizens were given the privileges of Roman citizenship, and it was then integrated with the Roman province of Lusitania (whose capital was Emerita Augusta).
Its glass and steel columns are inspired by Gothic architecture, lending the whole structure a visual fascination (especially in sunlight or when illuminated at night).
Lisbon is home every year to the Lisbon Gay & Lesbian Film Festival, the Lisboarte, the DocLisboa – Lisbon International Documentary Film Festival, the Festival Internacional de Máscaras e Comediantes, the Lisboa Mágica – Street Magic World Festival, the Monstra – Animated Film Festival, the Lisbon Book Fair, the Peixe em Lisboa – Lisbon Fish and Flavours, and many others.
The 6 June 1926 revolution would see the end of that first republic and firmly establish the Estado Novo, or the Portuguese Second Republic, as the ruling regime.
On 6 August 711, Lisbon was taken by Muslim forces.
