Internal shorts from manufacturing defect or physical damage can lead to spontaneous thermal runaway.
Lithium is also used as a source for alpha particles, or helium nuclei.
Finely divided lithium fluoride powder has been used for thermoluminescent radiation dosimetry (TLD): when a sample of such is exposed to radiation, it accumulates crystal defects which, when heated, resolve via a release of bluish light whose intensity is proportional to the absorbed dose, thus allowing this to be quantified.
Estimates for the Earth's crustal content range from 20 to 70 ppm by weight.
In the polymer industry, which is the dominant consumer of these reagents, alkyl lithium compounds are catalysts/initiators.
"Pentagon officials said that their initial analysis at one location in Ghazni Province showed the potential for lithium deposits as large as those of Bolivia, which now has the world's largest known lithium reserves."
Lithium salts are extracted from water in mineral springs, brine pools, and brine deposits.
In the United States, lithium is recovered from brine pools in Nevada.
In conceptualized (hypothetical) nuclear fusion power plants, lithium will be used to produce tritium in magnetically confined reactors using deuterium and tritium as the fuel.
Carriage and shipment of some kinds of lithium batteries may be prohibited aboard certain types of transportation (particularly aircraft) because of the ability of most types of lithium batteries to fully discharge very rapidly when short-circuited, leading to overheating and possible explosion in a process called thermal runaway.
For related reasons, lithium has important links to nuclear physics.
Both lithium-6 and lithium-7 produce tritium when irradiated by neutrons, and are thus useful for the production of tritium by itself, as well as a form of solid fusion fuel used inside hydrogen bombs in the form of lithium deuteride.
Lithium has a very low density (0.534 g/cm3), comparable with pine wood.
In 1855, larger quantities of lithium were produced through the electrolysis of lithium chloride by Robert Bunsen and Augustus Matthiessen.
Estimates of global lithium uses in 2011
Lithium aluminium hydride () is commonly used as a reducing agent in organic synthesis.
Opinions differ about potential growth.
These are extremely powerful bases and nucleophiles.
Under standard conditions, it is the lightest metal and the least dense solid element.
Lithium fluoride is sometimes used in focal lenses of telescopes.
The first major application of lithium was in high-temperature lithium greases for aircraft engines and similar applications in World War II and shortly after.
Chile is the leading producer, followed by Argentina.
Nuclear weapons manufacture and other nuclear physics applications are a major source of artificial lithium fractionation, with the light isotope 6Li being retained by industry and military stockpiles to such an extent that it has caused slight but measurable change in the 6Li to 7Li ratios in natural sources, such as rivers.
The study estimated global reserves at 39 million tons, and total demand for lithium during the 90-year period analyzed at 12–20 million tons, depending on the scenarios regarding economic growth and recycling rates.
Lithium (as  lithium fluoride) is used as an additive to aluminium smelters (Hall–Héroult process), reducing melting temperature and increasing electrical resistance, a use which accounts for 3% of production (2011).
With the surge of lithium demand in batteries in the 2000s, new companies have expanded brine extraction efforts to meet the rising demand.
According to modern cosmological theory, lithium—in both stable isotopes (lithium-6 and lithium-7)—was one of the 3 elements synthesized in the Big Bang.
Whether lithium has a physiological role in any of these organisms is unknown.
These estimates are "based principally on old data, which was gathered mainly by the Soviets during their occupation of Afghanistan from 1979–1989".
After the end of the nuclear arms race, the demand for lithium decreased and the sale of Department of Energy stockpiles on the open market further reduced prices.
Additional deposits in the same formation were estimated to be as much as 18 million tons.
Other rechargeable batteries that use lithium include the lithium-ion polymer battery, lithium iron phosphate battery, and the nanowire battery.
Although details remain secret, lithium-6 deuteride apparently still plays a role in modern nuclear weapons as a fusion material.
The element serves no apparent vital biological function, since animals and plants survive in good health without it, though non-vital functions have not been ruled out.
Both countries recover lithium from brine pools.
Lithium occurs in a number of pegmatitic minerals, but due to its solubility as an ion, is present in ocean water and is commonly obtained from brines and clays.
Because of this, lithium is a good conductor of heat and electricity as well as a highly reactive element, though it is the least reactive of the alkali metals.
But in the mid-1990s, several companies started to extract lithium from brine which proved to be a less expensive method than underground or even open-pit mining.
The lithium is separated by simple filtration.
The demand for lithium increased dramatically during the Cold War with the production of nuclear fusion weapons.
Like the other alkali metals, lithium has a single valence electron that is easily given up to form a cation.
Lithium-6 is valued as a source material for tritium production and as a neutron absorber in nuclear fusion.
Marine organisms tend to bioaccumulate lithium more than terrestrial organisms.
Many other inorganic compounds are known in which lithium combines with anions to form salts: borates, amides, carbonate, nitrate, or borohydride ().
Those orange stars found to have a higher than usual concentration of lithium (such as Centaurus X-4) orbit massive objects—neutron stars or black holes—whose gravity evidently pulls heavier lithium to the surface of a hydrogen-helium star, causing more lithium to be observed.
Glazes containing lithium oxides are used for ovenware.
In moist air, lithium rapidly tarnishes to form a black coating of lithium hydroxide (LiOH and LiOH·H2O), lithium nitride (Li3N) and lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, the result of a secondary reaction between LiOH and CO2).
Lithium is corrosive and requires special handling to avoid skin contact.
These can also include small amounts of boron, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, titanium, manganese, and iron.
Lithium soap has the ability to thicken oils, and it is used to manufacture all-purpose, high-temperature lubricating greases.
These uses consume more than three quarters of lithium production.
This use was supported by the fact that lithium-based soaps have a higher melting point than other alkali soaps, and are less corrosive than calcium based soaps.
7Li is one of the primordial elements (or, more properly, primordial nuclides) produced in Big Bang nucleosynthesis.
Because of this, lithium metal is often used in coolants for heat transfer applications.
The lithium ion Li+ administered as any of several lithium salts has proved to be useful as a mood-stabilizing drug in the treatment of bipolar disorder in humans.
The metal is separated from other elements in igneous minerals.
In many of these organolithium compounds, the lithium ions tend to aggregate into high-symmetry clusters by themselves, which is relatively common for alkali cations.
In 2013, the US Government Accountability Office said a shortage of lithium-7 critical to the operation of 65 out of 100 American nuclear reactors “places their ability to continue to provide electricity at some risk”.
The third most common use of lithium is in greases.
A 2012 Business Week article outlined the oligopoly in the lithium space: "SQM, controlled by billionaire Julio Ponce, is the second-largest, followed by Rockwood, which is backed by Henry Kravis’s KKR & Co., and Philadelphia-based FMC".
This feat, called "splitting the atom" at the time, was the first fully man-made nuclear reaction.
While it has one of the lowest melting points among all metals (180&nbsp;°C), it has the highest melting and boiling points of the alkali metals.
Lithium has a mass specific heat capacity  of 3.58 kilojoules per kilogram-kelvin, the highest of all solids.
The report said it would take five years and $10 million to $12 million to reestablish the ability to separate lithium-6 from lithium-7.
After the 2007 financial crisis, major suppliers such as Sociedad Química y Minera (SQM) dropped lithium carbonate pricing by 20%.
The stockpiled lithium was depleted in lithium-6 by 75%, which was enough to affect the measured atomic weight of lithium in many standardized chemicals, and even the atomic weight of lithium in some "natural sources" of lithium ion which had been "contaminated" by lithium salts discharged from isotope separation facilities, which had found its way into ground water.
Lithium-ion batteries, which are rechargeable and have a high energy density, should not be confused with lithium batteries, which are disposable (primary) batteries with lithium or its compounds as the anode.
When 7Li is bombarded by accelerated protons 8Be is formed, which undergoes fission to form two alpha particles.
Lithium peroxide (Li2O2) in presence of moisture not only reacts with carbon dioxide to form lithium carbonate, but also releases oxygen.
in anionic polymerization of unfunctionalized olefins.
The process known as laser isotope separation can be used to separate lithium isotopes, in particular 7Li from 6Li.
It was not isolated until 1821, when William Thomas Brande obtained it by electrolysis of lithium oxide, a process that had previously been employed by the chemist Sir Humphry Davy to isolate the alkali metals potassium and sodium.
Another 2011 study by researchers from the University of Michigan and Ford Motor Company found sufficient resources to support global demand until 2100, including the lithium required for the potential widespread transportation use.
Trace amounts of lithium are present in all organisms.
When cut open, it exhibits a metallic luster, but contact with moist air corrodes the surface quickly to a dull silvery gray, then black tarnish.
The reactors use lithium to counteract the corrosive effects of boric acid, which is added to the water to absorb excess neutrons.
Some popular compounds include lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), lithium triethylborohydride, n-Butyllithium and tert-butyllithium are commonly used as extremely strong bases called superbase.
Lithium has been found effective in assisting the perfection of silicon nano-welds in electronic components for electric batteries and other devices.
Each batch takes from 18 to 24 months.
The lack of lithium in older stars is apparently caused by the "mixing" of lithium into the interior of stars, where it is destroyed, while lithium is produced in younger stars.
Because of its reactivity with water, lithium is usually stored in a hydrocarbon sealant, often petroleum jelly.
Lithium compounds are also used as additives (fluxes) to foundry sand for iron casting to reduce veining.
In keeping with its name, lithium forms a minor part of igneous rocks, with the largest concentrations in granites.
The metal itself is a handling hazard because contact with moisture produces the caustic lithium hydroxide.
LiHe, a very weakly interacting van der Waals compound, has been detected at very low temperatures.
Lithium is superconductive below 400 μK at standard pressure and at higher temperatures (more than 9 K) at very high pressures (>20 GPa).
In vertebrates the concentration is slightly lower, and nearly all vertebrate tissue and body fluids contain lithium ranging from 21 to 763 ppb.
The reaction is as follows:
Lithium is present in seawater, but commercially viable methods of extraction have yet to be developed.
In June 2010, the ''New York Times'' reported that American geologists were conducting ground surveys on dry salt lakes in western Afghanistan believing that large deposits of lithium are located there.
In 1998, the price of lithium was about  (or 43 USD/lb).
Lithium-7 gained interest for use in nuclear reactor coolants.
Reactors that use lithium-7 heat water under high pressure and transfer heat through heat exchangers that are prone to corrosion.
Lithium ions substitute for magnesium and iron in octahedral sites in clay minerals, where 6Li is preferred to 7Li, resulting in enrichment of the light isotope in processes of hyperfiltration and rock alteration.
Lithium was used to decrease the melting temperature of glass and to improve the melting behavior of aluminium oxide when using the Hall-Héroult process.
Lithium is the only metal which reacts with nitrogen under normal conditions.
One of the largest ''reserve bases'' of lithium is in the Salar de Uyuni area of Bolivia, which has 5.4 million tonnes.
For the production of fine chemicals, organolithium compounds function as strong bases and as reagents for the formation of carbon-carbon bonds.
Lithium will ignite and burn in oxygen when exposed to water or water vapors.
Lithium deuteride was the fusion fuel of choice in early versions of the hydrogen bomb.
It was produced by Cockroft and Walton in 1932.
The metal is produced through electrolysis from a mixture of fused 55% lithium chloride and 45% potassium chloride at about 450&nbsp;°C.
Lithium fluoride, artificially grown as crystal, is clear and transparent and often used in specialist optics for IR, UV and VUV (vacuum UV) applications.
One potential source of lithium is the leachates of geothermal wells, which are carried to the surface.
Other major suppliers include Australia, Argentina and China.
Most of the mines closed or shifted their focus to other materials because only the ore from zoned pegmatites could be mined for a competitive price.
Many other lithium compounds are used as reagents to prepare organic compounds.
Many are very small, others are too low in grade."
Like all alkali metals, lithium is highly reactive and flammable.
Deposits are found in South America throughout the Andes mountain chain.
Furthermore, apart from helium and hydrogen, it is less dense than any liquid element, being only two thirds as dense as liquid nitrogen (0.808 g/cm3).
A typical lithium-ion battery can generate approximately 3 volts per cell, compared with 2.1 volts for lead-acid or 1.5 volts for zinc-carbon cells.
Global consumption may jump to 300,000 metric tons a year by 2020 from about 150,000 tons in 2012, to match the demand for lithium batteries that has been growing at about 25 percent a year, outpacing the 4 percent to 5 percent overall gain in lithium production.
:2 Li2O2 + 2 CO2 → 2 Li2CO3 + O2.
Lithium is useful in the treatment of bipolar disorder.
Lithium can float on the lightest hydrocarbon oils and is one of only three metals that can float on water, the other two being sodium and potassium.
According to the ''Handbook of Lithium and Natural Calcium'', "Lithium is a comparatively rare element, although it is found in many rocks and some brines, but always in very low concentrations.
Some of the aforementioned compounds, as well as lithium perchlorate, are used in oxygen candles that supply submarines with oxygen.
Certain orange stars can also contain a high concentration of lithium.
The publication compared the 2014 lithium situation with oil, whereby "higher oil prices spurred investment in expensive deepwater and oil sands production techniques"; that is, the price of lithium will continue to rise until more expensive production methods that can boost total output receive the attention of investors.
They may increase the risk of developing Ebstein's cardiac anomaly in infants born to women who take lithium during the first trimester of pregnancy.
The US shut down most of this machinery in 1963, when it had a huge surplus of separated lithium, mostly consumed during the twentieth century.
Lithium metal is soft enough to be cut with a knife.
There are a fairly large number of both lithium mineral and brine deposits but only comparatively few of them are of actual or potential commercial value.
At the end, the stockpile of lithium was roughly 42,000 tonnes of lithium hydroxide.
When cut, it possesses a silvery-white color that quickly changes to gray as it oxidizes to lithium oxide.
The active part of these salts is the lithium ion Li+.
On June 9, 2014, the ''Financialist'' stated that demand for lithium was growing at more than 12 percent a year; according to Credit Suisse, this rate exceeds projected availability by 25 percent.
Organolithium compounds are prepared from lithium metal and alkyl halides.
When bombarded by neutrons, both 6Li and 7Li produce tritium — this reaction, which was not fully understood when hydrogen bombs were first tested, was responsible for the runaway yield of the Castle Bravo nuclear test.
Naturally occurring lithium is composed of two stable isotopes, 6Li and 7Li, the latter being the more abundant (92.5% natural abundance).
Other known binary compounds include halides (LiF, LiCl, LiBr, LiI), sulfide (), superoxide (), and carbide ().
The high non-linearity of lithium niobate also makes it useful in non-linear optics applications.
A small amount of both 6Li and 7Li are produced in stars, but are thought to be "burned" as fast as produced.
Alloys of the metal with aluminium, cadmium, copper and manganese are used to make high-performance aircraft parts (see also Lithium-aluminium alloys).
The reaction forms hydrogen gas and lithium hydroxide in aqueous solution.
The shortest-lived isotope of lithium is 4Li, which decays through proton emission and has a half-life of 7.6 × 10−23 s.
Petalite (LiAlSi4O10) was discovered in 1800 by the Brazilian chemist and statesman José Bonifácio de Andrada e Silva in a mine on the island of Utö, Sweden.
When placed over a flame, lithium compounds give off a striking crimson color, but when it burns strongly the flame becomes a brilliant silver.
Because of its relative nuclear instability, lithium is less common in the solar system than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements even though the nuclei are very light in atomic weight.
Lithium fluoride, when highly enriched in the lithium-7 isotope, forms the basic constituent of the fluoride salt mixture LiF-BeF2 used in liquid fluoride nuclear reactors.
At 4.2 K it has a rhombohedral crystal system (with a nine-layer repeat spacing); at higher temperatures it transforms to face-centered cubic and then body-centered cubic.
Lithium hydroxide and lithium peroxide are the salts most used in confined areas, such as aboard spacecraft and submarines, for carbon dioxide removal and air purification.
Lithium fluoride is exceptionally chemically stable and LiF-BeF2 mixtures have low melting points.
Multiple allotropic forms have been identified for lithium at high pressures.
Because of its low atomic mass, it has a high charge- and power-to-weight ratio.
The US Geological Survey estimates that in 2010, Chile had the largest reserves by far (7.5 million tonnes) and the highest annual production (8,800 tonnes).
This is a result of the low temperature necessary to destroy lithium, and a lack of common processes to produce it.
The development of lithium ion batteries increased the demand for lithium and became the dominant use in 2007.
In addition, 7Li, Be, and F are among the few nuclides with low enough thermal neutron capture cross-sections not to poison the fission reactions inside a nuclear fission reactor.
As of 2015 most of the world's lithium production is in South America, where lithium-containing brine is extracted from underground pools and concentrated by solar evaporation.
Lithium compounds are used as pyrotechnic colorants and oxidizers in red fireworks and flares.
Breathing lithium dust or lithium compounds (which are often alkaline) initially irritate the nose and throat, while higher exposure can cause a buildup of fluid in the lungs, leading to pulmonary edema.
At temperatures below 70 K, lithium, like sodium, undergoes diffusionless phase change transformations.
Lithium and its compounds have several industrial applications, including heat-resistant glass and ceramics, lithium grease lubricants, flux additives for iron, steel and aluminium production, lithium batteries, and lithium-ion batteries.
He named the metal inside the material "''lithium''".
According to USGS, Bolivia's Uyuni Desert has 5.4 million tonnes of lithium.
Lithium reacts with water easily, but with noticeably less energy than other alkali metals.
As a result of this, though very light in atomic weight, lithium is less common in the Solar System than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements.
Though the heavier alkali metals can be stored in more dense substances, such as mineral oil, lithium is not dense enough to be fully submerged in these liquids.
Both natural isotopes have anomalously low nuclear binding energy per nucleon (compared to the neighboring elements on the periodic table, helium and beryllium); lithium is the only low numbered element that can produce net energy through nuclear fission.
The United States became the prime producer of lithium in the period between the late 1950s and the mid-1980s.
Granitic pegmatites also provide the greatest abundance of lithium-containing minerals, with spodumene and petalite being the most commercially viable sources.
It has one of the lowest refractive indexes and the farthest transmission range in the deep UV of most common materials.
'''Lithium''' (from , "stone") is a chemical element with the symbol '''Li''' and atomic number&nbsp;3.
Most consumer lithium batteries have built-in thermal overload protection to prevent this type of incident, or are otherwise designed to limit short-circuit currents.
Lithium is also found in brown dwarf substellar objects and certain anomalous orange stars.
Naturally occurring tritium is extremely rare, and must be synthetically produced by surrounding the reacting plasma with a 'blanket' containing lithium where neutrons from the deuterium-tritium reaction in the plasma will fission the lithium to produce more tritium:
This has led to unusual uncertainty in the standardized atomic weight of lithium, since this quantity depends on the natural abundance ratios of these naturally-occurring stable lithium isotopes, as they are available in commercial lithium mineral sources.
Though the amount of lithium generated in Big Bang nucleosynthesis is dependent upon the number of photons per baryon, for accepted values the lithium abundance can be calculated, and there is a "cosmological lithium discrepancy" in the Universe: older stars seem to have less lithium than they should, and some younger stars have much more.
Because lithium is present in cooler, less-massive brown dwarfs, but is destroyed in hotter red dwarf stars, its presence in the stars' spectra can be used in the "lithium test" to differentiate the two, as both are smaller than the Sun.
The standard extraction technique is to evaporate water from brine.
Berzelius gave the alkaline material the name "''lithion''/''lithina''", from the Greek word ''λιθoς'' (transliterated as ''lithos'', meaning "stone"), to reflect its discovery in a solid mineral, as opposed to potassium, which had been discovered in plant ashes, and sodium which was known partly for its high abundance in animal blood.
At 20&nbsp;mg lithium per kg of Earth's crust, lithium is the 25th most abundant element.
However, it was not until 1817 that Johan August Arfwedson, then working in the laboratory of the chemist Jöns Jakob Berzelius, detected the presence of a new element while analyzing petalite ore.
Lithium has a diagonal relationship with magnesium, an element of similar atomic and ionic radius.
Prices rose in 2012.
Multiple organolithium reagents are known in which there is a direct bond between carbon and lithium atoms, effectively creating a carbanion.
Natural lithium contains about 7.5% lithium-6 from which large amounts of lithium-6 have been produced by isotope separation for use in nuclear weapons.
For example, the US mines near Kings Mountain, North Carolina closed before the turn of the 21st century.
Lithium chloride and lithium bromide are hygroscopic and are used as desiccants for gas streams.
It is a soft, silver-white metal belonging to the alkali metal group of chemical elements.
As with all alkali metals, lithium fires are difficult to extinguish, requiring dry powder fire extinguishers (Class D type).
Lithium is safely stored in non-reactive compounds such as naphtha.
A newer source for lithium is hectorite clay, the only active development of which is through the Western Lithium Corporation in the United States.
'We are not aware of any discoveries of lithium,' he said."
In 1818, Christian Gmelin was the first to observe that lithium salts give a bright red color to flame.
The lithium-water reaction at normal temperatures is brisk but nonviolent because the hydrogen produced does not ignite on its own.
Seven radioisotopes have been characterized, the most stable being 8Li with a half-life of 838 ms and 9Li with a half-life of 178&nbsp;ms. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are shorter than 8.6&nbsp;ms.
Lithium hydroxide is a strong base and, when heated with a fat, produces a soap made of lithium stearate.
Worldwide, this is the single largest use for lithium compounds.
Arfwedson later showed that this same element was present in the minerals spodumene and lepidolite.
:6Li + n → 4He + 3T.
However, according to a 2011 study conducted at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of California, Berkeley, the currently estimated reserve base of lithium should not be a limiting factor for large-scale battery production for electric vehicles because an estimated 1 billion 40 kWh Li-based batteries could be built with current reserves - about 10&nbsp;kg of lithium per car.
These two uses dominated the market until the middle of the 1990s.
The small market for lithium soaps and lubricating greases was supported by several small mining operations mostly in the United States.
Lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) is generally used in this application  because it converts to the oxide upon heating.
Lithium oxide is widely used as a flux for processing silica, reducing the melting point and viscosity of the material and leading to glazes with improved physical properties including low coefficients of thermal expansion.
The discovery of this procedure led to commercial production of lithium in 1923 by the German company Metallgesellschaft AG, which performed an electrolysis of a liquid mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride.
Lithium applications are used in more than 60% of mobile phones.
