Eventually, the Commonwealth was partitioned in 1772, 1792, and 1795 by the Russian Empire, Prussia, and Habsburg Austria.
The Church has been the majority denomination since the Christianisation of Lithuania at the end of the 14th century.
guarantees tuition-free attendance at public institutions of higher education for students deemed 'good'; the number of such students has varied over the past decade, with 53.5% exempted from tuition fees in 2014.
Jogaila embarked on gradual Christianization of Lithuania and established a personal union between Poland and Lithuania.
These are sent to the Seimas for ratification.
The growing season lasts 202 days in the western part of the country and 169 days in the eastern part.
The ruling elite practised religious tolerance and Chancery Slavonic language was used as an auxiliary language to the Latin for official documents.
Lithuanian literary works in the Lithuanian language started being first published in the 16th century.
Yiddish is spoken by members of the tiny remaining Jewish community in Lithuania.
The data show that there were warm periods during the latter half of the 18th century, and that the 19th century was a relatively cool period.
Litas had been pegged to the euro at this rate since 2 February 2002.
A warming trend has persisted since then.
As a result, the country was often termed as a Baltic Tiger.
The Letters of Gediminas are another crucial heritage of the Lithuanian Latin writings.
The community numbered about 4,000 at the end of 2009.
Most German residents of the area had fled in the final months of World War II.
There has been a steady movement of population to the cities since the 1990s, encouraged by the planning of regional centres, such as Alytus, Marijampolė, Utena, Plungė, and Mažeikiai.
For 19 years Kaunas became the temporary capital of Lithuania.
Among the biggest private owned Lithuanian companies are: ORLEN Lietuva, Maxima Group, Achema Group, Lukoil Baltija, Linas Agro Group, Indorama Polymers Europe, Palink, Sanitex.
The Lithuanian Armed Forces is the name for the unified armed forces of Lithuanian Land Force, Lithuanian Air Force, Lithuanian Naval Force, Lithuanian Special Operations Force and other units: Logistics Command, Training and Doctrine Command, Headquarters Battalion, Military Police.
Vilnius International Airport is the largest airport.
Torte Napoleon was introduced during Napoleon's passage through Lithuania in the 19th century.
Some winters can be very cold.
, 66.5% of the total population lives in urban areas.
Lithuania has an extensive network of motorways.
Lithuania also cooperates with Nordic and the two other Baltic countries through NB8 cooperation format.
Laws govern long-term educational strategy along with general laws on standards for higher education, vocational training, law and science, adult education, and special education.
It served 2.9&nbsp;million passengers in 2014.
During the Interbellum a national university – Vytautas Magnus University was founded in Kaunas.
Perhaps the most renowned figure in Lithuania's art community was the composer Mikalojus Konstantinas Čiurlionis (1875–1911), an internationally renowned musician.
Vilnius University is one of the oldest universities in Northern Europe and the largest university in Lithuania.
Since 1990, the festival has been organised every four years and summons roughly 30,000 singers and folk dancers of various professional levels and age groups from across the country.
Kruonis Pumped Storage Plant is the only in the Baltic states power plant to be used for regulation of the power system's operation with generating capacity of 900 MW for at least 12 hours.
The main and largest river, the Nemunas River, and some of its tributaries carry international shipping.
Lithuania has a flat tax rate rather than a progressive scheme.
During the interwar period, the domestic affairs of Lithuania were controlled by the authoritarian President, Antanas Smetona and his party, the Lithuanian Nationalist Union, who came to power after the coup d'état of 1926.
They constitute sizeable minorities in Vilnius (14%) and Klaipėda (28%), and a majority in the town of Visaginas (52%).
County administrators, municipal administrators, and school founders (including non-governmental organizations, religious organizations, and individuals) are responsible for implementing these policies.
The edicts of the Lithuanian King Mindaugas is the prime example of the literature of this kind.
In 2010 the 12th Summit of the BDF was held in Vilnius.
The Commonwealth lasted more than two centuries, until neighboring countries systematically dismantled it from 1772–95, with the Russian Empire annexing most of Lithuania's territory.
Lithuanian partisans did exist, very few supported the communists.
It is also a member of the European Union, the Council of Europe, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and its adjunct North Atlantic Coordinating Council.
The country suffered along with the rest of Northwestern Europe during a heat wave in the summer of 2006.
Lithuania, together with other two Baltic countries, is also a member of Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) and cooperates in NORDPLUS programme committed to education.
The Lithuanian head of state is the President, directly elected for a five-year term and serving a maximum of two terms.
1st Lt. Normundas Valteris fell in Bosnia, as his patrol vehicle drove over a mine.
Since Lithuania declared the restoration of its independence on 11 March 1990, it has maintained strong democratic traditions.
Lithuania has won a total of 25 medals at the Olympic Games, including 6 gold medals in athletics, modern pentathlon, shooting, and swimming.
Baltic Development Forum (BDF) is an independent nonprofit organization that unites large companies, cities, business associations, and institutions in the Baltic Sea region.
Among other international companies operating in Lithuania are: PricewaterhouseCoopers, Ernst & Young, Societe Generale, UniCredit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Phillip Morris, Kraft Foods, Mars, Marks & Spencer, GlaxoSmithKline, United Colors of Benetton, Deichmann, Statoil, Neste Oil, Lukoil, Tele2, Hesburger and Modern Times Group.
His works have had profound influence on modern Lithuanian culture.
Lithuania's major warm-water port, Klaipėda, lies at the narrow mouth of the Curonian Lagoon (Lithuanian: ''Kuršių marios''), a shallow lagoon extending south to Kaliningrad.
There is a long-standing tradition of the Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival (Dainų Šventė).
It has around  of sandy coastline, of which only about  face the open Baltic Sea and which is the shortest among the Baltic Sea countries; the rest of the coast is sheltered by the Curonian sand peninsula.
Lithuania was historically home to a significant Jewish community and was an important center of Jewish scholarship and culture from the 18th century until the eve of World War II.
The Lithuanian National Defence Policy aims to guarantee the preservation of the independence and sovereignty of the state, the integrity of its land, territorial waters, airspace and its constitutional order.
Two instrument cultures meet in the areas inhabited by Lithuanians: stringed (kanklių) and wind instrument cultures.
Lithuania has established diplomatic relations with 149 countries.
There are also special operation forces units in Afghanistan.
Despite the devastating century-long struggle with the Orders, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania expanded rapidly, overtaking former Slavic principalities of Kievan Rus'.
After the deaths of Jogaila and Vytautas, the Lithuanian nobility attempted to break the union between Poland and Lithuania, independently selecting Grand Dukes from the Jagiellon dynasty.
By the early 21st century, about two-thirds of the total population lived in urban areas.
Lithuanian life expectancy at birth was 70.7 years for males and 80.7 for females, and the infant mortality rate was 6.2 per 1,000 births.
Discuss thrower Virgilijus Alekna is the most successful Olympic athlete of independent Lithuania, having won gold medals in the 2000 Sydney and 2004 Athens games, as well as a bronze in 2008 Beijing Olympics and numerous World Championship medals.
It operates through the Baltic Assembly and Baltic Council of Ministers.
In 1385, the Grand Duke Jogaila accepted Poland's offer to become its king.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, as in the whole Christian Europe, Lithuanian literature was primarily religious.
The Russian Empire resumed the construction of fortresses at its western borders for defence against a potential invasion from Germany in the West.
Vilnius is the only city with three choirs laureates (Brevis, Jauna Muzika and Chamber Choir of the Conservatoire) at the European Grand Prix for Choral Singing.
For centuries, the southeastern shores of the Baltic Sea were inhabited by various Baltic tribes.
Over a millennium, the Indo-Europeans, who arrived in the 3rd – 2nd millennium BC, mixed with the local population and formed various Baltic tribes.
The Port of Klaipėda is the only commercial port in Lithuania.
In a record year for the port, in 2011 45.5 million tons of cargo were handled (including Būtingė oil terminal figures), making it one of the biggest in the Baltic Sea.
Ethnic Lithuanians make up about five-sixths of the country's population and Lithuania has the most homogenous population in the Baltic States.
It is written in an adapted version of the Roman script.
In 2013, Lithuania assumed the role of the Presidency of the European Union.
The remaining unit, , supplied about 70% of Lithuania's electrical demand.
The Lithuanian Armed Forces currently have deployed personnel on international missions in Afghanistan, Kosovo, Mali and Somalia.
Foreign powers, especially Russia, became dominant in the domestic politics of the Commonwealth.
Schools where Russian or Polish are the primary languages of education exist in the areas populated by these minorities.
By constitutional mandate, ten years of formal enrollment in an educational institution is mandatory, ending at age 16.
According to ''Invest in Lithuania'', Lithuania has twice as many people with higher education than the EU-15 average and the proportion is the highest in the Baltic.
Baltic Council is a permanent organisation of international cooperation, located in Tallinn.
The Soviets engaged in massive deportations of Lithuanians to Siberia, complete nationalisation and collectivisation and general sovietization of everyday life.
As a member of the Commonwealth, Lithuania retained its institutions, including a separate army, currency, and statutory laws.
According to the 2011 census, the population of Lithuania stands at 3,043,400, 84% of whom are ethnic Lithuanians who speak Lithuanian, which is the official language of the country.
A separate referendum was held on 23 May 1992 to gauge public opinion on the matter and 41% of all the eligible voters supported the restoration of the President of Lithuania.
The current Lithuanian head of state, Dalia Grybauskaitė was elected on 17 May 2009, becoming the first female President in the country's history and the second female head of state in the Baltic States after Latvia elected their first female political leader in 1999.
Lithuanian GDP experienced very high real growth rates in the decade before 2009, peaking at 11.1% in 2007.
During World War I, the Council of Lithuania ('''') declared the independence of Lithuania and the re-establishment of the Lithuanian State on 16 February 1918.
The Soviet Union attempted to suppress the secession by imposing an economic blockade.
The defense ministry is responsible for combat forces, search and rescue, and intelligence operations.
Eventually Polonization affected all aspects of Lithuanian life: politics, language, culture, and national identity.
Average temperatures on the coast are  in January and  in July.
During the Northern Wars (1655–1661), the Lithuanian territory and economy were devastated by the Swedish army.
Before it could fully recover, Lithuania was ravaged during the Great Northern War (1700–1721).
The first one took place in Kaunas in 1924.
An early 20th century warming culminated in the 1930s, followed by a smaller cooling that lasted until the 1960s.
Other universities include Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre, Lithuanian University of Educology, Vytautas Magnus University, Mykolas Romeris University, Lithuanian Academy of Physical Education, Vilnius Gediminas Technical University, The General Jonas Zemaitis Military Academy of Lithuania, Klaipėda University, Lithuanian Veterinary Academy, Lithuanian University of Agriculture, Šiauliai University, Vilnius Academy of Art, and LCC International University.
Some priests actively led the resistance against the Communist regime (symbolised by the Hill of Crosses).
The country's main primary source of electrical power is Elektrėnai Power Plant.
In 2009, Barclays established Technology Centre Lithuania – one of four strategic engineering centres supporting the Barclays Retail Banking businesses across the globe.
The best known motorways are A1, connecting Vilnius with Klaipėda via Kaunas, as well as A2, connecting Vilnius and Panevėžys.
The country boasts a well-developed modern infrastructure of railways, airports and four-lane highways.
The unemployment rate was 9.1% at the end of 2015, down from 17.8% in 2010.
The Trans-European standard gauge Rail Baltica railway, linking Helsinki–Tallinn–Riga–Kaunas–Warsaw and continuing on to Berlin is under construction.
The last Russian troops left Lithuania on 31 August 1993 – even earlier than they departed from East Germany.
As World War I neared its end, Lithuania's Act of Independence was signed on 16 February 1918, declaring the founding of the modern Republic of Lithuania.
A party must receive at least 5% of the national vote to be eligible for any of the 70 national seats in the Seimas.
Its landscape has been smoothed by the glaciers of the last ice age.
In September 1939, tens of thousands of Polish Jews became Lithuanian subjects when the Soviets transferred the Vilnius region (of the former Polish state) to Lithuania and additional Jewish refugees arrived in Lithuania during the period prior to June 1941.
According to a Lithuanian government official, this was the start of a planned removal of 700,000 from Lithuania.
Lithuanian is believed to be the linguistically most conservative living Indo-European tongue, retaining many features of Proto Indo-European.
Lithuania is the first Baltic states country to be elected to such post.
The stated position of the Lithuanian government is that the focus of Lithuanian economy is high added-value products and services.
Large numbers of Lithuanians went to the United States in 1867–1868 after a famine.
Directly subordinated to the Chief of Defence are the Special Operations Forces and Military Police.
Lithuania has produced a number of NBA players, including Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductees Arvydas Sabonis and Šarūnas Marčiulionis and current NBA players Donatas Motiejūnas, Jonas Valančiūnas, Domantas Sabonis and Mindaugas Kuzminskas.
It included a stretch from Daugavpils via Vilnius and Kaunas to Virbalis.
According to the Speedtest.net website, as of 30 October 2011 Lithuania ranks first in the world by the internet upload speed and download speed, schools and corporations ignored.
One of the three Baltic states, it is situated along the southeastern shore of the Baltic Sea, to the east of Sweden and Denmark.
31% of these households are subscribers to this network at the time of publishing.
Lithuania also has the highest homicide rate in the EU.
This movement is thought to be the very reason the Lithuanian language and literature survived until today.
Lithuanian cuisine features the products suited to the cool and moist northern climate of Lithuania: barley, potatoes, rye, beets, greens, berries, and mushrooms are locally grown, and dairy products are one of its specialties.
The cooperation between the Nordic Council of Ministers and Lithuania is a political cooperation through which experience exchange contributes to realization of joint goals.
During his short life he created about 200 pieces of music.
Sweden has the next highest FTTH penetration with 23%.
Prior to the war, the Jewish population, outside of the Vilnius region (which was then in Poland), numbered about 160,000.
Lithuania is a member of the European Union, the Council of Europe, a full member of the Schengen Agreement and NATO.
After the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878), when German diplomats assigned what were seen as Russian spoils of war to Turkey, the relationship between Russia and the German Empire became complicated.
By the end of the 14th century, Lithuania was one of the largest countries in Europe and included present-day Belarus, Ukraine, and parts of Poland and Russia.
Lithuania, seeking closer ties with the West, applied for NATO membership in 1994.
Namely, similar versions of: dumplings (koldūnai, kreplach or pierogi), doughnuts spurgos or (pączki), and blynai crêpes (blintzes).
The country lies between latitudes 53° and 57° N, and mostly between longitudes 21° and 27° E (part of the Curonian Spit lies west of 21°).
Average annual wage (before taxes, for full-time employees) in Lithuania stood at around $10,000, still around 1/5 of that in the richest EU member states in 2015.
They also operate  of standard gauge lines.
The first documented school in Lithuania was established in 1387 at Vilnius Cathedral.
According to the Lithuanian population census of 2001, about 84% of the country's population speak Lithuanian as their native language, 8% are native speakers of Russian and 6% of Polish.
These liberties, especially the ''liberum veto'', led to anarchy and the eventual dissolution of the state.
Proposals have been made to construct another – Visaginas Nuclear Power Plant in Lithuania.
The judges of the Constitutional Court (''Konstitucinis Teismas''), who serve nine-year terms, are appointed by the President (three judges), the Chairman of the Seimas (three judges), and the Chairman of the Supreme Court (three judges).
The geopolitical situation between the west and the east determined the multicultural and multi-confessional character of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
In Vilnius the average temperatures are  in January and  in July.
An estimated 30,000 partisans and their supporters were killed, and many more were arrested and deported to Siberian gulags.
According to the most recent Eurobarometer Poll in 2010, 47% of Lithuanian citizens responded that "they believe there is a God", 37% answered that "they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force", and 12% said that "they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force".
Structurally, there is a gradual but consistent shift towards a knowledge-based economy with special emphasis on biotechnology (industrial and diagnostic).
The main goal of NB6 cooperation is to discuss and agree on positions before presenting them in the Council of the European Union and the meetings of the EU Foreign Affairs Ministers.
On 1 January 2015, Lithuania adopted the euro as the official currency and became the 19th member of the Eurozone.
In 2011, Western Union officially opened their new European Regional Operating Centre in Vilnius.
The first and only still operating in the Baltic states Kaunas Railway Tunnel was completed in 1860.
Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant was a Soviet-era nuclear station.
One of the most used is the European route E67 highway running from Warsaw to Tallinn, via Kaunas and Riga.
The information office aims to represent Nordic concepts and demonstrate Nordic cooperation in Lithuania.
The largest city is Vilnius, followed by Kaunas, Klaipėda, Šiauliai, and Panevėžys.
Other languages, such as Russian, Polish, Belarusian and Ukrainian, are spoken in the larger cities, in the Šalčininkai District Municipality and the Vilnius District Municipality.
Lithuania's foreign policy was dominated by territorial disputes with Poland and Germany.
Believers and clergy suffered greatly during the Soviet occupation, with many killed, tortured or deported to Siberia.
Lithuania's terrain is an alternation of moderate lowlands and highlands; its maximum elevation is Aukštojas Hill at  in the eastern part of the country.
Also mechatronics and information technology (IT) are seen as prospective knowledge-based economy directions.
Since then, fighter jets of NATO members are deployed in Zokniai airport and provide safety for the Baltic airspace.
Lithuania has thus Europe's most available fibre network and also has the highest FTTH penetration.
It is bordered by Latvia to the north, Belarus to the east and south, Poland to the south, and Kaliningrad Oblast (a Russian exclave) to the southwest.
After the retreat of the German armed forces, the Soviets re-established the annexation of Lithuania in 1944.
After a transition from a planned economy to a free market one, Lithuania became a full member of NATO and the European Union in the spring of 2004 and a member of the Schengen Agreement on 21 December 2007.
In 2011, Lithuania hosted the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Ministerial Council Meeting.
In June 1940, the Soviet Union occupied and annexed Lithuania in accordance to the secret protocols of Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.
A special security department handles VIP protection and communications security.
Dalia Grybauskaitė was re-elected for a second term in 2014.
But, at the end of the 15th century, Lithuania was forced to seek a closer alliance with Poland when the growing power of the Grand Duchy of Moscow threatened Lithuania's Russian principalities and sparked the Muscovite–Lithuanian Wars and the Livonian War.
After a re-estimation of the boundaries of the continent of Europe in 1989, Jean-George Affholder, a scientist at the Institut Géographique National (French National Geographic Institute) determined that the Geographic Centre of Europe is located at .
Since the summer of 2005 Lithuania has been part of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF), leading a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in the town of Chaghcharan in the province of Ghor.
As World War II neared its end in 1944 and the Germans retreated, the Soviet Union reoccupied Lithuania.
They banned the Lithuanian press, closed cultural and educational institutions, and made Lithuania part of a new administrative region called Northwestern Krai.
One of its most important functions is to discover new trends and new possibilities for joint cooperation.
The United Nations Human Development Index lists Lithuania as a "very high human development" country.
Lithuanian Railways' main network consists of  of  broad gauge railway of which  are electrified.
The post of president is quite relevant; main policy functions include foreign affairs and national security.
The litas was the national currency until 2015, when it was replaced by the euro at the rate of EUR 1.00 = LTL 3.45280.
The high speeds are largely due to the fact that Lithuania has the EU's and Europe's most available FTTH network.
The World Bank designates the literacy rate of Lithuanian persons aged 15 years and older as 100%  and, according to Eurostat Lithuania leads among other countries of EU by people with secondary education (93.3%).
Various Protestant churches have established missions in Lithuania since 1990.
The official language is Lithuanian.
Vytautas Miškinis (born 1954) is a professor, composer and choir director of the famous Lithuanian boys' choir Ąžuoliukas.
The first written mention of Lithuania is found in a medieval German manuscript, the ''Annals of Quedlinburg'', in an entry dated 9 March 1009.
The Reserve Forces are under command of the Lithuanian National Defence Volunteer Forces.
During the second half of 2013, Lithuania held the rotating Presidency of the Council of the European Union.
The president is also the commander-in-chief of the military.
Lithuanian income levels are somewhat lower than in older EU Member States but higher than in most new EU Member States that have joined in the last decade.
The Polish control over Vilnius was greatly resented by Lithuania; there were no diplomatic relations between the two states for most of the period between the two World Wars.
The most exotic of all the influences is Eastern (Karaite) cuisine, and the dishes kibinai and čeburekai are popular in Lithuania.
The official language, Lithuanian, along with Latvian, are the only two living languages in the Baltic branch of the Indo-European language family.
The similar format, called NB6 unites Nordic and Baltic countries members of EU.
The President also appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's nomination, the rest of the cabinet, as well as a number of other top civil servants and the judges for all courts.
Snow occurs every year, it can snow from October to April.
Of the approximately 220,000 Jews who lived in the Republic of Lithuania in June 1941, almost all were entirely annihilated during the Holocaust.
Lithuania's climate, which ranges between maritime and continental, is relatively mild.
Lithuanian folk music belongs to Baltic music branch which is connected with neolithic corded ware culture.
During the Tsarist annexation of Lithuania in the 19th century, the Lithuanian press ban was implemented, which led to the formation of the Knygnešiai (Book smugglers) movement.
