The city is the largest settlement in the Liverpool/Birkenhead metropolitan area which had an estimated population of over 2.24 million in 2011.
In June 1919 they were subject to attack by whites in racial riots; residents in the port included Swedish immigrants, and both groups had to compete with native people from Liverpool for jobs and housing.
The Mersey Estuary separates Liverpool from the Wirral Peninsula.
Train services from Lime Street provide connections to numerous destinations, including London (in 2 hours 8 minutes with Pendolino trains), Birmingham, Newcastle upon Tyne, Manchester, Preston, Leeds, Scarborough, Sheffield, Nottingham and Norwich.
However several services such as the Police and Fire and Rescue Service, continue to be run at a county-wide level.
Historically, Bidston Observatory (actually located on the Wirral Peninsula) has provided the longest and most unbroken weather data for the Merseyside area.
Felicia was born in Liverpool, a granddaughter of the Venetian consul in that city.
There are numerous music venues located across the city, however the Echo Arena is by far the largest.
Liverpool is most famous as the birthplace of The Beatles and during the 1960s was at the forefront of the Beat Music movement, which would eventually lead to the British Invasion.
Sefton Park and Liverpool are the league's founder members based in the city with Wavertree, Alder and Old Xaverians clubs having joined the league more recently.
In this period, race riots also took place in Cardiff, Newport and Barry, and there had been incidents in Glasgow, South Shields, London, Hull and Salford.
Other notable schools include Liverpool College founded in 1840 Merchant Taylors' School founded in 1620.
North of the city centre is Stanley Dock, home to the Stanley Dock Tobacco Warehouse, which was at the time of its construction in 1901, the world's largest building in terms of area and today stands as the world's largest brick-work building.
Liverpool was home to both the Cunard and White Star Line, and was the port of registry of the ocean liner RMS ''Titanic'' and others such as the RMS ''Lusitania'', ''Queen Mary'', and ''Olympic''.
The value of Liverpool's architecture and design was recognised in 2004, when several areas throughout the city were declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Liverpool experiences a temperate maritime climate, like much of the British Isles, with relatively cool summers and mild winters.
Over recent years there has also been significant growth in the knowledge economy of Liverpool with the establishment of the Liverpool Knowledge Quarter in sectors such as media and life sciences.
In 2006 ESPON (now (European Observation Network for Territorial Development and Cohesion) released a study defining a "Liverpool/Birkenhead Metropolitan area" as a functional urban area consisting of contiguous urban areas, labour pool, and commuter "Travel To Work Areas".
''The Furys'' (1935) is first in a sequence of five loosely autobiographical novels about working-class life in Liverpool.
Brodie oversaw the construction of the UK's first ring road, the UK's first intercity highway, as well as the Queensway Tunnel linking Liverpool and Birkenhead.
It is Europe's largest free music event and takes place every August.
The Liverpool Blue Coat School is the top-performing school in the city with 100% 5 or more A*-C grades at GCSE resulting in the 30th best GCSE results in the country and an average point score per student of 1087.4 in A/AS levels.
In 2007, a new cruise terminal was opened in Liverpool, located alongside the Pier Head in the city centre.
It was during the 2004 festival that Yoko Ono's work "My mother is beautiful" caused widespread public protest when photographs of a naked woman's pubic area were exhibited on the main shopping street.
The Mayor also exchanges direct dialogue with government ministers and the Prime minister through his seat at the 'Cabinet of Mayors'.
Several major docking firsts have occurred in the city including the construction of the world's first enclosed wet dock (the Old Dock) in 1715 and the first ever hydraulic lifting cranes.
Notable managers of the clubs include Harry Catterick and Howard Kendall of Everton, and Bill Shankly and Bob Paisley of Liverpool.
In 2008, during the city's European Capital of Culture celebrations, overnight visitors brought £188m into the local economy, while tourism as a whole is worth approximately £1.3bn a year to Liverpool.
This richness of architecture has subsequently seen Liverpool described by English Heritage, as England's finest Victorian city.
Among Liverpool's curiosities, the Austrian émigré Fritz Spiegl is notable.
Her father's business soon brought the family to Denbighshire in North Wales, where she spent her youth.
The network is predominantly electric.
The construction of suburban public housing expanded after the Second World War.
The oldest building within the city centre is the Grade I listed Bluecoat Chambers, which was built between 1717 and 1718.
There are many other notable buildings in Liverpool, including the art deco former terminal building of Speke Airport, the University of Liverpool's Victoria Building, (which provided the inspiration for the term ''Red Brick University''), and the Adelphi Hotel, which was in that past considered to be one of the finest hotels anywhere in the world.
Services are operated by the Merseyrail franchise and managed by the Merseyside Passenger Transport Executive.
Novelist Beryl Bainbridge (1932–2010) was born in Liverpool and raised in nearby Formby.
Anfield is classified as a 4 Star UEFA Elite Stadium with capacity for 54,000 spectators in comfort, and is a distinctive landmark in an area filled with smaller and older buildings.
Liverpool has been a center of industrial and later innovation.
During the late 1960s the city became well known for the Liverpool poets, who include Roger McGough and the late Adrian Henri.
The absolute minimum temperature recorded at Bidston was  during January 1881, typically the coldest night of the year should fall to  (1971–2000 average) However, the variability of the local climate was exposed as the weather station at Crosby fell to  during December 2010.
St. James's Park, Newcastle, opened in 1892, was little more than a field.
Liverpool inventor Frank Hornby was a visionary in toy development and manufacture; he produced three of the most popular lines of toys in the 20th century: Meccano, Hornby Model Railways and Dinky Toys.
During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Liverpool was drawing immigrants from across Europe.
The latest plan has been to move beyond Liverpool's council boundary to Kirkby, but this has proved controversial with some fans, as well as members of the local community.
Granada's short-lived shopping channel "Shop!"
The Shri Radha Krishna Temple from the Hindu Cultural Organisation in Liverpool is located there.
By the early 1980s unemployment rates in Liverpool were among the highest in the UK, standing at 17% by January 1982.
King John's letters patent of 1207 announced the foundation of the borough of Liverpool, but by the middle of the 16th century the population was still only around 500.
The absolute maximum at Crosby is , recorded in July 2006.
Liverpool is also home to the UK's oldest surviving classical orchestra, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, as well as the oldest surviving repertory theatre, the Liverpool Playhouse.
Since Roman times, the nearby city of Chester on the River Dee had been the region's principal port on the Irish Sea.
Services operate at intervals ranging from 20 minutes at peak times, to every hour during the middle of the day and during weekends.
''The Times'' newspaper named Bainbridge among their list of "The 50 greatest British writers since 1945".
Another of Liverpool's notable senior schools is St. Edward's College situated in the West Derby area of the city.
In the south of the city, Liverpool South Parkway provides a connection to the city's airport.
Boxing events are usually hosted at the Echo Arena and Liverpool Olympia within the city, although the former home of Liverpool boxing was the renowned Liverpool Stadium.
These schools are all run by the King David Foundation located in Harold House in Childwall; conveniently next door to the Childwall Synagogue.
An anthology of poems, ''The Mersey Sound'', written by Henri, McGough and Brian Patten, has sold well since it was first being published in 1967.
However, his career ended when he drowned in Ireland in 1979 at the age of 44.
Since the 20th century, Liverpool is also noted for its large African-Caribbean, Ghanaian, and Somali communities, formed of more recent African-descended immigrants and their subsequent generations.
The local rail network is managed and run by Merseyrail and provides links throughout Merseyside and beyond (see Local Travel below), while the national network, which is managed by Network Rail, provides Liverpool with connections to major towns and cities across the England.
Despite remaining an important transport link between the city and the Wirral Peninsula, the Mersey Ferry has become an increasingly popular tourist attraction within the city, with daytime River Explorer Cruises providing passengers with an historical overview of the River Mersey and surrounding areas.
Due to boundary changes prior to the 2010 election, the Liverpool Garston constituency was merged with most of Knowsley South to form the Garston and Halewood cross-boundary seat.
The main celebrations, in September 2008, included erection of La Princesse, a large mechanical spider 20 metres high and weighing 37 tonnes, and represents the "eight legs" of Liverpool: honour, history, music, the Mersey, the ports, governance, sunshine and culture.
The first School for the Blind, Mechanics' Institute, High School for Girls, council house and Juvenile Court were all founded in Liverpool.
and Kenny Dalglish, Alan Hansen, Kevin Keegan, Ian Rush and Steven Gerrard for Liverpool F.C..
The council's 90 elected councillors who represent local communities throughout the city, are responsible for scrutinising the Mayor's decisions, setting the Budget, and policy framework of the city.
While Liverpool through most of the 19th and early 20th Century was a municipal stronghold of Toryism, support for the Conservative Party recently has been among the lowest in any part of Britain, particularly since the monetarist economic policies of prime minister Margaret Thatcher after her 1979 general election victory contributed to high unemployment in the city which did not begin to fall for many years.
For local elections the city is split into 30 local council wards, which in alphabetical order are:
Kensington and Fairfield
Liverpool John Lennon Airport, which is located in the south of the city, provides Liverpool with direct air connections across the United Kingdom and Europe.
From a wealthy family, his father had business interests in Egypt, London and Liverpool.
The Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City includes the Pier Head, Albert Dock, and William Brown Street.
The derivation of the first element remains uncertain, with the Welsh word ''Llif'' (an old name for the Atlantic Ocean also meaning flood, flow or current) as the most plausible relative.
Since the mid-1990s the city has enjoyed growth rates higher than the national average.
Other contemporary ethnicities include Indian, Latin American, Malaysian, and Yemeni.
Garrett died in 1966.
Between 1862 and 1867, Liverpool held an annual ''Grand Olympic Festival''.
The airport is primarily served by low-cost airlines, notably Ryanair and Easyjet, although it does provide additional charter services in the summer.
In the 1960s Liverpool was the centre of the "Merseybeat" sound, which became synonymous with The Beatles and fellow Liverpudlian rock bands.
In the arts, Liverpool was home to the first lending library, athenaeum society, arts centre and public art conservation centre.
He spoke at reconciliation meetings in sectarian Liverpool, and helped found the Unity Theatre in the 1930s as part of the Popular Front against the rise of fascism, particularly its echoes in the Spanish Civil War.
In 1897, the Lumière brothers filmed Liverpool, including what is believed to be the world's first tracking shot, taken from the Liverpool Overhead Railway, the world's first elevated electrified railway.
In 2006, the city's GVA was £7,626 million, providing a per capita figure of £17,489, which was above the North West average.
The area covers Merseyside and the Borough of Halton and has an estimated population between 1,500,000 and 2,000,000 and.
The Lord Mayor is Councillor Frank Prendergast.
The prolific writer of adventure novels, Harold Edward Bindloss (1866–1945), was born in Liverpool.
Liverpool's moderated oceanic climate is in stark contrast to temperatures expected in continental Europe both at the same latitude as well as latitudes much further north, with very small swings between seasons in comparison.
However, as the Dee began to silt up, maritime trade from Chester became increasingly difficult and shifted towards Liverpool on the neighbouring River Mersey.
The cycle hire scheme has been successful and has been well received by the residents of Liverpool.
The project received outline planning permission in 2012, despite fierce opposition from such groups as UNESCO, which claimed that it would adversely affect Liverpool's World Heritage status.
ITV's daily magazine programme ''This Morning'' was famously broadcast from studios at Albert Dock until 1996, when production was moved to London.
It is situated on both sides of Taggart Avenue in Childwall and has a second campus in the city centre (the Cornerstone).
The FACT centre hosts touring multimedia exhibitions, while the Walker Art Gallery houses one of the most impressive permanent collections of Pre-Raphaelite art in the world.
Opened in 2008 the 11,000-seat arena hosted the MTV Europe Music Awards the same year and since then has held host to world-renowned acts such as Andrea Bocelli, Beyoncé, Elton John, Kanye West, Kasabian, The Killers, Lady Gaga, Oasis, Pink, Rihanna, UB40.
As early as 1851 the city was described as "the New York of Europe".
Many future redevelopment schemes are also planned including Central Village (planning permission granted), the Lime Street gateway (work started) and the highly ambitious Liverpool Waters (early planning stage).
Liverpool is home to Britain's oldest Black community, dating to at least the 1730s.
The chief conductor of the orchestra is Vasily Petrenko.
The writer, docker and political activist George Garrett was born in Secombe, on the Wirral Peninsula in 1896 and was brought up in Liverpool's South end, around Park Road, the son of a fierce Liverpool–Irish Catholic mother and a staunch 'Orange' stevedore father.
Previously this had been held at Calderstones Park, situated in Allerton in the south of the city.
In 1830, Liverpool and Manchester became the first cities to have an intercity rail link, through the Liverpool and Manchester Railway.
He also was a pioneer in the use of pre-fabricated housing.
Of the remaining seats the Liberal Party won three and the Green Party claimed two.
Liverpool is defined as a standalone NUTS3 area by the ONS for statistical purpose, and makes up part of the NUTS2 area "Merseyside" along with East Merseyside (Knowsley, St Helens and Halton), Sefton and the Wirral.
Liverpool John Moores University was previously a polytechnic, and gained status in 1992.
The dance music festival Creamfields was established by the famous Liverpool-based Cream clubbing brand which started life as a weekly event at Nation nightclub.
To the east, the M62 motorway connects Liverpool with Hull and along the route provides links to several large cities, including Manchester, Leeds and Bradford.
Her first poems, dedicated to the Prince of Wales, were published in Liverpool in 1808, when she was only fourteen, arousing the interest of Percy Bysshe Shelley, who briefly corresponded with her.
Liverpool's population is younger than that of England as a whole, with 42.3 per cent of its population under the age of 30, compared to an English average of 37.4 per cent.
It also produces the soap opera Hollyoaks, which was formerly filmed in Chester and began on Channel 4 in 1995.
The name appeared in 1190 as "Liuerpul", and it may be that the place appearing as ''Leyrpole'', in a legal record of 1418, refers to Liverpool.
Many high-profile players have played for the clubs, including Dixie Dean, Alan Ball, Gary Lineker, Neville Southall and Wayne Rooney for Everton F.C.
Liverpool has a large lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender/transsexual community.
The cathedral is colloquially referred to as "Paddy's Wigwam" due to its shape.
were founded in 1878 and play at Goodison Park and Liverpool F.C.
Transport in Liverpool is primarily centred on the city's road and rail networks, both of which are extensive and provide links across the United Kingdom.
However, unlike many other derbies, it is not rare for families in the city to contain supporters of both clubs.
The William Brown Street area has been likened to a modern recreation of the Roman Forum.
For £552 Mr. Barton prepared the land at 4½d a square yard.
The Deutsche Kirche Liverpool, Greek Orthodox Church of St Nicholas, Gustav Adolf Church and Princes Road Synagogue were all established in the 1800s to serve Liverpool's growing German, Greek, Nordic and Jewish communities, respectively.
In 2008, the airport handled over 5.3 million passengers and today offers services to 68 destinations, including Berlin, Rome, Milan, Paris, Barcelona and Zürich.
Constructed in British Queen Anne style, the building was influenced in part by the work of Christopher Wren and was originally the home of the Bluecoat School (who later moved to larger site in the south of the city).
The UK's first online only weekly newspaper called Southport Reporter (Southport and Mersey Reporter), is also one of the many other news outlets that covers the city.
They made their home near Abergele and St. Asaph (Flintshire), and it is clear that she came to regard herself as Welsh by adoption, later referring to Wales as "Land of my childhood, my home and my dead".
The independent media organisation Indymedia also covers Liverpool, while 'Nerve' magazine publishes articles and reviews of cultural events.
Previously part of Lancashire, and a county borough from 1889, Liverpool in 1974 became a metropolitan borough within the newly created metropolitan county of Merseyside.
It now has the capacity for more than 40,000 spectators all-seated, but the last expansion took place in 1994 when a new goal-end stand gave the stadium an all-seater capacity.
Liverpool has also featured in films; see List of films set in Liverpool for some of them.
Numerous colonial soldiers and sailors who had served with the UK settled in Liverpool and other port cities.
Liverpool is also home to the UK headquarters of many shipping lines including Japanese firm NYK and Danish firm Maersk Line, whilst shipping firm Atlantic Container Line has recently invested significant amounts in expanding its Liverpool operations, with a new headquarters currently under construction.
The third mosque was also recently opened in Toxteth and is on Granby Street.
But instead of a match the 12,000 crowd saw a short athletics meeting followed by a selection of music and a fireworks display.
Everton performed a miraculous transformation at Mere Green, spending up to £3000 on laying out the ground and erecting stands on three sides.
While the majority of Liverpool's architecture dates from the mid-18th century onwards, there are several buildings that pre-date this time.
It became a borough from 1207 and a city from 1880.
Thousands of families were relocated from the inner-city to new suburban housing estates, based on the belief that this would improve their standard of living, though this is largely subjective.
In recent years, several areas along Liverpool's waterfront have undergone significant redevelopment.
Liverpool University's Victoria Building was re-opened as a public art gallery and museum to display the University's artwork and historical collections which include the largest display of art by Audubon outside the US.
A 2011 TripAdvisor poll voted Liverpool as having the best nightlife of any UK city, ahead of Manchester, Leeds and even London.
Natives of Liverpool are referred to as Liverpudlians (or less commonly Liverpolitans) and colloquially as "Scousers", a reference to "scouse", a form of stew.
The city is also known for its large Irish population and its historically large Welsh population.
In 2010 Liverpool City Council and the Primary Care Trust Commissioned  The Mersey Forest to complete A Green Infrastructure Strategy for the City.
Famous professional footballers from Liverpool include Peter Reid, Gary Ablett, Wayne Rooney, Steven Gerrard, Jamie Carragher and Tony Hibbert.
The 2014 Tour of Britain cycle race began in Liverpool on 7 September, utilising a city centre circuit to complete  of racing.
Largely autobiographical, the middle sections of the book are set in Liverpool and describe the young merchantman's wanderings, and his reflections.
All projects could be eclipsed by the Liverpool Waters scheme, which if built will cost in the region of £5.5billion and be one of the largest megaprojects in the UK's history.
The clubs both compete in the Premier League, of which they are founding members, and contest the Merseyside Derby, dubbed the 'friendly derby' despite there having been more sending-offs in this fixture than any other.
The absolute maximum temperature recorded at Bidston was  in August 1990 – typically the warmest day of the year should reach  (1971–2000 average).
Allerton and Hunts Cross
''Pool'' is a common place name element in England from the Brythonic word for a pond, inlet, or pit, (cognate with the modern Welsh ''pwll'').
Much of the immediate reconstruction of the city centre has been deeply unpopular.
Both the most successful male band and girl group in global music history have contained Liverpudlian members.
The RSPCA, NSPCC, Age Concern, Relate, Citizen's Advice Bureau and Legal Aid all evolved from work in the city.
Tunisian & Ivory Coast Consulates are located in the neighbouring Metropolitan Borough of Sefton
Local bus services within and around Liverpool are managed by the Merseyside Passenger Transport Executive (more commonly known as Merseytravel) and are run by several different companies, including Arriva and Stagecoach.
free school milk and school meals, cancer research centre, and zoonosis research centre all originated in Liverpool.
Much of the population loss was as a result of large-scale resettlement programmes to nearby areas introduced in the aftermath of the Second World War, with towns such as Kirkby, Skelmersdale and Runcorn seeing a corresponding rise in their populations (Kirkby being the fastest growing town in Britain during the 1960s).
The city of Liverpool has ten listed parks and cemeteries, including two Grade I and five Grade II*, more than any other English city apart from London.
Liverpool's status as a port city has contributed to its diverse population, which, historically, was drawn from a wide range of peoples, cultures, and religions, particularly those from Ireland and Wales.
A significant West Indian black community existed in the city since the first two decades of the 20th century.
In the field of public health, the first lifeboat station, public baths and wash-houses, sanitary act, medical officer for health, district nurse, slum clearance, purpose-built ambulance, X-ray medical diagnosis, school of tropical medicine, motorised municipal fire-engine,
From the mid-1970s onwards, Liverpool's docks and traditional manufacturing industries went into sharp decline due to restructuring of shipping and industry, causing massive losses of jobs.
It is named in honour of Sir John Moores, one of the founders of the Littlewoods football pools and retail group, who was a major benefactor.
Tuebrook and Stoneycroft
Liverpool has an extensive local public transport network, which is managed by the Merseyside Passenger Transport Executive, and includes buses, trains and ferries.
A number of artists have also come from the city, including painter George Stubbs who was born in Liverpool in 1724.
The two lines operated by Merseyrail are the busiest British urban commuter networks outside London, covering  of track, with an average of 100,000 passenger journeys per weekday.
Car manufacturing also takes place in the city at the Jaguar Land Rover Halewood plant where the Range Rover Evoque model is assembled.
It regularly plays host to Catholic masses.
The Labour Party gained 11 seats during the election, taking their total to 62 seats, compared with the 22 held by the Liberal Democrats.
Collectively referred to as the ''Three Graces'', these buildings stand as a testament to the great wealth in the city during the late 19th and early 20th century.
After his father's death, Cavafy's mother brought him in 1872 at the age of nine to Liverpool where he spent part of his childhood being educated.
Numerous private homes were also built during this era.
At one point there was much talk for Everton to ground-share with Liverpool, at the proposed new Stanley Park Stadium, but this was not progressed by either club.
The world-famous Grand National horse race takes place annually at Aintree Racecourse on the outskirts of the city.
A collection of Liverpudlian horror fiction, ''Spook City'' was edited by a Liverpool expatriate, Angus Mackenzie, and introduced by Doug Bradley, also from Liverpool.
Discussions include whether to introduce an elected ‘Metro Mayor’ to oversee the entire metropolitan area.
The city is also home to the oldest surviving professional symphony orchestra in the UK, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, which is based in the Philharmonic Hall.
Liverpool and is typically grouped with the wider Merseyside area for the purpose of defining its metropolitan footprint, and there are several methodologies.
Liverpool has a thriving and varied nightlife, with the majority of the city's late night bars, pubs, nightclubs, live music venues and comedy clubs being located in a number of distinct districts.
Its articles of foundation provided the framework for the International Olympic Charter.
were founded in 1892 and play at Anfield.
Bellerive Catholic College is the city's top performing non-selective school, based upon GCSE results in 2007.
Shipowner Sir Alfred Lewis Jones introduced the banana to Great Britain in 1884.
The oldest building in the area is the Grade I listed Liverpool Town Hall, which is located at the top of Castle Street and dates from 1754.
Of all the poets who are connected with Liverpool, perhaps the greatest is Constantine P. Cavafy, a twentieth-century Greek cultural icon, although he was born in Alexandria.
Discussions include pressing decision makers in the government on local issues as well as building relationships with the other Directly elected mayors in England and Wales.
Liverpool's wealth as a port city enabled the construction of two enormous cathedrals in the 20th century.
Liverpool is noted for having two Cathedrals, each of which imposes over the landscape around it.
Nonetheless the city remains one of the most important ports in the United Kingdom, handling over 32.2m tonnes of cargo in 2008.
As a major city, Liverpool has direct road links with many other areas within England.
More recently, the Met Office has operated a weather station at Crosby.
The Roman Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral was constructed between 1962 and 1967 and is noted as one of the first Cathedrals to break the traditional longitudinal design.
In 1889 it became a county borough independent of Lancashire.
Hawthorne was stationed in Liverpool as United States consul between 1853 and 1856.
The city's primary mainline station is Lime Street station, which acts as a terminus for several lines into the city.
James Hanley's brother, novelist Gerald Hanley (1916–92) was also born in Liverpool (not County Cork, Ireland, as he claimed).
Liverpool also has a history of performing arts, reflected in several annual theatre festivals such as the Liverpool Shakespeare Festival which takes place inside Liverpool Cathedral and in the adjacent historic St James' Gardens every summer, The Everyword Festival of new theatre writing, the only one of its kind in the country, Physical Fest, an international festival of physical theatre, organised by Tmesis, the annual festivals run by John Moores University Drama department and LIPA, and by the number of theatres in the city.
