*unit VIII sits above unit V in the superio-medial position
Units V to VIII make up the right part of the liver:
The myth suggests the ancient Greeks may have known about the liver’s remarkable capacity for self-repair.
Additionally, intrahepatic lymphocytes are often present in the sinusoidal lumen.
In the adult liver, hepatocytes are not equivalent, with position along the portocentrovenular axis within a liver lobule dictating expression of metabolic genes involved in drug metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, ammonia detoxification, and bile production and secretion.
In many preparations, pieces of liver are combined with pieces of meat or kidneys, like in the various forms of Middle Eastern mixed grill (e.g.
In the Zulu language, the word for liver (isibindi) is the same as the word for courage.
It is located close to the right of the fossa between the bare area and the caudate lobe and immediately above the renal impression.
MRI is used for biliary tree anatomy.
Diseases that interfere with liver function will lead to derangement of these processes.
The liver is the only human internal organ capable of natural regeneration of lost tissue; as little as 25% of a liver can regenerate into a whole liver.
*Unit I is the caudate lobe and is situated posterior l and it may receive its supply from both the right and the left branches of portal vein.
Although there are narrations that suggest that Hind did "taste", rather than eat, the liver of Hamza, the authenticity of these narrations has to be questioned.
The risk of postoperative complications (and death) is far greater in right-sided operations than that in left-sided operations.
It presents with the classical triad of abdominal pain, ascites and liver enlargement.
When these ducts are damaged, bile and other toxins build up in the liver (cholestasis) and over time damages the liver tissue in combination with ongoing immune related damage.
These blood vessels subdivide into small capillaries known as liver sinusoids, which then lead to a lobule.
The bare area of the liver is a site that is vulnerable to the passing of infection from the abdominal cavity to the thoracic cavity.
The '''suprarenal impression''' is a small triangular depressed area on the liver.
Many ancient peoples of the Near East and Mediterranean areas practiced a type of divination called haruspicy, where they tried to obtain information by examining the livers of sheep and other animals.
The intrahepatic ducts eventually drain into the right and left hepatic ducts, which exit the liver at the transverse fissure, and merge to form the common hepatic duct.
Contrast is perfusing the right liver but not the left due to a left portal vein thrombus.
There it joins with the left branch of the portal vein.
That is, the hepatocytes go from the quiescent G0 phase to the G1 phase and undergo mitosis.
The gallbladder, a small pouch that sits just under the liver, stores bile produced by the liver.
Liver damage can also be caused by drugs, particularly paracetamol and drugs used to treat cancer.
Some of the bile drains directly into the duodenum, and some is stored in the gallbladder.
Traditionally, some fish livers were valued as food, especially the stingray liver.
In Persian slang, ''jigar'' is used as an adjective for any object which is desirable, especially women.
Located in the right upper quadrant of the abdominal cavity, it rests just below the diaphragm, to the right of the stomach and overlies the gallbladder.
The inferior surface of the left lobe of the liver presents behind and to the left the '''gastric impression'''.
Once hepatoblasts are specified into hepatocytes and undergo further expansion, they begin acquiring the functions of a mature hepatocyte, and eventually mature hepatocytes appear as highly polarized epithelial cells with abundant glycogen accumulation.
*unit IV lies medial to the falciform ligament and is subdivided into IVa (superior) and IVb (inferior)
Its form varies considerably in different species, and is largely determined by the shape and arrangement of the surrounding organs.
Besides signals from the septum transversum mesenchyme, fibroblast growth factor from the developing heart also contributes to hepatic competence, along with retinoic acid emanating from the lateral plate mesoderm.
As of now, liver transplantation is the only option for complete liver failure.
Between the hepatocyte plates are liver sinusoids, which are enlarged capillaries through which blood from the hepatic portal vein and hepatic artery enters via the portal triads, then drains to the central vein.
This was first performed in 1989 for pediatric liver transplantation.
The falciform ligament functions to attach the liver to the posterior portion of the anterior body wall.
The bipotential hepatoblasts begin differentiating into biliary epithelial cells and hepatocytes.
The liver performs several roles in carbohydrate metabolism: The liver synthesizes and stores approximately 100g of glycogen via glycogenesis, the formation of glycogen from glucose.
Donors with very unusual vascular anatomy, which makes them unsuitable for donation, could be screened out to avoid unnecessary operations.
A distinctive component of a lobule is the portal triad, which can be found running along each of the lobule's corners.
Image:LDLTP.jpg|MDCT image.
The liver has a wide range of functions, including detoxification of various metabolites, protein synthesis, and the production of biochemicals necessary for digestion.
Hepatitis is a common condition of inflammation of the liver.
By helping it on this duty, you are doing a great job.
Liver allografts for transplant usually come from donors who have died from fatal brain injury.
The liver is a major site of production for thrombopoietin, a glycoprotein hormone that regulates the production of platelets by the bone marrow.
Currently, there is no artificial organ or device capable of reproducing all the functions of the liver.
Hepatic stellate cells are non-parenchymal cells found in the perisinusoidal space, between a sinusoid and a hepatocyte.
Artificial livers are yet to be developed to promote long term replacement in the absence of the liver.
The '''liver''' is a vital organ of vertebrates and some other animals.
The greater part of the suprarenal impression is devoid of peritoneum and it lodges the right suprarenal gland.
The hepatic portal vein delivers approximately 75% of the liver's blood supply, and carries venous blood drained from the spleen, gastrointestinal tract, and its associated organs.
The fibrous coat is of areolar tissue and follows the vessels and ducts to support them.
From the visceral surface, the two additional lobes are located between the right and left lobes, one in front of the other.
Organogenesis, the development of the organs takes place from the third to the eighth week in human embryogenesis.
*units II and III lie lateral to the falciform ligament with II superior to the portal venous supply and III inferior
The umbilical vein enters the abdomen at the umbilicus, and passes upward along the free margin of the falciform ligament of the liver to the inferior surface of the liver.
This is caused by the descending portion of the duodenum, and is known as the '''duodenal impression'''.
WNT/β-catenin has now been identified to be playing a key role in this phenomenon.
The cystic duct from the gallbladder joins with the common hepatic duct to form the common bile duct.
In the periphery of each segment there is vascular outflow through the hepatic veins.
The liver is thought to be responsible for up to 500 separate functions, usually in combination with other systems and organs.
We are grateful for it".
In Greek mythology, Prometheus was punished by the gods for revealing fire to humans, by being chained to a rock where a vulture (or an eagle) would peck out his liver, which would regenerate overnight.
Hepatic encephalopathy is caused by an accumulation of toxins in the bloodstream that are normally removed by the liver.
The Persian, Urdu, and Hindi languages (جگر or जिगर or ''jigar'') refer to the liver in figurative speech to indicate courage and strong feelings, or "their best"; e.g., "This Mecca has thrown to you the pieces of its liver!".
In the disorders of cirrhosis and portal hypertension, the umbilical vein can open up again.
Lobules are the functional units of the liver.
After two to five days, the umbilical vein and ductus venosus are completely obliterated; the former becomes the round ligament of liver and the latter becomes the ligamentum venosum.
The bilirubin results from the breakup of the hemoglobin of dead red blood cells; normally, the liver removes bilirubin from the blood and excretes it through bile.
In most cases, the liver only produces symptoms after extensive damage.
It is also responsible for a large part of amino acid synthesis.
Due to the ability of the liver to regenerate, both the donor and recipient end up with normal liver function if all goes well.
Terminology related to the liver often starts in ''hepat-''  from the Greek word for liver.
The liver also produces insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), a polypeptide protein hormone that plays an important role in childhood growth and continues to have anabolic effects in adults.
Some of the proteins synthesized by the liver include coagulation factors I (fibrinogen), II (prothrombin), V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XIII, as well as protein C, protein S and antithrombin.
The amphioxus hepatic caecum produces the liver-specific proteins vitellogenin, antithrombin, plasminogen, alanine aminotransferase, and insulin/Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)
It can be palpated in a liver span measurement.
The mesenchyme of septum transversum induces this endoderm to proliferate, to branch, and to form the glandular epithelium of the liver.
The liver bud separates into the lobes.
After migration of hepatoblasts into the septum transversum mesenchyme, the hepatic architecture begins to be established, with liver sinusoids and bile canaliculi appearing.
Hepatomegaly refers to an enlarged liver and can be due to many causes.
The portal triad, misleadingly named, consists of five structures: a branch of the hepatic artery, a branch of the hepatic portal vein, and a bile duct, as well as lymphatic vessels and a branch of the vagus nerve.
In the growing fetus, a major source of blood to the liver is the umbilical vein which supplies nutrients to the growing fetus.
The tissue is sent to the laboratory, where it is analyzed under a microscope.
The biliary epithelial cells differentiate from hepatoblasts around portal veins, first producing a monolayer, and then a bilayer of cuboidal cells.
The duct, vein, and artery divide into left and right branches, and the areas of the liver supplied by these branches constitute the functional left and right lobes.The functional lobes are separated by the imaginary plane, Cantlie's line, joining the gallbladder fossa to the inferior vena cava.
The liver is also responsible for gluconeogenesis, which is the synthesis of glucose from certain amino acids, lactate or glycerol.
Non-parenchymal cells constitute 40% of the total number of liver cells but only 6.5% of its volume.
In the liver, large areas of the tissues are formed but for the formation of new cells there must be sufficient amount of material so the circulation of the blood becomes more active.
Only 20 percent of an adult's liver (Couinaud segments 2 and 3) is needed to serve as a liver allograft for an infant or small child.
It contains one or more hepatic veins which drain directly into the IVC.
The central area or hilum, known as the porta hepatis is where the common bile duct, hepatic portal vein, and the hepatic artery proper enter the liver.
This procedure is more controversial, as it entails performing a much larger operation on the donor, and indeed there have been at least two donor deaths out of the first several hundred cases.
A portion of the hepatic diverticulum (that region closest to the digestive tube) continues to function as the drainage duct of the liver, and a branch from this duct produces the gallbladder.
This contrasts with true regeneration where both original function and form are restored.
The left lobe is divided into the medial and lateral segments by the left hepatic vein.
The remainder of the units (II to VIII) are numbered in a clockwise fashion:
There is also some evidence of bipotential stem cells, called hepatic oval cells or ovalocytes (not to be confused with oval red blood cells of ovalocytosis), which are thought to reside in the canals of Hering.
Damage to the liver is sometimes determined with a biopsy, particularly when the cause of liver damage is unknown.
Medial to the renal impression is a third and slightly marked impression, lying between it and the neck of the gall-bladder.
The liver plays several roles in lipid metabolism: it performs cholesterol synthesis, lipogenesis, the production of triglycerides, and a bulk of the body's lipoproteins are synthesized in the liver.
The then - major, Jaime Quintanilla, also happened to be a doctor, and thought appropriate to promote the monument.
In the human embryo, the hepatic diverticulum is the tube of endoderm that extends out from the foregut into the surrounding mesenchyme.
Sometimes, an ultrasound or a CT scan is needed to produce an image of the liver.
They are cuboidal epithelium in the small interlobular bile ducts, but become columnar and mucus secreting in larger bile ducts approaching the porta hepatis and the extrahepatic ducts.
The liver is responsible for the breakdown and excretion of many waste products.
MDCT is good in vascular anatomy and volumetry.
In the first trimester fetus, the liver is the main site of red blood cell production.
However, the liver has a great capacity to regenerate and has a large reserve capacity.
A recent publication has addressed the problem of donor mortality, and at least 14 cases have been found.
This can lead to scarring (fibrosis) and cirrhosis.
The caudate lobe is a separate structure which receives blood flow from both the right- and left-sided vascular branches.
*unit VI is located more posteriorly
If infection is suspected, then other serological tests will be carried out.
An important anatomical landmark, the porta hepatis, also known as the ''transverse fissure of the liver'', divides this left portion into four segments, which can be numbered starting at the caudate lobe as I in an anticlockwise manner.
It was used to prepare delicacies, such as poached skate liver on toast in England, as well as the ''beignets de foie de raie'' and ''foie de raie en croute'' in French cuisine.
Because of its strategic location and multidimensional functions, the liver is also prone to many diseases.
Estimates regarding the organ's total number of functions vary, but textbooks generally cite it being around 500.
The fissure for the round ligament of the liver (ligamentum teres) also separates the medial and lateral segments.
Each segment has its own vascular inflow, outflow and biliary drainage.
However, medications with shorter half-lives, such as lorazepam and oxazepam, are preferred in most cases when benzodiazepines are required in regard to geriatric medicine.
File:Lateral MIP CT of anomalous surface hepatic veins.jpg|Lateral MIP view in the same patient
File:Axial CT anomalous hepatic veins.jpg|Axial CT image showing anomalous hepatic veins coursing on the subcapsular anterior surface of the liver.
*unit V is the most medial and inferior
The liver receives a dual blood supply from the hepatic portal vein and hepatic arteries.
On November 26, 1987, the city of Ferrol, Spain, inaugurated what is believed to be the only monument to the liver in the world.
At birth the liver comprises roughly 4% of body weight and is at average 120 g. Over the course of development, it will increase to 1.4–1.6&nbsp;kg but will only take up 2.5–3.5% of body weight.
It is both the heaviest internal organ and the largest gland in the human body.
The ductus venosus carries blood from the left portal vein to the left hepatic vein and then to the inferior vena cava, allowing placental blood to bypass the liver.
The whole surface of the liver is covered in a serous coat derived from peritoneum and this has an inner fibrous coat (Glisson's capsule) to which it is firmly adhered.
The various functions of the liver are carried out by the liver cells or hepatocytes.
Within the liver, these ducts are termed ''intrahepatic'' bile ducts, and once they exit the liver they are considered ''extrahepatic''.
Arterial anatomy contraindicated for liver donation
Oxygen is provided from both sources; approximately half of the liver's oxygen demand is met by the hepatic portal vein, and half is met by the hepatic arteries.
Liver diseases may be diagnosed by liver function tests–blood tests that can identify various markers.
The hepatic arteries supply arterial blood to the liver, accounting for the remaining quarter of its blood flow.
The liver breaks down ammonia into urea as part of the urea cycle, and the urea is excreted in the urine.
The medial segment is also called the quadrate lobe.
The left umbilical vein becomes the ductus venosus and the right vitelline vein becomes the portal vein.
Image:LDLTA.jpg|MDCT image.
Liver sausages may also be used as spreads.
By the 32nd week of gestation, the bone marrow has almost completely taken over that task.
Image:LDLT volume measure.jpg|MDCT image.
There are several impressions on the surface of the liver which accommodate the various adjacent structures and organs.
Liver sausages such as Braunschweiger and liverwurst are also a valued meal.
This sometimes results in toxication, when the metabolite is more toxic than its precursor.
In some other species, such as fish, the liver undergoes true regeneration by restoring both shape and size of the organ.
The '''visceral surface''' or inferior surface, is uneven and concave.
The internal structure of the liver is broadly similar in all vertebrates.
The middle hepatic vein also demarcates the true right and left lobes.
The biliary tract is derived from the branches of the bile ducts.
Living donor liver transplantation is a technique in which a portion of a living person's liver is removed and used to replace the entire liver of the recipient.
The biliary tract, also known as the biliary tree, is the path by which bile is secreted by the liver then transported to the first part of the small intestine, the duodenum.
Adipose and liver cells produce glycerol by breakdown of fat, which the liver uses for gluconeogenesis.
The evaluation is usually performed by multidetector row computed tomography (MDCT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
The lobules are roughly hexagonal, and consist of plates of hepatocytes radiating from a central vein.The central vein joins to the hepatic vein to carry blood out from the liver.
Animal livers are rich in iron and vitamin A, and cod liver oil is commonly used as a dietary supplement.
The most usual cause of this is viral, and the most common of these infections are hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E. Some of these infections are sexually transmitted.
In the motion picture ''The Message'', Hind bint Utbah is implied or portrayed eating the liver of Hamza ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib during the Battle of Uhud.
3D image created by MDCT can clearly visualize the liver, measure the liver volume, and plan the dissection plane to facilitate the liver transplantation procedure.
The Couinaud classification of liver anatomy divides the liver into eight functionally independent segments.
Microscopically, each liver lobe is seen to be made up of hepatic lobules.
At an approximate cost of $3.200, the monument stands in the village of Balón.
Infection with hepatitis B virus or hepatitis C virus is the main cause of  liver cancer.
The plane separates the liver into the true right and left lobes.
The lobules are held together by fine areolar tissue which extends into the structure of the liver, by accompanying the vessels (veins and arteries) ducts and nerves through the hepatic portal, as a fibrous capsule called '''Glisson's capsule'''.
The division of the liver into independent units means that segments can be resected without damaging the remaining segments.
The fetal liver releases some blood stem cells that migrate to the fetal thymus, creating the T-cells or T-lymphocytes.
File:Anterior MIP image of anomalous hepatic veins.jpg|Maximum intensity projection (MIP) CT image as viewed anteriorly showing the anomalous hepatic veins coursing on the anterior surface of the liver
The liver plays a role in the production of clotting factors as well as red blood cell production.
These peritoneal ligaments are not related to the anatomic ligaments in joints, and the right and left triangular ligaments have no known functional importance, though they serve as surface landmarks.
Scientific and medical works about liver regeneration often refer to the Greek Titan Prometheus who was chained to a rock in the Caucasus where, each day, his liver was devoured by an eagle, only to grow back each night.
On the '''diaphragmatic surface''', apart from a large triangular bare area where it connects to the diaphragm, the liver is covered by a thin double-layered membrane, the peritoneum, that help reduces friction against other organs.
The lobes that are removed do not regrow and the growth of the liver is a restoration of function, not original form.
In a biopsy, a needle is inserted into the skin just below the rib cage and a tissue sample obtained.
Bile either drains directly into the duodenum via the common bile duct, or is temporarily stored in the gallbladder via the cystic duct.
An organ sometimes referred to as a liver is found associated with the digestive tract of the primitive chordate ''Amphioxus''.
The classification system uses the vascular supply in the liver to separate the functional units (numbered I to VIII):
Other disorders caused by excessive alcohol consumption are grouped under alcoholic liver diseases and these include alcoholic hepatitis, fatty liver, and cirrhosis.
This means that resection lines parallel the hepatic veins, leaving the portal veins, bile ducts, and hepatic arteries intact.
The Talmud (tractate ''Berakhot 61b'') refers to the liver as the seat of anger, with the gallbladder counteracting this.
The latter do not require ultrasound guidance, lab involvement, microscopic analysis, organ damage, pain, or patient sedation; and the results are available immediately on a computer screen.
Image:R_vs_L_Liver_by_CT.PNG|Phase contrast CT image.
Most transplants are done for chronic liver diseases leading to cirrhosis, such as chronic hepatitis C, alcoholism, autoimmune hepatitis, and many others.
Blood flows through the liver sinusoids and empties into the central vein of each lobule.
(The liver is the only human internal organ that actually can regenerate itself to a significant extent.)
In the centre of each segment there is a branch of the portal vein, hepatic artery and bile duct.
When needed, the liver releases glucose into the blood by performing glycogenolysis, the breakdown of glycogen into glucose.
Many diseases of the liver are accompanied by jaundice caused by increased levels of bilirubin in the system.
70–85% of the liver volume is occupied by parenchymal hepatocytes.
In the widely used Couinaud (or "French") system, the functional lobes are further divided into a total of eight subsegments based on a transverse plane through the bifurcation of the main portal vein.
Budd–Chiari syndrome is a condition caused by blockage of the hepatic veins (including thrombosis) that drain the liver.
The hepatic artery carries oxygen-rich blood from the aorta, whereas the portal vein carries blood rich in digested nutrients from the entire gastrointestinal tract and also from the spleen and pancreas.
The peritoneum folds back on itself to form the falciform ligament and the right and left triangular ligaments.
There is currently no way to compensate for the absence of liver function in the long term, although liver dialysis techniques can be used in the short term.
This process is activated by the p75 receptors.
