After World War II, the Cinema Company Ljubljana, later named ''Ljubljana Cinematographers'', was established and managed a number of already functioning movie theaters in Ljubljana, including the only Yugoslav children's theater.
The symbol of the city is the Ljubljana Dragon.
It was the parent society of all Slovene Sokol societies as well as an encouragement for the establishment of the Croatian Sokol society in Zagreb.
The fleet is relatively modern.
A toll sticker system has been in use on the Ljubljana Ring Road since 1 July 2008.
In addition, the Arena Triglav complex of six jumping hills is located in the Šiška District.
Tivoli City Park () is the largest park in Ljubljana.
The Slovene National Opera and Ballet Theatre also resides in Ljubljana, presenting a wide variety of domestic and foreign, modern and classic, opera, ballet and concert works.
The city, with an area of , is situated in the Ljubljana Basin in Central Slovenia, between the Alps and the Karst.
Cultural events and weddings also take place there.
For passengers, the Slovenian Railways company offers the possibility to buy a daily or monthly city pass that can be used to travel between them.
They both compete in the Slovenian Hockey League; HDD Olimpija Ljubljana also takes part in the Austrian Hockey League.
Today, it is protected as a technical monument.
Ljubljana's ice hockey clubs are HK Slavija and HDD Olimpija.
Yearly MoTA organizes Sonica Festival.
The original has been moved into the National Gallery in 2006.
All international transit trains in Slovenia drive through the Ljubljana hub, and all international passenger trains stop there.
In 1597, Jesuits established the Jesuit College (1597–1773), intended to transmit general education.
The city's architecture is a mix of styles.
The first public library was the Carniolan Estates' Library, established in&nbsp;1569 by Primož Trubar.
In 1597, Jesuits arrived in the city, followed in 1606 by the Capuchins, to eradicate Protestantism.
They work with the municipality council to make known residents' suggestions and prepare activities in their territories.
The center of the city is more difficult to access especially in the peak hours due to long arteries with traffic lights and a large number of daily commuters.
It was there that Jason struck down a monster.
The last Sunday in October, the Ljubljana Marathon and a few minor competition runs take place on the city streets.
The origin of the city's name is unclear.
The Cavalier drives in the car-free zone in the Ljubljana downtown.
It is historically more believable that the dragon was adopted from Saint George, the patron of the Ljubljana Castle chapel built in the 15th century.
Of over 4,500 plant species and subspecies, roughly a third is endemic to Slovenia, whereas the rest originate from other European places and other continents.
The city of Ljubljana is governed by the City Municipality of Ljubljana (; MOL), which is led by the city council.
Situated at the middle of a trade route between the northern Adriatic Sea and the Danube region, it was the historical capital of Carniola, a Slovene-inhabited part of the Habsburg Monarchy, and it has been the cultural, educational, economic, political, and administrative center of independent Slovenia since 1991.
The rail goes from Krek Square (''Krekov trg'') near the Ljubljana Central Market to Ljubljana Castle.
Ljubljana Dance Theatre is today the only venue in Ljubljana dedicated to contemporary dance.
There are two major ponds in Ljubljana.
He decorated them with large stone balusters and lamps.
After they were expelled in 1598, marking the beginning of the Counter-Reformation, Catholic Bishop Thomas Chrön ordered the public burning of eight cartloads of Protestant books.
In Ljubljana, the occupying forces established strongholds and command centers of Quisling organisations, the Anti-Communist Volunteer Militia under Italy and the Home Guard under German occupation.
In 1821, it hosted the Congress of Laibach, which fixed European political borders for years to come.
Easily identifiable due to its green dome and twin towers, it is located at Cyril and Methodius Square () by the nearby Ljubljana Central Market and Town Hall.
Ljubljana's climate is oceanic (Köppen climate classification "Cfb"), bordering on a humid subtropical climate zone (Köppen climate classification ''Cfa''), with continental characteristics such as warm summers and moderately cold winters.
Only a tourist train leaves Prešeren Square every day, transporting tourists to Ljubljana Castle.
The daily number of rentals is around 2,500.
In the early 1960s, it was succeeded by the Ljubljana City Art Gallery, which has presented a number of modern Slovene and foreign artists.
This monster has evolved into the dragon that today is present in the city coat of arms and flag.
Since 1291, there were also trade-oriented private schools in Ljubljana.
All state schools are free, but the number of students they can accept is limited.
The first sports society in Ljubljana was the Gymnastic Society South Sokol (Slovene: ), established in 1863 and succeeded in 1868 by the Ljubljana Sokol.
Despite the appearance of large buildings, especially at the city's edge, Ljubljana's historic center remains intact.
Thunderstorms are very common from May to September and can occasionally be quite heavy.
To the north, A1-E57 leads to Maribor, Graz and Vienna.
In July 2015, over four days, the 56th Ljubljana Jazz Festival took place.
The city is called in Italian ''Lubiana'' and in  or ''Aemona''
Originally owned by a number of possessors, until the first half of the 12th century, the territory south of the Sava where the town of Ljubljana developed gradually became property of the Carinthian family of the Dukes of Sponheim.
The Trnovo Bridge is the most prominent object of Plečnik's renovation of the banks of the Gradaščica.
A number of cinema festivals took place in the 1960s, and a cinematheque opened its doors in 1963.
After World War II, Ljubljana became the capital of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia, part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Around 50 BC, the Romans built a military encampment that later became a permanent settlement called Iulia Aemona.
Beside football, the stadium is designed to host cultural events as well.
During antiquity, it was the site of a Roman city called '''Emona'''.
Since May 2011, the BicikeLJ, a self-service bicycle rental system offers the residents and visitors of Ljubljana 300 bicycles and 600 parking spots at 31 stations in the wider city center area.
On 10 October 2010, Janković was re-elected for another four-year term with 64.79% of the vote.
A statue of the Slovene national poet France Prešeren with a muse stands in the middle of the square.
It features twelve screens, including an IMAX 3D screen.
Since the municipal elections of 22 October 2006 until his confirmation as a deputy in the National Assembly of Slovenian in December 2011, Zoran Janković, previously the managing director of the Mercator retail chain, was the mayor of Ljubljana.
Instead, its programs are realised in different locations and contexts in temporary physical and virtual spaces dedicated to advancing the research, production and presentation of transitory, experimental, and live art forms.
Public order and municipal traffic regulations are also supervised by the city traffic wardens ().
The river transport on the Ljubljanica and the Sava was the main means of cargo transport to and from the city until the mid-19th century, when railroads were built.
The main watercourses in Ljubljana are the Ljubljanica, the Sava, the Gradaščica, the Mali Graben, the Iška and the Iščica Rivers.
It has a football stadium with five courts, an athletic hall, outdoor athletic areas, tennis courts, a Boules court, and a sand volleyball court.
There are five areal police stations and four sectoral police stations in Ljubljana.
It was administered by the Counts of Gorizia from 1279 until 1335, when it became the capital town of Carniola.
Prehistoric pile dwellings and the oldest wooden wheel in the world are among the most notable archeological findings from the marshland.
The highest point of the city, called Grmada, reaches ,  more than the nearby Mount Saint Mary () peak, a popular hiking destination.
Later, the area remained a transit point for numerous tribes and peoples, among them the Illyrians, followed by a mixed nation of the Celts and the Illyrians called the Iapydes, and then in the 3rd century BC a Celtic tribe, the Taurisci.
It was located in the Municipality of Polje (nowadays the Moste District), on a plain between Ljubljanica and Sava next to the railroad in Moste.
These schools were mainly private or established by the city.
Seven fires erupted in the town during the Middle Ages.
In 2010 and 2011, the square was heavily renovated and is now mostly closed to road traffic on ground area, however there are five floors for commercial purposes and a parking lot located underground.
The name ''Laibach'', he claimed, was actually a hybrid of German and Slovene and derived from the same personal name.
The Franciscan Bridge, a predecessor of the present-day Triple Bridge, and the Butchers' Bridge connected the walled areas with wood-made buildings.
In the 16th century, the population of Ljubljana numbered 5,000, 70% of whom spoke Slovene as their first language, with most of the rest using German.
The chief attraction of the bridge are four sheet-copper dragon statues, which stand on pedestals at its four corners and have become a symbol of the city.
Other fields include banking, finance, transport, construction, skilled trades and services and tourism.
In 1702, the Ursulines settled in the town, where, the following year, they opened the first public school for girls in the Slovene Lands.
From the Trnovo District to the Moste District, around Castle Hill, the Ljubljanica partly flows through the Gruber Canal, built according to plans by Gabriel Gruber from 1772 until 1780.
There is for example an architecture museum, a railway museum, a school museum, a sports museum, a museum of modern art, a museum of contemporary art, a brewery museum, the Slovenian Museum of Natural History and the Slovene Ethnographic Museum.
Several folk dance groups are active in Ljubljana.
Not much is known about the area during the settlement of Slavs in the period between the downfall of Emona and the Early Middle Ages.
Tivoli–Rožnik Hill–Šiška Hill Landscape Park is located in the western part of the city.
Ljubljana Castle (''Ljubljanski grad'') is a medieval castle with Romanesque, Gothic, and Renaissance architectural elements, located on the summit of Castle Hill, which dominates the city center.
The city bus network, run by the Ljubljana Passenger Transport (''LPP'') company, is Ljubljana's most widely used means of public transport.
In 1895, Ljubljana, then a city of 31,000, suffered a serious earthquake measuring 6.1&nbsp;degrees Richter and 8–9&nbsp;degrees&nbsp;MCS.
It has seven units at 11 locations.
The most notable bridges of Ljubljana are the Triple Bridge (), the Trnovo Bridge (), the Dragon Bridge (), the Hradecky Bridge (), and the Butchers' Bridge ().
The linguist Silvo Torkar, who specializes in Slovene personal and place names, argued at the same place for the thesis that the name ''Ljubljana'' derives from ''Ljubija'', the original name of the Ljubljanica River flowing through it, itself derived from the Old Slavic male name ''Ljubovid'', "the one of a lovely appearance".
In the Baroque, it became part of the coat of arms, and in the 19th and especially the 20th century, it outstripped the tower and other elements in importance.
At its eastern side stands the two-storey building of Maximarket, also work of Ravnikar.
Among other roles, the city council drafts the municipal budget, and is assisted by various boards active in the fields of health, sports, finances, education, environmental protection and tourism.
In 2010, there were 14 museums and 56 art galleries in Ljubljana.
Ljubljana has a quiet and secure reputation.
The basketball teams are KD Slovan and KK Union Olimpija.
There are two staircases, leading to terraces above the river, the banks with poplars, and the Ljubljana fish market.
Ljubljana appears in the 2005 ''The Historian'', written by Elisabeth Kostova, and is called by its Roman name (Emona).
File:Ljubljana BW 2014-10-09 12-19-48.jpg|Prešeren Square
Next to the eastern border of the city, the Ljubljanica, the Sava, and the Kamnik Bistrica Rivers flow together.
Town Hall (, ), located at Town Square, is the seat of the City Municipality of Ljubljana.
These lake-dwelling people lived through hunting, fishing and primitive agriculture.
In 1993, the seven buildings and 12,500 m2 of space were turned into art galleries, artist studios, and seven nightclubs, including two gay venues, playing host to all range of music from hardcore to jazz to dub to techno.
The nearby, older mountainous regions date back to the Mesozoic (Triassic) or Paleozoic.
In order to prevent an 1842 stone arch bridge from being a bottleneck, two additional pedestrian bridges on either side of the central one were added in 1932 according to the Plečnik's 1929 design.
Between 1717 and 1719, the building underwent a Baroque renovation with a Venetian inspiration by the architect Gregor Maček, Sr.. Near Town Hall, at Town Square, stands a replica of the Baroque Robba Fountain.
It symbolizes power, courage, and greatness.
Two Plečnik's urban axes of Ljubljana, the water axis and the Ljubljana Castle–Rožnik Axis, cross at the bridge.
Historically the first school in Ljubljana belonged to Teutonic Knights and was established in the 13th century.
The city is known for its fog, which is recorded on average on 64 days per year, mostly in autumn and winter, and can be particularly persistent in conditions of temperature inversion.
In 452, it was destroyed by the Huns under Attila's orders, and later by the Ostrogoths and the Lombards.
Each corner of the bridge is capped with a small pyramid, a signature motif of Plečnik's, whereas the mid-span features a pair of Art-Deco male sculptures.
It is work of Francesco Robba, who designed numerous other Baroque statues in the city.
In the 15th century, Ljubljana became recognized for its art, particularly painting and sculpture.
There are several explanations on the origin of the Ljubljana Dragon.
The modern dance was presented in Ljubljana for the first time at the end of the 19th century and developed rapidly since the end of the 1920s.
All grammar schools last four years and conclude with the matura exam.
The lowest point of Ljubljana, with an elevation of , is located at the confluence.
In 1893 followed the first Slovene mountaineering club, named Slovene Mountaineering Society, later succeeded by the Ljubljana-Matica Mountaineering Club, which is today the largest mountaineering club in Slovenia.
It connects the Ljubljana Central Market () and the Petkovšek Embankment ().
Currently in Ljubljana there are ten public and three private grammar schools.
There were five trolleybus lines in Ljubljana, until 1958 alongside the tram.
In 1693, the ''Academia Operosorum Labacensium'' was founded and lasted with an interruption until the end of the 18th century.
Within the park, there are different types of trees, flower gardens, several statues, and fountains.
The original building was built in a Gothic style in 1484.
The larger one can accommodate 6,000 spectators and is primarily used for hockey, but also for basketball matches.
It was designed in the second half of the 20th century by Edvard Ravnikar.
Čop Street () is a major thoroughfare in the center of Ljubljana.
File:Nebotičnik after renovation Skyscraper Ljubljana 2012.jpg|Nebotičnik
In the 6th century, the ancestors of the Slovenes moved in.
In 1779, St. Christopher's Cemetery replaced the cemetery at St. Peter's Church as the main Ljubljana cemetery.
The Gruber Canal has partly diminished the danger of floods in the Ljubljana Marshes, the largest marshes in Slovenia, south of Ljubljana.
The precipitation is relatively evenly distributed throughout the seasons, although winter and spring tend to be somewhat drier than summer and autumn.
There is a considerable amount of bicycle traffic in Ljubljana, especially in the warmer months of the year.
It houses one of the oldest department stores in Ljubljana and a cafe, which is a popular meeting place and a place of political talks and negotiations.
The square and surroundings have been closed to traffic since 1 September 2007.
The Prešeren Monument was created by Ivan Zajec in 1905, whereas the pedestal was designed by Max Fabiani.
Ljubljana Sports Park is located in Spodnja Šiška, part of the Šiška District.
Čerin did not hold the post of mayor.
The institution is a member of the international network Botanic Gardens Conservation International and cooperates with more than 270 botanical gardens all across the world.
It holds classical music concerts of domestic and foreign performers as well as educates youth.
Altogether, there are 5&nbsp;general public libraries and over 140&nbsp;specialized libraries in Ljubljana.
The Ljubljana Community Health Center is the largest health center in Slovenia.
Students make up one-seventh of Ljubljana's population, giving the city a youthful character.
Southern and western parts of the city are more flood-endangered than northern parts.
The destinations are mainly European.
Its plastered brick houses, painted in different colors, were already connected to a drainage system.
The Tacen Whitewater Course, located on a course on the Sava,  northwest of the city center, hosts a major international canoe/kayak slalom competition almost every year, examples being the ICF Canoe Slalom World Championships in 1955, 1991, and 2010.
The Roman Rite Catholic Diocese of Ljubljana was established in 1461 and the Church of St. Nicholas became the diocesan cathedral.
During Book Week, starting each year on World Book Day, events and book sales take place at Congress Square.
The largest among them are the Central Humanist Library in the field of humanities, the Central Social Sciences Library, the Central Economic Library in the field of economics, the Central Medical Library in the field of medical sciences, and the Libraries of the Biotechnical Faculty in the field of biology and biotechnology.
Other cultural venues include Križanke, Cankar Hall and the Exhibition and Convention Center.
In addition to the main houses, with the SNT Drama Ljubljana as the most important among them, a number of small producers are active in Ljubljana, involved primarily in physical theatre (e.g.
Adjacent to the Metelkova are located the Celica Hostel with rooms all artistically decorated by the Metelkova artists, and a new part of the Museum of Modern Art, Museum of Contemporary Art.
The latter, which has a green dragon as its mascot, hosts its matches in the 13,000-seat Arena Stožice since 2010.
Much of the original frescos were ruined by the cracks in the ceiling caused by the Ljubljana earthquake in 1895.
The full trip lasts 60&nbsp;s.
Historical Ljubljana tram system was completed in 1901 and was replaced by buses in 1928, which were in turn abolished and replaced by trams in 1931 in its final length of  in 1940, In 1959, it was abolished in favor of automobiles; the tracks were dismantled and tram cars were transferred to Osijek and Subotica.
Ljubljana accent and/or dialect (; or ;  as pronounced in the dialect itself) is part of the Upper Carniolan dialect group.
There is also a statue of Saint John the Baptist on the bridge, the patron of the Trnovo Church.
The Diocese of Ljubljana was set up in 1461.
At the same occasion, a triples competition is run on the trail, and a few days later, a student run from Prešeren Square to Ljubljana Castle is held.
It is distinguished by its width and two rows of birches that it bears, because it was meant to serve as a public space in front of the church.
Between 2002 and 2006, Danica Simšič was mayor of the municipality.
In addition, there are several elementary music schools.
After the quake in 1895, it was once again rebuilt, this time in the Vienna Secession style, which today is juxtaposed against the earlier Baroque style buildings that remain.
In 1805, the first state music school was established in Ljubljana.
Ljubljana remains the capital of independent Slovenia, which joined the European Union in 2004.
It is located in the northeast of Vodnik Square () It is a triple-hinged arch bridge and has a span of .
It is a pedestrian zone and regarded as the capital's central promenade.
There are numerous taxi companies in the city, but their services have been evaluated as bad.
It serves as the national opera and ballet house.
Predominantly a place of business, Nebotičnik is home to a variety of shops on the ground floor and first story, and various offices are located on floors two to five.
The Municipal City Library of Ljubljana, established in&nbsp;2008, is the central regional library and the largest Slovenian general public library.
This refers to cycle lanes in poor condition and constructed in a way that motorized traffic is privileged.
There is also a tractor with wagons decorated to look like a train for tourists in Ljubljana, linking Cyril and Methodius Square in the city center with Ljubljana Castle.
The new frescos were painted by the Slovene impressionist painter Matej Sternen.
The latest floods took place in 2010.
They eventually came to the spot of what is now modern Upper Ljubljana and built Nauportus.
It was established in 1701 as part of Academia operosorum Labacensis and is among the oldest such institutions in Europe.
There are also professional grammar schools in Ljubljana, offering economical, technical, or artistic subjects (visual arts, music).
The layout takes the form of an early-Baroque basilica with one nave and two rows of lateral chapels.
Between 1921 and 1939, it was renovated by the Slovene architect Jože Plečnik, who designed a broad central promenade, called the Jakopič Promenade () after the leading Slovene impressionist painter Rihard Jakopič.
Renamed ''Laibach'', it would be owned by the House of Habsburg until 1797.
The park was laid out during the French imperial administration of Ljubljana in 1813 and named after the Parisian Jardins de Tivoli.
Theater has a rich tradition in Ljubljana, starting with the 1867 first ever Slovene-language drama performance.
A number of reforms were implemented in the 19th century; there was more emphasis on general knowledge and religious education was removed from state secondary schools.
Joc Pečečnik, a Slovenian multimillionaire, plans to renovate it.
Koseze Pond is home to a number of rare plant and animal species and is a popular place of meeting and recreation.
Although the oldest architecture has been preserved from the Roman period, Ljubljana's downtown got its outline in the Middle Ages.
Since 1985, the a commemorative trail has ringed the city where this iron fence once stood.
In the time of Illyrian Provinces, "''école primaire''", a unified four-year elementary school program with a greater emphasis on Slovene, was introduced.
From December 2011 onwards, when Janković's list won the early parliamentary election, the deputy mayor Aleš Čerin was decided by him to lead the municipality.
The first society of the leading scientists and public workers in Carniola was the Dismas Fraternity (Latin: ), formed in Ljubljana in 1688.
A number of sport venues are located in Tivoli Park.
