The warlords who rule various regions of the country exert local control.
Common names for local government entities include state, province, region, department, county, prefecture, district, city, township, town, borough, parish, municipality, shire, village, and local service district.
The municipal council (''gemeenteraad'') is the highest authority in the municipality.
The government appoints the chairperson for a period of six years.
The provinces subdivide into 264 municipalities.
The local branches of the ruling party, the Arab Socialist Union (ASU), fostered a certain peasant political activism and coopted the local notables—in particular the village headmen—and checked their independence from the regime.
The other is area wide administration.
In federal states, local government generally comprises the third (or sometimes fourth) tier of government, whereas in unitary states, local government usually occupies the second or third tier of government, often with greater powers than higher-level administrative divisions.
As Crown appointees, mayors also have some responsibility for overseeing the work of the municipality, its policies and relations with other government bodies.
There are 178 municipalities across the kingdom.
The extension of officials into the countryside permitted the regime to bring development and services to the village.
With mayors, councils, and boards in place at the local level, newly elected officials, civil society organizations, decentralized technical services, private sector interests, other communes, and donor groups began partnering to further development.
A mayor leads a city or municipality while the ''Sangguniang Panlungsod'' (City Council) and the ''Sangguniang Bayan'' (Municipal Council) constitute the legislative branches of a city and municipality, respectively.
The city council is the highest level of local government.
For local government purposes, Denmark is divided into five regions (), with their most important area of responsibility being the public health service.
The top level of sub-national administration within England until the end of March 2012 consists of the nine regions.
Under this authority, provincial and municipal offices may be declared vacant, appointments annulled, and local elections supervised.
There are over five thousand local governments in Pakistan.
As a collective the kingdom's municipalities make up the Ministry of Municipality and Rural Affairs (MoMRA).
Local government in Scotland is arranged on the lines of unitary authorities, with the nation divided into 32 council areas.
A new administrative structure was adopted in parallel with the decentralisation of the economic system.
The county councils (''landsting'') are responsible for health care and usually provide transportation.
Uruguay's administrative subdivisions consisted of nineteen territories called departments and governed by intendencias, which were subordinate to the central government and responsible for local administration.
County and municipal councils are popularly elected every four years.
In addition to the 31 states, there is also one federal district comprising Mexico City, whose governor serves as a member of the cabinet.
Canada has a federal system with three orders of government.
Barangays can be further divided into puroks and sitios but their leadership is unelected.
Municipal budgets are approved by the respective state governors.
The districts lost most of their importance in 1999 in an administrative reform; they remain as territorial divisions and seats of various branches of state administration.
Data as of December 1990
Its main job is to decide the municipality's broad policies and to oversee their implementation.
Poland has three levels of subdivision.
Now mergers are common for cost effective administration.
The main governing body in most municipalities is called Ayuntamiento (in the less populated municipalities an alternative local organization system called open council, "''concejo abierto''", is used).
Peru is divided into 25 regions and the province of Lima.
Meanwhile, councillors in the Plenary but not part of the ''Junta de Gobierno'' (the opposition) will oversee Mayor's rule.
The governor was authorized to prepare the budget, submit it for approval to the departmental board, appoint the board's employees, and, if necessary, discipline or suspend them.
Divisions are subdivided into districts (''zila'').
Municipal governments are separately elected.
*Greater London, which is divided into 32 London boroughs and the City of London
The territory of Turkey is subdivided into 81 provinces for administrative purposes.
The goal of devolving power to regional and municipal governments was among others to improve popular participation.
Finally, each province comprises a number of municipalities.
Some districts, incorporating large metropolitan areas, are called City Districts.
Local policy decisions are sometimes heavily influenced by the TDs who represent the local constituency in Dáil Éireann (the main chamber of parliament), and may be dictated by national politics rather than local needs.
The institutions of local government vary greatly between countries, and even where similar arrangements exist, the terminology often varies.
There are two levels of local government in the Netherlands, the provinces and the municipalities.
Until 1996, the President appointed the mayor of Buenos Aires, and by law, the president and Congress controlled any legislation that affected the city.
Unlike councillors and aldermen, mayors are not elected (not even indirectly), but are appointed by the Crown.
The Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) is the only autonomous region in the Philippines.
Each state has a constitution, a governor elected for six years, and a unicameral legislature, with representatives elected by district vote in proportion to population.
The Netherlands is divided into twelve provinces (''provincie'', pl.
The elected councils acquired, at least formally, the right to approve or disapprove the local budget.
In different areas the highest tier of elected local government may be:
The coercive backbone of the state apparatus ran downward from the Ministry of Interior through the governors' executive organs to the district police station and the village headman (sing., ; pl., umadah).
Non-councillors can also be appointed.
to ''(college van) B&W)'', made up of the mayor (''burgemeester'') and the aldermen (''wethouder'', pl.
Mujaheddin groups retained links with the Peshawar parties to ensure access to weapons that were doled out to the parties by the government of Pakistan for distribution to fighters inside Afghanistan.
Council elections are held every four years.
South Africa has a two tiered local government system comprising local municipalities which fall into district municipalities, and metropolitan municipalities which span both tiers of local government.
This will see the transfer of (designated) powers from regional government departments to local authority districts.
Municipal governments were historical villages.
It has the power to collect taxes (in the form of assessment tax), to create laws and rules (in the form of by-laws) and to grant licenses and permits for any trade in its area of jurisdiction, in addition to providing basic amenities, collecting and managing waste and garbage as well as planning and developing the area under its jurisdiction.
The name given to the members of the Plenary is councillor (''concejal'').
The provinces are organized into 7 regions for census purposes; however, they do not represent an administrative structure.
In that case, they lose their seats on the council and their places are taken by other representatives of the same political parties.
The Taliban set up a provisional government for the whole of Afghanistan, but it did not exercise central control over the local shuras.
During the 19th century there was a bitter struggle between Buenos Aires and the interior provinces, and there has long been an element of tension regarding the division of powers between the central government and provincial bodies.
An ordinary session of the legislature is held annually, and extraordinary sessions may be called by the governor or the permanent committee.
Direct elections are held for each union (or ward), electing a chairperson and a number of members.
Executive authority was vested in a governor (intendente), who administered the department, and in a thirty-one-member departmental board (junta departmental), which carried out legislative functions.
The council elects the mayor and appoints elders to govern the elderships.
Regional council areas are based on water catchment areas, whereas territorial authorities are based on community of interest and road access.
Each district or municipality had to choose a predetermined number of electors, based on the size of its population.
This body consists of people representing the various categories of stakeholders: landholders, leaseholders, owners of buildings, companies and, since recently, all the residents as well.
They literally form the foundation of the whole Dutch system of local government; from time immemorial they have shouldered the responsibility for water management for the residents of their area.
There is also one autonomous area, Mount Athos.
A governor could be reelected only once, and candidates for the post had to meet the same requirements as those for a senator, in addition to being a native of the department or a resident therein for at least three years before assuming office.
Since 2001, these have been led by democratically elected local councils, each headed by a Nazim (the word means "supervisor" in Urdu, but is sometimes translated as Mayor).
Major cities normally have the status of both gmina and powiat.
Each administrative entity is given powers, structure, and boundaries by a law that was passed by the Prime Minister .
Mayors chair both the municipal council and the executive.
Since the adoption of the 1853 constitution, the federal government has intervened over 200 times, mostly by presidential decree.
Those councillors are elected between city's inhabitants every four years by direct vote.
It could issue decrees and resolutions that it deemed necessary either on the suggestion of the governor or on its own initiative.
The Queen's Commissioner is not elected by the residents of the province, but appointed by the Crown (the Queen and government ministers).
Although Montevideo was the smallest department in terms of area (divided into twenty-three geographic zones that generally coincided with the electoral zones), its departmental board had sixty-five members in 1990; all other departments had thirty-one-member boards and a five-member executive council appointed by the departmental board, with proportional representation from the principal political parties.
The cities with a city corporation, having mayoral elections, include Dhaka South, Dhaka North, Chittagong, Khulna, Sylhet, Rajshahi, Barisal, Rangpur, Comilla and Gazipur.
There are three types of local authorities: a borough corporation, town commissions, and parish commissions.
Local government in Ireland is mainly based on a structure of thirty-one local authorities, termed County, City or City and County Councils.
The role of the municipal council is comparable to that of the board of an organisation or institution.
Other major cities, these and other municipalities electing a mayor and councilors for each ward, include Mymensingh, Gopalganj, Jessore, Bogra, Dinajpur, Saidapur, Narayanganj, Naogaon and Rangamati.
Members in local committees and boards are elected proportionally by the political parties in the assemblies, giving all the major parties representation.
Rome) ''Municipio''.
The provincial governors are elected every four years.
**single tier unitary authorities, or
Local government traditionally had limited power in Egypt's highly centralized state.
The province of Lima is administered by a city council.
The national government oversees much of the country.
They are grouped into 19 counties (fylker), each governed by an elected county council.
Although they are obliged to carry out the decisions of the municipal council and executive, they may recommend that the Minister of the Interior quash any decision that they believe to be contrary to the law or against the public interest.
Local government on the Isle of Man is based on the concept of ancient parishes.
Governors acquired more authority under Law Number 43 of 1979, which reduced the administrative and budgetary controls of the central government over the provinces.
In May/June 1999, citizens of the communes elected their communal council members for the first time.
The regions were used by central government for various statistical purposes, and Government Offices and assorted other institutions including Regional Development Agencies.
Ordino, La Massana and Sant Julià de Lòria are subdivided into ''quarts'' (quarters), while Canillo is subdivided into 10 ''veïnats'' (neighborhoods).
The municipalities (''kommuner'') are responsible for:
Eventually, the cercles will be reinstituted (formerly grouping arrondissements) with a legal and financial basis of their own.
The Netherlands has three tiers of government.
Metropolitan counties, and a few non-metropolitan counties, no longer have elected councils or administrative functions, and their former functions are performed by districts.
Law 7/1985, passed by the former Spanish President Felipe González Márquez (socialist), lays down the procedure of the Local Government.
Departmental board members had to be at least twenty-three years of age, native born (or a legal citizen for at least three years), and a native of the department (or a resident for at least three years).
The autonomy of municipalities over their own matters is guaranteed by the constitution of Iceland.
''waterschappen'' and ''hoogheemraadschappen'') are among the oldest government authorities in the Netherlands.
These were subdivided into districts (sing., markaz; pl., marakaz) and villages (sing., qaryah; pl., qura) or towns.
There are overall 2980 villages/communities () in all Albania.
Regional Government Offices, Regional Development Agencies and Regional Ministers were all abolished by the Cameron ministry in 2010.
The Ayuntamiento in turn is formed by the Plenary (''el Pleno'', the collective formed by the city councillors) and the Mayor.
Spain is divided into 17 autonomous communities, which in turn are divided into 50 provinces.
The ''comarca'' is a commonwealth, or union, of municipalities with competences in several fields (Law 6/1987 of the Parliament of Catalonia).
The municipal sector is a provider of vital services to the Norwegian public, accounting for about 20% of Norwegian GNP and 24% of total employment.
**divided into districts (also known as boroughs in some areas)
In 2007 the borders of the districts were slightly adjusted and 119 municipalities are now within different districts.
It includes 27 provinces and a metropolitan capital province (Sofia-Grad).
Croatia is divided into 20 counties and the capital city of Zagreb, the latter having the authority and legal status of a county and a city at the same time.
The term is used to contrast with offices at state level, which are referred to as the central government, national government, or (where appropriate) federal government and also to supranational government which deals with governing institutions between states.
Also, it exists two other important Laws for specifically Madrid (Law 22/2006) and Barcelona (Law 1/2006).
Between these two tiers, there are 41 ''comarques'' (singular, ''comarca''), roughly equivalent to 'district' or 'county'.
Sadat took several measures to decentralize power to the provinces and towns.
In the past the administrative body was elected as individuals but from 2009 they will be elected as party representatives.
The first began in Jeddah during the Othmanic period.
Both the municipal heads are elected for a span of five years.
The first of these powers was designed to "guarantee the republican form of government in the provinces."
The layers of elected local government vary.
The board sat in the capital city of each department and exercised jurisdiction throughout the entire territory of the department.
These managers are usually referred to as mayors (''bæjarstjóri / borgarstjóri'') in the mostly urban municipalities but "commune manager" (''sveitarstjóri'') in the rural or mixed municipalities.
The local power of the old families and the headmen revived but more at the expense of peasants than of the state.
In most areas there is a lower tier of government, civil parish, with limited functions.
Norway had 435 municipalities of varying size in 2003, each administered by an elected municipal council.
The Municipalities of Iceland are local administrative areas in Iceland that provide a number of services to their inhabitants such as kindergartens, elementary schools, waste management, social services, public housing, public transportation, services to senior citizens and handicapped people.
Each district has its council which is composed of a number of municipalities.
The principal unit of state government is the municipality.
State penetration did not retreat under Sadat and Mubarak.
They account for half of public spending.
In polders this mainly involves regulating the water level.
They have a number of statutory powers and responsibilities of their own.
In the metropolitan areas, police stations are divided into wards, which are further divided into ''mahallas''.
The federal government retains control over such matters as the regulation of commerce, customs collections, currency, civil or commercial codes, or the appointment of foreign agents.
Local governments generally act within powers delegated to them by legislation or directives of the higher level of government.
In a few cases the parish is a city, and the parish council is called a city council.
The regions are further divided into 227 municipalities (''omavalitsus''), and each municipality is a unit of self-government with its representative and executive bodies.
At the municipal level, a mayor (intendente municipal) assumed executive and administrative duties, carrying out resolutions made by the local board (whose members were appointed on the basis of proportional representation of the political parties).
Like the governor, the members of the departmental board and the mayor were elected for five-year terms in direct, popular elections.
Each shura made laws and collected taxes locally.
Only one regional referendum has been held to date to seek consent for the introduction of direct elections elsewhere — in the northeast of England — and this was overwhelmingly rejected by the electorate.
As the parliament elects the national government, the local assemblies elect their executive committees and their boards.
''(hoog)heemraden'').
'''Local government''' is a form of public administration which, in a majority of contexts, exists as the lowest tier of administration within a given state.
*health protection, water, sewerage, refuse, emergency services
There are 64 districts in Bangladesh, each further subdivided into ''upazila'' (subdistricts) or ''thana''.
They also have councils in each of those three local government levels.
Only the London region which is a sub-region compared to the other regions of England has a directly elected government.
The autonomous community of Catalonia is divided in 4 provinces and more than 900 municipalities.
Each level has a People's Committee (executive - up to third tier), a People's Council (legislative - up to third tier) and a People's Court (judiciary - up to second tier)
Powers include tourism, economic development and planning.
The Taliban set up a shura (assembly), made up of senior Taliban members and important tribal figures from the area.
It also bears primary responsibility for the financial affairs of the municipality and for its personnel policies.
Meetings of the provincial executive are chaired by the Queen's Commissioner (''Commissaris van de Koning(in)'', abbr.
Before the revolution, state penetration of the rural areas was limited by the power of local notables, but under Nasser, land reform reduced their socioeconomic dominance, and the incorporation of peasants into cooperatives transferred mass dependence from landlords to government.
The delegates then took part in the Loya Jirga.
Swedes pay around 20% of their taxable income to the municipality and around 11% to the county council.
Argentina is a federation of 23 provinces and the federal capital of Buenos Aires.
The regions are divided into seventy-six districts (''okresy'', singular ''okres'') including three "statutory cities" (without Prague, which had special status).
These are governed by the member municipalities and have only limited powers.
In the principal cities and capitals, the executive department is headed by a mayor appointed by the minister of the interior; in other localities, the mayor is appointed by the presidents of the municipal boards.Police chiefs are appointed by the central government.
Municipalities co-operate in seventy-four sub-regions and nineteen regions.
They form the tier of administration between the central government and the municipalities.
There are 415 of them (1 January 2012).
A further reform in effect since January 2003 created 204 Municipalities with Extended Competence (obce s rozšířenou působností); also obce III.
A barangay is headed by the Barangay Captain and the Barangay Council.
Thus, officials in Upper Egypt often bowed to the powerful Islamic movement there, while those in the port cities struck alliances with importers.
The constitutional "national intervention" and "state of siege" powers of the president have been invoked frequently.
They also govern zoning and can voluntarily take on additional functions if they have the budget for it.
They can be dismissed only by the Crown and not by the municipal council.
Every fourth year general elections are held in Sweden to elect members of the national parliament, 20 county council assemblies and 290 municipal assemblies.
Each province is divided into districts, for a total of 923 districts.
Some parishes have a further territorial subdivision.
Under the central government were twenty-six governorates (sing., muhafazah; pl., muhafazat).
The 1987 Philippine Constitution also provides for the existence of autonomous regions.
Under Mubarak decentralization and local autonomy became more of a reality, and local policies often reflected special local conditions.
Each county is headed by a governor appointed by the king in council.
Qawm refers to the group to which the individual considers himself to belong, whether a subtribe, village, valley, or neighborhood.
NGOs played an important role in the decentralisation process and still influence local politics.
These governments plan regional development, execute public investment projects, promote economic activities, and manage public property.
They enforced national laws and administered the nation's social and educational policies and institutions within their territories.
Major cities also have an extra tier of local government named ''Circoscrizione di Decentramento Comunale'' or, in some cities (e.g.
The water boards are also part of the local government.
Between 1987 and 1999 the administrative structure consisted of nine provinces (''oblasti'', singular ''oblast'').
The regions have their own elected governors and regional councils, however there are seven decentralized administrations, which group from one to three regions under a government-appointed general secretary.
In Flevoland, the smallest of the Dutch provinces, it has four members, while most other provinces have six or seven.
