''Inference'' is not to be confused with ''implication''.
Model-theoretic semantics is one of the fundamental concepts of model theory.
* '''Completeness''', which means that if a formula is true, it can be proven, i.e.
In 1323, William of Ockham's influential ''Summa Logicae'' was released.
Thus, for example, the expression "all As are Bs" shows the logical form common to the sentences "all men are mortals", "all cats are carnivores", "all Greeks are philosophers", and so on.
commented that "it is embarrassing that there is no widely acceptable formal definition of 'a logic'".
is a form of logical inference that goes from observation to a hypothesis that accounts for the reliable data (observation) and seeks to explain relevant evidence.
Argumentation theory is one good example of how logic is being applied to artificial intelligence.
Thus 'every A is B' is true if and only if there is something for which 'A' stands for, and there is nothing for which 'A' stands for, which 'B' does not also stand for.
Intuitionistic logic was proposed by L.E.J.
From 1910 to 1913, Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell published ''Principia Mathematica'' on the foundations of mathematics, attempting to derive mathematical truths from axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic.
Many popular arguments are filled with errors because so many people are untrained in logic and unaware of how to formulate an argument correctly.
Kripke's supervaluationism in the semantics of logic).
The second class of paradoxes involves redundant premises, falsely suggesting that we know the succedent because of the antecedent: thus "if that man gets elected, granny will die" is materially true since granny is mortal, regardless of the man's election prospects.
Studying logic and the relationship between logic and ordinary speech can help a person better structure his own arguments and critique the arguments of others.
Second, certain parts of the sentence must be replaced with schematic letters.
Logic has an immediate impact on other areas of study.
free logics, tense logics) as well as various extensions of classical logic (e.g.
* The more complex modern view comes with more power.
By the 16th&nbsp;century, it developed theories resembling modern logic, such as Gottlob Frege's "distinction between sense and reference of proper names" and his "definition of number", as well as the theory of "restrictive conditions for universals" anticipating some of the developments in modern set theory.
Both the statement of Hilbert's program and its refutation by Gödel depended upon their work establishing the second area of mathematical logic, the application of mathematics to logic in the form of proof theory.
This is why many terms in logic are Latin.
If proof theory and model theory have been the foundation of mathematical logic, they have been but two of the four pillars of the subject.
Traditional Aristotelian syllogistic logic and modern symbolic logic are examples of formal logic.
As an example, Kurt Gödel's incompleteness theorems show that sufficiently complex formal systems of arithmetic cannot be consistent and complete; however, first-order predicate logics not extended by specific axioms to be arithmetic formal systems with equality can be complete and consistent.
The study of fallacies is an important branch of informal logic.
Hilary Putnam, building on a suggestion of W. V. Quine, argued that in general the facts of propositional logic have a similar epistemological status as facts about the physical universe, for example as the laws of mechanics or of general relativity, and in particular that what physicists have learned about quantum mechanics provides a compelling case for abandoning certain familiar principles of classical logic: if we want to be realists about the physical phenomena described by quantum theory, then we should abandon the principle of distributivity, substituting for classical logic the quantum logic proposed by Garrett Birkhoff and John von Neumann.
It consists of an alphabet, a language over the alphabet to construct sentences, and a rule for deriving sentences.
An inference is not true or false, but valid or invalid.
* '''Formal logic''' is the study of inference with purely formal content.
Aristotle's logic is in large parts concerned with the theory of non-modalized logic.
Frege's original system of predicate logic was second-order, rather than first-order.
On the modern view, the fundamental form of a simple sentence is given by a recursive schema, like natural language and involving logical connectives, which are joined by juxtaposition to other sentences, which in turn may have logical structure.
A formal system is an organisation of terms used for the analysis of deduction.
In Hegelian dialectic, the law of non-contradiction, of identity, itself relies upon difference and so is not independently assertable.
However, the introduction of quantification, needed to solve the problem of multiple generality, rendered impossible the kind of subject-predicate analysis that underlies medieval semantics.
Brouwer rejected formalization in mathematics, but his student Arend Heyting studied intuitionistic logic formally, as did Gerhard Gentzen.
Simply put, formalising simply means translating English sentences into the language of logic.
His rejection of truth did not lead him to reject the idea of either inference or logic completely, but rather suggested that "logic came into existence in man's head out of illogic, whose realm originally must have been immense.
Furthermore, computers can be used as tools for logicians.
Aristotle's Organon, especially On Interpretation, gives a cursory outline of semantics which the scholastic logicians, particularly in the thirteenth and fourteenth century, developed into a complex and sophisticated theory, called Supposition Theory.
can be seen to lead naturally into the fundamental controversy in metaphysics on realism versus anti-realism.
This was given an apparently paradoxical formulation by Philo, who said that the implication 'if it is day, it is night' is true only at night, so the inference 'it is day, therefore it is night' is valid in the night, but not in the day.
Medieval logicians recognized the problem of multiple generality, where Aristotelian logic is unable to satisfactorily render such sentences as "Some guys have all the luck", because both quantities "all" and "some" may be relevant in an inference, but the fixed scheme that Aristotle used allows only one to govern the inference.
Recursion theory captures the idea of computation in logical and arithmetic terms; its most classical achievements are the undecidability of the Entscheidungsproblem by Alan Turing, and his presentation of the Church–Turing thesis.
This is called ''affirming'' or ''denying'', and in general ''judging'''.
Logic has been defined as "the study of arguments correct in virtue of their form".
However, modal logic is normally formalized with the principle of the excluded middle, and its relational semantics is bivalent, so this inclusion is disputable.
An inference, on the other hand, consists of two separately asserted propositions of the form 'p therefore q'.
The validity of an argument is determined by its logical form, not by its content.
Hegel was deeply critical of any simplified notion of the Law of Non-Contradiction.
Another paper of the same name by Michael Dummett argues that Putnam's desire for realism mandates the law of distributivity.
Modern logicians usually wish to ensure that logic studies just those arguments that arise from appropriately general forms of inference.
Early modern logic defined semantics purely as a relation between ideas.
Its Latin formulation is 'Posito antecedente ponitur consequens'.
Logic is generally considered '''formal''' when it analyzes and represents the ''form'' of any valid argument type.
In this way, the question, "Is logic empirical?"
A valid argument is one where there is a specific relation of logical support between the assumptions of the argument and its conclusion.
Brouwer as the correct logic for reasoning about mathematics, based upon his rejection of the law of the excluded middle as part of his intuitionism.
The form of an argument is displayed by representing its sentences in the formal grammar and symbolism of a logical language to make its content usable in formal inference.
However, the theory of consequences, or of the so-called 'hypothetical syllogism' was never fully integrated into the theory of the 'categorical syllogism'.
The American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914) first introduced the term as "guessing".
The concept of logical form is central to logic.
The development of logic since Frege, Russell, and Wittgenstein had a profound influence on the practice of philosophy and the perceived nature of philosophical problems (see Analytic philosophy), and Philosophy of mathematics.
Aristotle's work was regarded in classical times and from medieval times in Europe and the Middle East as the very picture of a fully worked out system.
with expressions of a standard type (such as "all", or the universal quantifier ∀).
Some philosophers, such as Jürgen Habermas, claim his position is self-refuting—and accuse Nietzsche of not even having a coherent perspective, let alone a theory of knowledge.
By the 18th century, the structured approach to arguments had degenerated and fallen out of favour, as depicted in Holberg's satirical play ''Erasmus Montanus''.
It provides an account of quantifiers general enough to express a wide set of arguments occurring in natural language.
However, agreement on what logic is has remained elusive, and although the field of universal logic has studied the common structure of logics, in 2007 Mossakowski et al.
Despite the negative nature of the incompleteness theorems, Gödel's completeness theorem, a result in model theory and another application of mathematics to logic, can be understood as showing how close logicism came to being true: every rigorously defined mathematical theory can be exactly captured by a first-order logical theory; Frege's proof calculus is enough to ''describe'' the whole of mathematics, though not ''equivalent'' to it.
The Stoic logician Philo of Megara was the first to define the truth conditions of such an implication: false only when the antecedent p is true and the consequent q is false, in all other cases true.
In Europe during the later medieval period, major efforts were made to show that Aristotle's ideas were compatible with Christian faith.
Argumentation theory is now applied in artificial intelligence and law.
Philosophical logic has a much greater concern with the connection between natural language and logic.
Aristotelian logic became widely accepted in science and mathematics and remained in wide use in the West until the early 19th&nbsp;century.
Philosophical logic is essentially a continuation of the traditional discipline called "logic" before the invention of mathematical logic.
The importance of form was recognised from ancient times.
The concrete terms "man", "mortal", etc., are analogous to the substitution values of the schematic placeholders ''A'', ''B'', ''C'', which were called the "matter" (Greek ''hyle'') of the inference.
For example, the rule that licenses the move from the implication 'if p then q' plus the assertion of its antecedent p, to the assertion of the consequent q is known as modus ponens (or 'mode of positing').
Antoine Arnauld in the Port Royal Logic, says that 'after conceiving things by our ideas, we compare these ideas, and, finding that some belong together and some do not, we unite or separate them.
A building, for example, both moves and does not move; the ground for the first is our solar system and for the second the earth.
Modern semantics also admits rival approaches, such as the proof-theoretic semantics that associates the meaning of propositions with the roles that they can play in inferences, an approach that ultimately derives from the work of Gerhard Gentzen on structural proof theory and is heavily influenced by Ludwig Wittgenstein's later philosophy, especially his aphorism "meaning is use".
This position held by Nietzsche however, has come under extreme scrutiny for several reasons.
See 'Rival conceptions of logic', below.
* '''Mathematical logic''' is an extension of symbolic logic into other areas, in particular to the study of model theory, proof theory, set theory, and recursion theory.
Robert Brandom has argued against the idea that logic is the study of a special kind of logical truth, arguing that instead one can talk of the logic of material inference (in the terminology of Wilfred Sellars), with logic making explicit the commitments that were originally implicit in informal inference.
On a narrow conception of logic (see below) logic concerns just deductive reasoning, although such a narrow conception controversially excludes most of what is called informal logic from the discipline.
* Section F.3 on Logics and meanings of programs and F.4 on Mathematical logic and formal languages as part of the theory of computer science: this work covers formal semantics of programming languages, as well as work of formal methods such as Hoare logic;
In 1879, Gottlob Frege published ''Begriffsschrift'', which inaugurated modern logic with the invention of quantifier notation.
problem of existential import
Set theory originated in the study of the infinite by Georg Cantor, and it has been the source of many of the most challenging and important issues in mathematical logic, from Cantor's theorem, through the status of the Axiom of Choice and the question of the independence of the continuum hypothesis, to the modern debate on large cardinal axioms.
Some logical systems do not have all four properties.
Similarly, it is important to distinguish deductive validity and inductive validity (called "strength").
Today recursion theory is mostly concerned with the more refined problem of complexity classes—when is a problem efficiently solvable?—and the classification of degrees of unsolvability.
Dialectical logic is also the name given to the special treatment of dialectic in Hegelian and Marxist thought.
It is necessary because indicative sentences of ordinary language show a considerable variety of form and complexity that makes their use in inference impractical.
Rather it deals with inferences whose validity can be traced back to the formal features of the representations that are involved in that inference, be they linguistic, mental, or other representations."
That is the job of the theory of rationality.
* In the traditional view, the form of the sentence consists of (1) a subject (e.g., "man") plus a sign of quantity ("all" or "some" or "no"); (2) the copula, which is of the form "is" or "is not"; (3) a predicate (e.g., "mortal").
This view (psychologism) was taken to the extreme in the nineteenth century, and is generally held by modern logicians to signify a low point in the decline of logic before the twentieth century.
This suggests obvious difficulties, leading Locke to distinguish between 'real' truth, when our ideas have 'real existence' and 'imaginary' or 'verbal' truth, where ideas like harpies or centaurs exist only in the mind.
(Note that in a distinct philosophical use of the term, an argument is sound  when it is both valid and its premises are true).
* '''Consistency''', which means that no theorem of the system contradicts another.
A consequence of taking logic to treat special kinds of argument is that it leads to identification of special kinds of truth, the logical truths (with logic equivalently being the study of logical truth), and excludes many of the original objects of study of logic that are treated as informal logic.
The Latin formulations of many other rules such as 'ex falso quodlibet' (anything follows from a falsehood), 'reductio ad absurdum' (disproof by showing the consequence is absurd) also date from this period.
'''Logic''' (from the )  originally meaning ''the word'', or ''what is spoken'', (but coming to mean ''thought'' or ''reason'')  is generally held to consist of the systematic study of the form of arguments.
Distributivity of logic is essential for the realist's understanding of how propositions are true of the world in just the same way as he has argued the principle of bivalence is.
Friedrich Nietzsche provides a strong example of the rejection of the usual basis of logic: his radical rejection of idealization led him to reject truth as a "...&nbsp;mobile army of metaphors, metonyms, and anthropomorphisms—in short&nbsp;... metaphors which are worn out and without sensuous power; coins which have lost their pictures and now matter only as metal, no longer as coins."
(In ordinary discourse, the conclusion of such an argument may be signified by words like 'therefore', 'hence', 'ergo' and so on.)
Georg Lukács, in his book ''The Destruction of Reason'', asserts that, "Were we to study Nietzsche's statements in this area from a logico-philosophical angle, we would be confronted by a dizzy chaos of the most lurid assertions, arbitrary and violently incompatible."
Logic and the philosophy of language are closely related.
During the High Middle Ages, logic became a main focus of philosophers, who would engage in critical logical analyses of philosophical arguments, often using variations of the methodology of scholasticism.
The development of predicate logic is usually attributed to Gottlob Frege, who is also credited as one of the founders of analytical philosophy, but the formulation of predicate logic most often used today is the first-order logic presented in Principles of Mathematical Logic by David Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann in 1928.
Just as linguists recognize recursive structure in natural languages, it appears that logic needs recursive structure.
Graham Priest, the main proponent of dialetheism, has argued for paraconsistency on the grounds that there are in fact, true contradictions.
It requires, first, ignoring those grammatical features irrelevant to logic (such as gender and declension, if the argument is in Latin), replacing conjunctions irrelevant to logic (such as "but") with logical conjunctions like "and" and replacing ambiguous, or alternative logical expressions ("any", "every", etc.)
For the most part this discussion of logic deals only with deductive logic.
As a result, philosophical logicians have contributed a great deal to the development of non-standard logics (e.g.
For example, the sentence "All men are mortal" involves, in term logic, two non-logical terms "is a man" (here ''M'') and "is mortal" (here ''D''): the sentence is given by the judgement A(M,D).
Thus: 'all men are mortal'.
The Chinese logical philosopher Gongsun Long () proposed the paradox "One and one cannot become two, since neither becomes two."
It provides the foundation of modern mathematical logic.
In Europe, logic was first developed by Aristotle.
In many definitions of logic, logical inference and inference with purely formal content are the same.
Bertrand Russell described Nietzsche's irrational claims with "He is fond of expressing himself paradoxically and with a view to shocking conventional readers" in his book ''A History of Western Philosophy''.
Second-order logic is most prominently defended (against the criticism of Willard Van Orman Quine and others) by George Boolos and Stewart Shapiro.
* Boolean logic as fundamental to computer hardware: particularly, the system's section B.2 on Arithmetic and logic structures, relating to operatives AND, NOT, and OR;
Argumentation theory is the study and research of informal logic, fallacies, and critical questions as they relate to every day and practical situations.
However, it was not alone: the Stoics proposed a system of propositional logic that was studied by medieval logicians.
Case arguing against Sigwart's and Brentano's modern analysis of the universal proposition.
Since much informal argument is not strictly speaking deductive, on many conceptions of logic, informal logic is not logic at all.
Today, logic is extensively applied in the fields of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, and these fields provide a rich source of problems in formal and informal logic.
Most philosophers assume that the bulk of everyday reasoning can be captured in logic if a method or methods to translate ordinary language into that logic can be found.
It was based on Leibniz's idea that this law of logic also requires a sufficient ground to specify from what point of view (or time) one says that something cannot contradict itself.
However, there is a connection between implication and inference, as follows: if the implication 'if p then q' is ''true'', the inference 'p therefore q' is ''valid''.
What sort of argument is appropriate for criticizing purported principles of logic?
The logical constants such as "all", "no" and so on, plus sentential connectives such as "and" and "or" were called syncategorematic terms (from the Greek ''kategorei'' – to predicate, and ''syn'' – together with).
Philosophical logic deals with formal descriptions of ordinary, non-specialist ("natural") language.
More abstractly, we might say that modality affects the circumstances in which we take an assertion to be satisfied.
The analytical generality of predicate logic allowed the formalization of mathematics, drove the investigation of set theory, and allowed the development of Alfred Tarski's approach to model theory.
Inductive validity on the other hand requires us to define a reliable generalization of some set of observations.
Innumerable beings who made inferences in a way different from ours perished".
Logic arose (see below) from a concern with correctness of argumentation.
For example, "''We go to the games''" can be modified to give "''We should go to the games''", and "''We can go to the games''" and perhaps "''We will go to the games''".
In the 1950s and 1960s, researchers predicted that when human knowledge could be expressed using logic with mathematical notation, it would be possible to create a machine that reasons, or artificial intelligence.
Today, some academics claim that Aristotle's system is generally seen as having little more than historical value (though there is some current interest in extending term logics), regarded as made obsolete by the advent of propositional logic and the predicate calculus.
In logic programming, a program consists of a set of axioms and rules.
The syllogistic logic developed by Aristotle predominated in the West until the mid-19th&nbsp;century, when interest in the foundations of mathematics stimulated the development of symbolic logic (now called mathematical logic).
In 1854, George Boole published ''An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities'', introducing symbolic logic and the principles of what is now known as Boolean logic.
Modern semantics is in some ways closer to the medieval view, in rejecting such psychological truth-conditions.
The approach assumes that the meaning of the various parts of the propositions are given by the possible ways we can give a recursively specified group of interpretation functions from them to some predefined mathematical domains: an interpretation of first-order predicate logic is given by a mapping from terms to a universe of individuals, and a mapping from propositions to the truth values "true" and "false".
There have been pre-formal treatises on argument and dialectic, from authors such as Stephen Toulmin (''The Uses of Argument''), Nicholas Rescher (''Dialectics''), and van Eemeren and Grootendorst (Pragma-dialectics).
Specific types of dialogue can be analyzed and questioned to reveal premises, conclusions, and fallacies.
While the study of necessity and possibility remained important to philosophers, little logical innovation happened until the landmark investigations of Clarence Irving Lewis in 1918, who formulated a family of rival axiomatizations of the alethic modalities.
An implication is a sentence of the form 'If p then q', and can be true or false.
Thus there is the idea that logical inference has a use as a tool for human survival, but that its existence does not support the existence of truth, nor does it have a reality beyond the instrumental: "Logic, too, also rests on assumptions that do not correspond to anything in the real world".
Symbolic logic is often divided into two main branches: propositional logic and predicate logic.
In China, the tradition of scholarly investigation into logic, however, was repressed by the Qin dynasty following the legalist philosophy of Han Feizi.
Intuitionistic logic is of great interest to computer scientists, as it is a constructive logic and can be applied for extracting verified programs from proofs.
Using automated theorem proving, the machines can find and check proofs, as well as work with proofs too lengthy to write out by hand.
This is called showing the ''logical form'' of the argument.
This is the converse of completeness.
What is the epistemological status of the laws of logic?
This does not render the notion of informal logic vacuous, because no formal logic captures all of the nuances of natural language.
Closely related to questions arising from the paradoxes of implication comes the suggestion that logic ought to tolerate inconsistency.
Predicate logic is the generic term for symbolic formal systems such as first-order logic, second-order logic, many-sorted logic, and infinitary logic.
* Many fundamental logical formalisms are essential to section I.2 on artificial intelligence, for example modal logic and default logic in Knowledge representation formalisms and methods, Horn clauses in logic programming, and description logic.
is a ''theorem'' of the system.
Modern formal logic follows and expands on Aristotle.
An example of a theorem of propositional logic is , which says that if A holds, then B implies A.
Modal logic is not truth conditional, and so it has often been proposed as a non-classical logic.
Also, the problem of multiple generality was recognized in medieval times.
For example, in book II of his Summa Logicae, William of Ockham presents a comprehensive account of the necessary and sufficient conditions for the truth of simple sentences, in order to show which arguments are valid and which are not.
Others use Aristotle in argumentation theory to help develop and critically question argumentation schemes that are used in artificial intelligence and legal arguments.
This was partly because of the resistance to reducing the categorical judgment 'Every S is P' to the so-called hypothetical judgment 'if anything is S, it is P'.
Nonetheless, problems with syllogistic logic were not seen as being in need of revolutionary solutions.
The works of Aristotle contain the earliest known formal study of logic.
There is no universal agreement as to the exact scope and subject matter of logic (see , below), but it has traditionally included the classification of arguments, the systematic exposition of the 'logical form' common to all valid arguments, the study of inference, including fallacies, and the study of semantics, including paradoxes.
For example, Bertrand Russell's famous barber paradox, "there is a man who shaves all and only men who do not shave themselves" can be formalised by the sentence , using the non-logical predicate  to indicate that ''x'' is a man, and the non-logical relation  to indicate that ''x'' is shaved by ''y''; all other symbols of the formulae are logical, expressing the universal and existential quantifiers, conjunction, implication, negation and biconditional.
Aristotle uses variable letters to represent valid inferences in ''Prior Analytics'', leading Jan Łukasiewicz to say that the introduction of variables was "one of Aristotle's greatest inventions".
Such sentences violate the Gricean maxim of relevance, and can be modelled by logics that reject the principle of monotonicity of entailment, such as relevance logic.
Thus, to abduce  from  involves determining that  is sufficient (or nearly sufficient), but not necessary, for .
One of the boldest attempts to apply logic to mathematics was the logicism pioneered by philosopher-logicians such as Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell.
The ACM Computing Classification System in particular regards:
A propositional calculus or logic (also a sentential calculus) is a formal system in which formulae representing propositions can be formed by combining atomic propositions using logical connectives, and in which a system of formal proof rules establishes certain formulae as "theorems".
In an influential paper entitled "Is logic empirical?"
The various attempts to carry this out met with failure, from the crippling of Frege's project in his ''Grundgesetze'' by Russell's paradox, to the defeat of Hilbert's program by Gödel's incompleteness theorems.
it both treats logic in the context of a theory of the mind, and treats logic as the study of abstract formal structures.
* The modern view is more complex, since a single judgement of Aristotle's system involves two or more logical connectives.
Historically, logic has been studied in philosophy (since ancient times) and mathematics (since the mid-1800s), and recently logic has been studied in computer science, linguistics, psychology, and other fields.
By contrast, Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) argued for seeing logic as the science of judgement, an idea taken up in the logical and philosophical work of Gottlob Frege (1848-1925).
* '''Validity''', which means that the system's rules of proof never allow a false inference from true premises.
Dialectic has been linked to logic since ancient times, but it has not been until recent decades that European and American logicians have attempted to provide mathematical foundations for logic and dialectic by formalising dialectical logic.
The first was thought to imply 'some S is P', the second was not, and as late as 1911 in the Encyclopedia Britannica article on Logic, we find the Oxford logician T.H.
For example, Thomas Hofweber writes in the ''Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy'' that logic "does not, however, cover good reasoning as a whole.
This showed how the truth of simple sentences, expressed schematically, depend on how the terms 'supposit' or ''stand for'' certain extra-linguistic items.
The seminal work of Arthur Prior applied the same formal language to treat temporal logic and paved the way for the marriage of the two subjects.
Logic is commonly taught by university philosophy departments, often as a compulsory discipline.
Theories of defeasible reasoning can provide a foundation for the formalisation of dialectical logic and dialectic itself can be formalised as moves in a game, where an advocate for the truth of a proposition and an opponent argue.
