*** Gartempe (in La Roche-Posay)
One-third of the inhabitants died in the epidemic of the Black Death of 1348–9.
***** Salleron (in Ingrandes)
In this period, settlers established vineyards and began producing wines.
This style was perpetuated during the reign of Louis XVI (1774–92) but with more refinements; one such refined château seen close to Angers is the Château de Montgeoffroy.
** Ance (in Monistrol-d'Allier)
**** Yerre (near Cloyes-sur-le-Loir)
Married widow Anne de Bretagne after divorcing Jeanne de Valois.
*** Voueize (in Chambon-sur-Voueize)
File:Loire Cher Blois1 tango7174.jpg|Château de Blois interior façades in Gothic, Renaissance and Classic styles (from right to left).
Literary and architectural attainments.
Archaeological evidence suggest that the Romans planted the first vineyards in the Loire Valley during their settlement of Gaul in the 1st century AD.
The European eel (''Anguilla anguilla'') is common in the upper streams, whereas the flounder (''Platichtys flesus'') and flathead mullet (''Mugil'' spp.)
The Centre region of the Loire river valley accounts for the largest forest in France, the "Forêt d'Orléans", covering an area of , and the  forested park known as the "Foret de Chambord".
The WWF were particularly important in changing the perception of the French authorities in support for dam building to environmental protection and sustainable management of its river basin.
** Tardes (in Évaux-les-Bains)
** Palais (near Parthenay)
It is also known as the ''Garden of France'' – due to the abundance of vineyards, fruit orchards, artichoke, asparagus and cherry fields which line the banks of the river – and also as the "cradle of the French language".
The most common species are the Atlantic salmon (''Salmo salar''), sea trout (''Salmo trutta''), shads (''Alosa alosa'' and ''Alosa fallax''), sea lamprey (''Petromyzon marinus'') European river lamprey (''Lampetra fluviatilis'') and smelt (''Osmerus eperlanus'').
He was helped by the famous Joan of Arc to ascend the throne of France and ruled from Chinon.
Today some of these toll bridges still remain, dated to over 800 years.
The Loire Valley has been inhabited since the Middle Palaeolithic period from 40–90&nbsp;ka.
The endangered species include grayling (''Thymallus thymallus''), burbot (''Lota lota'') and bitterling (''Rhodeus sericeus'') and the non-native species are represented by the rock bass (''Ambloplites rupestris'').
Took refuge in Tours and eventually killed by a monk
ridubunda'') and Pool Frog (''R.
Captured in the war in 1525 with the Italians.
** Cosson (in Candé-sur-Beuvron)
The geological formations in the Loire river basin can be grouped into two sets of formations, namely, the basement domain and the domain of sedimentary formations.
The Villerest dam, built in 1985 a few kilometres south of Roanne, has played a key-role in preventing recent flooding.
Gallic rule ended in the valley in 56&nbsp;BC when Julius Caesar conquered the adjacent provinces for Rome.
Ruled during the peak of Hundred Years' War.
esculenta''), Perez's Frog (''R.
Today the river is officially navigable as far as Bouchemaine, where the Maine joins it near Angers.
Following this there was ongoing conflict between the Franks and the Visigoths.
The opening of the Canal latéral à la Loire in 1838 enabled navigation between Digoin and Briare to continue, but the river level crossing at Briare remained a problem until the construction of the Briare aqueduct in 1896.
In 1477, the first printing press in France was established in Angers, and around this time the Chateau de Langeais was built.
Secular ideas prevailed over religious ethos.
By the 11th century the wines of Sancerre had a reputation across Europe for their high quality.
File:Chateau Valencay 20050726.jpg|Château de Valençay.
In 1572 some 3000 Huguenots were slaughtered in Paris in the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre.
The climate is considered the most pleasant of northern France, with warmer winters and, more generally, fewer extremes in temperatures, rarely exceeding .
*** Petite Creuse (in Fresselines)
vulgaris''), Alpine Newt (''T.
The largest tributary of the river is the Allier,  in length, which joins the Loire near the town of Nevers at .
The Loire flows roughly northward through Roanne and Nevers to Orléans and thereafter westward through Tours to Nantes, where it forms an estuary.
Many inhabitants around the present city of Orléans have names bearing witness to the Alan presence – Allaines.
Many have been taken over by a local government authority or the giant structures like those at Chambord are owned and operated by the national government and are major tourist sites, attracting hundreds of thousands of visitors each year.
Furnishings inside the châteaux also witnessed changes to suit the living styles of its occupants.
52&nbsp;BC-5th century
A key transportation route, it served as one of the great "highways" of France for over 2000 years.
The Loire changed its course, due to tectonic deformations, from the original outfall into the English Channel to its new outfall into the Atlantic Ocean thereby creating the presently seen narrow terrain of gorges, the Loire Valley with alluvium formations and the long stretch of beaches along the Atlantic Ocean.
The estuary and its shoreline are also important for fishing, shellfish farming and tourism.
The region experiences a rainfall of  along the coast and  inland.
** Mayenne (near Angers)
The Canal de Roanne à Digoin was also opened in 1838.
* Lignon du Forez (in Feurs)
It is identified as temperate maritime climate, and is characterised by the lack of dry seasons and by heavy rains and snowfall in winter, especially in the upper streams.
*** Oudon (in Le Lion-d'Angers)
The WWF, BirdLife International, and local conservation bodies have also made considerable efforts to improve the conservation of the Loire estuary and its surroundings, given that they are unique habitats for migrating birds.
They were succeeded by the kings of France, who ruled from the late 14th century till the French Revolution; together these rulers contributed to the development of the valley.
Neanderthal man used stone tools to fashion boats out of tree trunks and navigated the river.
The '''Loire Valley wine region''' includes the French wine regions situated along the Loire River from the Muscadet region near the city of Nantes on the Atlantic coast to the region of Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé just southeast of the city of Orléans in north central France.
The reason for this is its sheer length and possibility of extensive navigation, which severely limits the scope of river conservation.
During the 17th century, Jean-Baptiste Colbert instituted the use of stone retaining walls and quays from Roanne to Nantes, which helped make the river more reliable, but navigation was still frequently stopped by excessive conditions during flood and drought.
Another short stretch much further upstream at Decize is also navigable, where a river level crossing from the Canal latéral à la Loire connects to the Canal du Nivernais.
They also began building the city of Caesarodunum, now Tours, from AD&nbsp;1.
Spread of Christianity among communities living along the Loire river banks and Benedictine Order prospered.
**** Semme (in Droux)
Some of these variations had a global nature, such as the expansion of the Mediterranean gull in Europe.
After AD&nbsp;16, the Loire river valley became part of the Roman province of Aquitania, with its capital at Avaricum.
* Nièvre (in Nevers)
** Cébron (near Saint-Loup-sur-Thouet)
They built megaliths to worship the dead, especially from around 3500&nbsp;BC.
** Argenton (near Saint-Martin-de-Sanzay)
Whereas the total biomass is low in the upper reaches, the biodiversity is high, with more than 250 taxa at Orléans.
It is also noteworthy for its architectural heritage: in part for its historic towns such as Amboise, Angers, Blois, Chinon, Nantes, Orléans, Saumur, and Tours, but in particular for its castles, such as the Château d'Amboise, Château de Chambord, Château d'Ussé, Château de Villandry and Chenonceau, and also for its many cultural monuments, which illustrate the ideals of the Renaissance and the Age of the Enlightenment on western European thought and design.
They are then joined by multicellular forms including ''Fragilaria crotonensis'', ''Nitzschia fruticosa'' and ''Skeletonema potamos'', as well as green algae which form star-shaped or prostrate colonies.
During the Wars of Religion from 1562 to 1598, Orléans served as a prominent stronghold for the Huguenots but in 1568, Protestants blew up Orléans Cathedral.
At high flows and in the upper reaches the fraction of the green algae decrease and the phytoplankton is dominated by diatoms.
The Loire has been described as "constantly under threat of losing its status as the last wild river in France".
The area includes 87 appellations under the ''Appellation d'origine contrôlée'' (AOC), ''Vin Délimité de Qualité Superieure'' (VDQS) and ''Vin de pays'' systems.
The basis of the decision was that the economic benefits of the dams did not outweigh their significant ecological impacts, so the intention was to restore the riverine ecosystems and replenish great Loire salmon stocks.
The English defeated the French in 1356 and Aquitaine came under English control in 1360.
The source of the river lies in the eastern Massif Central, in springs to the south side of Mont Gerbier de Jonc at .
River flow is particularly high in the river area near Roanne and Vichy up to the confluence with the Allier.
The three streams converge to form the Loire, which descends the valley south of Mount through the village of Sainte-Eulalie itself.
An authoritarian ruler, reigned from Amboise, and had two queens
During floods, which usually occur in February and March but also in other periods, the flow sometimes exceeds  for the Upper Loire and  in the Lower Loire.
In the intermediate section, the alluvial plain broadens and the river meanders and forks into multi-channels.
** Thouaret (near Taizé)
The climate can be very cool with spring time frost being a potential hazard for the vines.
Newts of the Loire include the Marbled Newt (''Triturus marmoratus''), Smooth Newt (''T.
** Creuse (north of Châtellerault)
The central part of the Loire Valley, located in the Centre-Val de Loire region, was added to the World Heritage Sites list of UNESCO on December 2, 2000.
The river flows through the continental ecoregions of Massif central and Bassin Parisien south and in its Lower course partly through South Atlantic and Brittany.
The Loire Valley, in particular, enjoys a pleasant temperate climate.
** Senouire (near Brioude)
The final dam was decommissioned by Électricité de France at a cost of 7&nbsp;million francs in 1998.
The Baroque style artists who created some of the exquisite château structures were: The Parisian, François Mansart (1598–1662) whose classical symmetrical design is seen in the Château de Blois; Jacquis Boogier (1635) of Blois whose classical design is the Château de Cheverny; Guillaume Bautru remodelled the Château de Serrant (at the extreme western end of the valley).
Historically the wineries of the Loire Valley have been small, family owned operations that do a lot of estate bottling.
*** Bouble (in Saint-Pourçain-sur-Sioule)
** Sarthe (near Angers)
* Layon (in Chalonnes-sur-Loire)
Christianity was introduced into this valley from the 3rd century AD, as missionaries (many later recognized as saints), converted the pagans.
It is originally a mere trickle of water located at  above sea level.
Their total mass is low when the river flow exceeds  and become significant at flows of  or lower which occur in summer.
The Gauls arrived in the valley between 1500 and 500&nbsp;BC, and the Carnutes settled in Cenabum in what is now Orléans and built a bridge over the river.
The tributaries host brown trout (''Salmo trutta''), European bullhead (''Cottus gobio''), European brook lamprey (''Lampetra planeri''), zander (''Sander lucioperca''), nase (''Chondrostoma nasus'' and ''C.
tend to stay near the river mouth.
perezi''), marsh frog (''R.
River traffic increased gradually, with a toll system being used in medieval times.
For centuries local people used wooden embankments and dredging to try to maintain a navigable channel on the river, as it was critical to transportation.
Some notable Châteaux on the Loire include Beaufort- Mareuil sur Cher – Lavoûte-Polignac – Bouthéon – Montrond – Bastie d'Urfé – Château féodal des Cornes d'Urfé – La Roche – Château féodal de Saint-Maurice-sur-Loire – Saint-Pierre-la-Noaille – Chevenon – Palais ducal de Nevers – Saint-Brisson – Gien – La Bussière – Pontchevron – La Verrerie (near Aubigny-sur-Nère) – Sully-sur-Loire – Châteauneuf-sur-Loire – Boisgibault – Meung-sur-Loire – Menars – Talcy – Château de la Ferté – Chambord – Blois – Villesavin – Cheverny – Beauregard – Troussay – Château de Chaumont – Amboise – Clos-Lucé – Langeais – Gizeux – Les Réaux – Montsoreau – Montreuil-Bellay – Saint-Loup-sur-Thouet – Saumur – Boumois – Brissac – Montgeoffroy – Plessis-Bourré – Château des Réaux
In 1990, Loire Vivante met with the French Prime Minister and the government, this time successfully as the government later demanded that the EPALA embark upon major reforms in its approach to managing the river.
The Atlantic coast is home to several aquatic herbs, the important species is Salicornia, which is used as a culinary ingredient on account of its diuretic value.
meneghiniana'', ''S.
At a certain point during the long history of uplift in the Paris Basin, the lower, Atlantic Loire captured the "palaeo-Loire" or ''Loire séquanaise'' ("Seine Loire"), producing the present river.
The sedimentary domain consists of limestone and carbonaceous rocks, that, where saturated, form productive aquifers.
**** Braye (in Pont-de-Braye)
The presence of an aquifer under Mont Gerbier de Jonc gives rise to multiple sources, three of them located at the foot of Mount have been highlighted as river sources.
The great Loire salmon, a subspecies of Atlantic salmon, is regarded as the symbolic fish of the river.
The '''Lower Loire''' that leads to the mouth of the river's entrance to the Atlantic goes through the Muscadet region which is dominated by wines of the Melon de Bourgogne grape.
The French government proposed a construction of a dam at Serre de la Fare on the upper Loire which would have been an environmental catastrophe, as it would have inundated some  of pristine gorges.
In the High Middle Ages, the wines of the Loire Valley were the most esteemed wines in England and France, even more prized than those from Bordeaux.
*** Huisne (in Le Mans)
Its main tributaries include the rivers Maine, Nièvre and the Erdre on its right bank, and the rivers Allier, Cher, Indre, Vienne, and the Sèvre Nantaise on the left bank.
alpestris'') and Palmate Newt (''T.
*** Loir (north of Angers)
The ''Vin de Pays du Jardin de la France'' refers to any varietally labelled wine, such as Chardonnay, that is produced in the region outside of an AOC designation.
The frogs are represented by the Parsley frog (''Pelodites punctatus''), European tree frog (''Hyla arborea''), Common Frog (''Rana temporaria''), Agile Frog (''R.
Studies of the palaeo-geography of the region suggest that the palaeo-Loire flowed northward and joined the Seine, while the lower Loire found its source upstream of Orléans in the region of Gien, flowing westward along the present course.
Her successful relief of the siege of Orléans, on the Loire, was the turning point of the war.
The French government initially rejected the conservation concerns and in 1989 gave the dam projects the green light.
** Taurion (in Saint-Priest-Taurion)
In choosing this area that includes the French ''départements'' of Loiret, Loir-et-Cher, Indre-et-Loire, and Maine-et-Loire, the committee said that the Loire Valley is:
First King of Bourbon Dynasty, Adopted the Catholic faith, Decreed the Edict of Nantes.
The latter are mostly affected by the industrial pollution, construction of dams and drainage of oxbows and swamps.
Activity centred at Amboise.
File:Langeais-Chateau.JPG|Chateau de Langeais
The French government undertook this major plan, chiefly because pollution and overfishing had reduced approximately 100,000 salmon migrating annually to their spawning grounds in the headwaters of the Loire and its tributaries to just 67 salmon in 1996 on the upper Allier.
Rock outcrops of granite or basalt also are exposed in the river bed in several stretches.
Downstream of Nevers lies the Loire Valley, a UNESCO World Heritage Site due to its fine assortment of castles.
The middle stretches of the river have many limestone caves which were inhabited by humans in the prehistoric era; the caves are several types of limestone formations, namely tuffeau (a porous type of chalk, not to be confused with tufa) and Falun (formed 12&nbsp;million years ago).
Several départements of France were named after the Loire.
The river can be divided into three main zones; the Upper Loire which is the area from the source to the confluence with the Allier, the middle Loire Valley which is the area from the Allier to the confluence with the Maine, about , and the Lower Loire which is the area from Maine to the estuary.
With more vines competing for the same limited resources in the soil, the density is designed to compensate for the excessive yields that some of the grape varieties, like Chenin blanc, are prone to have.
The Loire flows through the following départements and towns: Ardèche, Haute-Loire: Le Puy-en-Velay, Loire: Feurs, Roanne, Saône-et-Loire: Digoin, Allier, Nièvre: Decize, Nevers, La Charité-sur-Loire, Cosne-Cours-sur-Loire, Cher: Sancerre, Loiret: Briare, Gien, Orléans, Loir-et-Cher: Blois, Indre-et-Loire: Amboise, Tours, Maine-et-Loire: Saumur, Loire-Atlantique: Ancenis, Nantes, Saint-Nazaire.
In the 9th century, the Vikings began invading the west coast of France, using long ships to navigate the Loire.
They were originally created as feudal strongholds, over centuries past, in the strategic divide between southern and northern France; now many are privately owned.
The Loire gives its name to six departments: Loire, Haute-Loire, Loire-Atlantique, Indre-et-Loire, Maine-et-Loire, and Saône-et-Loire.
** Arnon (near Vierzon)
Saumur was established as a prominent academic centre.
**** Brame (in Darnac)
* Maine (near Angers)
In 408, the Iranian tribe of Alans crossed the Loire and large hordes of them settled along the middle course of the Loire in Gaul under King Sangiban.
**** Anglin (in Angles-sur-l'Anglin)
* Allier (near Nevers)
Typically passenger travel downriver from Orléans to Nantes took eight days, with the upstream journey against the flow taking fourteen.
Reine claude (''Prunus domestica italica'') tree species was planted in the gardens of the Château.
** Chapeauroux (in Saint-Christophe-d'Allier)
The French government adopted the Natural Loire River Plan (Plan Loire Grandeur Nature) in January 1994, initiating the decommissioning of three dams on the river.
*** Rère (in Villeherviers)
There are two generic designation that can be used across the whole of the Loire Valley.
Romans introduced melons, apples, cherries, quinces and pears during the Middle Ages, apart from extracting saffron from purple crocus species in the Orléans.
In the 1530s, the Reformation ideas reached the Loire valley, with some people becoming Protestant.
The discharge rate varies strongly along the river, with roughly  at Orléans and  at the mouth.
* Arroux (in Digoin)
* Arconce (in Varenne-Saint-Germain)
* Indre (east of Candes-Saint-Martin)
That year, the Upper Loire Valley Farmers Association was also established through a partnership between SOS Loire Vivante and a farmers’ union to promote sustainable rural tourism.
Attila, leader of Huns was stopped from entering the Orléans city.
dalmatina''), Edible Frog (''R.
Hantzschii'' and ''Thalassiosira pseudonana''.
Proposals to develop a fully navigable river up to Briare came to nothing.
**** Aigre (near Cloyes-sur-le-Loir)
There was further refinement in the design of the châteaux in the 15th century before the Baroque style came into prominence with decorative and elegantly designed interiors and which became fashionable from the 16th to the end of the 18th century.
** Sioule (in La Ferté-Hauterive)
Gardens, both ornamental fountains, foot paths flower beds and tended grass) and kitchen type (to grow vegetables), also accentuated the opulence of the châteaux.
Soon after the beginning of the 19th century, steam-driven passenger boats began to ply the river between Nantes and Orléans, making the upriver journey faster; by 1843, 70,000 passengers were being carried annually in the Lower Loire and 37,000 in the Upper Loire.
This sparked public demonstrations by the WWF and conservation groups.
Asparagus was also brought from northwestern France.
The Federation, a member of the IUCN since 1970, has been very important in the campaign to save the Loire river system from development.
By around 5000 to 4000&nbsp;BC, they began clearing forests along the river edges and cultivating the lands and rearing livestock.
These rulers started with the Gauls, followed by the Romans, and the Frankish Dynasty.
"an exceptional cultural landscape, of great beauty,  historic cities and villages, great architectural monuments – the Châteaux – and lands that have been cultivated and shaped by centuries of interaction between local populations and their physical environment, in particular the Loire itself."
It was nearly closed in 1971 but, in the early 21st century, it still provides navigation further up the Loire valley to Digoin.
The human history of the Loire river valley begins with the Middle Palaeolithic period of 90–40 kya (thousand years ago), followed by modern humans (about 30 kya), succeeded by the Neolithic period (6,000 to 4,500&nbsp;BC), all of the recent Stone Age in Europe.
In the marshy lands, ash, alder and willows are grown with duckweed providing the needed natural fertilizing effect.
*** Théols (in Bommiers)
** Viette (near Parthenay)
The Loire Valley itself follows the river through the Loire province to the river's origins in the Cévennes but the majority of the wine production takes place in the regions noted above.
Trading along the Loire
The Loire is unique in this respect as the Atlantic salmon can swim as far as  up the river and spawn in the upper reaches of the Allier.
* Thouet (near Saumur)
The mid-1990s saw an increase in the number of négociant and co-operative to where now about half of Sancerre and almost 80% of Muscadet is bottled by a négociant or co-op.
** Allagnon (near Jumeaux)
Reformist era, Wars of Religion
*** Vaige (in Sablé-sur-Sarthe)
**** Conie (near Châteaudun)
In 1707, floods were said to have drowned 50,000 people in the river valley, with the water rising more than  in two hours in Orléans.
