Loki and Logi sit down on opposing sides.
The old woman Thor wrestled was in fact old age (''Elli'', Old Norse "old age"), and there is no one that old age cannot bring down.
Loki ends the poetic verses of ''Lokasenna'' with a final stanza:
Loki returns, and the three gods give Hreidmar the money from the gold hoard and flatten out the otter skin, stretch out its legs, and heap gold atop it, covering it.
The Odin-kenning "Lóðurr's friend" furthermore appears to parallel the kenning "Loptr's friend" and Loki is similarly referred to as "Hœnir's friend" in ''Haustlöng'', strengthening the trio connection.
Útgarða-Loki then calls for his nurse Elli, an old woman.
The first of the four theories is that of Folke Ström, who in 1956 concluded that Loki is a hypostasis of the god Odin.
The poem begins with a prose introduction detailing that Ægir, a figure associated with the sea, is hosting a feast in his hall for a number of the gods and elves.
Njörðr (Freyja and Freyr's father) says that it is harmless for a woman to have a lover or "someone else" beside her husband, and that what is surprising is a "pervert god coming here who has borne children."
Frigg, a major goddess and Odin's wife, says that what Loki and Odin did in the ancient past should not be spoken of in front of others, and that ancient matters should always remain hidden.
Hreidmar tells them to leave, and the poem continues without further mention of Loki.
The two wrestle but the harder Thor struggles the more difficult the battle becomes.
Loki tells him to be silent, that Byggvir does not know how to apportion food among men, and that he hides among the straw and dais when men go to battle.
A depiction of a similarly horned and round-shouldered figure was discovered in Gainford, County Durham and is now housed in the Durham Cathedral Library.
Olrik further cites several different types of plants named after Loki.
Loki's wife is named Sigyn, and they have a son named "Nari or Narfi".
;Loki, Útgarða-Loki, and Logi
An example from 1841 reads as follows:
:from whom every ogress on earth is descended.
''Loka Táttur'' or ''Lokka Táttur'' (Faroese "tale—or ''þáttr''—of Loki") is a Faroese ballad dating to the late Middle Ages that features the gods Loki, Odin, and Hœnir helping a farmer and a boy escape the wraith of a bet-winning jötunn.
Only a wide landscape remains.
The castle is so tall that they must bend their heads back to their spines to see above it.
The gods then return to the hall, and continue drinking.
Inside the great hall are two benches, where many generally large people sit on two benches.
Loki appears in both prose and the first six stanzas of the poem ''Reginsmál''.
Loki's origins and role in Norse mythology have been much debated by scholars.
At the falls, Loki spreads his net before Andvari (who is in the form of a pike), which Andvari jumps into.
The stone may point to a connection between Loki and smithing and flames.
The goddess Freyja declares that Loki must be mad, stating that Frigg knows all fate, yet she does not speak it.
In addition, Loki is referred to as the father of Váli in the ''Prose Edda''.
In 1950, a semi-circular flat stone featuring a depiction of a mustachioed face was discovered on a beach near Snaptun, Denmark.
Loki does not respond to Bragi directly, but instead directs his attention to Odin, and states:
He is depicted as an ally of the gods (specifically Wotan's assistant rather than Donner's), although he generally dislikes them and thinks of them as greedy, as they refuse to return the Rhine Gold to its rightful owners.
Útgarða-Loki reveals that all was not what it seemed to the group.
In 1835, Jacob Grimm was first to produce a major theory about Loki, in which he advanced the notion of Loki as a "god of fire".
Breaking the silence, Loki says that, thirsty, he had come to these halls from a long way away to ask the gods for a drink of "the famous mead."
:Ale you brewed, Ægir, and you will never again hold a feast;
Loki consumed all of the meat off of the bones on his side, yet Logi had not only consumed his meat, but also the bones and the trencher itself.
Discovered in 2008, Loki's Castle, a group of five of the most northerly black smokers known, takes its name from the god.
The two return to Freyja, and tell her to dress herself in a bridal head dress, as they will drive her to Jötunheimr.
Skrýmir gives them advice; if they are going to be cocky at the keep of Útgarðr it would be better for them to turn back now, for Útgarða-Loki's men there won't put up with it.
Hreidmar looks it over, and notices a single hair that has not been covered.
In his study of Loki's appearance in Scandinavian folklore in the modern period, Danish folklorist Axel Olrik cites numerous examples of natural phenomena explained by way of Lokke in popular folk tradition, including rising heat.
Skrýmir throws his knapsack onto his back and abruptly goes into the forest.
:all your possessions which are here inside—
The god Heimdallr says that Loki is drunk and witless, and asks Loki why he won't stop speaking.
Upon seeing the skin, Regin and Hreidmar "seized them and made them ransom their lives" in exchange for filling the otterskin bag the gods had made with gold and covering the exterior of the bag with red gold.
Útgarða-Loki appears, has his servants prepare a table, and they all merrily eat and drink.
This stanza is followed by:
Prior to drinking, Loki declaims a toast to the gods, with a specific exception for Bragi.
Loki replies that Bragi is brave when seated, calling him a "bench-ornament," and that Bragi would run away when troubled by an angry, spirited man.
Loki tells Heimdallr to be silent, that he was fated a "hateful life," that Heimdallr must always have a muddy back, and serve as watchman of the gods.
In ''Baldr draumar'', Odin has awoken a deceased völva in Hel, and questions her repeatedly about his son Baldr's bad dreams.
Loki tells Iðunn to be silent, calling her the most "man-crazed" of all women, and saying that she placed her washed, bright arms around her brother's slayer.
The gods dress Thor as a bride, and Loki states that he will go with Thor as his maid, and that the two shall drive to Jötunheimr together.
Víðarr stands and pours a drink for Loki.
After some debate, the gods agree to these conditions, but place a number of restrictions on the builder, including that he must complete the work within three seasons without the help of any man.
:we mixed our blood together?
The main argument for this is that the gods Odin, Hœnir and Loki occur as a trio in ''Haustlöng'', in the prose prologue to ''Reginsmál'' and also in the ''Loka Táttur'' a Faroese ballad, an example of Norse deities appearing in later folklore.
The contests, too, were an illusion.
Thor again commands Loki to be silent, threatens Loki with Mjöllnir, and says he will send Loki to Hel, below the gates of Nágrind.
Thor is finally brought down to a single knee.
Odin responds that even if this is true, Loki (in a story otherwise unattested) once spent eight winters beneath the earth as a woman milking cows, and during this time bore children.
During the 19th century, Loki was depicted in a variety of manners, sometimes strongly at odds.
The second attempt awakes Skrýmir.
Þrymr sees Loki, and asks what could be amiss among the Æsir and the Elves; why is Loki alone in the Jötunheimr?
:The expressions: "Lokke (Lokki) sår havre i dag" (Lokke (Lokki) sows oats today), or: "Lokke driver i dag med sine geder" (Lokke herds his goats today), are used in several regions of Jutland, for example in Medelsom shire, the diocese of Viborg etc.
The mid-11th century Gosforth Cross has been interpreted as featuring various figures from Norse mythology and, like the Kirkby Stephen Stone, is also located in Cumbria.
... and stand for the sight in the springtime, when the sunshine generates vapour from the ground, which can be seen as fluttering or shimmering air in the horizon of the flat landscape, similar to the hot steam over a kettle or a burning fire
In Zealand the name "Lokke lejemand" ("Lokke the Playing Man") was used.
Further, with the hoard, he will have red gold for the rest of his life.
Loki may be depicted on the Snaptun Stone, the Kirkby Stephen Stone, and the Gosforth Cross.
The cat that Thor attempted to lift was in actuality the world serpent, Jörmungandr, and everyone was terrified when Thor was able to lift the paw of this "cat", for Thor had actually held the great serpent up to the sky.
Loki tells Njörðr to be silent, recalling Njörðr's status as once having been a hostage from the Vanir to the Æsir during the Æsir-Vanir War, that the "daughters of Hymir" once used Njörðr "as a pisspot," urinating in his mouth (an otherwise unattested comment).
That night, the three gods stay with Hreidmar (the father of Regin, Andvari, and the now-dead Ótr) and show him their catches, including the skin of the otter.
Útgarða-Loki tells Thor that it would be better for "both sides" if they did not meet again.
The stone is housed and on display at the Moesgård Museum near Aarhus, Denmark.
The reference to Loki is explained by a University of Bergen press release as "an appropriate name for a field that was so difficult to locate".
Loki tells Njörðr to maintain his moderation, and that he won't keep it secret any longer that Njörðr fathered this son with his sister (unnamed), although one would expect him to be worse than he turned out.
In stanza 54, after consuming Odin and being killed by Odin's son Víðarr, Fenrir is described as "Loki's kinsman".
This, in itself, is enough to show how little scholars agree, and how far we are from understanding him."
While the three gods are at the falls, Ótr (in the form of an otter) catches a salmon and eats it on a river bank, his eyes shut, when Loki hits and kills him with a stone.
Thor arrives, and tells Loki to be silent, referring to him as an "evil creature," stating that with his hammer Mjöllnir he will silence Loki by hammering his head from his shoulders.
Þorgeirsson also points to ''Þrymlur'' where the same identification is made with Loki and Lóðurr.
Loki says he intends to live for a long while yet despite Thor's threats, and taunts Thor about an encounter Thor once had with the Skrýmir (Útgarða-Loki in disguise).
High comments that "there is no report that the Æsir expressed hope for a happy reunion".
Thor invites the peasant family who own the farm to share with him the meal he has prepared, but warns them not to break the bones.
In the conclusion of the first opera ''Das Rheingold'' he reveals his hope to turn into fire and destroy Valhalla, and in the final opera ''Götterdämmerung'' Valhalla is set alight, destroying the Gods.
Thor slaughters his goats, prepares them, puts them in a pot, and Loki and Thor sit down for their evening meal.
:may flame play over them,
Loki has been depicted in or is referenced in an array of media in modern popular culture.
Loki appears in the 1975 fantasy novel ''Eight Days of Luke'' by Diana Wynne Jones.
:Do you remember, Odin, when in bygone days
Thor turns to Loki first, and tells him that nobody knows that the hammer has been stolen.
After World War II, four scholarly theories dominated.
Loki responds by asking Andvari "what requital" does mankind get if "they wound each other with words".
According to Bruce Dickins, the reference to "Loki's deceit" in the poem "is doubtless to Loki's responsibility for Balder's death."
Freyja pointedly refuses.
Skaði fastened a venomous snake over Loki's face, and from it poison dripped.
Þrymr then lifts "Freyja's" veil and wants to kiss "her" until catching the terrifying eyes staring back at him, seemingly burning with fire.
Loki counters that Odin once practiced seiðr on the island of ''Samsey'' (now Samsø, Denmark), and, appearing as a wizard, traveled among mankind, which Loki condemns as perverse.
Finding shelter in a side room, they experience earthquakes through the night.
Byggvir (referred to in the prose introduction to the poem as a servant of Freyr) says that if he had as noble a lineage and as an honorable a seat as Freyr, he would grind down Loki, and make all of his limbs lame.
Odin then asks his silent son Víðarr to sit up, so that Loki (here referred to as the "wolf's father") may sit at the feast, and so that he may not speak words of blame to the gods in Ægir's hall.
The builder goes into a rage, and when the Æsir realize that the builder is a hrimthurs, they disregard their previous oaths with the builder, and call for Thor.
;Re-entrance and insults
Loki "takes the horn," drinks it, and says that she would be, if it were so, and states that Sif had a lover beside Thor, namely, Loki himself (an event that is otherwise unattested).
Loki's positive relations with the gods end with his role in engineering the death of the god Baldr and Loki is eventually bound by the gods with the entrails of one of his sons.
Loki is mentioned in stanza 14, the final stanza of the poem, where the völva tells Odin to ride home, to be proud of himself, and that no one else will come visit until "Loki is loose, escaped from his bonds" and the onset of Ragnarök.
Thor agrees to compete in a drinking contest but after three immense gulps fails.
In chapter 42, High tells a story set "right at the beginning of the gods' settlement, when the gods at established Midgard and built Val-Hall."
Thor rejects the idea, and Loki (here described as "son of Laufey") interjects that this will be the only way to get back Mjöllnir, and points out that without Mjöllnir, the jötnar will be able to invade and settle in Asgard.
Frigg responds that if there was a boy like her now-deceased son Baldr in the hall, Loki would not be able to escape from the wrath of the gods.
They find themselves facing a massive castle in an open area.
Thor arrives, and subsequently kills the builder by smashing the builder's skull into shards with the hammer Mjöllnir.
High says that Loki's alternative name is ''Lopt'', that he is the son of the male jötunn Farbauti, his mother is "Laufey or Nál", and his brothers are Helblindi and Býleistr.
The figure is identified as Loki due to the lips, considered a reference to a tale recorded in ''Skáldskaparmál'' where sons of Ivaldi stitch up Loki's lips.
According to Stefan Arvidssen, "the conception of Loki varied during the nineteenth century.
In their terror, the family atones to Thor by giving Thor their son Þjálfi and their daughter Röskva.
Struggling, all four squeeze through the bars of the gate, and continue to a large hall.
Andvari gives some background information about himself, including that he was cursed by a "norn of misfortune" in his "early days".
In Jötunheimr, the jötunn Þrymr sits on a burial mound, plaiting golden collars for his female dogs, and trimming the manes of his horses.
The mare runs to the wood, Svaðilfari follows, and the builder chases after.
Njörðr responds that this was his reward when he was sent as a hostage to the Æsir, and that he fathered his son (Freyr), whom no one hates, and is considered a prince of the Æsir.
Many scholars, including Jan de Vries and Georges Dumézil, have also identified Lóðurr as being the same deity as Loki.
Útgarða-Loki comments that this would be a feat indeed, and calls for a being by the name of Logi to come from the benches.
Acknowledging that Thor has arrived, Loki asks Thor why he is raging, and says that Thor won't be so bold to fight against the wolf when he swallows Odin at Ragnarök.
Loki claims each of the gods and elves that are present have been Freyja's lover.
In both the ''Poetic Edda'' and the ''Prose Edda'', the goddess Skaði is responsible for placing a serpent above him while he is bound.
Loki says that, even if this is his fate, that he was "first and foremost" with the other gods at the killing of Skaði's father, Þjazi.
Regin, a dwarf, had two brothers; Andvari, who gained food by spending time in the Andvara-falls in the form of a pike, and Ótr, who would often go to the Andvara-falls in the form of an otter.
The goddess Iðunn interrupts, asking Bragi, as a service to his relatives and adopted relatives, not to say words of blame to Loki in Ægir's hall.
Anne Holtsmark, writing in 1962, concluded that no conclusion could be made about Loki.
Loki's origins and role in Norse mythology, which some scholars have described as that of a trickster god, have been much debated by scholars.
He is also a central character in Neil Gaiman's novel ''American Gods'' and an important character in a few arcs of Gaiman's comic ''The Sandman''.
Loki comes out of the woods, and meets Eldir outside of the hall.
Famously, Loki appears in Richard Wagner's opera cycle Ring of the Nibelung as ''Loge'' (a play on Old Norse ''loge'' "fire").
Þrymr commands the jötnar in his hall to spread straw on the benches, for Freyja has arrived to be his wife.
Loki states that it was indeed an effort, and also a success, for he has discovered that Þrymr has the hammer, but that it cannot be retrieved unless Freyja is brought to Þrymr as his wife.
The notion of Loki survived into the modern period in the folklore of Scandinavia.
The prose introduction to ''Reginsmál'' details that, while the hero Sigurd was being fostered by Regin, son of Hreidmar, Regin tells him that once the gods Odin, Hœnir, and Loki went to Andvara-falls, which contained many fish.
Minus the goats, Thor, Loki, and the two children continue east until they arrive at a vast forest in Jötunheimr.
:Loki ate some of the heart, the thought-stone of a woman,
The building turns out to be the huge glove of Skrymir, who has been snoring throughout the night, causing what seemed to be earthquakes.
Otherwise, Loki had three children with the female jötunn Angrboða from Jötunheimr; the wolf Fenrir, the serpent Jörmungandr, and the female being Hel.
The first stanza notes that Loki produced "the wolf" with the jötunn Angrboða, that Loki himself gave birth to the horse Sleipnir by the stallion Svaðilfari, and that Loki (referred to as the "brother of Býleistr") thirdly gave birth to "the worst of all marvels".
The tale notably features Loki as a benevolent god in this story, although his slyness is in evidence as usual.
In response, the gods grab their shields, shrieking at Loki, and chase him out of the hall and to the woods.
In response, Loki calls Freyja a malicious witch, and claims that Freyja was once astride her brother Freyr, when all of the other laughing gods surprised her, Freyja then farted.
A trencher is fetched, placed on the floor of the hall, and filled with meat.
The serpent drips venom from above him that Sigyn collects into a bowl; however, she must empty the bowl when it is full, and the venom that drips in the meantime causes Loki to writhe in pain, thereby causing earthquakes.
The gods think that this is great, and flay the skin from the otter to make a bag.
Scholar Haukur Þorgeirsson suggests that ''Loki'' and ''Lóðurr'' were different names for the same deity based on that Loki is referred to as Lóður in the rimur ''Lokrur''.
Loki's consumption of a woman's heart is otherwise unattested.
Loki is a shape shifter and in separate incidents he appears in the form of a salmon, a mare, a seal, a fly, and possibly an elderly woman named Þökk (Old Norse 'thanks').
The vent field was given the name ''Loki's Castle'' as its shape reminded its discoverers of a fantasy castle.
Byggvir says that he's proud to be here by all the gods and men, and that he's said to be speedy.
Thor agrees to lift a large, gray cat in the hall but finds that it arches his back no matter what he does, and that he can raise only a single paw.
Loki looks over the gold that Andvari possesses, and after Andvari hands over all of his gold, Andvari holds on to but a single ring; the ring Andvarinaut, which Loki also takes.
Loki retorts that Freyr purchased his consort Gerðr with gold, having given away his sword, which he will lack at Ragnarök.
The gods convene, and figure out who is responsible, resulting in a unanimous agreement that, along with most trouble, Loki is to blame (here referred to as ''Loki Laufeyjarson''—his surname derived from his mother's name, ''Laufey'').
The mare neighs at Svaðilfari, and "realizing what kind of horse it was," Svaðilfari becomes frantic, neighs, tears apart his tackle, and runs towards the mare.
Bragi responds that he will give a horse, sword, and ring from his possessions so that he does not repay the gods "with hatred."
Odin declares this perverse.
Sometimes he was presented as a dark-haired Semitic fifth columnist among the Nordic Aesir, but sometimes he was described as a Nordic Prometheus, a heroic bearer of culture".
Loki is referred to in the ''Poetic Edda'', compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources; the ''Prose Edda'' and ''Heimskringla'', written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson; the Norwegian Rune Poems, in the poetry of skalds, and in Scandinavian folklore.
:roasted on a linden-wood fire, he found it half-cooked;
Loki states that this is because "Freyja" had not slept for eight nights in her eagerness.
Thor laughs internally when he sees the hammer, takes hold of it, strikes Þrymr, beats all of the jötnar, and kills the "older sister" of the jötnar.
Tyr responds that while he may have lost a hand, Loki has lost the wolf, and trouble has come to them both.
The four seek shelter for the night.
This scenario is otherwise unattested.
Þrymr recounts his treasured animals and objects, stating that Freyja was all that he was missing in his wealth.
By his wife Sigyn, Loki is the father of Narfi and/or Nari.
Haukur concludes that if Lóðurr was historically considered an independent deity from Loki, then a discussion of when and why he became identified with Loki is appropriate.
:unless it were brought to both of us.
In turn, Þjálfi races against a figure by the name of Hugi three times and thrice loses.
As a result, the gods and goddesses meet and hold a thing to discuss and debate the matter.
The builder makes a single request; that he may have help from his stallion Svaðilfari, and due to Loki's influence, this is allowed.
The gods realized that these three children were being raised in Jötunheimr, and expected trouble from them partially due to the nature of Angrboða, but worse yet Loki.
High describes Loki as "pleasing and handsome" in appearance, malicious in character, "very capricious in behaviour", and as possessing "to a greater degree than others" learned cunning, and "tricks for every purpose", often getting the Æsir into trouble, and then getting them out of it with his trickery.
;The arrival of Thor and the bondage of Loki
Haukur says that unless the possible but unlikely idea that the 14th and 15th century poets possessed lost written sources unknown to us, the idea must have come from either an unlikely amount of sources from where the poets could have drawn a similar conclusion that Loki and Lóðurr are identical (like some recent scholars) or that remnants of an oral tradition remained.
In response to Thor, Loki says that he "spoke before the Æsir," and "before the sons of the Æsir" what his "spirit urged" him to say, yet before Thor alone he will leave, as he knows that Thor does strike.
The gods declare that Loki deserves a horrible death if he cannot find a scheme that will cause the builder to forfeit his payment, and threaten to attack him.
Þrymr finds the behaviour at odds with his impression of Freyja, and Loki, sitting before Þrymr and appearing as a "very shrewd maid", makes the excuse that "Freyja's" behaviour is due to her having not consumed anything for eight entire days before arriving due to her eagerness to arrive.
By the stallion Svaðilfari, Loki is the mother&mdash;giving birth in the form of a mare&mdash;to the eight-legged horse Sleipnir.
File:Kirkby Stephen Stone by Petersen.jpg|The bound figure on the Kirkby Stephen Stone
Skaði says that, with these events in mind, "baneful advice" will always come from her "sanctuaries and plains" to Loki.
:and may your back be burnt!
The goddess Gefjun asks why the two gods must fight, saying that Loki knows that he is joking, and that "all living things love him."
In the poem ''Þrymskviða'', Thor wakes and finds that his powerful hammer, Mjöllnir, is missing.
In Norse mythology, '''Loki''' () Anglicized (), '''Loptr''', or '''Hveðrungr''' is a god or jötunn (or both).
After riding together in Thor's goat-driven chariot, the two, disguised, arrive in Jötunheimr.
Thor responds by telling Loki to be silent, threatening him with Mjöllnir, and adding that every one of Loki's bones will be broken with it.
It was evident to all that Loki had lost.
One argument against it is that Loki appears as a malevolent being later in ''Völuspá'', seemingly conflicting with the image of Lóðurr as a "mighty and loving" figure.
;Loki, Svaðilfari, and Sleipnir
Þorgeirsson argues that the writer must have had information about the identification from either a tradition or that the author drew the conclusion based on the ''Prose Edda'', as Snorri does not mention Lóðurr.
Hreidmar demands that it be covered as well.
