His successor, Cleph, was also assassinated, after a ruthless reign of 18 months.
In Vurgundaib, the Lombards were stormed in camp by "Bulgars" (probably Huns) and were defeated; King Agelmund was killed and Laimicho was made king.
Bobbio Abbey was founded during this time.
This theory is highly plausible; Paul the Deacon mentions the Lombards crossing a river, and they could have reached ''Rugiland'' from the Upper Oder area via the Moravian Gate.
The Lombards themselves were probably made subjects of the Huns after the defeat but rose up and defeated them with great slaughter, gaining great booty and confidence as they "became bolder in undertaking the toils of war."
The burial sites are crematorial and are usually dated from the 6th century BC through the 3rd century AD, so a settlement breakoff seems unlikely.
Regarding their own civilisation as superior, the Lombards did indeed provide the environment for the illustrious Schola Medica Salernitana.
Now as for the tribe of the Suebi, it is the largest, for it extends from the Rhenus to the Albis; and a part of them even dwell on the far side of the Albis, as, for instance, the Hermondori and the Langobardi; and at the present time these latter, at least, have, to the last man, been driven in flight out of their country into the land on the far side of the river.
Primary source texts include short inscriptions in the Elder Futhark, among them the "bronze capsule of Schretzheim" (c. 600) and the silver belt buckle found in Pforzen, Ostallgäu (Schwaben).
In the following years, the Lombards penetrated further south, conquering Tuscany and establishing two duchies, Spoleto and Benevento under Zotto, which soon became semi-independent and even outlasted the northern kingdom, surviving well into the 12th century.
The Lombards were joined by numerous Saxons, Heruls, Gepids, Bulgars, Thuringians, and Ostrogoths, and their invasion of Italy was almost unopposed.
The Germanic language declined, beginning in the 7th century, but may have been in scattered use until as late as about the year 1000.
in order that they might increase the number of their warriors, the Lombards confer liberty upon many whom they deliver from the yoke of bondage, and that the freedom of these may be regarded as established, they confirm it in their accustomed way by an arrow, uttering certain words of their country in confirmation of the fact.
But when Pope Hadrian I called for help from the powerful Frankish king Charlemagne, Desiderius was defeated at Susa and besieged in Pavia, while his son Adelchis was forced to open the gates of Verona to Frankish troops.
However, the ''Codex Gothanus'' also mentions ''Patespruna'' (Paderborn) in connection with the Lombards.
He subsequently declared them to be in perpetual union, and they were separated only in 982, on the death of Pandulf Ironhead.
In 47, a struggle ensued amongst the Cherusci and they expelled their new leader, the nephew of Arminius, from their country.
The legendary king Sceafa of Scandza was an ancient Lombardic king in Anglo-Saxon legend.
The lands of the lower Elbe fall into the zone of the Jastorf Culture and became Elbe-Germanic, differing from the lands between Rhine, Weser, and the North Sea.
In the meantime, Authari embarked on a policy of internal reconciliation and tried to reorganize royal administration.
Finally, towards 915, Pope John X managed to unite the Christian princes of southern Italy against the Saracen establishments on the Garigliano river.
A modern theory suggests that the name "Langobard" comes from ''Langbarðr'', a name of Odin.
The cities of the Roman Empire had been partially destroyed in the series of wars of the 5th and 6th centuries.
In 847 a large Muslim force seized Bari, until then a Lombard gastaldate under the control of Pandenulf.
From that moment onwards, the Winnili were known as the ''Longbeards'' (Latinised as ''Langobardi'', Italianised as ''Longobardi'', and Anglicized(citation needed) as ''Longobards'' or ''Lombards'').
Perctarit fled to the Avars and then to the Franks.
To their east stretching northwards to the central Elbe are the Suebi Angili.
Agilulf died in 616; Theodelinda reigned alone until 628 when she was succeeded by Adaloald.
A number of Latin texts include Lombardic names, and Lombardic legal texts contain terms taken from the legal vocabulary of the vernacular.
In 552, the Byzantines aided by a large contingent of Foederati, notably Lombards, Heruls and Bulgars, defeated the last Ostrogoths lead by Teia in the Battle of Taginae.
Liutprand's successor Aistulf conquered Ravenna for the Lombards for the first time but had to relinquish it when he was subsequently defeated by the king of the Franks, Pippin III, who was called by the Pope.
The Italian language preserves a large number of Lombardic words, although it is not always easy to distinguish them from other Germanic borrowings such as those from Gothic or from  Frankish.
In the 7th century, the nominally Christian aristocracy of Benevento was still practising pagan rituals, such as sacrifices in "sacred" woods.
From the 2nd century onwards, many of the Germanic tribes recorded as active during the Principate started to unite into bigger tribal unions, such as the Franks, Alamanni, Bavarii, and Saxons.
Some of the late Lombard structures of the 9th and 10th centuries have been found to contain elements of style associated with Romanesque architecture and have been so dubbed "first Romanesque".
Gradually, they adopted Roman titles, names, and traditions, and partially converted to orthodoxy (in the 7th century), though not without a long series of religious and ethnic conflicts.
Agilulf successfully fought the rebel dukes of northern Italy, conquering Padua in 601, Cremona and Mantua in 603, and forcing the Exarch of Ravenna to pay tribute.
The ''Basilic autariana'' in Fara Gera d'Adda near Bergamo and the church of San Salvatore in Brescia also have Lombard elements.
Fröhlich inverts the order of events in Priester and states that with the Odin cult, the Lombards grew their beards in resemblance of the Odin of tradition and their new name reflected this.
Schmidt believed that the Germanic tribes were divided according to cantons and that the earliest government was a general assembly that selected canton chiefs and war leaders in times of conflict.
The treaty divided the kingdom into two states: the Principality of Benevento and the Principality of Salerno, with its capital at Salerno on the Tyrrhenian Sea.
However, Lombard nobles continued to rule southern parts of the Italian peninsula, well into the 11th century when they were conquered by the Normans and added to their County of Sicily.
Parts of Lombard constructions have been preserved in Pavia (San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro, crypts of Sant'Eusebio and San Giovanni Domnarum) and Monza (cathedral).
The Beneventan rite appears to have been less complete, less systematic, and more liturgically flexible than the Roman rite.
By the end of the 5th century, they had moved into the area roughly coinciding with modern Austria north of the Danube river, where they subdued the Heruls and later fought frequent wars with the Gepids.
As a result of the wars of their wanderings, royal power developed such that the king became the representative of the people, but the influence of the people on the government did not fully disappear.
There, Alboin created the first Lombard duchy, which he entrusted to his nephew Gisulf.
This weakness became even more evident when the Lombards had to face the increasing power of the Franks.
After the death of Louis, Landulf II of Capua briefly flirted with a Saracen alliance, but Pope John VIII convinced him to break it off.
By the end of the reign of Cunincpert, however, the Lombards were more or less completely Catholicised.
Soon Vicenza, Verona and Brescia fell into Germanic hands.
A new ethnic border was established that has lasted for over 1200 years up until the present time.
The Lombardy region in Italy, which includes the cities of Brescia, Bergamo, Milan, and the old capital Pavia, is a reminder of the presence of the Lombards.
Authari died in 591 and was succeeded by Agilulf, the duke of Turin, who also married Theodelinda in the same year.
Only fragments of the language have survived, the main evidence being individual words quoted in Latin texts.
The first important city to fall was ''Forum Iulii'' (Cividale del Friuli) in northeastern Italy, in 569.
The Exarch sent to Italy by Emperor Justin II, Longinus, could only defend coastal cities that could be supplied by the powerful Byzantine fleet.
The Lombard king Audoin defeated the Gepid leader Thurisind in 551 or 552; his successor Alboin eventually destroyed the Gepids at the Battle of Asfeld in 567.
Under Liutprand, the Catholicism became tangible, as the king sought to justify his title ''rex totius Italiae'' by uniting the south of the peninsula with the north and bringing together his Italo-Roman and Germanic subjects into one Catholic state.
In general, the Lombard princes were less inclined to ally with the Saracens than with their Greek neighbours of Amalfi, Gaeta, Naples, and Sorrento.
Alternatively some etymological sources suggest an Old High German root, barta, meaning “axe” (and related to English halberd), while Edward Gibbon notes an alternative suggestion put forth, which argues that:
Characteristic of this rite was the Beneventan chant, a Lombard-influenced chant that bore similarities to the Ambrosian chant of Lombard Milan.
They often bear some resemblance to English words, as Lombardic was akin to Saxon.
The Capuans revolted against Norman rule in 1091, expelling Richard's grandson Richard II and setting up one Lando IV.
There was a noble class, a class of free persons beneath them, a class of unfree non-slaves (serfs), and finally slaves.
The Saracens initially concentrated their attacks on Sicily and Byzantine Italy, but soon Radelchis I of Benevento called in more mercenaries, who destroyed Capua in 841.
Few buildings of importance were stone, most were wood.
Suetonius wrote that Roman general Nero Drusus defeated a large force of Germans and drove some “to the farther side of the Albis (Elbe)” river.
This subdivision, however, together with the independent indocility of the duchies, deprived the kingdom of unity, making it weak even when compared to the Byzantines, especially after they began to recover from the initial invasion.
Peace was made and the two tribes returned to their homes, which in the case of the Lombards was the lands of the lower Elbe.
Andrew II of Naples hired Saracen mercenaries for his war with Sicard of Benevento in 836; Sicard responded with other Muslim mercenaries.
Lombard architecture flourished under the impulse provided by the Catholic monarchs like Theodelinda, Liutprand, and Desiderius to the foundation of monasteries to further their political control.
The crossing into Mauringa was very difficult.
The Lombard reign began to recover only with Liutprand the Lombard (king from 712), son of Ansprand and successor of the brutal Aripert II.
Moving out of Golanda, the Lombards passed through Anthaib and Banthaib until they reached Vurgundaib, believed to be the old lands of the Burgundes.
The Capuan and Beneventan states were united by Atenulf I of Capua in 900.
The Beneventan dukes took the title ''prínceps'' (prince) instead of that of king.
It is, however, highly probable that, when the bulk of the Lombards migrated, a considerable part remained behind and afterwards became absorbed by the Saxon tribes in the Elbe region, while the emigrants alone retained the name of Lombards.
With the Bavarian queen Theodelinda, a Catholic, the monarchy was brought under heavy Catholic influence.
At the death of King Aripert I in 661, the kingdom was split between his children Perctarit, who set his capital in Milan, and Godepert, who reigned from Pavia (Ticinum).
''Tempietto Longobardo'', Cividale del Friuli
Scoringa was ruled by the Vandals and their chieftains, the brothers Ambri and Assi, who granted the Winnili a choice between tribute or war.
Complete emancipation appears to have been granted only among the Franks and the Lombards.
The shores of Uppland and Östergötland are covered with small rocks and rocky islands, which are called in German Schæren and in Swedish Skiaeren.
Gisulf II of Benevento had donated a large swathe of land to Montecassino in 744, and that became the basis for an important state, the ''Terra Sancti Benedicti'', which was a subject only to Rome.
Grimoald managed to regain control over the duchies and deflected the late attempt of the Byzantine emperor Constans II to conquer southern Italy.
Lombard society was divided into classes comparable to those found in the other Germanic successor states of Rome, Frankish Gaul and Visigothic Spain.
He managed to regain a certain control over Spoleto and Benevento, and, taking advantage of the disagreements between the Pope and Byzantium concerning the reverence of icons, he annexed the Exarchate of Ravenna and the duchy of Rome.
This double mention has been interpreted as an editorial error by Gudmund Schütte, in his analysis of Ptolemy.
Meanwhile, the prince Gisulf I of Salerno began using the title ''Langobardorum Gentis Princeps'' around mid-century, but the ideal of a united Lombard principality was realised only in December 977, when Gisulf died and his domains were inherited by Pandulf Ironhead, who temporarily held almost all Italy south of Rome and brought the Lombards into alliance with the Holy Roman Empire.
At one point in the reign of Sicard, Lombard control covered most of southern Italy save the very south of Apulia and Calabria and Naples, with its nominally attached cities.
The reason for the exodus was probably overpopulation.
In 589, he married Theodelinda, daughter of Garibald I of Bavaria, the Duke of Bavaria.
Pavia fell after a siege of three years, in 572, becoming the first capital city of the new Lombard kingdom of Italy.
Schmidt considers the name the equivalent of Gotland, meaning simply "good land."
The Old English poem Widsith, in a listing of famous kings and their countries, has Sceafa weold Longbeardum, so naming Sceafa as ruler of the Lombards.
The whole Lombard territory was divided into 36 duchies, whose leaders settled in the main cities.
The German archaeologist Willi Wegewitz defined several Iron Age burial sites at the Lower Elbe as ''Langobardic''.
The independent state of Salerno inspired the gastalds of Capua to move towards independence, and by the end of the century they were styling themselves "princes" and as a third Lombard state.
In the mid-2nd century, the Lombards apparently appeared in the Rhineland, because according to Claudius Ptolemy, the Suebic Lombards lived "below" the Bructeri and Sugambri, and between these and the Tencteri.
The Winnili were fewer in number and Gambara sought help from Frea (the goddess Frigg), who advised that all Winnili women should tie their hair in front of their faces like beards and march in line with their husbands.
Paul the Deacon gives an account of the Lombard tribal structure during the migration:
File:Cividale Tempietto Longobardo - Westwand Märtyrerinnen 1.jpg|8th-century Lombard sculpture depicting female martyrs, based on a Byzantine model.
The freemen of the Lombard kingdom were far more numerous than in Frank lands, especially in the 8th century, when they are almost invisible in surviving documentary evidence.
The aristocracy by the 8th century was highly dependent on the king for means of income related especially to judicial duties: many Lombard nobles are referred to in contemporary documents as ''iudices'' (judges) even when their offices had important military and legislative functions as well.
Priester states that when the Winnili changed their name to "Lombards", they also changed their old agricultural fertility cult to a cult of Odin, thus creating a conscious tribal tradition.
The Winnili were young and brave and refused to pay tribute, saying "It is better to maintain liberty by arms than to stain it by the payment of tribute."
According to this view Langobardi would signify “inhabitants of the long bord of the river;” and traces of their name are supposed still to occur in such names as Bardengau and Bardewick in the neighborhood of the Elbe.
Few Lombard buildings have survived.
Saracen incursions proceeded northwards until Adelchis of Benevento sought the help of his suzerain, Louis II, who allied with the Byzantine emperor Basil I to expel the Arabs from Bari in 869.
They may have owned more than half of the land in Lombard Italy.
They established a Lombard Kingdom in north and central Italy, later named ''Regnum Italicum'' ("Kingdom of Italy"), which reached its zenith under the 8th-century ruler Liutprand.
Rothari also made the famous edict bearing his name, the ''Edictum Rothari'', which established the laws and the customs of his people in Latin: the edict did not apply to the tributaries of the Lombards, who could retain their own laws.
In 572, Alboin was murdered in Verona in a plot led by his wife, Rosamund, who later fled to Ravenna.
Lombardic fragments are preserved in runic inscriptions.
Throughout this period the Lombard princes swung in allegiance from one party to another.
Arioald was succeeded by Rothari, regarded by many authorities as the most energetic of all Lombard kings.
The king ruled over them and administered the land through emissaries called ''gastaldi''.
The Beneventan rite is more closely related to the liturgy of the Ambrosian rite than to the Roman rite.
However, the ''Codex Gothanus'' states that the Lombards were subjected by the Saxons around 300 but rose up against them under their first king, Agelmund, who ruled for 30 years.
Lombard architecture was well-studied in the 20th century, and the four-volume ''Lombard Architecture'' (1919) by Arthur Kingsley Porter is a "monument of illustrated history".
Rothari's son Rodoald succeeded him in 652, still very young, and was killed by his opponents.
At about this time, in his ''Germania'' Tacitus says that "their scanty numbers are a distinction" because "surrounded by a host of most powerful tribes, they are safe, not by submitting, but by daring the perils of war".
He treats them as a branch of the Suebi, and states that:
The Beneventan rite has not survived in its complete form, although most of the principal feasts and several feasts of local significance are extant.
He also defeated the Franks.
The Catholic Theodelinda was a friend of Pope Gregory I and pushed for Christianization.
Desiderius managed to take Ravenna definitively, ending the Byzantine presence in northern Italy.
Charlemagne took part of the Lombard territory to create the Papal States.
Bruckner remarks that the name of the Lombards stands in close relation to the worship of Odin, whose many names include "the Long-bearded" or "the Grey-bearded", and that the Lombard given name ''Ansegranus'' ("he with the beard of the gods") shows that the Lombards had this idea of their chief deity.
Landulf the Red of Benevento and Capua tried to conquer the principality of Salerno with the help of John III of Naples, but with the aid of Mastalus I of Amalfi, Gisulf repulsed him.
All such figures were probably selected from a caste of nobility.
Desiderius surrendered in 774, and Charlemagne, in an utterly novel decision, took the title "King of the Lombards".
Landulf the Old founded the present-day Capua, "New Capua", on a nearby hill.
The same Old Norse root Barth or Barði, meaning "beard", is shared with the legendary Scandinavian Heaftobeardan, sometimes identified with the Heruli, who had a blood feud with the Danes sometime around A.D. 500.
The Slavs were defeated in the Battle of Lavariano, when they tried to conquer the Friulian Plain in 720.
To the south, Cassius Dio reported that just before the Marcomannic Wars, 6,000 Lombards and Obii (sometimes thought to be Ubii), crossed the Danube and invaded Pannonia.
Religious strife and the Slavic raids remained a source of struggle in the following years.
Strabo states that the Lombards dwelt on both sides of the Elbe.
During the next century, Arianism and paganism continued to hold out in Austria (the northeast of Italy) and in the Duchy of Benevento.
Scholar Ludwig Schmidt thinks this was further east, perhaps on the right bank of the Oder.
The independent status of these Lombard states is in general attested by the ability of their rulers to switch suzerains at will.
These early migration legends suggest that a major shifting of tribes occurred sometime between the 1st and 2nd century BC, which would coincide with the time that the Teutoni and Cimbri left their homelands in Scandinavia and migrated through Germany, eventually invading Roman Italy.
He tried to turn Benevento into a ''secundum Ticinum'': a second Pavia.
From the combined testimony of Strabo (AD 20) and Tacitus (AD 117), the Lombards dwelt near the mouth of the Elbe shortly after the beginning of the Christian era, next to the Chauci.
The area was then recovering from the terrible Gothic Wars, and the small Byzantine army left for its defence could do almost nothing.
He thought the pagan stories of his people "silly" and "laughable".
Aside from the richest and most powerful of the dukes and the king himself, Lombard noblemen tended to live in cities (unlike their Frankish counterparts) and hold little more than twice as much in land as the merchant class (a far cry from provincial Frankish aristocrats who held vast swathes of land, hundreds of times larger than those beneath his status).
So Godan spotted the Winnili first and asked, "Who are these long-beards?," and Frea replied, "My lord, thou hast given them the name, now give them also the victory."
The aristocracy itself was poorer, more urbanised, and less landed than elsewhere.
Wherever they went, they were joined by the Ostrogothic population, who was allowed to live peacefully in Italy with their Rugian allies under Roman sovereignty.
The ''Origo Gentis Langobardorum'' tells the story of a small tribe called the ''Winnili'' dwelling in southern Scandinavia (''Scadanan'') (the ''Codex Gothanus'' writes that the Winnili first dwelt near a river called ''Vindilicus'' on the extreme boundary of Gaul).
The aristocracy was more thoroughly powerful politically if not economically in Italy than in contemporary Gaul and Spain.
The Lombards are not mentioned at first, perhaps because they were not initially on the border of Rome, or perhaps because they were subjected to a larger tribal union, like the Saxons.
The Lombards departed from Mauringa and reached Golanda.
The Vandals prepared for war and consulted Godan (the god Odin), who answered that he would give the victory to those whom he would see first at sunrise.
It was during the 9th century that a strong Lombard presence became entrenched in formerly Greek Apulia.
Smallholders, owner-cultivators, and rentiers are the most numerous types of person in surviving diplomata for the Lombard kingdom.
Often the legal vassal of pope or emperor (either Byzantine or Holy Roman), they were the real power-brokers in the south until their erstwhile allies, the Normans, rose to preeminence: The Lombards regarded the Normans as barbarians and the Byzantines as oppressors.
In 705, the Friuli Lombards were defeated and lost the land to the west of the Soča River, namely the Gorizia Hills and the Venetian Slovenia.
He also helped the Frankish marshal Charles Martel drive back the Arabs.
After initial support for the anti-Rome party in the Schism of the Three Chapters, Theodelinda remained a close contact and supporter of Pope Gregory I.
Before then the Germanic kingdoms had frequently conquered each other, but none had adopted the title of King of another people.
According to the Gallaecian Christian priest, historian and theologian Paulus Orosius, the Lombards or Winnili lived originally in the Vinuiloth (Vinovilith) mentioned by Jordanes, in his masterpiece Getica, to the north of Uppsala, Sweden.
The Winnili were split into three groups and one part left their native land to seek foreign fields.
The departing people were led by the brothers Ybor and Aio and their mother Gambara and arrived in the lands of ''Scoringa'', perhaps the Baltic coast or the Bardengau on the banks of the Elbe.
The diminished Beneventan principality soon lost its independence to the papacy and declined in importance until it fell in the Norman conquest of southern Italy.
Marobod had made peace with the Romans, and that is why the Lombards were not part of the Germanic confederacy under Arminius at the Battle of Teutoburg Forest in AD 9.
All these buildings are in northern Italy (Langobardia major), but by far the best-preserved Lombard structure is in southern Italy (Langobardia minor).
The two tribes were defeated, whereupon they ceased their invasion and sent Ballomar, King of the Marcomanni, as ambassador to Aelius Bassus, who was then administering Pannonia.
The freemen were ''exercitales'' and ''viri devoti'', that is, soldiers and "devoted men" (a military term like "retainers"); they formed the levy of the Lombard army, and they were sometimes, if infrequently, called to serve, though this seems not to have been their preference.
Following this victory, Alboin decided to lead his people to Italy, which had become severely depopulated and devastated after the long Gothic War (535–554) between the Byzantine Empire and the Ostrogothic Kingdom there.
Since there is evidence that Lombardic participated in, and indeed shows some of the earliest evidence for, the High German consonant shift, it is usually classified as an Elbe Germanic or Upper German dialect.
Kingship developed amongst the Germanic peoples when the unity of a single military command was found necessary.
The Lombards engaged in fierce battles with Slavic peoples during these years: In 623–26 the Lombards unsuccessfully attacked Carantanians; in 663–64, the Slavs raided the Vipava Valley and the Friuli.
The Lombard kings can be traced back as early as c. 380 and thus to the beginning of the Great Migration.
Paul explained that the name "Langobard" came from the length of their beards.
A succession of Arian kings were militarily aggressive and presented a threat to the Papacy in Rome.
His death began an interregnum of years (the "Rule of the Dukes") during which the dukes did not elect any king, a period regarded as a time of violence and disorder.
Montecassino was also the starting point for another characteristic of Beneventan monasticism, the use of the distinct Beneventan script, a clear, angular script derived from the Roman cursive as used by the Lombards.
St. Barbatus of Benevento observed many pagan rituals and traditions amongst the Lombards authorised by the Duke Romuald, son of King Grimoald:
The Lombards were first touched by Christianity while still in Pannonia, but only touched: Their conversion and Christianisation was largely nominal and far from complete.
He was in his youth and desired to avenge the slaughter of Agelmund.
Adelchis regarded himself as the true successor of the Lombard kings, and in that capacity he amended the ''Edictum Rothari'', the last Lombard ruler to do so.
With all of the Lombard south under his control, except Salerno, Atenulf felt safe to use the title ''Princeps Gentis Langobardorum'' ("prince of the Lombard people"), which Arechis II had begun using in 774.
In AD 17, war broke out between Arminius and Marobod.
Paul the Deacon wasn't the only one to write about Langobard history.
In 584, threatened by a Frankish invasion, the dukes elected as king Cleph's son, Authari.
Archaeological finds show that the Lombards were an agricultural people.
When they entered Italy, some Lombards retained their native form of paganism, while some were Arian Christians.
In the end, the inhabited parts of the cities were separated from one another by stretches of pasture even within the city walls.
In the second half of the 4th century, the Lombards left their homes, probably due to bad harvests, and embarked on their migration.
In the absence of Lombardic texts, it is not possible to draw any conclusions about the language's morphology and syntax.
In 603, Adaloald, the heir to the throne, received a Catholic baptism.
At Grimoald's death in 671 Perctarit returned and promoted tolerance between Arians and Catholics, but he could not defeat the Arian party, led by Arachi, duke of Trento, who submitted only to his son, the philo-Catholic Cunincpert.
When Paul the Deacon wrote the ''Historia'' between 787 and 796 he was a Catholic monk and devoted Christian.
Heal signifies a port in the northern languages; consequently Skiæren-Heal is the port of the Skiæren, a name well adapted to the port of Stockholm, in the Upplandske Skiæren, and the country may be justly called Scorung or Skiærunga.
In 774, the Kingdom was conquered by the Frankish King Charlemagne and integrated into his Empire.
The Assipitti (possibly the Usipetes) denied them passage through their lands and a fight was arranged for the strongest man of each tribe.
Hence they did not enjoy good relations with the Catholic Church.
