With a Census-estimated population of 7,838,722 in 2015, constituting nearly 40% of the state's population, Long Island is the most populated island in any U.S. state or territory, and the 18th-most populous island in the world (ahead of Ireland, Jamaica, and Hokkaidō).
Also, daytime high temperatures on the eastern part of Long Island are cooler on most occasions due to moderation of the Atlantic Ocean and Long Island Sound.
Both the Suffolk County and Nassau County Music Educator's Associations are recognized by The National Association for Music Education (MENC),
As boroughs of New York City, both have borough presidents, which have been largely ceremonial offices since the shutdown of the New York City Board of Estimate.
Long Island is somewhat vulnerable to hurricanes.
For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has a district named "Long Island (Nassau-Suffolk Metro Division)."
Aircraft production on Long Island extended all the way into the Space Age – Grumman was one of the major contractors that helped to build the early lunar flight and space shuttle vehicles.
'''Long Island Total'''
The 1664 land patent granted to the Duke of York included all islands in Long Island Sound.
Several smaller islands, though geographically distinct, are in close proximity to Long Island and are often grouped with it.
Three of the nine specialized high schools in New York City are located in the two Long Island boroughs, those being Brooklyn Latin School, Brooklyn Technical High School (one of the original three specialized schools), and Queens High School for the Sciences.
The extent of Sandy's damages is second only to those caused by the 1938 Long Island Express, when adjusted for inflation.
Until the 1883 completion of the Brooklyn Bridge, the only connection between Long Island and the rest of the United States was by boat and ship.
The glaciers also formed Lake Ronkonkoma in Suffolk County and Lake Success in Nassau County, each a deep  kettle lake.
The North Fork peninsula of Suffolk County's East End has developed a burgeoning Wine Country region.
In contrast, Queens is the most ethnically diverse county in the United States and the most diverse urban area in the world.
Nassau and Suffolk counties are the home of 125 public school districts containing a total of 656 public schools.
Source for Race and Ethnicity: 2010 CensusAmerican Indian, Native Alaskan, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander make up just 0.5% of the population of Long Island, and have been included with "Other".
Source for religious groups: ARDA2000
Long Island, as part of the Outer Lands region, is formed largely of two spines of glacial moraine, with a large, sandy outwash plain beyond.
Also in existence is a reconstruction of Brooklyn's Old Stone House, on the site of the Maryland 400's celebrated last stand during the Battle of Long Island.
While the eastern region of Long Island was first settled by English, the western portion of Long Island was settled by the Dutch.
Stretching east-northeast from New York Harbor into the Atlantic Ocean, the island comprises four counties: Kings and Queens (these form the New York City boroughs of Brooklyn and Queens, respectively) to the west; then Nassau and Suffolk to the east.
The Nassau County Sheriff's Department and Suffolk County Sheriff's Office handle civil process, evictions, warrant service and enforcement, prisoner transport and detention, and operation of the county jail.
Brooklyn and Queens, on the other hand, do not have county governments.
In the last 25 years, development of vineyards on the North Fork became a major new industry, replacing potato fields.
Several cities were incorporated, such as the City of Brooklyn in Kings County, and Long Island City in Queens.
The land to the south of this moraine to the South Shore is the outwash plain of the last glacier.
After World War II, suburban development increased with incentives under the GI Bill, and Long Island's population skyrocketed, mostly in Nassau County and western Suffolk County.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has operated the LIRR as one of its two commuter railroads since 1966, and the LIRR is one of the few railroads worldwide that provides service all the time, year round.
In the 19th century, Long Island was still mainly rural and devoted to agriculture.
The island remained a British stronghold until the end of the war in 1783.
Half of the immigrants on Long Island hold white-collar positions.
Average dew points, a measure of atmospheric moisture, typically lie in the  range during July and August.
Farms allow fresh fruit picking by Long Islanders for much of the year.
Temperatures seldom fall below  or rise above .
Long Island is one of the most densely populated regions in the United States.
Likewise, the Long Island Koreatown (롱 아일랜드 코리아타운) originated in Flushing, Queens.
Long Island is home to some of the wealthiest communities in the United States, including The Hamptons, on the East End of the South Shore of Suffolk County; the Gold Coast, in the vicinity of the island's North Shore, along Long Island Sound; and increasingly, the western shoreline of Brooklyn, facing Manhattan.
This legacy continues in the Blue Point oyster, a now ubiquitous variety that was originally harvested on the Great South Bay and was the favorite oyster of Queen Victoria.
The move from New Jersey in the summer of 2012 marked the return to Long Island for the Nets franchise, which played at Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale from 1972 to 1977.
In contrast, all of Brooklyn and Queens are served by the New York City Department of Education, the largest school district in the United States.
People also park cars along the highway leading to the show, and others watch from the nearby beaches.
%blackorAfricanAmerican
The new stadium is designed with an exterior façade and main entry rotunda inspired by Brooklyn's famous Ebbets Field (see below).
The MTA is the largest public transportation provider in the Western Hemisphere.
Recently, new bands have been making a name for themselves originating from Long Island such as Brand New, Austin Schoeffel and Envy on the Coast.
For the century from 1830 until 1930, total population roughly doubled every twenty years, with more dense development in areas near Manhattan.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau's 2008 American Community Survey, Nassau and Suffolk counties have the 10th and 26th highest median household incomes in the nation, respectively.
In addition, the Long Island Rail Road is the busiest commuter railroad in North America and operates 24/7.
The New York Mets had planned to move their Double-A farm team to Long Island, as part of the ambitious but now-defunct plan for Nassau County called The Lighthouse Project.
The Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) is the busiest commuter railroad system in North America, carrying an average of 282,400 passengers each weekday on 728 daily trains.
Racial groups, ethnicity, and religious groups on Long Islandcompared to state and nation
The central and eastern portions contain the suburban Nassau and Suffolk counties.
Average yearly snowfall totals range from approximately , with the north shore and western parts averaging more than the south shore and the east end.
Lion Gardiner settled nearby Gardiners Island in 1637.
The park has over 1,300 companies employing more than 71,000 Long Islanders.
The line was completed to the east end of Long Island in 1844 (as part of a plan for transportation to Boston).
Levittown became noted as a suburb, where house construction was simplified to be produced on a large scale.
Long Island has a moderately sunny climate, averaging between 2,400 and 2,800 hours of sunshine annually.
Other 20th-century storms that made landfall on Long Island at hurricane intensity include the Great Atlantic Hurricane of 1944, Hurricane Donna in 1960, Hurricane Belle in 1976, and Hurricane Gloria in 1985.
Gentrification has affected much of Brooklyn and a portion of Queens, relocating a sizeable swath of New York City's population.
Companies in the park and abroad are represented by the Hauppauge Industrial Association.
Proximity to Manhattan attracted such men as J. P. Morgan, William K. Vanderbilt, and Charles Pratt, whose estates led to this area being nicknamed the Gold Coast.
As of the 2010 census, the combined population of Nassau and Suffolk counties was 2,832,882 people; Suffolk County's share being 1,493,350 and Nassau County's 1,339,532.
Queens and Brooklyn are patrolled by the New York City Police Department; Nassau and Suffolk counties respectively have the Nassau County Police Department and Suffolk County Police Department.
Also, the eyewall of Hurricane Bob in 1991 brushed the eastern tip.
Like Nassau and Suffolk Counties, they, too, are home to numerous private schools, such as Poly Prep Country Day School, Packer Collegiate Institute, and Saint Ann's School, and Berkeley Carroll School, and parochial schools operated by the Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn.
Chartered on April 24, 1834, and operating continuously since, it is also the oldest railroad in the U.S. that is still operating under its original charter and name.
The two main rugby teams are the Long Island RFC in East Meadow and the Suffolk Bull Moose in Stony Brook.
Nassau Inter-County Express (NICE) provides bus service in Nassau County, while Suffolk County Transit, an agency of the Suffolk County government, provides bus service in Suffolk County.
Long Island has been a hot spot for outdoor lacrosse at the youth and college level, which made way for a Major League Lacrosse team in 2001, the Long Island Lizards.
On eastern Long Island, such villages as Port Jefferson, Patchogue, and Riverhead have been changed from inactive shipbuilding and mill towns into tourist-centric commercial centers with cultural attractions.
Other famous aviators such as Wiley Post originated notable flights from Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn, which became the first major airport serving New York City before it was superseded by the opening of La Guardia Airport in 1939.
In its easternmost sections, Suffolk remains small-town rural, as in Greenport on the North Fork and some of the outward areas of The Hamptons, although summer tourism swells the population in those areas.
The Pine Barrens is a preserved pine forest encompassing much of eastern Suffolk County.
As of the United States 2010 Census, the total population of all four counties of Long Island was 7,568,304, which was 39 percent of the population of the State of New York.
Hurricane Sandy and its profound impacts have prompted the discussion of constructing seawalls and other coastal barriers around the shorelines of Long Island and New York City to minimize the risk of destructive consequences from another such event in the future.
The Dutch had granted an English settlement in Hempstead, New York (now in Nassau County) in 1644 but, after a boundary dispute, drove out English settlers from the Oyster Bay area.
The Duke of York held a grudge against Connecticut, as New Haven had hidden three of the judges who sentenced the Duke's father, King Charles I, to death in 1649.
In addition to Long Island's duck industry, Riverhead contains one of the largest buffalo farms on the East coast.
Long Island has historically been a center for fishing and seafood.
On October 29, 2012, Hurricane Sandy caused extensive damage to low-lying coastal areas of Brooklyn, Queens, Nassau and Suffolk counties, destroying or severely damaging thousands of area homes and other structures by ocean and bay storm surges.
To the extreme southwest, it is separated from Staten Island and New Jersey by Upper New York Bay, the Narrows, and Lower New York Bay.
Early in the American Revolutionary War, the island was captured  by the British from General George Washington in the Battle of Long Island, a decisive battle after which Washington narrowly evacuated his troops from Brooklyn Heights under a dense fog.
Although the aircraft companies eventually ended their Long Island operations and the early airports were all later closed – Roosevelt Field, for instance, became the site of a major indoor shopping center – the Cradle of Aviation Museum on the site of the former Mitchel Field documents the Island's key role in the history of aviation.
These provided opportunities for GIs returning home to buy houses and start a family.
North of the island is the Long Island Sound, across from which lie the states of Connecticut and a small part of Rhode Island across the Block Island Sound.
This is due to several factors: the western part is closer to the mainland and more densely developed, causing the "urban heat island" effect, and Long Island's land mass veers northward as one travels east.
In the 1990s, hip-hop became very popular with rap pioneers Rakim, EPMD, and Public Enemy growing up on Long Island.
Long Island is also home to the Long Island Ducks minor league baseball team of the Atlantic League.
Second and third-generation children of immigrants moved out to Long Island to settle in new housing developments built during the post-war boom.
Sawicki says that all the Long Island taxpayers' money would stay on Long Island, rather than the funds being dispersed all over the entire state of New York, and Long Island sending to Albany over three billion dollars more than it receives back.
The largest of these is Blue Point Brewing Company, best known for its ''toasted lager''.
The coldest month is January, when average temperatures range from , and the warmest month is July, when average temperatures range from .
These moraines consist of gravel and loose rock left behind during the two most recent pulses of Wisconsin glaciation during the Ice Ages some 21,000 years ago (19,000 BC).
Dutch and English settlers from the time before the American Revolutionary War, as well as communities of Native Americans, populated the island.
Italian cuisine is represented by ubiquitous pizzerias spread throughout the island, with the region hosting an annual competition, the Long Island Pizza Festival & Bake-Off.
Long Island was also the site of Mitchel Air Force Base and was a major center of military aircraft production by companies such as Grumman and Fairchild Aircraft during World War II and for some decades afterward.
Pumpkin farms have been added to traditional truck farming.
The complex also contains the biggest tennis stadium in the world, the Arthur Ashe Stadium.
show that whites are the largest racial group in all four counties, and are in the majority in Nassau and Suffolk counties.
Winston airport shuttle, the oldest of these companies in business since 1973, was the first to introduce door-to-door shared-ride service to and from the major airports, which almost all transportation companies now utilize.
Long Island is also known for its school music programs.
It is a popular place to view summer concerts, with new as well as classic artists performing there during the summer months.
It also hosts a number of private schools such as Friends Academy, Chaminade High School, and North Shore Hebrew Academy, as well as parochial schools, many of which are operated by the Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre.
Nassau County is more densely developed than Suffolk County.
Long Island is home to the East Coast's largest industrial park, the Hauppauge Industrial Park.
With a land area of 1,401 square miles (3,630&nbsp;km2), Long Island is the 11th-largest island in the United States and the 149th-largest island in the world — larger than the  of the smallest state, Rhode Island.
Competing railroads (soon absorbed by the LIRR) were built along the south shore to accommodate travellers from those more populated areas.
As Suffolk County has more than twice the land area of Nassau County, the latter still has a much higher population density.
These islands include Fire Island, the largest of the outer barrier islands that parallels the southern shore of Long Island for approximately 31 miles, Plum Island which is home to the biological weapons research facility Plum Island Animal Disease Center, Robins Island, Gardiners Island, Fishers Island, Long Beach Barrier Island, Jones Beach Island, and Shelter Island.
Due to its coastal location, Long Island temperatures are somewhat mild compared to the rest of the state.
Being such a large, populous island with several airports connecting the island to the rest of the world, there are several hundred transportation companies that service the Long Island/New York City area.
Suffolk County is divided into ten towns.
Catholics make up 52% of the population of Nassau and Suffolk, versus 22% for the country as a whole, with Jews at 16% and 7%, respectively, versus 1.7% nationwide.
Jewish cuisine is likewise represented by delicatessens and bagel stores.
Ferries connect Suffolk County northward across Long Island Sound to the state of Connecticut.
General Washington based his espionage activities on Long Island, due to the western part of the island's proximity to the British military headquarters in New York City.
Long Island also contains the Webb Institute, a small naval architecture college in Glen Cove.
Southampton was settled in the same year.
While affluent overall, Nassau County has pockets of more pronounced wealth with estates covering greater acreage within the Gold Coast of the North Shore and the Five Towns area on the South Shore.
Long Island has also become a producer of diverse craft beers, with 15 microbreweries existing across Nassau and Suffolk counties .
The storm also had a devastating impact on coastal communities in the Brooklyn and Queens portions of the island, including Coney Island in Brooklyn and the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens, although estimates of monetary damages there are usually calculated as part of the overall losses suffered in New York City as a whole.
Long Island has a professional soccer club, the New York Cosmos, who play in the Division 2 North American Soccer League at James M. Shuart Stadium in Hempstead.
Despite this success during the latter part of the team's stay in Brooklyn, they were a not-very-good second-division team for much of their history there – but nonetheless became legendary for the almost-fanatical devotion of the Brooklynites who packed the relatively small ballpark to vigorously root for the team they affectionately called "Dem Bums."
Roads in '''boldface''' are limited access roads.Sunrise Highway is only limited-access from western Suffolk county eastwards.
The Lizards play at Mitchel Athletic Complex in Uniondale.
Another category of sporting events popular in this region are Firematic Racing events, involving many local Volunteer fire departments.
Fishing continues to be an important industry, especially at Huntington, Northport, Montauk, and other coastal communities of the East End and South Shore.
In 2016, according to ''Business Insider'', the 11962 zip code encompassing Sagaponack, within Southampton, was listed as the most expensive in the U.S., with a median home sale price of $8.5 million.
Only a  small percentage of Protestants responded, 7% and 8% respectively, for Nassau and Suffolk counties.
Every August (September, in Olympic years) the best tennis players in the world travel to Long Island to play the championships, which is held in the USTA National Tennis Center, located adjacent to Citi Field in Flushing Meadows Park.
The Islanders played at Nassau Coliseum from their 1972 inception through 2015.
More generally, "Long Island" may also refer collectively to the main Island as well as its nearby, surrounding outer barrier islands.
As other bridges and tunnels were constructed, areas of the island began to be developed as residential suburbs, first around the railroads that offered commuting into the city.
According to a 2000 report on religion, which asked congregations to respond, Catholics are the largest religious group on Long Island, with non-affiliated in second place.
New York City's portion of the census was 4,735,538, with Brooklyn's population at 2,504,700 and Queens having 2,230,722 residents.
The respective Borough Presidents are responsible for appointing individuals to the Brooklyn Community Boards and Queens Community Boards, each of which serves an advisory function on local issues.
The predecessor to the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) began service in 1836 from the South Ferry, Brooklyn, through Brooklyn to Jamaica in Queens.
The very first settlements on Long Island were by settlers from England and its colonies in present-day New England.
Of land-based produce, Long Island duck has a history of national recognition since the 19th century, with four duck farms continuing to produce 2 million ducks a year .
Long Island is well known for its production of alcoholic beverages.
The counties of Nassau and Suffolk have been long renowned for their affluence.
Post campus, located on a former Gold Coast estate in Brookville, and a satellite campus in downtown Brooklyn).
Population2010census
Nine bridges and 13 tunnels (including railroad tunnels) connect Brooklyn and Queens (and thus Long Island) to the three other boroughs of New York City.
Hundreds of thousands of residents were left without electric power for periods of time ranging up to several weeks while the damage was being repaired.
More recently, a Little India (लघु भारत) community has emerged in Hicksville, Nassau County, spreading eastward from the more established Little India enclaves in Queens.
Rapidly growing Chinatowns have developed in Brooklyn (布魯克林) and Queens (皇后), with Asian immigrants moving into Nassau County, as did earlier European immigrants, such as the Irish and Italians.
It is expanding eastward along Northern Boulevard and into Nassau County.
Many schools in Suffolk County have distinguished music programs, with high numbers of students who are accepted into the statewide All-State music groups, or even the National All-Eastern Coast music groups.
During the occupation British troops used a number of civilian structures for defense and demanded to be quartered in the homes of civilians.
Two of the New York City metropolitan area's three busiest airports, JFK International Airport and LaGuardia Airport, as well as two major air traffic control radar facilities, the New York TRACON and the New York ARTCC, are located on the Island.
Among these are Raynham Hall, the Oyster Bay home of patriot spy Robert Townsend, and the Caroline Church in Setauket, which contains bullet holes from a skirmish known as the Battle of Setauket.
From the 1920s to the 1940s, Long Island began the transformation from backwoods and farms as developers created numerous suburbs.
In 1985, the United States Supreme Court ruled in ''United States v. Maine'' that Long Island was not an island for legal purposes.
Nikon at Jones Beach Theater is an outdoor amphitheatre, located at Jones Beach State Park.
Several dozen villages and the two cities in Nassau have their own police departments.
separated from Queens in 1899 to form Nassau County.
The northern moraine, which directly abuts the North Shore of Long Island at points, is known as the Harbor Hill moraine.
However, many people in the New York metropolitan area (even those living in Queens and Brooklyn) colloquially use the term "Long Island" (or "The Island") exclusively to refer to the Nassau-Suffolk county area collectively, which is mainly suburban in character.
The descendants of late 19th and early 20th-century immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, and black migrants from the South, have been followed by more recent ones from Latin America.
The first settlement on the geographic Long Island itself was on October 21, 1640, when Southold was established by settlers from New Haven, Connecticut.
The glaciers melted and receded to the north, resulting in the difference between the North Shore beaches and the South Shore beaches.
In the late 1970s through the 1980s, the influence of radio station WLIR made Long Island one of the first places in the U.S. to hear and embrace European New Wave bands such as Depeche Mode, the Pet Shop Boys, and Culture Club.
New York State Police patrol state parks and parkways.
The oceanic climate zone ('''Cfb''') only exists on the North Fork, the eastern end of the South Fork, islands in Peconic Bay, and Fishers Island, and is rare in eastern North America.
Famous rock bands that originated on Long Island include The Rascals, The Ramones (from Queens), Dream Theater, Blue Öyster Cult, Twisted Sister and guitar virtuosos Donald (Buck Dharma) Roeser, John Petrucci, Steve Vai and Joe Satriani.
In 2002, ''The New York Times'' cited a study by the non-profit group ERASE Racism, which determined that Nassau and Suffolk counties constitute the most racially segregated suburbs in the United States.
Both reservations are in Suffolk County.
The Barclays Center, a new sports arena, business, and residential complex built partly on a platform over the Atlantic Yards at Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, is the current home of the Brooklyn Nets basketball team and the New York Islanders hockey team.
Brooklyn and Queens contain five of eleven senior colleges within CUNY, the public university system of New York City and one of the largest in the country.
%Hispanic/Latinoof anyrace
Their former stadium, Shea Stadium was also home for the New York Jets football team from 1964 until 1983.
The Dodgers won several National League pennants in the 1940s and 1950s, losing several times in the World Series—often called ''Subway Series''—to their Bronx rivals, the New York Yankees.
Although a lower central pressure was recorded in Sandy, the National Hurricane Center estimates that the 1938 hurricane had a lower pressure at landfall.
Private institutions include the New York Institute of Technology, Hofstra University and Adelphi University (both located in the Town of Hempstead), as well as Long Island University (with its C.W.
Several colleges and universities within the State University of New York system are located on Long Island, such as Stony Brook (which noted its health sciences research and medical center), as well as Nassau Community College and Suffolk County Community College that serve their respective counties.
By the start of the 21st century a number of Long Island communities had successfully converted their assets from industrial uses to post-industrial roles.
Nassau County and Suffolk County each have their own governments, with a County Executive leading each.
Numerous branches of the LIRR already enabled commuting from the suburbs to the city.
On January 1, 1898, Kings County and portions of Queens were consolidated into ''The City of Greater New York'', abolishing all cities and towns within them.
The towns in both counties have their own governments as well, with town supervisors and a town council.
Long Island's proportion of New York's population has been increasing, with Long Island's Census-estimated population increasing 3.1% since 2010, to 7,838,722 in 2015, representing 39.6% of New York's Census-estimated 2015 population of 19,795,791.
Each has a county legislature and countywide-elected officials, such as district attorney, county clerk, and county comptroller.
Brooklyn's sixteen members and Queens' fourteen members represent the first and second largest borough contingents of the New York City Council.
Many public and private high schools on Long Island are ranked among the best in the United States.
The westernmost end of Long Island contains the New York City boroughs of Brooklyn (Kings County) and Queens (Queens County).
This is in contrast with 23% for the entire country on the same survey, and 50% on self-identification surveys.
The New York Mets baseball team plays at Citi Field in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
and the largest island in the contiguous United States, Long Island extends  eastward from New York Harbor to Montauk Point, with a maximum north-to-south distance of  between Long Island Sound and the Atlantic coast.
Queens also hosts one of the four tennis grand slams, the US Open.
Long Island temperatures vary from west to east, with the western part (Nassau County, Queens, and Brooklyn) generally warmer than the east (Suffolk County).
It hosts a large Fourth of July fireworks show every year which fills the stands.
If Long Island geographically constituted an independent metropolitan statistical area, it would rank fourth most populous in the United States; while if it were a U.S. state, Long Island would rank 13th in population and first in population density.
Long Island is also globally known for its signature cocktail, the Long Island Iced Tea, which purportedly was invented at a popular Jones Beach nightclub in the 1970s.
Long Island is home to two Native American reservations, Poospatuck Reservation, and Shinnecock Reservation.
Estimateof % notreporting
So far Nassau County executives have not expressed interest in joining in the secession proposal, which would need to be approved by the New York State Legislature.
