In 2002, voters defeated efforts by the San Fernando Valley and Hollywood to secede from the city.
Many varieties of Judaism are represented in the area, including Reform, Conservative, Orthodox, and Reconstructionist.
The median age was 34.1 years.
Among them are the Crips and Bloods, which are both African American street gangs that originated in the South Los Angeles region.
The Los Angeles metropolitan area is home to a large Middle Eastern population, including Armenians and Iranians, many of whom live in enclaves like Little Armenia and Tehrangeles.
A new stadium will be built in Inglewood, California for the team by the 2019 season.
During World War II, Los Angeles was a major center of wartime manufacturing, such as shipbuilding and aircraft.
The majority of this (30.5&nbsp;million) is taken up by the city's bus system, the second busiest in the country.
Situated in Southern California, Los Angeles is known for its mediterranean climate, ethnic diversity, sprawling metropolis, and as a major center of the American entertainment industry.
By 1930, the population surpassed one million.
The city is home to renowned institutions covering a broad range of professional and cultural fields and is one of the most substantial economic engines within the United States.
LAUSD has become known for its underfunded, overcrowded and poorly maintained campuses, although its 162 Magnet schools help compete with local private schools.
According to the 2010 United States Census, Los Angeles had a median household income of $49,497, with 22.0% of the population living below the federal poverty line.
For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.6 males.
Major streets are designed to move large volumes of traffic through many parts of the city; many of them are extremely long: Sepulveda Boulevard is  long, while Foothill Boulevard is over  long, reaching as far east as San Bernardino.
Also called Los Angeles Harbor and WORLDPORT LA, the port complex occupies  of land and water along  of waterfront.
With 621,000 Jews in the metropolitan area (490,000 in city proper), the region has the second largest population of Jews in the United States.
Los Angeles is the seat of Los Angeles County, the most populated county in the United States.
Climate change is also expected to affect sea levels which are expected to rise 5 to 24 inches from 2000 to 2050 leading to higher storm surge and waves, which could result in more extensive flooding that could threaten critical coastal infrastructure.
The city has major broadcast channels as well as three PBS stations.
In 1910, Hollywood merged into Los Angeles, with 10 movie companies already operating in the city at the time.
Washington area north of Downtown, eastern parts such as Boyle Heights, the Crenshaw district around the Baldwin Hills, and the San Pedro district.
The perimeter of the city is .
The city is also central to the commuter rail system Metrolink, which links Los Angeles to all neighboring counties as well as many suburbs.
A series of rainy days can bring floods to the lowlands and mudslides to the hills, especially after wildfires have denuded the slopes.
That being said, downtown Los Angeles itself has many buildings over 30 stories, with fourteen over 50 stories, and two over 70 stories (the tallest buildings west of Chicago-see List of tallest buildings in Los Angeles).
Los Angeles is the second-largest city in the United States but hosted no NFL team between 1995 and 2015.
When the tenth Olympic Games were hosted in 1932, the former 10th Street was renamed Olympic Blvd.
There were 1,413,995 housing units—up from 1,298,350 during 2005–2009—at an average density of 2,812.8 households per square mile (1,086.0/km²), of which 503,863 (38.2%) were owner-occupied, and 814,305 (61.8%) were occupied by renters.
At one time, the Los Angeles area hosted two NFL teams: the Rams and the Raiders.
Hours of sunshine total more than 3,000 per year, from an average of 7 hours of sunshine per day in December to an average of 12 in July.
There are also smaller, non-industrial harbors along Los Angeles' coastline.
The strike-slip San Andreas Fault system is located at the boundary between the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate, and is vulnerable to the "big one", a potentially large and damaging event.
For instance, the average July maximum temperature at the Santa Monica Pier is  whereas it is  in Canoga Park.
The city was officially founded on September 4, 1781, by Spanish governor Felipe de Neve.
One of the world's busiest general-aviation airports is also located in Los Angeles, Van Nuys Airport .
The highest point in the city proper is  Mount Lukens, located at the northeastern end of the San Fernando Valley.
In the California State Senate, the city is split between eight districts.
Los Angeles is strongly characterized by the presence of low-rise buildings.
In 1848, at the end of the Mexican–American War, Los Angeles and the rest of California were purchased as part of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, thereby becoming part of the United States.
The University of Southern California (USC) is the city's fourth largest employer and the largest private sector employer.
Its high point is Mount San Antonio, locally known as Mount Baldy, which reaches .
In 2011 the once common but ultimately lapsed custom of conducting a procession and Mass in honour of Nuestra Señora de los Ángeles in commemoration of the founding of the City of Los Angeles in 1781 was revived by the Queen of Angels Foundation and its founder Mark Albert, with the support and approbation of the Archdiocese of Los Angeles as well as several civic leaders.
The neighborhoods of South LA with highest concentration of African Americans include Crenshaw, Baldwin Hills, Leimert Park, Hyde Park, Gramercy Park, Manchester Square and Watts.
Nicknamed the "City of Angels", Los Angeles is a global city with a diverse economy in entertainment, culture, media, fashion, science, sports, technology, education, medicine and research.
The smog season lasts from approximately May to October.
The International Church of the Foursquare Gospel was founded in Los Angeles by Aimee Semple McPherson in 1927 and remains headquartered there to this day.
The main rail station in the city is Union Station just north of Downtown.
The current mayor is Eric Garcetti.
Los Angeles is rich in native plant species partly because of its diversity of habitats, including beaches, wetlands, and mountains.
Manufacturing in Los Angeles skyrocketed, and as William S. Knudsen, of the National Defense Advisory Commission put it, "We won because we smothered the enemy in an avalanche of production, the like of which he had never seen, nor dreamed possible.
Los Angeles arts, culture and nightlife news is also covered by a number of local and national online guides like  ''Time Out Los Angeles'', ''Thrillist'', ''Kristin's List'', ''DailyCandy'', ''LAist'', and ''Flavorpill''.
The Kabbalah Centre also has a presence in the city.
Years of average rainfall are rare.
The settlement remained a small ranch town for decades, but by 1820, the population had increased to about 650 residents.
Despite improvement, the 2006 and 2007 annual reports of the American Lung Association ranked the city as the most polluted in the country with short-term particle pollution and year-round particle pollution.
This included 15 officer-involved shootings.
Climate change has already affected Los Angeles with a 4 degree average temperature rise from 1878 to 2005 with a UCLA study predicting that coastal areas will rise 3 to 4 degrees in temperature and urban areas 4 to 4.5 degrees.
Both freezing temperatures and snowfall are extremely rare in the city basin and along the coast, with the last occurrence of a  reading at the downtown station being January 29, 1979; freezing temperatures occur nearly every year in valley locations while the mountains within city limits typically receive snowfall every winter.
Vietnamese make up 0.5% of Los Angeles' population.
The subway and light rail combined average the remaining roughly 8.2&nbsp;million boardings per month.
While other large cities rely on rain to clear smog, Los Angeles gets only  of rain each year: pollution accumulates over many consecutive days.
Together, both ports are the fifth busiest container port in the world, with a trade volume of over 14.2&nbsp;million TEU's in 2008.
The port includes four bridges: the Vincent Thomas Bridge, Henry Ford Bridge, Gerald Desmond Bridge, and Commodore Schuyler F. Heim Bridge.
Japanese comprise 0.9% of L.A.'s population, and have an established Little Tokyo in the city's downtown, and another significant community of Japanese Americans is located in the Sawtelle district of West Los Angeles.
The city also has local broadcasting such as:
Los Angeles is also home to the nation's largest urban oil field.
The largest employers in the city  were, in descending order, the City of Los Angeles, the County of Los Angeles, and University of California, Los Angeles.
The century ended with the Rampart scandal, one of the most extensive documented cases of police misconduct in American history.
Wet years are usually associated with warm water El Niño conditions in the Pacific, dry years with cooler water La Niña episodes.
One shooting led to the death of a SWAT team member, Randal Simmons, the first in LAPD's history.
During the peak rush hour there is 80% congestion, according to the index.
Temperatures in the San Fernando and San Gabriel Valleys are considerably warmer.
Los Angeles was followed by San Francisco/Oakland, Washington, D.C. and Atlanta, (each with 60 hours of delay).
''Yang-na'' has also been translated as "the valley of smoke".
Los Angeles is a charter city as opposed to a general law city.
Chinese people, which make up 1.8% of Los Angeles' population, reside mostly outside of Los Angeles city limits and rather in the San Gabriel Valley of eastern Los Angeles County, but make a sizable presence in the city, notably in Chinatown.
Los Angeles has twice hosted the Summer Olympic Games: in 1932 and in 1984, Los Angeles is bidding for 2024 Summer Olympics.
The most prevalent plant communities are coastal sage scrub, chaparral shrubland, and riparian woodland.
Calship built hundreds of Liberty Ships and Victory Ships on Terminal Island, and the Los Angeles area was the headquarters of six of the country's major aircraft manufacturers (Douglas Aircraft Company, Hughes Aircraft, Lockheed, North American Aviation, Northrop Corporation, and Vultee).
NBC affiliate KNBC on channel 4.
On September 4, 1781, a group of forty-four settlers known as "Los Pobladores" founded the pueblo called "El Pueblo de Nuestra Señora la Reina de los Ángeles de Porciúncula"; in English it is "The Town of Our Lady the Queen of the Angels of Porciúncula".
Chinatown and Thaitown are also home to many Thais and Cambodians, which make up 0.3% and 0.1% of Los Angeles' population, respectively.
Further afield, the highest point in the greater Los Angeles area is San Gorgonio Mountain, with a height of .
After Proposition 13 was approved in 1978, urban school districts had considerable trouble with funding.
In 1932, the city hosted the Summer Olympics.
Prior to 1995, the Rams played their home games in the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum from 1946–1979 and the Raiders played their home games at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum from 1982–1994.
The city extends for  longitudinally and for  latitudinally.
Atheism and other secular beliefs are also common, as the city is the largest in the Western U.S. Unchurched Belt.
The Los Angeles Basin and the San Fernando Valley are susceptible to atmospheric inversion, which holds in the exhausts from road vehicles, airplanes, locomotives, shipping, manufacturing, and other sources.
According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, Christianity is the most prevalently practiced religion in Los Angeles (65%).
Temperatures are subject to substantial daily swings; in inland areas the difference between the average daily low and the average daily high is over .
Dedicated in 1956, it was the first LDS temple built in California and it was the largest in the world when completed.
The LA County Metropolitan Transportation Authority and other agencies operate an extensive system of bus lines, as well as subway and light rail lines across Los Angeles County, with a combined monthly ridership (measured in individual boardings) of 38.8&nbsp;million as of September 2011.
Drivers in Los Angeles suffer from one of the worst rush hour periods in the world, according to an annual traffic index by navigation system maker, TomTom.
The Los Angeles Public Library system operates 72 public libraries in the city.
The geologic instability has produced numerous faults, which cause approximately 10,000 earthquakes annually in Southern California, though most of them are too small to be felt.
''Investor's Business Daily'' is distributed from its L.A. corporate offices, which are headquartered in Playa del Rey.
During the war, more aircraft were produced in one year than in all the pre-war years since the Wright brothers flew the first airplane in 1903, combined.
''', is the second-largest city in the United States after New York City, the most populous city in the state of California, and the county seat of Los Angeles County.
Los Angeles has plenty of sunshine throughout the year, with an average of only 35 days with measurable precipitation annually.
The smaller Ballona Creek flows into the Santa Monica Bay at Playa del Rey.
Other hilly parts of Los Angeles include the Mt.
More recently, the state of California has led the nation in working to limit pollution by mandating low-emission vehicles.
In 1771, Franciscan friar Junípero Serra directed the building of the Mission San Gabriel Arcángel, the first mission in the area.
KTBN 40 is the flagship station of the religious Trinity Broadcasting Network, based out of Santa Ana.
The performing arts play a major role in Los Angeles' cultural identity.
It became a part of Mexico in 1821 following the Mexican War of Independence.
After 21 seasons in St. Louis, on January 12, 2016, the NFL announced that the Rams would be moving back to Los Angeles for the 2016 NFL season.
The Los Angeles County Office of Education operates the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts.
In the United States House of Representatives, it is split between ten congressional districts.
Also, Los Angeles is increasingly becoming a city of apartments rather than single family dwellings, especially in the dense inner city and Westside neighborhoods.
More broadly, the city is divided into the following areas: Downtown Los Angeles, East Los Angeles and Northeast Los Angeles, South Los Angeles, the Harbor Area, Greater Hollywood, Wilshire, the Westside, and the San Fernando and Crescenta Valleys.
The Los Angeles basin and metropolitan area are also at risk from blind thrust earthquakes.
L.A hosted the Summer Olympic Games in 1932 and 1984 and is currently bidding to host the 2024 Summer Olympics.
(It is no longer a sacred space and is being converted to a museum and community center.)
The Breed Street Shul in East Los Angeles, built in 1923, was the largest synagogue west of Chicago in its early decades.
The Los Angeles River, which is largely seasonal, is the primary drainage channel.
Major earthquakes that have hit the Los Angeles area include the 1933 Long Beach, 1971 San Fernando, 1987 Whittier Narrows, and the 1994 Northridge events.
In 1994, the 6.7 Northridge earthquake shook the city, causing $12.5&nbsp;billion in damage and 72 deaths.
In addition, the city directly contracts for local and commuter bus service through the Los Angeles Department of Transportation, or LADOT.
A Gabrielino settlement in the area was called ''iyáangẚ'' (written ''Yang-na'' by the Spanish), which has been translated as "poison oak place".
Smog is expected to continue to drop in the coming years because of aggressive steps to reduce it, which include electric and hybrid cars, improvements in mass transit, and other measures.
Los Angeles also hosted the Deaflympics in 1985 and Special Olympics World Summer Games in 2015.
The age distribution was 874,525 people (23.1%) under 18, 434,478 people (11.5%) from 18 to 24, 1,209,367 people (31.9%) from 25 to 44, 877,555 people (23.1%) from 45 to 64, and 396,696 people (10.5%) who were 65 or older.
The Los Angeles metro area is served by a wide variety of local television stations, and is the second-largest designated market area in the U.S. with 5,431,140 homes (4.956% of the U.S.).
Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo, a Portuguese-born explorer, claimed the area of southern California for the Spanish Empire of the Kingdom of Spain in 1542, while on an official military exploring expedition moving north along the Pacific coast from earlier colonizing bases of New Spain in Central and South America.
Because of Los Angeles' large multi-ethnic population, a wide variety of faiths are practiced, including Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, Sikhism, Bahá'í, various Eastern Orthodox Churches, Sufism and others.
Talent is locally cultivated at premier institutions such as the Colburn School and the USC Thornton School of Music.
ABC affiliate KABC on channel 7.
Parts of the city are also vulnerable to tsunamis; harbor areas were damaged by waves from the Valdivia earthquake in 1960.
World TV operates on two channels and the area has several Spanish-language television networks.
There are 15 city council districts.
Super Bowls I and VII were also held in the city, as well as multiple FIFA World Cup games at the Rose Bowl in 1994, including the final.
FOX affiliate KTTV on channel 11.
In 1970, the Census Bureau reported the city's population as 17.9% black, 61.1% non-Hispanic white and 17.1% Hispanic.
There are 841 museums and art galleries in Los Angeles County.
Examples include ''The Daily Breeze'' (serving the South Bay), and ''The Long Beach Press-Telegram.''
The CW affiliate KTLA on channel 5.
The city's street pattern generally follows a grid plan, with uniform block lengths and occasional roads that cut across blocks.
The money generated by the industry kept the city insulated from much of the economic loss suffered by the rest of the country during the Great Depression.
Indians make up 0.9% of the city's population.
The Port of Los Angeles is located in San Pedro Bay in the San Pedro neighborhood, approximately  south of Downtown.
L.A. drivers spend an additional 92 hours in traffic each year.
At the official downtown station, the highest recorded temperature is  on September 27, 2010, while the lowest is , on January 4, 1949.
They were the largest riots in US history causing approximately $1.3 billion in damage as well as 53 deaths and over 2,000 injuries.
Historically home to the Chumash and Tongva, Los Angeles was claimed by Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo for Spain in 1542 along with the rest of what would become Alta California.
The average annual temperature of the sea is , from  in January to  in August.
The usual pattern is year to year variability, with a short string of dry years of  rainfall, followed by one or two wet years with more than .
The city has many departments and appointed officers, including the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), the Los Angeles Board of Police Commissioners, the Los Angeles Fire Department (LAFD), the Housing Authority of the City of Los Angeles (HACLA), the Los Angeles Department of Transportation (LADOT), and the Los Angeles Public Library (LAPL).
For many years, the church convened at Angelus Temple, which, when built, was one of the largest churches in the country.
Enclaves of unincorporated areas are served by branches of the County of Los Angeles Public Library, many of which are within walking distance to residents.
Issues of air quality in Los Angeles and other major cities led to the passage of early national environmental legislation, including the Clean Air Act.
The Los Angeles area is also subject to phenomena typical of a microclimate, causing extreme variations in temperature in close physical proximity to each other.
1,535,444 people (40.5% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 2,172,576 people (57.3%) lived in rental housing units.
Most construction is done in separate units, rather than wall-to-wall.
The neighborhood councils are relatively autonomous and spontaneous in that they identify their own boundaries, establish their own bylaws, and elect their own officers.
Singly, the Port of Los Angeles is the busiest container port in the United States and the largest cruise ship center on the West Coast of the United States&nbsp;– The Port of Los Angeles' World Cruise Center served about 590,000 passengers in 2014.
In 2016 the Expo Line will reach the Pacific at Santa Monica.
The 2010 United States Census reported that Los Angeles had a population of 3,792,621.
The ''Los Angeles Sentinel'' is the city's major African-American weekly paper, boasting the largest African-American readership in the Western United States.
During Mexican rule, Governor Pío Pico made Los Angeles Alta California's regional capital.
Temperatures in the coastal basin exceed  on a dozen or so days in the year, from one day a month in April, May, June and November to three days a month in July, August, October and to five days in September.
Cardinal Roger Mahony oversaw construction of the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels, which opened in September 2002 in downtown Los Angeles.
Los Angeles lies in a large coastal basin surrounded on three sides by mountains reaching up to and over .
'''Los Angeles''' (, Spanish for "The Angels"), officially the '''City of Los Angeles''' and often known by its initials '''L.A.
Memorial Coliseum as the host stadium.
There are numerous additional colleges and universities outside the city limits in the Greater Los Angeles area.
As home to Hollywood and its entertainment industry, numerous singers, actors and other entertainers live in various districts of Los Angeles.
Los Angeles is both flat and hilly.
In 2005, 10.2% of Los Angeles commuters rode some form of public transportation.
Both left the city in 1995, with the Rams moving to St. Louis, and the Raiders moving back to their original home of Oakland.
Racial tensions erupted on April 29, 1992, with the acquittal by a Simi Valley jury of the police officers captured on videotape beating Rodney King, culminating in large-scale riots.
The few skyscrapers that are built outside of those areas often stand out above the rest of the surrounding landscape.
Apart from South Los Angeles, neighborhoods in the Central region of Los Angeles, such as Mid-City, Mid-Wilshire and Arlington Heights has a moderate-to-high concentration of African Americans as well.
Immediately to the north lie the San Gabriel Mountains, which is a popular recreation area for Angelenos.
Two-thirds of the settlers were mestizo or mulatto with a mixture of African, indigenous and European ancestry.
The coast gets slightly less rainfall, while the inland and mountain areas get considerably more.
Los Angeles in the year of 2013 totaled 251 murders, a decrease of 16 percent from the previous year.
There are also a number of smaller regional newspapers, alternative weeklies and magazines, including the ''Los Angeles Register'', ''Los Angeles Daily News'' (which focuses coverage on the San Fernando Valley), ''LA Weekly,'' ''L.A.
The 1960s saw race relations boil-over into the Watts Riots of 1965 which resulted in 34 deaths and over 1,000 injuries.
It adjoins the separate Port of Long Beach.
This has led to the city being referred to as the "Gang Capital of America".
Los Angeles has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification ''Csb'' on the coast, ''Csa'' inland), and receives just enough annual precipitation to avoid either Köppen's ''BSh'' or ''BSk'' (semi-arid climate) classification.
The Metro Orange and Silver lines are bus rapid transit lines with stops and frequency similar to those of light rail.
During autumn and winter, Santa Ana winds sometimes bring much warmer and drier conditions to Los Angeles, and raise the wildfire risk.
The American Lung Association's 2013 survey ranks the metro area as having the nation's worst smog, and fourth in both short term and year round pollution amounts.
In a unanimous vote, the City Council approved special land-use restrictions for some of its most polluted neighborhoods and citywide requirements for advanced air filters in new developments near freeways.
In the California State Assembly, Los Angeles is split between fourteen districts.
Nevertheless, all but a few are of low intensity and are not felt.
Los Angeles boasts a number of sports venues, including Dodger Stadium, the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, The Forum, the StubHub Center, the Staples Center, and the Rose Bowl in nearby Pasadena.
Los Angeles is subject to earthquakes because of its location on the Pacific Ring of Fire.
There are currently about 90 neighborhood councils.
The rail system includes the Red and Purple subway lines, as well as the Gold, Blue, Expo, and Green light rail lines.
CBS affiliate KCBS on channel 2.
The Latino population is spread throughout the city of Los Angeles and its metropolitan area but it is most heavily concentrated in the East Los Angeles, Northeast Los Angeles and Northwest Los Angeles regions, which has a long established Mexican-American and Central American community.
In 2014, the fire season never finished in Southern California and studies have predicted that climate change will cause more frequent and larger fires by the end of the century.
The number of Stage 1 smog alerts in Los Angeles has declined from over 100 per year in the 1970s to almost zero in the new millennium.
The greatest snowfall recorded in downtown Los Angeles was  on January 15, 1932.
Summer days are usually rainless.
