He didn't want Gehrig to share the spotlight with any other all-star.
Although his final 1938 statistics were above average (.295 batting average, 114 RBI, 170 hits, .523 slugging percentage, 689 plate appearances with only 75 strikeouts, and 29 home runs), they were significantly down from his 1937 season, in which he batted .351 and slugged .643.
Knowing the way you came through
Of lasting Friendship's gleam,
Gehrig's birthplace in Manhattan, at 1994&nbsp;Second Avenue (near E.&nbsp;103rd Street), is memorialized with a plaque marking the site, as is another early residence on E.&nbsp;94th Street (near Second Avenue).
When you look around, wouldn't you consider it a privilege to associate yourself with such fine looking men as are standing in uniform in this ballpark today?
And always you were the leader,
Decked you with laurel leaves.
He was an All-Star seven consecutive times, a Triple Crown winner once, an American League (AL) Most Valuable Player twice, and a member of six World Series champion teams.
The Yankees dedicated a monument to Gehrig in center field at Yankee Stadium on July 6, 1941, the shrine lauding him as, "A man, a gentleman and a great ballplayer whose amazing record of 2,130&nbsp;consecutive games should stand for all time."
The idea of an appreciation day reportedly began with Bill Hirsch, a friend of sports columnist Bill Corum.
Pipp was in a slump, as was the team, so Huggins made several lineup changes to boost their performance, replacing Pipp, Aaron Ward, and Wally Schang.
He set several major league records during his career, including the most career grand slams (23) (since broken by Alex Rodriguez) and most consecutive games played (2,130), a record that stood for 56 years and was long considered unbreakable until surpassed by Cal Ripken, Jr. in 1995.
The Yankees gave him a silver trophy with their signatures engraved on it.
Gehrig starred in the 1938 20th Century Fox movie ''Rawhide'', playing himself in his only feature film appearance.
In 1910, he lived with his parents at 2266 Amsterdam Avenue in Washington Heights.
By the end of April, his statistics were the worst of his career, with one RBI and a .143 batting average.
I would not have traded two minutes of my life with that man for 40 years with another."
After a dozen games played for the Hartford Senators in the Eastern League, he was discovered and banned from collegiate sports his freshman year.
Her call was transferred to Charles William Mayo, who had been following Gehrig's career and his mysterious loss of strength.
In the 1938 World Series, he had four hits in 14 at-bats, all singles.
The pathos of his farewell from baseball was capped off by his iconic 1939 "Luckiest Man on the Face of the Earth" speech at Yankee Stadium.
He narrowly missed getting a fifth home run when Athletics center fielder Al Simmons made a leaping catch of another fly ball at the center field fence.
The 23-year-old Yankee first baseman's breakout season came in 1926, when he batted .313 with 47&nbsp;doubles, an American League-leading 20&nbsp;triples, 16&nbsp;home runs, and 112 RBI.
Although the AL recognized his season by naming him league MVP, Gehrig's accomplishments were overshadowed by Babe Ruth's 60&nbsp;home run season and the overall dominance of the 1927 Yankees, a team often cited as having the greatest lineup of all time&nbsp;— the famed "Murderers' Row".
'''Henry Louis''' "'''Lou'''" or "'''Buster'''"  '''Gehrig''' (Born '''Heinrich Ludwig Gehrig'''; June 19, 1903June 2, 1941) was an American baseball first baseman who played 17 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the New York Yankees, from 1923 through 1939.
In its coverage the following day, ''The New York Times'' said it was "perhaps as colorful and dramatic a pageant as ever was enacted on a baseball field as 61,808 fans thundered a hail and farewell."
He had rejected other job offers&nbsp;– including lucrative speaking and guest appearance opportunities&nbsp;– worth far more financially than the $5,700&nbsp;a year commissionership."
However, before his first semester, under the influence of New York Giants manager John McGraw, he was advised to play on a summer professional baseball team under a false name, Henry Lewis, despite the fact that it could jeopardize his collegiate sports eligibility.
It is currently on display at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum.
An article in the September 2010 issue of the ''Journal of Neuropathology & Experimental Neurology'' suggested the possibility that ALS-related illnesses diagnosed in Gehrig and other athletes may have been catalyzed by repeated concussions and other brain trauma.
The second mentioned plaque is present, but ascribes to his birthplace, not early residence.)
Helmets were not heavily introduced until the 1940s.
His New York School of Commerce team was playing a team from Chicago's Lane Tech High School in front of a crowd of more than 10,000&nbsp;spectators.
His father was a sheet metal worker by trade but frequently unemployed due to alcoholism, and his mother - a maid - was the main breadwinner and disciplinarian in the family.
Your Pals of the Yankees Team."
''The New York Times'' account the following day called it "one of the most touching scenes ever witnessed on a ball field", that made even hard-boiled reporters "swallow hard."
In 2006, researchers presented a paper to the American Academy of Neurology, reporting on an analysis of ''Rawhide'' and photographs of Lou Gehrig from the 1937–1939 period, to ascertain when Gehrig began to show visible symptoms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
His two sisters died from whooping cough and measles at an early age; a brother also died in infancy.
Gehrig was mentioned in the poem "Line-Up for Yesterday" by Ogden Nash:
She dedicated the remainder of her life to supporting ALS research.
From an early age, Gehrig helped his mother with work, doing tasks such as folding laundry and picking up supplies from the local stores.
"Examination of ''Rawhide'' showed that Gehrig functioned normally in January 1938", the report concluded.
A native of New York City and attendee of Columbia University, Gehrig signed with the Yankees in 1923.
(As of December 26, 2011, the first mentioned plaque is not present due to ongoing construction.
Gehrig was born at 309 East 94th Street in the Yorkville neighborhood of Manhattan, weighing almost  at birth.
Fourteen years later, Gehrig had played 2,130&nbsp;consecutive games.
The next day, June 2, Yankee manager Miller Huggins started Gehrig in place of regular first baseman Wally Pipp.
Gehrig's production helped the 1927 Yankees to a 110–44 record, the AL pennant (by 19 games), and a four-game sweep of the Pittsburgh Pirates in the World Series.
Real-life Yankees Babe Ruth, Bob Meusel, Mark Koenig, and Bill Dickey (then still an active player) played themselves, as did sportscaster Bill Stern.
Yankees Manager Joe McCarthy, struggling to control his emotions, then spoke of Lou Gehrig, with whom he had a close, almost father-and-sonlike bond.
Gehrig led the American League in runs scored four times, home runs three times, and RBIs five times.
Shepherd's father was booed mercilessly, and he never again took junior Jean to a game.
We took our foes as they came;
At Columbia, he was a member of Phi Delta Theta fraternity.
In 1999, editors at ''Sporting News'' ranked Lou Gehrig sixth on their list of "Baseball's 100 Greatest Players".
Gehrig visited New York City's correctional facilities, but insisted that the visits not be covered by news media.
Although almost knocked unconscious, Gehrig remained in the game.
(Babe Ruth had 498.)
The Cardinals won the series four games to three.
He batted fourth in the lineup behind Ruth, making it counterproductive to opposing pitchers to intentionally walk Ruth.
In addition, X-rays taken late in his life disclosed that Gehrig had sustained several fractures during his playing career, although he remained in the lineup despite those previously undisclosed injuries.
At the end of that season, he said, "I tired mid-season.
Following Gehrig's visit to the Mayo Clinic, he briefly rejoined the Yankees in Washington, D.C. As his train pulled into Union Station, he was greeted by a group of Boy Scouts, happily waving and wishing him luck.
The life of Lou Gehrig was the subject of the 1942 movie ''The Pride of the Yankees'', starring Gary Cooper as Gehrig and Teresa Wright as his wife Eleanor.
He had just played his 2,130th consecutive major league game.
"We've been to the wars together;
And ever you played the game.
Gehrig attended PS&nbsp;132 in the Washington Heights section of Manhattan, then went to Commerce High School, graduating in 1921.
Idol of cheering millions,
That's all we can do."
Gehrig was renowned for his prowess as a hitter and for his durability, a trait that earned him his nickname "The Iron Horse".
Playing 14 complete seasons, Gehrig had 13 consecutive seasons with 100 or more RBIs (a major league record shared with Foxx until eclipsed in 2010 by Alex Rodriguez).
On June 1, 1925, Gehrig entered the game as a pinch hitter, substituting for shortstop Paul "Pee Wee" Wanninger.
Gehrig's streak ended on May 2, 1939, when he voluntarily took himself out of the lineup to stunned fans after his play was hampered by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), an incurable neuromuscular disorder now commonly referred to in North America as ''Lou Gehrig's disease''.
It was the only time Gehrig had ever played any level of baseball—sandlot, high school, collegiate or pro—for a team based outside New York City.
Only a handful of collegians were at South Field that day, but more significant was the presence of Yankee scout Paul Krichell, who had been trailing Gehrig for some time.
Mayo told Eleanor to bring Gehrig as soon as possible.
He stayed with the Yankees as team captain for the rest of the season but never played in a major league game again.
Fans and the press openly speculated on Gehrig's abrupt decline.
When Tarzan creator Edgar Rice Burroughs spotted the outfit, he telegrammed Gehrig, "I want to congratulate you on being a swell first baseman."
James Kahn, a reporter who wrote often about Gehrig, said in one article:
In 1920, the family resided on 8th Avenue in Manhattan.
He was often helped by his wife Eleanor, who would guide his hand when he had to sign official documents.
In October 1939, he accepted Mayor Fiorello La Guardia's appointment to a ten-year term as a New York City Parole Commissioner (Gehrig had moved from New Rochelle to Riverdale in order to satisfy a residency requirement for the job) and was sworn into office on January 2, 1940.
He never had a formal induction ceremony.
In 1925, he batted .295, with 20&nbsp;home runs and 68 runs batted in (RBIs).
In his first two seasons, he saw limited playing time, mostly as a pinch hitter—he played in only 23&nbsp;games and was not on the Yankees' 1923 World Series roster.
Eleanor Gehrig was told that the cause of ALS was unknown but it was painless, non-contagious, and cruel—the motor function of the central nervous system is destroyed, but the mind remains fully aware to the end.
It was based on the 1976 autobiography ''My Luke and I'', written by Eleanor Gehrig and Joseph Durso.
It received 11 Academy Award nominations and won in one category, Film Editing.
In September 1933, Gehrig married Eleanor Twitchell (1904 or 1905–1984), the daughter of Chicago Parks Commissioner Frank Twitchell.
A monument in Gehrig's honor, originally dedicated by the Yankees in 1941, currently resides in Monument Park at Yankee Stadium.
"Don't think I am depressed or pessimistic about my condition at present", Lou Gehrig wrote following his retirement from baseball.
But Gehrig only got as far as posing for a widely distributed, and embarrassing, photo of himself in a leopard-spotted costume.
Gehrig often wrote letters to Eleanor, and in one such note written shortly afterwards, said in part:
McCarthy acquiesced, putting Ellsworth "Babe" Dahlgren in at first base, and also said that whenever Gehrig wanted to play again, the position was his.
Some came from VIPs; others came from the stadium's groundskeepers and janitorial staff.
In 1932, Gehrig became the first player in the 20th century to hit four home runs in a game, accomplishing the feat on June 3 against the Philadelphia Athletics.
Gehrig joined the New York Yankees midway through the 1923&nbsp;season and made his Major League debut at age 19 on June 15, 1923, as a pinch hitter.
Someone suggested the appreciation day be held during the All-Star Game, but when Yankees owner Ed Barrow got a hold of the idea, he quickly shot down the All-Star Game suggestion.
Gehrig's monument joined the one placed there in 1932 to Miller Huggins, which would eventually be followed by Babe Ruth's in 1949.
Gehrig had six seasons where he batted .350 or better (with a high of .379 in 1930), plus a seventh season at .349.
When the Yankees began their 1939 spring training in St. Petersburg, Florida, it was clear that Gehrig no longer possessed his once-formidable power.
On the single-season RBI list, Gehrig ranks second, fifth (175), and sixth (174), with four additional seasons of over 150 RBIs.
His 184 RBIs in 1931 remain the American League record as of 2015 and rank second all-time to Hack Wilson's 191 in 1930.
His name was often anglicized to Henry Louis Gehrig and he was known as "Lou" so that he would not be confused with his identically named father, who was known as Henry.
Let this be a silent token
He was indeed meeting the ball, with only one strikeout in 28&nbsp;at-bats; however, Joe McCarthy found himself resisting pressure from Yankee management to switch Gehrig to a part-time role.
With his team leading 8–6 in the top of the ninth inning, Gehrig hit a grand slam completely out of the major league park, an unheard-of feat for a 17-year-old.
Gehrig, as Yankee captain, himself took the lineup card out to the shocked umpires before the game, ending the fourteen-year streak.
The Detroit Tigers' fans gave Gehrig a standing ovation while he sat on the bench with tears in his eyes.
Believing the idea was valid and the best thing to do, he wanted the appreciation day to be soon, and the Yankees proclaimed July 4, 1939, "Lou Gehrig Appreciation Day" at Yankee Stadium.
The Gehrigs had no children during their eight-year marriage.
There was then a public push to honor Gehrig.
Throughout his career, Gehrig was considered an excellent base runner, but as the 1939 season got under way, his coordination and speed had deteriorated significantly.
Iron of frame they hailed you
I don't know why, but I just couldn't get going again."
Babe Ruth came over and hugged him as a band played "I Love You Truly" and the crowd chanted, "We love you, Lou".
Although his performance in the second half of the 1938 season was slightly better than in the first half, Gehrig reported physical changes at the midway point.
He returned to minor-league Hartford to play parts of two seasons, 1923 and 1924, batting .344 and hitting 61 home runs in 193 games.
A wire service photograph of Gehrig reclining against the dugout steps with a stoic expression appeared the next day in the nation's newspapers.
Murphy said, "Nice play, Lou."
The 1978 TV movie ''A Love Affair: The Eleanor and Lou Gehrig Story'' starred Blythe Danner and Edward Herrmann as Eleanor and Lou Gehrig.
In his first and only plate appearance, he singled and was promptly replaced by a pinch runner to rest his throbbing back, never taking the field.
She died 43 years after Lou on March 6, 1984, and was interred with him in Kensico Cemetery.
The Parole Commission commended the ex-ballplayer for his "firm belief in parole, properly administered", stating that Gehrig "indicated he accepted the parole post because it represented an opportunity for public service.
Gehrig had a .343 batting average, compared to .338 for Ruth.
After six days of extensive testing at Mayo Clinic, the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) was confirmed on June 19, 1939, which was Gehrig's 36th birthday.
On one occasion, the Sox were playing the Yankees, and Shepherd Sr. had been taunting Gehrig, yelling at him all day.
Gehrig, as always, quietly and efficiently performed his duties.
On April 18, 1923, the same day that Yankee Stadium opened for the first time and Babe Ruth inaugurated the new stadium with a home run against the Boston Red Sox, Columbia pitcher Gehrig struck out seventeen Williams College batters to set a team record, though Columbia lost the game.
The prognosis was grim: rapidly increasing paralysis, difficulty in swallowing and speaking, and a life expectancy of less than three years, although there would be no impairment of mental functions.
His 117&nbsp;extra-base hits that season are second all-time to Babe Ruth's 119&nbsp;extra-base hits in 1921 and his 447 total bases are third all-time, after Babe Ruth's 457&nbsp;total bases in 1921 and Rogers Hornsby's 450 in 1922.
McGraw, not Gehrig, got the main headlines in the sports sections the next day.
The Lou Gehrig Memorial Award is given annually to the MLB player best exhibiting his integrity and character.
After the game, manager Joe McCarthy told him, "Well, Lou, nobody can take today away from you."
It was not Gehrig's pitching that particularly impressed him; rather, it was Gehrig's powerful left-handed hitting.
However, Gehrig outpaced Ruth in RBI, 1,436 to 1,316.
The Yankees retired Gehrig's uniform number "4", making him the first player in Major League Baseball history to be accorded that honor.
In a few instances, Gehrig managed to keep the streak intact through pinch hitting appearances and fortuitous timing; in others, the streak continued despite injuries.
Gehrig was given many gifts, commemorative plaques, and trophies.
Ruth had 424 home runs compared to Gehrig's 347.
Gehrig was visibly shaken as he stepped away from the microphone, and wiped the tears away from his face with his handkerchief.
The trophy cost only about $5, but it became one of Gehrig's most prized possessions.
He hit 493 home runs and had 1,995 runs batted in (RBI).
Struggling against his ever-worsening physical condition, he added, "I intend to hold on as long as possible and then if the inevitable comes, I will accept it philosophically and hope for the best.
Gehrig flew alone to Rochester from Chicago, where the Yankees were playing at the time, arriving at the Mayo Clinic on June 13, 1939.
Footage of the ceremonies shows Gehrig being handed various gifts, and immediately setting them down on the ground, because he no longer had the arm strength to hold them.
About a month before his death, when Gehrig reached the point where his deteriorating physical condition made it impossible for him to continue in the job, he quietly resigned.
By the end of spring training, he had not hit a home run.
Turning tearfully to Gehrig, the manager said, "Lou, what else can I say except that it was a sad day in the life of everybody who knew you when you came into my hotel room that day in Detroit and told me you were quitting as a ballplayer because you felt yourself a hindrance to the team.
The doctors of the Mayo Clinic had released his ALS diagnosis to the public on June 19.
In the next day's away game, he was listed in the lineup as "shortstop", batting lead-off.
* On April 23, 1933, a pitch by Washington Senators pitcher Earl Whitehill struck Gehrig in the head.
He signed a contract with the Yankees on April 30.
According to news reports, he was out for five minutes.
On December 7, 1939, Lou Gehrig was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum in a special election related to his illness during the winter meeting by the Baseball Writers' Association.
Things came to a head when Gehrig struggled to make a routine put-out at first base.
The inscription on the trophy presented to Gehrig from his Yankees teammates:
On July 28, 2013, he and eleven other deceased players, including Rogers Hornsby received a special tribute during the induction ceremony, held during "Hall of Fame Induction Weekend", July 26–29 in Cooperstown, New York.
Gehrig first garnered national attention for his baseball ability while playing in a game at Cubs Park (now Wrigley Field) on June 26, 1920.
Even his base running was affected, and at one point he collapsed at Al Lang Field, then the Yankees' spring training park.
Yet today I consider myself the luckiest man on the face of this earth.
* On July 13, 1934, Gehrig suffered a "lumbago attack" and had to be assisted off the field.
Gehrig was voted the greatest first baseman of all time by the Baseball Writers' Association in 1969, and was the leading vote-getter on the Major League Baseball All-Century Team chosen by fans in 1999.
Also in 1936, at the urging of his wife Eleanor, Gehrig agreed to hire Babe Ruth's agent, who in turn, persuaded him to audition for the role of Tarzan, the Ape Man, after Johnny Weissmuller had vacated the iconic movie role.
Gehrig waved back, but he leaned forward to his companion, Rutherford "Rud" Rennie of the New York Herald Tribune, and said, "They're wishing me luck—and I'm dying."
Gehrig did exactly that, hitting a screaming liner, practically into the heckler's lap, for the eventual game-winning home run.
* On June 14, 1933, Gehrig was ejected from a game, along with manager Joe McCarthy, but he had already been at bat.
He was the second of four children of German immigrants, Christina Foch (1881–1954) and Heinrich Gehrig (1867–1946).
New York Mayor Fiorello La Guardia called Gehrig "the greatest prototype of good sportsmanship and citizenship" and Postmaster General James Farley concluded his speech by predicting, "For generations to come, boys who play baseball will point with pride to your record."
He had a career .340 batting average, .632 slugging average, and a .447 on base average.
On the other hand, the streak was helped when Yankees general manager Ed Barrow postponed a game as a rainout on a day when Gehrig was sick with the flu—even though it was not raining.
During the ten seasons (1925–1934) in which Gehrig and Ruth were teammates and next to each other in the batting order and played a majority of the games, Gehrig had more home runs than Ruth only once, in 1934 (which was Ruth's last year with the Yankees), when he hit 49 to Ruth's 22 (Ruth played 125&nbsp;games that year).
On May 2, the next game after a day off, Gehrig approached McCarthy before the game in Detroit against the Tigers and said, "I'm benching myself, Joe", telling the Yankees' skipper that he was doing so "for the good of the team."
Only two other players, Jimmie Foxx with 507 and Hank Greenberg with 503, have surpassed 500&nbsp;RBIs in ''any'' three seasons; their totals were non-consecutive.
There is no known intact film of Gehrig's speech; only a small snippet of the newsreel footage has survived, incorporating his opening and closing remarks:  "For the past two weeks you have been reading about the bad break I got.
Despite playing in the shadow of the larger-than-life Ruth for two-thirds of his career, Gehrig was one of the highest run producers in baseball history: he had 509&nbsp;RBIs during a three-season stretch (1930–32).
In 1939, he was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame and was the first MLB player to have his uniform number (4) retired by a team.
My God, man, you were never that."
As Gehrig's debilitation became steadily worse, his wife Eleanor called the famed Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.
Before the game began, the Briggs Stadium announcer told the fans, "Ladies and gentlemen, this is the first time Lou Gehrig's name will not appear on the Yankee lineup in 2,130 consecutive games."
He left the game, but was in the lineup the next day.
And all that we've left unspoken;
He apparently told this story originally when Gehrig's widow was in the audience at a speaking engagement.
On June 21, 1939, the New York Yankees announced Gehrig's retirement.
Later, in 1923, he played first base and pitched for the Columbia baseball team.
Dignitaries extolled the dying slugger and the members of the 1927 Yankees World Series team, known as "Murderer's Row", attended the ceremonies.
They tied at 46&nbsp;in 1931.
Inscribed on the front was a special poem written by ''The New York Times'' writer John Kieran.
On the same day, however, John McGraw announced his retirement after thirty years of managing the New York Giants.
1927, 1928, 1932, 1936, 1937, 1938
The crowd stood and applauded for almost two minutes.
On April 30, Gehrig went hitless against the Washington Senators.
Initially, he went to Columbia on a football scholarship, where he was preparing to pursue a degree in engineering.
A&E's ''Biography'' speculated that this illness, which he also described as "a cold in his back", might have been the first symptom of his debilitating disease.
During the time Krichell observed him, Gehrig had hit some of the longest home runs ever seen on various eastern campuses, including a  home run on April 28 at Columbia's South Field, which landed at 116th Street and Broadway.
After describing Gehrig as "the finest example of a ballplayer, sportsman, and citizen that baseball has ever known", McCarthy could stand it no longer.
Records are yours by sheaves;
