The chassis, frame, or basket, is designed to be rigid, avoiding deformation that could change critical alignments with the magnet gap, perhaps causing the voice coil to rub against the sides of the gap.
The human ear is remarkably tolerant of poor sound quality, and the distortion inherent in limited-range drivers may enhance their output at high frequencies, increasing clarity when listening to spoken word material.
A system design of this type was patented and produced commercially by Professor Amar Bose—the 2201.
The remainder is converted to heat, mostly in the voice coil and magnet assembly.
For example, a cone might be made of cellulose paper, into which some carbon fiber, Kevlar, glass, hemp or bamboo fibers have been added; or it might use a honeycomb sandwich construction; or a coating might be applied to it so as to provide additional stiffening or damping.
The dynamic speaker operates on the same basic principle as a dynamic microphone, but in reverse, to produce sound from an electrical signal.
The ideal material would 1) be rigid, to prevent uncontrolled cone motions; 2) have low mass, to minimize starting force requirements and energy storage issues; 3) be well damped, to reduce vibrations continuing after the signal has stopped with little or no audible ringing due to its resonance frequency as determined by its usage.
However, these designs were significantly limited by their poor sound quality and their inability to reproduce sound at low volume.
If the mid-range driver is a direct radiator, it can be mounted on the front baffle of a loudspeaker enclosure, or, if a compression driver, mounted at the throat of a horn for added output level and control of radiation pattern.
These first loudspeakers used electromagnets, because large, powerful permanent magnets were generally not available at a reasonable price.
The term "digital" or "digital-ready" is often used for marketing purposes on speakers or headphones, but these systems are not digital in the sense described above.
In some cases, improved impedance matching (via careful enclosure design) lets the speaker produce more acoustic power.
These drivers are less elaborate and less expensive than wide-range drivers, and they may be severely compromised to fit into very small mounting locations.
When multiple drivers are used in a system, a "filter network", called a crossover, separates the incoming signal into different frequency ranges and routes them to the appropriate driver.
Altec Lansing introduced the ''604'', which became their most famous coaxial Duplex driver, in 1943.
Since panels of infinite dimensions are impossible, most enclosures function by containing the rear radiation from the moving diaphragm.
Thus, a 100&nbsp;W driver ("A") rated at 92&nbsp;dB for 1&nbsp;W @ 1&nbsp;m sensitivity puts out twice as much acoustic power as a 200&nbsp;W driver ("B") rated at 89&nbsp;dB for 1&nbsp;W @ 1&nbsp;m when both are driven with 100&nbsp;W of input power.
Thus, a 3&nbsp;dB increase in sensitivity of the speaker means that it needs half the amplifier power to achieve a given SPL.
A typical suspension system consists of two parts: the ''spider'', which connects the diaphragm or voice coil to the frame and provides the majority of the restoring force, and the ''surround'', which helps center the coil/cone assembly and allows free pistonic motion aligned with the magnetic gap.
The benefits of this complication is reduced impedance at high frequencies, providing extended treble output, reduced harmonic distortion, and a reduction in the inductance modulation that typically accompanies large voice coil excursions.
Being unsuccessful in selling their product to telephone companies, in 1915 they changed their target market to radios and public address systems, and named their product Magnavox.
In this approach, a pleated diaphragm is mounted in a magnetic field and forced to close and open under control of a music signal.
Other materials such as molded plastic and damped plastic compound baskets are becoming common, especially for inexpensive, low-mass drivers.
Metallic chassis can play an important role in conducting heat away from the voice coil; heating during operation changes resistance, causes physical dimensional changes, and if extreme, may even demagnetize permanent magnets.
Active crossovers may be simple circuits that emulate the response of a passive network, or may be more complex, allowing extensive audio adjustments.
These reflected sound waves, when added to the direct sound, cause cancellation and addition at assorted frequencies (e.g., from resonant room modes), thus changing the timbre and character of the sound at the listener's ears.
The cancellation effect is most noticeable at frequencies where the loudspeakers are separated by a quarter wavelength or less; low frequencies are affected the most.
In a typical rectangular listening room, the hard, parallel surfaces of the walls, floor and ceiling cause primary acoustic resonance nodes in each of the three dimensions: left-right, up-down and forward-backward.
As a result, many cones are made of some sort of composite material.
The transformer must be carefully designed so that its frequency response and parasitic losses do not degrade the sound, further increasing cost and complication relative to conventional designs.
They also have a relatively narrow dispersion pattern that can make for precise sound-field positioning.
Larger loudspeaker systems are used for music, sound reinforcement in theatres and concerts, and in public address systems.
Most ribbon tweeters emit sound in a dipole pattern.
Subsequently, continuous developments in enclosure design and materials led to significant audible improvements.
Because of propagation delay, their output may be somewhat out of phase from another subwoofer (on another channel).
As a result, a step down transformer is typically used to increase the current through the ribbon.
They also  cause substantial overall signal loss and a significant reduction in damping factor between the voice coil and the crossover.
A woofer is a driver that reproduces low frequencies.
This rule of thumb is sometimes called Hofmann's Iron Law (after J.A.
Plasma arc loudspeakers use electrical plasma as a radiating element.
Problems of maintenance and reliability for this approach tend to make it unsuitable for mass market use.
Low frequencies excite these modes the most, since long wavelengths are not much affected by furniture compositions or placement.
The cone faced down into a sealed, airtight enclosure.
Piezoelectric speakers are frequently used as beepers in watches and other electronic devices, and are sometimes used as tweeters in less-expensive speaker systems, such as computer speakers and portable radios.
Polyester foam, for example, is lightweight and economical, though usually leaking air to some degree, but is degraded by exposure to ozone, UV light, humidity and elevated temperatures, significantly limiting useful life with adequate performance.
They are both fully integrated devices and compatible with Si-based semiconducting technology.
The most notable improvements to date in modern dynamic drivers, and the loudspeakers that employ them, are improvements in cone materials, the introduction of higher-temperature adhesives, improved permanent magnet materials, improved measurement techniques, computer-aided design, and finite element analysis.
Very few manufacturers still produce electrodynamic loudspeakers with electrically powered field coils, as was common in the earliest designs;  one of the last is a French firm.
This increases the tendency for electrical arcs as well as increasing the speaker's attraction of dust particles.
When an alternating current electrical audio signal is applied to its voice coil, a coil of wire suspended in a circular gap between the poles of a permanent magnet, the coil is forced to move rapidly back and forth due to Faraday's law of induction, which causes a diaphragm (usually conically shaped) attached to the coil to move back and forth, pushing on the air to create sound waves.
Ribbon designs generally require exceptionally powerful magnets, which makes them costly to manufacture.
This typically causes monophonic material in a stereo recording to be canceled out, reduced in level, and made more difficult to localize, all due to destructive interference of the sound waves.
A less expensive variation on this theme is the use of a flame for the driver, as flames contain ionized (electrically charged) gases.
The sound pressure level (SPL) a loudspeaker produces is measured in decibels (dBspl).
The drivers receive power only in their usable frequency range (the range they were designed for), thereby reducing distortion in the drivers and interference between them.
A few of the issues speaker and driver designers must confront are distortion, radiation lobing, phase effects, off-axis response, and crossover artifacts.
Detractors typically cite wide-range drivers' limited frequency response and modest output abilities (most especially at low frequencies), together with their requirement for large, elaborate, expensive enclosures—such as transmission lines, quarter wave resonators or horns—to approach optimum performance.
The horn also improves impedance matching between the voice and the air, which produces more acoustic power for a given speaker power.
Home stereos use the designation "tweeter" for the high frequency driver, while professional concert systems may designate them as "HF" or "highs".
); directivity vs. frequency (e.g., horizontally, vertically, spherically, etc.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences immediately began testing its sonic characteristics; they made it the film house industry standard in 1955.
The spider is usually made of a corrugated fabric disk, impregnated with a stiffening resin.
Because the intended range of frequencies is limited, subwoofer system design is usually simpler in many respects than for conventional loudspeakers, often consisting of a single driver enclosed in a suitable box or enclosure.
A full-range driver is a speaker designed to be used alone to reproduce an audio channel without the help of other drivers, and therefore must cover the entire audio frequency range.
This translates into a smaller, less complex power amplifier—and often, to reduced overall system cost.
Fans of wide-range driver hi-fi speaker systems claim a coherence of sound due to the single source and a resulting lack of interference, and likely also to the lack of crossover components.
The driver works with the characteristics of the enclosure to produce suitable low frequencies (see speaker enclosure for some of the design choices available).
In 2013, a research team introduced Transparent ionic conduction speaker which a 2 layers transparent conductive gel and a layer of transparent rubber in between to make high voltage and high actuation work to reproduce good sound quality.
They have advantages in these applications, not the least of which is simple and solid state construction that resists seawater better than a ribbon or cone based device would.
Lafayette Radio, a large US retail store chain, also sold speaker systems using such tweeters for a time.
Wireless speakers are very similar to traditional (wired) loudspeakers, but they receive audio signals using radio frequency (RF) waves rather than over audio cables.
Some amplifiers can cope with the variation better than others can.
Even if the diaphragm is not perfectly circular, this effect occurs such that larger sources are more directive.
He and his partner Henry Kloss formed the Acoustic Research company to manufacture and market speaker systems using this principle.
In typical installations, subwoofers are physically separated from the rest of the transducers.
AC ripple in the current was attenuated by the action of passing through the choke coil.
The size and type of magnet and details of the magnetic circuit differ, depending on design goals.
Furthermore, there are more complex resonance modes involving three, four, five and even all six boundary surfaces combining to create standing waves.
speakers generally have higher sensitivities of 103 to 110&nbsp;dB for 1&nbsp;W @ 1&nbsp;m—an efficiency of 10–20%.
Some horn designs not only fold the low frequency horn, but use the walls in a room corner as an extension of the horn mouth.
Ribbons have a very low resistance that most amplifiers cannot drive directly.
Most loudspeaker systems consist of drivers mounted in an enclosure, or cabinet.
In 1898, Horace Short patented a design for a loudspeaker driven by compressed air; he then sold the rights to Charles Parsons, who was issued several additional British patents before 1910.
This uncommon approach is being taken by only a very few manufacturers, in very different arrangements.
The German firm Rulik still offers drivers with uncommon spiders made of wood.
Any object radiating sound, including a loudspeaker system, can be thought of as being composed of combinations of such simple point sources.
A major problem in tweeter design is achieving wide angular sound coverage (off-axis response), since high frequency sound tends to leave the speaker in narrow beams.
The suspension system keeps the coil centered in the gap and provides a restoring (centering) force that returns the cone to a neutral position after moving.
The main cone in a whizzer design is manufactured so as to flex more in the outer diameter than in the center.
This is why they are generally used in single frequency (beeper) or non-critical applications.
The diaphragm is usually manufactured with a cone- or dome-shaped profile.
Jensen was, for years after the invention of the loudspeaker, a part owner of The Magnavox Company.
High-end speaker systems, which are typically heavier (and often larger) than economic shipping allows outside local regions, are usually made in their target market region and can cost $140,000 or more per pair.
They are often employed in movie theaters to recreate rumbling bass effects, such as explosions.
This winding usually served a dual role, acting also as a choke coil, filtering the power supply of the amplifier that the loudspeaker was connected to.
Passive crossovers, like the driver units that they feed, have power handling limits, have insertion losses (10% is often claimed), and change the load seen by the amplifier.
Where high fidelity reproduction of sound is required, multiple loudspeaker transducers are often mounted in the same enclosure, each reproducing a part of the audible frequency range ''(picture at right)''.
The speaker is suitable for robotics, mobile computing and adaptive optics fields.
With an infinitely large panel, this interference could be entirely prevented.
Several other manufacturers' designs follow similar principles.
The design is simple; each bit controls a driver, which is either fully 'on' or 'off'.
The following is a description of the individual components of this type of loudspeaker.
Instead, the voice coil is inductive, the driver has mechanical resonances, the enclosure changes the driver's electrical and mechanical characteristics, and a passive crossover between the drivers and the amplifier contributes its own variations.
A horn loaded speaker can have a sensitivity as high as 110&nbsp;dB at 2.83 volts (1 watt at 8 ohms) at 1 meter.
To make sound, a loudspeaker is driven by modulated electric current (produced by an amplifier) that pass through a "speaker coil"  which then (through inductance) creates a magnetic field around the coil, creating a magnetic field.
Soft-dome tweeters are widely found in home stereo systems, and horn-loaded compression drivers are common in professional sound reinforcement.
For the first example, a speaker 3&nbsp;dB more sensitive than another produces double the sound power (is 3&nbsp;dB louder) for the same power input.
Full-range drivers often employ an additional cone called a ''whizzer'': a small, light cone attached to the joint between the voice coil and the primary cone.
The length and cross-sectional mouth area required to create a bass or sub-bass horn require a horn many feet long.
A passive crossover is an electronic circuit that uses a combination of one or more resistors, inductors, or non-polar capacitors.
Bending wave transducers use a diaphragm that is intentionally flexible.
Using geometry and calculus, some simple combinations of sources are easily solved; others are not.
The German firm, Manger, has designed and produced a bending wave driver that at first glance appears conventional.
This somewhat breaks up the simple reflections otherwise caused by bare flat surfaces, and spreads the reflected energy of an incident wave over a larger angle on reflection.
The speaker mounting scheme (including cabinets) can also cause diffraction, resulting in peaks and dips in the frequency response.
Sensitivity is usually defined as so many decibels at 1&nbsp;W electrical input, measured at 1 meter (except for headphones), often at a single frequency.
However, a rigid enclosure reflects sound internally, which can then be transmitted back through the loudspeaker diaphragm—again resulting in degradation of sound quality.
Instead of a voice coil driving a speaker cone, a magnetostatic speaker uses an array of metal strips bonded to a large film membrane.
The highly responsive speaker material provides better clarity than traditional TV speakers.
Passive crossovers can also be designed to compensate for undesired characteristics of driver, horn, or enclosure resonances, and can be tricky to implement, due to component interaction.
is the angle off axis and  is the Bessel function of the first kind.
For example, a cheerleader's horn produces more sound output in the direction it is pointed by concentrating sound waves from the cheerleader in one direction, thus "focusing" them.
The use of horns as voice-amplifying megaphones dates at least to the 17th century, and horns were used in mechanical gramophones as early as 1857.
Jensen was denied patents.
Magnetostrictive transducers, based on magnetostriction, have been predominantly used as sonar ultrasonic sound wave radiators, but their use has spread also to audio speaker systems.
Loudspeaker driver of the type pictured are termed  "dynamic" (short for electrodynamic) to distinguish them from earlier drivers (i.e., moving iron speaker), or speakers using piezoelectric or electrostatic systems, or any of several other sorts.
This means the sound reaching a listener's ears consists not only of sound directly from the speaker system, but also the same sound delayed by traveling to and from (and being modified by) one or more surfaces.
A sufficiently large sealed box can approach this behavior.
The role of the enclosure is to prevent sound waves emanating from the back of a driver from interfering destructively with those from the front.
If the wires for a pair of speakers are not connected with respect to the proper electrical polarity (the + and − connections on the speaker and amplifier should be connected + to + and − to −;  speaker cable is almost always marked so that one conductor of a pair can be distinguished from the other, even if it has run under or behind things in its run from amplifier to speaker location), the loudspeakers are said to be "out of phase" or more properly "out of polarity".
Due to this and the low excursion capability, full range electrostatic loudspeakers are large by nature, and the bass rolls off at a frequency corresponding to a quarter wavelength of the narrowest panel dimension.
However, their optimum listening area is small and they are not very efficient speakers.
Limited-range drivers, also used alone, are typically found in computers, toys, and clock radios.
The amplifier "sees" a load that is the ribbon's resistance times the transformer turns ratio squared.
Some loudspeaker designs use a combination of passive and active crossover filtering, such as a passive crossover between the mid- and high-frequency drivers and an active crossover between the low-frequency driver and the combined mid- and high frequencies.
Oskar Heil invented the air motion transducer in the 1960s.
This eased by the limitations of human hearing at low frequencies;  such sounds cannot be located in space, due to their large wavelengths compared to higher frequencies which produce differential effects in the ears due to shadowing by the head, and diffraction around it, both of which we rely upon for localization clues.
This integration of amplifier and loudspeaker is known as an active loudspeaker.
To make the transition between drivers as seamless as possible, system designers have attempted to time-align (or phase adjust) the drivers by moving one or more driver mounting locations forward or back so that the acoustic center of each driver is in the same vertical plane.
Several loudspeaker designs approximate this behavior.
In this case the individual speakers are referred to as "drivers" and the entire unit is called a loudspeaker.
The wire in a voice coil is usually made of copper, though aluminum—and, rarely, silver—may be used.
ESS, a California manufacturer, licensed the design, employed Heil, and produced a range of speaker systems using his tweeters during the 1970s and 1980s.
This may also involve tilting the face speaker back, providing a separate enclosure mounting for each driver, or (less commonly) using electronic techniques to achieve the same effect.
Fabrication of finished loudspeaker systems has become segmented, depending largely on price, shipping costs, and weight limitations.
where ,  is the pressure on axis,  is the piston radius,  is the wavelength (i.e. )
Measurements taken with this reference are quoted as dB with 2.83&nbsp;V @ 1&nbsp;m.
Rather, they are conventional speakers that can be used with digital sound sources (e.g., optical media, MP3 players, etc.
There are two related problems with flat panel techniques: first, a flat panel is necessarily more flexible than a cone shape in the same material, and therefore moves as a single unit even less, and second, resonances in the panel are difficult to control, leading to considerable distortions.
There is normally an amplifier integrated in the speaker's cabinet because the RF waves alone are not enough to drive the speaker.
However, the influence of room resonances (sometimes called standing waves) is typically so large that such issues are secondary in practice.
German Physiks, an audio equipment firm in Germany, also produces speakers using this approach.
One such attempt was the development of "exciter" transducer coils mounted to flat panels to act as sound sources, most accurately called exciter/panel drivers.
However, AC line frequencies tended to modulate the audio signal going to the voice coil and added to the audible hum.
Full-range (or more accurately, wide-range) drivers are most commonly heard in public address systems, in televisions (although some models are suitable for hi-fi listening), small radios, intercoms, some computer speakers, etc.
The current flowing through the coil interacts with the magnetic field of carefully placed magnets on either side of the diaphragm, causing the membrane to vibrate more or less uniformly and without much bending or wrinkling.
They require large magnets and coils to increase force.
When high field-strength permanent magnets became available after WWII, Alnico, an alloy of aluminum, nickel, and cobalt became popular, since it dispensed with the problems of field-coil drivers.
GoldenEar Technologies incorporates them in its entire speaker line.
Speakers with very wide, or rapidly increasing directivity at high frequencies, can give the impression that there is too much treble (if the listener is on axis) or too little (if the listener is off axis).
This type of miswiring error does not damage speakers, but is not optimal for listening.
At the 1939 New York World's Fair, a very large two-way public address system was mounted on a tower at Flushing Meadows.
Ribbon tweeters have gained popularity in recent years, as the output power of some designs has been increased to levels useful for professional sound reinforcement, and their output pattern is wide in the horizontal plane, a pattern that has convenient applications in concert sound.
Since plasma has minimal mass, but is charged and therefore can be manipulated by an electric field, the result is a very linear output at frequencies far higher than the audible range.
In car audio systems, passive crossovers may be in a separate box, necessary to accommodate the size of the components used.
Above and below the ends of the more or less rectangular ribbon, there is less audible output due to phase cancellation, but the precise amount of directivity depends on ribbon length.
When an electrical signal is applied to the voice coil, a magnetic field is created by the electric current in the voice coil, making it a variable electromagnet.
An ideal point source is an infinitesimally small point radiating sound.
Electrostatic loudspeakers use a high voltage electric field (rather than a magnetic field) to drive a thin statically charged membrane.
In 2008, researchers of Tsinghua University demonstrated a thermoacoustic loudspeaker of carbon nanotube thin film,  whose working mechanism is a thermoacoustic effect.
High-frequency drivers were likely made by Western Electric.
The result is that the main cone delivers low frequencies and the whizzer cone contributes most of the higher frequencies.
While dynamic cone speakers remain the most popular choice, many other speaker technologies exist.
The size of the throat, mouth, the length of the horn, as well as the area expansion rate along it must be carefully chosen to match the drive to properly provide this transforming function over a range of frequencies (every horn performs poorly outside its acoustic limits, at both high and low frequencies).
The human brain is very sensitive to small variations, including some of these, and this is part of the reason why a loudspeaker system sounds different at different listening positions or in different rooms.
The addition of hard surfaced furniture, wall hangings, shelving and even baroque plaster ceiling decoration changes the echoes, primarily because of diffusion caused by reflective objects with shapes and surfaces having sizes on the order of the sound wavelengths.
Sound frequency electric currents are used to periodically heat the CNT and thus result in sound generation in the surrounding air.
Wireless speakers still need power, so require a nearby AC power outlet, or possibly batteries.
To reduce the size of commercial products, they are sometimes used as a high frequency driver in combination with a conventional dynamic driver that handles the bass frequencies effectively.
An example of the first is a room corner system with many small drivers on the surface of a 1/8 sphere.
The advantage of aluminum is its light weight, which raises the resonant frequency of the voice coil and allows it to respond more easily to higher frequencies.
If mounted on a finite baffle, and these out of phase waves are allowed to interact, dipole peaks and nulls in the frequency response result.
A '''loudspeaker''' (or '''loud-speaker''' or '''speaker''') is an electroacoustic transducer; which converts an electrical audio signal into a corresponding sound.
In practice, all three of these criteria cannot be met simultaneously using existing materials; thus, driver design involves trade-offs.
Clearly then, sensitivity does not correlate precisely with efficiency, as it also depends on the directivity of the driver being tested and the acoustic environment in front of the actual loudspeaker.
Examples of typical measurements are: amplitude and phase characteristics vs. frequency; impulse response under one or more conditions (e.g., square waves, sine wave bursts, etc.
Most loudspeakers are inefficient transducers; only about 1% of the electrical energy sent by an amplifier to a typical home loudspeaker is converted to acoustic energy.
Directivity is an important issue because it affects the frequency balance of sound a listener hears, and also the interaction of the speaker system with the room and its contents.
Since they are not damped, they are highly efficient, but they also produce strong resonances.
is slightly out of phase with the rest of the sound.
The efficiency of loudspeaker drivers varies with frequency as well.
Because they are driven over the entire membrane surface rather than from a small voice coil, they ordinarily provide a more linear and lower-distortion motion than dynamic drivers.
Unlike the newer dynamic (moving coil) design, a moving-iron speaker uses a stationary coil to vibrate a magnetized piece of metal (called the iron, reed, or armature).
No crossover can be perfect (i.e., absolute block at the edges of the passband, no amplitude variation within the passband, no phase changes across the frequency band boundaries the crossover establishes, ..), so this is an idealized description.
The effect can be minimized by rounding the front edges of the cabinet, curving the cabinet itself, using a smaller or narrower enclosure, choosing a strategic driver arrangement, using absorptive material around a driver, or some combination of these and other schemes.
An active crossover is an electronic filter circuit that divides the signal into individual frequency bands ''before'' power amplification, thus requiring at least one power amplifier for each bandpass.
Driver ratings based on the SPL for a given input are called sensitivity ratings and are notionally similar to efficiency.
* Typical home loudspeakers have sensitivities of about 85 to 95&nbsp;dB for 1&nbsp;W @ 1&nbsp;m—an efficiency of 0.5–4%.
Lincoln Walsh died before his speaker was released to the public.
Individual drivers are used to reproduce different frequency ranges.
