They don't like to be challenged or instructed, but comforted and entertained.
Director Clarence Brown pointed out that overall, Mayer's skill was similar to Hearst's in that they both learned by doing.
In his screen dramas, he wanted them to be melodramatic, whereas in comedies, he often laced them with a strong doses of sentimentality.
British director Victor Saville remembers him as being "the best listener.
Thalberg, eventually called the "boy wonder", took charge of all MGM productions.
in Haverhill, Massachusetts, which he reopened on November 28, 1907 as the Orpheum, his first movie theater.
At Mayer's funeral in 1957, Spencer Tracy expressed Mayer's ambitions:
Miniver'' won six Academy Awards and became the top box office hit of 1942.
Mayer handled the business part of running the studio, such as setting budgets and approving new productions, while Thalberg, still in his twenties, ran all MGM productions.
Joan Crawford was also concerned, feeling that with Thalberg gone, the concept of the quality "big" picture "pretty much went out the window."
But MGM received a serious blow when Thalberg died suddenly on September 14, 1936, at age 37.
Musicals were high on his list of preferred genres.
But despite his important role in MGM, Mayer was not a shareholder, and had no standing to challenge the sale.
Eventually Mayer sold off the stable, partly to finance his divorce in 1947.
Anxious to make more of them, on a hunch, he asked songwriter Arthur Freed to be associate producer for ''The Wizard of Oz''.
As pressure built to find a new Thalberg-style manager to handle production, Dore Schary was brought in from RKO, and began work in July 14, 1948, as vice president in charge of production, working under Mayer's direction.
The pilot, Charles Foster, recalled his visit: "Mary's driver took me through the gates, and I saw this little man come running down the steps of the Thalberg Building.
Some actors were affected, such as Luise Rainer, winner of Hollywood's first back-to-back Oscars, who felt that the death of Thalberg marked the death of her career: "Had it not been that he died, I think I may have stayed much longer in films."
Mayer was searching for someone to help him manage his small, but dynamic and fast-growing studio.
In some cases, especially for child actors, he could become closely involved in managing their everyday life, from telling where to shop, where to dine, or what doctor to visit.
Mayer's temper was widely known, but most people knew that his sudden bursts of anger faded quickly.
Some stars did not appreciate his control over their lives, while others saw him as a father figure, important in their lives.
At that first meeting, Thalberg made an immediate positive impression on Mayer, writes biographer Roland Flamini.
After the war erupted in Europe in September 1939, Mayer authorized the production of two anti-Nazi films, ''The Mortal Storm'' and ''Escape.''
While MGM's films during the 1920s and 1930s were often notable for having adult themes and strong female stars, such as Greta Garbo, after Thalberg's early death in 1936, he promoted a change in emphasis to more male leads, family themes, and child stars.
Mayer replied, "A studio isn't salami, Nick."
You'll only learn from them.'"
In 1914, the partners organized their own film distribution agency in Boston.
Under Mayer's management, MGM became the most prestigious film studio, accumulating the largest concentration of leading writers, directors and stars in Hollywood.
However, MGM under Mayer's leadership continued to produce successful movies.
Mayer visited her during her recuperation, found out about her mounting financial troubles, and personally began paying her medical expenses, knowing she would likely never make another film.
Two years later, Schenck agreed to sell Loew's – and MGM – to William Fox, which angered Mayer.
When meeting a new employee, he always told them to come to him personally for help with any problems.
Bosley Crowther (1960 biographer of Mayer, below), wrote in his ''New York Times'' review that ''Mrs.
He told the press that his films would carry on in the tradition of MGM's previous style of film subjects
Costar Howard Keel recalls that "she began to fall apart."
I thought, 'Oh, he's sent a man to greet me.'
While Mayer seldom discussed his early life, his partiality towards Canada would sometimes be revealed, especially after Canada and America entered World War II.
Actor Turhan Bey said, "In every meaningful way, it was the end of Hollywood."
When he hired writers, he made those objectives clear at the outset, once telling screenwriter Frances Marion that he never wanted his own daughters or his wife to be embarrassed when watching an MGM movie.
"Like Hearst and Henry Ford," said Brown, "he was an executive genius"
Mayer was the constant at MGM who set the tone.
The Voice of America radio network broadcast the minister's speech from the film, magazines reprinted it, and it was copied onto leaflets and dropped over German-occupied countries.
But before Foster arrived, Mayer had invited every Canadian in Hollywood to meet the flier, including Fay Wray, Walter Pidgeon, Jack Carson, Rod Cameron, Deanna Durbin, Walter Huston, Ann Rutherford, and even his main competitor, Jack Warner.
Mayer implored her "to have the same faith in me" that he had in her.
Foster said "It was like he was the father I never knew."
Mayer refused, telling him, "Judy Garland has made this studio a fortune in the good days, and the least we can do is to giver her one more chance.
He also believed in beauty, glamour, and the "star system."
Hearst, 20 years Mayer's senior, affectionately referred to Mayer as "son" and they became good friends.
His manners were considered "impeccable."
During the summer of 1929, Fox was severely injured in an auto accident.
He would hold this post for the next 27 years.
At the same time, Warner Brothers produced ''Confessions of a Nazi Spy.''
She suffered from overwork, various prescription drugs, weight problems, and domestic strains.
Horse of the Year, Busher, and the 1959 Preakness Stakes winner, Royal Orbit.
Mayer asked her to have him drop by the studio.
When the owner of a tin business, John Wilson, saw him with his cart, he began giving him copper trimmings which were of no use, and Mayer considered Wilson to be his first partner and his best friend.
Mayer had two daughters from his first marriage to Margaret Shenberg.
At one point he explained the process he went through in creating a star:
While Director Clarence Brown compared him to newspaper magnate, William Randolph Hearst:
For nine years from 1937, when he earned $1,300,000—equivalent to $ today,Mayer was the highest-paid man in the United States.
They shared a guiding philosophy, to make the best motion pictures they could at any cost, even if it meant reshooting the entire picture.
Although their personalities were in many ways opposite, Mayer being more outspoken and nearly twice the younger man's age, Thalberg was hired as vice president in charge of production at Louis B. Mayer Productions.
Mayer was born '''Lazar Meir''' to a Jewish family in Minsk, Belarus then in the Russian Empire and now in Belarus.
He had to be strong to do his job, and he couldn't do that without making enemies."
He had the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences establish the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award, given to producers to recognize their exceptional careers, and is now considered one of the most prestigious awards in the Hollywood film industry.
Mayer was pressured to tighten expenses by the studio's parent company, although Mayer's reputation as a "big-picture man" would make that difficult.
And I got out of the car, and this man threw his arms around me and said, 'Welcome to my studio.'
Many assumed that his leaving meant the end of an era.
Mayer took him on a personal tour of the studio, and Foster remembers that "everybody waved to him and he waved back.
Mayer was also thanked for founding and developing new personalities and for bringing the Hollywood "star system into full flower."
About 2,700 people ate in the commissary every day.
Defying those pleadings, MGM produced ''Mrs.
Loew died in 1927, and Schenck became president of Loew's.
Mayer never wrote or directed movies,  and never pretended to tell writers what to write or art directors what to design.
Loew had bought Metro and Goldwyn some months before, but could not find anyone to oversee his new holdings on the West Coast.
Stories about his sobbing or rages have often been repeated in books, but few employees ever saw that part of him.
He worked at the studio all the time, and decisively, without any fixed schedule, but didn't like paperwork.
Mayer endorsed the second term of President Herbert Hoover.
Churchill sent Mayer a telegram claiming that "''Mrs.
Mayer partnered with Richard A. Rowland in 1916 to create Metro Pictures Corporation, a talent booking agency, in New York City.
Mayer was serious about that, once coming from behind his desk and knocking director Erich von Stroheim to the floor when he said that all women were whores.
No, more than that, she was&nbsp;...
"Edgar and Louis B. virtually built that temple", said Herbert Brin.
For leisure activities, he liked going to the Hollywood Bowl, especially the annual John Philip Sousa concert.
Lillian Burns Sidney, George Sidney's wife, when she heard the news, marched into Mayer's office, "Now you've done it", she announced.
Louis B. Mayer died of leukemia on October 29, 1957.
Among his horses was Your Host, sire of Kelso, the 1945 U.S.
When her absences caused the production of ''Summer Stock'' to go far over budget, producer Joe Pasternak suggested that Mayer cut his losses and cancel the picture.
His funeral was a major news event in Los Angeles.
Mayer told him, "When this war is over, if you want to come back here, I'll find a job for you."
Three years after the merger, MGM became the most successful studio in Hollywood.
"Bombastic and colorful, but I never heard him use nasty language&nbsp;... he had a great loyalty to everybody, and everybody respected him.
Miniver'' was the finest film yet made about the war, "and a most exalting tribute to the British."
Although Mayer was often not liked and even feared by many in the studio, editor Sam Marx explains that "his reputation is far worse than it should be.
According to Eyman, "Mayer's view of America became America's view of itself."
Were we afraid of him?
"It was a crappy childhood", said Mayer's nephew Gerald.
Mayer was made head of production as well as studio's chief.
The studio provided all the essential services, such as formal education and medical care.
He roamed the streets with a cart that said "Junk Dealer", and collected any scrap metal he came across.
Young Louis quit school at age twelve to work with his father and help support his family.
Although they initially got along well, their relationship frayed over philosophical differences.
His death came as a shock to Mayer and everyone at MGM and the other studios.
And unusual for a movie mogul, he took moral positions in his movies, especially when it came to portraying family values—as in the ''Andy Hardy'' series.
Anywhere from sixteen to eighteen pictures were being shot at one time", remembers actress Ann Rutherford.
His attitude and conversational style was both professional and animated, sometimes "theatrical", observed June Caldwell, Eddie Mannix's secretary.
U.S. ambassador to England, Joseph Kennedy, told the studios to stop making pro-British and anti-German films.
Two years later, Mayer moved to Los Angeles and formed his own production company, Louis B. Mayer Pictures Corporation.
Mayer, with his proven success as a producer, was an obvious choice.
He was forced to resign MGM as its vice president in 1951, when the studio's parent company, Loew's, Inc., wanted to improve MGM's declining profits.
The post-war years saw a gradual decline in profits for MGM and the other studios.
Mayer took charge of the business part of running the studio, such as setting budgets and approving new productions.
They always talk badly about Mayer, but he was really a wonderful guy...he listened and you listened."
Mayer's greatest contributions to posterity are said to be his musicals.
Jesus Christ, yes!"
And although he never spoke Yiddish at the office, he sometimes spoke Yiddish with "some of the relatives", said his daughter Irene.
Nonetheless, Schenck believed Mayer had cost him a fortune and never forgave him, causing an already frigid relationship to get even worse.
He relied on his instinct and intuition, said actress Esther Williams.
Mayer was skilled at developing star actors, including child actors, then placing them in consistently slick productions, such as musicals or comedies, for which MGM became famous.
Director Joseph Newman said that their skills complemented each other well, with Thalberg having a great story mind, and Mayer having superior business acumen.
Some said Mayer had a lot in common with newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst.
With many of his actors, Mayer was like an overprotective mother, notes biographer Scott Eyman.
A partnership was set up with B. P. Schulberg to make the Mayer-Schulberg Studio.
Nevertheless, MGM produced ''Three Comrades'' in 1938, despite movie censor Joseph Breen warning Mayer that the film was "a serious indictment of the German nation and people and is certain to be violently resented by the present government in that country."
"He was so respected", said June Caldwell, Eddie Mannix's secretary.
On ''Rosalie'', for instance, when Nelson Eddy refused to sing a song he thought was too melodramatic, its songwriter, Cole Porter, went to Mayer and played it for him.
It was all he cared about", said Sidney.
Mayer owned or bred a number of successful thoroughbred racehorses at his ranch in Perris, California, near Los Angeles.
Garson accepted the role, winning the Academy Award for Best Actress.
After Thalberg died, many in Hollywood expected Mayer to "stumble and fall.".
"Mr. Mayer was to me like a father", said Ricardo Montalban.
Hearst had financed various MGM pictures, while MGM benefited by having film reviews included nationwide in the Hearst newspapers.
The number of high-grossing films in 1947 dwindled to six, compared to twenty-two a year earlier.
Mayer paid D.W. Griffith $25,000 for the exclusive rights to show ''The Birth of a Nation'' (1915) in New England.
Mayer dedicated MGM's front office building and christened it the Thalberg Building.
So he instead used his Washington connections to persuade the Justice Department to delay the merger on antitrust grounds.
Miniver'', a simple story about a British family trying to get by during the bombing blitz in London.
In 1951 he was given an honorary Oscar for heading MGM for over 25 years.
The following year, 1943, saw the release of another Oscar-winning film, this one aimed at supporting the home front, entitled ''The Human Comedy.''
Therefore, having messages was less important to Mayer than giving his audience pure entertainment and escapism.
When Mayer asked why, what's wrong with Schary?, she told him that she was afraid he would eliminate all future musicals, comedies and adventure movies, and replace them with mostly "message" movies.
His parents were Jacob Meir and Sarah Meltzer, and he had two sisters—Yetta, born in 1878, and Ida, born in 1883.
Growing up poor in Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada and quitting school at 12 to support his family, he later moved to Boston and purchased a small vaudeville theater.
Mayer helped create what is termed the "Star system".
1939 was an especially "golden" year: besides distributing ''Gone with the Wind,'' MGM released ''The Wizard of Oz,'' ''Babes in Arms,'' ''At the Circus,'' and ''The Women''.
He believed in wholesome entertainment and went to great lengths to discover new actors and develop them into major stars.
was a delegate to the 1932 Republican National Convention with fellow California Republicans Joseph R. Knowland, James Rolph, Jr. and Earl Warren.
Behind his gutta-percha face and roly-poly figure, it was evident there was a man of steel—but well-mannered steel."
At home, Mayer was boss.
When he learned that June Allyson was dating David Rose, for instance, he told her to stop seeing him: "If you care about your reputation, you cannot be seen with a married man."
One of Rooney's repeat costars in ''Andy Hardy'' and other films was Judy Garland, with whom he made nine films.
They began looking for someone, another Thalberg, to redo the studio system.
Mayer took Hearst's suggestion to build himself an office bungalow on the MGM lot, something Hearst said was appropriate for a studio head: "Everybody of distinction from all over the world comes to Los Angeles and everybody who comes wants to see your studio and they all want to meet you and do meet you, so put on a few airs son, and provide the atmosphere."
As a result, while other studios went through continuous upheavals or reorganizations, Mayer's hands-off policy kept MGM stable and sound, where employees felt their jobs were secure."
Some long-time studio executives saw this change as a sign of the eventual downfall of MGM.
His father started a scrap metal business, J. Mayer & Son.
There would be a buffet supper, drinks, and later a movie.
Because of his gift for understanding the nature of stardom and the needs of the audience, it was claimed that "Mayer's view of America became America's view of itself."
He believed that movies should not be a mere reflection of life, but be an entertaining escape from life.
MGM had to let go many of its top producers and other executives.
Mayer has a star on Canada's Walk of Fame.
Jackie Coogan, then 11, marked the studio's debut using child stars with his role in ''The Rag Man'' in 1925.
Mayer drank almost no alcohol, cared nothing for fine cuisine, and didn't gamble, but might play penny-ante card games for fun.
Although Mayer made the bid on a film that one of his scouts had seen, but he had not, his decision netted him over $100,000.
The studio usually succeeded in hiring those it wanted since they offered the highest salaries.
Mayer wanted the studio to develop a number of child stars, necessary for producing family-oriented stories.
He spoke to people and knew them by name.
Mayer became friends with Joseph R. Knowland, Marshall Hale, and James Rolph, Jr. Joseph Schenck was an alternate delegate at the convention.
Kildare'' stories in order to keep an ailing Lionel Barrymore, who became wheelchair bound with arthritis, on the job.
Mayer became the first person in American history to earn a million-dollar salary.
On his final day, as he walked down a red carpet laid out in front of the Thalberg Building, executives, actors, and staff lined the path and applauded him for his contributions.
He ousted Thalberg as production chief in 1932, while Thalberg was recovering from a heart attack, and replaced him with producer David O. Selznick.
He respected intelligence and talent overall, said manager Joe Cohn: "One time he said to me, 'Never be afraid of hiring a fellow smarter than you are.
Warners had to post guards to protect the family of actor Edward G. Robinson, and the Germans threatened Mayer with a boycott of all MGM films.
He left Cinerama in 1954 when the company was sold.
"He loved swaggering, charismatic hams like Lionel Barrymore and Marie Dressler", writes Eyman.
Then, they moved to Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada where Mayer attended school.
And he would listen...You could work with him."
At his home on Saint Cloud Road in the East Gate Bel Air, Sundays were reserved for brunches in what was an open house, which often included visiting statesmen or former Presidents, along with various producers, directors or stars.
While Mickey Rooney, another young actor, and someone who co-starred with Elizabeth when she was 12, formed the opposite impression: "He was the daddy of everybody and vitally interested in everybody.
Mayer knew that formula in his themes and stories usually works.
Mayer also enjoyed ballet and opera, and concerts where violinist Jascha Heifetz or pianist Arthur Rubinstein performed.
Mayer first moved with his family to Rhode Island, where they lived from 1887 to 1892 and where his two brothers were born—Rubin, in April 1888, and Jeremiah, in April 1891.
Mayer tried to express an idealized vision of men, women, and families in the real world they lived in.
The German government informed the studios that "those films would be remembered by Germany ''when'' — not ''if'' — they won the war", writes Eyman.
They relied on each other, and neither operated unilaterally.
By the time he recovered, the stock market crash had wiped out his fortune, destroying any chance of the deal going through even if the Justice Department had lifted its objections.
With MGM's film output as high as one film each week, he never panicked over a bad picture.
He would prod you and question you and suck you dry of any knowledge."
would ask only one question: 'Can you make it better?'
Others, such as actor Edward G. Robinson, after his first meeting Mayer, said "I found him to be a man of truth&nbsp;...
In the late 1940s she began having personal problems which affected her acting, and Mayer tried his best to protect her star reputation.
He liked giving suggestions about how they could take better care of themselves."
Then in 1904 the 19-year-old Mayer left Saint John for Boston, where he continued for a time in the scrap metal business, got married, and took a variety of odd jobs to support his new family when his junk business lagged.
He became enamored with the entertainment business.
According to Flamini, Thalberg was hired because, although Mayer was an astute businessman, he lacked Thalberg's strong ability to combine making films of quality with gaining commercial success.
Mayer was moved to tears by the song, and told Eddy to sing it.
Mayer and Schenck hated each other intensely; Mayer reportedly referred to his boss, whose name was pronounced "Skenk", as "Mr.
'''Louis Burt Mayer''' (; born '''Lazar Meir'''; July 12, 1884 – October 29, 1957; ) was an American film producer and co-founder of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer studios (MGM) in 1924.
