That contact resulted in an article in ''National Geographic'' and a large grant to continue work at Olduvai.
It makes me sadder still, however, and also very angry, when I think of the innumerable adult animals and birds deliberately caught and locked up for the so-called 'pleasure' and 'education' of thoughtless human beings.
He traveled the country as a pedlar, reporting on the talk.
He is also the father of paleoanthropologist Richard Leakey and the botanist Colin Leakey.
He sided with the settlers, serving as their spokesman and intelligence officer, helping to ferret out bands of guerrillas.
Grants dried up, but his mother raised enough money for another expedition to Olduvai, Kanam and Kanjera, the latter two on the Winam Gulf.
The mission, a center of activity, set up a clinic in one of the tents, and later a girls' school.
On the other hand, he continued to advocate for the Kikuyu in his 1954 book ''Defeating Mau Mau'' and numerous talks and articles.
He had used some of his preexisting qualifications; for example, Kikuyu was offered and accepted as the second modern language in which he was required to be proficient, even though no one there could test him on it.
In January 1947 Louis conducted the first Pan-African Congress of Prehistory at Nairobi.
Following Louis' suggestion, thousands of Kikuyu were placed in re-education camps and resettled in new villages.
Mary continued to find and excavate sites.
Contrary to expectation, she recovered and began another excavation at Hyrax Hill and then Njoro River Cave.
The other asked if, at the same time and place, he would examine a candidate in Swahili.
In 1929 Louis visited Berlin to talk to the now skeptical Reck.
Apart from some bumbling around, during which he and some settlers stalked each other as possible saboteurs of the Sagana Railway Bridge, his first task was to supply and arm Ethiopian guerrillas against the Italian invaders of their country.
In 1952, after a massacre of loyal chiefs, the government arrested Jomo Kenyatta, president of the Kenya African Union.
Then one day, he received two letters.
While the Leakeys were at Lake Victoria, the Kikuyu struck at the European settlers of the Kenyan highlands, who seemed to have the upper hand and were insisting on a "white" government of a "white" Africa.
He also learned to walk with the distinctive gait of the Kikuyu and speak their language fluently, as did his siblings.
He had his first heart attacks and spent six months in the hospital.
Frida's site became FLK, for Frida Leakey's karongo ("gully").
Louis returned to Kiambaa near Nairobi and persuaded Senior Chief Koinange, who designated a committee of chiefs, to help him describe the Kikuyu the way they had been.
Leakey, ''By the Evidence'', Chapter 4.
They also hunted fossils on the sly.
The conference restored Louis to the scientific fold and made him a major figure in it.
In 1961 Louis got a salary as well as a grant from the National Geographic Society and turned over the acting directorship of Coryndon to a subordinate.
After reconstruction Louis and Mary called it "Pinhead."
This interest may have predisposed him toward a career in archaeology.
This settlement was in Hertfordshire and had an unusual name which Louis, with his sense of humor noted in his ''Memoirs'', Chapter 5, as "the village of Nasty."
His headaches and epilepsy returned, and he was prescribed Luminal which he took for the rest of his life.
During this period his life was threatened and a reward placed on his head.
He easily found more fossils, which he named Homo kanamensis.
The government placed him under 24-hour guard.
Harry was working on a translation of the Bible into the Gikuyu language.
They lived in poverty for 18 months at this low point of their fortunes, visited at first only by Mary's relatives.
Louis convinced Mary to take on the illustration of his book, and a few months later companionship turned                               to romance.
Advised by one teacher to seek employment in a bank, he secured help from an English teacher in applying to Cambridge.
Leakey discoveries began to appear in the newspapers again.
The government brought in British troops and formed a home guard of 20,000 Kikuyu.
On 1 October 1972, Louis was stricken with  heart attack in Jane Goodall's apartment in London.
"When I think back ... of the serval cat and a baboon that I had as pets in my childhood days−and that eventually I had to house in large cages−it makes me sad.
The state of emergency lasted until 1960.
Not long afterwards, in 1960, Louis, his son Philip and Ray Pickering discovered a fossil he termed "Chellean Man", (Olduvai Hominid 9), in context with Oldowan tools.
He got into a shouting match in Kikuyu one evening with Jomo Kenyatta, later the president of Kenya, who was lecturing on the topic.
He opened another excavation at Fort Ternan on Lake Victoria.
... if we are to control our future, we must first understand the past better."
When mailed photographs, Le Gros Clark retorted casually "Shades of Piltdown."
The British realized the rebellion was being directed from urban centers, instituted military law and rounded up the committees.
The government offered Louis work as a policeman in intelligence, which he accepted.
When Britain went to war in September 1939 the Kenyan government drafted Louis into its African intelligence service.
During his final years Louis became famous as a lecturer in the United States and United Kingdom.
Louis was through at Cambridge.
Louis jumped into the fray as an exponent of the middle ground.
They investigated Rusinga Island and Olorgesailie.
His father was also a role model: Canon Leakey co-founded the East Africa and Uganda Natural History Society.
They never found a complete dinosaur skeleton, and Louis was recalled from the site by Cambridge in 1925.
Louis's parents, Harry (1868-1940) and Mary (May) Bazett Leakey (died 1948), were Church of England missionaries in British East Africa (now Kenya).
In denial, the family did not face the question of a memorial marker for a year.
The facilities slowly improved over time.
He died 30 minutes later at the age of 69.
Harry Leakey was assigned to an established post of the Church Mission Society among the Kikuyu at Kabete, in the highlands north of Nairobi.
While Louis was sick in camp, Mary discovered the fossilized skull OH 5 at FLK, ''Paranthropus boisei'', famously identified as "''Zinjanthropus''" or "Zinj."
They were named after the excavator: SHK (Sam Howard's karongo), BK (Peter Bell's), SWK (Sam White's), MNK (Mary Nicol's).
Richard intervened.
Shortly after, Heselon discovered ''Kenyapithecus wickeri'', named after the owner of the property.
He began to collect tools and was further encouraged in this activity by a role model, Arthur Loveridge, first curator (1914) of the Natural History Museum in Nairobi, predecessor of the Coryndon Museum.
Louis and Frida began a relationship which continued upon his return to Cambridge.
Richard began to assume more and more of his father's responsibilities, which Louis resisted, but in the end was forced to accept.
She suffered from morning sickness most of the time and was unable to work on the illustrations for Louis's second book, ''Adam's Ancestors.''
It was seen as intermediary between gracile ''Australopithecus'' and ''Homo''.
She did arrive eventually, however, and Louis put her to work.
Louis read a gift book, ''Days Before History'', by H. R. Hall (1907), a juvenile fictional work illustrating the prehistory of Britain.
Louis cabled him immediately and had some strong words at this suggestion of his incompetence.
One of Louis's greatest legacies stems from his role in fostering field research of primates in their natural habitats, which he understood as key to unraveling the mysteries of human evolution.
Louis and Mary conducted a temporary clinic for the Maasai, made preliminary investigations of Laetoli, and ended by studying the rock paintings at the Kisese/Cheke region.
In 1927, Louis received a visit at a site called Gamble's Cave, near Lake Elmenteita, by two women on a holiday, one of whom was Frida Avern (1902-1993).
In 1960, Louis appointed Mary director of excavation at Olduvai.
In 1942 the Italian menace ended, but the Japanese began to reconnoiter with a view toward landing in force.
Louis and Mary returned to England in 1935 without positions or any place to stay except Mary's mother's apartment.
Louis switched his focus to anthropology, and found a new mentor in Alfred Cort Haddon, head of the Cambridge department.
He returned on request to translate documents only.
Louis was summoned to be a court interpreter, but withdrew after an accusation of mistranslation because of prejudice against the defendant.
Leakey, ''Adam's Ancestors'', fourth edition, final page.
Louis found himself in counter-intelligence work, which he performed with zest and imagination.
When he came to his finals, he asked to be examined in this language, and the authorities agreed.
Louis matriculated at the University of Cambridge, his father's alma mater, in 1922, intending to become a missionary to British East Africa.
Frida gave birth to Colin in December 1933, and the next month Louis asked her for a divorce.
In 1922 the British had been awarded German East Africa as part of the settlement of World War I.
Leakey also played a major role in creating organizations for future research in Africa and for protecting wildlife there.
He personally chose three female researchers, Jane Goodall, Dian Fossey, and Birutė Galdikas, calling them The Trimates.
His first child, a daughter named Priscilla Muthoni Leakey, was born in 1931.
The family sat out World War I in Africa.
S. B. Leakey''', was a Kenyan paleoanthropologist and archaeologist whose work was important in demonstrating that humans evolved in Africa, particularly through discoveries made at Olduvai Gorge with his wife, fellow paleontologist Mary Leakey.
Louis on his return accused Boswell of treachery, but Boswell now had public opinion on his side.
Louis got an extension of his grant, which he used partially for fossil-hunting.
Louis's earliest home had an earthen floor, a leaky thatched roof, rodents and insects, and no heating system except for charcoal braziers.
He created the Centre for Prehistory and Paleontology on the same grounds, moved his collections to it, and appointed himself director.
In ''Kenya: Contrasts and Problems'', he angered the settlers by proclaiming Kenya could never be a "white man's country."
To make matters worse, all the photos Louis took were ruined by a light leak in the camera.
Their life was a menage of police work and archaeology.
Now he found himself pulled away from anthropology to investigate the Mau Mau.
Louis received his PhD in 1930 at the age of 27.
Mary wanted to cremate Louis and fly the ashes back to Nairobi.
Louis did find Acheulean tools within the first 24 hours, costing Reck ten pounds on the bet.
An empathy over health brought him and Dian Fossey together for a brief romance, which she broke off.
Early dates for human evolution were not widely accepted by the general public at the time.
Several members of Leakey's family became prominent scholars themselves.
He was initiated into the Kikuyu ethnic group, an event of which he never spoke, as he was sworn to secrecy.
He argued that it must have the date of the bed, which was believed to be 600,000 years, in the mid-Pleistocene.
Beginning in 1951, Louis and Mary began intensive research at Olduvai Gorge.
To find supporting evidence of the antiquity of Reck's Olduvai Man, Louis returned to Africa, excavating at Kanam and Kanjera.
His previous work there was questioned by P. G. H. Boswell, whom he invited to verify the sites for himself.
The question was whether the fossil belonged to a previous genus discovered by Robert Broom, ''Paranthropus'', or a member of a different genus ancestral to humans.
Because of lack of evidence linking Kenyatta to the Mau Mau, although convicted, he did not receive the death penalty, but was sentenced to several years of hard labor and banned from Kenya.
From 1925 on Louis lectured and wrote on African archaeological and palaeontological topics.
She fell ill with double pneumonia and was near death for two weeks in the hospital in Nairobi, during which time her mother was sent for.
He frequently told a story about his final exams.
Colin would not see his father for 20 years.
In Kenya he was a facilitator for hundreds of scientists exploring the East African Rift system for fossils.
Some of his names for archaeological cultures are still in use; for example, the Elmenteitan.
Having established a program of palaeoanthropological inquiry in eastern Africa, he also motivated many future generations to continue this scholarly work.
Jonathan was attacked by army ants in his crib.
In 1968, Louis refused an honorary doctorate from the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, primarily because of apartheid in South Africa.
The geology of Olduvai was known.
In 1959, excavations at Bed I were opened.
All the children developed a keen interest in and appreciation of the pristine natural surroundings in which they found themselves.
Frida delayed joining him and was less enthusiastic about him on behalf of Priscilla.
Louis had a younger brother, Douglas, and two older sisters, Gladys and Julia.
From 1904-1906 the entire family lived at May's mother's house in Reading, Berkshire, England, while Harry recovered from neurasthenia, and again in 1911-1913, while May recovered from general frailty and exhaustion.
He had a distinguished career in the CMS, becoming canon of the station.
Mary joined him under a stigma but her skill and competence eventually won over the other participants.
'''Louis Seymour Bazett Leakey''' (7 August 1903 – 1 October 1972), also known as '''L.
In 1926, Louis graduated with a "double first", or high honours, in anthropology and archaeology.
During the latter stay, Harry bought a house in Boscombe.
While he was gone, the opposition worked up some "evidence" of the intrusion of Olduvai Man into an earlier layer, evidence that seemed convincing at the time, but is missing and unverifiable now.
It was subsequently identified as ''Homo erectus'', contemporaneous with ''Paranthropus'' at 1.4 million years old.
Each went on to become an important scholar in the field of primatology.
Within the Tanganyika Territory the Germans had discovered a site rich in dinosaur fossils, Tendaguru.
One instructed him to report at a certain time and place for a ''viva voce'' examination in Swahili.
In 1949 the Kikuyu formed a secret society, the Mau Mau, which attacked settlers and especially loyalist Kikuyu.
Sixty scientists from 26 countries attended, delivering papers and visiting the Leakey sites.
Louis and his associates did the groundwork for future excavation at Olduvai, uncovering dozens of sites for a broad sampling, as was his method.
In January 1937 the Leakeys traveled to Kenya.
Present-day ''Homo sapiens'' is in many physical respects still very unspecialized− ...
In 1945 the family's income from police work all but vanished.
Tensions between the Kikuyu and the settlers increased alarmingly.
Louis was not only forced to retract the accusation but also to recant his support of Reck.
Its skipper, Hassan Salimu, was later to deliver Jane Goodall to Gombe.
Leakey also encouraged and supported many other Ph.D. candidates, most notably from Cambridge University.
During this time Louis played a difficult and contradictory role.
A panel at Cambridge investigated his morals.
His brain power is very over-specialized compared to the rest of his physical make-up, and it may well be that this over-specialization will lead, just as surely, to his extinction.
The inscription was signed with the letters, ''ILYFA'', "I'll love you forever always", which Rosalie used to place on her letters to him.
In 1960, geophysicists Jack Evernden and Garniss Curtis dated Bed I from 1.89 to 1.75 million years ago, confirming the great antiquity of fossil hominids in Africa.
He created a clandestine network using his childhood friends among the Kikuyu.
Jane sat up all night with him in St. Stephen's Hospital and left at 9:00&nbsp;a.m.
Leakey, ''By the Evidence'', Chapter 18.
She would not sue for divorce until 1936.
He received a scholarship for his high scores on the entrance exams.
He raised funds and directed his family and associates.
Louis and Mary thought it was female and named her Cinderella, or Cindy.
Louis gardened for subsistence and exercise and improved the house and grounds.
But in one thing man, as we know him today, is over-specialized.
In 1963 Kenya became independent, with Jomo Kenyatta as prime minister.
Excavations stopped in 1953 but were briefly resumed in 1955 with Jean Brown.
They lived in a rundown and bug infested Nairobi home, provided by the museum.
They raised baby animals, later turning them over to zoos.
He personally chose three female researchers, Jane Goodall, Dian Fossey, and Birute Galdikas, calling them The Trimates.
Harry was the son of James Shirley Leakey (1824-1871), one of the eleven children of the portrait painter James Leakey.
His patron and mentor at Cambridge was now Arthur Keith.
He did not personally excavate any longer, as he was crippled with arthritis, for which he had a hip replacement in 1968.
Deborah was born, but died at three months.
Mary accepted one, and thereafter led separate professional lives.
Phillip Tobias identified Jonny's Child with it and Raymond Dart came up with the name ''Homo habilis'' at Louis' request, which Tobias translated as "handyman."
Finds from Gamble's Cave were donated by Leakey to the British Museum in 1931.
At Olduvai, Mary set up Camp 5 and began work with her own staff and associates.
Louis was flown home and interred at Limuru, near the graves of his parents.
When Richard went to place a stone on the grave he found one already there, courtesy of Rosalie Osborn.
They soon leased Steen Cottage in Great Munden.
Even his mentors turned on him.
After an irritating and fruitless two-month search, Boswell left for England, promising, as Louis understood it, not to publish a word until Louis returned.
In her autobiography, Mary Leakey wrote that because of Louis's involvement with the Calico Hills site she had lost academic respect for him and that the Calico excavation project was "catastrophic to his professional career and was largely responsible for the parting of our ways".
This was his new operations center.
... Colonial governors and senior civil servants are not easy people to argue with; and, of course, I was not popular, because of my criticism of the colonial service ... Had it been possible to make the government open its eyes to the realities of the situation, I believe that the whole miserable episode of what is frequently spoken of as 'the Mau Mau rebellion' need never have taken place."
Each went on to become an important scholar in the field of primatology, immersing themselves in the study of chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans, respectively.
At a dinner party given in his honor after a lecture of his at the Royal Anthropological Institute, Gertrude Caton-Thompson introduced her own illustrator, the twenty-year-old Mary Nicol.
Louis requested and was given permission to build and move into a hut, Kikuyu style, at the end of the garden.
They found what Louis termed an Oldowan "slaughter-house," an ancient bog where animals had been trapped and butchered.
Kenya until 1956, when, deprived of its leadership and supplies, it had to disperse.
In Britain, the Leakey children attended elementary school; in Africa, they had a tutor.
He loved a good mystery of any sort.
Reck became involved in a media uproar.
Louis was told by C. W. Hobley, a friend of the family, that the British Museum of Natural History was going to send a fossil-hunting expedition led by William E. Cutler to the site.
Louis opted for ''Zinjanthropus'', a decision opposed by Wilfrid Le Gros Clark, but one which attracted the attention of Melville Bell Grosvenor, president of the National Geographic Society.
Leakey also encouraged and supported many other Ph.D. candidates, most notably from the University of Cambridge.
Neither Harry nor May were of strong constitution.
The Leakey household came to contain Miss Oakes (a governess), Miss Higgenbotham (another missionary), and Mariamu (a Kikuyu nurse).
While cleaning two skeletons he had found he noticed a similarity to one found in Olduvai Gorge by Professor Hans Reck, a German national, whom Louis had met in 1925 in Germany while on business for Keith.
In 1950, Louis was awarded an honorary doctorate by Oxford University.
