This group was called Louis Armstrong and his All Stars and included at various times Earl "Fatha" Hines, Barney Bigard, Edmond Hall, Jack Teagarden, Trummy Young, Arvell Shaw, Billy Kyle, Marty Napoleon, Big Sid Catlett, Cozy Cole, Tyree Glenn, Barrett Deems, Mort Herbert, Joe Darensbourg, Eddie Shu and percussionist Danny Barcelona.
Although the story was thought to be apocryphal, Armstrong himself confirmed it in at least one interview as well as in his memoirs.
Norman Granz then had the vision for Ella and Louis to record ''Porgy and Bess'' which is the most famous and critically acclaimed version  of the Gershwin brothers' work.
Armstrong performed in Italy at the 1968 Sanremo Music Festival where he sang "Mi Va di Cantare" alongside his friend, the Eritrean-born Italian singer Lara Saint Paul.
His performance of "Hello Dolly" won for best male pop vocal performance at the 1964 Grammy Awards.
In 1964, Armstrong knocked The Beatles off the top of the ''Billboard'' Hot 100 chart with "Hello, Dolly!
He hauled coal by day and played his cornet at night.
Long Island Music Hall of Fame
Armstrong kept up his busy tour schedule until a few years before his death in 1971.
At fourteen he was released from the home, living again with his father and new step-mother, Gertrude,  and then back with his mother and thus back to the streets and their temptations.
His second wife was instrumental in developing his career, but in the late 1920s Hardin and Louis grew apart.
It was a boom time in Chicago and though race relations were poor, the city was teeming with jobs available for black people, who were making good wages in factories and had plenty to spend on entertainment.
At first, he was actually a member of the Lil Hardin Armstrong Band and working for his wife.
Excited as he was to be in Chicago, he began his career-long pastime of writing nostalgic letters to friends in New Orleans.
Someone dubbed him "satchel mouth" for his mouth acting as a satchel.
He kept a strong connection throughout his life to the cooking of New Orleans, always signing his letters, "Red beans and ricely yours..."
Renowned for his charismatic stage presence and voice almost as much as for his trumpet-playing, Armstrong's influence extends well beyond jazz music, and by the end of his career in the 1960s, he was widely regarded as a profound influence on popular music in general.
Armstrong enjoyed working with Oliver, but Louis' second wife, pianist Lil Hardin Armstrong, urged him to seek more prominent billing and develop his newer style away from the influence of Oliver.
A fledgling  musician named "Louis," who is obsessed with Buddy Bolden, appears in two of David Fulmer's Storyville novels: ''Chasing the Devil's Tail'' and ''Jass.''
Additionally, jazz itself was transformed from a collectively improvised folk music to a soloist's serious art form largely through his influence.
During his long career he played and sang with some of the most important instrumentalists and vocalists of the time; among them were Bing Crosby, Duke Ellington, Fletcher Henderson, Earl Hines, Jimmie Rodgers, Bessie Smith and perhaps most famously Ella Fitzgerald.
He also toured Africa, Europe, and Asia under the sponsorship of the US State Department with great success, earning the nickname "Ambassador Satch" and inspiring Dave Brubeck to compose his jazz musical ''The Real Ambassadors''.
His recordings for Columbia Records, ''Louis Armstrong Plays W.C.
The concern with his health and weight was balanced by his love of food, reflected in such songs as "Cheesecake", "Cornet Chop Suey," though "Struttin' with Some Barbecue" was written about a fine-looking companion, not about food.
Lil's influence eventually undermined Armstrong's relationship with his mentor, especially concerning his salary and additional moneys that Oliver held back from Armstrong and other band members.
During the subsequent thirty years, Armstrong played more than three hundred gigs a year.
He also started to get into trouble.
At this time, he met Hoagy Carmichael (with whom he would collaborate later) who was introduced by friend Bix Beiderbecke, who now had his own Chicago band.
He was the first African American to host a nationally broadcast radio show in the 1930s.
Louis then married Lucille Wilson in October 1942, a singer at the Cotton Club, to whom he was married until his death in 1971.
As his fame grew, so did his access to the finer things in life usually denied to African-Americans, even famous ones.
At the same time, however, his oeuvre includes many original melodies, creative leaps, and relaxed or driving rhythms.
Argentine writer Julio Cortázar, a self-described Armstrong admirer, asserted that a 1952 Louis Armstrong concert at the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées in Paris played a significant role in inspiring him to create the fictional creatures called Cronopios that are the subject of a number of Cortázar's short stories.
The ''New Grove Dictionary of Jazz'' describes Crosby's debt to Armstrong in precise detail, although it does not acknowledge Armstrong by name:
Armstrong appeared in more than a dozen Hollywood films, usually playing a band leader or musician.
In 1948, he participated in the Nice Jazz Festival, where Suzy Delair sang "C'est si bon", by Henri Betti and André Hornez, for the first time in public.
He was heard on such radio programs as ''The Story of Swing'' (1937) and ''This Is Jazz'' (1947), and he also made countless television appearances, especially in the 1950s and 1960s, including appearances on ''The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson''.
Billie Holiday countered, however, "Of course Pops toms, but he toms from the heart."
During this time, Armstrong made many recordings on the side, arranged by an old friend from New Orleans, pianist Clarence Williams; these included small jazz band sides with the Williams Blue Five (some of the most memorable pairing Armstrong with one of Armstrong's few rivals in fiery technique and ideas, Sidney Bechet) and a series of accompaniments with blues singers, including Bessie Smith, Ma Rainey, and Alberta Hunter.
Armstrong's gregariousness extended to writing.
In his records, Armstrong almost single-handedly created the role of the jazz soloist, taking what had been essentially a collective folk music and turning it into an art form with tremendous possibilities for individual expression.
He later wrote a memoir of his relationship with the Karnofskys titled, ''Louis Armstrong + the Jewish Family in New Orleans, La., the Year of 1907.''
A new visitors center is planned.
The home band played around New Orleans and the thirteen-year-old Louis began to draw attention by his cornet playing, starting him on a musical career.
Armstrong enjoyed many types of music, from blues to the arrangements of Guy Lombardo, to Latin American folksongs, to classical symphonies and opera.
Often, Armstrong re-composed pop-tunes he played, simply with variations that made them more compelling to jazz listeners of the era.
He began to scat sing (improvised vocal jazz using nonsensical words) and was among the first to record it, on the Hot Five recording "Heebie Jeebies" in 1926.
Holiday said that she always wanted Bessie Smith's 'big' sound and Armstrong's feeling in her singing.
As his reputation grew, he was challenged to instrumental "cutting contests" by hornmen trying to displace him.
During this period, Armstrong made many recordings and appeared in over thirty films.
In the summer of 2001, in commemoration of the centennial of Armstrong's birth, New Orleans's main airport was renamed Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport.
The Louis Armstrong House Museum, at 34-56 107th Street (between 34th and 37th Avenues) in Corona, Queens, presents concerts and educational programs, operates as a historic house museum and makes materials in its archives of writings, books, recordings and memorabilia available to the public for research.
He attended the Fisk School for Boys, where he most likely had early exposure to music.
Armstrong made his first recordings on the Gennett and Okeh labels (jazz records were starting to boom across the country), including taking some solos and breaks, while playing second cornet in Oliver's band in 1923.
The most lauded recordings on which Armstrong plays trumpet include the Hot Five and Hot Seven sessions, as well as those of the Red Onion Jazz Babies.
That still did not prevent members of the African-American community, particularly in the late 1950s to the early 1970s, from calling him an ''Uncle Tom'', a black-on-black racial epithet for someone who kowtowed to white society at the expense of their own racial identity.
It was used as the title of a 2010 biography of Armstrong by Terry Teachout.
In a live recording of "Baby, It's Cold Outside" with Velma Middleton, he changes the lyric from "Put another record on while I pour" to "Take some Swiss Kriss while I pour."
Armstrong returned to Chicago in 1925 due mostly to the urging of his wife, who wanted to pump up Armstrong's career and income.
The recording was so popular that the group became the most famous jazz band in the United States, even though they had not performed live to any great extent.
Fearn, who was at the session, kept telling him to continue.
He also made a cameo appearance as a vocalist, regularly stealing the show with his rendition of "Ain't Misbehavin'", his version of the song becoming his biggest selling record to date.
A young Armstrong also appears as a minor fictionalized character in Patrick Neate's 2001 novel ''Twelve Bar Blues'', part of which is set in New Orleans, and which was a winner at that year's Whitbread Book Awards.
His agent Johnny Collins' erratic behavior and his own spending ways left Armstrong short of cash.
With Danny Kaye Armstrong performed a duet of "When the Saints Go Marching In" during which Kaye impersonated Armstrong.
His father, William Armstrong (1881–1933), abandoned the family when Louis was an infant and took up with another woman.
Armstrong was born into a poor family in New Orleans, Louisiana, and was the grandson of slaves.
At five, he moved back to live with his mother, her relatives and a parade of "step-fathers".
As a protest, Armstrong canceled a planned tour of the Soviet Union on behalf of the State Department saying: "The way they're treating my people in the South, the government can go to hell" and that he could not represent his government abroad when it was in conflict with its own people.
He had a fondness for lewd jokes and dirty limericks as well.
Armstrong's criticism of President Eisenhower, calling him "two-faced" and "gutless" because of his inaction during the conflict over school desegregation in Little Rock, Arkansas in 1957 made national news.
At the end of it he was hospitalized for a heart attack.
The group included Kid Ory (trombone), Johnny Dodds (clarinet), Johnny St. Cyr (banjo), wife Lil on piano, and usually no drummer.
Armstrong also had a part in the film alongside James Stewart in ''The Glenn Miller Story'' in which Glenn (played by Stewart) jammed with Armstrong and a few other noted musicians of the time.
He generally remained politically neutral, which at times alienated him from members of the black community who looked to him to use his prominence with white America to become more of an outspoken figure during the Civil Rights Movement of U.S. history.
His 1930s recordings took full advantage of the new RCA ribbon microphone, introduced in 1931, which imparted a characteristic warmth to vocals and immediately became an intrinsic part of the 'crooning' sound of artists like Bing Crosby.
The Cotton Club closed in 1936 after a long downward spiral, and many musicians stopped playing altogether as club dates evaporated.
Armstrong hardly looked back at his youth as the worst of times but drew inspiration from it instead: "Every time I close my eyes blowing that trumpet of mine—I look right in the heart of good old New Orleans...
Armstrong appears as a minor fictionalized character in Harry Turtledove's Southern Victory Series.
His honorary pallbearers included Bing Crosby, Ella Fitzgerald, Dizzy Gillespie, Pearl Bailey, Count Basie, Harry James, Frank Sinatra, Ed Sullivan, Earl Wilson, Alan King, Johnny Carson and David Frost.
In a 1955 letter to his manager, Joe Glaser, Armstrong affirmed his belief that Preston's newborn baby was his daughter, and ordered Glaser to pay a monthly allowance of $400 to mother and child.
Young musicians across the country, black or white, were turned on by Armstrong's new type of jazz.
Against his doctor's advice, Armstrong played a two-week engagement in March 1971 at the Waldorf-Astoria's Empire Room.
Armstrong had nineteen "Top Ten" records including "Stardust", "What a Wonderful World", "When The Saints Go Marching In", "Dream a Little Dream of Me", "Ain't Misbehavin'", "You Rascal You", and "Stompin' at the Savoy".
Armstrong's version remained on the Hot 100 for 22 weeks, longer than any other record produced that year, and went to No.&nbsp;1 making him, at 62 years, 9 months and 5 days, the oldest person ever to accomplish that feat.
Professor Peter Davis (who frequently appeared at the home at the request of its administrator, Captain Joseph Jones) instilled discipline in and provided musical training to the otherwise self-taught Armstrong.
The museum opened to the public on October 15, 2003.
Prior to Armstrong, most collective ensemble playing in jazz, along with its occasional solos, simply varied the melodies of the songs.
The nickname '''Pops''' came from Armstrong's own tendency to forget people's names and simply call them "pops" instead.
They adopted a 3-year-old boy, Clarence Armstrong, whose mother, Louis' cousin Flora, died soon after giving birth.
He spent his youth in poverty, in a rough neighborhood known as "the Battlefield", which was part of the Storyville legal prostitution district.
On February 4, 1924, Louis married Lil Hardin Armstrong, who was Oliver's pianist and had also divorced her first spouse only a few years earlier.
His influence upon Crosby is particularly important with regard to the subsequent development of popular music: Crosby admired and copied Armstrong, as is evident on many of his early recordings, notably "Just One More Chance" (1931).
Following a highly successful small-group jazz concert at New York Town Hall on May 17, 1947, featuring Armstrong with trombonist/singer Jack Teagarden, Armstrong's manager, Joe Glaser dissolved the Armstrong big band on August 13, 1947 and established a six-piece traditional jazz small group featuring Armstrong with (initially) Teagarden, Earl Hines and other top swing and Dixieland musicians, most of them ex-big band leaders.
He sponsored a local baseball team known as "Armstrong's Secret Nine" and had a cigar named after him.
The FBI kept a file on Armstrong for his outspokenness about integration.
Oliver's band was among the most influential jazz bands in Chicago in the early 1920s, at a time when Chicago was the center of the jazz universe.
"We Have All the Time in the World" was featured on the soundtrack of the James Bond film ''On Her Majesty's Secret Service'', and enjoyed renewed popularity in the UK in 1994 when it featured on a Guinness advert.
Although he is usually listed as being a member of Montgomery Lodge No.
Armstrong also played with Erskine Tate's Little Symphony, which played mostly at the Vendome Theatre.
He played at the New Cotton Club in Los Angeles with Lionel Hampton on drums.
Finally, he hired Joe Glaser as his new manager, a tough mob-connected wheeler-dealer, who began to straighten out his legal mess, his mob troubles, and his debts.
Soon his act included singing and telling tales of New Orleans characters, especially preachers.
He began recording under his own name for Okeh with his famous Hot Five and Hot Seven groups, producing hits such as "Potato Head Blues", "Muggles", (a reference to marijuana, for which Armstrong had a lifelong fondness), and "West End Blues", the music of which set the standard and the agenda for jazz for many years to come.
Armstrong was not the first to record scat singing, but he was masterful at it and helped popularize it with the first recording on which he scatted, "Heebie Jeebies".
He was residing in Corona, Queens, New York City, at the time of his death.
In 1937, Armstrong substituted for Rudy Vallee on the CBS radio network and became the first African American to host a sponsored, national broadcast.
After dropping out of the Fisk School at age eleven, Armstrong joined a quartet of boys who sang in the streets for money.
He also worked for a Lithuanian-Jewish immigrant family, the Karnofskys, who had a junk hauling business and gave him odd jobs.
..."Uh-huh" ..."Sure" ... "Way down, way down."
Though Armstrong is widely recognized as a pioneer of scat singing, Ethel Waters precedes his scatting on record in the 1930s according to Gary Giddins and others.
from the live album ''In Scandinavia vol.1''.
On various live records he's called "Louie" on stage, such as on the 1952 "Can Anyone Explain?"
In 1964, he recorded his biggest-selling record, "Hello, Dolly!
In 1922, Armstrong joined the exodus to Chicago, where he had been invited by his mentor, Joe "King" Oliver, to join his Creole Jazz Band and where he could make a sufficient income so that he no longer needed to supplement his music with day labor jobs.
They separated in 1931 and divorced in 1938, after which Louis married longtime girlfriend Alpha Smith.
In February 1968, he also appeared with Lara Saint Paul on the Italian RAI television channel where he performed "Grassa e Bella," a track he sang in Italian for the Italian market and C.D.I.
Armstrong was an avid audiophile.
Armstrong's radical re-working of Sidney Arodin and Carmichael's "Lazy River" (recorded in 1931) encapsulated many features of his groundbreaking approach to melody and phrasing.
After separating from Lil, Armstrong started to play at the Sunset Café for Al Capone's associate Joe Glaser in the Carroll Dickerson Orchestra, with Earl Hines on piano, which was soon renamed ''Louis Armstrong and his Stompers'', though Hines was the music director and Glaser managed the orchestra.
The Henderson Orchestra was playing in prominent venues for white-only patrons, including the famed Roseland Ballroom, featuring the arrangements of Don Redman.
It was a power and privilege that he enjoyed, although he was very careful not to flaunt it with fellow performers of color, and privately, he shared what access that he could with friends and fellow musicians.
Armstrong also began to experience problems with his fingers and lips, which were aggravated by his unorthodox playing style.
He would extol its virtues to anyone who would listen and pass out packets to everyone he encountered, including members of the British Royal Family.
When he and his band escape from a Nazi-like Confederacy, they enhance the insipid mainstream music of the North.
In 1969, Armstrong had a cameo role in the film version of ''Hello, Dolly!''
The other members quickly took up Armstrong's emotional, expressive pulse.
Cortázar once called Armstrong himself "Grandísimo Cronopio" (The Great Cronopio).
With the publishers' permission, Armstrong recorded the first American version of "C'est si bon" on June 26, 1950, in New York, with English lyrics by Jerry Seelen.
In it he describes his discovery that this family was also subject to discrimination by "other white folks" nationalities who felt that they were better than the Jewish race... "I was only seven years old but I could easily see the ungodly treatment that the White Folks were handing the poor Jewish family whom I worked for."
In the 1959 film, The Five Pennies (the story of the cornetist Red Nichols), Armstrong played himself as well as singing and playing several classic numbers.
Louis' marriage to Parker failed quickly and they separated in 1923.
In publicity, much to his chagrin, she billed him as "the World's Greatest Trumpet Player".
Peggy Lee sang The Lord's Prayer at the services while Al Hibbler sang "Nobody Knows the Trouble I've Seen" and Fred Robbins, a long-time friend, gave the eulogy.
In 1950, Bing Crosby, the most successful vocalist of the first half of the 20th century, said, "He is the beginning and the end of music in America."
Later, he played in brass bands and riverboats of New Orleans, and began traveling with the well-regarded band of Fate Marable, which toured on a steamboat up and down the Mississippi River.
They furnished music for silent movies and live shows, including jazz versions of classical music, such as "Madame Butterfly", which gave Armstrong experience with longer forms of music and with hosting before a large audience.
With his innovations, he raised the bar musically for all who came after him.
When it was released, the disc garnered worldwide sales.
Armstrong seems to have been tolerant towards various religions, but also found humor in them.
An album of the same title was quickly created around the song, and also shot to number one (knocking The Beatles off the top of the chart).
It reached number 3 in the charts on being re-released.
His marriage to his third wife lasted four years, and they divorced in 1942.
Armstrong quickly adapted to the more tightly controlled style of Henderson, playing trumpet and even experimenting with the trombone.
King Oliver made a few records but otherwise struggled.
There is a pivotal scene in ''Stardust Memories'' (1980) in which Woody Allen is overwhelmed by a recording of Armstrong's "Stardust" and experiences a nostalgic epiphany.
His mother, Mary "Mayann" Albert (1886–1927), then left Louis and his younger sister, Beatrice Armstrong Collins (1903–1987), in the care of his grandmother, Josephine Armstrong, and at times, his Uncle Isaac.
The combination of the music and the perfect moment is the catalyst for much of the film's action, prompting the protagonist to fall in love with an ill-advised woman.
His influence upon Henderson's tenor sax soloist, Coleman Hawkins, can be judged by listening to the records made by the band during this period.
After returning to the United States, he undertook several exhausting tours.
In 1964 his recording of the song "Hello Dolly" went to number one.
Clarence Armstrong was mentally disabled (the result of a head injury at an early age) and Louis would spend the rest of his life taking care of him.
Some of his solos from the 1950s, such as the hard rocking version of "St. Louis Blues" from the ''WC Handy'' album, show that the influence went in both directions.
Armstrong's marriages never produced any offspring, though he loved children.
His participation in Dave Brubeck's high-concept jazz musical ''The Real Ambassadors'' (1963) was critically acclaimed, and features "Summer Song," one of Armstrong's most popular vocal efforts.
Breach of contract violations plagued him.
It became impossible under such circumstances to support and finance a 16-piece touring band.
He recorded Hoagy Carmichael's Rockin' Chair for Okeh Records.
Armstrong was concerned with his health.
Armstrong recorded two albums with Ella Fitzgerald: ''Ella and Louis'', and ''Ella and Louis Again'' for Verve Records, with the sessions featuring the backing musicianship of the Oscar Peterson Trio and drummers Buddy Rich (on the first album), and Louie Bellson (on the second).
The band drew the Hollywood crowd, which could still afford a lavish night life, while radio broadcasts from the club connected with younger audiences at home.
Armstrong's playing technique, honed by constant practice, extended the range, tone and capabilities of the trumpet.
The song gained greater currency in the popular consciousness when it was used in the 1987 movie ''Good Morning, Vietnam'', its subsequent re-release topping many charts around the world.
He rarely publicly politicized his race, often to the dismay of fellow African-Americans, but took a well-publicized stand for desegregation in the Little Rock Crisis.
He had learned how to create a unique sound and also started using singing and patter in his performances.
Louis Armstrong and his Hot Five
In his early years, Armstrong was best known for his virtuosity with the cornet and trumpet.
He was content in New York but later would concede that she was right and that the Henderson Orchestra was limiting his artistic growth.
The house where Armstrong lived for almost 28 years was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1977 and is now a museum.
In the 1960s, he toured Ghana and Nigeria, performing with Victor Olaiya during the Nigerian Civil war.
Armstrong's famous interpretation of Carmichael's "Stardust" became one of the most successful versions of this song ever recorded, showcasing Armstrong's unique vocal sound and style and his innovative approach to singing songs that had already become standards.
At a recording session for Okeh Records, when the sheet music supposedly fell on the floor and the music began before he could pick up the pages, Armstrong simply started singing nonsense syllables while Okeh president E.A.
Armstrong lived luxuriously in Chicago, in his own apartment with his own private bath (his first).
In 1919, Joe Oliver decided to go north and resigned his position in Kid Ory's band; Armstrong replaced him.
The few exceptions made it more effective when he did speak out.
He described his time with Marable as "going to the University," since it gave him a much wider experience working with written arrangements.
He was criticized for accepting the title of "King of The Zulus" for Mardi Gras in 1949.
He appeared in movies again, including Crosby's 1936 hit ''Pennies from Heaven''.
Coming to prominence in the 1920s as an "inventive" trumpet and cornet player, Armstrong was a foundational influence in jazz, shifting the focus of the music from collective improvisation to solo performance.
The influence of Karnofsky is remembered in New Orleans by the Karnofsky Project, a non-profit organization dedicated to accepting donated musical instruments to "put them into the hands of an eager child who could not otherwise take part in a wonderful learning experience."
In a memoir written for Robert Goffin between 1943 and 1944, Armstrong states, "All white folks call me Louie," suggesting that he himself did not.
Armstrong made his last recorded trumpet performances on his 1968 album ''Disney Songs the Satchmo Way''.
Armstrong was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as an ''early influence''.
Today, there are many bands worldwide dedicated to preserving and honoring the music and style of Satchmo, including the Louis Armstrong Society located in New Orleans, Louisiana.
In the New Orleans African-American community it is an honored role as the head of leading black Carnival Krewe, but bewildering or offensive to outsiders with their traditional costume of grass-skirts and blackface makeup satirizing southern white attitudes.
Armstrong wore a Star of David pendant for the rest of his life and wrote about what he learned from them: "how to live—real life and determination."
He avidly typed or wrote on whatever stationery was at hand, recording instant takes on music, sex, food, childhood memories, his heavy "medicinal" marijuana use—and even his bowel movements, which he gleefully described.
Eventually, Davis made Armstrong the band leader.
Armstrong developed his cornet playing skills by playing in the band of the New Orleans Home for Colored Waifs, where he had been sent multiple times for general delinquency, most notably for firing his stepfather's pistol into the air at a New Year's Eve celebration, but it was only an empty shot, as police records confirm.
(Armstrong also appeared in humorous, albeit risqué, cards that he had printed to send out to friends; the cards bore a picture of him sitting on a toilet—as viewed through a keyhole—with the slogan ''"Satch says, 'Leave it all behind ya!'"'')
The cards have sometimes been incorrectly described as ads for Swiss Kriss.
", which gave the 63-year-old performer a U.S. record as the oldest artist to have a number one song.
and something of a riff on his unusual embouchure.
His 1964 song "Bout Time" was later featured in the film ''Bewitched''.
In 1999 Armstrong was nominated for inclusion in the American Film Institute's 100 Years...100 Stars.
His scat singing style was enriched by his matchless experience as a trumpet soloist.
Armstrong returned to New York, in 1929, where he played in the pit orchestra of the successful musical ''Hot Chocolate'', an all-black revue written by Andy Razaf and pianist/composer Fats Waller.
", a song by Jerry Herman, originally sung by Carol Channing.
Armstrong was one of the first truly popular African-American entertainers to "cross over", whose skin color was secondary to his music in an America that was extremely racially divided.
Armstrong's laxative of preference in his younger days was Pluto Water, but he then became an enthusiastic convert when he discovered the herbal remedy Swiss Kriss.
