St Bernard Parish has an Isleños museum, cemetery and church, as well as many street names with Spanish words and Spanish surnames from this heritage.
The United States adapted Louisiana law by adding parts of US or southern state laws.
Several unique dialects of French, Creole, and English are spoken in Louisiana.
Many ethnic French families continued to use French in private.
They are the primary criminal patrol and first responder agency in all matters criminal and civil.
The Caddoan Mississippians covered a large territory, including what is now eastern Oklahoma, western Arkansas, northeast Texas, and northwest Louisiana.
Both these units have served overseas during the War on Terror in either Iraq, Afghanistan, or both.
As late as August 31 it had been projected by the National Hurricane Center that the hurricane would remain at Category 3 or above on September 1, but in the event the center of Gustav made landfall as a strong Category 2 hurricane (1&nbsp;mph below Category 3), and dropped to Category 1 soon after.
Many sold slaves to traders to take to the Deep South.
Congressional races have also been held under the jungle primary system.
He had authorized the expenditure of $10 million for a port city, and instead received treaties committing the government to spend $15 million on a land package which would double the size of the country.
Many came from peoples of the same region of West Africa, thus concentrating their culture.
This ranks the state 4th highest nationally and represents a rise from 1995 when Louisiana received $1.35 per dollar of taxes in federal spending (ranked 7th nationally).
Through a peculiarity of the political geography of the United States, this is substantially less than the -wide jurisdiction of nearby states Texas and Florida, which, like Louisiana, have extensive Gulf coastlines.
When the army led by Napoleon's brother-in-law Leclerc was defeated, Napoleon decided to sell Louisiana.
This run-off did not take into account party identification; therefore, it was not uncommon for a Democrat to be in a runoff with a fellow Democrat or a Republican to be in a runoff with a fellow Republican.
In those years, a young person was considered an adult by the age of thirteen, and subject to sale away from the family from that age.
The French settlement had two purposes: to establish trade with the Spanish in Texas via the Old San Antonio Road, and to deter Spanish advances into Louisiana.
France ceded most of its territory to the east of the Mississippi to Great Britain in 1763, in the aftermath of Britain's victory in the Seven Years' War (generally referred to in North America as the French and Indian War).
In late 2007 and early 2008, a  film studio was scheduled to open in Tremé, with state-of-the-art production facilities, and a film training institute.
Especially controversial were his plans for wealth redistribution in the state.
Swamps have been extensively logged, leaving canals and ditches that allow saline water to move inland.
In 1932 the State Highway Patrol was authorized to carry weapons.
However, upon the passage of House Bill 292, Louisiana again adopted a nonpartisan blanket primary for its federal congressional elections.
Louisiana has 12 collegiate NCAA Division I programs, a high number given its population.
This added another infusion of African culture to the city, as more slaves in Saint-Domingue were from Africa than in the United States.
The fugitive slaves, called maroons, could easily hide in the backcountry of the bayous and survive in small settlements.
All other states (except Washington and California) use single-party primaries followed by a general election between party candidates, each conducted by either a plurality voting system or runoff voting, to elect Senators, Representatives, and statewide officials.
Some researchers estimate that the state is losing a land mass equivalent to 30 football fields every day.
Dialects of the French language are: Colonial French and Houma French.
For instance, most of the early governors were Creole Catholics.
With its first settlements, France lay claim to a vast region of North America and set out to establish a commercial empire and French nation stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to Canada.
In 1988 the Criminal Investigation Bureau was reorganized.
Louisiana has three personal income tax brackets, ranging from 2% to 6%.
The process of gaining independence in Saint-Domingue was complex, but uprisings continued.
Napoleon looked upon Louisiana as a depot for these sugar islands, and as a buffer to U.S. settlement.
There are also many species of tree frogs, and fish such as sturgeon and paddlefish.
The state also has a use tax, which includes 4% to be distributed by the Department of Revenue to local governments.
The high proportion and influence of the Catholic population makes Louisiana distinct among Southern states.
In the late 17th century, French and French Canadian expeditions, which included sovereign, religious and commercial aims, established a foothold on the Mississippi River and Gulf Coast.
Others were transported by their masters as slaveholders moved west for new lands.
In keeping with Catholic principles, the Code forbade the separation of family members, especially any selling of young children away from their parents.
Louisiana's statewide police force is the Louisiana State Police.
Louisiana was inhabited by Native Americans for many millennia before the arrival of Europeans in the 16th century.
Over time, there developed in the French colony a relatively large group of Creoles of Color (''gens de couleur libres''), who were primarily descended from African slave women and French men (later other Europeans became part of the mix, as well as some Native Americans.)
New Orleans had the largest population of free people of color in the region; they could find work there and created their own culture, marrying among themselves for decades.
Louisiana was among the southern states with a significant Jewish population before the 20th century; Virginia, South Carolina, and Georgia also had influential Jewish populations in some of their major cities from the 18th and 19th centuries.
They consist of prairie and woodlands.
Population increased dramatically and there is strong evidence of a growing cultural and political complexity.
Figures derived from the NTSHA show at least 25 persons in Louisiana were killed per year in motor vehicle collisions with non-fixed objects, including debris, dumped litter, animals and their carcasses.
Some ex-Confederate dominated legislatures passed Black Codes to regulate freedmen and generally refused to give them suffrage, nor to extend voting rights to African Americans who had been free before the war and had sometimes obtained education and property (as in New Orleans.)
At the start of the 19th century, Louisiana was a small producer of sugar with a relatively small number of slaves, compared to Saint-Domingue and the West Indies.
After sales in New Orleans, steamboats operating on the Mississippi transported slaves upstream to markets or plantation destinations at Natchez and Memphis.
Once part of the French Colonial Empire, the Louisiana Territory stretched from present-day Mobile Bay to just north of the present-day Canada–United States border, and included a small part of what is now southwestern Canada.
An 11-mound complex, it was built about 5400 BP (3500 BCE).
These control vast stores of reservoirs of petroleum and natural gas.
Training sites in the state include Camp Beauregard near Pineville, Camp Villere near Slidell, Camp Minden near Minden, England Air Park (formerly England Air Force Base) near Alexandria, Gillis Long Center near Carville, and Jackson Barracks in New Orleans.
The first European explorers to visit Louisiana came in 1528 when a Spanish expedition led by Panfilo de Narváez located the mouth of the Mississippi River.
By 1877, when federal forces were withdrawn, white Democrats in Louisiana and other states had regained control of state legislatures, often by paramilitary groups suppressing black voting through intimidation and violence.
Louisiana's natural gas reserves account for about 5 percent of the U.S. total.
As of September 2014, the state's unemployment rate was 5.8%.
Excluding the Gulf of Mexico OCS, Louisiana ranks fourth in petroleum production and is home to about 2 percent of total U.S. petroleum reserves.
The elected sheriff in each parish is the chief law enforcement officer in the parish.
English and its associated dialects became predominant after the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, after which the area became dominated by numerous English speakers.
Historians have assessed it also as a way to keep slaves more content by granting some freedoms and protecting their families.
Because of better opportunities elsewhere, from 1965 to 1970, blacks continued to migrate from Louisiana, for a net loss of more than 37,000 people.
In a covenant marriage, the couple waives their right to a "no-fault" divorce after six months of separation, which is available in a traditional marriage.
Louisiana's French settlements contributed to further exploration and outposts, concentrated along the banks of the Mississippi and its major tributaries, from Louisiana to as far north as the region called the Illinois Country, around present-day St. Louis, Missouri.
Artificial levees block spring flood water that would bring fresh water and sediment to marshes.
In addition to this dialect, the mixed-race people and slaves developed Louisiana Creole, with a base in West African languages.
The most significant of these is the Jewish community of the New Orleans area.
These support an exceptionally large number of plant species, including many species of orchids and carnivorous plants.
Slaves and some free people of color also spoke Louisiana Creole French.
In addition, colonists imported numerous African people as slaves in the 18th century.
State financial incentives since 2002 and aggressive promotion have given Louisiana the nickname "Hollywood South".
Their origin can be traced back to the early Gulf of Mexico, when the shallow ocean had high rates of evaporation.
With the possession of New Orleans, Napoleon could close the Mississippi to U.S. commerce at any time.
Trade with peoples to the southwest brought the bow and arrow.
Louisiana's incarceration rate is nearly five times Iran's, 13 times China's and 20 times Germany's.
During the 1740s economic crisis in the colony, masters had trouble feeding their slaves and themselves.
In 1804, Haiti, the second republic in the western hemisphere, proclaimed its independence, achieved by slave leaders.
In 2000, before the 2005 Hurricane Katrina, its population was about 12,000.
Spanish Canary Islanders, called Isleños, emigrated from the Canary Islands of Spain to Louisiana under the Spanish crown between 1778 and 1783.
The problem with this route was that the Spanish owned both sides of the Mississippi below Natchez.
The effect was immediate and long lasting.
They greatly increased the French-speaking population in New Orleans and Louisiana, as well as the number of Africans, and the slaves reinforced African culture in the city.
They imported thousands of slaves from tribes of West Africa, who spoke several different languages.
Giving them time off also effectively gave more power to slaves, who started cultivating their own gardens and crafting items for sale as their own property.
Until the 1970s, the term "Cajun" was considered somewhat derogatory.
They sought skilled jobs in the defense industry in California, better education for their children, and living opportunities in communities where they could vote.
Livingston was authorized to pay up to $2 million.
Louisiana contains a number of areas which are, in varying degrees, protected from human intervention.
Jewish communities are established in the state's larger cities, notably New Orleans and Baton Rouge.
They settled chiefly in the southwestern Louisiana region now called Acadiana.
There has never been an official language in Louisiana, and the state constitution enumerates "the right of the people to preserve, foster, and promote their respective historic, linguistic, and cultural origins," whether English, French, Spanish, or otherwise.
Two unique dialects developed of the English language: Louisiana English, a French-influenced variety of English; and what is informally known as Yat, which resembles the New York City dialect, particularly that of historical Brooklyn.
Following Mississippi's example in 1890, in 1898, the white Democratic, planter-dominated legislature passed a new constitution that effectively disfranchised blacks and people of color, by requirements for voter registration, such as poll taxes, residency requirements and literacy tests, whose implementation was directed at reducing black voter registration.
Louisiana is not classified as a "swing state" for future presidential elections, as since the late 20th century, it has regularly supported Republican candidates.
Owing to its location and geology, the state has high biological diversity.
President Jefferson ignored public pressure for war with France, and appointed James Monroe a special envoy to Napoleon, to assist in obtaining New Orleans for the United States.
Louisiana was named after Louis XIV, King of France from 1643 to 1715.
Initially, Mobile and then Biloxi functioned as the capital of the colony.
The Louisiana economy as well as its politics of the last half-century cannot be understood without thoroughly accounting for the influence of the petroleum and gas industries.
The oldest rocks are exposed in the north, in areas such as the Kisatchie National Forest.
Louisiana is bordered by Arkansas to the north, Mississippi to the east, Texas to the west, and the Gulf of Mexico to the south.
In the creolization process, the slaves developed a Louisiana Creole dialect incorporating both French and African forms, which colonists adopted to communicate with them, and which persisted beyond slavery.
Historians believe that the revocation of the right of deposit was prompted by abuses by the Americans, particularly smuggling, and not by French intrigues as was believed at the time.
Between 2008 and 2010, federal congressional elections were run under a closed primary system – limited to registered party members.
Louisiana was the first site of petroleum drilling over water in the world, on Caddo Lake in the northwest corner of the state.
When petroleum and gas boomed in the 1970s, so did Louisiana's economy.
According to the Energy Information Administration, the Gulf of Mexico OCS is the largest U.S. petroleum-producing region.
The  Nature Conservancy also owns and manages a set of natural areas.
Often the French would free their concubines and mixed-race children, and pass on social capital to them.
Louisiana is the only state in the U.S. with political subdivisions termed parishes, which are the local government's equivalent to counties.
An estimated 110,000 homes were damaged and thousands of residents were displaced.
Enfranchised elite whites' strong economic interest in maintaining the slave system contributed to Louisiana's decision to secede from the Union in 1861.
On October 18, 1802, however, Juan Ventura Morales, Acting Intendant of Louisiana, made public the intention of Spain to revoke the right of deposit at New Orleans for all cargo from the United States.
Salt domes are also found in Louisiana.
Many current place names in the state, including Atchafalaya, Natchitouches (now spelled Natchitoches), Caddo, Houma, Tangipahoa, and Avoyel (as Avoyelles), are transliterations of those used in various Native American languages.
Some members of the Isleño community still speak Spanish – with their own Canary Islander accent.
The State Constitution of 1812 gave English official status in legal proceedings, but use of French remained widespread.
In the post-Civil War environment, Anglo-Americans increased the pressure for Anglicization, and in 1921, English was for a time made the sole language of instruction in Louisiana schools before a policy of multilingualism was revived in 1974.
Much of the state's lands were formed from sediment washed down the Mississippi River, leaving enormous deltas and vast areas of coastal marsh and swamp.
Louisiana is a subsidized state, receiving $1.44 from the federal government for every dollar paid in.
The ancestors of Cajuns immigrated from west central France to New France, where they settled in the Atlantic provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, known originally as Acadia.
One of Louisiana's largest natural areas is Kisatchie National Forest.
In the 1950s the state created new requirements for a citizenship test for voter registration.
It lasted until approximately 700 BCE.
The Mississippi River flows along a ridge formed by its own natural deposits (known as a levee), from which the lands decline toward a river beyond at an average fall of six feet per mile (3&nbsp;m/km).
Beginning in the 1790s, waves of immigration took place from Saint-Domingue, following a slave rebellion that started in 1791.
Property taxes are assessed and collected at the local level.
Most parishes have an elected government known as the Police Jury, dating from the colonial days.
Patterns of Jim Crow segregation against African Americans still ruled in Louisiana in the 1960s.
Based on official census figures, the African American population in 1970 stood at 1,085,109, a net gain of more than 46,000 people compared to 1960.
The easiest way to ship produce was to use a flatboat to float it down the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers to the port of New Orleans, from whence goods could be put on ocean-going vessels.
In October 1801 he sent a large military force to take back Saint-Domingue, then under control of Toussaint Louverture after a slave rebellion.
Others scattered, to France, Canada, Mexico, or the Falkland Islands.
The Louisiana Air National Guard has over 2,000 airmen and its 159th Fighter Squadron has likewise seen overseas service in combat theaters.
The oldest Louisiana manuscript to use the word "Creole," from 1782, applied it to a slave born in the French colony.
Artillery marched his troops into town and had the American flag run up the fort's flagpole.
Organizations such as CODOFIL promote use of the French language in the state.
By 1000 CE in the northwestern part of the state, the Fourche Maline culture had evolved into the Caddoan Mississippian culture.
Louisiana operates a system of 22 state parks, 17 state historic sites and one state preservation area.
In some regions, English was influenced by French, as seen with Louisiana English.
Federal spending in 2005 and subsequent years since has been exceptionally high due to the recovery from Hurricane Katrina.
What really worried the opposition was the new states which would inevitably be carved from the Louisiana territory, strengthening Western and Southern interests in Congress, and further reducing the influence of New England Federalists in national affairs.
Neighboring states and the amount of federal spending received per dollar of federal tax collected were: Texas ($0.94), Arkansas ($1.41), and Mississippi ($2.02).
White insurgents mobilized to enforce white supremacy, first in Ku Klux Klan chapters.
Of these, only Caddo and Choctaw still have living native speakers, although several other tribes are working to teach and revitalize their languages.
It lost one House seat due to stagnant population growth in the 2010 Census.
Among these were Alabama, Biloxi, Koasati, and Ofo peoples.
Numerous Isleño identity organizations, and many members of Isleños society keep contact with the Canary Islands of Spain.
The British forcibly separated families and evicted them from Acadia because they refused to vow loyalty to the new British regime.
In 1942 this office was abolished and became a division of the Department of Public Safety, called the Louisiana State Police.
An annual festival called Fiesta celebrates the heritage of the Isleños.
The light keeper at the Sabine Pass lighthouse had to turn the lens by hand, as vibrations caused by the wave action put the clockwork out of order.
The Mississippian period in Louisiana was when Plaquemine and the Caddoan Mississippian cultures developed and extensive maize agriculture was adopted.
The earliest Jewish colonists were Sephardic Jews who immigrated with English colonists from London.
Officials issued warnings to evacuate the city and nearby areas, but tens of thousands of people, mostly African Americans, stayed behind, many of them stranded, and suffered through the damage of the widespread floodwaters.
The state has no NCAA Division II teams and only two NCAA Division III teams.
At one time, the land was added to when spring floods from the Mississippi River added sediment and stimulated marsh growth; the land is now shrinking.
The ban on the African slave trade and importation of slaves had increased demand in the domestic market.
Colonial French was the dominant language of white settlers in Louisiana during the French colonial period; it was spoken primarily by the French Creoles (native-born).
Over the next decade, thousands of migrants landed in Louisiana from the island, including ethnic Europeans, free people of color, and African slaves, some of the latter brought in by each free group.
Slaves were driven by traders overland from the Upper South or transported to New Orleans and other coastal markets by ship in the coastwise slave trade.
*September 9, 1965, Betsy (Category 3 at landfall) came ashore in Louisiana, causing massive destruction as the first hurricane in history to cause one billion dollars in damage (over ten billion in inflation-adjusted USD).
Louisiana's secession was announced on January 26, 1861, and it became part of the Confederate States of America.
According to the ''Times Picayune'', Louisiana is the prison capital of the world.
The Louisiana Science Education Act is a controversial law passed by the Louisiana Legislature on June 11, 2008 and signed into law by Governor Bobby Jindal on June 25.
As described by historian Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, they developed a marked Afro-Creole culture in the colonial era.
The 1,039,207 black citizens were adversely affected by segregation and efforts at disfranchisement.
A public outcry criticized governments at the local, state, and federal levels, for lack of preparation and slowness of response.
Protestants are concentrated in the northern and central parts of the state and in the northern tier of the Florida Parishes.
However, it is incorrect to equate the Louisiana Civil Code with the Napoleonic Code.
Beginning in 1950, Louisiana was sued several times by the U.S.
The settlement soon became a flourishing river port and crossroads, giving rise to vast cotton kingdoms along the river.
Louisiana is rich in petroleum and natural gas.
These include the Louisiana pine snake and Red-cockaded woodpecker.
They developed four main communities, but many relocated to what is modern-day St. Bernard Parish.
These cultures lasted until 200 CE.
African Americans continued to suffer disproportionate discriminatory application of the state's voter registration rules.
Because of the Great Migration of blacks to the north and west, and growth of other groups in the state, by 1960 the proportion of African Americans in Louisiana had dropped to 32%.
In 2014 Louisiana had a higher murder rate than any other U.S. state (10.3 murders per 100,000); this was the 26th consecutive year (1989–2014) that Louisiana has recorded the highest per-capita murder rate among U.S. states.
There are several hundred salt domes in the state; one of the most familiar is Avery Island.
It soon became a major sugar producer as new settlers arrived to develop plantations.
The Tchefuncte culture were the first people in Louisiana to make large amounts of pottery.
In general, the northern terraces have had sufficient time for rivers to cut deep channels, while the newer terraces tend to be much flatter.
Differences are found between Louisianan civil law and the common law found in the other U.S. states.
William C. C. Claiborne, Louisiana's first United States governor, said that African slave labor was needed because white laborers "cannot be had in this unhealthy climate."
The suffix -ana (or -ane) is a Latin suffix that can refer to "information relating to a particular individual, subject, or place."
Gales howled throughout Cameron and Vermilion Parishes and as far east as Mobile.
Louisiana also has a SPHL minor league hockey team, the Louisiana IceGators, who play in the city of Lafayette and are affiliated with the New York Islanders.
During the 19th century after the Louisiana Purchase by the United States, English gradually gained prominence for business and government due to the shift in population with settlement by numerous Americans who were English speakers.
Starting in 1719, traders began to import slaves in higher numbers; two French ships, the ''Du Maine'' and the ''Aurore,'' arrived in New Orleans carrying more than 500 black slaves coming from Africa.
The previous Republican Senator, John S. Harris, who took office in 1868 during Reconstruction, was chosen by the state legislature under the rules of the 19th century.
The Zephyrs are currently affiliated with the Miami Marlins.
Since the 1980s, these industries' headquarters have consolidated in Houston, but many of the jobs that operate or provide logistical support to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico crude-oil-and-gas industry remained in Louisiana .
Louisiana is nominally the least populous state with more than one major professional sports league franchise: the National Basketball Association's New Orleans Pelicans and the National Football League's New Orleans Saints.
One is the use of the term "parish" (from the French: ''paroisse'') in place of "county" for administrative subdivision.
Louisiana has six seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, five of which are currently held by Republicans and one by a Democrat.
