The Italian holdings are notable, particularly the Renaissance collection.
Museum expansion slowed after World War I, and the collection did not acquire many significant new works; exceptions were Georges de La Tour's ''Saint Thomas'' and Baron Edmond de Rothschild's (1845–1934) 1935 donation of 4,000&nbsp;engravings, 3,000&nbsp;drawings, and 500&nbsp;illustrated books.
The Louvre employs a staff of 2,000 led by Director Jean-Luc Martinez, who reports to the French Ministry of Culture and Communications.
The Louvre has three entrances: the main entrance at the pyramid, an entrance from the Carrousel du Louvre underground shopping mall, and an entrance at the Porte des Lions (near the western end of the Denon wing).
The collection spans from the Cycladic period to the decline of the Roman Empire.
The onset of Romanticism rekindled interest in Renaissance and Medieval artwork, and the Sauvageot donation expanded the department with 1,500&nbsp;middle-age and faïence works.
Guarded by the ''Large Sphinx'' (c. 2000&nbsp;BC), the collection is housed in more than 20&nbsp;rooms.
The Louvre is involved in controversies that surround cultural property seized under Napoleon I, as well as during World War II by the Nazis.
Three quarters were derived from the royal collections, the remainder from confiscated émigrés and Church property (''biens nationaux'').
In the galleries paralleling the Seine, much of the museum's Roman sculpture is displayed.
During the Third Republic (1870–1940) the Louvre acquired new pieces mainly via donations and gifts.
As a result, he was later installed by Napoleon as the director of Musée Napoléon, formerly the Louvre, cementing the status of the museum as a center for global patrimony and storehouse for cultural heritage.
According to the authoritative ''Grand Larousse encyclopédique'', the name derives from an association with wolf hunting den (via Latin: ''lupus'', lower Empire: ''lupara'').
These finds formed the basis of the Assyrian museum, the precursor to today's department.
On 14 October 1750, Louis XV agreed and sanctioned a display of 96 pieces from the royal collection, mounted in the ''Galerie royale de peinture'' of the Luxembourg Palace.
Every year, the Louvre now raises as much as it gets from the state, about €122 million.
The Directory wanted France to assume responsibility for liberating the works of art they deemed in danger in order to protect and nationalize the heritage and culture of their subjects.
Among the works are the ''Pyxide d'al-Mughira'', a 10th&nbsp;century ivory box from Andalusia; the ''Baptistery of Saint-Louis'', an engraved brass basin from the 13th&nbsp;or&nbsp;14th&nbsp;century Mamluk period; and the 10th&nbsp;century ''Shroud of Saint-Josse'' from Iran.
A central landmark of the city, it is located on the Right Bank of the Seine in the city's1st arrondissement (district or ward).
The early days were hectic; privileged artists continued to live in residence, and the unlabelled paintings hung "frame to frame from floor to ceiling".
The works are displayed on the Richelieu Wing's first floor and in the Apollo Gallery, named by the painter Charles Le Brun, who was commissioned by Louis&nbsp;XIV (the Sun King) to decorate the space in a solar theme.
These statues had previously been in the Vatican, and both were housed in the Louvre until 1815.
In response, foreign states sent emissaries to London to seek help, and many pieces were returned, even some that had been restored by the Louvre.
The republic of Azerbaijan, the Emir of Kuwait, the Sultan of Oman and King Mohammed VI of Morocco donated in total €26 million.
Under Louis XVI, the royal museum idea became policy.
The collection showcased 537&nbsp;paintings and 184&nbsp;objects of art.
In 1861, Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte bought 11,835&nbsp;artworks including 641 paintings, Greek gold and other antiquities of the Campana collection.
The art will come from multiple museums, including the Louvre, the Georges Pompidou Centre, the Musée d'Orsay, Versailles, the Musée Guimet, the Musée Rodin, and the Musée du quai Branly.
Parallel to the Jeu de Paume is the Orangerie, home to the famous Water Lilies paintings by Claude Monet.
In early 1945, after the liberation of France, art began returning to the Louvre.
Under this treaty, Italian cities were required to contribute pieces of art and patrimony to take part in Napoleon's "parades of booty" through Paris before being put into the Louvre Museum.
The adjacent Tuileries Gardens, created in 1564 by Catherine de' Medici, was designed in 1664 by André Le Nôtre.
The  Code of Hammurabi, discovered in 1901, displays Babylonian Laws prominently, so that no man could plead their ignorance.
France agreed to rotate between 200 and 300&nbsp;artworks during a 10-year period; to provide management expertise; and to provide four temporary exhibitions a year for 15&nbsp;years.
Due to the urban expansion of the city, the fortress eventually lost its defensive function and, in 1578, was converted by Francis I of France into the main residence of the French Kings.
The Louvre is slightly askew of the Historic Axis (''Axe historique''), a roughly eight-kilometre (five-mile) architectural line bisecting the city.
During the late 1990s, the comparison of the American war archives, which had not been done before, with the French and German ones as well as two court cases which finally settled some of the heirs' rights (Gentili di Giuseppe and Rosenberg families) allowed more accurate investigations.
The department opened on 5 August 1797, with 415&nbsp;pieces displayed in the ''Galerie d'Apollon''.
The archaic is demonstrated by jewellery and pieces such as the limestone ''Lady of Auxerre'', from 640 BC; and the cylindrical ''Hera of Samos'', circa 570–560&nbsp;BC.
Some of the best known paintings of the museum have been digitized by the French Center for Research and Restoration of the Museums of France.
Nearly two-thirds are by French artists, and more than 1,200&nbsp;are Northern European.
The High Renaissance collection includes Leonardo da Vinci's ''Mona Lisa'', ''Virgin and Child with St. Anne'', ''St.
The museum participates too in arbitration sessions held via UNESCO's Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to Its Countries of Origin.
In 2008, the French government provided $180&nbsp;million of the Louvre's yearly $350&nbsp;million budget; the remainder came from private contributions and ticket sales.
Select sculptures such as ''Winged Victory of Samothrace'' and the ''Venus de Milo'' were sent to the Château de Valençay.
The collection began with Francis, who acquired works from Italian masters such as Raphael and Michelangelo and brought Leonardo da Vinci to his court.
Loyrette has tried to improve weak parts of the collection through income generated from loans of art and by guaranteeing that "20% of admissions receipts will be taken annually for acquisitions".
A hall was opened by Le Normant de Tournehem and the Marquis de Marigny for public viewing of the ''Tableaux du Roy'' on Wednesdays and Saturdays, and contained Andrea del Sarto's ''Charity'' and works by Raphael; Titian; Veronese; Rembrandt; Poussin or Van Dyck, until its closing in 1780 as a result of the gift of the palace to the Count of Provence (the future king, Louis XVIII) by the king in 1778.
The Louvre is the world's second most visited museum after the Palace Museum in China, receiving more than 9.26 million visitors in 2014.
The New Kingdom and Coptic Egyptian sections are deep, but the statue of the goddess Nephthys and the limestone depiction of the goddess Hathor demonstrate New Kingdom sentiment and wealth.
After the defeat of Napoleon, the ''Nile'' was returned to Italy.
The holdings are displayed in the Pavillon de Flore; due to the fragility of the paper medium, only a portion are displayed at one time.
Since 2003, the museum has been required to generate funds for projects.
He oversaw the creation of extended hours and free admission on Friday nights and an increase in the acquisition budget to $36&nbsp;million from $4.5&nbsp;million.
In 1871, the burning of the Tuileries Palace by the Paris Commune revealed that the Louvre was slightly askew of the ''Axe'' despite past appearances to the contrary.
The Louvre administration has thus argued in favor of retaining this item despite requests by Egypt for its return.
The Louvre Abu Dhabi, designed by the French architect Jean Nouvel and the engineering firm of Buro Happold, will occupy  and will be covered by a roof shaped like a flying saucer.
Initially the collection included only 100&nbsp;pieces, the rest of the royal sculpture collection being at Versailles.
The medieval collection contains the coronation crown of Louis&nbsp;XIV, Charles&nbsp;V's sceptre, and the 12th&nbsp;century ''porphyry vase''.
In 2004, French officials decided to build a satellite museum on the site of an abandoned coal pit in the former mining town of Lens to relieve the crowded Paris Louvre, increase total museum visits, and improve the industrial north's economy.
Middle Kingdom art, "known for its gold work and statues", moved from realism to idealization; this is exemplified by the schist statue of Amenemhatankh and the wooden ''Offering Bearer''.
In 1983, French President François Mitterrand proposed, as one of his Grands Projets, the '''Grand Louvre''' plan to renovate the building and relocate the Finance Ministry, allowing displays throughout the building.
The painting collection has more than 7,500&nbsp;works from the 13th&nbsp;century to 1848 and is managed by 12&nbsp;curators who oversee the collection's display.
The structure itself closed in May 1796 due to structural deficiencies.
When the ''d'Orsay'' train station was converted into the Musée d'Orsay in 1986, the collection was split, and pieces completed after the 1848 Revolution were moved to the new museum.
In October, a committee to "preserve the national memory" began assembling the collection for display.
The 18th-century BC mural of the ''Investiture of Zimrilim'' and the 25th-century BC ''Statue of Ebih-Il'' found in the ancient city-state of Mari are also on display at the museum.
The long ''Galerie Campana'' displays an outstanding collection of more than one thousand Greek potteries.
The Louvre will be the sole owner and manager of the store.
The Italian Peninsula was not the only region from which Napoleon took art.
In 1794, France's revolutionary armies began bringing pieces from Northern Europe, augmented after the Treaty of Tolentino (1797) by works from the Vatican, such as ''Laocoön and His Sons'' and the ''Apollo Belvedere'', to establish the Louvre as a museum and as a "sign of popular sovereignty".
The Louvre Palace was altered frequently throughout the Middle Ages.
A 30-year agreement, signed by French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres and Sheik Sultan bin Tahnoon Al Nahyan, will establish the museum on Saadiyat Island in Abu Dhabi in exchange for €832,000,000 (US$1.3&nbsp;billion).
At the end of Napoleon's First Italian Campaign in 1797, the Treaty of Campo Formio was signed with Count Philipp von Cobenzl of the Austrian Monarchy.
The department's origins lie in the royal collection, but it was augmented by Napoleon's 1798 expeditionary trip with Dominique Vivant, the future director of the Louvre.
It is the world's second most visited museum, averaging 15,000&nbsp;visitors per day, 65&nbsp;percent of whom are foreign tourists.
As of 2002, attendance had doubled since completion.
The four antique bronze horses, which had adorned the basilica of San Marco in Venice after the sack of Constantinople in 1204, were brought to Paris to reside atop Napoleon's Arc du Carrousel in Paris in 1797.
The La Caze Collection, a bequest to the Musée du Louvre in 1869 by Louis La Caze, was the largest contribution of a person in the history of the Louvre.
After Jean-François Champollion translated the Rosetta Stone, Charles&nbsp;X decreed that an Egyptian Antiquities department be created.
In the 19th&nbsp;century, the Louvre acquired works including vases from the Durand collection, bronzes such as the ''Borghese Vase'' from the Bibliothèque nationale.
In addition, the opening of the Louvre Abu Dhabi is supposed to provide €400 million over the course of 30 years for its use of the museum's prestigious brand.
In 1949, it entrusted 2,130 unclaimed pieces (including 1,001 paintings) to the ''Direction des Musées de France'' in order to keep them under appropriate conditions of conservation until their restitution and meanwhile classified them as MNRs (''Musees Nationaux Recuperation'' or, in English, the National Museums of Recovered Artwork).
Initially, the collection focused on marble sculptures, such as the ''Venus de Milo''.
This treaty not only marked the completion of Napoleon's conquest of Italy, but also the end of the first phases of the French Revolutionary Wars.
The Persian portion of Louvre contains work from the archaic period, like the ''Funerary Head'' and the Persian ''Archers of Darius I''.
La Caze gave 584 paintings of his personal collection to the museum.
From 16th&nbsp;century Venice, the Louvre displays Titian's ''Le Concert Champetre'', ''The Entombment'' and ''The Crowning with Thorns''.
Martinez replaced Henri Loyrette in April 2013.
Pieces from the ancient period include the ''Gebel el-Arak Knife'' from 3400&nbsp;BC, ''The Seated Scribe'', and the ''Head of King Djedefre''.
Caravaggio is represented by ''The Fortune Teller'' and ''Death of the Virgin''.
The Durand collection's 1825 acquisition added "ceramics, enamels, and stained glass", and 800&nbsp;pieces were given by Pierre Révoil.
In July 2015, a team led by British firm Rogers Stirk Harbour + Partners was selected to design the complex, which will have light-filled work spaces under one vast, green roof.
The Renaissance art holdings include Giambologna's bronze ''Nessus and Deianira'' and the tapestry ''Maximillian's Hunt''.
Exemplifying the French School are the early ''Avignon Pietà'' of Enguerrand Quarton; the anonymous painting of ''King Jean le Bon'' (c.1360), possibly the oldest independent portrait in Western painting to survive from the postclassical era; Hyacinthe Rigaud's ''Louis XIV''; Jacques-Louis David's ''The Coronation of Napoleon''; and Eugène Delacroix's ''Liberty Leading the People''.
The collection is divided among eight curatorial departments: Egyptian Antiquities; Near Eastern Antiquities; Greek, Etruscan and Roman Antiquities; Islamic Art; Sculpture; Decorative Arts; Paintings; Prints and Drawings.
The collection is organized into three sections: the core ''Cabinet du Roi'', 14,000&nbsp;royal copper printing-plates, and the donations of Edmond de Rothschild, which include 40,000&nbsp;prints, 3,000&nbsp;drawings, and 5,000&nbsp;illustrated books.
According to Serge Klarsfeld, since the now complete and constant publicity which the artworks got in 1996, the majority of the French Jewish community is nevertheless in favour of the return to the normal French civil rule of ''prescription acquisitive'' of any unclaimed good after another long period of time and consequently to their ultimate integration into the common French heritage instead of their transfer to foreign institutions like during World War II.
The building was extended many times to form the present Louvre Palace.
During the Second French Empire, between 1852 and 1870, the French economy grew; by 1870 the museum had added 20,000&nbsp;new pieces to its collections, and the Pavillon de Flore and the ''Grande Galérie'' were remodelled under architects Louis Visconti and Hector Lefuel.
Several churches and palaces, including Saint Mark's Basilica, were looted by the French, which outraged the Italians and their artistic and cultural sensibilities.
The government pays for operating costs (salaries, safety and maintenance), while the rest – new wings, refurbishments, acquisitions – is up to the museum to finance.
The sculpture department comprises work created before 1850 that does not belong in the Etruscan, Greek, and Roman department.
Originally part of the decorative arts department, the holdings became separate in 2003.
Growth continued via acquisitions by Auguste Mariette, founder of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo.
In March 2007, the Louvre announced that a Louvre museum would be completed by 2016 in Abu Dhabi.
The Louvre exhibits sculptures, objets d'art, paintings, drawings, and archaeological finds.
Japanese architects SANAA were selected to design the Lens project in 2005.
French and Northern European works are in the Richelieu wing and ''Cour Carrée''; Spanish and Italian paintings are on the first floor of the Denon wing.
In 2009, Minister of Culture Frédéric Mitterrand approved a plan that would have created a storage facility 30&nbsp;km northwest of Paris to hold objects from the Louvre and two other national museums in Paris's flood zone, the Musée du Quai Branly and the Musée d'Orsay; the plan was later scrapped.
It reopened on 14 July 1801, arranged chronologically and with new lighting and columns.
Six cities were considered for the project: Amiens, Arras, Boulogne-sur-Mer, Calais, Lens, and Valenciennes.
The works include Andrea Mantegna and Giovanni Bellini's ''Calvary''s, which reflect realism and detail "meant to depict the significant events of a greater spiritual world".
The Louvre Palace, which houses the museum, was begun as a fortress by Philip II in the 12th century, with remnants of this building still visible in the crypt.
Pei's glass pyramid in 1989.
; this territory probably did not correspond exactly to the modern site, however.
During the Restoration (1814–30), Louis&nbsp;XVIII and Charles&nbsp;X between them added 135&nbsp;pieces at a cost of 720,000&nbsp;francs and created the department of Egyptian antiquities curated by Champollion, increased by more than 7,000&nbsp;works with the acquisition of antiquities in the Edme-Antoine Durand, the Egyptian collection of Henry Salt or the second collection former by Bernardino Drovetti.
This section also contains rare objects from Persepolis which were also lent to the British Museum for its Ancient Persia exhibition in 2005.
The department, comprising over 50,000&nbsp;pieces, includes artifacts from the Nile civilizations which date from 4,000&nbsp;BC to the 4th&nbsp;century AD.
The collection's development corresponds to archaeological work such as Paul-Émile Botta's 1843 expedition to Khorsabad and the discovery of Sargon II's palace.
During World War II the museum removed most of the art and hid valuable pieces.
By 1874, the Louvre Palace had achieved its present form of an almost rectangular structure with the Sully Wing to the east containing the square ''Cour Carrée'' and the oldest parts of the Louvre; and two wings which wrap the ''Cour Napoléon'', the Richelieu Wing to the north and the Denon Wing, which borders the Seine to the south.
In 1815 Louis XVIII finally concluded agreements with the Austrian government for the keeping of pieces such as Veronese's ''Wedding at Cana'' which was exchanged for a large Le Brun or the repurchase of the Albani collection.
Under the main entrance to the museum is the Carrousel du Louvre, a shopping mall operated by Unibail-Rodamco.
The Louvre has been a repository of sculpted material since its time as a palace; however, only ancient architecture was displayed until 1824, except for Michelangelo's ''Dying Slave'' and ''Rebellious Slave''.
Remnants of the fortress are visible in the basement of the museum.
The collection, among the world's largest, overviews Egyptian life spanning Ancient Egypt, the Middle Kingdom, the New Kingdom, Coptic art, and the Roman, Ptolemaic, and Byzantine periods.
The 18th and 19th centuries are represented by the French sculptor Alfred Barye.
Near Eastern antiquities, the second newest department, dates from 1881 and presents an overview of early Near Eastern civilization and "first settlements", before the arrival of Islam.
The €98.5 million expansion of the Islamic Art galleries in 2012 received state funding of €31 million, as well as €17 million from the Alwaleed Bin Talal Foundation founded by the eponymous Saudi prince.
Laborde developed the medieval section and purchased the first such statues and sculptures in the collection, ''King Childebert'' and ''stanga door'', respectively.
It was seized by British Forces following the defeat of Napoleon in Egypt and the subsequent signing of the Treaty of Alexandria in 1801.
The 583-item ''Collection La Caze'' donated in 1869, included works by Chardin; Fragonard; Rembrandt – such as ''Bathsheba at Her Bath'' – and ''Gilles'' by Watteau.
It begins on the east in the Louvre courtyard and runs west along the Champs-Élysées.
As the Louvre became a point of interest in the book ''The Da Vinci Code'' and the 2006 film based on the book, the museum earned $2.5&nbsp;million by allowing filming in its galleries.
The department is divided into three geographic areas: the Levant, Mesopotamia (Iraq), and Persia (Iran).
Because of fear of vandalism or theft, on 19 August, the National Assembly pronounced the museum's preparation as urgent.
Many proposals were offered for the Louvre's renovation into a museum; however, none was agreed on.
The neighborhood, known as the 1st arrondissement, was home to the former Tuileries Palace, which closed off the western end of the Louvre entrance courtyard, but was heavily damaged by fire during the Paris Commune of 1871 and later demolished.
In September 2000, the Louvre Museum dedicated the Gilbert Chagoury and Rose-Marie Chagoury Gallery to display tapestries donated by the Chagourys, including a 16th-century six-part tapestry suite, sewn with gold and silver threads representing sea divinities, which was commissioned in Paris for Colbert de Seignelay, Secretary of State for the Navy.
In the 16th century, Renaissance influence caused French sculpture to become more restrained, as seen in Jean Goujon's bas-reliefs, and Germain Pilon's ''Descent from the Cross'' and ''Resurrection of Christ''.
The campaign was an expansionist effort on the part of the government, but the Directory had another goal to make Paris the center of art, science, and culture.
This piece, though heavily damaged, has been prominently displayed since 1884.
After architects Mario Bellini and Rudy Ricciotti had won an international competition to create its new galleries for Islamic art, the new 3,000 sq m pavilion eventually opened in 2012, consisting of ground- and lower-ground-level interior spaces topped by a golden, undulating roof (fashioned from almost 9,000 steel tubes that form an interior web) that seems to float within the neo-Classical Visconti Courtyard in the middle of the Louvre's south wing.
From later periods, highlights include Madame de Pompadour's Sèvres vase collection and Napoleon&nbsp;III's apartments.
Holdings have grown steadily through donations and bequests since the Third Republic.
The public was given free access on three days per week, which was "perceived as a major accomplishment and was generally appreciated".
However, the ''Tiber'' remained in the Louvre Museum and can be seen in the collections today.
Mariette, after excavations at Memphis, sent back crates of archaeological finds including ''The Seated Scribe''.
One of the most famous pieces taken under this program was the Horses of Saint Mark.
La collection La Caze".
Although the Rosetta Stone was discovered by the French, it actually never made it to the Louvre Museum.
Museum officials predicted that the new building, capable of receiving about 600&nbsp;works of art, would attract up to 500,000&nbsp;visitors a year when it opened in 2012.
The collection was further increased during the reigns of Louis XVIII and Charles X, and during the Second French Empire the museum gained 20,000&nbsp;pieces.
Since 1996, the restitutions, according sometimes to less formal criteria, concerned 47 more pieces (26 paintings, with 6 from the Louvre including a then displayed Tiepolo), until the last claims of French owners and their heirs ended again in 2006.
Under the Directory government of the 1790s, Napoleon (then a General) led an expedition to Egypt.
The origins of the collection were the 8,600&nbsp;works in the Royal Collection (''Cabinet du Roi''), which were increased via state appropriation, purchases such as the 1,200&nbsp;works from Fillipo Baldinucci's collection in 1806, and donations.
The galleries, which the museum had initially hoped to open by 2009, represent the first major architectural intervention at the Louvre since the addition of I.M.
A further €3 million to €5 million a year is raised by the Louvre from exhibitions that it curates for other museums, while the host museum keeps the ticket money.
The museum is housed in the Louvre Palace, originally built as a fortress in the late 12th&nbsp;century under Philip&nbsp;II.
By 2006, government funds had dipped from 75&nbsp;percent of the total budget to 62&nbsp;percent.
In June 2015, the Louvre had been accused of discriminating against Israeli students.
The ''Société des Amis du Louvre'' donated the ''Pietà of Villeneuve-lès-Avignon'', and in 1863 an expedition uncovered the sculpture ''Winged Victory of Samothrace'' in the Aegean Sea.
On 27 August 1939, after two days of packing, truck convoys began to leave Paris.
The prints and drawings department encompasses works on paper.
Because of structural problems with the building, the museum was closed in 1796 until 1801.
After Louis&nbsp;XIV chose Versailles as his residence in 1682, constructions slowed; however, the move permitted the Louvre to be used as a residence for artists.
The collection was increased under Napoleon and the museum renamed the ''Musée Napoléon'', but after Napoleon's abdication many works seized by his armies were returned to their original owners.
The department began as a subset of the sculpture department, based on royal property and the transfer of work from the Basilique Saint-Denis, the burial ground of French monarchs that held the ''Coronation Sword of the Kings of France''.
The gardens house the Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume, a contemporary art exhibition space which was used to store confiscated Jewish cultural property during the 1940 to 1944 German occupation of France.
This department is one of the museum's oldest; it began with appropriated royal art, some of which was acquired under Francis I.
The Grand Louvre project separated the department into two exhibition spaces; the French collection is displayed in the Richelieu wing, and foreign works in the Denon wing.
The Roman portraiture is representative of that genre; examples include the portraits of Agrippa and Annius Verus; among the bronzes is the Greek ''Apollo of Piombino''.
Among the budding collection's most prized works were pietre dure vases and bronzes.
The collection was part of the Department of Antiquities but was given autonomy in 1871 under Louis Courajod, a director who organized a wider representation of French works.
It was discovered in 1799, and eventually led to the ability to decipher ancient hieroglyphs.
In 2006, it loaned 1,300&nbsp;works, which enabled it to borrow more foreign works.
Nearly 35,000&nbsp;objects from prehistory to the 21st century are exhibited over an area of 60,600 square metres (652,300 square feet).
The museum consequently returned in 2009 five Egyptian fragments of frescoes (30&nbsp;cm x 15&nbsp;cm each) whose existence of the tomb of origin had only been brought to the authorities attention in 2008, eight to five years after their good-faith acquisition by the museum from two private collections and after the necessary respect of the procedure of ''déclassement'' from French public collections before the ''Commission scientifique nationale des collections des musées de France''.
Fare, an abbess in Meaux, left part of her "Villa called Luvra situated in the region of Paris" to a monastery.
The Louvre's administrators were loath to comply and hid many works in their private collections.
In 1692, the building was occupied by the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres and the Académie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture, which in 1699 held the first of a series of salons.
The pyramid and its underground lobby were inaugurated on 15 October 1988; the pyramid was completed in 1989.
Champollion advised the purchase of three collections, formed by Edmé-Antoine Durand, Henry Salt and Bernardino Drovet; these additions added 7,000&nbsp;works.
Among other stores, it has the first Apple Store in France, and a McDonald's restaurant, the presence of which has created controversy.
To expand and organize the collection, the Republic dedicated 100,000&nbsp;livres per year.
During the French Revolution the Louvre was transformed into a public museum.
In 2007, this bequest was the topic of the exhibition "1869: Watteau, Chardin... entrent au Louvre.
This was less than the amount given for rehabilitation of Versailles, and the Louvre suffered relative to the rest of Paris.
Following the Egyptian campaign of 1798–1801, Napoléon appointed the museum's first director, Dominique Vivant Denon.
But after the war, 61,233 articles of more than 150,000 seized artworks returned to France and were assigned to the Louvre's ''Office des Biens Privés''.
In 2013, his successor Aurélie Filippetti announced that the Louvre would move more than 250,000 works of art held in a  basement storage area in Liévin; the cost of the project, estimated at €60 million, will be split between the region (49%) and the Louvre (51%).
After the creation of the French Second Republic in 1848, the new government allocated two&nbsp;million francs for repair work and ordered the completion of the ''Galerie d'Apollon'', the ''Salon Carré'', and the ''Grande Galérie''.
During the French Revolution, the National Assembly decreed that the Louvre should be used as a museum to display the nation's masterpieces.
John the Baptist'', and ''Madonna of the Rocks''.
By the mid-18th&nbsp;century there were an increasing number of proposals to create a public gallery, with the art critic La Font de Saint-Yenne publishing, in 1747, a call for a display of the royal collection.
Northern European works include Johannes Vermeer's ''The Lacemaker'' and ''The Astronomer''; Caspar David Friedrich's ''The Tree of Crows''; Rembrandt's ''The Supper at Emmaus'', ''Bathsheba at Her Bath'', and ''The Slaughtered Ox''.
Whether this was the first building on that spot is not known; it is possible that Philip modified an existing tower.
The second phase of the ''Grand Louvre'' plan, La Pyramide Inversée (The Inverted Pyramid), was completed in 1993.
By 28 December, the museum was cleared of most works, except those that were too heavy and "unimportant paintings that were left in the basement".
