Practitioners of Sufism believe that love is a projection of the essence of God to the universe.
In contrast to ''kāma'', ''prema''or ''prem''refers to elevated love.
Christian theologians see God as the source of love, which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships.
Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God.
Tertullian wrote regarding love for enemies: ''“Our individual, extraordinary, and perfect goodness consists in loving our enemies.
Attraction is the more individualized and romantic desire for a specific candidate for mating, which develops out of lust as commitment to an individual mate forms.
Christians believe that to ''Love God with all your heart, mind, and strength'' and ''Love your neighbor as yourself'' are the two most important things in life (the greatest commandment of the Jewish Torah, according to Jesus; cf.
Prior to Western influence, the term  generally represented romantic love, and was often the subject of the popular Man'yōshū Japanese poetry collection.
In the Bhakti tradition within Hinduism, it is believed that execution of devotional service to God leads to the development of Love for God ''(taiche bhakti-phale krsne prema upajaya)'', and as love for God increases in the heart, the more one becomes free from material contamination ''(krishna-prema asvada haile, bhava nasa paya)''.
The Japanese language uses three words to convey the English equivalent of "love".
In contemporary Chinese, ''Ai'' () is often used as the equivalent of the Western concept of love.
Interpersonal love is most closely associated with interpersonal relationships.
Recent studies in neuroscience have indicated that as people fall in love, the brain consistently releases a certain set of chemicals, including the neurotransmitter hormones, dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, the same compounds released by amphetamine, stimulating the brain's pleasure center and leading to side effects such as increased heart rate, loss of appetite and sleep, and an intense feeling of excitement.
Although eros is initially felt for a person, with contemplation it becomes an appreciation of the beauty within that person, or even becomes appreciation of beauty itself.
It claimed that such issues were the concern of the people involved, and no one else.
In recent years, various human bonding theories have been developed, described in terms of attachments, ties, bonds, and affinities.
Love may be understood as a function to keep human beings together against menaces and to facilitate the continuation of the species.
These are also beliefs of Feminism.
Rumi, Hafiz and Sa'di are icons of the passion and love that the Persian culture and language present.
In the Persian culture, everything is encompassed by love and all is for love, starting from loving friends and family, husbands and wives, and eventually reaching the divine love that is the ultimate goal in life .
Two philosophical underpinnings of love exist in the Chinese tradition, one from Confucianism which emphasized actions and duty while the other came from Mohism which championed a universal love.
Her example of love is considered to be beyond the understanding of material realm as it surpasses any form of selfish love or lust that is visible in the material world.
(Further possible ambiguities come with usages "girlfriend", "boyfriend", "just good friends").
Psychology sees love as more of a social and cultural phenomenon.
''Storge'' ( ''storgē'') is natural affection, like that felt by parents for offspring.
This is also true in Japanese (''suki da'', ).
His work states that three factors constitute love: attachment, caring, and intimacy.
Among the prevailing types of theories that attempt to account for the existence of love are: psychological theories, the vast majority of which consider love to be very healthy behavior; evolutionary theories which hold that love is part of the process of natural selection; spiritual theories which may, for instance consider love to be a gift from a god; and theories that consider love to be an unexplainable mystery, very much like a mystical experience.
It may also describe compassionate and affectionate actions towards other humans, one's self or animals.
For many Hindu schools, it is the third end (''Kama'') in life.
, although the prior existence of romantic attachments is attested by ancient love poetry.
Helen Fisher, a leading expert in the topic of love, divides the experience of love into three partly overlapping stages: lust, attraction, and attachment.
Interpersonal love refers to love between human beings.
Stone images of Kamadeva and Rati can be seen on the door of the Chennakeshava temple at Belur, in Karnataka, India.
The word ''agapo'' is the verb ''I love''.
The love of Radha, a cowherd girl, for Krishna is often cited as the supreme example of love for Godhead by Gaudiya Vaishnavas.
In recent years, the sciences of psychology, anthropology, neuroscience, and biology have added to the understanding the concept of love.
In the condition of separation, there is an acute yearning for being with the beloved and in the condition of union there is supreme happiness and nectarean.
Peck maintains that love is a combination of the "concern for the spiritual growth of another," and simple narcissism.
Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love."''
After the review of Christian doctrine, Augustine treats the problem of love in terms of use and enjoyment until the end of Book I of ''De Doctrina Christiana'' (1.22.21-1.40.44;).
However, there are some examples of ''agape'' used to mean the same as ''eros''.
This is quite different from ordinary love, which is usually about attachment and sex and which rarely occurs without self-interest.
Amongst the 99 names of God (Allah), there is the name ''Al-Wadud'', or "the Loving One," which is found in Surah  as well as Surah .
Love as a general expression of positive sentiment (a stronger form of ''like'') is commonly contrasted with hate (or neutral apathy); as a less sexual and more emotionally intimate form of romantic attachment, love is commonly contrasted with lust; and as an interpersonal relationship with romantic overtones, love is sometimes contrasted with friendship, although the word ''love'' is often applied to close friendships.
The Qur'an exhorts Muslim believers to treat all people, those who have not persecuted them, with ''birr'' or "deep kindness" as stated in Surah .
Companionate love includes intimacy and commitment.
All forms of love are viewed as varying combinations of these three components.
Cicero wrote a treatise called ''On Friendship'' (''de Amicitia''), which discusses the notion at some length.
The Romans used it both in an affectionate sense as well as in a romantic or sexual sense.
The philosophical work ''Narada Bhakti Sutras'', written by an unknown author (presumed to be Narada), distinguishes eleven forms of love.
Following the Meiji Restoration 1868, the term became associated with "love" in order to translate Western literature.
Some translations list it as "love of the body."
In this tradition, salvation or liberation is considered inferior to love, and just an incidental by-product.
Rabbinic literature differs as to how this love can be developed, e.g., by contemplating divine deeds or witnessing the marvels of nature.
Instead, in Buddhism it refers to detachment and unselfish interest in others' welfare.
''Xenia'' (ξενία ''xenía''), hospitality, was an extremely important practice in ancient Greece.
Describing love in the famous poetic interpretation in 1 Corinthians, he wrote, "Love is patient, love is kind.
God desires to recognize beauty, and as if one looks at a mirror to see oneself, God "looks" at himself within the dynamics of nature.
The term's origins come from the concept of lonely solitude as a result of separation from a loved one.
The Qur'an refers to God as being "full of loving kindness."
Attachment is generally based on commitments such as marriage and children, or on mutual friendship based on things like shared interests.
It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres."
''Eros'' ( ''érōs'') (from the Greek deity Eros) is passionate love, with sensual desire and longing.
This notion, however, is much more generally expressed in Latin by ''placere'' or ''delectāre'', which are used more colloquially, the latter used frequently in the love poetry of Catullus.
There are also a number of psychological disorders related to love, such as erotomania.
He said that a human being, created in the image of God, who is love, is able to practice love; to give himself to God and others (agape) and by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation (eros).
This mentality created a vision of strongly defined gender roles, which provoked the advancement of the free love movement as a contrast.
The Apostle John wrote, ''"For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life.
This is the explanation of the Christian need to love others, including their enemies.
A core concept to Confucianism is ''Ren''  ("benevolent love", ), which focuses on duty, action and attitude in a relationship rather than love itself.
Eros helps the soul recall knowledge of beauty and contributes to an understanding of spiritual truth.
''wo ai ni'' , or "I love you") and a noun (such as ''aiqing'' , or "romantic love").
Kamadeva is often pictured holding a bow of sugar cane and an arrow of flowers; he may ride upon a great parrot.
For example, compassionate outreach and volunteer workers' "love" of their cause may sometimes be born not of interpersonal love but impersonal love, altruism, and strong spiritual or political convictions.
It has also been translated as "love of the soul."
From this verb come ''amans''—a lover, amator, "professional lover," often with the accessory notion of lechery—and ''amica'', "girlfriend" in the English sense, often being applied euphemistically to a prostitute.
Non-Western traditions have also distinguished variants or symbioses of these states; words like ''storge'', ''philia'', ''eros'', and ''agape'' each describe a unique "concept" of love.
This view is represented in the works of Scott Peck, whose work in the field of applied psychology explored the definitions of love and evil.
Though modern usage of ''koi'' focuses on sexual love and infatuation, the Manyō used the term to cover a wider range of situations, including tenderness, benevolence, and material desire.
These effects rarely last more than a few weeks or months.
The mathematical approach was through the collection of large data from the dating site.
The Apostle Paul glorified love as the most important virtue of all.
Intimacy is a form in which two people share confidences and various details of their personal lives, and is usually shown in friendships and romantic love affairs.
Instead of frequently saying "I love you" as in some Western societies, the Chinese are more likely to express feelings of affection in a more casual way.
''Diligere'' often has the notion "to be affectionate for," "to esteem," and rarely if ever is used for romantic love.
But that person can "love" just one special person, which they call the word "aşk."
The last and most common form of love is sexual attraction and passion.
Saint Augustine says that one must be able to decipher the difference between love and lust.
The complex and abstract nature of love often reduces discourse of love to a thought-terminating cliché.
Philosopher Gottfried Leibniz said that love is "to be delighted by the happiness of another."
Ovid wrote a guide to dating called ''Ars Amatoria'' (''The Art of Love''), which addresses, in depth, everything from extramarital affairs to overprotective parents.
The importance of this can be seen throughout Greek mythology—in particular, Homer's ''Iliad'' and ''Odyssey''.
The concept of ''Ai'' () was developed by the Chinese philosopher Mozi in the 4th century BC in reaction to Confucianism's benevolent love.
It includes loyalty to friends, family, and community, and requires virtue, equality, and familiarity.
In Christianity the practical definition of love is best summarised by St. Thomas Aquinas, who defined love as "to will the good of another," or to desire for another to succeed.
Benedict XVI wrote his first encyclical on "God is love".
In Buddhism, ''Kāma'' is sensuous, sexual love.
He is usually accompanied by his consort Rati and his companion Vasanta, lord of the spring season.
To love one's friends is common practice, to love one's enemies only among Christians.”''
Lust is the initial passionate sexual desire that promotes mating, and involves the increased release of chemicals such as testosterone and estrogen.
Another factor may be that sexually transmitted diseases can cause, among other effects, permanently reduced fertility, injury to the fetus, and increase complications during childbirth.
In this sense, Fromm held that love is ultimately not a feeling at all, but rather is a commitment to, and adherence to, loving actions towards another, oneself, or many others, over a sustained duration.
Love has additional religious or spiritual meaning&mdash;notably in Abrahamic religions.
Gaudiya Vaishnavas who worship Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cause of all causes consider Love for Godhead (Prema) to act in two ways: sambhoga and vipralambha (union and separation)—two opposites .
A person can be said to love an object, principle, or goal to which they are deeply committed and greatly value.
In this, he argued directly against Confucians who believed that it was natural and correct for people to care about different people in different degrees.
''Philia'' ( ''philía''), a dispassionate virtuous love, was a concept addressed and developed by Aristotle.
Are not even the tax collectors doing that?
The Chinese are also more likely to say "I love you" in English or other foreign languages than they would in their mother tongue.
It is a much more potent sentiment than a simple ''liking'' for another.
The Torah's commandment to love God "with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your might" (Deuteronomy 6:5) is taken by the Mishnah (a central text of the Jewish oral law) to refer to good deeds, willingness to sacrifice one's life rather than commit certain serious transgressions, willingness to sacrifice all of one's possessions, and being grateful to the Lord despite adversity (tractate Berachoth 9:5).
Many people in the early 19th century believed that marriage was an important aspect of life to "fulfill earthly human happiness."
Non-love does not include any of these components.
Meher Baba stated that in love there is a "feeling of unity" and an "active appreciation of the intrinsic worth of the object of love."
Some Western authorities disaggregate into two main components, the altruistic and the narcissistic.
Liking only includes intimacy.
Philia is motivated by practical reasons; one or both of the parties benefit from the relationship.
The word "love" can have a variety of related but distinct meanings in different contexts.
He even says, ''“I was in love with love.”'' Finally, he does fall in love and is loved back, by God.
It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud.
Augustine regards the duplex commandment of love in Matthew 22 as the heart of Christian faith and the interpretation of the Bible.
People can also "love" material objects, animals, or activities if they invest themselves in bonding or otherwise identifying with those things.
A common viewpoint of Sufism is that through love, humankind can get back to its inherent purity and grace.
Another interesting equation of love is found by in the philosophical blog 'In the Quest of Truth'.
''Adveṣa'' and ''mettā'' are benevolent love.
Psychology depicts love as a cognitive and social phenomenon.
Biological models of sex tend to view love as a mammalian drive, much like hunger or thirst.
Throughout history, philosophy and religion have done the most speculation on the phenomenon of love.
The corresponding noun ''diligentia'', however, has the meaning of "diligence" or "carefulness," and has little semantic overlap with the verb.
The term ''s'agapo'' means ''I love you'' in Greek.
This diversity of uses and meanings combined with the complexity of the feelings involved makes love unusually difficult to consistently define, compared to other emotional states.
However, in a few unusual and specific domains, such as immune systems, it seems that humans prefer others who are unlike themselves (e.g., with an orthogonal immune system), since this will lead to a baby that has the best of both worlds.
Lewis wrote a book called ''The Four Loves''.
Sufism is often referred to as the religion of love.
Lust is the feeling of sexual desire; romantic attraction determines what partners mates find attractive and pursue, conserving time and energy by choosing; and attachment involves sharing a home, parental duties, mutual defense, and in humans involves feelings of safety and security.
The host fed and provided quarters for the guest, who was expected to repay only with gratitude.
The Free Love movement's initial goal was to separate the state from sexual matters such as marriage, birth control, and adultery.
As for love between marital partners, this is deemed an essential ingredient to life: "See life with the wife you love" (Ecclesiastes 9:9).
By whatever name, advocates had two strong beliefs: opposition to the idea of forceful sexual activity in a relationship and advocacy for a woman to use her body in any way that she pleases.
Passionate love is intense longing, and is often accompanied by physiological arousal (shortness of breath, rapid heart rate); companionate love is affection and a feeling of intimacy not accompanied by physiological arousal.
The term , which is often associated with maternal love or selfless love, originally referred to beauty and was often used in religious context.
The 20th-century Rabbi Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler is frequently quoted as defining love from the Jewish point of view as "giving without expecting to take" (from his ''Michtav me-Eliyahu'', Vol.&nbsp;1).
Empty love only includes commitment.
However, due to the influence of Confucian ''Ren'', the phrase 'Wo ai ni' (I love you) carries with it a very specific sense of responsibility, commitment and loyalty.
Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of romantic love.
The Greek word ''erota'' means ''in love''.
Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.”
''Agape'' ( ''agápē'') means ''love'' in modern-day Greek.
Several common proverbs regard love, from Virgil's "Love conquers all" to The Beatles' "All You Need Is Love".
And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others?
The corresponding noun is ''amor'' (the significance of this term for the Romans is well illustrated in the fact, that the name of the City, Rome—in Latin: ''Roma''—can be viewed as an anagram for ''amor'', which was used as the secret name of the City in wide circles in ancient times), which is also used in the plural form to indicate love affairs or sexual adventures.
The strongest motivation one has in order to take the path of the Bodhisattva is the idea of salvation within unselfish, altruistic love for all sentient beings.
God in Sufism is referred to in three main terms, which are the Lover, Loved, and Beloved, with the last of these terms being often seen in Sufi poetry.
Research has indicated that this stage generally lasts from one and a half to three years.
If you love those who love you, what reward will you get?
The traditional psychological view sees love as being a combination of companionate love and passionate love.
Gaudiya Vaishnavas consider that Krishna-prema (Love for Godhead) is not fire but that it still burns away one's material desires.
A person who practices ''bhakti'' is called a ''bhakta''.
In Confucianism, one displays benevolent love by performing actions such as filial piety from children, kindness from parent, loyalty to the king and so forth.
''Caritas'' is used in Latin translations of the Christian Bible to mean "charitable love"; this meaning, however, is not found in Classical pagan Roman literature.
It was an almost ritualized friendship formed between a host and his guest, who could previously have been strangers.
''Aşk'' (a word of Arabic origin) is a feeling for ''to love,'' or being "in love" (Aşık), as it still is in Turkish today.
''amō'' is the basic verb meaning ''I love'', with the infinitive ''amare'' (“to love”) as it still is in Italian today.
Following developments in electrical theories such as Coulomb's law, which showed that positive and negative charges attract, analogs in human life were developed, such as "opposites attract".
The term "'''sex radical'''" is also used interchangeably with the term "free lover", and was the preferred term by advocates because of the negative connotations of "free love".
It has been linked to higher levels of the chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin to a greater degree than short-term relationships have.
Psychologist Robert Sternberg formulated a triangular theory of love and argued that love has three different components: intimacy, commitment, and passion.
The conventional view in biology is that there are two major drives in love: sexual attraction and attachment.
This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and the Blessed Virgin Mary and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them.
In combination, love is an ''activity'', not simply a feeling.
Such love might exist between family members, friends, and couples.
Over seven centuries ago, Sa'di wrote:
At the same time, the Ancient Greek text of the Bible has examples of the verb ''agapo'' having the same meaning as ''phileo''.
One such attempt was by Christian Rudder, a mathematician and co-founder of online dating website OKCupid, one of the largest online dating sites.
Consequently, "I like you" (''Wo xihuan ni'', ) is a more common way of expressing affection in Chinese; it is more playful and less serious.
A person can love a god, a person, parents, or family.
It can also be a virtue representing human kindness, compassion, and affection—"the unselfish loyal and benevolent concern for the good of another".
The Bodhisattva ideal in Mahayana Buddhism involves the complete renunciation of oneself in order to take on the burden of a suffering world.
Being absorbed in Love for God is considered to be the perfection of life.
Attachment between adults is presumed to work on the same principles that lead an infant to become attached to its mother.
''Koi'' describes a longing for a member of the opposite sex and is typical interpreted as selfish and wanting.
The biblical book Song of Solomon is considered a romantically phrased metaphor of love between God and his people, but in its plain reading, reads like a love song.
The Persian word for love is ''eshgh'',  derived from the Arabic ''ishq'', however is considered by most to be too stalwart a term for interpersonal love and is more commonly substituted for 'doost dashtan' ('liking').
Greek distinguishes several different senses in which the word "love" is used.
and this is the ultimate way of salvation or liberation.
Love encompasses the Islamic view of life as universal brotherhood that applies to all who hold faith.
Saint Augustine says the only one who can love you truly and fully is God, because love with a human only allows for flaws such as ''“jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and contention.”'' According to Saint Augustine, to love God is ''“to attain the peace which is yours.”'' (Saint Augustine's Confessions)
''Birr'' is also used by the Qur'an in describing the love and kindness that children must show to their parents.
Lastly, consummate love includes all three.
Love in its various forms acts as a major facilitator of interpersonal relationships and, owing to its central psychological importance, is one of the most common themes in the creative arts.
It can refer to an emotion of a strong attraction and personal attachment.
If sexual passion is also involved, then this feeling is called paraphilia.
Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth.
Enzo Emanuele and coworkers reported the protein molecule known as the nerve growth factor (NGF) has high levels when people first fall in love, but these return to previous levels after one year.
Many different theories attempt to explain the nature and function of love.
Mozi tried to replace what he considered to be the long-entrenched Chinese over-attachment to family and clan structures with the concept of "universal love" (''jiān'ài'', ).
''Ai'' is used as both a verb (e.g.
Biologist Jeremy Griffith defines love as "unconditional selflessness".
The term '''free love''' has been used to describe a social movement that rejects marriage, which is seen as a form of social bondage.
