Also the Famous Kakori Incident involving  Ram Prasad Bismil, Ashfaqullah Khan, Rajendra Nath Lahiri , Roshan Singh and others followed by the Kakori trial which captured the imagination of the country took place in Lucknow.
It is mostly used by wealthier families, the remaining members of the royal family as well as in Urdu poetry and on public signs.
The Awadh region has its own distinct "Nawabi"-style cuisine.
Hindi is the main language of the city and Urdu is also widely spoken.
Lucknow is the Headquarter for the Badminton Association of India.
The building is now used as a museum and contains delicately executed portraits of men who played major roles in the administration of the kingdom of Oudh.
The economy is growing with contributions from the fields of IT, manufacturing and processing and medical/bio-technology.
All stations lie within the city limits and are well interconnected by bus services and other public road transport.
Despite the fact that the overall work participation rate in the district (32.24%) is higher than the state average (23.7%), the rate among females in Lucknow is very low at only 5.6 percent and shows a decline from the 1991 figure of 5.9 percent.
The Lucknow Police, a subsidiary of Uttar Pradesh Police, keeps the citizens under watch through high-technology control rooms and all important streets and intersections are under surveillance with the help of drone cameras.
* Radio City 91.1&nbsp;MHz
Kanpur Lucknow Roadways Service is a key service for daily commuters who travel back and forth to the city for business and educational purposes.
The government has announced to develop two film cities in Lucknow.
The prestigious National P. G. College, affiliated to the University of Lucknow is ranked as the second best college imparting formal education in the country by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council.
These include Kukrail Reserve Forest and the surrounding picnic area, Begum Hazrat Mahal Park, Gautam Buddha Park, Qaisar Bagh, Rumi Park, Nimbu Park, Sardar Ballabh Bhai Patel Park, Dream Valley Resort, Swarn Jayanti Smriti Vihar Park, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Park, the Ambedkar Memorial and Janeshwar Mishra park which upon completion, would be the largest park in Asia.
'''Lucknow Golf Club''', on the sprawling greens of La Martinière College, is a well-known golf course while an international-level cricket stadium and academy project in the city is under construction in Gomti Nagar and is expected to host its first international match in 2017.
Lucknow is known as a seat of Shia Islam and the epitome of Shia culture in India.
The decision to go ahead with the project was taken in the Uttar Pradesh state budget debate for 2013–14.
In common with other metropolitan cities across India, Lucknow is multicultural and home to people who use different dialects and languages.
To promote the textile industry in the city, the Indian government has allocated Rs.
Suburban stations include Bakshi Ka Talab and Kakori.
Several movies have used Lucknow as their backdrop including Shashi Kapoor's ''Junoon'', Muzaffar Ali's ''Umrao Jaan'' and ''Gaman'', Satyajit Ray's ''Shatranj ke khiladi''.
About 2,500 entrepreneurs are engaged in manufacturing ''chikan'' for sale in local, national and international markets with Lucknow the largest exporter of ''chikan'' embroidered garments.
The city also has a botanical garden, which is a zone of wide plant diversity.
The other stadiums are Dhyan Chand Astroturf Stadium, Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta Stadium at Northern India Engineering College, Babu Banarsi Das UP Badminton Academy, Charbagh, Mahanagar, Chowk and the Sports College near the Integral University.
Persian adventurer Saadat Khan, also known as Burhan-ul-Mulk, was appointed ''nizam'' of Awadh in 1722 and established his court in Faizabad, near Lucknow.
The city has parks and recreation areas managed by the Lucknow Development Authority.
Lucknow, along with Agra and Varanasi, is one of the 3 cities in the Uttar Pradesh Tourism's Heritage Arc, which is a chain of survey triangulations created by the Government Of Uttar Pradesh to boost tourism in the state.
Lucknow also has a sports college named Guru Gobind Singh Sports College.
Over time, the name changed as follows: Laksmanauti -> Laksmnaut -> Laksnaut – > Laksnau -> Laknau.
Hazratganj is a major shopping area situated in the heart of the city, which is home to bazaars, retail complexes, restaurants, hotels, theatres and offices.
The total area covered by the Lucknow district is only about , the population density was much above that of the 690 persons per km2 recorded at state level.
It was built by Major-General Claude Martin who was born in Lyon and died in Lucknow on 13September 1800.
The name changed to ''Lakhanavati'', then Lakhnauti and finally Lakhnau.
Major export items are marble products, handicrafts, art pieces, gems, jewellery, textiles, electronics, software products, computers, hardware products, apparel, brass products, silk, leather goods, glass items and chemicals.
A similar theory states that the city was known as ''Lakshmanavati'' (Sanskrit: लक्ष्मणवती) after Lakshmana.
For the following twenty years, processions and gatherings took place in private or community spaces including Talkatora karbala, Bara Imambara (Imambara Asifi), Chota Imambara (Imambara Husainabad), Dargah Hazrat Abbas, Shah Najaf and Imambara Ghufran Ma'ab.
Historically, Lucknow was considered one of the great centres of Muslim culture.
Air conditioned "Royal Cruiser" buses manufactured by Volvo are operated by UPSRTC for inter state bus services.
This 400-year-old art in its present form was developed in Lucknow and it remains the only location where the skill is practised today.
The Scheduled Caste population of the state represented 21.3 percent of the total population, a figure higher that the state average of 21.15 percent.
This will be the most expensive public transport system in the state, but will provide a rapid means of mass transport to decongest traffic on city roads.
Summers are extremely hot with temperatures rising into the  to  range, the average highs being in the high of 30s (degree Celsius).
Located on National Highway 25, it provides adequate services to ongoing and incoming customers.
HCL Technologies  also started its training program with 150 candidates in April 2016 at HCL Lucknow campus.
The ''chikan'' industry, almost unknown under the Nawabs, has not only survived but is flourishing.
Rajnath Singh replaced Tandon in the Lok Sabha elections of 2014.
By the mid-nineteenth century, however, the British had grown impatient with the arrangement and demanded direct control over Awadh.
They were, however, disinclined to capture Awadh outright and come face to face with the Maratha Empire and the remnants of the Mughal Empire.
It is divided into two corridors with the North-South corridor connecting Munshipulia to CCS International Airport and the East-West corridor connecting Charbagh Railway Station to Vasant Kunj.
He became a puppet king, and in a treaty of 1801, yielded large part of Awadh to the EIC while also agreeing to disband his own troops in favour of a hugely expensive, British-controlled army.
The British East India Company appointed a resident (ambassador) in 1773 and by early 19th century gained control of more territory and authority in the state.
It was set up in 1975 by the Sangeet Natak Akademy (Government of Uttar Pradesh), and became an independent drama school in 1977.
The monument required approximately 22,000 labourers during construction.
It also houses the Uttar Pradesh State Museum.
However the Dalit movement believes that Lakhan Pasi a dalit ruler, was the settler of the city and is named after him.
The Traffic Police is a semi-autonomous body under the Lucknow Police while the Lucknow Fire Brigade department is headed by the Chief Fire Officer, who is assisted by a Deputy Chief Fire Officers and Divisional Officers.
The classical Indian dance form ''Kathak'' took shape in Lucknow.
There are around 35 routes in the city.
An Integrated 'Dial 100' Control Room building is also under construction which when completed will be the world's biggest modern Police Emergency Response System(PERS).
Except for Mohibullapur, all stations are connected to broad gauge and metre gauge railways.
Construction of the first phase will be completed by 2016–17.
Covering , with Terminal 1 for international flights and Terminal 2 for domestic flights, the airport can handle Boeing 767 to Boeing 747-400 aircraft allowing significant passenger and cargo traffic.
Awadh's capital, Lucknow rose to prominence when Asaf-ud-Daula, the fourth nawab, shifted his court to the city from Faizabad in 1775.
In 1798, the fifth Nawab Wazir Ali Khan alienated both his people and the British, and was forced to abdicate.
The completion of metro rail project is the primary object of Uttar Pradesh government currently headed by the chief minister Akhilesh Yadav
Roundly defeated at the Battle of Buxar by the EIC, he was forced to pay heavy penalties and surrender parts of his territory.
Wajid Ali Shah, the then Nawab, was imprisoned then exiled by the EIC to Calcutta.
Lucknow has two Lok Sabha Constituencies Lucknow and Mohanlalganj and nine Vidhan Sabha constituencies.
The city has broadband internet connectivity and video conferencing facilities.
It is also known as the Turkish Gateway, as it was erroneously thought to be identical to the gateway at Constantinople.
In the year 2015, Lucknow also hosted a national level cycling event called 'The Lucknow Cyclothon' in which professional and amateur cyclists took part.
The government has taken many innovative steps to promote Urdu.
'''Lucknow''' ( ) is the largest city of the state of Uttar Pradesh, India A major metropolitan city of India, Lucknow is the administrative headquarters of the eponymous District and Division and the capital of the state of Uttar Pradesh.
Lucknow Development Authority (LDA) together with city's administration organises monthly carnival on the second Sunday of each month in Hazratganj market.
Lucknow sports hostel has produced international-level cricketers such as Mohammad Kaif, Piyush Chawla, Anurag Singh, Suresh Raina, Gyanendra Pandey, Praveen Kumar and R. P. Singh.
Lucknow is among the most bicycle-friendly cities in Uttar Pradesh.
Occasionally, Lucknow experiences colder winter spells than places like Shimla and Mussoorie which are situated way high up in the Himalayas.
Some restaurants in the city are around 100 years old; there are also many high-end restaurants, bakeries, lounges and pubs which cater to the affluent class and foreign travellers.
With the rebellion over, Oudh returned to British governance under a chief commissioner.
The collector is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the city.
Located in Gomti Nagar, It was formed in 1934 and has been holding national-level tournaments in India since 1936.
It is the 10th-busiest airport in India, busiest in Uttar Pradesh, and second-busiest in North India.
The sex ratio in Lucknow city stood at 915 females per 1000 males in 2011 compared to 2001 census figure of 888.
The third Nawab, Shuja-ud-Daula (r. 1753–1775), fell out with the British after aiding the fugitive Nawab of Bengal, Mir Qasim.
This last mourning procession takes place on the morning of the 8th of Rabi' al-awwal, the third Muslim month and includes ''alam'' (flags), ''Zari'' and a ''ta'zieh'' (an imitation of the mausolems of Karbala).
International destinations include Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Muscat, Riyadh, Singapore, and Jeddah.
''Chikankari'' is a popular embroidery work well known all over India.
One of the Nawab's enduring legacies is the region's syncretic Hindu–Muslim culture that has come to be known as the ''Ganga-Jamuni tehzeeb''.
The Commission of Railway Safety of India, under the Ministry of Civil Aviation, has its head office in the Northeast Railway Compound in Lucknow.
The ban was partially lifted in 1997 and Shias were successful in taking out the first Azadari procession in January 1998 on the 21st of Ramadan, the Muslim fasting month.
Former Prime Minister A.
Over 36.37 percent of the total population reside in rural areas leaving barely around 63.3 percent composed of urban population.
It has 300 CNG buses operating in the city out of an overall fleet of 9,500.
It is the world's 74th fastest growing city.
''The Pioneer'' newspaper, headquartered in Lucknow and started in 1865, is the second oldest English language newspaper in India still in production.
It has an imposing structure built in 1923 and acts as the divisional headquarters of the Northern Railway division.
The average national sex ratio in India is 940 according to the Census 2011 Directorate.
Glimpses of Gothic architecture can also be seen in the college building.
* Big FM 92.7&nbsp;MHz
The cities outside Uttar Pradesh that are covered by inter-state bus services are Jaipur, New Delhi, Gwalior, Bharatpur, Singrauli, Faridabad, Gurgaon, Dausa, Ajmer, Dehradun, and Haridwar.
This treaty effectively made the state of Awadh a vassal of the EIC, although it continued to be part of the Mughal Empire in name until 1819.
The dedicated four-metre-wide lane for cyclists is separate from the footpath and the main road.
Muslims observe Muharram, the first month of the Islamic calendar and on Ashura (the 10th day of the month) mourn the memory of Imam Husain, grandson of the Islamic prophet, Muhammad.
The Urdu language is also a part of Lucknowi culture and heritage.
Kebabs are served in a variety of styles; ''kakori'', ''galawati'' , ''shami'', ''boti'', ''patili-ke'', ''ghutwa'' and ''seekh'' are among the available varieties.
* Red FM 93.5&nbsp;MHz
Awadhi, a dialect of the Hindi dialect continuum, has played an important role in Lucknow's history and is still used in the city's rural areas and by the urban population on the streets.
Lucknow is served by several railway stations in different parts of the city.
Around Hazratganj, the city's main market, there is a fusion of old and modern architecture.
With 1975–76 designated South Asian Tourism Year, Lucknow took the opportunity to promote the city's art, culture and tourism to national and international tourists.
During that period, the garrison based at the Residency in Lucknow was besieged by rebel forces during the Siege of Lucknow.
Bhatkande Music Institute University at Lucknow is named after the musician Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande
''Lakshmana's city'').
*  BBDU FM  90.8&nbsp;MHz (Babu Banarsi Das University broadcast station)
It is billed as the India's most hi-tech police control room.
''Lucknow Mahotsava'' (Lucknow Festival) is organised every year to showcase Uttar Pradesh art and culture and to promote tourism.
Wajid Ali Shah, the last Nawab of Awadh, was a great patron and a passionate champion of ''Kathak''.
'''Lucknow Race Course''' in Lucknow Cantonment is spread over ; the course's  long race track is the longest in India.
Historically, the capital of Awadh was controlled by the Delhi Sultanate which then came under the Mughal rule, it was later transferred to the Nawabs of Awadh.
Lucknow has a humid subtropical climate with cool, dry winters from mid-November to February and dry, hot summers from late March to June.
As a sign of recognition, in December 2008, the Indian Geographical Indication Registry (GIR) accorded Geographical Indication (GI) status for ''chikankari'', recognising Lucknow as the exclusive hub for its manufacture.
Yet another theory states that the city's name is connected with Lakshmi, the Hindu goddess of wealth.
Bike-friendly tracks have been established near the Chief Minister's residence in the city.
Collection of soil samples for metro construction began on 5 August 2009 and was completed in September the same year.
More than half of these buildings lie in the old part of the city.
The city became North India's cultural capital, and its nawabs, best remembered for their refined and extravagant lifestyles, were patrons of the arts.
Morphologically, three clear demarcations exist; the Central business district, which is a fully built up area, comprises Hazratganj, Aminabad and Chowk A middle zone surrounds the inner zone with cement houses while the outer zone consists of slums.
The city elects members to the Lok Sabha as well as the Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Sabha (State Assembly).
Along with the rest of India, Lucknow became independent from Britain on 15August 1947.
The residents of Lucknow call themselves ''Lucknowites'' or ''Lakhnavi''.
Although the city's primary official language is Hindi, the most commonly spoken language is colloquial Hindustani.
The city spans an area stretching from the Mohanlalganj (Lok Sabha constituency) in the south to Bakshi Ka Talab in the north and Kakori in the east.
The University of Lucknow shows a huge inspiration from the European style while Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture is prominently present in the Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Sabha building and Charbagh Railway station.
They can be arranged by phone or at taxi stands.
The city has the following FM radio stations:
Ismail Merchant's ''Shakespeare Wallah'', and PAA.
The major Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Inter-state Bus Terminal (ISBT) in Alambagh provides the main inter and intrastate bus lines in Lucknow.
The Shias are authorised to stage nine processions out of the nine hundred that are listed in the register of the Shias.
The main sports hub is the K. D. Singh Babu Stadium, which also has a world-class swimming pool and indoor games complex.
Lucknow's buildings show different styles of architecture with the many iconic buildings built during British and Mughal era.
Lucknow falls under the jurisdiction of a district collector, who is an IAS officer.
Lucknow features a large number of shopping-centres and markets/bazaars.
The first Lucknow Festival was staged as a part of this promotion and ever since, with some exceptions, Lucknow Mahotsava has taken place annually.
Lucknow Urban Agglomeration (LUA) includes Lucknow Municipal Corporation and Lucknow Cantonment with executive power vested in the municipal commissioner of Lucknow, who is an administrative officer.
Many other private players such as Ola cabs have also their presence in the city.
Lucknow has always been known as a multicultural city that flourished as a North Indian cultural and artistic hub and the seat of power of Nawabs in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Surrounding towns such as Kakori, Daryabad, Fatehpur, Barabanki, Rudauli, and Malihabad produced many eminent Urdu poets and litterateurs including Mohsin Kakorvi, Majaz, Khumar Barabankvi and Josh Malihabadi.
The reputation of Lucknow's kebabs is not limited to the local population and the dish attracts people not only from other cities but also from other countries.
The same figures stood at 75.98% and 60.47% in 2001.
In addition, the revenues from running Awadh's armed forces brought them useful returns while the territory acted as a buffer state.
The country's first prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru founded ''The National Herald'' in the city prior to World War II with Manikonda Chalapathi Rau as its editor.
Major companies such as Sify, BSNL, Bharti Airtel, Reliance Communications, Tata Communications, Aircel, Vodafone, uninor, Idea, Tikona, Hathway, and STPI.
The rainy season is from July to mid-September, when the city gets an average rainfall of  from the south-west monsoon winds, and occasionally frontal rainfall will occur in January.
200 crore (2000 million rupees) to set up a textile business cluster in the city.
Some parts of ''Ladies vs Ricky Bahl'', ''Bullett Raja'', ''Ishaqzaade'' ''Ya Rab'' and ''Dabangg 2'' were shot in Lucknow or at other sites nearby.
It houses a rich collection of animals from Asia and other continents.
It has become one of the most important Azadari processions in Lucknow and one of the nine permitted by the government.
Upon Indian independence in 1947, the United Provinces were reorganised into the state of Uttar Pradesh, and Lucknow remained its capital.
B. Vajpayee was a member of Parliament for the Lucknow Parliamentary constituency until 2009, when he was replaced by Lalji Tandon.
The credit for this goes to the secular and syncretic traditions of the Nawabs of Awadh, who took a keen interest in every walk of life, and encouraged these traditions to attain a rare degree of sophistication.
To the east lies Barabanki, to the west Unnao, to the south Raebareli, while to the north lie the Sitapur and Hardoi.
The corporation comprises elected members (corporators elected from the wards directly by the people) with the city mayor as its head.
It is the largest hall in Asia without any external support from wood, iron or stone beams.
Direct air connections are available in Lucknow to New Delhi, Patna, Kolkata, Mumbai, Bangalore, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad, Dehradun and other major cities via Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport.
With a good record in modern sports, the city has produced several national and world-class sporting personalities.
Nahari, a dish prepared using mutton, is very popular among non-vegetarians.
There is also a plan for runway expansion.
It has a multi-level parking lot in place of an old and dilapidated police station making way for extending the corridors into well-aligned pebbled pathways, adorned with piazzas, green areas and wrought-iron Tall, beautifully crafted cast-iron lamp-posts, reminiscent of the Victorian era, flank both sides of the street.
This festival is celebrated in month of May as a birthday of ancient Hanuman temple known as Purana Mandir.In this festival,fair conducted by local public in whole city.
Collectors are in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government, and oversee the national elections held in the city.
It functioned as a throne room at coronations for the royal courts.
One of the earliest All India Radio stations has been operational in Lucknow since 1938.
A pioneer of the style, ''"Ae Mohabbat Tere anjaam pe rona aaya"'' is one of her best known musical renditions.
It oversees five states of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand, Chattisgarh for naxal and terrorist activities.
It is a deemed university and an autonomous organisation under the Ministry of Culture, Government of Uttar Pradesh.
The police is headed by a Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), who is an IPS officer, and comes under the authority of the state Home Ministry.
Lucknow city is located in a seismic zone III.
Lucknow has promoted public-private partnerships in a major way in sectors such as electricity supply, roads, expressways, and educational ventures.
This decision was taken by the state government and UPSRTC to decongest traffic in the railway station area.
Even the new buildings are fashioned using characteristic domes and pillars, and at night these illuminated monuments become the city's main attractions.
Until 1719, the ''subah'' of Awadh was a province of the Mughal Empire administered by a Governor appointed by the Emperor.
The  tall Rumi Darwaza, built by Nawab Asaf-ud-daula (r. 1775–1797) in 1784, served as the entrance to the city of Lucknow.
A sprawling  IT city is planned by the state government at the Chak Ganjaria farms site on the road to Sultanpur and they have already approved special economic zone status for the project, which is expected to create thousands of job opportunities in the state.
The Gomti River, Lucknow's chief geographical feature, meanders through the city and divides it into the Trans-Gomti and Cis-Gomti regions.
Bounded on the east by the Barabanki, on the west by Unnao, on the south by Raebareli and in the north by Sitapur and Hardoi, Lucknow sits on the northwestern shore of the Gomti River.
Mob controlling is carried out with the help of pepper spraying drones.
In winter the maximum temperature is around  and the minimum is in the  to  range.
Ranked sixth in a list of the ten fastest growing job-creating cities in India according to a study conducted by Assocham Placement Pattern, Lucknow's economy was formerly based on the tertiary sector and the majority of the workforce were employed as government servants.
Lucknow was ranked "India's second happiest city" in a survey conducted by IMRB International and LG Corporation, after only Chandigarh.
Lucknow witnessed some of the pivotal moments which changed the politics of the country forever .
Today cricket, association football, badminton, golf and hockey are among the most popular sports in the city.
The school consistently ranks among the top ICSE schools of India.
Lucknow's Asafi Imambara exhibits vaulted halls as its architectural speciality.
* Gyan Vani 105.6&nbsp;MHz (Educational)
Lucknowites refer to strolling in this area as 'Ganjing', a term which has been made very popular among the locals now.
It boasts of lush greenery, a man-made lake, India's longest cycling and jogging track and a variety of flora.
In Lucknow city the total literate population totalled 2,147,564 people of which 1,161,250 were male and 986,314 female.
It has sculptural masterpieces dating back to the 3rd century AD, including intricately carved Mathura sculptures ranging from dancing girls to scenes from the life of Buddha.
The Chattar Manzil, which served as the palace for the rulers of Awadh and their wives is topped by an umbrella-like dome and so named on account of ''Chattar'' being the Hindi word for "umbrella".
