Stone had previously met Catt at an Iowa state woman's suffrage convention in October, 1889, and had been impressed at her ambition and sense of presence, saying "Mrs. Chapman will be heard from yet in this movement."
Back at the NAWSA convention, Anthony was elected president, with Stanton and Stone becoming honorary presidents.
Postal Service honored Stone with a 50¢ postage stamp in the Prominent Americans series.
An Indianapolis newspaper reported that Stone “set about two-thirds of the women in the town crazy after women’s rights and placed half the men in a similar predicament.” St. Louis papers said her lectures attracted the largest crowds ever assembled there, filling the city’s largest auditorium beyond its capacity of two thousand.
Many women retreated in the face of criticism, but Stone continued to wear the short dress exclusively for the next three years.
To her mother's fears that she would be reviled, Stone said she knew she would be disesteemed and even hated, but she must "pursue that course of conduct which, to me, appears best calculated to promote the highest good of the world.”
Blackwell maintained that despite the law, couples could create a marriage of equal partnership, governed by their mutual agreement.
But by then, the dress had become controversial.
Stone and Brown would eventually marry abolitionist brothers and thus become sisters-in-law.
By the spring of 1851, women in several states were wearing the dress in public.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton would later write that "Lucy Stone was the first speaker who really stirred the nation's heart on the subject of woman's wrongs."
When the Panic of 1857 disrupted Anthony’s plan to move the convention to Chicago, Stone made the announcement that the next National Woman’s Rights Convention would be in May 1858.
They could also take steps to protect the wife against unjust laws, such as placing her assets in the hands of a trustee.
The League was re-instituted in 1997.
Along with Isabella Beecher Hooker, Stone, Stanton and Anthony, the "triumvirate" of women's suffrage, were called away from the convention's opening hours by an unexpected woman suffrage hearing before the United States House Committee on the Judiciary.
Stone gave her first public speeches on women's rights in the fall of 1847, first at brother Bowman’s church in Gardner, Massachusetts, and a little later in neighboring Warren.
It inspired other couples to make similar protests part of their wedding ceremonies.
Stone gradually fell in love and in November 1854 agreed to marry Blackwell.
Stone had helped launch the New York campaign at a state woman’s rights convention in Saratoga Springs in August, and at the Cleveland convention recruited workers for it as well as for the work in Illinois, Michigan, and Ohio.
At the national convention of 1856, Stone presented a new strategy suggested by Antoinette Brown Blackwell to send a memorial to the various state legislatures signed by the officers of the National Woman’s Rights Convention.
Stone frequently rose at two o'clock to fit in work and study, and she found her health declining.
When the Faculty Board refused and Stone was elected to write an essay, she declined, saying she could not support a principle that denied women “the privilege of being co-laborers with men in any sphere to which their ability makes them adequate.”
It shall be the business of my life to deepen this disappointment in every woman's heart until she bows down to it no longer.
Indiana and Pennsylvania referred the memorial to select committees, while both Massachusetts and Maine granted hearings.
Seven women were appointed to organize the convention, with Davis and Stone appointed to conduct the correspondence needed to solicit signatures to the call and recruit speakers and attendance.
Stone viewed the tradition of wives abandoning their own surname to assume that of their husbands as a manifestation of the legal annihilation of a married woman’s identity.
Her resumption of long skirts drew the condemnation of such dress-reform leaders as Gerrit Smith and Lydia Sayer Hasbrouk, who accused her of sacrificing principle for the sake of pleasing a husband.
In 1879, when Boston women were granted the franchise in school elections, Stone registered to vote.
Stone made it clear that those wishing for "free divorce" were not associated with Stone's organization AWSA, headed at that time by Reverend Henry Ward Beecher.
Although the farmhouse in which Stone was born and married burned to the ground in 1950, its ruins are at the center of the property.
Having determined to obtain the highest education she could, Stone enrolled at Mount Holyoke Female Seminary in 1839, at the age of 21.
Stone went with her daughter to Chicago in May, 1893 and gave her last public speeches at the World's Congress of Representative Women where she saw a strong international involvement in women's congresses, with almost 500 women from 27 countries speaking at 81 meetings, and attendance topping 150,000 at the week-long event.
Before her own marriage, Stone felt that women should be allowed to divorce drunken husbands, to formally end a "loveless marriage" so that "a true love may grow up in the soul of the injured one from the full enjoyment of which no legal bond had a right to keep her ...Whatever is pure and holy, not only has a right to be, but it has a right also to be recognized, and further, I think it has no right not to be recognized."
Stone mentored Catt the rest of that winter, giving her a wealth of information about lobbying techniques and fund-raising.
But upon receiving assurance from Chase that no law required a married woman to change her name, Stone made a public announcement at the May 7, 1856, convention of the American Anti-Slavery Society in Boston that her name remained Lucy Stone.
Born August 13, 1818.
Also in 1870, Elizabeth Roberts Tilton told her husband Theodore Tilton that she had been carrying on an adulterous relation with his good friend Henry Ward Beecher.
When the first vote was taken,  Stone raised her hand in his defense.
It was here that Stone delivered impromptu remarks that became famous as her "disappointment" speech.
She spoke out for women's rights and against slavery at a time when women were discouraged and prevented from public speaking.
Theodore Tilton published an editorial saying that Beecher "has at a most unseemly time of life been detected in improper intimacies with certain ladies of his congregation."
While some commentators viewed it as a protest against marriage itself, others agreed that no woman should resign her legal existence without such formal protest against the despotism that forced her to forgo marriage and motherhood or submit to the degradation in which law placed a married woman.
She wrote final letters to friends and relatives.
Catt later used the teaching to good effect in leading the final drive to gain women the vote in 1920.
Help from home was not needed, however, because after three months of pressure, the faculty yielded and hired Stone back, paying both her and other women student teachers at the same rate paid male student teachers.
Stone's friends often felt differently about the issue; "Nettee" Brown wrote to Stone in 1853 that she was not ready to accept the idea, even if both parties wanted divorce.
On January 22, 1858, the city auctioned some of her household goods to pay the tax and attendant court costs.
Woodhull's self-serving activities were attracting disapproval from both centrist AWSA and radical NWSA.
Amelia Bloomer, recently moved to Iowa near the Nebraska border, took up the work in that area, while the Indiana Woman’s Rights Society, at least one of whose officers was at the Cincinnati convention, directed the work in Indiana.
Over an eighteen-month courtship conducted primarily through correspondence, Stone and Blackwell discussed the nature of marriage, actual and ideal, as well as their own natures and suitability for marriage.
On May 27, 1853, Stone and Phillips addressed the convention’s Committee on Qualifications of Voters.
Years later, Stone's position on divorce would change.
From the examples of her mother, Aunt Sally, and a neighbor neglected by her husband and left destitute, Stone early learned that women were at the mercy of their husbands’ good will.
When Stone sent petitions to the legislature in February 1850, over half were from towns where she had lectured.
Patchwork and scattered support was reported by activists, with some areas more receptive.
Plans were drawn up, and, at their annual meetings, propositions were heard and voted on, then passed to the other group for evaluation.
Until 1999, the Massachusetts State House displayed only portraits of influential male leaders of the state of Massachusetts.
Like Kelley, she stubbornly raised her hand for each of the remaining five votes.
In 1915, a pilgrimage of suffragists placed a memorial tablet on the house, which read: “This house was the birthplace of Lucy Stone, pioneer advocate of equal rights for women.
You do not care so much for us as if we had votes..." Stone argued that men should work to pass laws for equality in property rights between the sexes.
She initiated petition efforts in New England and several other states and assisted the petitioning efforts of state and local organizations in New York, Ohio, and Indiana.
Although women students could debate each other in their literary society, it was considered inappropriate for them to participate in oral exercises with men; women members of the collegiate rhetoric class were expected to learn by observing their male classmates.
On August 13, 1968, the 150th anniversary of her birth, the U.S.
How then could I blame her for wishing her child to find freedom with God and the angels, where no chains are?"
She was so moved by the sculpture that when she addressed the meeting that evening, she poured out her heart about the statue being emblematic of all enchained womanhood.
Stone's immediate focus was on state referenda under consideration in New York and Nebraska.
Although newspapers had initially praised the practicality of the new style, they soon turned to ridicule and condemnation, now viewing the trousers as a usurpation of the symbol of male authority.
Stone drafted and printed the appeal and Brown Blackwell mailed it to twenty-five state legislatures.
Nevertheless, she disliked the instant attention it drew whenever she arrived in a new place.
Shortly thereafter, Stone accepted a challenge from a former editor of a county newspaper to a public debate on women’s rights, and she soundly defeated him.
In February 1846 Stone intimated to Abby Kelley Foster that she was thinking of becoming a public speaker, but not until the following summer did a storm of controversy over Foster’s speaking at Oberlin decide the matter for her.
In the long-running and influential ''Woman's Journal'', a weekly periodical that she founded and promoted, Stone aired both her own and differing views about women's rights.
When she came across the biblical passage, “and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee,” she was distraught over what appeared to be divine sanction of women’s subjugation, but then reasoned that the injunction applied only to wives.
In February 1845, having decided to submit to the injustice no longer, she asked the Faculty Board for the same pay given two lesser-experienced male colleagues.
Stone demanded an eradication of coverture, the folding of a wife's property into that of her husband.
After gaining a measure of competence, they sought and received permission to debate each other before Stone’s rhetoric class.
In 1844 Stone was given a position teaching arithmetic in the Ladies Department, but again received reduced pay because of her sex.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton wrote that "Lucy Stone was the first person by whom the heart of the American public was deeply stirred on the woman question."
Stone told him she did not wish to marry because she did not want to surrender control over her life and would not assume the legal position occupied by a married woman.
During the May, 1869 AERA conference, a division arose between the great majority of participants such as Stone who wanted to voice support for the proposed fifteenth amendment which would grant suffrage to African-American men, and a vocal minority who opposed any amendment to voting rights which would not provide universal suffrage.
Stone told the assembled congressmen "I come before this committee with the sense which I always feel, that we are handicapped as women in what we try to do for ourselves by the single fact that we have no vote.
After completing a year at coeducational Monson Academy in the summer of 1841, Stone learned that Oberlin Collegiate Institute in Ohio had become the first college in the nation to admit women and had bestowed college degrees on three women.
Stone took charge of the work in Ohio, her new home state, drafting its petition, placing it in Ohio newspapers, and circulating it during lectures across southern Ohio while her recruit worked in the northern part of the state.
Those who knew Stone well thought her voice was lacking strength.
So while continuing to sign her name as Lucy Stone in private correspondence, for eight months she signed her name as Lucy Stone Blackwell on public documents and allowed herself to be so identified in convention proceedings and newspaper reports.
Stone's impromptu speech paled in comparison to Stanton's brilliant outpouring which preceded hers.
Together, Stone and Blackwell worked the northern half of the state in late summer, while Susan Anthony traveled the less-promising rough-and-tumble southern half.
The convention adopted Stone’s resolution calling for the circulation of petitions and saying it was “the duty of women in their respective States to ask the legislators for the elective franchise.” Following the convention, suffrage petitioning took place in the New England states, New York, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, and Nebraska, with resultant legislative hearings or action in Nebraska and Wisconsin.
Stone found the short skirt convenient during her travels and defended it against those who said it was a distraction that hurt the women’s rights cause.
Stone met with Carrie Chapman Catt and Abigail Scott Duniway to form a plan for organizing in Colorado, and Stone attended two days of meetings about getting a woman suffrage drive restarted in Kansas.
In January 1858, Stone staged a highly publicized protest that took the issue of taxation without representation across the nation.
In grateful memory Massachusetts suffragists placed this tablet August 13, 1915.” That tablet, severely damaged but surviving the 1950 fire, is now in the Quaboag Historical Society Museum.
She is featured on the Boston Women's Heritage Trail.
In April 1849, Stone was invited to lecture for the Philadelphia Female Anti-Slavery Society, and Lucretia Mott took advantage of her presence to hold Pennsylvania’s first women’s rights meeting, on May 4, 1849.
Immediately after her marriage, with the agreement of her husband, she continued to sign correspondence as “Lucy Stone” or “Lucy Stone – only.” But during the summer, Blackwell tried to register the deed for property Stone purchased in Wisconsin, and the registrar insisted she sign it as “Lucy Stone Blackwell.” The couple consulted Blackwell’s friend, Salmon P. Chase, a Cincinnati lawyer and future Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, who was not immediately able to answer their question about the legality of her name.
Married working men showed the greatest support, and young single men the least.
The text was used as the standard scholarly resource on 19th-century American feminism for much of the 20th century, causing Stone's extensive contribution to be overlooked in many histories of women's causes.
But she was so disappointed in Mary Lyons’ intolerance of antislavery and women’s rights that she withdrew after only one term.
Stone later published Stanton's speech in its entirety in the ''Woman's Journal'' as "Solitude of Self".
Six women and six men served as pallbearers, including sculptor Anne Whitney, and Stone's old abolitionist friends Thomas Wentworth Higginson and Samuel Joseph May.
Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Matilda Joslyn Gage and Ida Husted Harper began in 1876 to write the ''History of Woman Suffrage''.
Wendell Phillips drafted the first petitions and accompanying appeals for circulation, and William Lloyd Garrison published them in the Liberator for readers to copy and circulate.
Ever since the fall of 1849, when the  ''Water-Cure Journal'' urged women to invent a style of dress that would allow them the free use of their legs, women across the country had been wearing some form of pants and short skirt, generally called the “Turkish costume” or the “American dress.” Most wore it as a walking or gardening dress, but a letter writer to the National Woman’s Rights Convention urged women to adopt it as common attire.
The Bloomer became a fashion fad during the following months, as women from Toledo to New York City and Lowell, Massachusetts, held reform-dress social events and festivals.
The convention adopted her resolution for petitioning all six New England legislatures as well as her proposed form of petition, and it appointed a committee in each state to organize the work.
In the fall of 1846 Stone informed her family of her intention to become a woman’s rights lecturer.
Stone concentrated on convincing Denver voters during the October ballot, but the measure lost heavily, with 68% voting against it.
This caused a sensation in the press, and resulted in an inconclusive legal suit and a subsequent formal inquiry lasting well into 1875.
Stone and Blackwell developed a private agreement aimed at preserving and protecting Stone’s financial independence and personal liberty.
In the fall of 1854, she added a dress a few inches longer, for occasional use.
Stone spoke in front of a number of legislative bodies to promote laws giving more rights to women.
But because of its policy against employing first-year students as teachers, the only work Stone could get other than teaching at district schools during the winter break was house keeping chores through the school’s manual labor program.
This she refused to do, and because her time and energy were consumed with suffrage work, she did not challenge the action in a court of law.
Stone accepted the offer.
"In education, in marriage, in religion, in everything, disappointment is the lot of woman.
Over Blackwell’s objections, Stone refused to be supported and insisted on paying half of their mutual expenses.
To divert criticism from herself, Woodhull published a denunciation of Beecher in 1872 saying that he practiced free love in private while speaking out against it from the pulpit.
Harry Blackwell wrote to Stone from Michigan where he was working toward putting woman suffrage into the state constitution, saying "This Beecher-Tilton affair is playing the deuce with woman suffrage in Michigan.
In May 1851, while in Boston attending the New England Anti-Slavery Society’s annual meeting, Stone went to the exhibit of Hiram’s Powers’s statue of The Greek Slave.
Stone was appointed to the Central Committee of nine women and nine men.
In 1879, after Stone organized a petition by suffragists across the state, Massachusetts women were given strictly delimited voting rights: a woman who could prove the same qualifications as a male voter was allowed to cast her vote for members of the school board.
The debate attracted a large student audience as well as attention from the Faculty Board, which thereupon formally banned women’s oral exercises in coeducational classes.
When a heckler interrupted the proceedings, calling female speakers "a few disappointed women," Stone retorted that yes, she was indeed a "disappointed woman."
Heading the minority, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony formed the female-only National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA) to focus on women gaining voting rights.
Stanton was less inclined to clerical orthodoxy; she was very much in favor of giving women the right to divorce, eventually coming to the view that the reform of marriage laws was more important than women's voting rights.
On October 14, 1853, following the National Woman's Rights Convention held in Cleveland, Ohio, Stone and Lucretia Mott addressed Cincinnati’s first women’s rights meeting, arranged by Henry Blackwell, a local businessman from a family of capable women, who had taken an interest in Stone.
Her brothers were at once supportive, her father encouraged her to do what she considered her duty, but her mother and only remaining sister begged her to reconsider.
In 1892, Stone was convinced to sit for a portrait in sculpture, rendered by Anne Whitney, sculptor and poet.
Stone wrote extensively about a wide range of women's rights, publishing and distributing speeches by herself and others, and convention proceedings.
Stone helped initiate the first National Women's Rights Convention in Worcester, Massachusettsand she supported and sustained it annually, along with a number of other local, state and regional activist conventions.
Warren, Massachusetts contains a Lucy Stone Park, along the Quaboag River.
Blackwell called it "The Colorado Lesson", writing that "Woman suffrage can never be carried by a popular vote, without a political party behind it."
When Stone lectured in the dress in the fall of 1851, hers was the first Bloomer most of her audiences had ever seen.
Over the following thirteen weeks, Stone gave over forty lectures in thirteen cities, during which a report to the ''New York Tribune'' said she was stirring the West on women’s rights “as it is seldom stirred on any subject whatsoever.” After four lectures in Louisville, Stone was begged to repeat the entire course and told she was having more effect there than she could have anywhere else.
Stone was referred to by the court as "Mrs. Lucy Stone Blackwell" and was asked if she wanted to defend herself; she preferred to address the assembly off the record after adjournment, saying "...With my own teeth I would tear open my veins and let the earth drink my blood, rather than wear the chains of slavery.
Stone's organizational activities for the cause of women's rights yielded tangible gains in the difficult political environment of the 19th century.
Antoinette Brown had married Samuel Charles Blackwell on January 24, 1856, becoming Stone's sister-in-law in the process.
Lucy Stone was born on August 13, 1818, on her family's farm at Coy's Hill in West Brookfield, Massachusetts.
She entered the college believing that women should vote and assume political office, that women should study the classic professions and that women should be able to speak their minds in a public forum.
In accordance with that view, Blackwell agreed that Stone would choose “when, where and how often” she would “become a mother.” In addition to this private agreement, Blackwell drew up a protest of laws, rules, and customs that conferred superior rights on husbands and, as part of the wedding ceremony, pledged never to avail himself of those laws.
The AERA could not hold together from the internal strife between these two positions.
Mourners lined the streets for a sight of the funeral procession, and front-page banner headlines ran in news accounts.
Frail health limited her participation in the National Woman’s Rights Convention held October 23–24, 1850, in Worcester, Massachusetts, and she made no formal address until the closing session.
She was the eighth of nine children born to Hannah Matthews and Francis Stone; she grew up with three brothers and three sisters, two siblings having died before her own birth.
Refusing to relinquish her right, Kelley had defiantly raised her hand every time a vote was taken.
The Trustees acquired the home site in 2002 and have been maintaining the property ever since.
On March 6, 1857, Stone, Wendell Phillips, and James Freeman Clarke addressed the Judiciary Committee of the Massachusetts senate, and on March 10 Stone and Phillips addressed a select committee of the Maine legislature.
etc.” Stone read a newspaper account of how a Connecticut antislavery meeting had denied the right to speak or vote to Abby Kelley, recently hired as an antislavery agent to work in that state.
As a child, Lucy resented instances of what she saw as her father’s unfair management of the family’s money.
In addition to being the women’s rights movement’s most prominent spokesperson, Lucy Stone led the movement’s petitioning efforts.
Stone received her baccalaureate degree from Oberlin College on August 25, 1847, becoming the first female college graduate from Massachusetts.
In August when she and her husband Harry wanted to take part in more meetings at the Exposition, she was too weak to go.
According to her wishes, her body was cremated, making her the first person cremated in Massachusetts, though a wait of over two months was undertaken while the crematorium at Forest Hills Cemetery could be completed.
Wendell Phillips drafted both the petition asking that the word “male” be stricken wherever it appeared in the constitution, and an appeal urging Massachusetts citizens to sign it.
In 1843, a deacon of her church was recommended for expulsion because of certain antislavery activities, including giving countenance to Abby Kelley’s anti-church views by driving her to lectures and entertaining her at his home.
Arranging women’s rights lectures around these engagements, she used pay for her antislavery work to defray expenses of her independent lecturing until she felt confident enough to charge admission.
Douglass later found Stone at fault for speaking at a whites-only Philadelphia lecture hall, but Stone insisted that she had replaced her planned speech that day with an appeal to the audience to boycott the facility.
Stone hoped to earn most of her college expenses through teaching in one of the institute’s lower departments.
He also believed that marriage would allow each partner to accomplish more than he or she could alone, and to show how he could help advance Stone’s work, he arranged her highly successful western lecturing tour of 1853.
At the same time, Stone founded the ''Woman's Journal'', a Boston publication voicing the concerns of the AWSA.
That year, a project called "Hear Us", initiated by the state legislature, came to fruition: the portraits of six female leaders were mounted in the historic building.
The image was adapted from a photograph included in Alice Stone Blackwell's biography of Stone.
At age sixteen, Stone began teaching in district schools, as her brothers and sister Rhoda also did.
In February 1893, Stone invited her brother Frank and his wife Sarah to come see the bust, before it was shipped to Chicago for display at the upcoming World's Columbian Exposition.
This editorial position would come back to haunt Stone.
Stone was known for using her maiden name after marriage, as the custom was for women to take their husband's surname.
Stone and Blackwell moved to Pope's Hill in Dorchester, Massachusetts in 1870, relocating from New Jersey to organize the New England Woman Suffrage Association.
After Stone lectured in New York City in April 1853, the report of her speeches in the ''Illustrated News'' was accompanied by this engraving of Stone in the Bloomer dress.
Stone was said to have slipped the prisoner the knife so that Garner could kill herself if she was forced to return to slavery.
With the support of Garrison and other abolitionists, Stone arranged the May 30, 1850, meeting at Boston’s Melodeon Hall that called the first National Woman’s Rights Convention.
While married and living together they would share earnings, but if they should separate, they would relinquish claim to the other’s subsequent earnings.
Oberlin’s compensation policies required Stone to do twice the labor a male student had to do to pay the same costs.
In August 1843, just after she turned 25, Stone traveled by train, steamship, and stagecoach to Oberlin College in Ohio, the country's first college to admit both women and African Americans.
Lucy Stone was among the women so honored.
Wright proposed that because women bore the results of sexual intercourse, wives should govern a couple’s marital relations.
Many of the town's women had been active in the Dorchester Female Anti-Slavery Society and, by 1870, a number of local women were suffragists.
Stone was too weak with heart problems and respiratory illness to attend its first convention, but was elected to chair the executive committee.
She pushed "for the right of woman to the control of her own person as a moral, intelligent, accountable being."
For this she was paid three cents an hour—less than half what male students received for their work in the program.
Stone became a lecturing agent for the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society in June 1848, persuaded by Abby Kelley Foster that the experience would give her the speaking practice she still felt she needed before beginning her women’s rights campaign.
In 1864, the organization gathered 400,000 signatures to petition the United States Congress, significantly assisting in the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment abolishing slavery.
Among measures taken to reduce her expenses, Stone prepared her own meals in her dormitory room.
At the time of Stone’s wedding, both her parents and a married brother and his family lived in the two-and-one-half-story house, and family descendants continued to live there until 1936.
Stone aimed her 1853 petitions at the convention that would meet on May 4, 1853, to revise the state constitution.
She then submitted a petition to the Faculty Board, signed by most members of her graduating class, asking that women chosen to write graduation essays be permitted to read them themselves, as men so honored did, instead of having them read by faculty members.
'''Lucy Stone''' (August 13, 1818 &ndash; October 19, 1893) was a prominent American orator, abolitionist, and suffragist, and a vocal advocate and organizer promoting rights for women.
With the help of abolitionists, Stone conducted Massachusetts’ first petition campaigns for the right of women to vote and hold public office.
Hannah Stone earned  a modest income through selling eggs and cheese but was denied her any control over that money, sometimes denied money to purchase things Francis considered trivial.
The furor over adultery and the friction between various camps of women's rights activists took focus away from legitimate political aims.
Chicago papers praised her lectures as the best of the season, and said they were inspiring discussion and debate in the city’s homes and meeting places.
The wedding took place at Stone’s home in West Brookfield, Massachusetts, on  May 1, 1855, with Stone’s close friend and co-worker Thomas Wentworth Higginson officiating.
Stone continued to edit the journal for the rest of her life, assisted by her husband and their daughter.
Each would have the right to will their property to whomever they pleased unless they had children.
Three years later, Stone followed Kelley’s example.
The previous summer she and Blackwell had purchased a house in Orange, New Jersey, and when the first tax bill came, Stone returned it unpaid with the explanation that taxing women while denying them the right to vote was a violation of America’s founding principles.
In addition to financial independence, Stone and Blackwell agreed that each would enjoy personal independence and autonomy: “Neither partner shall attempt to fix the residence, employment, or habits of the other, nor shall either partner feel bound to live together any longer than is agreeable to both.” During their discussion of marriage, Stone had given Blackwell a copy of Henry C. Wright’s book ''Marriage and Parentage; Or, The Reproductive Element in Man, as a Means to His Elevation and Happiness,'' and asked him to accept its principles as what she considered the relationship between husband and wife should be.
As secretary, Stone took a leading part in organizing and setting the agenda for the national conventions throughout the decade.
In March, Amelia Bloomer, editor of the temperance newspaper ''The Lily,'' announced that she was wearing it and printed a description of her dress along with instructions on how to make it.
Stone's death was the most widely reported of any American woman's up to that time.
In Cleveland on November 24, Stone, along with her husband and Julia Ward Howe, founded the more moderate American Woman Suffrage Association (AWSA), that admitted both men and women.
