Several drugs that target molecular pathways in lung cancer are available, especially for the treatment of advanced disease.
Some people with mediastinal N2 lymph node involvement might benefit from post-operative radiotherapy.
This form of high-intensity radiotherapy is called radical radiotherapy.
This is partly due to the introduction of filter cigarettes.
The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy which is usually performed by bronchoscopy or CT-guidance.
In small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC), the cells contain dense neurosecretory granules (vesicles containing neuroendocrine hormones), which give this tumor an endocrine/paraneoplastic syndrome association.
The English National Health Service was in 2014 re-examining the evidence for screening.
In the middle airways, implicated stem cells include club cells and neuroepithelial cells that express club cell secretory protein.
Typically, two drugs are used, of which one is often platinum-based (either cisplatin or carboplatin).
For individuals who have more advanced disease, hospice care may also be appropriate.
The role of passive smoking is increasingly being recognized as a risk factor for lung cancer, leading to policy interventions to decrease undesired exposure of nonsmokers to others' tobacco smoke.
For individuals with high risk of developing lung cancer, computed tomography (CT) screening can detect cancer and give a person options to respond to it in a way that prolongs life.
About 10% of people with lung cancer do not have symptoms at diagnosis; these cancers are incidentally found on routine chest radiography.
The lung is a common place for the spread of tumors from other parts of the body.
File:Diagram 2 of 3 showing stage 3A lung cancer CRUK 014.svg|Stage IIIA lung cancer, if there is one feature from the list on each side
The presence of Napsin-A, TTF-1, CK7 and CK20 are helpful in confirming the subtype of lung carcinoma.
Prevention is by avoiding risk factors including smoking and air pollution.
People with extensive-stage SCLC have an average five-year survival rate of less than 1%.
Although most cases of adenocarcinoma are associated with smoking, adenocarcinoma is also the most common form of lung cancer among people who have smoked fewer than 100 cigarettes in their lifetimes ("never-smokers") and ex-smokers with a modest smoking history.
Some cancer cells appear to exploit this by expressing PD-L1 in order to switch off T cells that might recognise them as a threat.
Studies from the US, Europe and the UK have consistently shown a significantly increased risk among those exposed to passive smoke.
Investigations of sidestream smoke suggest it is more dangerous than direct smoke.
Signaling through PD-1 inactivates T cells.
In many people, the cancer has already spread beyond the original site by the time they have symptoms and seek medical attention.
Denosumab is a monoclonal antibody directed against receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand.
CT imaging should not be used for longer or more frequently than indicated as extended surveillance exposes people to increased radiation.
More rigorous studies have not demonstrated a clear association between diet and lung cancer risk.
Monoclonal antibodies targeting both PD-1 and PD-L1, such as pembrolizumab and nivolumab are currently in clinical trials for treatment for lung cancer.
For every 3–4 million cigarettes smoked, one lung cancer death occurs.
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) and VATS lobectomy use a minimally invasive approach to lung cancer surgery.
Different aspects of lung cancer were described further in 1810.
These approaches allow additional discussion of treatment options and provide opportunities to arrive at well-considered decisions.
In advanced non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), chemotherapy improves survival and is used as first-line treatment, provided the person is well enough for the treatment.
For nitrogen dioxide, an incremental increase of 10 parts per billion increases the risk of lung cancer by 14%.
Evidence for brachytherapy, however, is less than that for external beam radiotherapy.
Blood tests and pulmonary function testing are used to assess whether a person is well enough for surgery.
However, the effect of smoking cannabis on lung cancer risk is not clear.
Several drugs that target epigenetic mechanisms are in development.
A hollow cavity and associated cell death are commonly found at the centre of the tumor.
During World War Two and the Korean War asbestos also played a part and Agent Orange may have caused some problems during the Vietnam War.
The TRACERx project is looking at how NSCLC develops and evolves, and how these tumors become resistant to treatment.
From the 1960s, the rates of lung adenocarcinoma started to rise relative to other types of lung cancer.
This is likely due to a combination of genes.
Common treatments include palliative care, surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy.
If stage II or III disease is confirmed, adjuvant chemotherapy improves survival by 5% at five years.
The radiation decay products ionize genetic material, causing mutations that sometimes turn cancerous.
This may reveal an obvious mass, widening of the mediastinum (suggestive of spread to lymph nodes there), atelectasis (collapse), consolidation (pneumonia) or pleural effusion.
The World Health Organization has called for governments to institute a total ban on tobacco advertising to prevent young people from taking up smoking.
Chemotherapy before surgery in NSCLC that can be removed surgically also appears to improve outcomes.
About one in 15 homes in the US has radon levels above the recommended guideline of 4 picocuries per liter (pCi/l) (148 Bq/m³).
A refinement of this technique is continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy (CHART), in which a high dose of radiotherapy is given in a short time period.
Bhutan has had a complete smoking ban since 2005 while India introduced a ban on smoking in public in October 2008.
Most cancers that start in the lung, known as primary lung cancers, are carcinomas.
In the United States, black men and women have a higher incidence.
The chemotherapy regimen depends on the tumor type.
By studying samples at different points of tumor development, the researchers hope to identify the changes that drive tumor growth and resistance to treatment.
Silver has been mined there since 1470, and these mines are rich in uranium, with its accompanying radium and radon gas.
In 2012, there were 1.82 million new cases globally, and 1.56 million deaths due to lung cancer, representing 19.4% of all deaths from cancer.
The combination of vinorelbine and cisplatin is more effective than older regimens.
Prognostic factors in small cell lung cancer include performance status, gender, stage of disease, and involvement of the central nervous system or liver at the time of diagnosis.
Targeting these tags with drugs can kill cancer cells.
Adjuvant chemotherapy refers to the use of chemotherapy after apparently curative surgery to improve the outcome.
Passive smoking causes about 3,400 deaths from lung cancer each year in the USA.
Of all people with lung cancer in the US, 16.8% survive for at least five years after diagnosis.
An alternative signaling pathway, c-Met, can be inhibited by tivantinib and onartuzumab.
This form of screening reduces the chance of death from lung cancer by an absolute amount of 0.3% (relative amount of 20%).
Early-stage research in NSCLC using drugs aimed at epigenetic modifications shows that blocking more than one of these tags can kill cancer cells with fewer side effects.
The long-term use of supplemental vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin D or vitamin E does not reduce the risk of lung cancer.
This classification is important for determining management and predicting outcomes of the disease.
Clinical practice guidelines recommend frequencies for pulmonary nodule surveillance.
Lung cancers are classified according to histological type.
In the United States military veterans have a 25-50% higher rate of lung cancer primarily due to higher rates of smoking.
The connection with radon gas was first recognized among miners in the Ore Mountains near Schneeberg, Saxony.
In SCLC, cisplatin and etoposide are most commonly used.
Outdoor air pollution has a small effect on increasing the risk of lung cancer.
Asbestos can cause a variety of lung diseases, including lung cancer.
In lung cancer, these phenomena may include hypercalcemia, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH, abnormally concentrated urine and diluted blood), ectopic ACTH production, or Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (muscle weakness due to autoantibodies).
The most common age at diagnosis is 70 years.
Case reports in the medical literature numbered only 374 worldwide in 1912, but a review of autopsies showed the incidence of lung cancer had increased from 0.3% in 1852 to 5.66% in 1952.
Clinical staging is performed prior to definitive surgery.
The NSCLC Meta-Analyses Collaborative Group recommends if the recipient wants and can tolerate treatment, then chemotherapy should be considered in advanced NSCLC.
Polymorphisms on chromosomes 5, 6 and 15 are known to affect the risk of lung cancer.
Rates in Africa and South Asia are much lower.
File:Diagram showing one option for stage 2Bb lung cancer CRUK 177.svg|One option for stage IIB lung cancer, with T2b; but if tumor is within 2&nbsp;cm of the carina, this is stage 3
With increased smoking in developing countries, the rates are expected to increase in the next few years, notably in China and India.
Common sites of spread include the brain, bone, adrenal glands, opposite lung, liver, pericardium, and kidneys.
Surgery might improve outcomes when added to chemotherapy and radiation in early stage SCLC.
File:Diagram showing stage 1A and 1B lung cancer CRUK 197.svg|Stage IA and IB lung cancer
About 9% of lung cancers are large-cell carcinoma.
Radical radiotherapy, initially used in the 1950s, was an attempt to use larger radiation doses in patients with relatively early-stage lung cancer, but who were otherwise unfit for surgery.
Small-cell lung carcinoma (SCLC), even relatively early stage disease, is treated primarily with chemotherapy and radiation.
Nearly 40% of lung cancers are adenocarcinoma, which usually originates in peripheral lung tissue.
Malignant lung tumors made up only 1% of all cancers seen at autopsy in 1878, but had risen to 10–15% by the early 1900s.
For potentially curable SCLC cases, chest radiotherapy is often recommended in addition to chemotherapy.
As more damage accumulates, the risk of cancer increases.
Other immunotherapy treatments interfere with the binding of programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) protein with its ligand PD-1 ligand 1 (PD-L1).
If cancer growth blocks a short section of bronchus, brachytherapy (localized radiotherapy) may be given directly inside the airway to open the passage.
At presentation, 30–40% of cases of NSCLC are stage IV, and 60% of SCLC are stage IV.
SCLC derived from neuroendocrine cells may express CD56, neural cell adhesion molecule, synaptophysin or chromogranin.
File:Diagram showing stage 4 lung cancer CRUK 232.svg|Stage IV lung cancer
For both NSCLC and SCLC patients, smaller doses of radiation to the chest may be used for symptom control (palliative radiotherapy).
Tobacco smoking and asbestos have a synergistic effect on the formation of lung cancer.
Lung cancers are carcinomas—malignancies that arise from epithelial cells.
A subtype of adenocarcinoma, the bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, is more common in female never-smokers, and may have a better long-term survival.
File:Diagram 1 of 2 showing stage 3B lung cancer CRUK 005.svg|Stage IIIB lung cancer
Fine particulates (PM2.5) and sulfate aerosols, which may be released in traffic exhaust fumes, are associated with slightly increased risk.
In the US, people with medical insurance are more likely to have a better outcome.
Passive smoking—the inhalation of smoke from another's smoking—is a cause of lung cancer in nonsmokers.
The incidence of lung adenocarcinoma continues to rise.
In the USA, the lifetime risk of developing lung cancer is 8% in men and 6% in women.
Other genes that are often mutated or amplified are ''c-MET'', ''NKX2-1'', ''LKB1'', ''PIK3CA'', and ''BRAF''.
If left untreated, this growth can spread beyond the lung by the process of metastasis into nearby tissue or other parts of the body.
Radiotherapy is often given together with chemotherapy, and may be used with curative intent in people with NSCLC who are not eligible for surgery.
They typically occur close to large airways.
For NSCLC, the best prognosis is achieved with complete surgical resection of stage IA disease, with up to 70% five-year survival.
The cell lines of origin are not fully understood.
Outdoor air pollution is estimated to account for 1–2% of lung cancers.
Prophylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) is a type of radiotherapy to the brain, used to reduce the risk of metastasis.
Palliative care when added to usual cancer care benefits people even when they are still receiving chemotherapy.
Common treatments include surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy.
Lung cancer can also be an incidental finding, as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph or CT scan done for an unrelated reason.
The results of this project will help scientists and doctors gain a better understanding of NSCLC and potentially lead to the development of new treatments against the disease.
Adjuvant chemotherapy for people with stage IB cancer is controversial, as clinical trials have not clearly demonstrated a survival benefit.
However, the differential diagnosis is wide.
For both NSCLC and SCLC, the two general types of staging evaluations are clinical staging and surgical staging.
Screening should not be done in those with other health problems that would make treatment of lung cancer if found not an option.
Smoking accounts for about 85% of lung cancer cases.
Erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib inhibit tyrosine kinase at the epidermal growth factor receptor.
Research has not found two other available tests—sputum cytology or chest radiograph (CXR) screening tests—to have any benefit.
In SCLC, chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy is typically used.
They assess that such bans have reduced tobacco consumption by 16% where instituted.
In smokers who work with asbestos, the risk of lung cancer is increased 45-fold compared to the general population.
Laser photosection involves the delivery of laser light inside the airway via a bronchoscope to remove the obstructing tumor.
Her2/neu is affected less frequently.
Four main histological subtypes are recognised, although some cancers may contain a combination of different subtypes, such as adenosquamous carcinoma.
Emissions from automobiles, factories, and power plants also pose potential risks.
The U.S. Preventative Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends yearly screening using low-dose computed tomography in those who have a total smoking history of 30 pack-years and are between 55 and 80 years old until a person has not been smoking for more than 15 years.
Metastases often have a characteristic round appearance on chest radiograph.
In 1997, continuous hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy was seen as an improvement over conventional radical radiotherapy.
The vast majority (85%) of cases of lung cancer are due to long-term tobacco smoking.
A 2013 review did not find an increased risk from light to moderate use.
This makes it the most common cause of cancer-related death in men and second most common in women after breast cancer.
These changes affect the normal functions of the cell, including cell proliferation, programmed cell death (apoptosis) and DNA repair.
Young nonsmokers who see tobacco advertisements are more likely to take up smoking.
DNA methyltransferase inhibitors in development include decitabine, azacytidine, and hydralazine.
These are so named because the cancer cells are large, with excess cytoplasm, large nuclei and conspicuous nucleoli.
Compared to external beam radiotherapy, brachytherapy allows a reduction in treatment time and reduced radiation exposure to healthcare staff.
File:Diagram showing one option for stage 2Ba lung cancer CRUK 176.svg|Stage IIB lung cancer
Most cases arise in the larger airways (primary and secondary bronchi).
Metastasis of lung cancer requires transition from epithelial to mesenchymal cell type.
Combinations with carboplatin, gemcitabine, paclitaxel, vinorelbine, topotecan, and irinotecan are also used.
The most common symptoms are coughing (including coughing up blood), weight loss, shortness of breath, and chest pains.
Mutations and amplification of EGFR are common in non-small-cell lung carcinoma and provide the basis for treatment with EGFR-inhibitors.
Lung cancer was uncommon before the advent of cigarette smoking; it was not even recognized as a distinct disease until 1761.
Palliative care may avoid unhelpful but expensive care not only at the end of life, but also throughout the course of the illness.
In the 1970s, successful chemotherapy regimens were developed.
About 10–15% of cases occur in people who have never smoked.
The influence of "Big Tobacco" plays a significant role in the smoking culture.
Despite this discovery, mining continued into the 1950s, due to the USSR's demand for uranium.
In NSCLC, samples are taken of nearby lymph nodes during surgery to assist staging.
Prognostic factors in NSCLC include presence of pulmonary symptoms, large tumor size (>3&nbsp;cm), nonsquamous cell type (histology), degree of spread (stage) and metastases to multiple lymph nodes, and vascular invasion.
Those who live with someone who smokes have a 20–30% increase in risk while those who work in an environment with secondhand smoke have a 16–19% increase in risk.
In most cases of early-stage NSCLC, removal of a lobe of lung (lobectomy) is the surgical treatment of choice.
In people who are unfit for a full lobectomy, a smaller sublobar excision (wedge resection) may be performed.
Stage is often advanced at the time of diagnosis.
As a result, in 1964 the Surgeon General of the United States recommended smokers should stop smoking.
In limited-stage disease, PCI increases three-year survival from 15% to 20%; in extensive disease, one-year survival increases from 13% to 27%.
Treatment and long-term outcomes depend on the type of cancer, the stage (degree of spread), and the person's overall health.
PCI is most useful in SCLC.
The definitive diagnosis of lung cancer is based on histological examination of the suspicious tissue in the context of the clinical and radiological features.
'''Lung cancer''', also known as '''lung carcinoma''', is a malignant lung tumor characterized by uncontrolled cell growth in tissues of the lung.
In England, between 2005 and 2009, overall five-year survival for lung cancer was less than 10%.
Histone deacetylase inhibitors in development include valproic acid, vorinostat, belinostat, panobinostat, entinostat, and romidepsin.
Policy interventions to decrease passive smoking in public areas such as restaurants and workplaces have become more common in many Western countries.
Immunostaining of a biopsy is often helpful to determine the original source.
This may occur through activation of signaling pathways such as Akt/GSK3Beta, MEK-ERK, Fas, and Par6.
File:Diagram 1 of 3 showing stage 3A lung cancer CRUK 008.svg|Stage IIIA lung cancer
However the role of surgery in SCLC is being reconsidered.
Other commonly used drugs are gemcitabine, paclitaxel, docetaxel, pemetrexed, etoposide or vinorelbine.
Radon was confirmed as a cause of lung cancer in the 1960s.
Asbestos can also cause cancer of the pleura, called mesothelioma (which is different from lung cancer).
However, the smoker has to inhale more deeply to receive the same amount of nicotine, increasing particle deposition in small airways where adenocarcinoma tends to arise.
For lung cancer cases that develop resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) tyrosine kinase inhibitors, new drugs are in development.
Squamous-cell carcinoma accounts for about 30% of lung cancers.
In advanced cases, appropriate chemotherapy improves average survival over supportive care alone, as well as improving quality of life.
File:Diagram 2 of 2 showing stage 3B lung cancer CRUK 011.svg|Stage IIIB lung cancer
Treatment for lung cancer depends on the cancer's specific cell type, how far it has spread, and the person's performance status.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) regulates cell proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion.
Sixty to seventy percent have extensive disease (which cannot be targeted within a single radiation therapy field) at presentation.
Symptoms that suggest the presence of metastatic disease include weight loss, bone pain and neurological symptoms (headaches, fainting, convulsions, or limb weakness).
Clinical trials are underway to evaluate how well these drugs kill lung cancer cells in humans.
The average survival time for limited-stage disease is 20 months, with a five-year survival rate of 20%.
File:Diagram showing stage 2A lung cancer CRUK 213.svg|Stage IIA lung cancer
Outcomes are generally worse in the developing world.
In the proximal airways, stem cells that express keratin 5 are more likely to be affected, typically leading to squamous-cell lung carcinoma.
Techniques used for this include transthoracic needle aspiration, transbronchial needle aspiration (with or without endobronchial ultrasound), endoscopic ultrasound with needle aspiration, mediastinoscopy, and thoracoscopy.
Tentative evidence supports an increased risk of lung cancer from indoor air pollution related to the burning of wood, charcoal, dung or crop residue for cooking and heating.
Other concerns include radiation exposure and the cost of testing along with follow up.
The British Doctors' Study, published in the 1950s, was the first solid epidemiological evidence of the link between lung cancer and smoking.
Rare subtypes include carcinoid tumors, bronchial gland carcinomas and sarcomatoid carcinomas.
