Pulmonary plethysmographs are used to measure functional residual capacity.
The throat muscles then presses the throat against the underside of the skull, forcing the air into the lungs.
Air then travels continuously from the air sacs at the back, through the lungs, and to the air sacs at the front.
The medial surface of the lungs faces towards the centre of the chest, and lies against the heart, great vessels, and the carina where the two main bronchi branch off from the base of the trachea.
Lungs are relatively fixed in size, unlike the fluctuating size of a bellows-type lung.
Females tend to have a 20–25% lower capacity than males.
The dorsal respiratory group seems primarily responsible for control of the diaphragm and integration of signals transmitted back via the vagus nerve that affect the rate of respiration.
The respiratory tract begins with the trachea and bronchi.
The inhaled and exhaled by a person at rest is the tidal volume (normally 500-750mL); the inspiratory reserve volume and expiratory reserve volume are the additional amounts a person is able to forcibly inhale and exhale respectively.
These type I cells also make up the alveolar septa which separate each alveolus.
At birth, the baby's lungs are filled with fluid secreted by the lungs and are not inflated.
This volume change is caused by the movement of the sternum and ribs and this movement is often synchronised with movement of the flight muscles.
Input from the parasympathetic nervous system occurs via the vagus nerve.
The lungs also receive deoxygenated blood from the heart and supply it with oxygen, in a process known as respiration.
Obstructive lung diseases are often identified because of symptoms and diagnosed with pulmonary function tests such as spirometry.
Reptilian lungs typically receive air via expansion and contraction of the ribs driven by axial muscles and buccal pumping.
This is not very efficient, but amphibians have low metabolic demands and can also quickly dispose of carbon dioxide by diffusion across their skin in water, and supplement their oxygen supply by the same method.
It begins in the lower oblique fissure near the posterior border of the lung, and, running horizontally forward, cuts the anterior border on a level with the sternal end of the fourth costal cartilage; on the mediastinal surface it may be traced backward to the hilum.
They are situated within the thoracic cavity of the chest.
Other rarer conditions may also affect the blood supply of the lung, such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis, which causes inflammation of the small blood vessels of the lungs and kidneys.
Carbon dioxide levels, particularly the arterial and cerebrospinal fluid levels, detected by medullary central chemoreceptors, cause an increase in the rate of breathing when high and a decrease when low.
This means that birds are able to extract a greater concentration of oxygen from inhaled air.
The upper, horizontal fissure, separates the upper from the middle lobe.
The air sacs expand and contract due to changes in the volume in the thorax and abdomen.
The esophagus may sit in a wider shallow impression at the base of the lung.
This accompanies other changes which result in an increased amount of blood entering the lung tissues.
Breathing refers to the process by which air enters and leaves the lungs.
The bronchial tree continues branching until it reaches the level of terminal bronchioles, which lead to respiratory bronchioles and alveolar sacs.
Within these two groups are mixed groups of nerves, inspiratory neurons, and expiratory neurons.
These in turn supply air through alveolar ducts into the alveoli, where the exchange of gases take place.
Significant hypoxia, primarily detected by peripheral chemoreceptors in the aortic body, can cause an increase in the rate of breathing.
This quantity can easily fluctuate from between one-half and twice the normal volume.
The heart sits in an impression called the cardiac impression.
A pulmonary embolism is a blood clot that becomes lodged in the pulmonary arteries.
In most of the ray-finned fish the sacs evolved into closed off gas bladders, while a number of carps, trouts, herrings, catfish, and eels have retained the physostome condition with the sack being open to the esophagus.
The left subclavian artery, a branch off the aortic arch, sits in a groove from the arch to near the apex of the lung.
Once a cancer is identified it is staged using scans such as a CT scan and a sample of tissue (a biopsy) is taken.
On the same surface, immediately above the hilum, is a well-marked curved groove for  the aortic arch, and a groove below it for the descending aorta.
Types I and II make up the walls and septa of the alveoli.
Blood passes through small capillaries next to the alveoli in the lung, receives oxygen, and travels back to the heart.
These include pulmonary fibrosis which can occur when the lung is inflamed for a long period of time.
The action of breathing takes place because of nerve signals sent by the respiratory centres in the brainstem, along the phrenic nerve to the diaphragm.
From here, air is expelled.
The lungs are located in the chest on either side of the heart in the rib cage.
The respiratory centres are situated below the fourth ventricle and contains two main groups of neurons, a ventral respiratory group and a dorsal respiratory group.
In embryonic development, the lungs begin to develop as an outpouching of the foregut, a tube which goes on to form the upper part of the digestive system.
Pulmonary hypertension describes an increased pressure at the beginning of the pulmonary artery that has a large number of differing causes.
At birth the lungs are very undeveloped with only a fraction of the alveoli present.
It is divided into three lobes, an upper, middle, and a lower, by two fissures, one oblique and one horizontal.
Before birth, the lungs are filled with fetal lung fluid.
Smaller particles deposit in and behind the mouth, and larger particles are trapped after inhalation by nose hairs.
In caecilians, as in snakes, only the right lung attains any size or development.
Small sacs called called ''atria'' radiate from the walls of the tiny passages, and are the site of gas exchange.
This mucociliary clearance is an important defence system against air-borne infection.
From week 16 to week 26, the bronchi enlarge and lung tissue becomes highly vascularised.
This necessarily restrict their size: all are small and rather thread-like in appearance, maximising skin surface relative to body volume.
They cannot swim and would drown in water, yet they possess a rudimentary set of gills.
Bronchioles possess the same columnar epithelial lining, but are not surrounded by cartilage rings.
During the fifth week the right bud branches into three secondary bronchial buds and the left branches into two secondary bronchial buds.
Thus, the lungs of vertebrates are homologous to the gas bladders of fish (but not to their gills).
Diseases such as bronchitis can also affect the respiratory tract.
Instead, they are encircled by a layer of smooth muscle.
The left lung, unlike the right, does not have middle lobe, though it does have a homologous feature, a projection of the upper lobe termed the “lingula”.
This triggers the first breath, within about 10 seconds after delivery.
The lungs also serve a protective role.
The majority of emboli arise because of deep vein thrombosis in the legs.
There are usually three arteries, and they branch alongside the bronchi and bronchioles.
After the first breath, the fluid is quickly absorbed into the body or exhaled.
The trachea receives air from the pharynx and travels down to a place where it splits (the carina) into a right and left bronchus.
The inner lining of the blood vessels secretes angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) an enzyme that catalyses the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II.
This also allows them to sustain a higher metabolic rate than most equivalent weight mammals.
They are conical in shape with a narrow rounded apex at the top and a broad base that rests on the diaphragm.
The major risk factor for cancer is smoking.
The '''lungs''' are the primary organs of respiration in humans and many other animals including a few fish and some snails.
Both lungs have a central recession called the  hilum at the root of the lung, where the blood vessels and airways pass into the lungs.
This sac encloses each lung and also divides each lung into sections called lobes.
The segmental anatomy is useful clinically for localising disease processes in the lungs.
The lungs are supplied by nerves of the autonomic nervous system.
This draws air into the lungs, which passes through the respiratory tract and into the alveoli, where respiration occurs.
Fibrosis in the lung replaces functioning lung tissue with fibrous connective tissue.
This is described in more detail below.
These saccules form at the end of the bronchioles and their appearance marks the point at which limited respiration would be possible.
Lung function testing is carried out by evaluating a person's capacity to inhale and exhale in different circumstances.
from the respiratory bud (or diverticulum) which appears ventrally to the caudal portion of the foregut.
This ratio, the FEV1/FEV ratio, is important to distinguish whether a disease is restrictive or obstructive.
The bronchi in the conducting zone are reinforced with hyaline cartilage in order to hold open the airways.
At birth however, air begins to pass through the lungs, and the diversionary duct closes, so that the lungs can begin to respire.
From the sixth week to the sixteenth week, the major elements of the lungs appear except the alveoli.
These may be investigated using a chest X-ray or CT scan, and may require the insertion of a surgical drain until the underlying cause is identified and treated.
Due to the possibility of respiration across the skin combined with small size, all known lungless tetrapods are amphibians.
These pockets are similar to alveoli in mammals, but much larger and fewer in number.
Interspersed with the epithelial cells are goblet cells which produce mucous, and club cells with actions similar to macrophages.
Oxygen diffuses through the walls of the alveoli into the enveloping capillaries (small blood vessels).
These structures are lined with columnar epithelial cells that possess cilia, small frond-like projections.
Segments for the left and right lung are shown in the table.
Lung cancer can can either arise directly from lung tissue or as a result of metastasis from another part of the body.
The lungs also provide airflow that makes vocal sounds including human speech possible.
An azygos lobe is a congenital anatomical variation which though usually without effect can cause problems in thoracoscopic procedures.
Together, the lungs contain approximately  of airways and 300 to 500 million alveoli.
A number of muscles assist in this action, including the intercostal muscles and muscles that line the abdominal wall.
The bottom of the lungs is smooth and rests on the diaphragm, matching its concavity.
Surrounding these in the trachea and bronchi are cartilage rings, which help to maintain stability.
Some invertebrates have "lungs" that serve a similar respiratory purpose as, but are not evolutionarily related to, vertebrate lungs.
Pulmonary emboli may be investigated using a ventilation/perfusion scan, a CT scan of the arteries of the lung, or blood tests such as the D-dimer.
Other lungfish and ''Polypterus'', however, have two lungs, which are located in the upper part of the body, with the connecting duct curving around and above the esophagus.
The lungs of birds are honeycomb-like and contain millions of tiny passages called ''parabronchi''.
Alveolar sacs, are made up of clusters of alveoli, like individual grapes within a bunch.
The bronchi continue to divide within the lung, and after multiple divisions, give rise to bronchioles.
In particular, how much a person is able to exhale in one minute (called FEV1) as a proportion of how much they are able to exhale in total (FEV).
The mediastinal surface of the right lung is indented by a number of nearby structures.
They are involved in the maintenance of homeostasis.
Cancers may be treated by surgically removing the tumour, radiotherapy, chemotherapy or combinations thereof, or with the aim of symptom control.Lung cancer screening is being recommended in the United States for high-risk populations.
The front and outer sides of the lung face the ribs, which make light indendations on their surfaces.
The ventral respiratory group is responsible for muscle movements associated with respiration (such as of the pharynx, larynx and intercostal muscles) and may contain the "pacemaker" cells responsible for driving the rate of respiration in the pre-Botzinger complex.
The lungs are enclosed within a sac called the pleural sac which allows the inner and outer walls to slide over each other whilst breathing takes place, without much friction.
The lungs of birds are relatively small, but are connected to 8–9 air sacs that extend through much of the body, and are in turn connected to air spaces within the bones.
Some arachnids, spiders and scorpions, have structures called "book lungs" used for atmospheric gas exchange.
Many obstructive lung diseases are managed by avoiding triggers (such as dust mites or smoking), with symptom control such as bronchodilators, and with suppression of inflammation (such as through corticosteroids) in severe cases.
The summed total of forced inspiration and expiration is a person's vital capacity.
Humans have two lungs, a right lung and a left lung.
Tall people tend to have a larger total lung capacity than shorter people.
Inter alveoli septa have a double capillary network instead of the single network of the developed lung.
In some salamanders even these are lacking, and the lung has a smooth wall.
Birds are thus equipped to fly at altitudes at which mammals would succumb to hypoxia.
Other known lungless tetrapods are the Bornean flat-headed frog and ''Atretochoana eiselti'', a caecilian.
Pulmonates are mostly land snails and slugs that have developed a simple lung from the mantle cavity.
Amphisbaenians, however, have the opposite arrangement, with a major left lung, and a reduced or absent right lung.
The respiratory tract ends in lobules.
In mammals and most other vertebrates, two lungs are located near the backbone on either side of the heart.
The oxygenated blood is then pumped to the rest of the body.
Its name means “little tongue”.
A shallower groove in front of the artery and near the edge of the lung, lodges the left innominate vein.
The mediastinal surface of the left lung has a large ''cardiac impression'' where the heart sits.
Drugs and other substances can be absorbed, modified or excreted in the lungs.
In buccal pumping, the floor of the mouth is lowered, filling the mouth cavity with air.
When the lungs are formed the fetus is held in the fluid-filled amniotic sac and so they do not function to breathe.
The lungs of most frogs and other amphibians are simple and balloon-like, with gas exchange limited to the outer surface of the lung.
These spontaneously generate signals (action potentials) responsible for inspiration and expiration which are then transmitted to the diaphragm by the phrenic nerve.
The lungs together weigh approximately , and the right is heavier.
The process of breathing occurs because of signals sent along the phrenic nerve in the respiratory centres situated in the medulla of the brainstem.
The lower, oblique fissure, separates the lower from the middle and upper lobes, and is closely aligned with the oblique fissure in the left lung.
Air is warmed to , humidified and cleansed by the conduction zone; particles from the air being removed by the cilia on the respiratory epithelium lining the passageways.
Factors internal to the lung, including pulmonary stretch or detection of irritants, can also stimulate breathing.
Alveoli consist of two types of alveolar cell and an alveolar macrophage.
The lungs of amphibians typically have a few narrow internal walls (septa) of soft tissue around the outer walls, increasing the respiratory surface area and giving the lung a honey-comb appearance.
Snakes and limbless lizards typically possess only the right lung as a major respiratory organ; the left lung is greatly reduced, or even absent.
Gas exchange occurs by diffusion in these walls, as gas travels between the blood vessels and the lumen of each parabronchus.
The coconut crab is terrestrial and uses structures called branchiostegal lungs to breathe air.
Thinner persons tend to have a larger capacity, and capacity can be increased by physical training as much as 40%.
The septa consist of an epithelial lining and associated basement membranes.
The lung of most reptiles has a single bronchus running down the centre, from which numerous branches reach out to individual pockets throughout the lungs.
It is largely driven by the muscular diaphragm at the bottom of the thorax.
On inspiration, air travels through the trachea of a bird into the 8–9 air sacs.
Each lung is divided into lobes by the invaginations of the pleura as fissures.
These consist of a respiratory bronchiole, which branches into alveolar ducts and alveolar sacs, which in turn divide into alveoli.
The surfactant reduces the surface tension at the air-alveolar surface which allows expansion of the terminal saccules.
The lining of the lung also secretes immunoglobulin A which protects against respiratory infections; goblet cells secrete mucous which also contains contains several antimicrobial compounds such as defensins, antiproteases, and antioxidates.
There is a groove for the esophagus behind the hilum and the pulmonary ligament, and near the lower part of the esophageal groove is a deeper groove for the inferior vena cava before it enters the heart.
These give the lung a sponge-like texture.
It results in hemorrhage of the alveoli causing a build-up of fluid which can impair breathing, and this can be either mild or severe.
At the end of the fourth week the lung bud divides into two, the right and left primary bronchial buds.
The lungs also have a sympathetic tone from norepinephrine acting on the beta 2 receptors in the respiratory tract, which causes bronchodilation.
In tuataras, snakes, and some lizards, the lungs are simpler in structure, similar to that of typical amphibians.
The blood volume of the lungs is about 450 millilitres on average, about 9 per cent of the total blood volume of the entire circulatory system.
Type II cells are able to divide and differentiate to Type 1 cells.
The lungs possess several characteristics which protect against infection.
An externally located opening called the pneumostome allows air to be taken into the mantle cavity lung.
There are two bronchopulmonary segments of the lingula: superior and inferior.
They help in the regulation of blood pressure as part of the renin-angiotensin system.
Other lung function tests include spirometry, measuring the amount (volume) and flow of air that can be inhaled and exhaled.
The function of the lungs can also be affected by compression from fluid in the pleural cavity pleural effusion, or other substances such as air (pneumothorax), blood (hemothorax), or rarer causes.
The apex of the lung extends into the root of the neck, reaching shortly above the level of the sternal end of the first rib.
These outpocketings first arose in the  bony fish.
Scorpions have spiracles on their body for the entrance of air to the book lungs.
Type I cells are not able to divide, and consequently rely on differentiation from Type II cells.
Amphibians employ a positive pressure system to get air to their lungs, forcing air down into the lungs by buccal pumping.
Between the pleurae is a potential space called the pleural cavity containing pleural fluid.
Both crocodilians and monitor lizards have developed lungs similar to those of birds, providing an unidirectional airflow and even possessing air sacs.
They remove substances which deposit in the alveoli including loose red blood cells that have been forced out from blood vesels.
The alveoli continue to form until the third year.
Respiration is divided into 'inspiration'', in which air is taken into the lungs, and ''expiration'', in which it is expelled from them.
Crocodilians also rely on the hepatic piston method, in which the liver is pulled back by a muscle anchored to the pubic bone (part of the pelvis), which in turn pulls the bottom of the lungs backward, expanding them.
The lungs have a unique blood supply, receiving deoxygenated blood sent from the heart for the purposes of receiving oxygen (the pulmonary circulation) and a separate supply of oxygenated blood (the bronchial circulation).
Type I are squamous epithelial cells that make up the alveolar wall structure.
Over the following week, the secondary buds branch into tertiary buds, about ten on each side.
The lungs only fully develop in early childhood.
Medical terms related to the lung often begin with ''pulmo-'', from the Latin ''pulmonarius'' (of the lungs) as in pulmonology, or with ''pneumo-'' (from Greek πνεύμων "lung") as in pneumonia.
Asthma, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are all obstructive lung diseases characterised by airway obstruction.
Above the hilum of the lung is an arched groove for the azygos vein, and above this is a wide groove for the superior vena cava and right innominate vein; behind this, and close to the top of the lung is a groove for the innominate artery.
Type I cells provide 95% of the surface area of each alveoli and are flat ("squamous"), and Type II cells generally cluster in the corners of the alveoli and have a cuboidal shape.
Some types of chronic lung diseases are classified as restrictive lung disease, because of a restriction in the amount of lung tissue involved in respiration.
During normal breathing, exhalation is passive and no muscles are contracted (the diaphragm relaxes).
In humans, the primary muscle that drives breathing is the diaphragm.
A number of factors influence the rate of breathing.
The lungs are surrounded by the pulmonary pleurae.
Respiration is the process by which oxygen is taken into the body and carbon dioxide is expelled.
The left lung is divided into two lobes, an upper and a lower, by the oblique fissure, which extends from the costal to the mediastinal surface of the lung both above and below the hilum.
In early tetrapods, air was driven into the lungs by the pharyngeal muscles via buccal pumping, a mechanism still seen in amphibians.
This type of lung construction is called a circulatory lung, as distinct from the bellows lung possessed by other animals.
The lungs of lungfish are similar to those of amphibians, with few, if any, internal septa.
