The largest organizations of Lutheran churches around the world are the Lutheran World Federation, the International Lutheran Council, and the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference.
Lutheran schools have always been a core aspect of Lutheran mission work, starting with Bartholomew Ziegenbalg and Heinrich Putschasu, who began work in India in year 1706.
Lutheran churches in the North America, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean regions are experiencing decreases and no growth in membership, while those in Africa and Asia continue to grow.
Friedrich Julius Stahl led the ''High Church Lutherans''.
The ''Book of Concord'' replaced earlier, incomplete collections of doctrine, unifying all German Lutherans with identical doctrine and beginning the period of Lutheran Orthodoxy.
For example, the state churches in Scandinavia consider only the ''Augsburg Confession'' as a "summary of the faith" in addition to the three ecumenical Creeds.
Medieval mystical traditions continued in the works of Martin Moller, Johann Arndt, and Joachim Lütkemann.
Lutheranism is also a state religion in Iceland, Norway, Denmark, Greenland, and the Faroe Islands.
Dissenting Lutheran pastors were often reprimanded by the government bureaucracy overseeing them, for example, when they tried to correct Rationalist influences in the parish school.
During Frederick's reign, Lutheranism made significant inroads in Denmark.
However, European traders brought Lutheranism to Africa beginning in the 17th century as they settled along the coasts.
The split between the Lutherans and the Catholics was made public and clear with the 1521 Edict of Worms: The edicts of the Diet condemned Luther and officially banned citizens of the Holy Roman Empire from defending or propagating his ideas, subjecting advocates of Lutheranism to forfeiture of all property, half of the seized property to be forfeit to the imperial government and the remaining half forfeit to the party who brought the accusation.
Among us the Mass is celebrated every Lord's Day and on other festivals, when the Sacrament is made available to those who wish to partake of it, after they have been examined and absolved.
Lutherans believe everything exists for the sake of the Christian Church, and that God guides everything for its welfare and growth.
Although Namibia is the only country outside Europe to have a Lutheran majority, there are sizable Lutheran bodies in other African countries.
Johann Gottfried Herder, superintendent at Weimar and part of the Inner Mission movement, joined with the Romantic movement with his quest to preserve human emotion and experience from Rationalism.
The explanation of the Apostles' Creed given in the ''Small Catechism'' declares that everything good that people have is given and preserved by God, either directly or through other people or things.
These teachings were accepted during the orthodox Lutheranism of the 17th century.
The WELS and ELS are members of the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference.
The ''Apology of the Augsburg Confession'' identifies Holy Scripture with the Word of God and calls the Holy Spirit the author of the Bible.
Many Lutherans, called "Old Lutherans", chose to leave the state churches despite imprisonment and military force.
Although the beginning of this ''Awakening'' tended heavily toward Romanticism, patriotism, and experience, the emphasis of the ''Awakening'' shifted around 1830 to restoring the traditional liturgy, doctrine, and confessions of the Lutheran church in the Neo-Lutheran movement.
In 2006, both the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, in cooperation with certain foreign English speaking church bodies within their respective fellowships, released new hymnals: Evangelical Lutheran Worship (ELCA) and Lutheran Service Book (LCMS).
The authority of the Scriptures has been challenged during the history of Lutheranism.
Baptism is a "means of grace" through which God creates and strengthens "saving faith" as the "washing of regeneration" in which infants and adults are reborn.
Pietism became a rival of orthodoxy but adopted some orthodox devotional literature; for example, Arndt's, Scriver's and Prätorius' which were all Pietistic literature.
Today, Lutheranism is one of the largest denominations of Protestantism.
With the encouragement of Swedberg, church fellowship was established between Swedish Lutherans and Anglicans in the Middle Colonies.
In Sweden, Lars Levi Læstadius began the Laestadian movement that emphasized moral reform.
In the 1840s, this church experienced a revival through the work of the Leipzig Mission, including Karl Graul.
Even though baptized infants cannot articulate that faith, Lutherans believe that it is present all the same.
The Lutheran World Federation estimates the total membership of its churches at approximately 72.3 million.
Good works are the natural result of faith, not the cause of salvation.
Lutherans believe Christians are "saved"; that all who trust in Christ alone and his promises can be certain of their salvation.
Today, Lutherans disagree about the inspiration and authority of the Bible.
23% said the Bible was written by men and not the Word of God.
Similarly, Sweden also has its national church, which was a state church until 2000.
Lutherans hold that sacraments are sacred acts of divine institution.
Because of this, all humanity deserves eternal damnation in hell.
Small groups sprang up, often in universities, which devoted themselves to Bible study, reading devotional writings, and revival meetings.
Of the services others provide us through family, government, and work, "we receive these blessings not from them, but, through them, from God."
The Porvoo Communion is a communion of episcopally led Lutheran and Anglican churches in Europe.
Lutheranism there has survived and become self-sustaining.
Rather, it is expected before receiving the Eucharist for the first time.
God in eternity has turned His Fatherly heart to this world and planned for its redemption because he loves all people and does not want anyone to be eternally damned.
Lutheranism is the largest religious group in Denmark, the Faroe Islands, Greenland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Latvia, Namibia, and North Dakota.
Presently, Lutherans are divided over how to interact with other Christian denominations.
There, professor Adolf von Harless, though previously an adherent of rationalism and German idealism, made Erlangen a magnet for revival oriented theologians.
God concurs with an act's effect, but he does not cooperate in the corruption of an act or the evil of its effect.
::"...we do not abolish the Mass but religiously keep and defend it.
Lutherans believe that humans are saved from their sins by God's grace alone (''Sola Gratia''), through faith alone (''Sola Fide''), on the basis of Scripture alone (''Sola Scriptura'').
Every human thought and deed is infected with sin and sinful motives.
There are no deficiencies in Scripture that need to be filled with by tradition, pronouncements of the Pope, new revelations, or present-day development of doctrine.
Some Lutheran church bodies require this pledge to be unconditional because they believe the confessions correctly state what the Bible teaches.
Abraham Calovius represents the climax of the scholastic paradigm in orthodox Lutheranism.
Luther's efforts to reform the theology and practice of the Catholic Church launched the Protestant Reformation in the German-speaking territories of the Holy Roman Empire.
Private or family offices include the Morning and Evening Prayers from Luther's ''Small Catechism''.
They confess in the ''Apology of the Augsburg Confession'':
Instruction is still similar.
The priests had to  understand the Holy Scripture well enough to preach and explain the Gospel and the Epistles for their congregations.
For confessional Lutherans who are more aligned with mainline Protestantism, a basic claim is made that the canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments are the inspired Word of God and the authoritative source and norm of its proclamation, faith, and life.
Johann Sebastian Bach, a devout Lutheran, composed music for the Lutheran church.
The Lutheran World Federation, in its Nairobi Statement on Worship and Culture, recommended every effort be made to bring church services into a more sensitive position with regard to cultural context.
Eventually, the fascist German Christians movement pushed the final national merger of Lutheran, Union, and Reformed church bodies into a single Reich Church in 1933, doing away with the previous umbrella German Evangelical Church Confederation (DEK), refounded in 1945 as the new umbrella Evangelical Church in Germany (EKD).
As a result of the impact of a local form of rationalism, termed Neology, by the latter half of the 18th century, genuine piety was found almost solely in small Pietist conventicles.
After the death of Martin Luther in 1546, the Schmalkaldic War started out as a conflict between two German Lutheran rulers in 1547.
In the special section on infant baptism in his Large Catechism, Luther argues that infant baptism is God-pleasing because persons so baptized were reborn and sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
The definition of sacrament in the ''Apology of the Augsburg Confession'' lists Absolution as one of them.
In the following African countries, the total number of Lutherans exceeds 100,000: Nigeria, Central African Republic, Chad, Kenya, Malawi, Congo, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, and Madagascar.
As time passed by, the word ''Evangelical'' was dropped.
This belief is called Real Presence or sacramental union and is different from consubstantiation and transubstantiation.
These churches in turn began to evangelize those in their areas who were not of European background, including indigenous peoples.
They were taught to expect at the end of life: "forgiving of their sins", "to be counted as just", and "the eternal life".
Some Lutherans assert that everyone must share the "whole counsel of God" (Acts 20:27) in complete unity (1 Cor.
Orthodox Lutheran theology holds that God made the world, including humanity, perfect, holy and sinless.
Instead, it sparked a Neo-Lutheran revival, prompting many to form the General Council, including Charles Porterfield Krauth.
A 1958 report from the publishing house of the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod states that, "Masonry is guilty of idolatry.
Another theological issue that arose was the Crypto-Kenotic controversy.
To this end, "God sent his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord, into the world to redeem and deliver us from the power of the devil, and to bring us to Himself, and to govern us as a King of righteousness, life, and salvation against sin, death, and an evil conscience," as the Large Catechism explains.
This figure undercounts Lutherans worldwide as not all Lutheran churches belong to this organization.
As editor of the periodical ''Evangelische Kirchenzeitung'', he developed it into a major support of Neo-Lutheran revival and used it to attack all forms of theological liberalism and rationalism.
In the 19th century, a confessional revival re-emphasized the authority of the Bible and agreement with the Lutheran Confessions.
A layman, Luther scholar Johann Georg Hamann (1730–88), became famous for countering Rationalism and striving to advance a revival known as the ''Erweckung'', or ''Awakening''.
During conversion, one is moved from impenitence to repentance.
Historically, Lutherans maintain that Holy Scripture, the Word of God, carries the full authority of God.
While this effectively granted official sanction to Lutheran ideas, Lutheranism did not become official until 1593.
In 1597, theologians in Wittenberg defined the title ''Lutheran'' as referring to the true church.
At that time the Uppsala Synod declared Holy Scripture the sole guideline for faith, with four documents accepted as faithful and authoritative explanations of it: the ''Apostles' Creed'', the ''Nicene Creed'', the ''Athanasian Creed'', and the unaltered ''Augsburg Confession'' of 1530.
The pope's refusal to allow the replacement of an archbishop who had supported the invading forces opposing Gustav Vasa during the Stockholm Bloodbath led to the severing of any official connection between Sweden and the papacy in 1523.
In the Lutheran Church of Australia, the official hymnal is the ''Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement'' of 1986, which includes a supplement to the ''Lutheran Hymnal'' of 1973, itself a replacement for the ''Australian Lutheran Hymn Book'' of 1921.
Recently, the ELCA has declared full communion with several American Churches: the Moravian Church, the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the Reformed Church in America, the United Methodist Church, and the United Church of Christ.
It developed from both German Neo-Lutheranism and Pietism.
Lutheran hymns are sometimes known as chorales.
Religious Landscape Survey conducted by the Pew Research Center surveyed 1,926 adults in the United States that self-identified as Lutheran.
In line with Luther's initial statement in his Large Catechism some speak of only two sacraments, Baptism and Holy Communion, although later in the same work he calls Confession and Absolution "the third sacrament."
Whenever they are properly administered by the use of the physical component commanded by God along with the divine words of institution, God is, in a way specific to each sacrament, present with the Word and physical component.
During the 18th century, Rationalism advocated reason rather than the authority of the Bible as the final source of knowledge, but most of the laity did not accept this Rationalist position.
In addition, Lutheranism is a main Protestant denomination in Germany (behind United Protestant churches; Protestants form about 31.7% of the country's total population), Estonia, Poland, Austria, Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Papua New Guinea, North Sumatra, and Tanzania.
Since 1520, regular Lutheran services have been held in Copenhagen.
In recent years India has relaxed its anti-religious conversion laws, allowing a resurgence in missionary work.
Martin Luther always disliked the term ''Lutheran'', preferring the term ''Evangelical'', which was derived from ''euangelion'', a Greek word meaning "good news", i.e.
Lutherans reject the idea that the Father and the Son are merely faces of the same person, stating that both the Old Testament and the New Testament show them to be two distinct persons.
Lutherans confess that Scripture is united with the power of the Holy Spirit and with it, not only demands, but also creates the acceptance of its teaching.
He led the Neo-Lutheran ''Repristination School'' of theology, which advocated a return to the orthodox theologians of the 17th century and opposed modern Bible scholarship.
Lutherans teach that, at death, the souls of Christians are immediately taken into the presence of Jesus, where they await the second coming of Jesus on the last day.
Lutherans teach that sinners, while capable of doing works that are outwardly "good", are not capable of doing works that satisfy God's justice.
Beside its membership in the Porvoo Communion, Church of Sweden also has declared full communion with the Philippine Independent Church and the United Methodist Church.
It partly succeeded in continuing the Pietist movement's drive to right social wrongs and focus on individual conversion.
Although they decried the visible division of Christians on earth, orthodox Lutherans avoided ecumenical fellowship with other churches, believing that Christians should not, for example, join together for the Lord's Supper or exchange pastors if they do not completely agree about what the Bible teaches.
By 1969, Manfried Kober complained that "unbelief is rampant" even within German Lutheran parishes.
The Reformation in Sweden began with Olaus and Laurentius Petri, brothers who took the Reformation to Sweden after studying in Germany.
Late orthodoxy was torn by influences from rationalism, philosophy based on reason, and Pietism, a revival movement in Lutheranism.
Their alternative approach was "Lutheran pulpits are for Lutheran ministers only, and Lutheran altars are for Lutheran communicants only."
Despite political meddling in church life, local and national leaders sought to restore and renew Christianity.
Lutherans do not believe in any sort of earthly millennial kingdom of Christ either before or after his second coming on the last day.
Early missionary attempts during the century after the Reformation did not succeed.
Thereby he covered all our disobedience, which is embedded in our nature and in its thoughts, words, and deeds, so that this disobedience is not reckoned to us as condemnation but is pardoned and forgiven by sheer grace, because of Christ alone.
These services were in a variety of styles, depending on the preferences of the congregation.
Many of the largest Lutheran congregations in the United States have been heavily influenced by these "progressive Evangelicals."
For conservative confessional Lutherans, every single statement of the Bible calls for instant and unqualified acceptance.
The Neo-Lutheran call to renewal failed to achieve widespread popular acceptance because it both began and continued with a lofty, idealistic Romanticism that did not connect with an increasingly industrialized and secularized Europe.
Religious disputes between the Crypto-Calvinists, Philippists, Sacramentarians, Ubiquitarians and Gnesio-Lutherans raged within Lutheranism during the middle of the 16th century.
Others allow their congregations to do so "insofar as" the Confessions are in agreement with the Bible.
The study found that 30% believed that the Bible was the Word of God and was to be taken literally word for word.
According to Lutherans, God preserves his creation, cooperates with everything that happens, and guides the universe.
Prior to this time, the two Lutheran church bodies in Australia (which merged in 1966) used a bewildering variety of hymnals, usually in the German language.
Additionally Lutherans reject the idea that communion is a mere symbol or memorial.
(''Apology of the Augsburg Confession'', Article XXIV.1)
In Latin America, missions began to serve European immigrants of Lutheran background, both those who spoke German and those who no longer did.
By contrast, the Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference and International Lutheran Council as well as some unaffiliated denominations such as the Church of the Lutheran Confession (CLC) maintain that the orthodox confessional Lutheran churches are the only churches with completely correct doctrine.
A correct translation of their writings is God's Word because it has the same meaning as the original Hebrew and Greek.
After German missionaries were expelled in 1914, Lutherans in India became entirely autonomous, yet preserved their Lutheran character.
Ernst Wilhelm Hengstenberg, though raised Reformed, became convinced of the truth of historic Lutheranism as a young man.
However, following his victory in the civil war that followed, in 1537 he became Christian III and advanced the Reformation in Denmark-Norway.
The dispute over ecumenism overshadowed other controversies within German Lutheranism.
Lutheranism came to India beginning with the work of Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg, where a community totaling several thousand developed, complete with their own translation of the Bible, catechism, their own hymnal, and system of Lutheran schools.
However, some of the laity preserved Lutheran orthodoxy from both Pietism and rationalism through reusing old catechisms, hymnbooks, postils, and devotional writings, including those written by Johann Gerhard, Heinrich Müller and Christian Scriver.
Although he received a large amount of slander and ridicule during his forty years at the head of revival, he never gave up his positions.
Lutherans hold that Baptism is a saving work of God, mandated and instituted by Jesus Christ.
Today, millions belong to Lutheran churches, which are present on all populated continents.
In addition, the following nations also have sizable Lutheran populations: Canada, France, the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, Brazil, Malaysia, India, Indonesia, the Netherlands (within the Protestant Church of the Netherlands), South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States, especially in the heavily German and Scandinavian Upper Midwest.
Four years later, at the Diet of Västerås, the king succeeded in forcing the diet to accept his dominion over the national church.
Philipp Melanchthon and his Philippist party felt that Christians of different beliefs should join in union with each other without completely agreeing on doctrine.
Their souls will then be reunited with the same bodies they had before dying.
He held that every passage of Scripture has one straightforward meaning, the literal sense as interpreted by other Scripture.
Against them stood the Gnesio-Lutherans, led by Matthias Flacius and the faculty at Jena.
Unlike some Calvinists, Lutherans do not believe in a predestination to damnation, usually referencing "God our Savior, who desires all people to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth" as contrary evidence to such a claim.
In 1999 the LWF and the Catholic Church jointly issued a statement, the ''Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification'' (''JDDJ''), that stated that the LWF and the Catholic both agreed about certain basics of Justification and lifted certain Catholic anathemas formerly applying to the LWF member churches.
He earnestly offers to all who receive the sacrament forgiveness of sins and eternal salvation.
Termed the ''Erlangen School'' of theology, they developed a new version of the Incarnation, which they felt emphasized the humanity of Jesus better than the ecumenical creeds.
Lutherans were divided about the issue of church fellowship for the first thirty years after Luther's death.
Although not an "ecumenical" movement in the formal sense, in the 1990s influences from the megachurches of American evangelicalism have become somewhat common.
Lutherans disagree with those who make predestination—rather than Christ's suffering, death, and resurrection—the source of salvation.
Instead people should honor others, no matter how lowly, as being the means God uses to work in the world.
Since the creation of faith is exclusively God's work, it does not depend on the actions of the one baptized, whether infant or adult.
The unification of the two branches of German Protestantism sparked the Schism of the Old Lutherans.
In Finland, Lutherans have experimented with the St Thomas Mass or Metal Mass in which traditional hymns are adapted to heavy metal.
It was published in 1550, with 3,000 copies printed in the first edition; a second edition was published in 1589.
Theological conservatives use the historical-grammatical method of Biblical interpretation, while theological liberals use the higher critical method.
They may include Matins, Vespers, Compline, and Easter Vigil.
God's Word is freely accessible to every reader or hearer of ordinary intelligence, without requiring any special education.
Unlike Catholicism, the Lutheran Church does not believe that tradition is a carrier of the "Word of God", or that only the communion of the Bishop of Rome has been entrusted to interpret the "Word of God".
Lutherans also preserve a liturgical approach to the celebration of the Mass (or the Holy Eucharist/Communion), emphasizing the sacrament as the central act of Christian worship.
On the other hand, other Lutherans practice varying degrees of open communion and allow preachers from other Christian denominations in their pulpits.
According to this belief, Lutheranism is a reform movement rather than a movement into doctrinal correctness.
The constitution upon which the Danish Norwegian Church, according to the Church Ordinance, should rest was "The pure word of God, which is the Law and the Gospel".
He also wrote about 1,500 hymns, including ''God's Word Is Our Great Heritage''.
In 1892, the first Lutheran missionaries reached Japan.
Lutherans believe that the actual body and blood of Jesus Christ are present in, with and under the bread and the wine.
Meals are blessed with the ''Common Table Prayer'', , or other prayers, and after eating the Lord is thanked, for example, with .
Good works have their origin in God, not in the fallen human heart or in human striving; their absence would demonstrate that faith, too, is absent.
Unlike the Reformed tradition, Lutherans retain many of the liturgical practices and sacramental teachings of the pre-Reformation Church, with a particular emphasis on the Eucharist, or Lord's Supper.
The plan failed because most Swedish bishops rejected the Calvinism of the Church of England, although Swedberg and Gezelius, bishops of Skara, Sweden and Turku, Finland, were in favor.
These influences are sharply criticized by some Lutherans as being foreign to orthodox Lutheran beliefs.
Saving faith is the knowledge of, acceptance of, and trust in the promise of the Gospel.
This is in contrast to the belief of the Catholic Church, defined at the Council of Trent, concerning authority coming from both the Scriptures and Tradition.
Some churches also allow for individual absolution on Saturdays before the Eucharistic service.
Although work began slowly and a major setback occurred during the hardships of WWII.
Lutherans place great emphasis on a liturgical approach to worship services; although there are substantial non-liturgical minorities, for example, the Haugean Lutherans from Norway.
The ''Augsburg Confession'' divides repentance into two parts: "One is contrition, that is, terrors smiting the conscience through the knowledge of sin; the other is faith, which is born of the Gospel, or of absolution, and believes that for Christ's sake, sins are forgiven, comforts the conscience, and delivers it from terrors."
We also keep traditional liturgical forms, such as the order of readings, prayers, vestments, and other similar things."
Because of this, Lutherans confess in the ''Formula of Concord'', "we receive and embrace with our whole heart the prophetic and apostolic Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as the pure, clear fountain of Israel."
Some formed independent church bodies, or "free churches", at home while others left for the United States, Canada and Australia.
Because it is faith alone that receives these divine gifts, Lutherans confess that baptism "works forgiveness of sins, delivers from death and the devil, and gives eternal salvation to all who believe this, as the words and promises of God declare."
In 1948 the Lutheran church bodies within EKD founded their denominational umbrella, despite being named church, the United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany.
Christ submitted to the law for us, bore our sin, and in going to his Father performed complete and perfect obedience for us poor sinners, from his holy birth to his death.
His attempt to get the synod to reject the ''Augsburg Confession'' in favor of his compromising ''Definite Platform'' failed.
By God's grace, made known and effective in the person and work of Jesus Christ, a person is forgiven, adopted as a child and heir of God, and given eternal salvation.
Though raised a Jew, he was baptized as a Christian at the age of 19 through the influence of the Lutheran school he attended.
Near the end of the Thirty Years' War, the compromising spirit seen in Philip Melanchthon rose up again in Helmstedt School and especially in theology of Georgius Calixtus, causing the syncretistic controversy.
Lutheran hymnody is well known for its doctrinal, didactic, and musical richness.
Pastors usually teach in the common language of the local congregation.
Spanish-speaking ELCA churches frequently use Libro de Liturgia y Cántico (1998, Augsburg Fortress) for services and hymns.
During the first half of the 19th century, missionary activity in Africa expanded, including preaching by missionaries, translation of the Bible, and education.
Today, few but some Lutheran congregations have contemporary worship as their sole form of worship.
In the 18th century, there was some ecumenical interest between the Church of Sweden and the Church of England.
Lifelong study of the catechism is intended for all ages so that the abuses of the pre-Reformation Church will not recur.
Danish pastor and philosopher N. F. S. Grundtvig reshaped church life throughout Denmark through a reform movement beginning in 1830.
Under the reign of Frederick I (1523–33), Denmark-Norway remained officially Catholic.
Catechism is considered foundational in most Lutheran churches.
