After a brief membership in the Athenian Empire, it seceded and became independent (its treaty with Athens had omitted the usual non-secession clause), was under the Persians again, revolted again, was conquered by Mausolus of Caria, returned to the Persians, and went under Macedonian hegemony at the defeat of the Persians by Alexander the Great.
Harpagos was not related by blood.
Suetonius wrote that Claudius "deprived the Lycians of their independence because of deadly intestine feuds."
After the death of Alexander the Great in 324&nbsp;BC, his generals fought amongst themselves over the succession.
It must have been they who put down local resistance and transported the prisoners to Persepolis, or ordered them transported.
Not all of these can yet be entirely understood, due to remaining ignorance of the language.
When Murena ended the tyranny he included the cities of  Balbura and Bubon within the territory of the Lycians.
Inscriptions in Lycian diminished, while those in Greek multiplied.
A substantial Christian community of Greeks lived in Lycia until the 1920s when they were forced to migrate to Greece after the population exchange between Greece and Turkey following the Greco-Turkish War in the early 20th century.
It might have been another fire.
Furthest west of the four are Boncuk Dağlari, or "the Boncuk Mountains," extending from about Altinyayla, Burdur, southwest to about Oren north of Fethiye.
Herodotus also says or implies that 80 Xanthian families were away at the time, perhaps with the herd animals in alpine summer pastures (pure speculation), but helped repopulate the place.
When Roman envoys went to the city he begged them not to ravage is lands as he was a friend of Rome and promised a paltry sum of money, fifteen talents.
In these latter stages of the Roman republic Lycia came to enjoy freedom as part of the Roman protectorate.
Lycia comprised what is now the westernmost portion of Antalya Province, the easternmost portion of Muğla Province, and the southernmost portion of Burdur Province.
After the fall of the Byzantines in the 15th century, Lycia was under the Ottoman Empire.
According to Livy, the consul Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus put Lycia had been under Rhodian control in 190 BC.
The last statement is unclear.
The Aedesa once drained the plain through a chasm to the east, but now flows entirely through pipelines covering the same route, but emptying into the water supplies of Arycanda and Arif.
By 240&nbsp;BC Lycia was part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom, centred on Egypt, and remained in their control through 200&nbsp;BC.
Cassius Dio's statement that Claudius incorporated Lycia into Phampylia (which he had as governed by a prefect, rather than a propraetor, see above) is refuted by the existence of legati Augusti pro praetore Lyciae (imperial provincial governors of Lycia with propraetorial rank).
Polybius had Manlius say that he was the worst enemy of Rome and that he deserved punishment rather than friendship (ancient historians made up speeches).
The records for the most part do not offer positive reports of them.
The borders of Lycia varied over time but at its centre was the Teke peninsula of southwestern Turkey, which juts into the Mediterranean Sea in a north-south direction, is bounded on the west by the Gulf of Fethiye, and on the east by the Gulf of Antalya.
Moagetes saved his city and Manlius moved on.
Fellows could not read the Lycian inscription, except for one line identifying a person of illegible name, to whom the monument was erected, termed the son of Arppakhu in Lycian, equivalent to Greek Harpagos.
It had been formed by the city of  Cibyra Megale, (Greater Cibyra, as opposed to Cibyra Mikra, Little Cibyra, of the coast, not too far from modern Side.
This configuration is entirely modern.
They landed in Milyas, bearing the ancient name of the country known later as Lycia, which was tenanted by the Solymi.
The Lycians once again fell under Persian domination, and were ruled by men such as Mithrapata (late 4th century BC), whose name was Persian, and by 412&nbsp;BC, Lycia is documented as fighting on the winning side of Persia.
This failed when Lycia's leader Gergis of Xanthos defeated General Melasander.
They knew nothing of the Hittite Empire or the state of Lycia within it.
Looking for any nuance that might shed light on the repopulation of Xanthus, Keen interprets Herodotus' "those Lycians who now say that they are Xanthians" to mean that Xanthus was repopulated by other Lycians (and not by Iranians or other foreigners).
It is entirely conventional; these states were not Hittite in any way.
Since it is mainly walked in March - June and Sept-Nov, it also has lengthened the tourism season.
As to whether the Iranian family were related to any satrap, probably not.
Polybius wrote that the Romans sent envoys to Rhodes to say that "the Lycians had not been handed over to Rhodes as a gift, but to be treated like friends and allies."
At that time (546&nbsp;BC) the Luwian speakers were decimated, and Lycia received an influx of Persian speakers.
The next logical possibility is that Kheriga's father, Arppakhu, was a descendant of the conqueror.
'''Lycia''' (Lycian: 𐊗𐊕𐊐𐊎𐊆𐊖 ''Trm̃mis''; , ) was a geopolitical region in Anatolia in what are now the provinces of Antalya and Muğla on the southern coast of Turkey, and Burdur Province inland.
Regent, son of the former.
The next ridge to the east, Beydağlari, "the Bey Mountains," peaks at Kizlarsevrisi, , the highest point of the Teke Peninsula.
There is nothing except legend to fill the gap until history begins with the classical Greek historian, Herodotus, who mentions them extensively.
The younger Kheriga was the successor of Kuprlli.
The Xanthus Valley was the country called Tŗmmis in dynastic Lycia, from which the people were the Termilae or Tremilae, or Kragos in the coin inscriptions of Greek Lycia: Kr or Ksan Kr.
It had apparently come under Seleucid control by 190&nbsp;BC, when the Seleucids' defeat in the Battle of Magnesia resulted in Lycia being awarded to Rhodes in the Peace of Apamea in 188&nbsp;BC.
The context in which this treaty was made in unknown.
In 43&nbsp;AD the Roman emperor Claudius dissolved the league.
Subsequently Lycus, the son of Pandion II of Athens, driven into exile by his brother, King Aegeus, settled among the Termilae.
Despite its resistance, because of which the population of Xanthus was decimated, Lycia became part of the Persian Empire.
The country was known by the name of Lukka then, and was under Hittite rule.
The Lycians possessed the same rights under the suzerainty and protection of Rhodes that friendly states possessed under the suzerainty of Rome."
It was not the Persian custom to grant hereditary satrapies; satrap was only a step in the ''cursus honorum''.
The ancient route to Antalya goes up the valley and over the cul-de-sac, as the coast itself is impassible except by boat.
In 169 BC, during the Third Macedonian War, the relationship between Rome and Rhodes became strained and the Roman senate issued a decree which gave the Carians and the Lycians their freedom.
The dating is uncertain.
The conqueror, therefore, was not the founder of the line, which was not Harpagid.
The largest cities had three votes, the medium-sized ones two, and the rest one.
Each country awaited its own fate alone.
They did not know that Anatolia once spoke languages of the Anatolian language group, or that Lycian was such a language.
Polybius recorded a decree “freeing” the Carians and Lycians in 168–7 BC.
In reports of official transactions with Lycians in the late Bronze Age, the Hittite and Egyptian empires described them as rebels, pirates, and raiders.
Kheriga had two grandfathers, Kuprlli and Kheriga.
Arbinas (Iranian name)
The main evidence against the Harpagid Theory (as Keen calls it) is the reconstruction of the name of the Xanthian Obelisk's deceased as Lycian Kheriga, Greek Gergis (Nereid Monument), a king reigning approximately 440-410&nbsp;BC, over a century later than the conqueror of Lycia.
On the contemporaneous deaths of both him and his son-in-law, Kheriga, named after his paternal grandfather, acquired the throne.
For the most part they spoke languages of the Luwian family.
Artembares (Iranian name, *Rtambura, self-identified as "the Mede.")
Lycia appears elsewhere in Greek myth, such as in the story of Bellerophon, who eventually succeeded to the throne of the Lycian king Iobates (or Amphianax).
A small population of Turkish farmers moved into the region when the Lycian Greeks migrated to Greece.
All memory of the Bronze Age Greek script, Linear B, had been lost.
Where coinage before the Lycian League had often been stamped LY for Lycia, it was now stamped KP (kr) or MA.
Four ridges extend from northeast to southwest, roughly, forming the western extremity of the Taurus Mountains.
Ancient episcopal sees of Lycia listed in the ''Annuario Pontificio'' as titular sees:
If the government was any sort of federal democracy, there is no evidence of it, as the term "dynastic" suggests.
Pericles (Greek name)
The Lycian dynasty may therefore be summarized as follows:
Herodotus mentioned that the leader of the Lycian fleet under Xerxes in the Second Persian War of 480&nbsp;BC was ''Kuberniskos Sika'', previously interpreted as "Cyberniscus, the son of Sicas," two non-Lycian names.
The establishment of the path was a private initiative by a British/Turkish woman called Kate Clow.
Then, after taking an oath not to surrender, they died to a man fighting the Persians, foreshadowing and perhaps setting an example for Spartan conduct at the Battle of Thermopylae a few generations later.
After the Karabisianoi were disbanded (between ca.
Sixth in succession, brother of the former.
However, all the legends are at odds with archaeological and proto-historic realities.
The holders of this title can be traced in coin legends, having been given the right to coin.
In Homer's Iliad, the Lycian contingent was said to have been led by two esteemed warriors: Sarpedon (son of Zeus and Laodamia) and Glaucus (son of Hippolochus).
The abandoned Greek villages in the region are a striking reminder of this exodus.
Details could be amended if both parties agreed.
Upstream it is dammed in four places, after an origin in the vicinity of Sarikavak in Denizli Province.
Letoon, an important center in Hellenic times of worship for the goddess Leto and her twin children, Apollo and Artemis, and nearby Xanthos, ancient capital of Lycia, constitute a UNESCO World Heritage site.
Seventh in succession, son of the former.
An inscription found on a statue-base found in Thespiae attests that in 46 BC Julius Caesar signed a treaty with the Lycian league.
To the west of it the steep gorges of Dalaman Çayi ("the Dalaman River"), the ancient Indus, formed the traditional border between Caria and Lycia.
They named it Lycia after him.
It is not known for certain whether it was formed before or after Lycia was removed from Rhodian control.
Lycia prospered under a monarchy set up by the Persians.
This is a fairly low range peaking at about .
It was then granted autonomy as a protectorate of Rome in 168&nbsp;BC and remained so until becoming a Roman province in 43&nbsp;AD under Claudius.
The Achaemenid Persian policy toward Lycia was hands-off.
The Persian satraps were re-installed, but (as the coinage of the time attests) they allowed local dynasts the freedom to rule.
The name Kubernis does not appear again.
A slight regrouping of the letters obtains ''kubernis kosika'', "Cybernis, son of Cosicas," where Cosicas is for Kheziga.
An inscription found in Tyberissos provides the first record of such an alliance treaty (foedus).
Keen suggests that Darius I created the kingship on reorganizing the satrapies in 525, and that on the intestate death of Kubernis in battle, the Persians chose another relative named Kheziga, who was the father of Kuprlli.
Herodotus said nothing of the remainder of Lycia; presumably, that is true because they submitted without further incident.
The coins recognize two districts, termed, for want of a better term, "monetary districts:" Masicytus and Cragus, both named after mountain ranges, in the shadow of which, presumably, the communities lived and conducted business.
Complete assimilation to Greek occurred in the 4th century, after Lycia had come under Alexander the Great and his fellow Macedonians.
Concluding that this person was the conqueror of Lycia in 546, Fellows conjectured that Harpagos had been made permanent satrap of Lycia for his services; moreover, the position was hereditary, creating a Harpagid Dynasty.
In 81 BC Lucius Licinius Murena, the Roman commander who fought the Second Mithridatic War (83-81 BC) in Anatolia deposed Moagetes, a tyrant of the a tetrapolis (four towns) in the Cibyratis (northern Lycia).
Within the park on the slopes of Mt.
The first coins with Lycian letters on them appeared not long before 500.
The Rhodians claimed that king Eumenes of Pergamon had stirred up the Lycians against them.
Lycia fought for the Persians in the Persian Wars, but on the defeat of the Achaemenid Empire by the Greeks, it became intermittently a free agent.
Strabo wrote that there were twenty-three cites which came together for a general assembly and had a share in its votes "after choosing whatever city they approve of".
When Rome got involved in the eastern Mediterranean the Lycians allied with Rome.
At about 535&nbsp;BC, before the first appearance of attested Lycian, the Achaemenid Empire overran Lycia.
The gap must be a gap in the use of writing.
He was supported by Attalus II, the king of Pergamon.
However, the Luwian languages originated in Anatolia during the 2nd millennium BC.
In ancient times the surrounding districts were, from west to east, Caria, Pisidia, and Pamphylia, all equally as ancient, and each speaking its own Anatolian language.
Moasetes persuaded him to reduce the sum to 100 talents and promised an  amount of grain.
He wrote that a Lycian embassy complained about the cruel tyranny of the Rhodians and that they were under king Antiochus III the Great they had been in liberty in comparison.
And finally, a destitute mountain country would have been a poor reward for Cyrus' best general.
Bryce hypothesizes that it was formed as an agent to convince Rome to rescind the annexation of Lycia to Rhodes.
The region is now one of the key centres of domestic and foreign tourism in Turkey.
The British Museum in London has one of the best collections of Lycian artifacts.
However, they had the freedom to choose a Lyciarch as the head of the league and to designate general courts.
The intent of the Treaty of Lausanne was to define borders that would not leave substantial populations of one country in another.
Studies of coin legends, initiated by Fellows, went on.
Fourth in succession, son of the former.
Below the reservoir a braided stream alternates with a single, small channel flowing through irrigated land.
After the defeat of the Persians by the Greeks, Lycia became open to further Greek settlement.
He assigned the task to Harpagus, a Median general, who proceeded to subdue the various states of Anatolia, one by one, some by convincing them to submit, others through military action.
The region is mainly flat, with minor slopes often plunging into the abyss of tartarus.
Moagetes sent his envoys to Manlius' camp.
727) they became the Theme of the Cibyrrhaeots.
It was slavery, rather that just political oppression, " they, their wives and children were the victims of violence; their oppressors vented their rage on their persons and their backs, their good name was besmirched and dishonoured, their condition rendered detestable in order that their tyrants might openly assert a legal right over them and reduce them to the status of slaves bought with money.. the senate gave them a letter to and to the Rhodias that ...it was not the pleasure of the senate that either the Lycians or any other men born free should be handed over as slaves to the Rhodians or any one else.
The Lycian League (Lukiakou systema in Strabo's Greek transliterated, a "standing together") is first known from two inscriptions of the early 2nd century BC in which it honors two citizens.
Sufficient gaps in their knowledge exist to cast doubt on the historicity of everything they had to say.
The name of the Teke Peninsula comes from the former name of Antalya Province, which was Teke Province, named from the Turkish tribe that settled in the region.
Currently most, but not all, of the Harpagid Theory, has been rejected.
The principal cities of ancient Lycia were Xanthos, Patara, Myra, Pinara, Tlos and Olympos (each entitled to three votes in the Lycian League) and Phaselis.
The wide bed gives an indication of the former size of the river.
Upstream the river is impounded behind Alakir Dam to form an urban-size reservoir.
Lycia already had been hosting a small enclave of the Dorian Greeks as Doris for some centuries.
The monarchy was hereditary, hence the term "dynast."
Therefore, it seems that there might have been a revolutionary popular uprising which could have overturned the established order.
The Akçay, or "White River," the ancient Aedesa, brought water from the slopes to the plain, where it pooled in two lakes below the town, Karagöl and Avlangöl.
According to this theory, Cybernis was the KUB of the first coin legends, dated to the window, 520–500.
The elevation of the town of Elmali, which means "Apple Town," from the density of fruit-bearing groves in the region, is , which is the highest part of the valley below it.
Lycian proto-history came to an end.
According to Strabo, Cibyra had two votes, while the other three cities had one and the tertarchy was ruled by a benign tyrannts.
The preamble stated: "There will be peace and loyal alliance between the People of the Romans and the cites of Lycia and the assembly of the Lycians by land and sea for all time.” There were four clauses which stipulated that: 1) the Lycian League was not to allow enemies of Rome to cross all territory over which they had authority so that they could bring war on Rome or her subjects and was not to give them aid; 2) Rome was not to allow enemies of the Lycians to pass though territory they controlled or had authority over so that they might bring war on the Lycian League or the people subject to them and was not to give them aid; 3) if anyone started a war against the Lycian people first, Rome was to come to her aid as soon as possible and if anyone started a war against Rome, the Lycian league was to aid Rome as soon as possible provided that this was allowed to Rome and the Lycian League in accordance with the agreements and oath; 4) Additions and subtractions to the agreements were possible if each side agreed though a joint decision.
Turkish and Greek settlements existed side-by-side, each speaking their own language.
He reigned approximately 480-440.
There is no agreement yet on which Lycian inscription is the very last.
Coincidentally archaeology has turned up a major fire on the acropolis of Xanthus in the mid-6th century BC, but as Antony Keen points out, there is no way to connect that fire with the event presented by Herodotus.
The conqueror of new lands was seldom made their satrap; he went on to other conquests.
Keen hypothesizes that since Caria had responsibility for the King's Highway through Lycia, Lycia and Caria were a satrapy.
There was not even a satrap stationed in the country.
During the Byzantine period Lycia and Pamphylia came under the command of the Karabisianoi (the mainstay of the Byzantine navy from the mid-7th century until the early 8th century).
Ruler of western Lycia from Telmessos.
It makes a reference to the transfer of power from the multitude to the councillors, selected from among the best.
The adoptive son and heir of Augustus, Gaius Caesar, died  in Lycia in 4&nbsp;AD after being wounded during a campaign in Artagira, Armenia.
After the collapse of the Hittite Empire, Lycia emerged as an independent "Neo-Hittite" kingdom.
It is only done by their consent, or when it may be for their own advantage."
Cybernis went to the bottom of the Straits of Salamis with the entire Lycian fleet in the Battle of Salamis, but he may be commemorated by the Harpy Tomb.
In 74 AD the emperor Vespasian joined the Roman provinces of Lycia and Pamphylia into the province of Lycia et Pamphylia.
Lycia had a single monarch, who ruled the entire country from a palace at Xanthos.
The Turks had won wars with Greece and Armenia in the preceding few years, settling the issue of whether the coast of Anatolia was going to be Greek or Turkish.
Persia held Lycia until it was conquered by Alexander III (the Great) of Macedon during 334–333&nbsp;BC.
Subsequently the Lycians were defeated by the Roman Republic, which for most of its final tenure allowed home rule to the Lycians, including their own language, then Greek.
This satrapy was later broken up and recombined.
Cyrus the Great, founder of the Achaemenid dynasty, resolved to complete the conquest of Anatolia as a prelude to operations further west, to be carried out by his successors.
In an inscription found at Perge which has been dated to late 45/early 46 BC the Lycians, who described themselves as 'faithful allies’, praised Claudius for freeing them from disturbances, lawlessness and brigandage and for the restoration of the ancestral laws.
The name of western Lycia was given by Charles Fellows to it and points of Lycia west of it.
In the Xanthus Valley an army of Xanthians sallied out to meet them, fighting determinedly, although vastly outnumbered.
The treaty concluded by Caesar in 46 BC had already established a framework for the distinction of judicial areas under the competence of the Lycian League and those under the Roman praetor peregrino (chief justice for foreigners) and could be used to define the assignment of legal areas between the Roman provincial governor and the League.
In 429&nbsp;BC, Athens sent an expedition against Lycia to try to force it to rejoin the league.
The ancient sources mention about 70 settlements of Lycia.
Known to history since the records of ancient Egypt and the Hittite Empire in the Late Bronze Age, it was populated by speakers of the Luwian language group.
Despite home rule under republican principles Lycia was not a sovereign state and had not been since its defeat by the Carians.
The easternmost ridge extends along the east coast of the Teke Peninsula, and is called, generally, Tahtali Dağlari, "The Tahtali Mountains."
It became an eparchy of the Eastern, or Byzantine Empire, continuing to speak Greek even after being joined by communities of Turkish language speakers in the early 2nd millennium.
The latter's son, therefore, Kheziga, who was Kheriga's uncle, must have predeceased Kuprlli.
The restoration of ancestral law was probably linked to the Roman practice of respecting and guaranteeing the ancestral laws, customs and privileges of city-states or leagues of city-states it made alliance agreements with in the eastern Mediterranean.
Cities such as Telmessos and Krya were sometimes listed by Classical authors as Carian and sometimes as Lycian.
In opposition, Keen reconstructs the dynastic sequence from coin inscriptions as follows.
The Lycian inscriptions indicate the monarch was titled xñtawati, more phonetically khñtawati.
No date is later than 300 at the very latest.
The Romans validated home rule officially under the Lycian League in 168&nbsp;BC.
Lycian has been attested only between about 500&nbsp;BC and no later than 300&nbsp;BC, in a unique alphabet devised for the purpose from the Greek alphabet of Rhodes.
In the 2nd millennium Anatolia was infiltrated by Turkish speaking settlers, but they never were very numerous in Lycia.
When they contended for the kingship of Crete, their native land, Minos drove Sarpedon and his people, the Termilae, into exile.
They are often difficult to access, which in ancient times was a defensive feature.
In 181 BC, at the end of the Roman-Seleucid War, the consul Gnaeus Manlius Vulso decided to fight the Galatian War (189 BC) against the Galatians.
A more likely possibility is *kasikas for Kheziga, the same as Kheriga's uncle, the successor to Kuprlli, who predeceased him.
The Lycians have left no written records of themselves at all from this period, which suggests that they probably were illiterate.
Ancient Egyptian records describe the Lycians as allies of the Hittites.
This massif may have been ancient Mount Cragus.
It is unlikely, for example, that the Lycians came from Crete.
