Other ocular defects including optic atrophy, microphthalmia, vitreitis, leukokoria and cataracts can also be seen.
Specifically, the study of persistent viral infections as well as vaccine development, represent two essential areas.
Specifically, LCMV has been recently used to quantify the efficiency of a new hydrogen peroxide-based vaccine formation mechanism.
In these mice, and some hamsters, vasculitis and lymphocytic infiltrates in many organs and tissues including the liver, spleen, lung, kidneys, pancreas, blood vessels, meninges and brain are present.
Systemic signs seem to be rare, but hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytopenia and hyperbilirubinemia have been documented in a few cases, and skin blisters were reported in one infant.
: Infection with LCMV should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any compatible, severe viral infection or aseptic meningitis, especially when there is a history of occupational exposure to laboratory rodents.
Its causative agent is the '''Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus''' (LCMV), a member of the family Arenaviridae.
A diagnosis can also be made by the intracerebral inoculation of blood or CSF into mice.
Pleural and pericardial effusion, sometimes sanguineous, has also been reported.
'''Lymphocytic choriomeningitis''' (LCM), is a rodent-borne viral infectious disease that presents as aseptic meningitis, encephalitis or meningoencephalitis.
LCMV is a prototype of more severe hemorrhagic fever viruses, especially Lassa virus with the greatest prevalence in sub-Saharan Africa.
The formation of a strong hairpin sequence at the end of each gene terminates transcription.
Of the 82 workers that were tested, seven had definite serologic evidence of past LCMV infection, and two were hospitalized for an acute febrile illness.
The ribonucleocapsid interacts with the Z matrix protein  and buds on the cell membrane, releasing the virion out from the infected cell.
After experimental inoculation, the incubation period in adult mice is 5 to 6 days.
Symptoms in hamsters are highly variable, and typically indicate that the pet has been infected and shedding the virus for several months.
Blood samples were obtained and tested for LCMV antibodies.
Localized rash and diarrhea were also seen in some patients.
They observed that T-cell receptors must recognise a complex of foreign antigen and an MHC antigen in order to destroy infected cells.
However, obtaining an accurate sense of prevalence by geographic region is difficult due to underreporting.
All seven reported direct contact with the animals at the institute.
It is approximately 7.2 kb in size and encodes a high-molecular-mass protein (L; 200 kDa) and an 11 kDa small polypeptide Z with unknown function and a ring finger motif.
In Argentina, no congenital LCMV infections were reported among 288 healthy mothers and their infants.
Mortality among infants is approximately 30%.
The only documented cases of transmission from animals have occurred between humans and mice or hamsters.
All in all, the fast advancements in the potential experiments with the LCMV model system will guide future investigators towards the enrichment of biomedical research.
The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine defines lymphocytic choriomeningitis (LCM) as "a viral infection of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord and of the cerebrospinal fluid."
LCMV causes callitrichid hepatitis in New World primates.
Pathological diagnosis of congenital infection is performed using either an immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) test or an enzyme immunoassay to detect specific antibody in blood or cerebrospinal fluid.
Patients with meningitis may have a stiff neck, fever, headache, myalgia, nausea and malaise.
The incidence of LCMV in pet rodents is unknown, yet very few human cases have been associated with exposure to pets.
The morbidity rate in naturally infected post-neonatal mice is unknown; however, subclinical disease may be the most common form, as few natural outbreaks have been reported.
Other practices to reduce cross-contamination in rodents include washing hands or changing gloves between animal care activities, thoroughly decontaminating cages before reusing them, and avoiding housing healthy rodents in the vicinity of potentially infected rodents.
Neonatally and congenitally infected mice remain asymptomatic for many months, but the onset of glomerulonephritis reduces overall life expectancy.
To date, documented infections in humans have occurred only after introduction to infected mice, guinea pigs, and hamsters, with the majority of cases transmitted by mice.
Transplant-acquired lymphocytic choriomeningitis proves to have a very high morbidity and mortality rate.
Ribavirin has not been evaluated yet in controlled clinical trials.
Immunosuppressive therapy has been effective in halting the disease for laboratory animals.
The prevalence varies with the living conditions and exposure to mice, and it has been higher in the past due to lower standards of living.
(CSF) Virus isolation is not used for diagnosis in most cases but it can be isolated from the blood or nasopharyngeal fluid early in the course of the disease, or from CSF in patients with meningitis.
In 1989, an outbreak among humans occurred in a US cancer research institute that studied the effects of various therapeutic and diagnostic agents in animal models.
Interference with research may involve:
In one study, antibodies to LCMV were detected in 0.8% of normal infants, 2.7% of infants with neurological signs  and 30% of infants with hydrocephalus.
Pathogenesis occurs in the same manner in hamsters as in mice.
Among the survivors, two thirds have lasting neurologic abnormalities.
recommend vigilant screening laboratory animals to be used in research facilities either through serum samples or cell line aliquots, as well as ensuring adequate ventilation in housing areas and use of appropriate sanitation products.
In addition, a better understanding of CD-4 T cell memory is also a result of studies with LCMV and will continue to contribute to a more efficient mechanism of vaccine formation.
This is referred to as acute (Armstrong) LCMV infection.
Another means of diagnosis is introducing a known naïve adult mouse to the suspect rodent colony.
The first arenavirus, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), was isolated in 1933 by Charles Armstrong during a study of an epidemic in St. Louis.
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis is not a commonly reported infection in humans, though most infections are mild and are often never diagnosed.
Although the house mouse (Mus musculus) is the primary reservoir host for LCMV, it is also often found in the wood mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus) and the yellow-necked mouse (Apodemus flavicollis).
Due to an oversight, no sentinel animals were monitored from August 1988 to March 1989.
As the disease progresses, the animal may experience weight loss, hunched posture, inflammation around the eyes, and eventually death.
For laboratory purposes, immunohistochemistry staining of tissues and virus isolation are used for more accurate testing, but this is unnecessary for the general house pet.
The spikes present on the virion envelope are dictated by tetramer formation of GP-1 and GP-2.
:*Do not kiss pet rodents or hold them close to your face.
Onset typically occurs between one or two weeks after exposure to the virus and is followed by a biphasic febrile illness.
:*Wash hands thoroughly with soap and water after cleaning up pet droppings.
Serologic testing is not recommended for pet rodents, as it has been unreliable in detecting antibodies in animals with active infections.
Conveniently, the mouse is also the most widely used genetic model for mammalian genetics.
Dr. Clare A. Dykewicz, ''et al.''
The National Center for Infectious Disease suggests the following precautions to reduce the risk of LCMV infection:
In choosing a pet, the CDC advises looking for general indications of health both in the prospective pet and others in the facility.
The probability that a woman will become infected after being exposed to rodents, the frequency with which LCMV crosses the placenta, and the likelihood of clinical signs among these infants are still poorly understood.
Congenitally or neonatally infected mice and hamsters do not become symptomatic for several months or longer.
Aspiration pneumonia can be a fatal complication.
The only survivor of a transplant-associated LCMV infection was treated with ribavirin and simultaneous tapering of the immunosuppressive medications.
The onset of the second phase occurs several days after recovery, and consists of symptoms of meningitis or encephalitis.
Infections have also been reported in rabbits, dogs and pigs.
In addition, LCMV can also be inactivated by heat, ultraviolet light or gamma irradiation.
Children with hydrocephalus often need a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
LCMV infections have also been associated with pancreatitis, pneumonitis, myocarditis and pericarditis.
Studies have indicated that human infection of the virus occurs primarily during the fall winter months, presumably due to the movement of mice indoors.
LCMV infection in other animals, including zoo animals, may be possible.
Less frequent symptoms include a sore throat and cough, as well as joint, chest, and parotid pain.
The ribonucleocapsid is then released in the cytoplasm.
A history of infection does not pose a risk for future pregnancies.
Rodent owners who no longer wish to keep their pet should consult a veterinarian.
: Inhibition of tumor induction due to polyoma virus, and mammary tumor virus in the mouse, and interference with transplantable leukaemia in the guinea pig and the mouse.
The LCMV model will be a great path towards advancements in cancer studies.
Other rodents including guinea pigs, rats and chinchillas can be infected but do not appear to maintain the virus.
In some occasions, meningitis occurs without a prodromal syndrome.
Less severe cases with isolated cerebellar hypoplasia and symptoms of ataxia and jitteriness have been reported occasionally.
As in humans, the sensitivity of testing methods for rodents contributes to the accuracy of diagnosis.
In one series, 35% of infants diagnosed withcongenital infections had died by the age of 21 months.
When LCMV attacks a cell, the process of replication starts by attachment of the virus to host receptors through its surface glycoproteins.
The latter is referred to as chronic (Clone 13) LCMV infection.
However, some authors note that such complement-fixation tests are insensitive and should not be used for diagnosis.
Rejection of cutaneous grafts or transplantable tumors may be delayed.
The mechanism of these mutations and how they confer such a profound physiological difference, acute versus chronic LCMV infection is yet to be understood.
Clinical diagnosis of LCM can be made by the history of prodrome symptoms and by considering the period of time before the onset of meningitis symptoms, typically 15–21 days for LCM.
The name was coined by Charles Armstrong in 1934.
Furthermore, the United States National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) has appointed the family of arenaviridae to be "Category A Priority Pathogens".
Understanding the biology of the LCMV model virus will help in advancing the understanding of this important class of viruses and more specifically will give insight into the biology of the Lassa virus which proves to be a growing threat around the world.
Products include devices that emit ultrasonic sound that allegedly irritates mice and drives them away, and more swift, painless means of death such as mini electrocution or gas chambers.
Other findings include chorioretinal scars, and optic atrophy.
Taking this into consideration, Doherty and Zinkernagel were working on the response of mice to virus infections.
The overall case fatality rate is less than 1% and people with complications, including meningitis, almost always recover completely.
LCMV occurs worldwide and its natural host, the rodent, has become established on all continents, except Antarctica.
It was the original model when first studied focused on CD-8 T cells response towards LCMV infection.
Experimental intracerebral infection of suckling rats results in microcephaly, retinitis and the destruction of several brain regions, leading to permanent abnormalities of movement, coordination, vision and behavior.
In all reported cases, the initial symptoms included fever, lethargy, anorexia and leukopenia, and quickly progressed to multisystem organ failure, hepatic insufficiency or severe hepatitis, dysfunction of the transplanted organ, coagulopathy, hypoxia, multiple bacteremias and shock.
Later congenital infection may lead to malformations such as intracranial calcifications, hydrocephalus, microcephaly or macrocephaly, intellectual disabilities, and seizures.
Another detection assay is the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests which may detect nucleic acids in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid.
In many ways, this disease mirrors persistent viral infection, in the way that it evades and progresses despite the immune system’s effort to eliminate it.
Clinical symptoms include excitability, weight loss, and severe retardation of growth and hair development.
However, one study  found that two of 95 children in a home for people with severe mental disabilities had been infected with this virus.
Use of ribavirin during pregnancy is generally not recommended, as some studies indicate the possibility of teratogenic effects.
LCMV is already identified as the best model to examine the difference between acute and viral infection in its natural host Mus musculus, the common house mouse.
Seroprevalence is approximately 5% (0.7–4.7%) of the US population.
One donor had been infected from a recently acquired pet hamster while the sources of the virus in the other cases were unknown.
In addition, infection will increase the sensivity of the mouse to ectromelia virus and to bacterial endotoxins.
The negative RNA strand, complementary to the necessary mRNA strand, indicates that it must first be transcribed into a positive mRNA strand before it can be translated into the required proteins.
However, it is possible that sporadic cases have been overlooked because of the wide range of clinical presentations.
After a rodent has been purchased, it should not be returned to the pet store as it may have been exposed to LCMV through house mice.
The future enhancement of the field of vaccinology will greatly depend on the LCMV model system.
However, pets can become vectors if they are exposed to wild house mice in a breeding facility, pet store, or home.
For this reason, LCMV may be more common than is realized.
Infection is associated with depression of cellular immunity in the mouse.
They concluded that these virus specific CTLs only lyse cells carrying the same molecules of the major histocompatibility site (MHC) as the CTLs themselves.
If one of the animals in the facility looks ill, the others may have been exposed, and none of the rodents at that location should be purchased.
LCMV has been isolated from fleas, ticks, cockroaches and Culicoides and Aedes mosquitoes.
Although not the cause of the outbreak, LCMV was found to be a cause of nonbacterial or aseptic meningitis.
Meningoencephalitis is characterized by more profound neurological signs such as confusion, drowsiness, sensory abnormalities and motor signs.
It tends to be more common among lower socio-economic groupings, probably reflecting more frequent and direct contacts with mice.
All received organs from a common donor, and within a month of transplantation, three of the four recipients had died as a result of the viral infection.
Pathological findings during the first stage consist of leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.
The virus seems to be relatively resistant to drying and therefore humans can become infected by inhaling infectious aerosolized particles of rodent urine, feces, or saliva, by ingesting food contaminated with virus, by contamination of mucous membranes with infected body fluids, or by directly exposing cuts or other open wounds to virus-infected blood.
Their key experiment involved harvesting of splenocytes containing LCMV specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes(CTL) from an infected mouse strain A.
Furthermore, LCMV has been a widely used model system for understanding T cell memory and vaccine synthesis.
The introduced mouse will seroconvert, allowing use of immunofluorescence antibody (IFA), MFIA or ELISA to detect antibodies.
LCMV is a spherical enveloped virus with a diameter between 60 and 300&nbsp;nm.
Most of the infants in one case series were of normal birth weight, although 30% were underweight.
In the 1970s, studies concerning the importance of MHC locus were done exclusively in transplantation and tumor rejection.
If aseptic meningitis, encephalitis, or meningoencephalitis develops in consequence to LCMV, hospitalization and supportive treatment may be required.
LCMV infection manifests itself in a wide range of clinical symptoms, and may even be asymptomatic for immunocompetent individuals.
Closely supervise young children, especially those less than five years old, when cleaning cages, and make sure they wash their hands immediately after handling rodents and rodent caging or bedding.
Nucleoside analog ribavirin is used in some cases due to the inhibitory effect the agent has ''in vitro'' on arenaviruses.
For immunocompetent mothers, there is no significant threat, but the virus has damaging effects upon the fetus.
The viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is encoded by the L protein which contains conserved characteristic motifs throughout all the RNA-dependent, RNA-polymerases.
LCMV has been shown to cause illness in New World primates such as macaques, marmosets and tamarins.
The helical nucleocapsid contains an RNA genome consisting of two negative single-stranded RNA segments.
In the future, studies with the LCMV virus will shed light on perhaps a pattern of persistence between all chronic viral infections.
When testing resumed, LCMV antibodies were found in the oldest sentinel hamsters.
Similar cases occurred in Massachusetts in 2008, and Australia in 2013.
Unlike their human counterparts, the Cylons do not have a natural immunity to this virus and many die.
Morbidity and mortality rates vary with the species of animal and its age at infection, as well as the strain of the virus and route of exposure.
Currently, there is not a LCMV infection test that is approved by the Food and Drug Administration for organ donor screening.
The prognosis for severely affected infants appears to be poor.
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
Callitrichid hepatitis is reported to be highly fatal in naturally infected marmosets and tamarins in zoos.
More severe disease is likely to occur in people who are immunosuppressed.
However, there is not sufficient evidence for efficacy in humans to support routine use.
Histological findings in persistently infected mice often show chronic glomerulonephritis.
It triggers a vigorous cytotoxic T lymphocytes(CTL) response and thus, it is cleared rapidly by the host.
This variant potentiates a less vigorous CTL response in the immune system, and thus can ultimately persist in the host organism indefinitely.
There have also been rare cases with evidence of chorioretinitis but without neurological signs.
27The latter undergoes posttranslational cleavage and results in the synthesis of two mature virion glycoproteins, GP-1 (40 to 46 kDa) and GP-2 (35 kDa).
Chronic infections have not been reported in humans and deaths rarely occur.
A checklist  of precautions is provided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, providing tips for sealing the home to keep rodents out, using traps to eliminate existing rodents, and maintaining a clean, healthy home.
Such infections are rare.
By the method of Cr-release cytotoxicity assay, thereby tagging the CTL with Chromium-51(Cr-51), the CTL destruction of infected cells was quantified by release of Cr-51.
Approximately 10–20% of the cases in immunocompetent individuals are thought to progress to neurological disease, mainly as aseptic meningitis.
Choriomeningitis is "cerebral meningitis in which there is marked cellular infiltration of the meninges, often with a lymphocytic infiltration of the choroid plexuses."
An important aspect of the present modern society is the thorough understanding of the burden of cancer.
Hamster populations can act as reservoir hosts.
The virus will continue to proliferate for an indefinite time.
Serological surveys suggest that approximately 1–5% of the population in the U.S. and Europe has antibodies to LCMV.
The greatest risk of infection to humans occurs shortly after purchase of a pet, so that exposure to the virus, if present, has likely already occurred to existing pet owners.
The L strand is ambisense RNA, encoding multiple proteins in opposite directions, separated by an intergenic region.
In experimentally infected rhesusmacaques, three of four animals became fatally ill when inoculation was by the intravenous route.
Pets should not be released into the wild for humane, legal, and ecological reasons.
Under reported complications include myelitis, Guillain–Barré-type syndrome, cranial nerve palsies, transient or permanent hydrocephalus, sensorineural hearing loss, orchitis, arthritis and parotitis.
The name is based on the tendency of an individual to have abnormally high levels of lymphocytes during infection.
Early and intravenous ribavirin treatment is required for maximal efficacy, and it can produce considerable side effects.
These were then mixed ''in vitro'' with virus infected fibroblasts or macrophages from two different mouse strains, A and B.
It was first isolated from mice which sustained a persistent LCMV infection from birth.
Chorioretinitis, which is followed by chorioretinal scarring, is the most common ocular lesion.
The presence of LCMV in laboratories may cause serious long-term repercussions to worker safety.
Several measures can be taken to prevent exposure to LCM from wild rodents in the home.
Individuals with the highest risk of infection are laboratory personnel who handle rodents or infected cells.
Patients infected in solid organ transplants have developed a severe fatal illness, starting within weeks of the transplant.
Thus, the virus specific CTLs are "MHC-restricted".
In the transplant-associated cases linked to a pet hamster in 2005, two other hamsters and a guinea pig at the pet shop, and approximately 4% of the hamsters at the distributor, were also infected.
On the other hand, Clone 13 is a variant of the Armstrong viral strain, isolated from the spleen and is consequently tropic for visceral organs.
The field of viral immunology will continue to be uncovered by the model system of LCMV.
New technology reflects a growing trend for more humane means of eliminating rodents.
Other modes of mouse-to-mouse transmission include nasal secretions, milk from infected dams, bites, and during social grooming within mouse communities.
Ticks, lice and mosquitoes have been shown to transmit this virus mechanically in the laboratory.
Early signs may include inactivity, loss of appetite, and a rough coat.
The humans learn of this weakness in the episode entitled "A Measure of Salvation".
If infection occurs during the first trimester, LCMV results in an increased risk of spontaneous abortion.
In hamsters, approximately half of all congenitally infected animals clear the virus when they are approximately three months old and remain healthy; the remaining animals develop chronic disease.
:*Clean the cage in a well-ventilated area or outside.
However, other strains of this virus ( Junin and Machupo viruses) are present in parts of South America and other strains continue to significantly affect the southern African population.
If LCMV infection occurs ''in utero'' or within the first few hours of life, during the immunologically unresponsive period, the mouse will develop immune tolerance.
In general, mortality is less than one percent.
In general, as the period of time between birth and inoculation decreases, less disease and mortality occurs.
The island of Vir in Croatia is one of the biggest described endemic places of origin of LCMV in the world, with IFA testing having found LCMV antibodies in 36% of the population.
