C-Kit+, CD44+, CD25-
NK Cells mainly are in the circulation (5-15% of the circulating lymphocytes) yet are also distributed in tissues everywhere.
These cells are thought to possess important an autoimmunity property by regulating 'autoreactive' T cells in the periphery.
The acquisition of CD27 and Flt3 by the HSC coincides with the loss of long-term repopulating potential.
*The progenitor CLP of the mouse or the progenitor MLP of the human differentiates into lymphocytes by first becoming a lymphoblast (Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;10).
Because all WBCs are microscopic, colorless and often seemingly identical in appearance they are individually identified by their natural chemical markers, many of which have been analyzed and named.
* B-2 further differentiate into:
Recent reports indicate that the human thymus is active throughout adult life.
This is called the (surface) phenotype of an HSC.
The opportunity they seek is to encounter and recognize and then kill abnormal cells such as cancer or virally infected cells.
The remaining 96-98% of T cells die by apoptosis and are phagocytosed by macrophages in the thymus.
Most textbooks say that B Cells mature in the bone marrow but, generally, immature B cells migrate to the spleen for 'higher education' of some sort where they go through  transitional stages before final maturation.
*Note explaining the barcode parameter details: ''Flt3 is a cytokine tyrosine kinase receptor thought to be important in early lymphoid development.
The CLP is the transit cell responsible for these (generally parallel) stages of development, below:
As the production of lymphocytes is so close to the central role of the immune response it is wise to approach the study of it with some humility in the face of the task, although there are general principles that help in understanding.
Only 2% to 3% of the differentiating thymocytes, those that express TcR capable of interaction with MHC molecules, but tolerant to self-peptides,  survive the Stage Four selection process.
This is the final stage of B lymphopoiesis but it is the clincher because the plasma cells must either issue antibody close to a source of infection, or disseminate it in the blood to fight an infection at a distance or in an inaccessible part of the body.
The development and regulation of DC is not well-characterized.
Yet they are much more closely related to T cells (part of the adaptive immune system) than to other cells of the innate immune system.
*Typical barcodes for some cell types appearing in this article.
*NK cells (also called LGL (large granular lymphocytes))
Because of these abilities much research has been done into transforming these qualities into medical therapy but progress has been slow.
The process has an astonishingly complex beauty to it.
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;119)
Progression of HSC differentiation and lineage commitment is indicated by changes in this phenotype.
A heterogeneous group with ill-defined properties.
*T-suppressor cells (which moderate the immune response of other leukocytes).
This basic map of T Cell formation, in sequence, is simplified and is akin to textbook descriptions, and may not reflect latest research.
After antigenic stimulation, B cells differentiate into plasma cells that secrete large quantities of soluble IgG.
*NKT cells  see Natural Killer T cell main article
* T-cytotoxic (which kill virally infected cells),
All are generated by normal or abnormal lymphopoiesis except for certain artificial strains created in the laboratory by development from existing strains.
In his 1976 text ''Immunology, Aging and Cancer'' immunologist and Nobel Prize winner Sir Frank Macfarlane Burnet speculated that the immune system might one day be found to be as complex as the nervous system.
**(Germinal Center (GC); Memory ; Plasma )
*T Cells, B Cells and NK Cells (and all other Innate lymphoid cells) are unique to the lymphocyte family, but dendritic cells are not.
**(TNK; CD4; CD8; Treg)
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;136)
This has been known for more than 40 years.
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;118)
Despite their remarkable ability to generate the complete suite of lymphocytes, most progenitors are not true stem cells, however, and must be continually renewed by differentiation from the pHSC stem cell.
*T Regulatory cells
Thus the following developmental states may be noticed in sequence in blood tests:
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;117-122)
These barcodes partially define the modern meaning of phenotype for leukocytes.
*Progenitor B cells
HSC are technically described as: lacking FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (Flt3) and lacking the markers specific to discrete lymphoid lineages (Lin), but expressing high levels of Sca1 and c-kit; HSC also express CD44, low levels of Thy1.1 (CD90), but no IL-7Ra or CD27.
Any daughter cell will usually have new specialized abilities and if it is able to divide it will form a new sub-lineage.
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;122)
*Natural killer-like T cells
A generally regarded valid map of B cell lymphopoiesis is as follows in sequence, in two parts with the first being in the bone marrow and the second in the spleen:.
Upon maturity, there are several forms of thymocytes including
Afterward some T cells leave the thymus to migrate to the skin and mucosae.
Tc kill by apoptosis and either splash their target with perforin or granzymes or else use Fas-Fasl Interaction to command target elimination.
This is the most common protective immunoglobulin in the adult body.
While the DC precursors have been identified in the human fetal liver, thymus, and bone marrow, during adult life DC are thought to be produced only from the bone marrow and released into the blood to wander and settle down.
*(Marginal Zone (MZ); B-1 ; B-2)
NKT cells are thought to play an important role in tumor immunity and immunoregulation.
For example, one kind is found in the peripheral blood while another predominates in the intestinal tract.
For example it was thought that the process of lymphopoiesis was a direct, orderly unidirectional sequence.
Probably NK cells can develop in a variety of organs but the major site of NK cell development is not known.
pHSC, MPP and ELP cells are not fully committed to the lymphoid lineage because if one is removed to a different location it may differentiate into non-lymphoid progeny.
This is more than just nomenclature, it is new science that provides challenges of complexity yet offers new vistas of bio-science and the promise of early enhancement of private and public health issues.
Lymphopoiesis also arises from the yolk sac.
T-lymphopoiesis does not occur automatically but  requires signals generated from the thymic stromal cells.
'''Basic map of B cell lymphopoiesis'''
B lymphocytes are identified by the presence of soluble immunoglobulin G (IgG).
The apoptosed thymocyte dies and is quickly recycled.
This is hardly a simple topic.
Killers are distinguished from cells such as macrophages that eat other cells or munch debris by a method called phagocytosis.
The morphological differences do not just correspond to steps in mitosis (somatic cell division), but result from continuous "maturation processes"of the cell nucleus as well as of the cytoplasm and so one must not be too rigid about morphological distinctions between certain cell stages.
Recent evidence suggests a role working together with hepatic stellate cells being a liver-resident antigen-presenting cell that presents lipid antigens to and stimulates proliferation of NKT cells.
(See Barcode Section of this article).
NK cells not only share many surface markers, functions and activities in common  with  T  Cells, they also  arise  from  a common T/NK progenitor.
(also called '''Tc''' or antigen-specific cytolytic T lymphocytes ('''CTL)''').
Also called T-regulatory cells (Tregs)
In mice, transplantation of a single pHSC cell can reconstitute a sub-lethally irradiated host (i.e.
After maturation and release from the marrow they circulate in the blood through their lifetime seeking opportunity.
Thus several factors may contribute to the supply of T cells in adult life: generation in the thymus, extra-thymic differentiation, and the fact that memory T cells are long-lived and survive for decades.
These studies are important now mainly to immunology researchers but are likely to eventually lead to changes in medical treatments.
*LAK cells (Lymphokine-activated killer) are a laboratory/clinical subset of NK Cells promoted by IL-2 to attack tumor cells.
It then divides several more times to become a prolymphocyte that has specific cell-surface markers unique to either a (1) T cell or (2) B cell.
The complete loss of or loss of function of any WBC cell type is a serious health matter, but lymphopoiesis is absolutely necessary for life.
What the P mother cell does ''not'' do is divide into two new P mother cells or a mother and a daughter; this is a matter of observation as such limited progenitor cells are known to not self-renew.
With the commitment to the T cell lineage, begins a very complex process known as TcR gene rearrangement.
This set is a ‘barcode’ for the HSC, akin to the barcode label attached to your chicken-wing plastic bag for checkout at a supermarket!
NK cells not only have a catchy movie-title name (Natural Killer) but are also the only lymphocytes considered part of the innate immune system (in contrast to the adaptive immune system.
NK cells have a definition 'barcode' as CD3, CD16+, CD56t lymphocytes.
They perform quite different (although co-operative) functions in the body.
Changes in cytoplasm, morphology of the cell nucleus, granules, cell internal biochemistry, signaling molecules and cell surface markers are difficult to correlate with definite stages in lymphopoiesis.
Were this system to fail, the body would be largely undefended from infection.
The progenitor can also differentiate into (3) natural killer cells (NK) and (4) dendritic cells.
There are four major types of lymphocytes, many sub-types, and hundreds or thousands of lymphocyte cell types that have been identified by scientists.
Worse, some macrophages (long considered a myeloid lineage) could be generated by lymphoid lineage progenitors.
* T-helper (needed for activation of other cells such as B cells and macrophages),
Here is the parade of killers and how they work:
Traveling to lymph nodes the 'CD56 bright' NK cells differentiate again into mature NK cells which express killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR), natural cytotoxicity receptors (NCR), and critical adhesion molecules.
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;121)
The T/NK  precursor is also believed to be the source of a subpopulation of lymphoid DC.
At this stage the cells retain both lymphoid and myeloid potential and are referred to as multipotent progenitors.''
Tregs comprised about 5% of the circulating CD4+ T cells.
A set of markers is colloquially describes as the ''barcode'' for that cell or that cell line.
**Pro-B cells => Early Pro (or pre-pre)-B cells => Late Pro (or pre-pre)-B cells
An example of maturity is a plasma cell, from the B cell lineage, which produces copious antibody, but cannot divide and eventually dies after a few days or weeks.
More differentiated double negative T cells (DN2 cells) have more limited potentiality but are not yet fully restricted to the T cell lineage (they can still develop into DC, T cells, or NK cells).
'''Stages of T cell maturation'''
**B Cells => (B1 cells; B2 cells)
NK progenitors can be found mainly in the thymus (mouse), but the thymus is not absolutely required for NK development.
The difference of a daughter cell from the mother may be great, but it could also be much less, even subtle.
It is well known that lymphocytes never have granules or at least not granules that are readily visible even upon staining.
It was previously believed that the human thymus remained active as the site of T cell differentiation only until early adulthood and that later in adult life the thymus atrophies, perhaps even vanishing.
They do have numerous granules which provide their ability to kill cells and these granules are why NK cells have an alternate name, LGL, Large Granular Lymphocytes.
This creates an enormous diversity of T cells bearing antigen receptors.
Although lymphocytes are usually considered mature (as seen in blood tests) they are certainly not inert but can and do get around the body to anywhere there is a need; and when such need arises, new rounds of 'downstream' lymphopoiesis such as cell multiplication and differentiation may arise, coupled with intense mitotic and metabolic activity.
Unlike other lymphoid lineages, T cell development occurs almost exclusively in the thymus.
Scientists use these barcodes to check, categorize and accumulate cells for many purposes often using laboratory methods such as cell flow cytometry.
In essence focus has been shifted away from the CLP to the MLP (lymphoid-specified progenitors), which are clearly lymphoid progenitors yet retain some myeloid potential, particularly the interesting ability in both man and mouse to make macrophages - one of the most versatile of immune cell defenders - and also many dendritic cells, the best 'watchdogs' of antigen invaders.
Lymphocytes have a number of alarming properties such as the ability to wander around the body and take up lodging almost anywhere, and while on the way issue commands in the form of cytokines and chemokines and lymphokines, commands that affect many cell types in the body and which may also recursively induce further lymphopoiesis.
Many progenitor cells are also referred to as ''transit cells'', sometimes also called ''transit amplifying cells'', the meaning of this term being that the transit cell may found a new sub-lineage but the number of resultant cells is strictly limited (although possibly very large, even trillions yet finite) and the lineage is terminated by cells that die off (by apoptosis) or remain as cells that can no longer divide.
It can be expressed as a set (Lin2, Sca1high, c-kit high, CD44+, Thy1.1low, CD27 2, and IL-7Ra2).
No evidence has ever been found that T and B cells can ever interconvert.
NK cells, which lack antigen specific receptors, develop in the bone marrow.
'''Basic Map of T Cell lymphopoiesis'''
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;114)
This kills cells that are infected and display antigen.
And T Cells come in many flavors, for example: the conventional TcRαβ T cells; the so-called unconventional TcRγδ T cells; NKT cells; and T regulatory cells (Treg).
Killers are known to attack virus-infected cells and cells that have become cancerous.
They emigrate from the thymus in "waves" of clonal populations, which home to discrete tissues.
The changes were sparked by observations that lymphopoiesis did not always break into two lineages at the level of the CLP.
The set comprising CLP cells and similar progenitors are themselves descendants of the pluripotential hemopoietic stem cell (pHSC) which is capable of generating all of the cell types of the complete blood cell system.
They select their targets based on typical molecules displayed by cells that are under stress by viral infection.
Pathosis in lymphopoiesis leads to any of various lymphoproliferative disorders, such as the lymphomas and lymphoid leukemias.
Later on, they are fully committed to the T cell lineage- when thymoctyes expressing Notch1 receptors engage thymic stromal cells expressing Notch1 ligands, the thymocytes become finally committed to the T-cell lineage.
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;135), yet little is known.
However T and B lymphocytes are very distinct cell lineages and they ‘grow up’ in different places in the body.
These kill with exactly the same methods as Tc, but have no interaction with any antigen.
CD27 plays a role in lymphoid proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.
A smaller subset (10–15%) called NK 'CD56 bright' is chiefly responsible for cytokine production and has enhanced survival.
Lymphopoiesis continues throughout life and so progenitor cells and their parent stem cells must always be present.
(Medical Immunology, p.&nbsp;122)
Examples of such cells are CFUs (Colony-forming units - referred to as such because of their ability to form colonies in vitro in artificial media) such as CFU-T.
**Large Pre-B cells => Small Pre-B cells
Final commitment to the T cell lineage occurs within the thymic microenvironment, the microscopic structures of the thymus where T cells are nurtured.
When two cells have the same markers, the reasonable assumption is made that the cells are identical at that time.
The relative proportion of precursor B cells in the bone marrow remains rather constant throughout the life span of an organism.
The most primitive T cells retain pluripotential ability and can differentiate into cells of the myeloid or lymphoid lineages (B cells, DC, T cells, or NK cells).
T cells are formed in bone marrow then migrate to the cortex of the thymus to undergo maturation in an antigen-free environment for about one week where a mere 2-4% of the T cells succeed.
However beginning around 2000 and gaining momentum after 2005 in both studies on man and mouse, new complexities were noted and published in papers.
This large lymphocyte (known in this context as a lymphoblast) then divides several times to produce an expanded population of medium (9–12μm) and small lymphocytes (5–8μm) with the same  antigenic specificity.
*Dendritic cells (lymphoid lineage; DC2 )
Dendritic cells of identical appearance but different markers are spread throughout the body, and come from either lymphoid and myeloid lineages, but these cells may have somewhat different tasks and may take up lodging preferentially in different locations.
Interestingly, later in T cell development and its maturation these same regulatory factors again are used to influence T cell specialization.
Several stages at which specific regulators and growth factors are required for T cell development to proceed have been defined.
And it gives insight into the nature of redundancy and overlap in the immune system and hints how to use this to advantage.
Until recently the model of the CMP generating all myeloid cell and the CLP generating all lymphoid cells was considered necessary and sufficient to explain the known facts observed in the generation of WBCs, and it is still found in most basic textbooks.
The development process in the bone marrow occurs in Germinal Centers.
So many thymocytes (T cells) die during the maturation process because there is intensive screening to make sure each thymocyte has the ability to recognize self-peptide:self-MHC complex  and for self tolerance.
The most primitive cells in the thymus are the early thymocyte progenitors (ETP), which retain all lymphoid and myeloid potential but exist only transiently, rapidly differentiating into T and NK lineages.
However early in gestation the developing embryo has begun its own lymphopoiesis from the fetal liver.
New questions emerge in immunology continuously as though there were a stem cell for questions.
See Gallery Image "Double Negatives"
Details regarding the developmental and life cycle of the unconventional T cells are less well-described compared to the conventional T cells.
This is in contrast to the adult where all lymphocytes originate in the bone marrow.
*Natural Killer T cells
Mature lymphocytes are a critical part of the immune system that (with the exception of memory B and T cells) have short lives measured in days or weeks and must be continuously generated throughout life by cell division and differentiation from cells such as common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) in mice.
Overall a large number of DC of varying types are dispatched throughout the body, especially at epithelia such as skin, to monitor invaders and nibble their antigens.
T and B cells are biochemically distinct and this is reflected in the differing markers and receptors they possess on their cell surfaces.
However in summary there is ''no known cell or set of cells'' that is capable of killing cancerous cells in general.
However NK cells are the exception.
It was only natural to ask where these two great classes of cells arose, and after much work two cell types with some strong stem cell properties were isolated and defined - CMP, the common myeloid progenitor and CLP, the common lymphoid progenitor for mice.
* T-memory (T cells that remember antigens previously encountered), and
Stage Three: β-Selection
Nor is it clear whether lineages of lymphocytes develop via a continuum of differentiation with a progressive loss of lineage options or whether abrupt events result in the acquisition of certain properties.
In humans, the majority (85–90%) of the NK cells have a high cytolytic capacity (the ability to lyse cells).
A small, resting T lymphocyte rapidly undergoes blastogenic transformation into a large lymphocyte (13–15μm).
That is, as the cell changes, the markers will also change and the barcode will change.
However, whatever the details may turn out to be, the process of lymphopoiesis always seems to relentlessly give rise to progeny with special attributes and abilities - "superpowers" so to speak - but with progressively more restricted lymphoid developmental potential.
Several differences between αβ and γδ T cell development have been described.
Stage Two: Proliferative Expansion and T Lineage Commitment
(Revise in light of new research) This is now an open question; also, the different dendritic cell lineages may have different ‘tasks’ and stay in different ‘locations.’
*Here is an example of how a barcode can come to be, for the all-important HSC as an example.
Stage Four: T Cell Receptors Selection
"Tregs" are considered as naturally occurring regulatory T cells.
Stage Five: Continuing Differentiation in the Periphery
When T-Cells become activated they undergo a further series of developments.
There seems to be no other sentencing option available.
a mouse that has been irradiated so that all leukocytes are killed) with all these lineages of cells, including all types of lymphocytes via CLPs.
This seems to be true in all vertebrates, although there are many differences in the details between the species.
Human NK T cells are a unique population (which express NK cell markers such as CD56 and KIR).
Multipotent lymphoid progenitors (MLP) enter the T cell pathway as they immigrate to the thymus.
*Regardless of whether the CLP (mouse) or MLP or a small closely related set of progenitor cells take credit for generating the profusion of lymphocytes, it remains an interesting observation that the same lymphoid progenitors can still opt to generate some cells that are clearly identifiably myeloid.
One strong behavior pattern that captivates researchers and the public alike is the ability of lymphocytes to act as police, judge and executioner to kill other cells or demand that they suicide, a command that is usually obeyed.
There are stages such as Pre-B-I cells (5% to 10% of the total); Pre-B-II cells (60% to 70%) while the remaining 20% to 25% are immature B cells.
Natural Killer T Cells.
In addition, Flt3 plays a major role in maintaining B lymphoid progenitors.
T cells are unique among the lymphocyte populations in their ability to further specialize as mature cells and become yet more mature.
Image:MLP to DN3 resized annotated-Aug 3 2010.jpg | Revised Lineage Myelo-lymphoid flowchart.
However CLP ''are'' committed to the lymphoid lineage.
Killers do not use phagocytosis, they just kill and leave the clean-up to other cells.
Final activated and differentiated T lymphocytes are once again morphologically indistinguishable from a small, resting lymphocyte.
*There is a sort of exception when daughter cells at some level of the lineage may divide several times to form more seemingly identical cells, but then further differentiation and division will inevitably occur, until a final stage is reached in which no further division can occur and the cell type lineage is finally mature.
