Fisherman's Wharf, Macao, 2013-08-08, DD 01.jpg|Fisherman's Wharf
Macau has a well-established public transport network connecting the Macau Peninsula, Cotai, Taipa Island and Coloane Island.
Some local workers complain about the lack of jobs due to the influx of cheap imported labour.
As prescribed by the Macau Basic Law, the government follows the principle of keeping expenditure within the limits of revenues in drawing up its budget, and strives to achieve a fiscal balance, avoid deficits and keep the budget commensurate with the growth rate of its gross domestic product.
Today, there are 16 casinos operated by the STDM, and they are still crucial in the casino industry in Macau, but in 2004, the opening of the Sands Macau ushered in the new era.
Since 1989, Macau owns a thoroughbred horse racing track called Taipa Racecourse operated by the Macau Jockey Club.
The Historic Centre of Macau, which includes some twenty-five historic locations, was officially listed as a World Heritage Site UNESCO on 15 July 2005 during the 29th session of the World Heritage Committee, held in Durban, South Africa.
Autumn in Macau, from October to November, is sunny and still pleasantly warm with lower humidity.
Macau always participates in the Rink Hockey World Championship in B category.
Nevertheless, education levels in Macau are low among high income regions.
The Chinese and Portuguese governments commenced negotiations on the question of Macau in June 1986.
However, the pataca was not the official currency when it was first enacted.
The biggest event of the year is the Macau Grand Prix in November, when the main streets in Macau Peninsula are converted to a racetrack bearing similarities with the Monaco Grand Prix.
According to a survey conducted between 2005, 2007 and 2009, 30% of the population follows folk faiths, 10% are adherents of Buddhism or Taoism, 5% are Christians, and the remaining part do not declare religious affiliation.
The clothing industry has provided about three quarters of export earnings, and the gaming, tourism and hospitality industry is estimated to contribute more than 50% of Macau's GDP, and 70% of Macau government revenue.
File:Vista_de_Taipa,_Macao,_2013-08-08,_DD_01.jpg|Macau, in 2013
This new bus operator operates on the existing routes by Transmac and Transportas Companhia de Macau.
The result was that a virtual Japanese protectorate was created over Macau.
File:Macau Government Headquarters 01.JPG|Headquarters of the Government of Macau, previously the Governor's House until 1999.
Buses and taxis are the major modes of public transport in Macau.
Another concern is the widening of income inequality in the region.
The rating agency also upgraded Macau's foreign currency bank deposit ceiling to 'Aa3' from 'A1'.
In 1894, the pataca was introduced in both Macau and Portuguese Timor as a unit of account for the Mexican dollar and the other silver dollar coins in circulation.
As prescribed by the Basic Law of Macau Chapter VI Article 121, the Government of Macau shall, on its own, formulate policies on education, including policies regarding the educational system and its administration, the language of instruction, the allocation of funds, the examination system, the recognition of educational qualifications, and the system of academic awards so as to promote educational development.
The Portuguese continued to pay an annual tribute up to 1863 in order to stay in Macau.
The amount of performances performed in Macau has also shown an increasing trend since the early 2010s, including the show ''House of Dancing Water'', concerts, industry trade shows and international art crossovers.
In 1557, Macau was rented to Portugal from Ming China as a trading port.
File:Casinos, Macao, 2013-08-08, DD 01.jpg|Grand Lisboa and Casino Lisboa
The mixing of the Chinese and Portuguese cultures and religious traditions for more than four centuries has left Macau with an inimitable collection of holidays, festivals and events.
File:Museu de Macau (2052750102).jpg|Museum of Macau
Portuguese traders first settled in Macau in the 1550s.
In February 2009, the Legislative Assembly passed the Macau national security law based on a withdrawn security legislation previously introduced in Hong Kong.
The Health Bureau in Macau is mainly responsible for coordinating the activities between the public and private organizations in the area of public health, and assure the health of citizens through specialized and primary health care services, as well as disease prevention and health promotion.
The government shall also in accordance with law, gradually institute a compulsory education system.
File:Santa Casa de Misericordia, Macao, 2013-08-08, DD 02.jpg|Senado Square, Macau
Following Portuguese government protest, in 1950 the United States paid US$20,255,952 to the government of Portugal.
When it was discovered that neutral Macau was planning to sell aviation fuel to Japan, aircraft from the  bombed and strafed the hangar of the Naval Aviation Centre on 16 January 1945 to destroy the fuel.
As such, Macau enjoyed a brief period of economic prosperity as the only neutral port in South China after the Japanese had occupied Guangzhou and Hong Kong.
Coen said after the defeat that "The slaves of the Portuguese at Macau served them so well and faithfully, that it was they who defeated and drove away our people there last year", and "Our people saw very few Portuguese" during the battle.
File:Coloane Village.JPG|Coloane Village with the artistic Portuguese pavement
Portugal was also obliged "never to alienate Macau without previous agreement with China", therefore ensuring that negotiation between Portugal and France (regarding a possible exchange of Macau and Portuguese Guinea with the French Congo) or with other countries would not go forward&nbsp;– so that the British commercial interests would be secured; Macau officially became a territory under Portuguese administration.
Local nurses are trained at the Macau Polytechnic Institute and the Kiang Wu Nursing College.
Hong Kong lies about  to its East across the Delta.
According to ''The World Factbook'', Macau has the fourth highest life expectancy in the world, while its infant mortality rate ranks among the lowest in the world.
Macau is an offshore financial centre, a tax haven, and a free port with no foreign exchange control regimes.
Located on China's southern coast, Macau has ample rainfall, with average annual precipitation being .
In Coloane Village, the Taoist god Tam Kong is also honoured on the same day.
Three years later, Portugal and China agreed to regard Macau as "a Chinese territory under (temporary) Portuguese administration".
Judges are selected by a committee and appointed by the chief executive.
Macau preserves many historical properties in the urban area.
In 2007, Moody's Investors Service upgraded Macau's foreign and local currency government issuer ratings to 'Aa3' from 'A1', citing its government's solid finances as a large net creditor.
Macau also has a basketball team, which qualified for the Asian Basketball Championship twice.
Captain Kornelis Reyerszoon was commander of the 800-strong Dutch invasion force.
Macau has one active international airport, known as Macau International Airport located at the eastern end of Taipa and neighbouring waters.
In 1583, the Portuguese in Macau were permitted to form a Senate to handle various issues concerning their social and economic affairs under strict supervision of the Chinese authority, but there was no transfer of sovereignty.
In 1557, the Portuguese established a permanent settlement in Macau, paying an annual rent of 500 taels (18.9 kilograms41.6 pounds) of silver.
In addition to hospitals, Macau also has numerous health centres providing free basic medical care to residents.
In 2006, the Programme for International Student Assessment, a worldwide test of 15-year-old schoolchildren's scholastic performance coordinated by OECD, ranked Macau as the fifth and sixth in science and problem solving respectively.
According to the 2006 by-census, 47% of the residents were born in mainland China, of whom 74.1% were born in Guangdong and 15.2% in Fujian.
Numerous other hotel casinos, including Galaxy Cotai Megaresort, opened in 2011, and plans for a $3.9 billion complex that will be known as Lisboa Palace is expected to be completed by 2017.
However, the Chinese were suspicious of these paper patacas, being so accustomed to using silver for barter, and as such, the paper patacas circulated at a discount in relation to the silver dollar coins.
Around 1552–1553, they obtained temporary permission to erect storage sheds onshore, in order to dry out goods drenched by sea water; they soon built rudimentary stone houses around the area now called Nam Van.
The present Chinese name () means "Inlet Gates".
File:Macau Penha Hill.jpg|Landscape of Penha Hill in Macau.
The organization has a total of 739 uniformed firefighters and paramedics serving from 7 stations in Macau.
Another common sport is Rink Hockey, which is often practised by the Portuguese.
Under Portuguese rule, Macau often served as an expeditionary base to Japan and other regions of East Asia from the 16th century onwards, while maintaining a strong garrison mainly to repel Dutch and mainland Chinese attacks.
Famous dishes include minchi, capella, galinha à Portuguesa, galinha à Africana (African chicken), bacalhau, Macanese chili shrimps and stir-fry curry crab.
In 2002, the Macau government ended the monopoly system and six casino operating concessions and subconcessions are granted to Sociedade de Turismo e Diversões de Macau, Wynn Resorts, Las Vegas Sands, Galaxy Entertainment Group, the partnership of MGM Mirage and Pansy Ho (daughter of Stanley Ho), and the partnership of Melco and Publishing and Broadcasting Limited (PBL).
In 2006, the airport handled about 5 million passengers.
As more Portuguese settled in Macau to engage in trade, they made demands for self-administration; but this was not achieved until the 1840s.
Macau did not develop as a major settlement until the Portuguese arrived in the 16th century.
With the opening of the Sands Macao, in 2004 and Wynn Macau in 2006, gambling revenues from Macau's casinos were greatly prosperous.
Currently three companiesTransmac, Transportas Companhia de Macau and Macau Nova Era de Autocarros Públicos operate franchised public bus services in Macau.
Foreign judges may serve on the courts.
The literacy rate of the territory is 93.5%.
Other languages such as Mandarin, English, and Hokkien are spoken by local communities.
In 1513, Jorge Álvares became the first Portuguese to land in China.
The Dutch Governor Jan Pz.
Macau is among the world's richest regions, and  its GDP per capita by purchasing power parity is higher than that of any country in the world, according to the World Bank.
The government in Macau is headed by the Chief Executive of Macau, who is appointed by the central government upon the recommendation of an election committee, whose three hundred members are nominated by corporate and community bodies.
The newest public bus operator, Macau Nova Era, previously Reolian Public Transport Co., entered service on 1 August 2011.
Vistas de Macao, 2013-08-08, DD 02.jpg|View of the old city in Macau with tenement housing in the foreground
Together with the liberalization of Macau's gaming industry in 2001 that induces significant investment inflows, the average growth rate of the economy between 2001 and 2006 was approximately 13.1% annually.
The '''Macau Light Rapid Transit''' or '''Macau LRT''' also known as '''Metro Ligeiro de Macau''' is a mass transit system in Macau under construction.
File:Assembleia Legislativa.jpg|Office building of the Legislative Assembly of Macau.
Following the First Opium War (1839–42), Portugal occupied Taipa and Coloane in 1851 and 1864 respectively.
95% of Macau's population is Chinese; another 2% is of Portuguese and/or mixed Chinese/Portuguese descent, an ethnic group often referred to as Macanese.
On June 24, 1622, the Dutch attacked Macau in the Battle of Macau, in the hope of turning it into a Dutch possession.
The next month they demanded the installation of Japanese "advisors" under the alternative of military occupation.
The peninsula is formed by the Zhu Jiang (Pearl River) estuary on the east and the Xi Jiang (West River) on the west.
Other chief economic activities in Macau are export-geared textile and garment manufacturing, banking and other financial services.
However, despite having no Portuguese garrison left on the territory, a small security force managed by the local PSP was kept, which proved useful with the escalating triad warfare tensions towards the last decades of Portuguese administration.
The Chinese government assumed formal sovereignty over Macau on 20 December 1999.
In February 2015, the gambling revenue in Macau fell by 48.6 percent from a year earlier to 19.5 billion patacas ($2.4 billion), the biggest monthly decline that has ever been recorded.
In 1935, when China and Hong Kong abandoned the silver standard, the Hong Kong dollar was pegged to sterling at the fixed rate of 1 shilling and 3 pence, whereas the pataca was pegged to the Portuguese escudo at a sterling equivalent rate of only 1 shilling.
Macau participates in international organizations and events that do not require members to possess national sovereignty.
Macau was administered by the Portuguese Empire and its inheritor states from the mid-16th century until late 1999, when it was the last remaining European colony in Asia.
In 1976, Lisbon redefined Macau as a "Chinese territory under Portuguese administration" and granted it a large measure of administrative, financial, and economic autonomy.
It became the world's largest gambling centre in 2006, with the economy heavily dependent on gambling and tourism, as well as manufacturing.
Macau has a three-tier court system: the Court of the First Instance, the Court of the Second Instance and the Court of Final Appeal.
In a World Tourism Organization report of international tourism for 2006, Macau ranked 21st in the number of tourists and 24th in terms of tourism receipts.
July is the warmest month, the average temperature being .
With a dense urban environment, Macau has no arable land, pastures, forest, or woodland.
None of the Macau hospitals are independently assessed through international healthcare accreditation.
It is said that when the Portuguese sailors landed at the coast just outside the temple and asked the name of the place, the natives replied "" ().
'''Macau''' (; ), spelled '''Macao''' officially in English, officially the '''Macao Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China''', is an autonomous territory on the western side of the Pearl River Delta in China.
After the Handover in 1999, there has been a rapid rise in the number of mainland visitors due to China's easing of travel restrictions.
Winter (December to early March) is generally mild with temperatures above  most of the time, although it can drop below  at times.
It will serve the Macau Peninsula, Taipa and Cotai, serving major border checkpoints such as the Border Gate, the Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal, the Lotus Bridge Border and the Macau International Airport.
The Macau native people were Tanka boat people.
The name pataca is a Portuguese word which was applied to the Mexican dollars that were the main circulating coin in the wider region in the second half of the 19th century.
Free Casino Shuttle Buses are everywhere in Macau.
Community organizations and individuals may, in accordance with law, run educational undertakings of various kinds.
Moreover, it is one of only a few regions in Asia with a "very high Human Development Index", ranking 18th in the world .
Meanwhile, 42.5% of the residents were born in Macau, and those born in Hong Kong, the Philippines and Portugal shared 3.7%, 2.0% and 0.3% respectively.
Macau has its own professional football league, the Campeonato da 1ª Divisão do Futebol, where the ''Big Three'' professional football clubs of Portugal have their own branches: S.L.
In 1901, it was decided to grant the Banco Nacional Ultramarino the exclusive rights to issue banknotes denominated in patacas, and in the year 1906, all foreign coins were outlawed.
The frequency for each route is usually 15 minutes.
There are currently 10 tertiary educational institutions in the region, four of them being public.
The Central People's Government shall not levy any taxes in the Macau Special Administrative Region.
The average annual temperature of Macau is .
The coolest month is January, with a mean temperature of .
Macau is otherwise known in Chinese as ''Haojing'' (, literally "Oyster Mirror") or ''Jinghai'' (, literally "Mirror Sea").
From 9.1&nbsp;million visitors in 2000, arrivals to Macau has grown to 18.7&nbsp;million visitors in 2005 and 22 million visitors in 2006, with over 50% of the arrivals coming from mainland China and another 30% from Hong Kong.
The first recorded Chinese inhabitants of the area were people seeking refuge in Macau from invading Mongols during the Southern Song.
The senate of Macau once complained to the viceroy of Goa of the contempt with which the Chinese authorities treated them, confessing however that "it was owing more to the Portuguese themselves than to the Chinese".
During World War II, unlike Portuguese Timor, which was occupied by the Japanese in 1942 along with Dutch Timor, the Japanese respected Portuguese neutrality in Macau, but only up to a point.
The Procession of the Passion of Our Lord is a well-known Roman Catholic rite and journey, which travels from Saint Austin's Church to the Cathedral, also taking place in February.
Also the Capitania dos Portos kept operating a coast guard and the Portuguese airforce kept airfields active until the opening of Macau International Airport in the mid-1990s.
Indirect election is limited to organizations registered as "corporate voters" and a 300-member election committee drawn from broad regional groupings, municipal organizations, and central government bodies.
It is higher than those of neighbouring regions, such as mainland China (0.447), South Korea (0.316) and Singapore (0.425).
The Monetary Authority of Macau regulates offshore finance, while the Macau Trade and Investment Promotion Institute provides services for investment in Macau.
The chief executive and the cabinet have their offices in the Macau Government Headquarters, located in the area of São Lourenço.
However, winter is mostly dry due to the influence of the vast Siberian High affecting much of East Asia.
The name ''Macau'' is thought to be derived from the ''A-Ma Temple'' (), a temple built in 1448 dedicated to Mazu, the goddess of seafarers and fishermen.
It also has  of coastline, yet only  of land border with Guangdong of Mainland China.
Land reclamation in the 17th century transformed Macau into a peninsula with generally flat terrain, though numerous steep hills still mark the original land mass.
Gambling revenue has made Macau the world's top casino market, surpassing Las Vegas.
However, Beijing was not ready to settle the treaty question, leaving the maintenance of "the status quo" until a more appropriate time.
Macau's Gini coefficient, a popular measure of income inequality where a low value indicates a more equal income distribution, rose from 0.43 in 1998 to 0.48 in 2006.
The ''Macau Corps of Firefighters'' (Portuguese:''Corpo de Bombeiros de Macau'') is responsible for ambulance service (Ambulância de Macau).
In Macau, the unit of currency is the pataca, which is currently pegged to the Hong Kong dollar at a rate of HK$1&nbsp;= MOP1.03.
Its ingredients and seasonings include those from Europe, South America, Africa, India, and Southeast Asia, as well as local Chinese ingredients.
However, since the allied British settled Hong Kong, the need for a strong military presence in Macau dimmed and it became limited before ceasing in 1974.
Fernando Chui is the current Chief Executive.
Many unique dishes resulted from the spice blends that the wives of Portuguese sailors used in an attempt to replicate European dishes.
Sovereignty over Macau was transferred to China on 20 December 1999.
The legislative organ of the territory is the Legislative Assembly, a 33-member body comprising 14 directly elected members, 12 indirectly elected members representing functional constituencies and seven members appointed by the chief executive.
Consultation in traditional Chinese medicine is also available.
Macau has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen ''Cwa''), with average relative humidity between 75% and 90%.
Typically, Macanese food is seasoned with various spices and flavours including turmeric, coconut milk, cinnamon and bacalhau, giving special aromas and tastes.
Alto de Coloane is the highest point in Macau, with an altitude of .
There are no western-style medical schools in Macau, and thus all aspiring physicians in Macau have to obtain their education and qualification elsewhere.
Any permanent residents at or over 18 years of age are eligible to vote in direct elections.
The majority of the defenders were African slaves, with only a few Portuguese soldiers and priests.
All financial revenue of the Macau Special Administrative Region shall be managed and controlled by the region itself and shall not be handed over to the Central People's Government.
From 1945 to 1951, fractional coins of the pataca were minted for issue in Portuguese Timor; and, in 1952, similar issues were minted for Macau including an actual pataca coin for the first time.
In 1999, upon handover to the PRC, a substantial garrison of the People's Liberation Army was established in the city helping deliver the last blow to the violence perpetrated by the triads, who were weakened by police action and arrests prior to the handover.
In May it is common to see dancing dragons at the Feast of the Drunken Dragon and twinkling-clean Buddhas at the Feast of the Bathing of Lord Buddha.
With an estimated population of around 652,500 living in an area of 30.5&nbsp;km² (11.8 sq mi), it is the most densely populated region in the world.
The Lunar Chinese New Year is the most important traditional festival and celebration normally takes place in late January or early February.
The Macanese language, a distinctive creole generally known as ''Patuá'', is still spoken by several dozen Macanese.
The chief executive's cabinet is made up of five policy secretaries and is advised by the Executive Council of Macau, which has between seven and eleven members.
The growth of population in Macau mainly relies on immigrants from mainland China and the influx of overseas workers since its birth rate is one of the lowest in the world.
The World Bank classifies Macau as a high income economy and the GDP per capita of the region in 2006 was US$28,436.
The Portuguese repulsed their attack and the Dutch never tried to conquer Macau again.
The Portuguese then named the peninsula "Macau".
Shortly after Portugal's 1974 Carnation Revolution, which overthrew the Estado Novo dictatorship, the new government determined it would relinquish all its overseas possessions.
Humidity starts to increase from late March.
According to ''The World Factbook'', Macau has the fourth highest life expectancy in the world.
It is planned to open in 2019.
The monopoly ended in 2002 and several casino owners from Las Vegas attempted to enter the market.
Since Macau has an economy driven by tourism, 14.6% of the workforce is employed in restaurants and hotels, and 10.3% in the gambling industry.
According to the 2006 by-census, among the resident population aged 14 and above, only 51.8% has a secondary education and 12.6% has a tertiary education.
It also handles the organization of care and prevention of diseases affecting the population, sets guidelines for hospitals and private healthcare providers, and issues licences.
During the 17th century, some 5,000 slaves lived in Macau, in addition to 2,000 Portuguese and 20,000 Chinese.
The Pou Tai Un Temple in Taipa is the place for the Feast of Tou Tei, the Earth god, in February.
File:Catedral de la Natividad de Nuestra Señora, Macao, 2013-08-08, DD 01.jpg|Macau Cathedral
File:Macau peninsula.jpg|Macau Peninsula.
Reasons for this fall of revenue are related to the slowdown that the Chinese economy is having & a corruption crackdown by Chinese officials which has constrained lavish spending.
Between the end of the Pacific War and the establishment of the People's Republic of China, Macau served as a safe haven for refugees of the Chinese Civil War.
The national team of Macau is the most powerful of Asia and has many Rink Hockey Asian Championship titles.
In return, Macau Government would cooperate with Hong Kong's smuggle of Indian opium and China would be able to increase profits through customs taxes.
The trishaw, a hybrid of the tricycle and the rickshaw, is also available, though it is mainly for sightseeing purposes.
It is the primary hub for Air Macau.
Under the policy of "one country, two systems", the State Council of the People's Republic of China is responsible for military defense and foreign affairs while Macau maintains its own legal system, public security force, monetary system, customs policy, and immigration policy.
In 1576, Pope Gregory XIII established the Roman Catholic Diocese of Macau.
In 1535, Portuguese traders obtained the rights to anchor ships in Macau's harbours and to carry out trading activities, though not the right to stay onshore.
On 28 January 1967, the Portuguese government issued a formal apology by means of an "admission of guilt".
Currently there are no training courses in midwifery in Macau.
Macau officials, rather than PRC officials, run Macau through the exercise of separate executive, legislative, and judicial powers, as well as the right to final adjudication.
The hot weather is often followed by heavy rain, thunderstorms and occasional typhoons.
Macau is a founding member of the WTO and has maintained sound economic and trade relations with more than 120 countries and regions, with European Union and Portuguese-speaking countries in particular; Macau is also a member of the IMF.
The Macau Red Cross also operates ambulances (Toyota HiAce vans) for emergency and non-emergencies to local hospitals with volunteer staff.
Macau does not have its own region-wide education system; non-tertiary schools follow either the British, the Chinese, or the Portuguese education system.
With the opening of several casino resorts and other major constructions underway, many sectors reportedly experience a shortage of labour, and the government seeks to import labour from neighbouring regions.
The number of imported workers stood at a record high of 98,505 in the second quarter of 2008, representing more than 25% of the labour force in Macau.
Macau maintains its own currency (the Macanese pataca), customs territory, immigration and border controls and police force.
The territory has its own independent judicial system with a High Court.
