Primarily on the basis that the Lambert Charter had not been respected, France invaded Madagascar in 1883 in what became known as the first Franco-Hova War.
Hery Rajaonarimampianina was declared the winner of the 2013 presidential election, which the international community deemed fair and transparent.
Reflecting a widespread veneration of the ancestors, tombs are culturally significant in many regions and tend to be built of more durable material, typically stone, and display more elaborate decoration than the houses of the living.
However, in a popular uprising in 2009, president Marc Ravalomanana was made to resign and presidential power was transferred in March 2009 to Andry Rajoelina.
In 2004 Cyclone Gafilo became the strongest cyclone ever recorded to hit Madagascar.
Madagascar was again suspended by the African Union in March 2009 following the unconstitutional transfer of executive power to Rajoelina.
More recent contributors to the loss of forest cover include the growth in cattle herd size since their introduction around 1000 years ago, a continued reliance on charcoal as a fuel for cooking, and the increased prominence of coffee as a cash crop over the past century.
Despite the training and leadership provided by British military advisers, the Malagasy army was unable to withstand French weaponry and was forced to surrender following an attack on the royal palace at Antananarivo.
Consequently, Madagascar is a biodiversity hotspot; over 90% of its wildlife is found nowhere else on Earth.
Although invertebrates remain poorly studied on Madagascar, researchers have found high rates of endemism among the known species.
The courts, which adhere to civil law, lack the capacity to quickly and transparently try the cases in the judicial system, often forcing defendants to pass lengthy pretrial detentions in unsanitary and overcrowded prisons.
Like its flora, Madagascar's fauna is diverse and exhibits a high rate of endemism.
These policies, coupled with economic pressures stemming from the 1973 oil crisis, resulted in the rapid collapse of Madagascar's economy and a sharp decline in living standards, and the country had become completely bankrupt by 1979.
In the 1930s, Nazi political thinkers developed the Madagascar plan that had identified the island as a potential site for the deportation of Europe's Jews.
Sculptors create a variety of furniture and household goods, ''aloalo'' funerary posts, and wooden sculptures, many of which are produced for the tourist market.
From his initial capital Ambohimanga, and later from the Rova of Antananarivo, this Merina king rapidly expanded his rule over neighboring principalities.
Budget cuts since 2009 have severely impacted the national police force, producing a steep increase in criminal activity in recent years.
Malagasy and French are both official languages of the state.
Four-fifths of the world's ''Pachypodium'' species are endemic to the island.
A number of other mammals, including the cat-like fossa, are endemic to Madagascar.
The Southeast Asian cultural influence is also evident in Malagasy cuisine, in which rice is consumed at every meal, typically accompanied by one of a variety of flavorful vegetable or meat dishes.
Upon its emergence in the early 17th century, the highland kingdom of Imerina was initially a minor power relative to the larger coastal kingdoms and grew even weaker in the early 18th century when King Andriamasinavalona divided it among his four sons.
The nation comprises the island of Madagascar (the fourth-largest island in the world), and numerous smaller peripheral islands.
The wrestling of zebu cattle, which is named savika or ''tolon-omby'', is also practiced in many regions.
The plastic arts are also widespread throughout the island.
This policy, known as ''malgachization'', coincided with a severe economic downturn and a dramatic decline in the quality of education.
Following the coup, the courtiers offered Radama's queen Rasoherina (1863–68) the opportunity to rule, if she would accept a power sharing arrangement with the Prime Minister—a new social contract that would be sealed by a political marriage between them.
In 2010, Madagascar had approximately  of paved roads,  of railways and  of navigable waterways.
Education policy in Ravalomanana's second term focused on quality issues, including an increase in minimum education standards for the recruitment of primary teachers from a middle school leaving certificate (BEPC) to a high school leaving certificate (BAC), and a reformed teacher training program to support the transition from traditional didactic instruction to student-centered teaching methods to boost student learning and participation in the classroom.
To the east, the ''Canal des Pangalanes'' is a chain of man-made and natural lakes connected by canals built by the French just inland from the east coast and running parallel to it for some .
, only 6.8&nbsp;percent of Madagascar's ''fokontany'' had access to water provided by Jirama, while 9.5&nbsp;percent had access to its electricity services.
By the early 19th century, the Merina sovereigns of the Kingdom of Madagascar had brought much of the island under their control by mobilizing an army of trained and armed soldiers numbering as high as 30,000.
Madagascar later split from India about 88&nbsp;million years ago, allowing plants and animals on the island to evolve in relative isolation.
The First Republic (1960–72), under the leadership of French-appointed President Philibert Tsiranana, was characterized by a continuation of strong economic and political ties to France.
The political independence and sovereignty of the Malagasy armed forces, which comprises an army, navy and air force, was restored with independence from France in 1960.
Upon arrival, early settlers practiced slash-and-burn agriculture to clear the coastal rainforests for cultivation.
English was removed as an official language from the constitution approved by voters in the November referendum 2010.
Madagascar is the world's principal supplier of vanilla, cloves and ylang-ylang.
As human population density rose on the island, deforestation accelerated beginning around 1400 years ago.
Medical centers, dispensaries and hospitals are found throughout the island, although they are concentrated in urban areas and particularly in Antananarivo.
Ratsiraka's dwindling popularity in the late 1980s reached a critical point in 1991 when presidential guards opened fire on unarmed protesters during a rally.
Religious, ethnic and sexual minorities are protected under the law.
Madagascar has historically been perceived as being on the margin of mainstream African affairs despite being a founding member of the Organisation of African Unity, which was established in 1963 and dissolved in 2002 to be replaced by the African Union.
It is widely believed that by showing respect for ancestors in these ways, they may intervene on behalf of the living.
Key mineral resources include various types of precious and semi-precious stones, and Madagascar currently provides half of the world's supply of sapphires, which were discovered near Ilakaka in the late 1990s.
Government initiatives such as a rural development program and state farms were established to boost production of commodities such as rice, coffee, cattle, silk and palm oil.
Opposition leader and then-mayor of Antananarivo, Andry Rajoelina, led a movement in early 2009 in which Ravalomanana was pushed from power in an unconstitutional process widely condemned as a ''coup d'état''.
There were an estimated 25,000&nbsp;Comorans, 18,000&nbsp;Indians, and 9,000&nbsp;Chinese living in Madagascar in the mid-1980s.
Madagascar's economy quickly deteriorated as exports fell, industrial production dropped by 75&nbsp;percent, inflation spiked and government debt increased; the rural population was soon reduced to living at subsistence levels.
Due to their lower population densities, Madagascar's dry deciduous forests have been better preserved than the eastern rain forests or the original woodlands of the central plateau.
The storm killed 172 people, left 214,260 homeless and caused more than US$250&nbsp;million in damage.
One of the island's foremost artistic traditions is its oratory, as expressed in the forms of ''hainteny'' (poetry), ''kabary'' (public discourse) and ''ohabolana'' (proverbs).
Until the late 18th century, the island of Madagascar was ruled by a fragmented assortment of shifting sociopolitical alliances.
In 2012, the population of Madagascar was estimated at just over 22&nbsp;million, 90% of whom live on less than $2 per day.
The new Madagascar constitution established a multi-party democracy and a separation of powers that placed significant control in the hands of the National Assembly.
Polygamy was outlawed and Christianity, declared the official religion of the court in 1869, was adopted alongside traditional beliefs among a growing portion of the populace.
Approximately 30&nbsp;percent of the districts are able to access the nations' several private telecommunications networks via mobile telephones or land lines.
The island is home to around 170 palm species, three times as many as on all of mainland Africa; 165 of them are endemic.
These include such projects as ilmenite and zircon mining from heavy mineral sands near Tôlanaro by Rio Tinto, extraction of nickel near Moramanga and its processing near Toamasina by Sherritt International, and the development of the giant onshore heavy oil deposits at Tsimiroro and Bemolanga by Madagascar Oil.
Consideration for ancestors is also demonstrated through adherence to ''fady'', taboos that are respected during and after the lifetime of the person who establishes them.
Hundreds of public and private stations with local or regional range provide alternatives to state broadcasting.
Madagascar is a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the United States military.
In addition to a common language and shared traditional religious beliefs around a creator god and veneration of the ancestors, the traditional Malagasy worldview is shaped by values that emphasize ''fihavanana'' (solidarity), ''vintana'' (destiny), ''tody'' (karma), and ''hasina'', a sacred life force that traditional communities believe imbues and thereby legitimates authority figures within the community or family.
Islam is also practiced on the island.
Although social castes are no longer legally recognized, ancestral caste affiliation often continues to affect social status, economic opportunity and roles within the community.
All 651 species of terrestrial snail are endemic, as are a majority of the island's butterflies, scarab beetles, lacewings, spiders and dragonflies.
The French established trading posts along the east coast in the late 17th century.
Lemurs have been characterized as "Madagascar's flagship mammal species" by Conservation International.
The High Constitutional Court observed in its decision that, in the absence of a language law, French still had the character of an official language.
More recently, Hinduism was introduced to Madagascar through Gujarati people immigrating from the Saurashtra region of India in the late 19th century.
Habitat destruction and hunting have threatened many of Madagascar's endemic species or driven them to extinction.
Beginning in 1835 Queen Ranavalona I persecuted these converts as part of an attempt to halt European cultural and political influence on the island.
Rain clouds originating over the Indian Ocean discharge much of their moisture over the island's eastern coast; the heavy precipitation supports the area's rain forest ecosystem.
Human settlement of Madagascar occurred between 350&nbsp;BC and AD&nbsp;550 by Austronesian peoples arriving on outrigger canoes from Borneo.
Primary classrooms are crowded, with average pupil to teacher ratios of 47:1 in 2008.
In 2003 Ravalomanana announced the Durban Vision, an initiative to more than triple the island's protected natural areas to over  or 10&nbsp;percent of Madagascar's land surface.
In 1890, the British accepted the full formal imposition of a French protectorate on the island, but French authority was not acknowledged by the government of Madagascar.
Archaeological finds such as cut marks on bones found in the northwest and stone tools in the northeast indicate that Madagascar was visited by foragers around 2000&nbsp;BC.
The police and gendarmerie are stationed and administered at the local level.
The small island of Nosy Boroha off the northeastern coast of Madagascar has been proposed by some historians as the site of the legendary pirate utopia of Libertalia.
By the 16th century, the central highlands had been largely cleared of their original forests.
A small but growing number of fine art galleries in Antananarivo, and several other urban areas, offer paintings by local artists, and annual art events, such as the Hosotra open-air exhibition in the capital, contribute to the continuing development of fine arts in Madagascar.
A number of traditional pastimes have emerged in Madagascar.
The island is home to two-thirds of the world's chameleon species, including the smallest known, and researchers have proposed that Madagascar may be the origin of all chameleons.
During the post-colonial First Republic, a continued reliance on French nationals as teachers, and French as the language of instruction, displeased those desiring a complete separation from the former colonial power.
The judiciary is modeled on the French system, with a High Constitutional Court, High Court of Justice, Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, criminal tribunals, and tribunals of first instance.
Accusations of media censorship have increased since 2009 due to the alleged intensification of restrictions on political criticism.
Human rights in Madagascar are protected under the constitution and the state is a signatory to numerous international agreements including the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The last National Assembly election was held on 20 December 2013.
The majority of the population adheres to traditional beliefs, Christianity, or an amalgamation of both.
To raise public awareness of Madagascar's environmental challenges, the Wildlife Conservation Society opened an exhibit entitled "''Madagascar!''"
Imports of such items as foodstuffs, fuel, capital goods, vehicles, consumer goods and electronics consume an estimated 52&nbsp;percent of GDP.
At the local level, the island's 22 provinces are administered by a governor and provincial council.
Those schooled during this period generally failed to master the French language or many other subjects and struggled to find employment, forcing many to take low-paying jobs in the informal or black market that mired them in deepening poverty.
Since Madagascar gained independence from France in 1960, the island's political transitions have been marked by numerous popular protests, several disputed elections, an impeachment, two military coups and one assassination.
Key products were cultivated and distributed nationally through producers' and consumers' cooperatives.
The traveler's palm, known locally as ''ravinala'' and endemic to the eastern rain forests, is highly iconic of Madagascar and is featured in the national emblem as well as the Air Madagascar logo.
Arab traders first reached the island between the seventh and ninth centuries.
Following the prehistoric breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana, Madagascar split from the Indian peninsula around 88&nbsp;million years ago, allowing native plants and animals to evolve in relative isolation.
The most important seaport in Madagascar is located on the east coast at Toamasina.
Rugby Union is considered the national sport of Madagascar.
Eleven countries have established embassies in Madagascar, including France, the United Kingdom, the United States, China and India.
In 2012, the population of Madagascar was estimated at 22&nbsp;million.
Madagascar has produced a world champion in pétanque, a French game similar to lawn bowling, which is widely played in urban areas and throughout the Highlands.
The sacrifice of zebu is a traditional method used to appease or honor the ancestors.
''Moraingy'', a type of hand-to-hand combat, is a popular spectator sport in coastal regions.
The western coast features many protected harbors, but silting is a major problem caused by sediment from the high levels of inland erosion carried by rivers crossing the broad western plains.
The IMF forced Madagascar's government to accept structural adjustment policies and liberalization of the economy when the state became bankrupt in 1982 and state-controlled industries were gradually privatized over the course of the 1980s.
By contrast, a previous study in 2008 had found only 38&nbsp;percent of lemur species were at risk of extinction.
Artisan missionary envoys from the London Missionary Society began arriving in 1818 and included such key figures as James Cameron, David Jones and David Griffiths, who established schools, transcribed the Malagasy language using the Roman alphabet, translated the Bible, and introduced a variety of new technologies to the island.
These are complemented by public teacher-training colleges and several private universities and technical colleges.
The first archaeological evidence for human foraging on Madagascar dates to 2000&nbsp;BC.
Membership in 2011 was estimated at 14,905.
Antananarivo is the administrative capital and largest city of Madagascar.
As Merina dominance expanded over neighboring Malagasy peoples in the early 19th century to establish the Kingdom of Madagascar, Antananarivo became the center of administration for virtually the entire island.
In his joint role as Commander-in-Chief, Rainilaiarivony also successfully ensured the defense of Madagascar against several French colonial incursions.
Slavery was abolished in 1896 and approximately 500,000 slaves were freed; many remained in their former masters' homes as servants  or as sharecroppers; in many parts of the island strong discriminatory views against slave descendants are still held today.
Ports at Mahajanga and Antsiranana are significantly less used due to their remoteness.
Approximately 42.5&nbsp;percent of the population is younger than 15 years of age, while 54.5&nbsp;percent are between the ages of 15 and 64.
Chinese, Indian and Comorian minorities are present in Madagascar, as well as a small European (primarily French) populace.
Malagasy farmers embrace and perpetuate the practice not only for its practical benefits as an agricultural technique, but for its cultural associations with prosperity, health and venerated ancestral custom (''fomba malagasy'').
Government school construction initiatives have ensured at least one primary school per ''fokontany'' and one lower secondary school within each commune.
Several media outlets are owned by political partisans or politicians themselves, including the media groups MBS (owned by Ravalomanana) and Viva (owned by Rajoelina), contributing to political polarization in reporting.
Agriculture (including raffia), fishing and forestry are mainstays of the economy.
However, there are a number of core cultural features that are common throughout the island, creating a strongly unified Malagasy cultural identity.
Approximately half of the country's population practice traditional religion, which tends to emphasize links between the living and the ''razana'' (ancestors).
The vast majority of Muslims are Sunni.
Running water and electricity are supplied at the national level by a government service provider, Jirama, which is unable to service the entire population.
The production and weaving of silk can be traced back to the island's earliest settlers, and Madagascar's national dress, the woven ''lamba'', has evolved into a varied and refined art.
The contested 2001 presidential elections in which then-mayor of Antananarivo, Marc Ravalomanana, eventually emerged victorious, caused a seven-month standoff in 2002 between supporters of Ravalomanana and Ratsiraka.
More than 80&nbsp;percent of Madagascar's 14,883 plant species are found nowhere else in the world, including five plant families.
Newer groups such as Seventh-day Adventists are rapidly growing in rural areas through the establishment of intellectual discussion groups, as well as clinics and churches.
Many native plant species are used as herbal remedies for a variety of afflictions.
The combination of southeastern trade winds and northwestern monsoons produces a hot rainy season (November–April) with frequently destructive cyclones, and a relatively cooler dry season (May–October).
Malagasy people traditionally consult ''Mpanandro'' ("Makers of the Days") to identify the most auspicious days for important events such as weddings or ''famadihana'', according to a traditional astrological system introduced by Arabs.
, there were officially 103 species and subspecies of lemur, 39 of which were described by zoologists between 2000 and 2008.
In the absence of monkeys and other competitors, these primates have adapted to a wide range of habitats and diversified into numerous species.
To the west of this ridge lies a plateau in the center of the island ranging in altitude from  above sea level.
Madagascar was not permitted to attend the first African Union summit because of a dispute over the results of the 2001 presidential election, but rejoined the African Union in July 2003 after a 14-month hiatus.
The rise of centralized kingdoms among the Sakalava, Merina and other ethnic groups produced the island's first standing armies by the 16th century, initially equipped with spears but later with muskets, cannons and other firearms.
Mobile telephone and internet access are widespread in urban areas but remain limited in rural parts of the island.
There are several rail lines.
The Malagasy Council of Churches comprises the four oldest and most prominent Christian denominations of Madagascar (Roman Catholic, Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar, Lutheran, and Anglican) and has been an influential force in Malagasy politics.
The city remained the capital of Madagascar after regaining independence in 1960.
At least 17 species of lemur have become extinct since humans arrived on Madagascar, all of which were larger than the surviving lemur species.
Additional schools were built, particularly in rural and coastal areas where the schools of the Merina had not reached.
Many high-level technical positions were filled by French expatriates, and French teachers, textbooks and curricula continued to be used in schools around the country.
Under Ravalomanana, these investments produced substantial economic growth, but the benefits were not evenly spread throughout the population, producing tensions over the increasing cost of living and declining living standards among the poor and some segments of the middle class.
The political crisis of 1991 led to the suspension of IMF and World Bank assistance.
A two-year resistance movement organized in response to the French capture of the royal palace was effectively put down at the end of 1897.
Probably the descendants of an earlier and less technologically advanced Austronesian settlement wave, the Vazimba were assimilated or expelled from the highlands by the Merina kings Andriamanelo, Ralambo and Andrianjaka in the 16th and early 17th centuries.
As a result of the island's long isolation from neighboring continents, Madagascar is home to an abundance of plants and animals found nowhere else on Earth.
The population grew from 2.2 million in 1900 to an estimated 22&nbsp;million in 2012.
The diverse origins of Malagasy culture are evident in its tangible expressions.
The oral histories of the Merina people, who may have arrived in the central highlands between 600 and 1000 years ago, describe encountering an established population they called the Vazimba.
Education became mandatory between the ages of 6 to 13 and focused primarily on French language and practical skills.
This period saw a political alignment with the Eastern Bloc countries and a shift toward economic insularity.
In addition to sports, a wide variety of games are played.
Traditional community tribunals, called ''dina'', are presided over by elders and other respected figures and remain a key means by which justice is served in rural areas where state presence is weak.
The autonomous state of Madagascar has since undergone four major constitutional periods, termed republics.
Following almost a century of warring and famine, Imerina was reunited in 1793 by King Andrianampoinimerina (1787–1810).
Schools were constructed throughout the island and attendance was made mandatory.
General Gilles Andriamahazo ruled after Ratsimandrava for four months before being replaced by another military appointee: Vice Admiral Didier Ratsiraka, who ushered in the socialist-Marxist Second Republic that ran under his tenure from 1975 to 1993.
The family ''Didiereaceae'', composed of four genera and 11 species, is limited to the spiny forests of southwestern Madagascar.
The famadihana is an occasion to celebrate the beloved ancestor's memory, reunite with family and community, and enjoy a festive atmosphere.
Among those who continued to reside in Imerina were Jean Laborde, an entrepreneur who developed munitions and other industries on behalf of the monarchy, and Joseph-François Lambert, a French adventurer and slave trader, with whom then-Prince Radama II signed a controversial trade agreement termed the Lambert Charter.
Popular dissatisfaction over these policies was a key factor in launching the socialist-Marxist Second Republic, in which the formerly private bank and insurance industries were nationalized; state monopolies were established for such industries as textiles, cotton and power; and import–export trade and shipping were brought under state control.
In the Malagasy language, the island of Madagascar is called ''Madagasikara''  and its people are referred to as ''Malagasy''.
The drugs vinblastine and vincristine, used to treat Hodgkin's disease, leukemia and other cancers, were derived from the Madagascar periwinkle.
Many European sailors were shipwrecked on the coasts of the island, among them Robert Drury, whose journal is one of the few written depictions of life in southern Madagascar during the 18th century.
The new constitution also emphasized human rights, social and political freedoms, and free trade.
It is anticipated that all the island's rainforests, excluding those in protected areas and the steepest eastern mountain slopes, will have been deforested by 2025.
Approximately 90% of all plant and animal species found in Madagascar are endemic, including the lemurs (a type of strepsirrhine primate), the carnivorous fossa and many birds.
Popular resentment over Tsiranana's tolerance for this "neo-colonial" arrangement inspired a series of farmer and student protests that overturned his administration in 1972.
Radama concluded a treaty in 1817 with the British governor of Mauritius to abolish the lucrative slave trade in return for British military and financial assistance.
Madagascar is a francophone country, and French is mostly spoken as a second language among the educated population and used for international communication.
Polo's name was preferred and popularized on Renaissance maps.
Upon reaching the city in September 1895, the column bombarded the royal palace with heavy artillery, causing heavy casualties and leading Queen Ranavalona III to surrender.
The veneration of ancestors has led to the widespread tradition of tomb building, as well as the highlands practice of the ''famadihana'', whereby a deceased family member's remains may be exhumed to be periodically re-wrapped in fresh silk shrouds before being replaced in the tomb.
For instance, they may bless their dead at church before proceeding with traditional burial rites or invite a Christian minister to consecrate a ''famadihana'' reburial.
Gabriel Ramanantsoa, a major general in the army, was appointed interim president and prime minister that same year, but low public approval forced him to step down in 1975.
This distinctive ecology has led some ecologists to refer to Madagascar as the "eighth continent", and the island has been classified by Conservation International as a biodiversity hotspot.
He was consequently impeached in 1996, and an interim president, Norbert Ratsirahonana, was appointed for the three months prior to the next presidential election.
Similarly, the nobles of many Malagasy communities in the pre-colonial period would commonly employ advisers known as the ''ombiasy'' (from ''olona-be-hasina'', "man of much virtue") of the southeastern Antemoro ethnic group, who trace their ancestry back to early Arab settlers.
This tradition was continued in the 20th century by such artists as Jean-Joseph Rabearivelo, who is considered Africa's first modern poet, and Elie Rajaonarison, an exemplar of the new wave of Malagasy poetry.
In 1818 the London Missionary Society sent the first Christian missionaries to the island, where they built churches, translated the Bible into the Malagasy language and began to gain converts.
Access to schooling was expanded in coastal areas during the colonial period, with French language and basic work skills becoming the focus of the curriculum.
The LMS was invited by King Radama I (1810–28) to expand its schools throughout Imerina to teach basic literacy and numeracy to aristocratic children.
Legal codes were reformed on the basis of British common law and three European-style courts were established in the capital city.
Ecotourism and agriculture, paired with greater investments in education, health, and private enterprise, are key elements of Madagascar's development strategy.
The negative economic impact of the political crisis was gradually overcome by Ravalomanana's progressive economic and political policies, which encouraged investments in education and ecotourism, facilitated foreign direct investment, and cultivated trading partnerships both regionally and internationally.
Because of its advanced sports facilities, Antananarivo gained the hosting rights for several of Africa's top international basketball events, including the 2011 FIBA Africa Championship, the 2009 FIBA Africa Championship for Women, the 2014 FIBA Africa Under-18 Championship, the 2013 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship, and the 2015 FIBA Africa Under-16 Championship for Women.
During Madagascar's First Republic, France heavily influenced Madagascar's economic planning and policy and served as its key trading partner.
Public expenditure on education was 13.4&nbsp;percent of total government expenditure and 2.9&nbsp;percent of GDP in 2008.
Air Madagascar services the island's many small regional airports, which offer the only practical means of access to many of the more remote regions during rainy season road washouts.
The constitution establishes independent executive, legislative and judicial branches and mandates a popularly elected president limited to three five-year terms.
However, education quality is weak, producing high rates of grade repetition and dropout.
A series of protests led by Andry Rajoelina against Ravalomanana in early 2009 became violent, with more than 170 people killed.
In the Constitution of 2007, Malagasy remained the national language while official languages were reintroduced: Malagasy, French, and English.
Neighboring islands include the French territory of Réunion and the country of Mauritius to the east, as well as the state of Comoros and the French territory of Mayotte to the north west.
