The city was a stronghold of the Republicans from July 1936.
Other concert venues for classical music are the Fundación Joan March and the Auditorio 400, devoted to contemporary music.
However, when Ferdinand VII returned to Madrid, the city was already occupied by Joachim-Napoléon Murat, so that both the king and his father were virtually prisoners of the French army.
Francisco Goya was once one of the academy's directors, and its alumni include Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dalí, Antonio López García, Juan Luna, and Fernando Botero.
Summer temperatures occasionally climb over  during the city's heatwaves.
Since 1997, green areas have increased by 16%.
Royal Convent of La Encarnación is an Augustinian Recollect convent.
The permanent exhibit is divided into five major themed areas: an awareness of America, the reality of America, society, religion and communication.
On 2 May, a crowd began to gather at the Royal Palace.
The proportion classified as affluent was 43.3%, much higher than Spain overall (28.6%).
The first democratic mayors belonged to the leftist parties (Enrique Tierno Galván, Juan Barranco Gallardo), turning the city after more conservative positions (Agustín Rodríguez Sahagún, José María Álvarez del Manzano, Alberto Ruiz-Gallardón and Ana Botella).
In the church are preserved shrines containing the blood of St. Januarius and St. Pantaleon, the second (according to tradition) liquefies every year on the saint's day on 27 July.
The Madrid Río cycling network covers some  and is linked to other bike routes.
A study made by ''Unión de comunidades islámicas de España'' demonstrated that there were about 250,000 inhabitants of Muslim background living in Community of Madrid  ( less than 4% of the total population of Madrid).
Madrid is home to two world-famous football clubs, Real Madrid and Atlético de Madrid.
The academy is also the headquarters of the Madrid Academy of Art.
Madrid attracts about 8M tourists annually from other parts of Spain and from all over the world, exceeding even Barcelona.
The Royal Academy of Fine Arts of San Fernando (''Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando'') currently functions as a museum and gallery that houses a fine art collection of paintings from the 15th to 20th centuries, including works by Giovanni Bellini, Correggio, Rubens, Zurbarán, Murillo, Goya, Juan Gris, Pablo Serrano.
In 2011, the unemployment rate was 15.8%, remaining lower than in Spain as a whole.
After studying at the University, students return home with a fluent sense of Spanish as well as culture and diversity.
Soto de Viñuelas, also known as Mount Viñuelas, is a meadow-oak forest north of the city of Madrid and east of the Monte de El Pardo.
The interior of the church has been recently restored.
It has 10,000 staff members and a student population of 117,000.
* Comillas Pontifical University (in Spanish only).
The city of Madrid had a GDP of €124.780M in 2011.
Since 1188, Madrid won the right to be a city with representation in the courts of Castile.
Nowadays, mayoral team consists of the mayor, the deputy mayor and 8 delegates; all of them form The Board of Delegates (the Municipal Executive Committee).
The art of landscaping in El Capricho is displayed in three different styles of classical gardenscapes: the "parterre" or French garden, English landscaping and the Italian giardino.
In 2015, about 89.8% of the inhabitants were Spaniards, while people of other origins, including immigrants from Latin America, Europe, Asia, North Africa and West Africa, represented 11.2% of the population.
The city has 17 universities and over 30 research centres.
Located in south-western Europe, the city spans a total of .
The Calle del Arenal comes to Royal Theatre in Plaza de la Ópera, continuing through Plaza de Oriente, where the Royal Palace is it.
Madrid is also home to the Queen Sofía College of Music (''Escuela Superior de Música Reina Sofía''), the Madrid Royal Conservatory (''Real Conservatorio Superior de Música de Madrid'')
Madrid has been one of the great centres of Spanish literature.
At present, 8.2% of Madrid's grounds are green areas, meaning that there are  of green area per inhabitant, far exceeding the  per inhabitant recommended by the World Health Organization.
Precipitation is concentrated in the autumn and spring, and, together with Athens which has similar annual precipitation, is the driest capital in Europe.
A great many important road, rail and air links converge on the capital, providing effective connections with other parts of the metropolitan region and with the rest of Spain and other parts of Europe.
Madrid organizes fairs such as FITUR, ARCO, SIMO TCI and the Cibeles Madrid Fashion Week.
It comprises eight eco-systems from tropical rain forests to polar regions, and contains over 1,500 animals, some of which roam freely within.
To the south, Madrid Río provides access to the Enrique Tierno Galván Park and the Linear Park of the Manzanares River, an extensive green zone running parallel to the river as far as Getafe.
Nightlife and young cultural awakening flourished after the death of Franco, especially during the 80s while Madrid's mayor Enrique Tierno Galván (PSOE) was in office.
The public sector employs 18.1% of all employees.
Real have won a record 11 European Cups and 32 National championships.
Also important to the city's economy is Madrid-Barajas Airport, the fourth largest airport in Europe.
The Madrid urban agglomeration has the third-largest GDP in the European Union and its influences in politics, education, entertainment, environment, media, fashion, science, culture, and the arts all contribute to its status as one of the world's major global cities.
The Paseo del Prado, surrounded by gardens and decorated with neoclassical statues, is an example of urban planning.
( in diameter: it's smaller than the dome of the Rome's Pantheon (), St. Peter's Basilica (), the Florence Cathedral () and the Rotunda of Mosta () in Malta, but it's larger than St. Paul's Cathedral () in London and Hagia Sophia () in Istanbul).
Another reason might have been the slowdown in the rate of growth of the European economy.
Also Spain business are designing new high speed trains which will be the new generation AVE 104 like Talgo AVRIL.
It was originally built to house the remains of Saint Isidore Laborer (Madrid's patron saint), but it was used as the Vargas family mausoleum.
The crowd saw the French soldiers pulled out of the palace to the royal family members who were still in the palace.
Charles III took upon himself the feat of transforming Madrid into a capital worthy of this category.
Thanks to this, the city of Madrid became the political center of the monarchy, being the capital of Spain except for a short period between 1601 and 1606 (Philip III of Spain's government), in which the Court returned to Valladolid.
The share of services in the city’s economy is 86%.
Its landmarks include the Royal Palace of Madrid; the Royal Theatre with its restored 1850 Opera House; the Buen Retiro Park, founded in 1631; the 19th-century National Library building (founded in 1712) containing some of Spain's historical archives; a large number of national museums, and the Golden Triangle of Art, located along the Paseo del Prado and comprising three art museums: Prado Museum, the Reina Sofía Museum, a museum of modern art, and the Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum, which completes the shortcomings of the other two museums.
Other notable buildings include the Bank of Spain, the neo-Gothic Almudena Cathedral, Atocha Station, and the Catalan art-nouveau Palace of Longoria.
Industrial Gross Value Added grew by 4.3% in the period 2003–2005, but decreased by 10% during 2008–2010.
GDP per capita in 2011 was 74% above the national GDP per capita average and 70% above that of the 27 European Union member states, although 11% behind the average of the top 10 cities of the EU.
In a 2011 survey conducted by InfoCatólica, 57.1% of Madrid residents of all ages identified themselves as Catholic.
El Prado is one of the most visited museums in the world, and it is considered to be among the greatest museums of art.
The Royal Botanical Garden of Madrid (''Real Jardín Botánico de Madrid'') is an 8-hectare botanical garden located in the Plaza de Murillo, next to the Prado Museum.
The employed workforce comprised 49% women in 2011 (Spain, 45%).
Some of the most prominent writers of the Spanish Golden Age settled here, as Lope de Vega, Quevedo or Góngora, and the theatres of Cruz and Príncipe, two of the major comedy theaters of that time.
It is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Madrid.
File:Placa edición príncipe Quijote 1604.jpg|Commemorative plaque of the 1st edition of Don Quixote
The Prado Museum (''Museo del Prado'') is a museum and art gallery that features one of the world's finest collections of European art, from the 12th century to the early 19th century, based on the former Spanish Royal Collection.
Napoleon, took advantage of the weakness of the Spanish Bourbons, forcing both, first the father then the son, to join him in Bayonne, where Ferdinand arrived on 20 April.
Although housing just over 50% of the region's's population, the city generates 65.9% of its GDP.
The building's architect was Fray Alberto de la Madre de Dios, who built it between 1611 and 1616.
And in the village is dated the Treaty of Madrid of 1526 (later denounced by the French) that resolved their situation.
File:Terminal 4 del aeropuerto de Madrid-Barajas, España, 2013-01-09, DD 05.jpg|Adolfo Suárez Madrid–Barajas Airport, Terminal 4
The "Barrio de las Letras" (District of Letters) owes its name to the intense literary activity developed over the 16th and 17th centuries.
The chapel was built on orders of King Charles IV of Spain, who also commissioned the frescoes by Goya.
The monastery's cloister is preserved.
Antonio Palacios built a series of buildings inspired by the Viennese Secession, such as the Palace of Communication, the Fine Arts Circle of Madrid (''Círculo de Bellas Artes'') and the Río de La Plata Bank (Instituto Cervantes).
Other art galleries and museums in Madrid include:
Its sumptuous interior features many artworks, including paintings by Goya and Zurbarán.
The city was thriving and was given the title of ''Villa'', whose administrative district extended from the Jarama in the east to the river Guadarrama in the west.
The style of the plaza is Neo-Mudéjar.
Services to business, transport & communications, property & financial together account for 52% of total value added.
The traditional religion in Madrid is the Roman Catholic.
There were 2,476 Japanese citizens registered with the Japanese embassy in Madrid in 1993.
* EAE Business School (in English and Spanish).
If the form is correct, it could be a Celtic place-name from ''ritu-'' 'ford' (Old Welsh ''rit'', Welsh ''rhyd'', Old Breton ''rit'', Old Northern French ''roy'') and a first element, that is not clearly identified ''*mageto'' derivation of ''magos'' 'field, plain' (Old Irish ''mag'' 'field', Breton ''ma'' 'place'), or ''matu'' 'bear', that could explain the Latin translation ''Ursalia''.
Philip V tried to complete King Philip II's vision of urbanization of Madrid.
It is the third metropolis in the EU by population, and the fourth by gross internal product.
Following the recession commencing 2007/8, recovery was under way by 2014, with forecast growth rates for the city of 1.4% in 2014, 2.7% in 2015 and 2.8% in 2016.
Madrid is the 17th most livable city in the world according to Monocle magazine, in its 2014 index.
The oak is the dominant tree species in the area and, although many of them are over 100 years old and reach a great height, they are also present in the form of chaparral and bushes.
Also in this square is the start of Gran Vía street.
The city is located on the Manzanares in the centre of both the country and the Community of Madrid (which comprises the city of Madrid, its conurbation and extended suburbs and villages); this community is bordered by the autonomous communities of Castile and León and Castile-La Mancha.
Casa de Campo's vegetation is one of its most important features.
The poor population of the court was composed of ex-soldiers, foreigners, rogues and Ruanes, dissatisfied with the lack of food and high prices.
Madrid has tended to be a stronghold of the People's Party (PP, right-wing political party), which has controlled the city's mayoralty since 1989.
The material used during the Habsburg era was mostly brick, and the humble façades contrast with the elaborate interiors.
Madrid is considered one of the top European destinations concerning art museums.
The Madrid region experiences a cold semi-arid climate (Köppen ''BSk'') with cool winters due to its altitude of  above sea level and distance to the sea, including sporadic snowfalls and minimum temperatures sometimes below freezing.
Madrid is home to the Royal Academy of Spanish Language, an internationally-important cultural institution dedicated to language planning by enacting legislation aimed at promoting linguistic unity within the Hispanic states; this ensures a common linguistic standard, in accordance with its founding statutes "to ensure that the changes undergone by the language ... not break the essential unity that keeps all the Hispanic".
The collection currently comprises around 7,600 paintings, 1,000 sculptures, 4,800 prints and 8,200 drawings, in addition to a large number of works of art and historic documents.
During the revolt of the Comuneros, led by Juan de Padilla, Madrid joined the revolt against Emperor Charles V of Germany and I of Spain, but after defeat at the Battle of Villalar, Madrid was besieged and occupied by the royal troops.
Tapas bars, cocktail bars, clubs, jazz lounges, live music venues, flamenco theatres, and establishments of all kinds cater to all.
While Madrid possesses modern infrastructure, it has preserved the look and feel of many of its historic neighbourhoods and streets.
In terms of longer-distance transport, Madrid is the central node of the system of ''autovías'', giving the city direct fast road links with most parts of Spain and with France and Portugal.
Although residential property prices have fallen by 39% since 2007, the average price of dwelling space was €2,375.6 per sq.
It scored ahead of usual stalwarts, INSEAD and IMD, giving it top billing among International MBA programs.
Casa de Campo is an enormous urban parkland to the west of the city, the largest in Spain and Madrid's main green lung.
The Roman Empire established a settlement on the banks of the Manzanares river.
In 1970 the Government reformed the High Education, and the Central University became the Complutense University of Madrid.
San Francisco el Grande Basilica was built in neoclassical style in the second half of the 18th century by Francesco Sabatini.
The fight lasted hours and spread throughout Madrid.
Royal Chapel of St. Anthony of La Florida is sometimes named the "Goya's Sistine Chapel".
The construction sector, contributing 6.5% to the city’s economy in 2010, was a growing sector before the recession, aided by a large transport and infrastructure program.
There are now 2,900&nbsp;km of AVE track, connecting Madrid with 17 provincial capitals, and further lines are under construction.
Cafés include the retro café ''Lolina'' and bohemian cafés ''La Ida'', ''La Paca'' and ''Café de la Luz'' in Malasaña, ''La Piola'' in Huertas and ''Café Olmo'' and ''Aguardiente'' in Lavapiés.
However, Charles I was generous to the town and gave it the titles of ''Coronada'' (Crowned) and ''Imperial''.
From the street you get from Plaza de Cibeles.
Among the most famous paintings in this museum are ''Las Meninas,'' '' The Immaculate Conception'' and '' The Judgement of Paris''.
Some of its attributions are: fiscal matters, the election and deposition of the mayor, the approval and modification of decrees and regulations, the approval of budgets, the agreements related to the limits and alteration of the municipal term, the services management, the participation in supramunicipal organizations, etc.
Centrocentro is an exhibition space in Cibeles Palace, formerly the Palace of Communications and now the City Hall.
These reforms were embodied in the Plaza Mayor, characterized by its symmetry and austerity, as well as the new Alcázar, which would become the second most impressive royal palace of the kingdom.
The construction of transport infrastructure has been vital to maintain the economic position of Madrid.
Participation in the labour force was 1,638,200 in 2011, or 79.0%.
The Complutense University of Madrid (''Universidad Complutense de Madrid'') is the second largest university in Spain after UNED Spanish open University and one of the oldest universities in the world.
The Museum Cerralbo (''Museo Cerralbo'') houses a private collection of ancient works of art, artifacts and other antiquities collected by Enrique de Aguilera y Gamboa, 17th Marquis of Cerralbo.
After the death of Franco and the start of the democratic regime, the 1978 constitution confirmed Madrid as the capital of Spain.
Most of the literary routes are articulated along the Barrio de las Letras, where you can find scenes from novels of the Siglo de Oro and more recent works like "Bohemian Lights".
It was the cathedral of Madrid between 1885 and 1993, which is the time it took to build the Almudena.
The government of the town was vested to the neighboring of Madrid since 1346, when king Alfonso XI of Castile implements the regiment, for which only the local oligarchy was taking sides in city decisions.
The resident orchestra of the theatre is the Community of Madrid Orchestra.
Subsequently, in 1927, a new University City (Ciudad Universitaria) was planned to be built in the district of Moncloa-Aravaca, in lands handed over by the King Alfonso XIII to this purpose.
The nightlife in Madrid is one of the city's main attractions.
Madrid is the European city with the highest number of trees and green surface per inhabitant and it has the second highest number of aligned trees in the world, with 248,000 units, only exceeded by Tokyo.
It was consecrated by Pope John Paul II on his fourth trip to Spain on 15 June 1993, thus being the only Spanish cathedral dedicated by a pope.
File:Museo Arqueológico Nacional de España 01.jpg|National Archaeological Museum of Spain
From the mid 19th century until the Civil War, Madrid modernized and built new neighbourhoods and monuments.
The leading industries were: paper, printing & publishing, 28.8%; energy & mining, 19.7%; vehicles & transport equipment, 12.9%; electrical and electronic, 10.3%; foodstuffs, 9.6%; clothing, footwear & textiles, 8.3%; chemical, 7.9%; industrial machinery, 7.3%.
Throughout the remainder of the 16th century and into the 17th century, the convent attracted young widowed or spinster noblewomen.
During the decade of the 2000s, the four tallest skyscrapers in Spain were built, and together form the Cuatro Torres Business Area.
Cervantes and Góngora also lived in the city, although they were not born there.
Bullfights are held every day during the festivities of San Isidro (Madrid's patron saint) from mid May to early June, and every Sunday, and public holiday, the rest of the season.
From around 1970 until the mid-1990s, the city's population dropped.
In 2011 services accounted for 85.9% of value added, while industry contributed 7.9% and construction 6.1%.
The Sabatini Gardens have a formal Neoclassic style, consisting of well-trimmed hedges, in symmetric geometrical patterns, adorned with a pool, statues and fountains, with trees also planted in a symmetrical geometric shape.
The name of this first village was "Matrice" (a reference to the river that crossed the settlement).
It is one of Europe's largest financial centres and the largest in Spain.
It has many works of Renaissance and Baroque art, including a recumbent Christ by Gaspar Becerra, a staircase whose paintings were painted by an unknown artist (perhaps Velázquez) and which are considered masterpieces of Spanish  Illusionistic painting, and Brussels tapestries inspired by paintings of Rubens.
The National Library of Spain is the largest major public library in Spain.
File:Dama de Elche 1.jpg|Lady of Elche (National Archaeological Museum)
Industry contributed 7.5% to Madrid's value-added in 2010.
The Royal Palace (''Palacio Real'') is surrounded by three green areas.
The research departments of the museum are biodiversity and evolutionary biology, evolutionary ecology, paleobiology, vulcanology and geology.
The reign of the Bourbons during the eighteenth century marked a new era in the city.
During the early 19th century, the Peninsular War, the loss of viceroyalties in the Americas, and continuing coups limited the city's architectural development (Royal Theatre, the National Library of Spain, the Palace of the Senate and the Congress).
As this was happening, there was the Mutiny of Aranjuez (17 March 1808), by which the crown prince, Ferdinand VII, replaced his father as king.
It is also the focal point of one of the world's three largest high-speed rail systems, ''Alta Velocidad Española'' (AVE), which has brought major cities such as Seville and Barcelona within 2.5 hours travel time.
Las Ventas is considered by many to be the world centre of bullfighting and has a seating capacity of almost 25,000.
Madrid was frequently altered by revolutionary outbreaks and pronouncements, such as Vicálvaro 1854, led by General Leopoldo O'Donnell  and initiating the progressive biennium.
The other two museums are the Thyssen Bornemisza Museum, established from a mixed private collection, and the Reina Sofía Museum, where Pablo Picasso's '' Guernica'' hangs, returned to Spain from New York after more than two decades.
Madrid is an important centre for trade fairs, many of them coordinated by IFEMA, the Trade Fair Institution of Madrid.
The Cathedral of Santa María la Real de la Almudena is the episcopal seat of the Archdiocese of Madrid.
Examples of post-war architecture include the Spanish Air Force headquarters, and the skyscrapers of Plaza de España, at the time (the 1950s) the highest in Europe.
The Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum (''Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza'') is an art museum that fills the historical gaps in its counterparts' collections: in the Prado's case, this includes Italian primitives and works from the English, Dutch and German schools, while in the case of the Reina Sofía, the Thyssen-Bornemisza collection, once the second largest private collection in the world after the British Royal Collection, includes Impressionists, Expressionists, and European and American paintings from the second half of the 20th century, with over 1,600 paintings.
The current mayor is Manuela Carmena from Ahora Madrid.
As the capital city of Spain, the city has attracted many immigrants from around the world.
In June 1561, when the town had 30,000 inhabitants, Philip II of Spain moved his court from Valladolid to Madrid, installing it in the old castle.
Chueca is popularly known as the gay quarter, comparable to The Castro district in San Francisco.
The most famous one is the Prado Museum, known for such highlights as Diego Velázquez's ''Las Meninas'' and Francisco de Goya's ''La maja vestida'' and ''La maja desnuda''.
The theatre stages around seventeen opera titles (both own productions and co-productions with other major European opera houses) per year, as well as two or three major ballets and several recitals.
It is a baroque palace full of artworks and is one of the largest European royal palaces, characterized by its luxurious rooms and its rich collections of armors and weapons, pharmaceuticals, silverware, watches, paintings, tapestries and the most comprehensive collection of Stradivarius in the world
It has recently been renovated by Rafael Moneo, with the goal to house the neoclassical collection of El Prado Museum, and also sculptures by Leone Leoni and Pompeo Leoni.
Madrid's citizens have access to a green area within a 15-minute walk.
The Calle de Alcalá or Alcalá Street leads from the Puerta del Sol from the NE of the city.
These are bounded on either side by rows of statues paths, popularly known as the Gothic kings, and mark the dividing line between the main body of the plaza and the Cabo Noval Gardens at north, and the Lepanto Gardens at south.
File:Portal barroco del Museo de Historia de Madrid.jpg|Museum of Madrid History
Inside are the altairpiece and the tombs of the Vargas family, which were the work of Francisco Giralte, a disciple of Alonso Berruguete.
The Catholic Monarchs ordered its construction in the 15th century, as part of a vanished monastery.
Its less favourable characteristics were seen as pollution, languages spoken, and political environment.
More than 130,000 (52%) of them had Spanish nationality.
The collection includes, in addition to numerous works by Joaquín Sorolla, a large number of objects that the artist possessed, including sculptures by Auguste Rodin.
It was an 18th-century creation by Carlos III and it was used as a base for the plant species being collected across the globe.
File:APM Madrid airport.JPG|APM Madrid airport (Train Terminal 4 -> 4S)
Some of Spain's top footballers are Madrilenians (born in Madrid), including Real Madrid former captains Emilio Butragueño (and co-teammate of La Quinta del Buitre, "The Vulture's Cohort"), Raúl or Iker Casillas , Sergio Ramos and Atlético Madrid player Fernando Torres .
Following the invasions carried out by the Germanic Sueves and Vandals, as well as the Sarmatic Alans during the 5th century AD, the Roman Empire no longer had the military presence required to defend its territories on the Iberian Peninsula, and as a consequence, these territories were soon occupied by the Vandals, who were in turn dispelled by the Visigoths, who then ruled Hispania in the name of the Roman emperor, also taking control of "Matrice".
Madrid hosts the largest ''plaza de toros'' (bullring) in Spain, Las Ventas, established in 1929.
Many members of Madrid's Japanese community, particularly those with children, live in Majadahonda, Mirasierra, The Vaguada, and other areas in northwest Madrid, in proximity to the Japanese international school.
In general urban area grew the number of inhabitants, from 4,060 in the year 1530 to 37,500 in the year 1594.
Madrid Río (Madrid River) is a linear park that runs along the bank of the Manzanares River, in the middle of Madrid.
comes from the name of a fortress built on the Manzanares River in the 9th century AD, and means "Place of abundant water".
Due to Madrid's altitude and dry climate, diurnal ranges are often significant during the summer.
Atocha Railway Station (''Estación de Atocha'') is the city's first and most central station, and is also home to a  indoor garden, with more than 500 species of plant life and ponds with turtles and goldfish in.
After the disintegration of the Caliphate of Córdoba, Madrid was integrated in the Taifa of Toledo.
* Charles III University of Madrid through the ''Centro de Ampliación de Estudios'' (in English or Spanish).
The vast majority was composed of immigrants and descendants originating from Morocco and other African countries.
Near these social areas are two large street maps showing the 59 institutions, monuments and buildings of special interest that make the Art Walk such a diverse experience.
In the 2007 regional and local elections, the People's Party obtained 34 seats, the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE, left political party) obtained 18 and United Left (IU, left political party) obtained 5.
State Education in Spain is free, and compulsory from 6 to 16 years.
Las Ventas also hosts music concerts and other events outside of the bullfighting season.
is the main venue for classical music concerts in Madrid.
The Teatro Monumental is the concert venue of the RTVE Symphony Orchestra.
Its western suburbs were the scene of an all-out battle in November 1936 and it was during the Civil War that Madrid became the first European city to be bombed by aeroplanes (Japan was the first to bomb civilians in world history, at Shanghai in 1932) specifically targeting civilians in the history of warfare.
