where the integral sums over the wire length where vector  is the vector line element with direction in the same sense as the current ,  is the magnetic constant,  is the distance between the location of  and the location where the magnetic field is calculated, and  is a unit vector in the direction of .
This result is similar in form to Ohm's law , where  is the current density,  is the conductance and  is the electric field.
Bending a current-carrying wire into a loop concentrates the magnetic field inside the loop while weakening it outside.
Such a model is deficient, though, both in that there are no magnetic charges and in that it obscures the link between electricity and magnetism.
The details of the Amperian loop model are different and more complicated but yield the same result: that magnetic dipoles are attracted/repelled into regions of higher magnetic field.
As discussed above, materials respond to an applied electric  field and an applied magnetic  field by producing their own internal 'bound' charge and current distributions that contribute to  and  but are difficult to calculate.
magnetization field  inside a permanent magnet.
Important classes of magnetometers include using a rotating coil, Hall effect magnetometers, NMR magnetometers, SQUID magnetometers, and fluxgate magnetometers.
In everyday life, magnetic fields are most often encountered as a force created by permanent magnets, which pull on ferromagnetic materials such as iron, cobalt, or nickel, and attract or repel other magnets.
so, for  charges where
The magnetic field of larger magnets can be obtained by modelling them as a collection of a large number of small magnets called dipoles each having their own .
Further, all other orientations feel a torque that twists them toward the direction of magnetic field.
Rotating magnetic fields are used in both electric motors and generators.
If this conductor is placed in a magnetic field of magnitude  that makes an angle  with the velocity of charges in the conductor, the force exerted on a single charge  is
In 1850, Lord Kelvin, then known as William Thomson, distinguished between two magnetic fields now denoted  and .
To circumvent this problem,  and  fields are used to re-factor Maxwell's equations in terms of the ''free current density''  and ''free charge density'' :
If, however, the magnetic field of the first magnet is ''nonuniform'' (such as the  near one of its poles), each pole of the second magnet sees a different field and is subject to a different force.
This bound current, then, is the source of the magnetic  field due to the magnet.
Magnetic field lines form in concentric circles around a cylindrical current-carrying conductor, such as a length of wire.
The most recent reversal occurred 780,000 years ago.
These two models produce two different magnetic fields,  and .
With the definition of  as the pole strength times the distance between the poles, this leads to , where  is a constant called the vacuum permeability, measuring  V·s/(A·m) and  is the angle between  and .
There is also a corresponding differential form of this equation covered in Maxwell's equations below.
The short-circuited turns of the rotor develop eddy currents in the rotating field of the stator, and these currents in turn move the rotor by the Lorentz force.
The force on each magnet depends on its magnetic moment and the magnetic field of the other.
One confusion that arises from this definition is that, if Earth itself is considered as a magnet, the ''south'' pole of that magnet would be the one nearer the north magnetic pole, and vice versa.
In the magnetic pole model, the elementary magnetic dipole  is formed by two opposite magnetic poles of pole strength  separated by a small distance vector , such that .
Any non-uniform magnetic field, whether caused by permanent magnets or electric currents, exerts a force on a small magnet in this way.
is most commonly defined in terms of the Lorentz force it exerts on moving electric charges.
The vector  is termed the magnetic field, and it is ''defined'' as the vector field necessary to make the Lorentz force law correctly describe the motion of a charged particle.
All equations in this article are in the classical approximation, which is less accurate than the quantum description mentioned here.
Using this analogy it is straightforward to calculate the magnetic flux of complicated magnetic field geometries, by using all the available techniques of circuit theory.
Alternatively, the magnetic field can be defined in terms of the torque it produces on a magnetic dipole (see magnetic torque on permanent magnets below).
Rotating the loop faster (in the same direction) increases the current and therefore the magnetic moment, for example.
Magnetic poles, therefore, always come in N and S pairs.
Most agree that Kelvin avoided  to prevent confusion with the SI fundamental unit of length, the Metre, abbreviated "m".
This is particularly true for magnetic fields, such as those due to electric currents, that are not generated by magnetic materials.
In 1750, John Michell stated that magnetic poles attract and repel in accordance with an inverse square law.
Albert Einstein, in his paper of 1905 that established relativity, showed that both the electric and magnetic fields are part of the same phenomena viewed from different reference frames.
Further, Ampère derived both Ampère's force law describing the force between two currents and Ampère's law, which, like the Biot–Savart law, correctly described the magnetic field generated by a steady current.
Like all vector fields, a magnetic field has two important mathematical properties that relates it to its ''sources''.
Here, two equal and opposite magnetic charges experiencing the same  also experience equal and opposite forces.
The Maxwell term ''is'' critically important in the creation and propagation of electromagnetic waves.
Devices used to measure the local magnetic field are called magnetometers.
Informally, though, and formally for some recent textbooks mostly in physics, the term 'magnetic field' is used to describe  as well as or in place of .
(For an infinite length wire the strength is inversely proportional to the distance.)
A ''magnetic monopole'' is a hypothetical particle (or class of particles) that has, as its name suggests, only one magnetic pole (either a north pole or a south pole).
On the other hand, for simple relationships between these quantities this form of Maxwell's equations can circumvent the need to calculate the bound charges and currents.
First, in 1819, Hans Christian Ørsted discovered that an electric current generates a magnetic field encircling it.
Technically,  is a pseudovector (also called an ''axial vector'') due to being defined by a vector cross product.
Published in 1600, Gilbert's work, ''De Magnete'', helped to establish magnetism as a science.
Unlike the electric dipole, a magnetic dipole is properly modeled as a current loop having a current  and an area .
where the integral is a surface integral over the closed surface  (a closed surface is one that completely surrounds a region with no holes to let any field lines escape).
When a charged particle moves in a static magnetic field, it traces a helical path in which the helix axis is parallel to the magnetic field, and in which the speed of the particle remains constant.
The magnetic field of a magnetic dipole is depicted in the figure.
(A closed surface completely surrounds a region with no holes to let any field lines escape.)
In Gaussian-cgs units,  is measured in gauss (symbol: G).
The magnetic field at any given point is specified by both a ''direction'' and a ''magnitude'' (or strength); as such it is a vector field.
Later, Franz Ernst Neumann proved that, for a moving conductor in a magnetic field, induction is a consequence of Ampère's force law.
For linear non-dispersive materials, though, the general equation leads directly to the simpler energy density equation given above.
They also must be supplemented by the relationship between  and  as well as that between  and .
A permanent magnet in such a field rotates so as to maintain its alignment with the external field.
The negative sign occurs because the magnetization field moves from south to north.
For most locations, the magnetic field has a significant up/down component in addition to the north/south component.
In 1885, Galileo Ferraris independently researched the concept.
*Paramagnetic materials produce a magnetization in the same direction as the applied magnetic field.
See orders of magnitude (magnetic field).
Since  points outward, the dot product in the integral is positive for -field pointing out and negative for -field pointing in.
In it, he showed the equivalence of electrical currents to magnets and proposed that magnetism is due to perpetually flowing loops of current instead of the dipoles of magnetic charge in Poisson's model.
In the Amperian loop model, the magnetization is due to combining many tiny Amperian loops to form a resultant current called ''bound current''.
In 1831, Michael Faraday discovered electromagnetic induction when he found that a changing magnetic field generates an encircling electric field.
The magnetic field generated by a steady current  (a constant flow of electric charges, in which charge neither accumulates nor is depleted at any point) is described by the ''Biot–Savart law'':
Magnetic fields are widely used throughout modern technology, particularly in electrical engineering and electromechanics.
The precision attained for a magnetic field measurement for Gravity Probe B experiment is 5&nbsp;attoteslas (); the largest magnetic field produced in a laboratory is 2.8&nbsp;kT (VNIIEF in Sarov, Russia, 1998).
To date no exception to this rule has been found.
It is used as well to find the sign of the dominant charge carriers in materials such as semiconductors (negative electrons or positive holes).
These two properties, along with the two corresponding properties of the electric field, make up ''Maxwell's Equations''.
In special relativity, electric and magnetic fields are two interrelated aspects of a single object, called the electromagnetic tensor; the split of this tensor into electric and magnetic fields depends on the relative velocity of the observer and charge.
The magnetic field of permanent magnets can be quite complicated, especially near the magnet.
where  = complete microscopic current density and  is the charge density.
A rotating magnetic field can be constructed using two orthogonal coils with 90 degrees phase difference in their AC currents.
where the direction of  is perpendicular to the area of the loop and depends on the direction of the current using the right-hand rule.
the force exerted on the conductor is
Maxwell's Equations together with the Lorentz force law form a complete description of classical electrodynamics including both electricity and magnetism.
Earth's magnetic field is not constant—the strength of the field and the location of its poles vary.
This equation is strictly only valid for magnets of zero size, but is often a good approximation for not too large magnets.
Then, mark each location with an arrow (called a vector) pointing in the direction of the local magnetic field with its magnitude proportional to the strength of the magnetic field.
One important property of the -field produced this way is that magnetic -field lines neither start nor end (mathematically,  is a solenoidal vector field); a field line either extends to infinity or wraps around to form a closed curve.
A '''magnetic field''' is the magnetic effect of electric currents and magnetic materials.
In this model, a magnetic -field is produced by ''magnetic charges'' that are 'smeared' around each pole.
A slightly more general way of relating the current  to the -field is through Ampère's law:
The SI unit of tesla is equivalent to (newton·second)/(coulomb·metre).
Ampère's law is always valid for steady currents and can be used to calculate the -field for certain highly symmetric situations such as an infinite wire or an infinite solenoid.
The complete set of Maxwell's equations then are:
Currents of electric charges both generate a magnetic field and feel a force due to magnetic B-fields.
The magnetic pole model does not account for magnetism that is produced by electric currents.
Also in 1888, Ferraris published his research in a paper to the ''Royal Academy of Sciences'' in Turin.
It is known from experiments in electrostatics that a particle of charge  in an electric field  experiences a force .
The interaction of magnetic fields in electric devices such as transformers is studied in the discipline of magnetic circuits.
where  is the magnetic flux in the circuit,  is the magnetomotive force  applied to the circuit, and  is the reluctance of the circuit.
The ''magnetization'' vector field  represents how strongly a region of material is magnetized.
(The conversion is 1 T = 10,000 G.) One nanotesla is also called a gamma (symbol: γ).
Maxwell completed his set of equations in his later 1865 paper ''A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field'' and demonstrated the fact that light is an electromagnetic wave.
These magnetic dipoles produce a magnetic -field.
The magnetic field can be visualised as a bar magnet buried deep in Earth's interior.
Superconductors often have a broad range of temperatures and magnetic fields (the so-named mixed state) under which they exhibit a complex hysteretic dependence of  on .
A magnetic material placed inside a magnetic field, though, generates its own bound current, which can be a challenge to calculate.
In ferromagnetic substances like iron and in plasmas, magnetic forces can be understood by imagining that the field lines exert a tension, (like a rubber band) along their length, and a pressure perpendicular to their length on neighboring field lines.
If a magnetized object is divided in half, a new pole appears on the surface of each piece, so each has a pair of complementary poles.
There is no torque on a magnet if  is in the same direction as the magnetic field.
These relations between   and  are examples of constitutive equations.
A compass, therefore, turns to align itself with Earth's magnetic field.
If two like poles of two separate magnets are brought near each other, and one of the magnets is allowed to turn, it promptly rotates to align itself with the first.
Once the relationship between  and  is known this equation is used to determine the work needed to reach a given magnetic state.
These ''magnetic charges'' are in fact related to the magnetization field
After Ørsted discovered that electric currents produce a magnetic field and Ampere discovered that electric currents attracted and repelled each other similar to magnets, it was natural to hypothesize that all magnetic fields are due to electric current loops.
This difference in the two forces moves the magnet in the direction of increasing magnetic field and may also cause a net torque.
Further, he derived how  and  relate to each other.
The result of the curl is called a 'circulation source'.
The equations for the curl of  and of  are called the Ampère–Maxwell equation and Faraday's law respectively.
The twentieth century extended electrodynamics to include relativity and quantum mechanics.
The direction of force on a charge or a current can be determined by a mnemonic known as the ''right-hand rule'' (see the figure).
First, measure the strength and direction of the magnetic field at a large number of locations (or at every point in space).
Since these equal and opposite forces are in different locations, this produces a torque proportional to the distance (perpendicular to the force) between them.
Despite these efforts, no magnetic monopole has been observed to date.
The force between two small magnets is quite complicated and depends on the strength and orientation of both magnets and the distance and direction of the magnets relative to each other.
If a -field line enters a magnet somewhere it has to leave somewhere else; it is not allowed to have an end point.
Mapping the magnetic field of an object is simple in principle.
These equations were valid although incomplete.
Using the four potential instead of the electromagnetic tensor has the advantage of being much simpler—and it can be easily modified to work with quantum mechanics.
An alternative method to map the magnetic field is to 'connect' the arrows to form magnetic ''field lines''.
Consider a conductor of length , cross section , and charge  due to electric current .
Here the reluctance  is a quantity similar in nature to resistance for the flux.
Because the magnetic force is always perpendicular to the motion, the magnetic field can do no work on an isolated charge.
The magnetic field of some astronomical objects such as magnetars are much higher; magnetars range from 0.1 to 100&nbsp;GT (108 to 1011&nbsp;T).
Three similar coils having mutual geometrical angles of 120 degrees create the rotating magnetic field in this case.
The first property is the divergence of a vector field , , which represents how  'flows' outward from a given point.
*Superconductors (and ferromagnetic superconductors) are materials that are characterized by perfect conductivity below a critical temperature and magnetic field.
Magnetic forces give information about the charge carriers in a material through the Hall effect.
This definition allows the determination of  in the following way
This additional term is proportional to the time rate of change of the electric flux and is similar to Faraday's law above but with a different and positive constant out front.
Magnetization field lines, therefore, begin near the magnetic south pole and ends near the magnetic north pole.
For example, iron filings placed in a magnetic field, form lines that correspond to 'field lines'.
They also are highly magnetic and can be perfect diamagnets below a lower critical magnetic field.
This integral formulation of Faraday's law can be converted into a differential form, which applies under slightly different conditions.
The term "magnetic field" is historically reserved for  while using other terms for .
The Lorentz force on a macroscopic current is often referred to as the ''Laplace force''.
(The electric flux through an area is proportional to the area times the perpendicular part of the electric field.)
And, any net force on the magnet is a result of adding up the forces on the individual dipoles.
Materials are divided into groups based upon their magnetic behavior:
These, though, are usually described using the differential form of this equation given below.
In a vacuum,  and  are proportional to each other, with the multiplicative constant depending on the physical units.
(See Magnetic dipoles below and magnetic poles vs. atomic currents for more information.)
Field lines can be used as a qualitative tool to visualize magnetic forces.
The force on a negatively charged particle is in the opposite direction.
(Such vector fields are called solenoidal vector fields.)
The full law including the correction term is known as the Maxwell–Ampère equation.
In quantum physics, the electromagnetic field is quantized and electromagnetic interactions result from the exchange of photons.
If  is in the same direction as  then the dot product is positive and the gradient points 'uphill' pulling the magnet into regions of higher -field (more strictly larger ).
Mathematically, the torque  on a small magnet is proportional both to the applied magnetic field and to the magnetic moment  of the magnet:
The -field is measured in amperes per metre (A/m) in SI units, and in oersteds (Oe) in cgs units.
Magnetic field lines are like streamlines in fluid flow, in that they represent something continuous, and a different resolution would show more or fewer lines.
For instance, electrons spiraling around a field line produce synchrotron radiation that is detectable in radio waves.
Finally, the emergent field of quantum mechanics was merged with electrodynamics to form quantum electrodynamics (QED).
Here  is the particle's velocity and &times; denotes the cross product.
'''torque on a dipole''': An  field (to right) causes equal but opposite forces on a N pole () and a S pole () creating a torque.As is the case for the force between magnets, the magnetic pole model leads more readily to the correct equation.
In this model, the ''-field'' of one magnet pushes and pulls on ''both'' poles of a second magnet.
Building on this force between poles, Siméon Denis Poisson (1781–1840) created the first successful model of the magnetic field, which he presented in 1824.
The second mathematical property is called the curl, such that  represents how  curls or 'circulates' around a given point.
Others believe the choices were purely random.
Further, as discussed above it fails to explain the inherent connection between angular momentum and magnetism.
However, in other situations, such as when a charged particle moves in the vicinity of a current-carrying wire, the force also depends on the velocity of that particle.
These concepts can be quickly 'translated' to their mathematical form.
This fact is known as ''Maxwell's correction to Ampère's law'' and is applied as an additive term to Ampere's law as given above.
The term is used for two distinct but closely related fields denoted by the symbols  and , where  is measured in units of amperes per meter (symbol: A&middot;m−1 or A/m) in the SI.
Formally, special relativity combines the electric and magnetic fields into a rank-2 tensor, called the ''electromagnetic tensor''.
Outside a material, though, the two are identical (to a multiplicative constant) so that in many cases the distinction can be ignored.
Often the magnetic field is defined by the force it exerts on a moving charged particle.
Heinrich Hertz experimentally confirmed this fact in 1887.
An advantage of using magnetic field lines as a representation is that many laws of magnetism (and electromagnetism) can be stated completely and concisely using simple concepts such as the 'number' of field lines through a surface.
where the integral is a closed surface integral over the closed surface  and  is the 'magnetic charge' (in units of magnetic flux) enclosed by .
This is known as the ''Hall effect''.
Maxwell's correction to Ampère's Law together with Faraday's law of induction describes how mutually changing electric and magnetic fields interact to sustain each other and thus to form electromagnetic waves, such as light: a changing electric field generates a changing magnetic field, which generates a changing electric field again.
The ''Hall effect'' is often used to measure the magnitude of a magnetic field.
In a modified form that accounts for time varying electric fields, Ampère's law is one of four Maxwell's equations that describe electricity and magnetism.
The force is particularly sensitive to rotations of the magnets due to magnetic torque.
As discussed above, a -field line never starts or ends at a point but instead forms a complete loop.
Synchronous motors use DC-voltage-fed rotor windings, which lets the excitation of the machine be controlled—and induction motors use short-circuited rotors (instead of a magnet) following the rotating magnetic field of a multicoiled stator.
An ideal magnetic dipole is modeled as a real magnetic dipole whose area  has been reduced to zero and its current  increased to infinity such that the product  is finite.
Noting that the resulting field lines crossed at two points he named those points 'poles' in analogy to Earth's poles.
Changing reference frames ''mixes'' these components.
The dipole moment of this loop is  where  is the area of the loop.
In one simple motor design, a magnet is fixed to a freely rotating shaft and subjected to a magnetic field from an array of electromagnets.
where the integral is a line integral over any closed loop and  is the 'bound current' enclosed by that closed loop.
Similar to the way that a changing magnetic field generates an electric field, a changing electric field generates a magnetic field.
An important use of  is in ''magnetic circuits'' where  inside a linear material.
where the gradient  is the change of the quantity  per unit distance and the direction is that of maximum increase of .
For hysteretic materials such as ferromagnets and superconductors, the work needed also depends on how the magnetic field is created.
The figure is a sketch of Earth's magnetic field represented by field lines.
There are two competing models for the nature of these dipoles.
