It was subsequently displayed in San Francisco, and was taken out of display for a time to undergo conservation in preparation for another visit to the United States, where it was exhibited in 2007 at the Contemporary Art Center of Virginia and the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia.
In 1223, the tensions over the status of the charters became clear in the royal court, when Henry's government attempted to reassert its rights over its properties and revenues in the counties, facing resistance from many communities that argued—if sometimes incorrectly—that the charters protected the new arrangements.
In 2014, Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk celebrated the 800th anniversary of the barons' Charter of Liberties, said to have been secretly agreed there in November 1214.
His work was challenged at the time by Lord Ellesmere, and modern historians such as Ralph Turner and Claire Breay have critiqued Coke as "misconstruing" the original charter "anachronistically and uncritically", and taking a "very selective" approach to his analysis.
The prominent lawyer Lord Denning described Magna Carta in 1956 as "the greatest constitutional document of all times&nbsp;– the foundation of the freedom of the individual against the arbitrary authority of the despot".
Between the 13th and 15th centuries Magna Carta was reconfirmed 32 times according to Sir Edward Coke, and possibly as many as 45 times.
The historian W. L. Warren has observed that "many who knew little and cared less about the content of the Charter have, in nearly all ages, invoked its name, and with good cause, for it meant more than it said".
Short of funds, Henry reissued the charter again in 1225 in exchange for a grant of new taxes; his son, Edward I, repeated the exercise in 1297, this time confirming it as part of England's statute law.
The Great Charter remained a text for lawyers, particularly as a protector of property rights, and became more widely read than ever as printed versions circulated and levels of literacy increased.
Men were to be compelled to swear an oath to assist the council in controlling the King, but once redress had been made for any breaches, the King would continue to rule as before.
In many literary representations of the medieval past, however, Magna Carta remained a foundation of English national identity.
As part of the June peace deal, the barons were supposed to surrender London by 15 August, but this they refused to do.
John Lilburne, for example, argued that Magna Carta contained only some of the freedoms that had supposedly existed under the Anglo-Saxons before being crushed by the Norman yoke.
By 1350 half the clauses of Magna Carta were no longer actively used.
Once aware of the charter, the Pope responded in detail: in a letter dated 24 August and arriving in late September, he declared the charter to be "not only shameful and demeaning but also illegal and unjust" since John had been "forced to accept" it, and accordingly the charter was "null, and void of all validity for ever"; under threat of excommunication, the King was not to observe the charter, nor the barons try to enforce it.
In many ways still a "sacred text", Magna Carta is generally considered part of the uncodified constitution of the United Kingdom; in a 2005 speech, the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, Lord Woolf, described it as the "first of a series of instruments that now are recognised as having a special constitutional status".
An anti-Cromwellian pamphlet published in 1660, ''The English devil'', said that the nation had been "compelled to submit to this Tyrant Nol or be  cut off by him; nothing but a word and a blow, his Will was his Law; tell him of Magna Carta, he would lay his hand on his sword and cry Magna Farta".
Under the republic that followed, some questioned whether Magna Carta, an agreement with a monarch, was still relevant.
Often the first item of parliamentary business was a public reading and reaffirmation of the Charter, and, as in the previous century, parliaments often exacted confirmation of it from the monarch.
Both James I and his son Charles I attempted to suppress the discussion of Magna Carta, until the issue was curtailed by the English Civil War of the 1640s and the execution of Charles.
For example, in 1226, the knights of Lincolnshire argued that their local sheriff was changing customary practice regarding the local courts, "contrary to their liberty which they ought to have by the charter of the lord king".
The colonists drew on English law books, leading them to an anachronistic interpretation of Magna Carta, believing that it guaranteed trial by jury and ''habeas corpus''.
Numerous copies, known as exemplifications, were made of the various charters, and many of them still survive.
Initially, the Whig interpretation of Magna Carta and its role in constitutional history remained dominant during the 19th century.
Lord Camden denounced the treatment of Wilkes as a contravention of Magna Carta.
Sir Edward Coke was a leader in using Magna Carta as a political tool during this period.
The Massachusetts Bay Company charter, for example, stated that the colonists would "have and enjoy all liberties and immunities of free and natural subjects."
This copy is now on display in the Members' Hall of Parliament House, Canberra.
These changes brought the customary rights of lay rulers such as John over ecclesiastical appointments into question.
It influenced the early American colonists in the Thirteen Colonies and the formation of the American Constitution in 1787, which became the supreme law of the land in the new republic of the United States.
Henry's rule became lax and careless, resulting in a reduction in royal authority in the provinces and, ultimately, the collapse of his authority at court.
*Richard de Clare, Earl of Hertford
The handwriting on this version is different from that of the other three, suggesting that it was not written by a royal scribe but rather by a member of the cathedral staff, who then had it exemplified by the royal court.
Guala set about strengthening the ties between England and the Papacy, starting with the coronation itself, during which Henry gave homage to the Papacy, recognising the Pope as his feudal lord.
He had substantial support though from Guala, who intended to win the civil war for Henry and punish the rebels.
The 25 barons selected for the new council were all rebels, chosen by the more extremist barons, and many among the rebels found excuses to keep their forces mobilised.
There were no signatures on the charter of 1215, and the barons present did not attach their own seals to it.
The importance of this clause may also reflect the role of Archbishop Langton in the negotiations: Langton had taken a strong line on this issue during his career.
After John's death, the regency government of his young son, Henry III, reissued the document in 1216, stripped of some of its more radical content, in an unsuccessful bid to build political support for their cause.
The Dering charter is usually identified as the copy originally sent to the Cinque Ports in 1215.
It was John's hope that the Pope would give him valuable legal and moral support, and accordingly John played for time; the King had declared himself to be a papal vassal in 1213 and correctly believed he could count on the Pope for help.
They congregated at Northampton in May and renounced their feudal ties to John, marching on London, Lincoln, and Exeter.
Antiquarians Robert Beale, James Morice, and Richard Cosin argued that Magna Carta was a statement of liberty and a fundamental, supreme law empowering English government.
Even in the 13th century, some clauses of Magna Carta rarely appeared in legal cases, either because the issues concerned were no longer relevant, or because Magna Carta had been superseded by more relevant legislation.
*Alan of Galloway, Constable of Scotland
Four exemplifications of the 1225 charter survive: the British Library holds one, which was preserved at Lacock Abbey until 1945; Durham Cathedral also holds a copy, with the Bodleian Library holding a third.
The Constitution's Fifth Amendment guarantees that "no person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law", a phrase that was derived from Magna Carta.
Clauses 39 and 40 demanded due process be applied in the royal justice system, while clause 45 required that the King appoint knowledgeable royal officials to the relevant roles.
4 c. 31 s. 1), was the first time a clause of Magna Carta was repealed.
*Hugh Bigod, heir to the Earldoms of Norfolk and Suffolk
Scutage was a form of medieval taxation; all knights and nobles owed military service to the Crown in return for their lands, which theoretically belonged to the King, but many preferred to avoid this service and offer money instead; the Crown  often used the cash to pay for mercenaries.
Magna Carta carries little legal weight in modern Britain, as most of its clauses have been repealed and relevant rights ensured by other statutes, but the historian James Holt remarks that the survival of the 1215 charter in national life is a "reflexion of the continuous development of English law and administration" and symbolic of the many struggles between authority and the law over the centuries.
There are also a handful of the subsequent charters in public and private ownership, including copies of the 1297 charter in both the United States and Australia.
Although the Charter of 1215 was a failure as a peace treaty, it was resurrected under the new government of the young Henry III as a way of drawing support away from the rebel faction.
In addition, the Constitution included a similar writ in the Suspension Clause, Article 1, Section 9: "The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it."
*Richard de Montfichet
Louis entered into fresh peace negotiations, and the factions came to agreement on the final Treaty of Lambeth, also known as the Treaty of Kingston, on 12 and 13 September 1217.
To distinguish the two charters, the term ''magna carta libertatum'', "the great charter of liberties", was used by the scribes to refer to the larger document, which in time became known simply as Magna Carta.
In early 1225, a great council approved a tax of £40,000 to dispatch an army, which quickly retook Gascony.
This brought into question the validity of the previous charters issued during his minority, and Henry actively threatened to overturn the Charter of the Forest unless the taxes promised in return for it were actually paid.
Sometimes considered a subclause, "Suffix B", of clause 61.
The other was found in Dover Castle in 1630 by Sir Edward Dering.
On this occasion, Henry gave oral assurances that he considered himself bound by the charters, enabling a royal inquiry into the situation in the counties to progress.
It was quickly realised that Magna Carta stood in the same relation to the King-in-Parliament as it had to the King without Parliament.
The charter resembled that of 1216, although some additional clauses were added to protect the rights of the barons over their feudal subjects, and the restrictions on the Crown's ability to levy taxation were watered down.
Under this new constitution, monarchical absolutism was replaced by parliamentary supremacy.
They were sealed with the royal great seal by an official called the spigurnel, equipped with a special seal press, using beeswax and resin.
In the case of the Sandwich and Oriel College exemplifications, the copies of the Charter of the Forest originally issued with them also survive.
In his judgment the Master of the Rolls gave this short shrift, noting somewhat drily that although clause 29 was considered by many the foundation of the rule of law in England, he did not consider it directly relevant to the case, and the two other surviving clauses actually concerned the rights of the Church and the City of London.
Its style and content reflected Henry I's Charter of Liberties, as well as a wider body of legal traditions, including the royal charters issued to towns, the operations of the Church and baronial courts and European charters such as the Statute of Pamiers.
Rediscovered by the cathedral in 1812, it has remained in Salisbury throughout its history, except when being taken off-site for restoration work.
*William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke
By putting Magna Carta in historical context, he cast doubt on its contemporary political relevance; his historical understanding did not survive the Glorious Revolution, which, according to the historian J. G. A. Pocock, "marked a setback for the course of English historiography."
The names include some of the moderate reformers, notably Archbishop Stephen Langton, and some of John's loyal supporters, such as William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke.
Still working from the 1225 version of the text—the first printed copy of the 1215 charter only emerged in 1610&nbsp;– Coke spoke and wrote about Magna Carta repeatedly.
*Walter de Gray, Bishop of Worcester
In particular the third statute, in 1354, redefined clause 29, with "free man" becoming "no man, of whatever estate or condition he may be", and introduced the phrase "due process of law" for "lawful judgement of his peers or the law of the land".
Magna Carta still forms an important symbol of liberty today, often cited by politicians and campaigners, and is held in great respect by the British and American legal communities, Lord Denning describing it as "the greatest constitutional document of all times&nbsp;– the foundation of the freedom of the individual against the arbitrary authority of the despot".
Of these documents, only four survive, all held in the UK—two in the British Library, one by Lincoln Cathedral, and one in Salisbury Cathedral.
Its perceived guarantee of trial by jury and other civil liberties, for example, led to Tony Benn's reference to the debate in 2008 over whether to increase the maximum time terrorism suspects could be held without charge from 28 to 42 days as "the day Magna Carta was repealed".
The Sandwich copy was rediscovered in early 2015 in a Victorian scrapbook in the town archives of Sandwich, Kent, one of the Cinque Ports.
This view also became popular in wider circles, and in 1930 Sellar and Yeatman published their parody on English history, ''1066 and All That'', in which they  mocked the supposed importance of Magna Carta and its promises of universal liberty: "Magna Charter was therefore the chief cause of Democracy in England, and thus a ''Good Thing'' for everyone (except the Common People)".
Feudal relief was one way that a king could demand money, and clauses 2 and 3 fixed the fees payable when an heir inherited an estate or when a minor came of age and took possession of his lands.
Letters backing John arrived from the Pope in April, but by then, the rebel barons had organised into a military faction.
Gerrard Winstanley, the leader of the more extreme Diggers, stated "the best lawes that England hath, viz., the Magna Carta were got by our Forefathers importunate petitioning unto the kings that still were their Task-masters; and yet these best laws are yoaks and manicles, tying one sort of people to be slaves to another; Clergy and Gentry have got their freedom, but the common people still are, and have been left servants to work for them."
*John FitzRobert de Clavering, Lord of Warkworth Castle
At the end of the 16th century there was an upsurge in interest in Magna Carta.
Research by Victorian historians showed that the original 1215 charter had concerned the medieval relationship between the monarch and the barons, rather than the rights of ordinary people, but the charter remained a powerful, iconic document, even after almost all of its content was repealed from the statute books in the 19th and 20th centuries.
Magna Carta became increasingly embedded into English political life during Henry III's minority.
Lincoln Cathedral's original copy of the 1215 charter has been held by the county since 1215; it was displayed in the Common Chamber in the cathedral before being moved to another building in 1846.
The historian William Stubbs's ''Constitutional History of England'', published in the 1870s, formed the high-water mark of this view.
Edward also invoked Magna Carta in advancing his cause, arguing that the reformers had taken matters too far and were themselves acting against Magna Carta.
The document returned to New York to be displayed at the Fraunces Tavern Museum during 2009.
45, 23 April 1763''; he cited Magna Carta continually.
Neither side stood behind their commitments, and the charter was annulled by Pope Innocent III, leading to the First Barons' War.
The Massachusetts Body of Liberties contained similarities to clause 29 of Magna Carta; when drafting it, the Massachusetts General Court viewed Magna Carta as the chief embodiment of English common law.
Other early versions of the charters survive today.
The rebel leadership was unimpressive by the standards of the time, even disreputable, but were united by their hatred of John; Robert FitzWalter, later elected leader of the rebel barons, claimed publicly that John had attempted to rape his daughter, and was implicated in a plot to assassinate John in 1212.
Runnymede was a traditional place for assemblies, but it was also located on neutral ground between the royal fortress of Windsor Castle and the rebel base at Staines, and offered both sides the security of a rendezvous where they were unlikely to find themselves at a military disadvantage.
Meanwhile, instructions from the Pope arrived in August, written before the peace accord, with the result that papal commissioners excommunicated the rebel barons and suspended Langton from office in early September.
*Eustace de Vesci, Lord of Alnwick Castle
Rubenstein commented "I have always believed that this was an important document to our country, even though it wasn't drafted in our country.
The Ninth Amendment states that "The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people."
The Levellers rejected history and law as presented by their contemporaries, holding instead to an "anti-Normanism" viewpoint.
The King offered to submit the problem to a committee of arbitration with the Pope as the supreme arbiter, but this was not attractive to the rebels.
Both saw Magna Carta as a useful declaration of liberties that could be used against governments they disagreed with.
John had used his royal discretion to extort large sums of money from the barons, effectively taking payment to offer justice in particular cases, and the role of the Crown in delivering justice had become politically sensitive among the barons.
Louis returned at the end of April, but his northern forces were defeated by William Marshal at the Battle of Lincoln in May.
In the late 18th century, the United States Constitution became the supreme law of the land, recalling the manner in which Magna Carta had come to be regarded as fundamental law.
Under the Angevin kings, and in particular during John's reign, the rights of the King had frequently been used inconsistently, often in an attempt to maximise the royal income from the barons.
The inconsistency with which he applied the charters over the course of his rule alienated many barons, even those within his own faction.
First, it showed that Parliament no longer considered its previous statutes unassailable, as it provided for a maximum parliamentary term of seven years, whereas the Triennial Act (1694) (enacted less than a quarter of a century previously) had provided for a maximum term of three years.
The Charter was confirmed in 1423 by King Henry VI.
Both Edward and the Pope were accused by some contemporary chroniclers of "perjury", and it was suggested by Robert McNair Scott that Robert the Bruce refused to make peace with Edward I's son, Edward II, in 1312 with the justification: "How shall the king of England keep faith with me, since he does not observe the sworn promises made to his liege men..."
Historians such as Albert Pollard agreed with Jenks in concluding that Edward Coke had largely "invented" the myth of Magna Carta in the 17th century; these historians argued that the 1215 charter had not referred to liberty for the people at large, but rather to the protection of baronial rights.
Those who questioned these conclusions, including the Member of Parliament Arthur Hall, faced sanctions.
The move was not successful, and opposition to Henry's new government hardened.
Most of the 1215 charter and later versions sought to govern the feudal rights of the Crown over the barons.
In 1306 Edward I took the opportunity given by the Pope's backing to reassert forest law over large areas which had been "disafforested".
When English colonists left for the New World, they brought royal charters that established the colonies.
Seven copies of the 1300 exemplification by Edward I survive, in Faversham, Oriel College, Oxford, the Bodleian Library, Durham Cathedral, Westminster Abbey, the City of London (held in the archives at the London Guildhall) and Sandwich (held in the Kent County Council archives).
The monarchy responded by arguing that the historical legal situation was much less clear-cut than was being claimed, restricted the activities of antiquarians, arrested Coke for treason, and suppressed his proposed book on Magna Carta.
John and the rebel barons did not trust each other, and neither side seriously attempted to implement the peace accord.
It promised the protection of church rights, protection from illegal imprisonment, access to swift justice, and, most importantly, limitations on taxation and other feudal payments to the Crown, with certain forms of feudal taxation requiring baronial consent.
This copy was damaged in the Cotton library fire of 1731, when its seal was badly melted.
Royal forests were economically important in medieval England and were both protected and exploited by the Crown, supplying the King with hunting grounds, raw materials, and money.
Although this historical account was badly flawed, jurists such as Sir Edward Coke used Magna Carta extensively in the early 17th century, arguing against the divine right of kings propounded by the Stuart monarchs.
When the Second World War broke out, Winston Churchill wanted to gift the charter to the American people, hoping that this would encourage the United States, then neutral, to enter the war against the Axis powers, but the cathedral was unwilling and the plans were dropped.
The young King inherited a difficult situation, with over half of England occupied by the rebels.
In practice, cases were not brought against the King for breach of Magna Carta and the Forest Charter, but it was possible to bring a case against the King's officers, such as his sheriffs, using the argument that the King's officers were acting contrary to liberties granted by the King in the charters.
Most of the clauses were repealed in England and Wales by the Statute Law Revision Act 1863, and in modern Northern Ireland and also in the modern Republic of Ireland by the Statute Law (Ireland) Revision Act 1872.
In 1621, a bill was presented to Parliament to renew Magna Carta; although this bill failed, lawyer John Selden argued during Darnell's Case in 1627 that the right of ''habeas corpus'' was backed by Magna Carta.
*Matthew FitzHerbert
In the absence of a settlement, Louis remained in London with his remaining forces, hoping for the arrival of reinforcements from France.
Some of the clauses addressed wider economic issues.
*Geoffrey de Mandeville, Earl of Essex and Gloucester
The preamble to Magna Carta includes the names of the following 27 ecclesiastical and secular magnates who had counselled John to accept its terms.
At least 13 original copies of the 1215 charter were issued by the royal chancery at the time, seven in the first tranche distributed on 24 June and another six later; they were sent to county sheriffs and bishops, who would probably have been charged for the privilege.
Modern historians note that although this narrative was fundamentally incorrect—many refer to it as a "myth"&nbsp;– it took on great importance among the legal historians of the time.
One of the Bodleian's copies was displayed at San Francisco's California Palace of the Legion of Honor in 2011.
Many contemporary writers believed that monarchs should rule in accordance with the custom and the law, with the counsel of the leading members of the realm, but there was no model for what should happen if a king refused to do so.
John was already personally unpopular with many of the barons, many of whom owed money to the Crown, and little trust existed between the two sides.
*Hugh of Wells, Bishop of Lincoln
The ''English Liberties'' (1680, in later versions often ''British Liberties'') by the Whig propagandist Henry Care (d. 1688) was a cheap polemical book that was influential and much-reprinted, in the American colonies as well as Britain, and made Magna Carta central to the history and the contemporary legitimacy of its subject.
Both sides appealed to Pope Innocent III for assistance in the dispute.
In September 1215, the papal commissioners in England – Subdeacon Pandulf, Peter des Roches, Bishop of Winchester, and Simon, Abbot of Reading  – excommunicated the rebels, acting on instructions earlier received from Rome.
As an additional measure, Henry took the cross, declaring himself a crusader and thereby entitled to special protection from Rome.
Under what historians later labelled "clause 61", or the "security clause", a council of 25 barons would be created to monitor and ensure John's future adherence to the charter.
*Hubert de Burgh, Seneschal of Poitou
Lawyers and historians at the time believed that there was an ancient English constitution, going back to the days of the Anglo-Saxons, that protected individual English freedoms.
They are listed here in the order in which they appear in the original sources:
The war was not going well for the loyalists, but Prince Louis and the rebel barons were also finding it difficult to make further progress.
They sought to clarify certain parts of the Charters.
As the King grew older, his government slowly began to recover from the civil war, regaining control of the counties and beginning to raise revenue once again, taking care not to overstep the terms of the charters.
The size of the forests had expanded under the Angevin kings, an unpopular development.
Disputes began to emerge between those rebels who had expected the charter to return lands that had been confiscated and the royalist faction.
In a 2005 speech the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, Lord Woolf, repeated the claim that Cromwell had referred to Magna Carta as "Magna Farta".
*William de Forz, Earl of Albemarle
*Richard de Clare, Earl of Hertford
On 15 June 2015, a commemoration ceremony was conducted in Runnymede at the National Trust park, attended by British and American dignitaries.
In a further move to shore up his support, John took an oath to become a crusader, a move which gave him additional political protection under church law, even though many felt the promise was insincere.
At the end of the 16th century, there was an upsurge in antiquarian interest in England.
By 15 June, general agreement had been made on a text, and on 19 June, the rebels renewed their oaths of loyalty to John and copies of the charter were formally issued.
From the 1040s onwards successive popes had emphasised the importance of the church being governed more effectively from Rome, and had established an independent judicial system and hierarchical chain of authority.
The artwork is a copy of an earlier version of this Wikipedia page (as it appeared on the document's 799th anniversary, 15 June 2014), embroidered into the form of a tapestry.
The Great Charter was referred to in legal cases throughout the medieval period.
According to the Whig interpretation of history, the Glorious Revolution was an example of the reclaiming of ancient liberties.
Henry's government encouraged the rebel barons to come back to his cause in exchange for the return of their lands, and reissued a version of the 1215 Charter, albeit having first removed some of the clauses, including those unfavourable to the Papacy and clause 61, which had set up the council of barons.
The parchment was somewhat shrivelled but otherwise relatively unscathed, and an engraved facsimile of the charter was made by John Pine in 1733.
England slipped back into the Second Barons' War, which was won by Henry's son, Prince Edward.
Two years later, the question of Henry's commitment to the charters re-emerged, when Louis VIII of France invaded Henry's remaining provinces in France, Poitou and Gascony.
A great council was called in October and November to take stock of the post-war situation; this council is thought to have formulated and issued the Charter of 1217.
Radicals such as Sir Francis Burdett believed that Magna Carta could not be repealed, but in the 19th century clauses which were obsolete or had been superseded began to be repealed.
The reformist barons argued their case based on Magna Carta, suggesting that it was inviolable under English law and that the King had broken its terms.
The first attempt at a proper historiography was undertaken by Robert Brady, who refuted the supposed antiquity of Parliament and belief in the immutable continuity of the law.
Henry's army in Poitou was under-resourced, and the province quickly fell.
Despite the various charters, the provision of royal justice was inconsistent and driven by the needs of immediate politics: sometimes action would be taken to address a legitimate baronial complaint, while on other occasions the problem would simply be ignored.
Here the rebels presented John with their draft demands for reform, the 'Articles of the Barons'.
The barons were trying to force John to keep to the charter, but clause 61 was so heavily weighted against the King that this version of the charter could not survive.
*Robert de Ros, Baron of Helmsley
Francis Bacon argued that clause 39 of Magna Carta was the basis of the 16th-century jury system and judicial processes.
The ''Confirmatio Cartarum'' (Confirmation of Charters) was issued in Norman French by Edward I in 1297.
Edward, needing money, had taxed the nobility, and they had armed themselves against him, forcing Edward to issue his confirmation of Magna Carta and the Forest Charter to avoid civil war.
The document also continues to be honoured in the United States as an antecedent of the United States Constitution and Bill of Rights.
Coke supported the Petition of Right in 1628, which cited Magna Carta in its preamble, attempting to extend the provisions, and to make them binding on the judiciary.
*William d'Aubigny, Lord of Belvoir
Between 1939 and 1940 the copy was displayed in the British Pavilion at the 1939 World Fair in New York City, and at the Library of Congress.
*Robert, chaplain to Robert Fitzwalter
Henry placed a symbolic emphasis on rebuilding royal authority, but his rule was relatively circumscribed by Magna Carta.
John and his predecessors had ruled using the principle of ''vis et voluntas'', or "force and will", taking executive and sometimes arbitrary decisions, often justified on the basis that a king was above the law.
At the end of the war in 1217, it formed part of the peace treaty agreed at Lambeth, where the document acquired the name Magna Carta, to distinguish it from the smaller Charter of the Forest which was issued at the same time.
This is, nonetheless, the only surviving 1215 copy still to have its great seal attached.
*William de Mowbray
These clauses concern 1) the freedom of the English Church, 2) the "ancient liberties" of the City of London (clause 13 in the 1215 charter, clause 9 in the 1297 statute), and 3) a right to due legal process (clauses 39 and 40 in the 1215 charter, clause 29 in the 1297 statute).
*Roger Bigod, Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk
The fourth copy of the 1225 exemplification was held by the museum of the Public Record Office and is now held by The National Archives.
In 1976, the UK lent one of four surviving originals of the 1215 Magna Carta to the United States for their bicentennial celebrations and also donated an ornate display case for it.
During the negotiations, the rebellious barons produced an initial document, which historians have termed "the Unknown Charter of Liberties", which drew on Henry I's Charter of Liberties for much of its language; seven articles from that document later appeared in the "Articles of the Barons" and the subsequent charter.
In 1716, the Septennial Act was passed, which had a number of consequences.
Clause 61 of Magna Carta contained a commitment from John that he would "seek to obtain nothing from anyone, in our own person or through someone else, whereby any of these grants or liberties may be revoked or diminished".
