He also wrote extensively on vegetarianism, diet and health, religion, social reforms, etc.
Gandhi was again arrested, and the government tried and failed to negate his influence by completely isolating him from his followers.
In July, Kasturba gave birth to the couple's first surviving son, Harilal.
At a mass protest meeting held in Johannesburg on 11 September that year, Gandhi adopted his still evolving methodology of ''Satyagraha'' (devotion to the truth), or nonviolent protest, for the first time.
And when it becomes English, it will be called not Hindustan but Englishtan.
He believed that the British government was not being honest in its dealings with Muslims on the Khilafat issue.
Gandhian economics focused on the need for economic self-sufficiency at the village level.
Gandhi moved his headquarters to Nadiad, organising scores of supporters and fresh volunteers from the region, the most notable being Vallabhbhai Patel.
Perhaps to show his support for the Empire and help his case for India's independence, Gandhi agreed to actively recruit Indians for the war effort.
He also stated that he believed "that the white race of South Africa should be the predominating race."
In London he committed himself to truthfulness, temperance, chastity, and vegetarianism.
The Champaran agitation pitted the local peasantry against their largely British landlords who were backed by the local administration.
In 1847, Rana Vikmatji appointed Uttamchand's son, Karamchand, as ''diwan'' after disagreeing with Uttamchand over the state's maintenance of a British garrison.
It was at Tolstoy Farm where Gandhi and Hermann Kallenbach systematically trained their disciples in the philosophy of nonviolence.
He protested and was allowed on first class the next day.
For Gandhi, democracy was a way of life.
As a rule, Gandhi was opposed to the concept of partition as it contradicted his vision of religious unity.
He lived modestly in a self-sufficient residential community and wore the traditional Indian ''dhoti'' and shawl, woven with yarn hand-spun on a ''charkha''.
In his autobiography, he admits that they left an indelible impression on his mind.
By Hindu tradition the ashes were to be spread on a river.
Decades later, the Nobel Committee publicly declared its regret for the omission, and admitted to deeply divided nationalistic opinion denying the award.
Not having shown interest in religion before, he became interested in religious thought.
Gandhi was criticised by some Congress party members and other Indian political groups, both pro-British and anti-British.
The Gandhi Memorial in Kanyakumari resembles central Indian Hindu temples and the Tamukkam or Summer Palace in Madurai now houses the Mahatma Gandhi Museum.
This view was also held by two South African professors Ashwin Desai and Goolam Vahed who claimed that Gandhi described black Africans  as “savage,” “raw” and living a life of “indolence and nakedness”.
The plays built support among illiterate peasants steeped in traditional Hindu culture.
The Government of India awarded the annual Gandhi Peace Prize to distinguished social workers, world leaders and citizens.
Our beloved leader, Bapu as we called him, the father of the nation, is no more.
Several other young women and girls also sometimes shared his bed as part of his experiments.
He wrote the book ''The Moral Basis of Vegetarianism'' and wrote for the London Vegetarian Society's publication.
Membership in the party was opened to anyone prepared to pay a token fee.
Intolerance betrays want of faith in one's cause."
Rather, it is a political creed, an economic doctrine, a religious outlook, a moral precept, and especially, a humanitarian world view.
Gandhi had not only moderated the views of younger men like Subhas Chandra Bose and Jawaharlal Nehru, who sought a demand for immediate independence, but also reduced his own call to a one-year wait, instead of two.
The British did not respond.
The concept of nonviolence (''ahimsa'') and nonresistance has a long history in Indian religious thought.
In November 1887, he sat the regional matriculation exams in Ahmedabad, writing exams in arithmetic, history, geography, natural science, English and Gujarati.
General Redvers Buller mentioned the courage of the Indians in his dispatch.
Bhana and Vahed argue that Gandhi, at first, shared racial notions prevalent of the times and that his experiences in jail sensitised him to the plight of South Africa's indigenous peoples.
Indians were not allowed to walk on public footpaths in South Africa.
After witnessing racism, prejudice, and injustice against Indians in South Africa, Gandhi began to question his place in society and his people's standing in the British Empire.
The government, represented by Lord Edward Irwin, decided to negotiate with Gandhi.
Accompanied by his grandnieces, Gandhi was on his way to address a prayer meeting, when his assassin, Nathuram Godse, fired three bullets from a Beretta 9&nbsp;mm pistol into his chest at point-blank range.
One of the terminal reports rated him as "good at English, fair in Arithmetic and weak in Geography; conduct very good, bad handwriting".
Some of Gandhi's ashes were scattered at the source of the Nile River near Jinja, Uganda, and a memorial plaque marks the event.
Vallabhbhai Patel, who grew up in a Swaminarayan household was attracted to Gandhi due to this aspect of Gandhi's doctrine.
Gandhi's memorial (or ''Samādhi'') at Rāj Ghāt, New Delhi, bears the epigraph "Hē Ram" (Devanagari: ''हे !
His other autobiographies included: ''Satyagraha in South Africa'' about his struggle there, ''Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule'', a political pamphlet, and a paraphrase in Gujarati of John Ruskin's ''Unto This Last''.
Gandhi extended his original period of stay in South Africa to assist Indians in opposing a bill to deny them the right to vote.
In the months following, he undertook several fasts unto death to promote religious harmony.
From Jainism, Gandhi took the idea of applying nonviolence to human situations and the theory that Absolute Reality can be comprehended only relatively in human affairs.
This is not the Swaraj I want."
Gandhi stayed out of active politics and, as such, the limelight for most of the 1920s.
I am mindful that I might not be standing before you today, as President of the United States, had it not been for Gandhi and the message he shared with America and the world.
He ate simple vegetarian food, and also undertook long fasts as a means of both self-purification and social protest.
Andrews, Gandhi returned to India in 1915.
"Non-cooperation" enjoyed widespread appeal and success, increasing excitement and participation from all strata of Indian society.
Gandhi always fought against "communalism", which pitted Muslims against Hindus in Indian politics, but he could not reverse the rapid growth of communalism after 1922.
Godse and his co-conspirator were tried and executed in 1949.
In 1938, Gandhi stated that his "sympathies are all with the Jews.
In 2011, ''Time'' magazine named Gandhi as one of the top 25 political icons of all time.
If these gentlemen choose to occupy your homes, you will vacate them.
He opposed ''purdah'', child marriage, untouchability, and the extreme oppression of Hindu widows, up to and including ''sati''.
The moral influence he had on the consciously thinking human being of the entire civilised world will probably be much more lasting than it seems in our time with its overestimation of brutal violent forces.
''Quit India'' became the most forceful movement in the history of the struggle, with mass arrests and violence on an unprecedented scale.
In 1931, he suggested that while he could understand the desire of European Jews to emigrate to Palestine, he opposed any movement that supported British colonialism or violence.
Gandhi, having vowed to spend the day of independence fasting and spinning, was in Calcutta on 15 August 1947 where he prayed, confronted rioters and worked with Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy to stop the communal killing.
The Gandhi family originated from the village of Kutiana in what was then Junagadh State.
Gandhi took leadership of the Congress in 1920 and began escalating demands until on 26 January 1930 the Indian National Congress declared the independence of India.
There is a wide spread rumour that Gandhi took his own goat all the way to London which is wrong.
He authored the resolution offering condolences to British civilian victims and condemning the riots which, after initial opposition in the party, was accepted following Gandhi's emotional speech advocating his principle that all violence was evil and could not be justified.
Pursuing a strategy of nonviolent protest, Gandhi took the administration by surprise and won concessions from the authorities.
However Gandhi himself did not approve of the notion of "Gandhism", as he explained in 1936:
In 1997, Tushar Gandhi immersed the contents of one urn, found in a bank vault and reclaimed through the courts, at the Sangam at Allahabad.
He did not disagree with the party's position but felt that if he resigned, his popularity with Indians would cease to stifle the party's membership, which actually varied, including communists, socialists, trade unionists, students, religious conservatives, and those with pro-business convictions, and that these various voices would get a chance to make themselves heard.
According to Howard, Gandhi "developed his discourse as a religious renouncer within India's traditions to confront repressive social and religious customs regarding women and to bring them into the public sphere, during a time when the discourse on celibacy was typically imbued with masculine rhetoric and misogynist inferences.... his writings show a consistent evolution of his thought toward creating an equal playing field for members of both sexes and even elevating women to a higher plane—all through his discourse and unorthodox practice of ''brahmacharya''."
Hay says the vegetarian movement had the greatest impact for it was Gandhi's point of entry into other reformist agendas of the time.
First proposed by UNESCO in 1948, as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace (DENIP in Spanish), 30 January is observed as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace in schools of many countries In countries with a Southern Hemisphere school calendar, it is observed on 30 March.
A social boycott of ''mamlatdars'' and ''talatdars'' (revenue officials within the district) accompanied the agitation.
In 1910, Gandhi established an idealistic community called 'Tolstoy Farm' near Johannesburg, where he nurtured his policy of peaceful resistance.
Rather than a system where rights are enforced by a higher authority, people are self-governed by mutual responsibilities.
One of his favourite pastimes was twisting dogs' ears."
The government successfully repressed the protesters, but the public outcry over the harsh treatment of peaceful Indian protesters by the South African government forced South African leader Jan Christiaan Smuts, himself a philosopher, to negotiate a compromise with Gandhi.
The result was a boycott of the commission by Indian political parties.
He also took Mohandas to a brothel one day, though Mohandas "was struck blind and dumb in this den of vice," rebuffed the prostitutes' advances and was promptly sent out of the brothel.
Gandhi's educational policies reflected ''Nai Talim'' ('Basic Education for all'), a spiritual principle which states that knowledge and work are not separate.
Although Gandhi wanted a total focus on the task of winning independence and not speculation about India's future, he did not restrain the Congress from adopting socialism as its goal.
After 1947 the Nehru government's vision of an industrialised, centrally planned economy had scant place for Gandhi's village-oriented approach.
They agreed the first objective must be to calm the hysteria.
Themes from Jainism that Gandhi absorbed included asceticism; compassion for all forms of life; the importance of vows for self-discipline; vegetarianism; fasting for self-purification; mutual tolerance among people of different creeds; and "syadvad", the idea that all views of truth are partial, a doctrine that lies at the root of Satyagraha.
This challenged his belief that practicality and morality necessarily coincided.
Despite Gandhi's opposition, Bose won a second term as Congress President, against Gandhi's nominee, Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya; but left the Congress when the All-India leaders resigned en masse in protest of his abandonment of the principles introduced by Gandhi.
When Jinnah called for Direct Action, on 16 August 1946, Gandhi was infuriated and personally visited the most riot-prone areas to stop the massacres.
His wide popularity among both Hindus and Muslims made his leadership possible; he even convinced the extreme faction of Muslims to support peaceful non-co-operation.
In his long political career, this was the only time when he presided over a Congress session.
Gandhi was somewhat of a food faddist.
Lord Irwin's successor, Lord Willingdon, taking a hard line against nationalism, began a new campaign of controlling and subduing the nationalist movement.
The engine of the vehicle was not used; instead four drag-ropes manned by 50 people each pulled the vehicle.
In South Africa, Gandhi faced the discrimination directed at all coloured people.
In 1920 Gandhi became a major leader in Congress.
Gandhi was pleased when someone said that European ambulance corpsmen could not make the trip under the heat without food or water.
His attempts at establishing a law practice in Bombay failed because he was psychologically unable to cross-question witnesses.
This campaign was one of his most successful at upsetting British hold on India; Britain responded by imprisoning over 60,000&nbsp;people.
Similar messianic imagery appeared in popular songs and poems, and in Congress-sponsored religious pageants and celebrations.
As a child, Gandhi was described by his sister Raliat as "restless as mercury, either playing or roaming about.
Gandhi initially favoured offering "nonviolent moral support" to the British effort when World War II broke out in 1939, but the Congressional leaders were offended by the unilateral inclusion of India in the war without consultation of the people's representatives.
He brought an international reputation as a leading Indian nationalist, theorist and organiser.
Gandhi had a clash with Subhas Chandra Bose, who had been elected president in 1938, and who had previously expressed a lack of faith in nonviolence as a means of protest.
Gandhi returned to active politics again in 1936, with the Nehru presidency and the Lucknow session of the Congress.
But they must wait for its fulfillment till Arab opinion is ripe for it."
In 1918, Kheda was hit by floods and famine and the peasantry was demanding relief from taxes.
The book was translated into English the next year, with a copyright legend that read "No Rights Reserved".
Gandhi had also refused to support the untouchables in 1924–25 when they were campaigning for the right to pray in temples.
They used the assassination to consolidate the authority of the new Indian state.
Influenced by Henry Salt's writing, he joined the Vegetarian Society, was elected to its executive committee, and started a local Bayswater chapter.
During his tenure, Karamchand married four times.
Gandhi was also the runner-up to Albert Einstein as "Person of the Century" at the end of 1999.
Gandhi then launched a new Satyagraha against the tax on salt in March 1930.
Thus, ''satya'' (truth) in Gandhi's philosophy is "God".
Geir Lundestad, Secretary of Norwegian Nobel Committee in 2006 said, "The greatest omission in our 106 year history is undoubtedly that Mahatma Gandhi never received the Nobel Peace prize.
N. A. Toothi felt that Gandhi was influenced by the reforms and teachings of Swaminarayan, stating "Close parallels do exist in programs of social reform based on to nonviolence, truth-telling, cleanliness, temperance and upliftment of the masses."
George Orwell remarked that Gandhi's methods confronted 'an old-fashioned and rather shaky despotism which treated him in a fairly chivalrous way', not a totalitarian Power, 'where political opponents simply disappear.'
Gandhi challenged Nehru and the modernizers in the late 1930s who called for rapid industrialisation on the Soviet model; Gandhi denounced that as dehumanising and contrary to the needs of the villages where the great majority of the people lived.
Spodek finds that some of Gandhi's most effective methods such as fasting, non-co-operation and appeals to the justice and compassion of the rulers were learned as a youth in Gujarat.
His time in London was influenced by the vow he had made to his mother.
Gandhi's ideas took shape, and the concept of ''Satyagraha'' matured during this struggle.
However, as was prevailing tradition, the adolescent bride was to spend much time at her parents' house, and away from her husband.
Einstein said of Gandhi:
Gokhale was a key leader of the Congress Party best known for his restraint and moderation, and his insistence on working inside the system.
In 2007, the United Nations General Assembly declared Gandhi's birthday 2 October as "the International Day of Nonviolence."
Gandhi considered them all to be Indians, taking a lifetime view that "Indianness" transcended religion and caste.
Congress in the 1920s appealed to peasants by portraying Gandhi as a sort of messiah, a strategy that succeeded in incorporating radical forces within the peasantry into the nonviolent resistance movement.
Gandhi also borrowed Christian-Islamic ideas of equality, the brotherhood of man, and the concept of turning the other cheek.
Finally, Gandhi made a vow to his mother in the presence of a Jain monk to observe the precepts of sexual abstinence as well as abstinence from meat and alcohol, after which Putlibai gave her permission and blessing.
This day was commemorated by almost every other Indian organisation.
He thereafter resumed a vegetarian diet.
In addition to boycotting British products, Gandhi urged the people to boycott British educational institutions and law courts, to resign from government employment, and to forsake British titles and honours.
If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot afford to be intolerant.
Gandhi was deeply influenced by his mother Putlibai, an extremely pious lady who "would not think of taking her meals without her daily prayers...she would take the hardest vows and keep them without flinching.
In Kheda, Vallabhbhai Patel represented the farmers in negotiations with the British, who suspended revenue collection and released all the prisoners.
Gandhi attempted to practise nonviolence and truth in all situations, and advocated that others do the same.
He helped found the Natal Indian Congress in 1894, and through this organisation, he moulded the Indian community of South Africa into a unified political force.
Though unable to halt the bill's passage, his campaign was successful in drawing attention to the grievances of Indians in South Africa.
Initially, Putlibai did not want her youngest son to leave India and travel across the "black waters", thereby losing his caste.
In 2000, a revised edition of the complete works sparked a controversy, as it contained a large number of errors and omissions.
Gandhi also opposed vivisection: "Vivisection in my opinion is the blackest of all the blackest crimes that man is at present committing against god and his fair creation."
He believed he could bridge historic differences, especially regarding religion, and he took that belief back to India where he tried to implement it.
Among them are D. G. Tendulkar with his ''Mahatma.
Ambedkar and his allies also felt Gandhi was undermining Dalit political rights.
After Gandhi's death, Nehru led India to large-scale planning that emphasised modernisation and heavy industry, while modernising agriculture through irrigation.
The community adopted this plan, and during the ensuing seven-year struggle, thousands of Indians were jailed, flogged, or shot for striking, refusing to register, for burning their registration cards or engaging in other forms of nonviolent resistance.
Jahnu Barua's ''Maine Gandhi Ko Nahin Mara'' (I did not kill Gandhi), places contemporary society as a backdrop with its vanishing memory of Gandhi's values as a metaphor for the senile forgetfulness of the protagonist of his 2005 film, writes Vinay Lal.
In 1876, Karamchand became ''diwan'' of Rajkot and was succeeded as ''diwan'' of Porbandar by his brother Tulsidas.
India's partition and independence were accompanied by more than half a million killed in riots as 10–12&nbsp;million Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims crossed the borders dividing India and Pakistan.
Possibly as a result, in 1874 Karamchand left Porbandar for the smaller state of Rajkot, where he became a counsellor to its ruler, the Thakur Sahib; though Rajkot was a less prestigious state than Porbandar, the British regional political agency was located there, which gave the state's ''diwan'' a measure of security.
At the Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival in 2007, former US Vice-President and environmentalist Al Gore spoke of Gandhi's influence on him.
The writings comprise about 50,000 pages published in about a hundred volumes.
In thousands of villages plays were performed that presented Gandhi as the reincarnation of earlier Indian nationalist leaders, or even as a demigod.
Tolstoy responded and the two continued a correspondence until Tolstoy's death in 1910 (Tolstoy's last letter was to Gandhi).
A free India for Gandhi meant the flourishing of thousands of self-sufficient small communities who rule themselves without hindering others.
The opportunity came in the form of the Khilafat movement, a worldwide protest by Muslims against the collapsing status of the Caliph, the leader of their religion.
Gandhi expanded his nonviolence platform to include the ''swadeshi'' policy—the boycott of foreign-made goods, especially British goods.
It would have aroused the world and the people of Germany... As it is they succumbed anyway in their millions."
He fasted in 1932 to protest the voting scheme for separate political representation for Dalits; Gandhi did not want them segregated.
The government suppressed the RSS, the Muslim National Guards, and the Khaksars, with some 200,000 arrests.
Despite being only an average student in his year there, in October 1880 he sat the entrance examinations for Kathiawar High School, also in Rajkot.
Gandhi declared that Sitaramayya's defeat was his defeat.
By the 1930s all major political groups in India opposed a Jewish state in Palestine.
The Mahatma Gandhi District in Houston, Texas, United States, an ethnic Indian enclave, is officially named after Gandhi.
This new campaign was not universally embraced within the Dalit community, as Ambedkar condemned Gandhi's use of the term ''Harijans'' as saying that Dalits were socially immature, and that privileged caste Indians played a paternalistic role.
Gandhi did not receive the Nobel Peace Prize, although he was nominated five times between 1937 and 1948, including the first-ever nomination by the American Friends Service Committee, though he made the short list only twice, in 1937 and 1947.
Gandhi dedicated his life to the wider purpose of discovering truth, or ''Satya''.
In response the government tried to manipulate news coverage to minimise his challenge to the Raj.
Satyagraha is also termed a "universal force", as it essentially "makes no distinction between kinsmen and strangers, young and old, man and woman, friend and foe."
He returned to Rajkot to make a modest living drafting petitions for litigants, but he was forced to stop when he ran foul of a British officer.
Historian Kuruvilla Pandikattu says "it was Nehru's vision, not Gandhi's, that was eventually preferred by the Indian State."
An RTI query filed by a 10-year-old girl from Lucknow in February 2012 revealed that PMO has no records of ever according such title to Gandhi.
Ruskin inspired his decision to live an austere life on a commune, at first on the Phoenix Farm in Natal and then on the Tolstoy Farm just outside Johannesburg, South Africa.
This was the start of a new campaign by Gandhi to improve the lives of the untouchables, whom he named Harijans, the children of God.
''Time magazine'' named Gandhi the Man of the Year in 1930.
In protest, Gandhi embarked on a six-day fast on 20 September 1932, while he was imprisoned at the Yerwada Jail, Pune.
After several incidents with Whites in South Africa, Gandhi began to change his thinking and apparently increased his interest in politics.
Gandhi's death and funeral linked the distant state with the Indian people and made more understand why religious parties were being suppressed during the transition to independence for the Indian people.
Gandhi's private secretary noted that "The question of the consistency between his creed of 'Ahimsa' (nonviolence) and his recruiting campaign was raised not only then but has been discussed ever since."
Gandhi influenced important leaders and political movements.
He therefore advised that everyone need not keep to nonviolence, especially if it were used as a cover for cowardice, saying, "where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, I would advise violence."
The British did not recognise the declaration but negotiations ensued, with the Congress taking a role in provincial government in the late 1930s.
In the late 17th or early 18th century, one Lalji Gandhi moved to Porbandar and entered the service of its ruler, the Rana.
"He must reduce himself to zero and have perfect control over all his senses-beginning with the palate or tongue."
"Mahatma Gandhi" is used by Cole Porter in his lyrics for the song You're the Top which is included in the 1934 musical Anything Goes.
Later on, the financial, cultural, organizational and geographical support needed to bring his campaigns to a national audience were drawn from Ahmedabad and Gujarat, his Indian residence 1915–1930.
He began his sentence on 18 March 1922.
The 1996 film ''The Making of the Mahatma'' documented Gandhi's time in South Africa and his transformation from an inexperienced barrister to recognised political leader.
Most were immersed at the Sangam at Allahabad on 12 February 1948, but some were secretly taken away.
According to Gandhi, "Poverty is the worst form of violence."
Mahatma Gandhi's life achievement stands unique in political history.
Balkrishna Gokhale argues that Gandhi took his philosophy of history from Hinduism and Jainism, supplemented by selected Christian traditions and ideas of Tolstoy and Ruskin.
One of Gandhi's earliest publications, ''Hind Swaraj'', published in Gujarati in 1909, is recognised as the intellectual blueprint of India's independence movement.
In August 1947 the British partitioned the land with India and Pakistan each achieving independence on terms that Gandhi disapproved.
He urged Indians to defy the new law and to suffer the punishments for doing so.
