These ranges also serve as natural limits to the state.
Maharashtra has an Indian Premier League franchise known as the Mumbai Indians; the Maharashtra Cricket Association (MCA), regulates cricket in state.
The modern Marathi language developed from the Maharashtri Prakrit, and the word ''Mahratta'' (later used for the Marathas) is found in the Jain Maharashtri literature.
The television industry developed in Maharashtra and is a significant employer in the state's economy.
In Maharashtra, health insurance includes any program that helps pay for medical expenses, whether through privately purchased insurance, social insurance or a social welfare program funded by the government.
The third important region is the Satpura hills along the northern border, and the Bhamragad-Chiroli-Gaikhuri ranges on the eastern border, which form physical barriers preventing easy movement.
Keshavrao Jedhe, S.M.
Thane, Raigad, Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg districts, receive heavy rains of an average of 200 centimetres annually.
Aurangabad and Nanded are the main cities of the region.
The high electricity demand of the state constitutes 13% of the total installed electricity generation capacity in India, which is mainly from fossil fuels such as coal and natural gas.
Their compositions are mostly in poetic form, which are called Abhang.
Most of the famous hill stations of the state are at the Ghats.
Flights are operated by both private and government airline companies.
The wrestling championship Hind Kesari is widely popular in the rural regions and is affiliated with the All India Amateur Wrestling Federation (AIAWF).
Prithviraj Chavan of the Congress party was the last Chief Minister of Maharashtra under the Congress / NCP alliance until September 2014.
This usage includes private insurance and social insurance programs such as National Health Mission, which pools resources and spreads the financial risk associated with major medical expenses across the entire population to protect everyone, as well as social welfare programs such as National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) and the Health Insurance Program, which provide assistance to people who cannot afford health coverage.
After India's independence, the Deccan States, including Kolhapur were integrated into Bombay State, which was created from the former Bombay Presidency in 1950.
Animal husbandry is an important agriculture related activity.
Scheduled banks are of two types, commercial and co-operative.
The state continues to have a dispute with Karnataka regarding the region of Belgaum and Karwar.
Multimillion-dollar Bollywood productions, with the most expensive costing up to , are filmed there.
The four major India broadcast networks are all headquartered in Maharashtra: The Times, STAR India, CNN-IBN and ZEEL.
Maharashtrian artists have made major contributions to Indian Classical music.
There are around 48 minor ports in Maharashtra.
Maharashtra has three domestic cricket teams: the Mumbai cricket team, Maharashtra cricket team and Vidarbha cricket team.
The ultimatum to the British during the Quit India Movement was given in Mumbai, and culminated in the transfer of power and independence in 1947.
The agriculture and allied activities sector contributes 12.9% to the state's income.
Top countries that invested FDI equity in Maharashtra (from January 2000 to December 2011) were Mauritius (39%), Singapore (10%), United Kingdom (10%), United States (7%) and Netherlands (5%).
According to the 2011 census, Hinduism was the principal religion in the state at 79.8% of the total population, while Muslims constituted 11.5% of the total population.
The Subordinate judicial service of the judiciary is controlled by the District Judge.
His son Shivaji succeeded in establishing the Maratha Empire which was further expanded during the 18th century by the Bhat family ''Peshwas''  based in Pune, Bhonsle of Nagpur, Gaekwad of Baroda, Holkar of Indore, Scindia of Gwalior.
Students choose from one of three streams, namely liberal arts, commerce or science.
Maharashtra has an above average knowledge industry in India with the Pune Metropolitan area being the leading IT hub in the state..
Maharashtra Power Generation Company (MAHAGENCO) operates thermal power plants.
Flora of Maharashtra is heterogeneous in composition.
But the districts of Nasik, Pune, Ahmednagar, Dhule, Jalgaon, Satara, Sangli, Solapur and parts of Kolhapur get rainfall less than 50 centimetres.
It has over 112&nbsp;million inhabitants and its capital, Mumbai, has a population of approximately 18&nbsp;million.
The Nashik Gazetteer states that in 246&nbsp;BC Maharatta is mentioned as one of the places to which Mauryan emperor Ashoka sent an embassy, and Maharashtraka is recorded in a Chalukyan inscription of 580 CE as including three provinces and 99,000 villages.
The Chalukya dynasty ruled from the 6th century to the 8th century CE and the two prominent rulers were Pulakeshin II, who defeated the north Indian Emperor Harsha, and Vikramaditya II, who defeated the Arab invaders in the 8th century.
The High Court has regional branches at Nagpur and Aurangabad in Maharashtra and Panaji which is the capital of Goa.
20th century notable writers include Mahadevshastri Joshi, Kusumagraj, Pu La Deshpande, Va Pu Kale, Vyankatesh Digambar Madgulkar, Vishnu Sakharam Khandekar, Prahlad Keshav Atre, B. S. Mardhekar, Sane Guruji, Vinoba Bhave, Chintamani Tryambak Khanolkar, Bahinabai Chaudhari and Laxmanshastri Joshi.
Local self governance institutions in rural areas include 34 zilla parishads, 355 Taluka Panchayat samitis and 27,993 Gram panchayats.
Municipal Corporations, 222 Municipal Councils, four Nagar Panchayats and seven Cantonment Boards.
Among seafood, the most popular fish is bombil or the Bombay duck.
These practitioners primarily use the traditional Indian therapy of Ayurveda but can use modern western medicine as well.
Other places that attract pilgrims from other parts of India and beyond include Hazur Sahib Gurudwara at Nanded, and Sai Baba shrine at Shirdi.
Its GDP per capita crossed the  threshold for the first time in 2013, making it one of the richest states in India.
Major English language newspapers which are published and sold in large numbers are ''Daily News & Analysis'', ''The Times of India'', ''Hindustan Times'', ''The Indian Express'', ''Mumbai Mirror'', ''Asian Age'', ''MiD-DAY'' and ''The Free Press Journal''.
The sex ratio in Maharashtra was 925 females per 1000 males, which was below the national average of 940.
In 2011, the health care system in Maharashtra consisted of 363 rural government hospitals, 23 district hospitals (with 7,561 beds), 4 general hospitals (with 714 beds) mostly under the Maharashtra Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and 380 private medical establishments; these establishments provide the state with more than 30,000 hospital beds.
Wankhede Stadium, which has a capacity of 45,000, hosted the final match of the 2011 Cricket World Cup.
Apart from this, there are a number of deemed universities in Maharashtra: the Symbiosis International University, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Tilak Maharashtra University and Tata Institute of Social Sciences.
However, their exact etymology is uncertain.
July is the wettest month in Maharashtra, while August also gets substantial rain.
The Maharashtra Legislative Assembly consists of 288 members who are elected for five-year terms.
, the state had a per capita income of , more than the national average of .
The secondary schools are affiliated with the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE), the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), the National Institute of Open School (NIOS) or the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education.
The Bhajan, Kirtan and Abhangas of the Varkari sect (Vaishanav Devotees) have a long history and are part of their daily rituals.
Other judges are appointed by the chief justice of the high court of the judiciary on the advice of the Chief Justice.
The ''bhaaji''s are vegetable dishes made with a particular vegetable or a combination.
The state cabinet on 13 May 2015 passed a resolution favouring the setting up of one more bench of the Bombay high court in Kolhapur, covering the region.
Marathi dance forms draw from folk traditions.
It would engage in attacking the British, Portuguese, Dutch, and Siddi Naval ships and kept a check on their naval ambitions.
The President of India appoints the chief justice of the High Court of the Maharashtra judiciary on the advice of the chief justice of the Supreme Court of India as well as the Governor of Maharashtra.
The State continues to attract industrial investments from domestic as well as foreign institutions.
Monsoon starts its retreat with the coming of September to the state.
Maharashtra's business opportunities along with its potential to offer a higher standard of living attract migrants from all over India.
The 2011 census found scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to account for 11.8 and 8.9% of the population respectively.
The State is pioneer in small scale industries.
Most of the forests are found in the Sahyadri region and are very dense.
Other district roads and village roads provide villages accessibility to meet their social needs as well as the means to transport agricultural produce from villages to nearby markets.
Each district is governed by a district collector or district magistrate, appointed either by the Indian Administrative Service or the Maharashtra Civil Service.
Koli dance is among the most popular dances of Maharashtra.
Central Maharashtra receives less rainfall.
Maharashtra has the highest share of the internet market at 18.8% of total households internet users in India.
Rainfall in Maharashtra differs from region to region.
Nashik district shares highest in the agricultural and allied activities sector, but is far behind in the Industry and Services sectors as compared to Thane and Pune districts.
The state contributed 9.28% to India's population.
The Deccan College Post-Graduate and Research Institute was established in 1821.
The University of Pune, the National Defence Academy, Film and Television Institute of India, Armed Forces Medical College and National Chemical Laboratory were established in Pune soon after the Indian independence in 1947.
The greatest ruler of the Satavahana Dynasty was Gautamiputra Satakarni.
''Varan'' is nothing but plain dal, a common Indian lentil stew.
Subordinate Judicial Service is another vital part of the judiciary of Maharashtra.
Maharashtra is known for its extensive avifauna.
Depending on the caste or specific religious tradition of a family, onion and garlic may not be used in cooking.
The Mumbai Rajdhani Express, the fastest rajdhani train, connects the Indian capital of New Delhi to Mumbai.
As of 2012, Maharashtra was the largest power generating state in India, with installed electricity generation capacity of 26,838 MW.
The State's share in the livestock and poultry population in India is about 7% and 10% respectively.
The Chief Minister, along with the council of ministers, drives the legislative agenda and exercises most of the executive powers.
Maharashtra football team represents the state in competition for the Santosh Trophy.
Marathwada, which was a part of the princely state of Hyderabad until 1956, is located in the southeastern part of the state.
The state has two club franchises playing in Elite Football League of India.
For the first time, in the year 2011, it was found to be lower than the national average.
The flora of regions such as Nag region formed by Nagpur, Bhandara, Chandrapur and Gadchiroli and the plateau of Vidarbha composed by Wardha, Amravati, Yavatmal, Akola and Buldhana districts.
Well known for its art films, the early Marathi film industry included acclaimed directors such as Dadasaheb Phalke, and V. Shantaram.
The Marathi language, which boasts a rich literary heritage, is a Sanskrit-derived language and is written in the Devanagari script.
Sikhs, Christians and Jains constituted 0.2%, 1.0%, 1.2% of the population respectively.
These forests are confined to areas which have low annual rainfall (50–70&nbsp;cm), a mean annual temperature of 25–27&nbsp;°C and low humidity.
Nanded division of South central railway comprises Marathwada region.
However, dew, frost and hail also occur sometimes, depending upon the seasonal weather.
Vodafone, Airtel, BSNL, Reliance Communications, Aircel, MTS India, Tata Indicom, Idea Cellular and Tata DoCoMo are available cellular phone operators.
Mumbai has the largest share in GSDP (21.5 per cent), both Thane and Pune districts contribute about same in the Industry sector, Pune district contributes more in the agriculture and allied activities sector, whereas Thane district contributes more in the Services sector.
Summers are extreme with March, April and May as the hottest months.
However, as of 2014, the GDP per capita reduced to  Agriculture and industries are the largest parts of the state's economy.
The state has a long tradition of highly powerful planning bodies at district and local levels.
Forests comprise 17% of the total area of the state.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the struggle for independence took shape, led by nationalist extremists like Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Vinayak Damodar Savarkar and the moderates like Justice Mahadev Govind Ranade, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, Pherozeshah Mehta and Dadabhai Naoroji who were all born in this region.
The 2011 census for the state found 55% of the population to be rural with 45% being urban based.
Wheat, rice, ''jowar'', ''bajri'', vegetables, lentils and fruit form staple food of the Maharashtrian diet.
The songs from Hindi films and Marathi films are popular in urban areas.
Meals (mainly lunch and dinner) are served on a plate called thali.
Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) in India are classified into five types: State Bank of India and its associates, nationalised banks, private sector banks, Regional Rural Banks and others (foreign banks).
The economy of Maharashtra is driven by international trade, Mass Media (television, motion pictures, video games, recorded music), aerospace, technology, petroleum, fashion, apparel, and tourism.
However, this theory has not found acceptance among modern scholars who believe it to be the Sanskritised interpretation of later writers.
Malik Ambar, the regent of the Nizamshahi dynasty of Ahmednagar from 1607 to 1626.  increased the strength and power of Murtaza Nizam Shah and raised a large army.
One of the more prominent physical features of Maharsahtra is the Deccan plateau, which is separated from the Konkan coastline by 'Ghats'.
It covers a variety of financial instruments, such as lending, savings, life insurance, and crop insurance.
The Dadasaheb Phalke Award is India's highest award in cinema, given annually by the Government of India for lifetime contribution to Indian cinema.
A number of the Maratha states persisted as princely states, retaining autonomy in return for acknowledging British suzerainty.
Since the central parts of the state receives low rainfall, most of the rivers in the region have multiple dams.
In a more technical sense, the term is used to describe any form of insurance that provides protection against the costs of medical services.
Some of the forest areas are converted into wildlife reserves, thus preserving their biodiversity.
Sahyadri range, with an elevation of 1000 meters, is known for its crowning plateaus.
Malik Ambar assisted Mughal emperor Shah Jahan in Delhi against his stepmother, Nur Jahan, who had ambitions of seating her son-in-law on the throne.
Maharashtra has a long tradition in spiritual literature, evidenced by the ''Amrutanubhav'', ''Bhavarth Deepika'', ''Bhagavata Purana'', ''Eknathi Bhagwat'' and ''Bhavarth Ramayan''.
United, they decisively defeated the Vijayanagara Empire of the south in 1565.
A ‘special’ status was accorded to the sugar cooperatives and the government assumed the role of a mentor by acting as a stakeholder, guarantor and regulator, Apart from sugar, Cooperatives play a crucial role in dairy, cotton, and fertiliser industries.
Major industries include chemical products, electrical and non-electrical machinery, textiles, petroleum and allied products.
The state has several popular Hindu places of pilgrimage including  Pandharpur, Dehu and Alandi.
An alternative theory states that the term derives from the word ''Maha'' ("great") and ''Rashtra'' ("nation/dominion").
The Infant mortality rate is 28 and the maternal mortality ratio is 104 (2012–2013), which are lower than the national averages.
Though quite different, both use a lot of seafood and coconut.
It is also home to some of India's premier scientific and nuclear institutes like BARC, NPCL, IREL, TIFR, AERB, AECI, and the Department of Atomic Energy.
The major rivers of the state are Godavari, and Krishna.
The present area of Mumbai was ruled by the Sultanate of Gujarat before its capture by Portugal in 1535 and the Faruqi dynasty ruled the Khandesh region between 1382 and 1601 before finally getting annexed by the Mughal Empire.
After the partial autonomy given to the states by the Government of India Act of 1935, B. G. Kher became the first Chief Minister of the Congress party led Government of tri-lingual Bombay Presidency.
The state has three game reserves, as well as several national parks and bird sanctuaries.
Maharashtra has played a pioneering role in the development of the modern education system in India.
During his career, he has split the Congress twice with significant consequences for the state politics.
The Deputy Conservator of Forests, an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service, manages the forests, environment and wildlife of the district, assisted by the officers of Maharashtra Forest Service and Maharashtra Forest Subordinate Service.
Although its population makes Maharashtra one of the country's largest energy users, conservation mandates, mild weather in the largest population centres and strong environmental movements have kept its per capita energy use to one of the smallest of any Indian state.
Additional smaller airports include Aurangabad, Akola, Amravati, Chandrapur, Dhule, Gondia, Jalgaon, Karad, Kolhapur, Nashik, Ratnagiri, and Solapur.
The Congress party enjoyed a near unchallenged dominance of the political landscape until 1995 when the Shiv Sena and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) secured an overwhelming majority in the state to form a coalition government.
The Narmada  and Tapi flow near the border between Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat..  Maharashtra is the second most urbanised state in India.
Most of the State's airfields are operated by the Airports Authority of India (AAI) while Reliance Airport Developers (RADPL), currently operate five non-metro airports at Latur, Nanded, Baramati, Osmanabad and Yavatmal on a 95-year lease.
The scheduled tribes include  ''adivasis'' such as Thakar, Warli, Konkana and Halba.
Thane and CST are the busiest railway stations in India, the latter serving as a terminal for both long-distance trains and commuter trains of the Mumbai Suburban Railway.
Lying between the Arabian Sea and the Sahyadri Range, Konkan is narrow coastal lowland, just 50&nbsp;km wide and with an elevation below 200 meters.
Maharashtra has a microfinance system, which refers to small scale financial services extended to the poor in both rural and urban areas.
Konkani and Gujarati is also spoken in some areas.
The British governed western Maharashtra as part of the Bombay Presidency, which spanned an area from Karachi in Pakistan to northern Deccan.
Since 1921, the populations of Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg shrank by −4.96% and −2.30% respectively, while the population of Thane grew by 35.9%, followed by Pune at 30.3%.
The main rivers of the state are Krishna, Bhima, Godavari, Tapi-Purna and Wardha-Wainganga.
The word ''rashtrika'' is a Sanskritized form of Ratta, the name of a tribe or dynasty of petty chiefs ruling in the Deccan region.
Maharashtra is a prominent location for the Indian entertainment industry, with many films, television series, books, and other media being set there.
In fact, it was an integral part of the then Governing Congress party's vision of ‘rural development with local initiative’.
Almost all the major cities of Maharashtra have airports.
Scottish missionary John Wilson, Indian Nationalists such as Vasudev Balwant Phadke and Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Social reformers such as Jyotirao Phule, Dhondo Keshav Karve and Bhaurao Patil  all played a leading role in the setting up of modern schools and colleges in the state.
Wild sanctuaries in the state include Radhanagari Wildlife Sanctuary, Bor Wildlife Sanctuary, Koyna Wildlife Sanctuary, Chandoli National Park, Sanjay Gandhi National Park and Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary.
According to the provisional results of the 2011 national census, Maharashtra is the second most populous state in India with a population of 112,374,333 (9.28% of India's population) of which male and female are 58,243,056 and 54,131,277 respectively.
Later, Muhammad bin Tughluq conquered parts of the Deccan, and temporarily shifted his capital from Delhi to Daulatabad in Maharashtra.
Maharashtra is the third largest state by area in India.
This type of dance is represented by both men and women.
The politics of the state since its formation in 1960
The administration in each district is headed by a Deputy Commissioner, who belongs to the Indian Administrative Service and is assisted by a number of officers belonging to Maharashtra state services.
It is replaced by the letter ''y'' in the Varhadii dialect, which makes it quite distinct.
By the early 17th century, Shahaji Bhosale, an ambitious local general who had served Ahmadnagar Nizamshahi , the Mughals and Adil Shah of Bijapur at different periods during his career, attempted to establish his independent rule.
Each food item served on the ''thali'' has a specific place.
Other compositions are by Bhakti saints such as Tukaram, Eknath, Namdev, Ramdas, and Gora Kumbhar.
After his second parting from the Congress party in 1999, Sharad Pawar formed the NCP but formed a coalition with the Congress to keep out the BJP-Shivsena
Other animals in the state include reptiles such as lizards, cobras and kraits.
Maharashtra was a pioneer in the development of Agricultural Cooperative Societies after independence.
According to the economic survey of Maharashtra (2008–09), the percentage of the state's population that names Marathi as its mother tongue has declined to 68.8% from 76.5% over the past three decades, while there has been a sharp rise in the Hindi-speaking population (11% from 5%) in the same period.
Lavani is popular form of dance in the state.
The state houses important financial institutions such as the Reserve Bank of India, the Bombay Stock Exchange, the National Stock Exchange of India, the SEBI and the corporate headquarters of numerous Indian companies and multinational corporations.
Maharashtra cuisine covers a range from mild to very spicy dishes.
Politicians and leaders involved in the huge cooperative movement in Maharashtra were instrumental in setting up the private institutes.
Most of the private colleges were set up in the last thirty years after the State Government of Vasantdada Patil liberalised the Education Sector in 1982.
Several battles were fought between the Western Chalukya Empire and the Chola dynasty in the Deccan Plateau during the reigns of Raja Raja Chola I, Rajendra Chola I, Jayasimha II, Someshvara I and Vikramaditya VI.
Net State Domestic Product (State Income), as per the first revised estimates was 10,827.51&nbsp;billion and Per Capita State Income was 95,339 during 2011–12.
A block consists of panchayats (village councils) and town municipalities.
Some prominent financial dailies like ''The Economic Times'', ''Mint'', ''Business Standard'' and ''The Financial Express'' are widely circulated.
In 2011, the total length of surface road in Maharashtra was 267,452&nbsp;km; national highways comprised 4,176&nbsp;km and state highways 3,700&nbsp;km.
'''Maharashtra''' (; Marathi: महाराष्ट्र pronunciation: , abbr.
Under the 10+2+3 plan, after completing secondary school, students typically enroll for two years in a junior college, also known as pre-university, or in schools with a higher secondary facility affiliated with the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education or any central board.
On 1 May 1960, following mass protests and 105 deaths, the separate Marathi-speaking state was formed by dividing earlier Bombay State into the new states of Maharashtra and Gujarat.
Kalsubai, a peak in the Sahyadris, near Nashik city is the highest elevated point in Maharashtra.
To the west of these hills lie the Konkan coastal plains, 50–80 kilometres in width.
But the Marathas as a people do not seem to be mentioned before the thirteenth or fourteenth century.
In 2012 the recorded thick forest area in the state was  which was about 20.13% of the state's geographical area.
Besides Marathi theatre, Maharashtra and particularly, Mumbai, has had a long tradition of theatre in other languages such as Gujarati, Hindi and English.
India's main stock exchanges and capital market and commodity exchanges are located in Mumbai.
The state is surrounded by Gujarat to the north west, Madhya Pradesh to the north, Chhattisgarh to the east, Telangana to the south east, Karnataka to the south and Goa to the south west.
MADC is playing the lead role in the planning and implementation of the Multi-modal International Cargo Hub and Airport at Nagpur (MIHAN) project.
The Rashtrakuta dynasty ruled Maharashtra from the 8th to the 10th century.
Maharashtra contributes 25% of the country's industrial output and is the most indebted state in the country.
The southernmost part of Bombay State was ceded to Mysore.
In 2012, Maharashtra reported a revenue surplus of 1524.9&nbsp;million (US$24&nbsp;million), with a total revenue of 1,367,117&nbsp;million (US$22&nbsp;billion) and a spending of 1,365,592.1&nbsp;million (US$22&nbsp;billion).
The two principal sea ports, Mumbai Port and Jawaharlal Nehru Port, which is also in the Mumbai region, are under the control and supervision of the government of India.
The staple foods of the Konkani people are rice and fish
