The complete text of Ganguli's translation is in the public domain and is available online.
Our objective can only be to reconstruct ''the oldest form of the text which it is possible to reach'' on the basis of the manuscript material available."
Though initially sticking to chivalrous notions of warfare, both sides soon adopt dishonourable tactics.
Pandu then retires to the forest along with his two wives, and his brother Dhritarashtra rules thereafter, despite his blindness.
The two collateral branches of the family that participate in the struggle are the Kaurava and the Pandava.
The oldest preserved parts of the text are thought to be not much older than around 400&nbsp;BCE, though the origins of the epic probably fall between the 8th and 9th centuries BCE.
This is the longest book of the Mahabharata.
The ''Mahabharata'' offers one of the first instances of theorizing about "just war", illustrating many of the standards that would be debated later across the world.
The epic is traditionally ascribed to the sage Vyasa, who is also a major character in the epic.
Amar Chitra Katha published a 1,260 page comic book version of the ''Mahabharata''.
The Pandavas enter the competition in disguise as Brahmins.
I. Gusti Putu Phalgunadi.
Attempts to date the events using methods of archaeoastronomy have produced, depending on which passages are chosen  and how they are interpreted, estimates ranging from the late 4th to the mid-2nd millennium BCE.
This is an addendum to the 18 books, and covers those parts of the life of Krishna which is not covered in the 18 parvas of the ''Mahabharata''.
Vishnu Sukthankar, editor of the first great critical edition of the ''Mahabharata'', commented: "It is useless to think of reconstructing a fluid text in a literally original shape, on the basis of an archetype and a ''stemma codicum''.
He serves as Prime Minister (Mahamantri or Mahatma) to King Pandu and King Dhritarashtra.
The rivalry and enmity between them and the Pandava brothers, from their youth and into manhood, leads to the Kurukshetra war.
Only 7 warriors remain on the Pandava side and 3 on the Kaurava side.
This has led to the Gita often being described as a concise guide to Hindu philosophy and a practical, self-contained guide to life.
That this is "a date not too far removed from the 8th or 9th century B.C."
There have been many attempts to unravel its historical growth and compositional layers.
The Adi-parva includes the snake sacrifice (''sarpasattra'') of Janamejaya, explaining its motivation, detailing why all snakes in existence were intended to be destroyed, and why in spite of this, there are still snakes in existence.
Of the second kind are analyses of parallel genealogies in the Puranas between the times of Adhisimakrishna (Parikshit's great-grandson) and Mahapadma Nanda.
The two sides summon vast armies to their help and line up at Kurukshetra for a war.
Shakuni calls the architect Purochana to build a palace out of flammable materials like lac and ghee.
War becomes inevitable.
Jaini traces the origin of this list of brothers to the Jinacharitra by Bhadrabahu swami (4th–3rd century BCE).
The ''Mahabharata'' itself ends with the death of Krishna, and the subsequent end of his dynasty and ascent of the Pandava brothers to heaven.
Dhritarashtra, Bhishma, and the other elders are aghast at the situation, but Duryodhana is adamant that there is no place for two crown princes in Hastinapura.
For instance, Abhijñānashākuntala by the renowned Sanskrit poet Kālidāsa (c. 400 CE), believed to have lived in the era of the Gupta dynasty, is based on a story that is the precursor to the ''Mahabharata''.
Her brother Shakuni is enraged by this and vows to take revenge on the Kuru family.
Many condensed versions, abridgements and novelistic prose retellings of the complete epic have been published in English, including works by Ramesh Menon, William Buck, R. K. Narayan, C. Rajagopalachari, K. M. Munshi, Krishna Dharma, Romesh C. Dutt, Bharadvaja Sarma, John D. Smith and Sharon Maas.
The Pandavas, who had ruled their kingdom meanwhile, decide to renounce everything.
The world conquest by Arjuna.
However, some scholars, such as John Brockington, argue that ''Jaya'' and ''Bharata'' refer to the same text, and ascribe the theory of ''Jaya'' with 8,800 verses to a misreading of a verse in ''Adiparvan'' (1.1.81).
According to this story, Krishna arranged young Neminath’s marriage with Rajamati, the daughter of Ugrasena, but Neminatha, empathizing with the animals which were to be slaughtered for the marriage feast, left the procession suddenly and renounced the world.
The evidence of the Puranas is of two kinds.
As each one stumbles, Yudhishthira gives the rest the reason for their fall (Draupadi was partial to Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva were vain and proud of their looks, and Bhima and Arjuna were proud of their strength and archery skills, respectively).
Against his wishes Dhritarashtra orders for another dice game.
The ''Mahabharata'' is an epic narrative of the Kurukshetra War and the fates of the Kaurava and the Pandava princes.
Another traditional school of astronomers and historians, represented by Vriddha-Garga, Varahamihira (author of the ''Brhatsamhita'') and Kalhana (author of the ''Rajatarangini''), place the Bharata war 653 years after the Kaliyuga epoch, corresponding to 2449&nbsp;BCE.
B. Lal used the same approach with a more conservative assumption of the average reign to estimate a date of 836&nbsp;BCE, and correlated this with archaeological evidence from Painted Grey Ware sites, the association being strong between PGW artifacts and places mentioned in the epic.
Whilst they were in hiding the Pandavas learn of a swayamvara which is taking place for the hand of the Pāñcāla princess  Draupadī.
As the fisherman is not sure about the prince's children honouring the promise, Devavrata also takes a vow of lifelong celibacy to guarantee his father's promise.
The ''Mahabharata'' was also reinterpreted by Shyam Benegal in Kalyug.
Neither the Pandava nor Kaurava sides are happy with the arrangement however.
The copper-plate inscription of the Maharaja Sharvanatha (533–534 CE) from Khoh (Satna District, Madhya Pradesh) describes the ''Mahabharata'' as a "collection of 100,000 verses" (''shatasahasri samhita'').
Krishna Udayasankar, a Singapore based Indian author has written several novels which are modern-day retellings of the epic, most notably the Aryavarta Chronicles Series.
Prof. Padmanabh Jaini notes that, unlike in the Hindu Puranas, the names Baladeva and Vasudeva are not restricted to Balarama and Krishna in Jain puranas.
Gandhari and the women (''stri'') of the Kauravas and Pandavas lament the dead and Gandhari cursing Krishna for the massive destruction and the extermination of the Kaurava.
Ashramavasika Parva (The Book of the Hermitage)
If discovered by the Kauravas, they will be forced into exile for another 12 years.
The battle produces complex conflicts of kinship and friendship, instances of family loyalty and duty taking precedence over what is right, as well as the converse.
This Javanese version of the Mahabharata differs slightly from the original Indian version.
At least three redactions of the text are commonly recognized: ''Jaya'' (Victory) with 8,800 verses attributed to Vyasa, ''Bharata'' with 24,000 verses as recited by Vaisampayana, and finally the ''Mahabharata'' as recited by Ugrasrava Sauti with over 100,000 verses.
Sauptika Parva (The Book of the Sleeping Warriors)
His furious son, Janamejaya, decides to perform a snake sacrifice (''sarpasattra'') in order to destroy the snakes.
The Pandavas are required to go into exile for 12 years, and in the 13th year must remain hidden.
The oldest princess Amba, however, informs Bhishma that she wishes to marry king of Shalva whom Bhishma defeated at their swayamvara.
After the wedding, the Pandava brothers are invited back to Hastinapura.
Both Duryodhana and Yudhishthira claim to be first in line to inherit the throne.
V. S. Khandekar's Marathi novel, ''Yayati'' (1960) and Girish Karnad's debut play ''Yayati'' (1961) are based on the story of King Yayati found in the ''Mahabharat''.
1.1.50, there were three versions of the epic, beginning with ''Manu'' (1.1.27), ''Astika'' (1.3, sub-parva 5) or ''Vasu'' (1.57), respectively.
Mahaprasthanika Parva (The Book of the Great Journey)
Duryodhana walks round the palace, and mistakes a glossy floor for water, and will not step in.
Moritz Winternitz (''Geschichte der indischen Literatur'' 1909) considered that "only unpoetical theologists and clumsy scribes" could have lumped the parts of disparate origin into an unordered whole.
They invite their Kaurava cousins to Indraprastha.
Dhritarashtra wanted his own son Duryodhana to become king and lets his ambition get in the way of preserving justice.
It is generally agreed that "Unlike the Vedas, which have to be preserved letter-perfect, the epic was a popular work whose reciters would inevitably conform to changes in language and style," so the earliest 'surviving' components of this dynamic text are believed to be no older than the earliest 'external' references we have to the epic, which may include an allusion in Panini's 4th century BCE grammar ''Ashtādhyāyī'' 4:2:56.
Shortly after this, Arjuna elopes with and then marries Krishna's sister, Subhadra.
The text has been described by some early 20th-century  western Indologists as unstructured and chaotic.
Shakuni, Duryodhana's uncle, now arranges a dice game, playing against Yudhishthira with loaded dice.
They spend their final year in disguise in the court of Virata, and are discovered just after the end of the year.
The earliest known references to the ''Mahabharata'' and its core ''Bharata'' date to the ''Ashtadhyayi'' (sutra 6.2.38) of Pāṇini (''fl.''
Hermann Oldenberg supposed that the original poem must once have carried an immense "tragic force" but dismissed the full text as a "horrible chaos."
The addition of the latest parts may be dated by the absence of the ''Anushasana-parva'' and the ''Virata parva'' from the "Spitzer manuscript".
The ''Mahabharata'' itself (1.1.61) distinguishes a core portion of 24,000 verses: the ''Bharata'' proper, as opposed to additional secondary material, while the ''Ashvalayana Grhyasutra'' (3.4.4) makes a similar distinction.
A report by the Greek writer Dio Chrysostom (c. 40 - c. 120 CE) about Homer's poetry being sung even in India seems to imply that the ''Iliad'' had been translated into Sanskrit.
Urubhanga, a Sanskrit play written by Bhāsa who is believed to have lived before Kālidāsa, is based on the slaying of Duryodhana by the splitting of his thighs by Bhima.
Her father refuses to consent to the marriage unless Shantanu promises to make any future son of Satyavati the king upon his death.
Many years later, when King Shantanu goes hunting, he sees Satyavati, the daughter of the chief of fisherman, and asks her father for her hand.
After the deaths of their mother (Madri) and father (Pandu), the Pandavas and their mother Kunti return to the palace of Hastinapur.
Currently available are 15 volumes of the projected 32-volume edition.
It was initiated by Indologist J.
The last day of the battle, with Shalya as commander.
He lives a very short uneventful life and dies.
In the ''Bhagavad Gita'', Krishna explains to Arjuna his duties as a warrior and prince and elaborates on different Yogic and Vedantic philosophies, with examples and analogies.
Ambika and Ambalika consent to be married to Vichitravirya.
Its longest version consists of over 100,000 ''shloka'' or over 200,000 individual verse lines (each shloka is a couplet), and long prose passages.
However the arrow hits the sage Kindama, who curses him that if he engages in a sexual act, he will die.
Mausala Parva (The Book of the Clubs)
Krishna and Balrama are shown as contemporaries and cousins of 22nd Tirthankara, Neminatha.
Back at Hastinapur, the Pandavas and Kunti are presumed dead.
The Pandavas have a new palace built for them, by Maya the Danava.
He then arranges for the Pandavas and the Queen Mother Kunti to stay there, with the intention of setting it alight.
Most of the great warriors on both sides are dead by the end of this book.
They also prepare alliances for a possible future conflict.
Yudhishthira loses all his wealth, then his kingdom.
It is recited by the sage Vaisampayana, a disciple of Vyasa, to the King Janamejaya who is the great-grandson of the Pandava prince Arjuna.
To resolve his father's dilemma, Devavrata agrees to relinquish his right to the throne.
A dynastic conflict of the period could have been the inspiration for the ''Jaya'', the foundation on which the Mahabharata corpus was built, with a climactic battle eventually coming to be viewed as an epochal event.
The eldest, Ambika, shuts her eyes when she sees him, and so her son Dhritarashtra is born blind.
Krishna advises him, and after due preparation and the elimination of some opposition, Yudhishthira carries out the ''rājasūya yagna'' ceremony; he is thus recognised as pre-eminent among kings.
Starting with Ebrahim Alkazi it was staged by numerous directors.
The Pandavas spend thirteen years in exile; many adventures occur during this time.
Instead they serve as names of two distinct class of mighty brothers, who appear nine times in each half of  time cycles of the Jain cosmology and rule the half the earth as half-chakravartins.
Between 1919 and 1966, scholars at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune, compared the various manuscripts of the epic from India and abroad and produced the ''Critical Edition'' of the ''Mahabharata'', on 13,000 pages in 19 volumes, followed by the ''Harivamsha'' in another two volumes and six index volumes.
After explaining the nature of the test, Yama takes Yudhishthira back to heaven and explains that it was necessary to expose him to the underworld because (Rajyante narakam dhruvam) any ruler has to visit the underworld at least once.
Vyasa agrees on condition that Ganesha takes the time to understand what was said before writing it down.
The fact that Ambika and Ambalika are sisters is not shown in the family tree.
However, this fails, as Duryodhana objects that they were discovered while in hiding, and that no return of their kingdom was agreed.
One by one the brothers and Draupadi fall on their way.
Jain versions of ''Mahabharata'' can be found in the various Jain texts like ''Harivamsapurana'' (the story of Harivamsa) ''Trisastisalakapurusa Caritra'' (Hagiography of 63 Illustrious persons),   ''Pandavacaritra'' (lives of Pandavas) and ''Pandavapurana'' (stories of Pandavas).
Another notable difference is the inclusion of the Punakawans, the clown servants of the main characters in the storyline.
From the earlier canonical literature, ''Antakrddaaśāh'' (8th cannon) and ''Vrisnidasa'' (''upangagama'' or secondary canon) contain the stories of Neminatha (22nd Tirthankara), Krishna and Balarama.
Shantanu has two sons by Satyavati, Chitrāngada and Vichitravirya.
Ultimately, the Pandavas and Balarama take renunciation as Jain monks and are reborn in heavens, while on the other hand Krishna and Jarasandha are reborn in hell.
Upon Shantanu's death, Chitrangada becomes king.
The translation is based not on the ''Critical Edition'' but on the version known to the commentator Nīlakaṇṭha.
Other Kaurava brothers were Vikarna and Sukarna.
Another difference is that Shikhandini does not change her sex and remains a woman, to be wed to Arjuna, and takes the role of a warrior princess during the war.
Yudhisthra wishes to establish his position as king; he seeks Krishna's advice.
Madri dies on his funeral pyre out of remorse.
The redactors of these additions were probably Pancharatrin scholars who according to Oberlies (1998) likely retained control over the text until its final redaction.
The historicity of the Kurukshetra War is unclear.
Many historians  estimate the date of the Kurukshetra war to Iron Age India of the 10th century BCE.
Most critics consider the translation by Ganguli to be faithful to the original text.
The Kuru family elders and relatives negotiate and broker a split of the kingdom, with the Pandavas obtaining a new territory.
Stri Parva (The Book of the Women)
Kunti shares her mantra with the younger queen Madri, who  bears the twins Nakula and Sahadeva through the Ashwini twins.
Ambalika turns pale and bloodless upon seeing him, and thus her son Pandu is born pale and unhealthy (the term Pandu may also mean 'jaundiced').
Before the battle, Arjuna, seeing the opposing army includes many relatives and loved ones, including his great grandfather Bhishma and his teacher Drona, has doubts about the battle and he fails to lift his Gāndeeva bow.
Bengali writer and playwright, Buddhadeva Bose wrote three plays set in Mahabharat, ''Anamni Angana'', ''Pratham Partha'' and ''Kalsandhya''.
This ''sarpasattra'' material was often considered an independent tale added to a version of the ''Mahabharata'' by "thematic attraction" (Minkowski 1991), and considered to have a particularly close connection to Vedic (Brahmana) literature.
A 2013 animated adaptation holds the record for India's most expensive animated film.
Prof. Jaini admits a possibility that perhaps because of his popularity, the Jain authors were keen to rehabilitate Krishna.
The Pandavas return home and inform their mother that Arjuna has won a competition and to look at what they have brought back.
The birth of Duryodhana took place after the birth of Karna, Yudhishthira and Bhima, but before the birth of the remaining Pandava brothers.
The final instructions (''anushasana'') from Bhishma.
Vyasa fathers a third son, Vidura, by the maid.
Uncompleted projects on the ''Mahabharata'' include a ones by Rajkumar Santoshi,  and a theaterical adaptation planned by Satyajit Ray.
What then is possible?
The background to the ''Mahabharata'' suggests the origin of the epic occurs "after the very early Vedic period" and before "the first Indian 'empire' was to rise in the third century B.C."
On explaining the previous life of Draupadi, she ends up being the wife of all five brothers.
In the Western world, a well-known presentation of the epic is Peter Brook's nine-hour play, which premiered in Avignon in 1985, and its five-hour movie version ''The Mahabharata'' (1989).
Svargarohana Parva (The Book of the Ascent to Heaven)
The allies of the Kauravas included the kings of Pragjyotisha, Anga, Kekaya, Sindhudesa (including Sindhus, Sauviras and Sivis), Mahishmati, Avanti in Madhyadesa, Madra, Gandhara, Bahlika people, Kambojas and many others.
Kunti raises the five brothers, who are from then on usually referred to as the Pandava brothers.
Aryabhatta's date of February 18 3102&nbsp;BCE for Mahabharata war has become widespread in Indian tradition.
Kunti uses this boon to ask Dharma the god of justice, Vayu the god of the wind, and Indra the lord of the heavens for sons.
King Janamejaya's ancestor Shantanu, the king of Hastinapura, has a short-lived marriage with the goddess Ganga and has a son, Devavrata (later to be called Bhishma, a great warrior), who becomes the heir apparent.
The story is then recited again by a professional storyteller named Ugrasrava Sauti, many years later, to an assemblage of sages performing the 12-year sacrifice for the king Saunaka Kulapati in the Naimisha Forest.
Although the Kaurava is the senior branch of the family, Duryodhana, the eldest Kaurava, is younger than Yudhishthira, the eldest Pandava.
Sixteen of the eighteen volumes are now available.
In Indian cinema, several film versions of the epic have been made, dating back to 1920.
The materialisation of Gandhari's curse, i.e., the infighting between the Yadavas with maces (''mausala'') and the eventual destruction of the Yadavas.
The core story of the work is that of a dynastic struggle for the throne of Hastinapura, the kingdom ruled by the Kuru clan.
In the late 1980s, the ''Mahabharat'' TV series, directed by Ravi Chopra, was televised on India's national television (Doordarshan).
Only the virtuous Yudhishthira, who had tried everything to prevent the carnage, and the dog remain.
The eventual deaths of Dhritarashtra, Gandhari and Kunti in a forest fire when they are living in a hermitage in the Himalayas.
Yama then assures him that his siblings and wife would join him in heaven after they had been exposed to the underworld for measures of time according to their vices.
Puranic literature presents genealogical lists associated with the ''Mahabharata'' narrative.
According to Jain cosmology Balarama, Krishna and Jarasandha are the ninth and the last set of Baladeva, Vasudeva, and Partivasudeva.
These versions would correspond to the addition of one and then another 'frame' settings of dialogues.
The epic employs the story within a story structure, otherwise known as frametales, popular in many Indian religious and non-religious works.
Amba becomes enraged and becomes Bhishma's bitter enemy, holding him responsible for her plight.
Traditionally, the authorship of the ''Mahabharata'' is attributed to Vyasa.
Bhishma lets her leave to marry king of Shalva, but Shalva refuses to marry her, still smarting at his humiliation at the hands of Bhishma.
Without looking, Kunti asks them to share whatever it is Arjuna has won among themselves.
Dhritarashtra has a hundred sons through Gandhari, all born after the birth of Yudhishthira.
Of the first kind, there is the direct statement that there were 1015 (or 1050) years between the birth of Parikshit (Arjuna's grandson) and the accession of Mahapadma Nanda (400-329&nbsp;BCE), which would yield an estimate of about 1400&nbsp;BCE for the Bharata battle.
The Aihole inscription of Pulikeshi II, dated to Saka 556 = 634 CE, claims that 3735 years have elapsed since the Bharata battle, putting the date of Mahabharata war at 3137&nbsp;BCE.
The main battle is not the Mahabharata, but the fight between Krishna and Jarasandha (who is killed by Krishna).
A long discussion ensues between the siblings, establishing criteria like ''proportionality'' (chariots cannot attack cavalry, only other chariots; no attacking people in distress), ''just means'' (no poisoned or barbed arrows), ''just cause'' (no attacking out of rage), and fair treatment of captives and the wounded.
A later poetic "transcreation" (author's own description) of the full epic into English, done by the poet P. Lal, is complete, and in 2005 began being published by Writers Workshop, Calcutta.
Dhritarashtra  marries Gandhari, a princess from Gandhara, who blindfolds herself so that she may feel the pain that her husband feels.
Meanwhile, the King of Kāśī arranges a swayamvara for his three daughters, neglecting to invite the royal family of Hastinapur.
Gujarati poet Chinu Modi has written long narrative poetry ''Bahuk'' based on character Bahuka.
The ''astika'' version would add the ''sarpasattra'' and ''ashvamedha'' material from Brahmanical literature, introduce the name ''Mahabharata'', and identify Vyasa as the work's author.
The ''Mahabharata'' is the longest known epic poem and has been described as "the longest poem ever written".
This may mean the core 24,000 verses, known as the ''Bharata'', as well as an early version of the extended ''Mahabharata'', were composed by the 4th century BCE.
The Panchavimsha Brahmana (at 25.15.3) enumerates the officiant priests of a ''sarpasattra'' among whom the names Dhrtarashtra and Janamejaya, two main characters of the ''Mahabharata'''s ''sarpasattra'', as well as Takshaka, the name of a snake in the ''Mahabharata'', occur.
In more modern times, Swami Vivekananda, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Mahatma Gandhi and many others used the text to help inspire the Indian independence movement.
The late 4th millennium date has a precedent in the calculation of the Kaliyuga epoch, based on planetary conjunctions, by Aryabhata (6th century).
Krishna takes part in a non-combatant role, as charioteer for Arjuna.
He then even gambles his brothers, himself, and finally his wife into servitude.
He also describes the Guru-shishya parampara, which traces all great teachers and their students of the Vedic times.
The author later added some female characters to be wed to the Pandavas, for example, Arjuna is described as having many wives and consorts next to Subhadra.
Outside the Indian subcontinent, in Indonesia, a version was developed in ancient Java as Kakawin Bhāratayuddha in the 11th century under the patronage of King Dharmawangsa (990–1016) and later it spread to the neighboring island of Bali, which remains a Hindu majority island today.
B. van Buitenen (books 1–5) and, following a 20-year hiatus caused by the death of van Buitenen, is being continued by D. Gitomer of DePaul University (book 6), J. L. Fitzgerald  of Brown University (books 11–13) and Wendy Doniger of the University of Chicago (books 14–18).
One day, when Pandu is relaxing in the forest, he hears the sound of a wild animal.
Some elements of the present ''Mahabharata'' can be traced back to Vedic times.
These are the Kaurava brothers, the eldest being Duryodhana, and the second Dushasana.
He then decides to avenge his humiliation.
The oldest surviving Sanskrit text dates to the Kushan Period (200 CE).
Later she is reborn to King Drupada as Shikhandi (or Shikhandini) and causes Bhishma's fall, with the help of Arjuna, in the battle of Kurukshetra.
At the end of their exile, they try to negotiate a return to Indraprastha.
The continuation of the battle with Karna as commander of the Kaurava forces.
It is estimated that the Sanskrit text probably reached something of a "final form" by the early Gupta period (about the 4th century CE).
Karna Parva (The Book of Karna)
