Whenever a player draws a flower or season, it is announced and then placed to the side (it is not considered a part of the hand but the player with the winning hand will earn a bonus point for them) and the last tile of the wall is drawn as a replacement tile so that the player has the 14 pieces needed before their discard.
Prolonged playing of Mahjong may trigger epileptic seizures according to a 2007 study.
* '''South African Mahjong''' is a variant of Cantonese Mahjong.
Players cannot skip numbers or meld from the 8 or 9 to 1 or 2.
The rule is treated the same as "abortive draws".
For these reasons Hong Kong mahjong is a suitable variation for the introduction of game rules and play.
In addition, tile discards are specifically arranged in front of each player by discard order, to take discarded tiles into account during play.
The rule set includes a unique function in that players who get 2 specific animals get a one-time immediate payout from all players.
The winner of a game receives the score from the player who discards the winning tile, plus 8 basic points from each player; in the case of ''zimo'' (self-drawn win), he receives the value of this round plus 8 points from all players.
Alternatively, a player may also win by drawing the tile required to complete a legal hand on his turn.
* '''Western classical Mahjong''' is a descendant of the version of Mahjong introduced by Babcock to America in the 1920s.
Starting from the left of the stacks counted, the dealer takes 4 tiles to himself, and players in counterclockwise order take blocks of 4 tiles until all players have 12 tiles, so that the stacks decrease clockwise.
Although, sets originating from the United States or Southeast Asia will probably have more.
Also in Shenyang Mahjong, the player must to have Bamboos, Characters, Circles and number one or 9 in his hand.
Standardization came with the formation of the National Mah Jongg League (NMJL) in 1937, along with the first American Mahjong rulebook, ''Maajh: The American Version of the Ancient Chinese Game, written by NMJL's first president and co-founder, Viola L. Cecil.
For example, in most playing circles in Singapore, if there is at least one Kong when the hand is a draw, the following player of the dealer becomes the next dealer; otherwise, the dealer remains dealer.
Japanese Mahjong rarely uses Flowers or Seasons.
* '''Chinese classical Mahjong''' is the oldest surviving variety of Mahjong and was the version introduced to America in the 1920s under various names.
It is closer to the Chinese classical scoring system but only the winner scores.
The player must then discard a tile, and play continues to the right.
There were 152 participants.
The rulebook contains 81 combinations, based on patterns and scoring elements popular in classic and modern regional Chinese variants; some table practices of Japan have also been adopted.
It needs fewer people to start a game and the turnaround time of a game is short—hence, it is considered a fast game.
It does not allow multiple players to win from a single discard.
The 4th piece of the Kong (not Flowers/Seasons) is not considered as one of the 13 tiles a player must always have in their hand.
A player only scores a bonus fan for Flowers or Seasons if it is their own flower or season (East=1, South=2, West=3 and North=4) or if the player has all 4 Flowers or all 4 Seasons (scoring 5 fan in total).
One reason for this is that there are cases in which bars of 1,000 points for declaring ''rīchi'' cannot be divided by 3.
If this does not complete a legal hand, he then discards a piece (throwing it into the middle of the wall with no particular order in mind).
Solutions include having the dealer penalised points, shuffling the turned over piece back into the wall somehow, allowing the player who the tiles were dealt to to take the piece or not (meaning the dealer must take it as his/her 14th piece) or other house rules.
Legal hands are changed annually.
While the basic rules are more or less the same throughout Mahjong, the greatest divergence between variations lies in the scoring systems.
* '''Filipino Mahjong''', 16 tile hands.
The principles of the new, wholesome Mahjong are no gambling, no drinking, and no smoking.
Later, when the 1920s fad died out, many of Babcock's simplifications were abandoned.
In addition to scoring changes, the rules of ''rīchi'' (ready hand) and ''dora'' (bonus tiles) are unique highlights of this variant.
However, a player who declares ''rīchi'' and loses is usually penalized in some fashion.
These early jokers are still found in the Vietnamese and Thai sets.
When 2 or more players call for a discarded tile, a player taking the tile to win the hand has precedence over all others.
They do so by revealing the meld and placing 2 pieces in the middle face up and 2 pieces on the ends face down.
Some groups also play with the "great Flowers" rule.
Hong Kong Mahjong is played with a set of Mahjong tiles (though cards may be used).
This form of Mahjong uses all of the tiles of the most commonly available sets, includes no exotic complex rules and has a relatively small set of scoring sets/hands with a simple scoring system.
Korean Mahjong removes the bamboo suit or at least its numbers 2–8 so that terminals can be used.
The flower and season tiles are unique not only in playing a different roles in the mechanics of the game but also in the fact that there is only one instead of four copies of each tile.
* '''Tianjin Mahjong''' using normally 7 jokers, with special scoring such as ''joker-free'', ''joker-waiting-pair'', ''catch-5'', ''dragon'', ''joker-suited-dragon''.
The bonus tiles are not available for wild cards.
Tiles may flip over when being dealt and players should agree in advance on how to deal with the problem.
In 1986, the National Mah Jongg League conducted their first Mah Jongg Cruise Tournament, in conjunction with Mah Jongg Madness.
This may happen successively in a player's turn.
Some rules replace some of number 5 tiles with red tiles so that they can eventually get more value.
Calling a Mahjong without having a legal hand or with the minimum points is usually penalized via points or with the player having to play the rest of the hand with his tiles shown to the other players face up.
If a player picks up all 4 Flowers and all 4 Seasons during their hand, they instantly wins the hand and receives the maximum points from all of the players.
The most common form, which eventually became "American Mahjong", was most popular among Jewish women.
Japanese mahjong also uses four yakitori markers to indicate which players have not won a hand yet.
There are fairly standard rules about how a piece is drawn, how a piece is robbed from another player, the use of simples (numbered tiles) and honors (winds and dragons), the kinds of melds allowed, how to deal the tiles and the order of play.
* '''Vietnamese Mahjong''' has the same 8 specialized jokers but with only 8 different extra flowers for a total of 160 tiles.
* '''Eyes''' (also known as a pair) are 2 identical tiles which are an essential part of a legal winning hand.
Wildcards can't replace any tiles in Pongs and Kongs.
* If the winner is east all losers double the basepoints
The table is progressive doubling the amount of base points when reaching a certain faan point targe.
Each player then stacks a row of 18 tiles 2 tiles high in front of them (for a total of 36 tiles).
Another variation has become the new trend, it's called 红中赖子杠.
Whenever a Kong is formed, that player must draw an extra tile from the end of the wall and then discard a tile.
3 bamboo Pongs/Kongs and a pair of bamboo (eye) with a Pong/Kong of the Green dragon (no chows).
* '''Japanese Mahjong''' is a standardized form of Mahjong in Japan and is also found prevalently in video games.
During play, the number of tiles maintained by each player should always be thirteen tiles (meaning in each turn a tile must be picked up and another discarded).
The Dragons are Red, Green and White.
In Hong Kong Mahjong the most common point set is 3 but can be higher or lower depending on consensus before the match begins.
** the composition of the entire hand,
Rules governing discarding Joker tiles also exist; some variations permit the Joker tile to take on the identity of any tile, and others only permit the Joker tile to take on the identity of the previously discarded tile (or the absence of a tile, if it is the first discard).
Khanhoo is an early example of such a game.
The game is played with a set of 144 tiles based on Chinese characters and symbols, although some regional variations may omit some tiles and/or add unique tiles.
A new hand begins, and depending on the variant, the Game Wind may change.
Joker tiles are used in some versions.
If 2 or 3 players need the piece to win, there are 2 ways to resolve the issue depending on agreed table rules: Either the players compete to see who would have a better hand in terms of scoring, or simply the player closest to the discarder in order of turn wins the game.
Prize pools are based on the number participating.
* Before discarding a player who has all 4 matching tiles in their hand may declare a Kong.
For example, if a character 4 taken out, then character 4 and the next number 5 can be used as wild cards in this round (When the tile showed, the tiles of the same pattern left only 3, so the next tile in the suit will be used as wild cards as well, adding to 7 wild cards for 4 players).
Several hit songs were recorded during the Mahjong fad, most notably "Since Ma Is Playing Mah Jong" by Eddie Cantor.
If the player who melds a discard is not directly after the discarder (in order of play), one or 2 players essentially miss their turn as play continues to the player after the one who declared the meld.
Some rules may replace some of the number 5 tiles with red tiles, as they can earn more points.
The competition was won by Masato Chiba from Japan.
They were played with a stripped deck of money-suited cards.
Points are distinct from the actual payment received from each player.
They may be used as a wild card: a substitute for any tile in a hand, or, in some variations, only tiles in melds.
His rules simplified the game to make it easier for Americans to take up, and his version was common through the Mahjong fad of the 1920s.
Players may only call for a Chow from the discard of the player immediately prior to them, unless the tile is the final one required to complete the hand, but may call for a Pong or Kong from any player.
In addition, there are 3 wild cards: '''Red flower''', '''White flower''', and '''Old thousand'''.
A player who declares ''rīchi'' and wins usually receives a point bonus for their hand directly, and a player who won with ''rīchi'' also has the advantage to open the inner  which leads to higher possibilities to match such a card, thus has more chance to grant additional bonus.
The game and its regional variants are widely played throughout Eastern and South Eastern Asia and have a small following in Western countries.
Any rule set can be adapted for 3 players; however, this is far more common and accepted in Japan, Korea, Malaysia and the Philippines.
+ Limit Hands (winner receives agreed maximum payment from each player)
Mahjong, as of 2010, is the most popular table game in Japan.
Mahjong tiles are split into 3 categories: Suits, Honors, and Bonuses.
In some versions there is a jackpot for winning in which whoever accumulates a point of 10 is considered to hit the jackpot or whoever scores 3 hidden hands first.
A player cannot win by a discard if that player had already discarded that piece, where players' discards are kept in neat rows in front of them.
This ends the hand, and scoring commences.
The following year saw the first annual China Mahjong Championship, held in Hainan; the next 2 annual tournaments were held in Hong Kong and Beijing.
They are described in more detail below.
In international tournaments, players are often grouped in teams to emphasize that Mahjong from now on is considered a sport.
Sometimes a loser may score more points than a winner.
'''Points''' (terminology of which differs from variation to variation) are obtained by matching the winning hand with different criteria scoring different values.
How points are reckoned is agreed by players before hand.
These sets differ from modern ones in several ways.
These 4 blocks cannot be touched until the player has a ready hand.
In the Glover sets, there were no "flower" and ''fā'' ("green dragon") tiles.
The wild cards are decided at the beginning of the game.
Each player takes a turn picking up a tile from the wall and then discarding a tile by throwing it into the center and, if desired, announcing out loud what the piece is.
* '''Fujian Mahjong''', 13 tile hands.
The other 4 flower tiles (or season tiles) represent Seasons:
Depending on the ''house'' rules ''Flowers'' may also be used to boost scoring.
This organization held its first World Mahjong Championship in November 2007 in the Chinese town of Chengdu, attended by 144 participants from all over the world.
Using the same total on the dice, the player then counts the stacks of tiles from right to left.
All players score and it is possible to score higher than the winner.
American Mahjong has distinctive game mechanics and the article on American Mahjong details these.
This hand always has 4 melds and the eyes.
The Charleston, a distinctive feature of American Mahjong, may have been borrowed from card games such as Hearts.
* If the winner wins from the wall the base points is doubled.
The player reveals his 3 pieces face up and places the stolen discard on top of the middle tile.
Certain tiles can be wild.
Depending on the game, there are multiple copies of each card.
The tiles have a different artistic rendering of a specific type of flower or season and that each design has only one tile in the whole set making a total of 4 flower tiles and 4 season tiles altogether.
In their place were "king" tiles for heaven, earth, man, and harmony and also for each of the 4 "winds" which may have acted as bonus tiles.
A winning hand with 9 faan is worth 4 base points.
The game has taken on a number of trademarked names, such as "Pung Chow" and the "Game of Thousand Intelligences".
* The payment received from each player depends on 3 factors:
The second European championship in Copenhagen(2007) was attended by 136 players and won by Danish player Martin Wedel Jacobsen.
Play continues until a loser is decided or a draw.
Japanese and Korean Mahjong have some special rules.
Players then push each side of their tiles together to form a square wall.
The edges are raised to prevent tiles from sliding off and the surface is covered in felt to limit wear on the tiles.
A winning hand consists of 14 tiles.
* '''Taiwanese Mahjong''' is the variety prevalent in Taiwan and involves hands of 16 tiles (as opposed to the 13-tile hands in other versions), features bonuses for dealers and recurring dealerships, and allows multiple players to win from a single discard.
* '''Mah Jongg Card Game''' by Winning Moves is a card game variant based on the basic Mah Jongg game.
* '''Shenyang Mahjong''' using 13 hands in a game, and Shenyang Mahjong has a really fast speed on playing, which is matching the personality of North-east people in China.
Some sets include racks to hold the tiles, especially if they are larger/smaller than standard tiles or have an odd shape.
Most players include table variations in their games, of which some non-standard are included.
Hong Kong Mahjong is essentially a payment system of doubling and redoubling where winning from the wall adds great value to the final payment and where the dealer is highly rewarded or penalized if he or she wins or loses.
In turn players draw and discard tiles until they complete a legal hand using the 14th drawn tile to form 4 groups (meld) and a pair (eye).
Modern variant triplicates or quadruplicates the jokers for a total of 176 or 184 tiles.
These tiles have no numerical sequence like the simples (for example the bamboo pieces number 1 to 9).
If at any point in the game a player can use another player's discard to complete a legal hand (and with the agreed minimum points), they yell out Mahjong, take the piece and reveal their hand, with the way of calling it out depending on variations.
The AMJA currently hosts tournaments all across North America, with their signature event being at the Trump Taj Mahal Casino Resort in Atlantic City, New Jersey.
Standard requirements for ''rīchi'' are that the hand be ''closed'' or have no melds declared (other than a concealed Kong) and that players already have points for declaration of ''rīchi''.
They represent the cat, mouse, rooster and centipede.
If a player has 3 faan then his hand is worth one base point.
In Singapore and Malaysia an extra set of bonus tiles of 4 animals are used.
Counting counterclockwise so that the dealer is 1 (or 5, 9, 13, 17), so that south is 2 (or 6, 10, 14, 18), etc., a player's quarter of the wall is chosen.
The Seasons are removed in Korean Mahjong, while many Southeast Asian sets have more flower series.
* '''Korean Mahjong''' is unique in many ways and is an excellent version for 3 players.
A declaration of ''rīchi'' is a promise that any tile drawn by the player is immediately discarded unless it constitutes a win.
The next World Championship took place in Utrecht, the Netherlands, 27 to 29 August 2010.
There are several manga and anime (e.g.
Table rules dictate if these rare and special hands are allowed, which ones, and the limit for scoring.
He did not explain the dialect of the originator or region specific etymology of this information.
* '''Sichuan Mahjong''' is a growing variety, particularly in southern China, disallowing chi melds, and using only the suited tiles.
Some 3 player versions remove the North Wind and one Chinese provincial version has no honors.
4 Pongs of all 4 winds
There are variations that feature specific use of tiles.
Player has 1112345678999 of any simple suit and one extra piece of numbers 1 to 9.
Abercrombie & Fitch sold a total of 12,000 Mahjong sets.
Otherwise a player who can form a ''Pong'' or ''Kong'' takes precedence over a player who claims a ''Chow''.
Hand is made of chows, Pongs and the eyes of circles.''
These tiles are not drawn into a player's hand but are set aside (kept near the player's other tiles for scoring purposes should they win the hand) when drawn and an extra tile is drawn in replacement of the bonus tile.
If a player declares a Kong (by melding it or adding a 4th piece to a Pong to form a Kong or declaring a concealed Kong) and another player(s) can use that piece to complete a hand (which by logic could not be used to form a Pong or Kong as 2 players cannot make a Pong out of the same tile) a player may steal that piece from that player when declaring the Kong and go Mahjong (win the hand).
* Only the winner scores points.
* If a player can use a discarded tile to compliment 3 matching tiles in their hand, they can take the piece and reveal a "Kong by discard" or "melded Kong".
* '''Competition Mahjong''' is an international standard founded by All-China Sports Federation in July 1998 that some Mahjong societies have adopted for competition play and in some cases for all play.
There are 4 different ways that this order of play can be interrupted.
3 character Pongs/Kongs and a pair of character (eye) with a Pong/Kong of the Red dragon (no chows).
One example is the Pure Green hand made of chows or Pongs using 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 of bamboo and green dragon.
In American Mahjong, it is illegal to pass Jokers during the Charleston.
Wild cards are not allowed to be discarded and can replace any tiles in Chows.
Games scholar David Parlett has written that the Western card games Conquian and Rummy share a common origin with Mahjong.
** if the player was the dealer or not.
The hands of ''7 different pairs'' and ''thirteen orphans'' are examples which do not have 4 melds and the eyes.
American Mahjong generally has greatly divergent scoring rules, as well as greatly divergent general rules.
Mahjong culture is still deeply ingrained in the Chinese community.
They may have been removed as the tiles share the same titles as the leaders of the Taiping Rebellion (1850-1864).
Since the 1980s, hundreds of different Mahjong arcade machines in Japanese video arcades have been created, including strip versions.
A feature of several variations of Mahjong, most notably in American mahjong, is the notion of some number of  Joker tiles.
Old Hong Kong Mahjong uses the same basic features and rules as the majority of the different variations of the game.
Korean Mahjong does not allow melded (stolen) chows.
The Third Open European Mahjong Championship 2009 at Baden/Vienna, Austria, was won by Japanese player Koji Idota, while runner-up Bo Lang from Switzerland became European Champion.
In addition, the players have to Pong before they Chow, so there is no chance to win even if some players win at the first time they have their hands in hand.
Player has all Honors in the hand (only winds and dragons)
The Malaysian and Korean versions drop one wind and may include a seat dragon.
Some superstitious rituals in Mahjong can involve things from not counting one's wins and losses, to changing one's underwear after a loss.
''A high scoring hand formed using only circles, known as a pure hand.
In some variations, a situation in which all 4 players declare a ''rīchi'' is an automatic drawn game, as it reduces the game down to pure luck, i.e., who gets their needed tile first.
3 Pongs of all 3 dragons
It is very similar in terms of game play and follows most of the rules and regulations of Cantonese Mahjong.
Wind indicators come in various formats such as cubes, discs, or cylinders.
Some variations of Mahjong, most notably Japanese and Korean ones, allow a player to declare .
It is not known when the conversion from cards to tiles took place precisely but it most likely occurred in the middle of the 19th century.
If a Pong has been melded a player cannot steal the 4th piece if another player discards it.
The NMJL was founded by Jewish players and is considered a Jewish organization.
Some players accept wild cards (Chinese: 混儿，''hùnr'') when playing Mahjong.
A rarely occurring and high scoring feature of Hong Kong Mahjong is a move called robbing the Kong.
Each player now sets aside any Flowers or Seasons they may have drawn and takes replacement piece(s) from the wall.
