It is still closely studied in rabbinic yeshivot (academies).
During Maimonides's lifetime the debate expanded into a full-blown controversy, with Maimonides charged as a heretic by some Jewish leaders.
The money was collected and then given to two judges sent to Palestine to negotiate with the Crusaders.
There shall remain in his days, both, the strong and the weak, in comparison to others, only that in those days the people's livelihood will be made much easier for them, insofar that if a man should work any work no matter how short-lived, he will gain much thereby.
Maimonides claims that any man has the potential to become a prophet (not just Jews) and that in fact it is the purpose of the human race.
Maimonides places anthropomorphic personification statements about God in the latter class.
Rather, he considered resurrection to be a miracle that the book of Daniel predicted; thus at some point in time we could expect some instances of resurrection to occur temporarily, which would have no place in the final eternal life of the righteous.
Other translations say "Giving unwillingly."
Born in Cordova, Almoravid Empire (present-day Spain) on Passover Eve, 1135 or 1138, he died in Egypt on December 12, 1204, whence his body was taken to the lower Galilee and buried in Tiberias.
For the next ten years, Maimonides moved about in southern Spain, eventually settling in Fes in Morocco.
Maimonides believes that there are three types of evil in the world: evil caused by nature, evil that people bring upon others, and evil man brings upon himself (Guide 3:12).
For instance, Maimonides was an adherent of "negative theology" (also known as "Apophatic theology".)
While in Cairo, he studied in a yeshiva attached to a small synagogue (which now bears his name).
He expressed disapproval of poetry, the best of which he declared to be false, since it was founded on pure invention.
This indicates a line of conduct for the reader, who must read the text keeping in mind Al-Farabi's works on logic.
All he says it is that whatever resurrection does take place, it will occur at an indeterminate time before the world to come, which he repeatedly states will be purely spiritual.
Chabad and The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute focus on Maimonides's teaching that each Jew should understand his unique importance in the world.
Maimonides compiled the principles from various Talmudic sources.
His kingdom shall continue for a very long time, while the lives of men will also be prolonged; for by the absence of worries and troubles they shall prolong their lives.
Educated more by reading the works of Arab Muslim philosophers than by personal contact with Arabian teachers, he acquired an intimate acquaintance not only with Arab Muslim philosophy, but with the doctrines of Aristotle.
Maimonides was brought into this dispute by both sides, as the first group stated that his writings agreed with them, and the second group portrayed him as a heretic for writing that the afterlife is for the immaterial spirit alone.
This forced conversion was ruled legally invalid under Islamic law when brought up by a rival in Egypt.
Influenced by Al-Farabi (ca.
With the loss of the family funds tied up in David's business venture, Maimonides assumed the vocation of physician, for which he was to become famous.
The historical records of abuses against Jews in the immediate post-1148 period are subject to different interpretations.
The ''Oath'' is not to be confused with a more lengthy ''Prayer of Maimonides''.
He worked as a rabbi, physician, and philosopher in Morocco and Egypt.
The most rigorous medieval critique of Maimonides is Hasdai Crescas's ''Or Adonai''.
This confers on the soul that perfection in which human happiness consists, and endows the soul with immortality.
In Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah Chaps.
He says that if one were to examine existence only in terms of humanity, then that person may observe evil to dominate good, but if one looks at the whole of the universe, then he sees good is significantly more common than evil (Guide 3:12).
** The Introduction to Mishnah Sanhedrin, chapter ten (''Perek Helek''), is an eschatological essay that concludes with Maimonides's famous creed ("the thirteen principles of the Torah").
May a man never be like this, but rather, let his soul be what stops him from acting in such a manner, that is to say, his inner human form given to man by God at the hour of Creation – if it were perfected, it will prevent him from whatever thing that withholds from him perfection (i.e., the betterment of his condition), which things are called deficiencies, but it will spurn him on in whatever is considered wholesome, which things are the virtues.
His full Hebrew name is Rabbi Mosheh ben Maimon (), whose acronym forms "Rambam" (רמב"ם).
Rather, divine interaction is by way of angels, whom Maimonides often regards to be metaphors for the laws of nature, the principles by which the physical universe operates, or Platonic eternal forms.
God did not create evil, rather God created good, and evil exists where good is absent (Guide 3:10).
* ''Guide for the Perplexed'', a philosophical work harmonising and differentiating Aristotle's philosophy and Jewish theology.
The work illustrates the essentials of Aristotelian logic to be found in the teachings of the great Arabic philosophers such as Avicenna and, above all, Al-Farabi, "the Second Master," the "First Master" being Aristotle.
Some more acculturated Jews in the century that followed his death, particularly in Spain, sought to apply Maimonides's Aristotelianism in ways that undercut traditionalist belief and observance, giving rise to an intellectual controversy in Spanish and southern French Jewish circles.
"… 'The days of the Messiah' (i.e., the Messianic Era) is a timeframe in which the kingdom shall return to Israel, and they (i.e., the people of Israel) will return to the Land of Israel, and the king who shall stand-up will establish the place of his kingdom in Zion, whose name shall be extolled and it will reach unto the ends of the earth, being even greater than Solomon's kingdom, and the nations will enter a covenant of peace with him, and all lands shall serve him on account of the abundance of his righteousness, and for the wondrous things that shall be revealed through him; whosoever shall rise-up against him, the Lord will cut him off and deliver him into his hands.
There were two main reasons for this opposition.
Beyond scriptural similarities, Michael Pollak comments the Jews' Pentateuch was divided into 53 sections according to the Persian style.
Against his brother's wishes, David boarded a ship for India, since great wealth was to be found in the East.
Spinoza's doctrine of immortality was strikingly similar.
** The Introduction to the Mishnah deals with the nature of the oral law, the distinction between the prophet and the sage, and the organizational structure of the Mishnah.
The Rambam is the greatest of the decisors, and all the communities of the Land of Israel and the Arabistan and the Maghreb practice according to his word, and accepted him as their rabbi."
First, Maimonides had refrained from adding references to his work for the sake of brevity; second, in the introduction, he gave the impression of wanting to "cut out" study of the Talmud, to arrive at a conclusion in Jewish law, although Maimonides later wrote that this was not his intent.
Maimonides contests the common view that evil outweighs good in the world.
Because of his path-finding synthesis of Aristotle and Biblical faith, Maimonides had a fundamental influence on the great Christian theologian Saint Thomas Aquinas.
However, the ''Mishneh Torah'' was written in Hebrew.
Each chapter offers a cluster of associated notions.
The work proceeds rationally through a lexicon of philosophical terms to a summary of higher philosophical topics, in 14 chapters corresponding to Maimonides's birthdate of 14 Nissan.
In reaction, the more radical interpretations of Maimonides were defeated.
In his ''Guide for the Perplexed'', Maimonides writes that all the evil that exists within human beings stems from their individual attributes, while all good comes from a universally shared humanity (Guide 3:8).
He became a prominent philosopher and polymath in both the Jewish and Islamic worlds.
Throughout his career, he defended his father's writings against all critics.
To commemorate the 800th anniversary of his death, Harvard University issued a memorial volume.
Until very recently, it was accepted that Maimonides wrote the ''Treatise on logic'' in his twenties or even in his teen years.
His full Arabic name is Abū ʿImrān Mūsā bin Maimūn bin ʿUbaidallāh al-Qurtabī ( ابو عمران موسى بن ميمون بن عبيد الله القرطبي ) or Mūsā bin Maymūn () for short.
Maimonides displayed in his interactions with patients attributes that today would be called intercultural awareness and respect for the patient's autonomy.
872–950/951), Avicenna (c. 980 – 1037), and his contemporary Averroes (1126–1198), he in his turn influenced other prominent Arab and Muslim philosophers and scientists.
He succeeded Maimonides as Nagid and as court physician at the age of eighteen.
The number 14 recurs in many of Maimonides's works.
Maimonides also writes, that those who claimed that he believed the verses of the Hebrew Bible referring to the resurrection were only allegorical, were spreading falsehoods and "revolting" statements.
The ''Oath of Maimonides'' is a document about the medical calling and recited as a substitute for the ''Oath of Hippocrates''.
His rabbinic writings are valued as fundamental and unparalleled resources for religious Jews today.
** The Introduction to Tractate ''Avot'' (popularly called ''The Eight Chapters'') is an ethical treatise.
It has been suggested that his "incessant travail" undermined his own health and brought about his death at 69 (although this is a normal lifespan).
Following this sojourn in Morocco, together with two sons, he sojourned in the Holy Land, before settling in Fustat, Egypt around 1168.
Moreover, seeing that this is the desired end and purpose of one's life, it is not fitting that he who wishes to serve his Maker out of love should serve Him for the sole intent of attaining the next world, as we have premised earlier, but rather that he may serve Him in the manner that I shall prescribe, ''viz''., that if he has already come to believe that knowledge has been imparted unto the prophets from God, and that by it (i.e., that knowledge) He has revealed to them that the coveted virtues are such and such, and the faults are such and such, it behooves him, therefore, by reason of his being a moderate man of reason, to draw near to the virtues and to shun that which is deficient.
The knowledge of God is a form of knowledge which develops in us the immaterial intelligence, and thus confers on man an immaterial, spiritual nature.
The Tomb of Maimonides on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee in Israel marks his grave.
He responded that man should believe only what can be supported either by rational proof, by the evidence of the senses, or by trustworthy authority.
A popular medieval saying that also served as his epitaph states, ''From Mosheh (of the Torah) to Mosheh (Maimonides) there was none like Mosheh.''
He took the premise that an omnipotent and good God exists.
Moreover, it is that which is said: 'Be ye not like a horse, or like a mule, which has no understanding; who must be held back by bit and bridle' (Psalm 32:9), meaning, the thing that prevents them from idleness and uncontrollable conduct is an external thing like a bit and a bridle.
He affirms that he had studied astrology, and that it does not deserve to be described as a science.
To justify the existence of evil, assuming God is both omnipotent and omnibenevolent, Maimonides postulates that one who created something by causing its opposite not to exist is not the same as creating something that exists; so evil is merely the absence of good.
There is also Maimonides School in Brookline, Massachusetts, Maimonides Academy School in Los Angeles, California, the Brauser Maimonides Academy in Hollywood, Florida, and Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, New York.
These documents may not have been written by Maimonides, but later.
The ''Prayer'' appeared first in print in 1793 and has been attributed to Marcus Herz, a German physician, pupil of Immanuel Kant.
They used Maimonides's works on this subject to back up their position.
Maimonides wrote on theodicy (the philosophical attempt to reconcile the existence of a God with the existence of evil).
These writings often included considerable philosophical chapters or discussions in support of halakhic observance; David Hartman observes that Maimonides clearly expressed "the traditional support for a philosophical understanding of God both in the Aggadah of Talmud and in the behavior of the hasid the pious Jew."
A Berber dynasty, the Almohads, conquered Córdoba in 1148, and abolished ''dhimmi'' status (i.e., state protection of life and wealth) in some of their territories.
Chapter two of the treatise on resurrection refers to those who believe that the world to come involves physically resurrected bodies.
Throughout the centuries, it has been widely studied and its halakhic decisions have weighed heavily in later rulings.
But Spinoza teaches that the way to attain the knowledge which confers immortality is the progress from sense-knowledge through scientific knowledge to philosophical intuition of all things ''sub specie æternitatis'', while Maimonides holds that the road to perfection and immortality is the path of duty as described in the Torah and the rabbinic understanding of the oral law.
Maimonides writes that the second type of evil is relatively rare, and that humanity brings it upon itself.
His fourteen-volume ''Mishneh Torah'' still carries significant canonical authority as a codification of Talmudic law.
His brilliant adaptation of Aristotelian thought to Biblical faith deeply impressed later Jewish thinkers, and had an unexpected immediate historical impact.
Following this triumph, the Maimonides family, hoping to increase their wealth, gave their savings to his brother, the youngest son David ben Maimon, a merchant.
See Negative theology for uses in other religions.
In his medical writings, Maimonides described many conditions, including asthma, diabetes, hepatitis, and pneumonia, and he emphasized moderation and a healthy lifestyle.
Maimonides wrote much on this topic, but in most cases he wrote about the immortality of the soul for people of perfected intellect; his writings were usually ''not'' about the resurrection of dead bodies.
As he goes on to say in this letter, even on the Sabbath he would receive members of the community.
Some Jews at this time taught that Judaism did not require a belief in the physical resurrection of the dead, as the afterlife would be a purely spiritual realm.
Most of Maimonides's works were written in Judeo-Arabic.
Maimonides died on December 12, 1204 (20th of Tevet 4965 ) in Fustat.
In the view of Maimonides (taken from Avicenna), God does not become angry with people, as God has no human passions; but it is important for them to believe God does, so that they desist from doing wrong.
He describes fourteen shorashim (roots or principles) to guide his selection.
To prevent the majority of evil which stems from harm we do to ourselves, we must learn how to ignore our bodily urges.
During this time, he composed his acclaimed commentary on the Mishnah in the years 1166–1168.
'''Moshe ben Maimon''' ( ''Moshe ben Maymon''), or '''Mūsā bin Maymūn''' (), acronymed '''Rambam''' (;  – for "'''''R'''abbeinu '''M'''oshe '''B'''en '''M'''aimon''", "Our Rabbi/Teacher Moses Son of Maimon"), and Graecized (and subsequently Latinized) '''Moses Maimonides''' ( ), a preeminent medieval Sephardic Jewish philosopher and astronomer, became one of the most prolific and influential Torah scholars and physicians of the Middle Ages.
* Sefer Ha'shamad (letter of Martydom)
He also points out:
The Messiah will then die as all men, and his son, and his son's son will rule after him.
Maimonides and his wife, the daughter of Mishael ben Yeshayahu Halevi, had one child who survived into adulthood, Avraham, who became recognized as a great scholar.
Although it no longer functions as a Jewish house of worship, it is open to the public.
Maimonides distinguishes two kinds of intelligence in man, the one material in the sense of being dependent on, and influenced by, the body, and the other immaterial, that is, independent of the bodily organism.
At an early age, he developed an interest in sciences and philosophy.
I would go to heal them, and write prescriptions for their illnesses ... until the evening ... and I would be extremely weak."
May there not be many who profess this folly, and let us hope that he will go no farther than this in his folly and believe that the Creator is corporeal.
In his time, many Jews believed that the physical resurrection was identical to the world to come; thus denial of a permanent and universal resurrection was considered tantamount to denying the words of the Talmudic sages.
In March 2008, during the Euromed Conference of Ministers of Tourism, The Tourism Ministries of Israel, Morocco and Spain agreed to work together on a joint project that will trace the footsteps of the Rambam and thus boost religious tourism in the cities of Córdoba, Fez and Tiberias.
He writes "It appears to us on the basis of these verses (Daniel 12:2,13) that those people who will return to those bodies will eat, drink, copulate, beget, and die after a very long life, like the lives of those who will live in the Days of the Messiah."
It is in this manner that a man will acquire the next world with a firm acquisition, while the desired end of every man is the world to come, and all that comes before it is merely human effort.
The author explains the technical meaning of the words used by logicians.
36:26), and there are many similar verses that speak of such matters.
''The Book of Commandments'').
Maimonides thus disassociated the resurrection of the dead from both the World to Come and the Messianic era.
At least amongst Ashkenazi Jews, there was a tendency to ignore his specifically philosophical writings and to stress instead the rabbinic and halakhic writings.
Thus, if a unique event actually occurs, even if it is perceived as a miracle, it is not a violation of the world's order.
Maimonides is sometimes said to be a descendant of King David, although he never made such a claim.
2–4, Maimonides describes angels that are actually created beings.
If he has done this, Lo!
Neither should it seem strange that his kingdom will continue for thousands of years, inasmuch as the Sages have already said that no matter how noble the things that are collected together, when they are but few that are amassed together, they will fall apart.
In the Hebrew versions, the Treatise is called ''The words of Logic'' which describes the bulk of the work.
The first translation of this work into Hebrew was done by Samuel ibn Tibbon in 1204.
For instance, one should not say that God exists in the usual sense of the term; it can be said that God is not non-existent.
Aquinas refers specifically to Maimonides in several of his works, including the ''Commentary on the Sentences''.
* ''Hilkhot ha-Yerushalmi'', a fragment of a commentary on the Jerusalem Talmud, identified and published by Saul Lieberman in 1947.
He is sometimes known as "ha Nesher ha Gadol" (the great eagle) in recognition of his outstanding status as a ''bona fide'' exponent of the Oral Torah.
We should not say that "God is wise"; but we can say that "God is not ignorant," i.e., in some way, God has some properties of knowledge.
This then is what has become clear unto me from all of their words relating to this noble matter, but things that can be easily misconstrued."
* ''Teshuvot'', collected correspondence and responsa, including a number of public letters (on resurrection and the afterlife, on conversion to other faiths, and ''Iggereth Teiman'' – addressed to the oppressed Jewry of Yemen).
His treatises became influential for generations of physicians.
In a letter (discovered later in the Cairo Geniza), he wrote:
This sage, who was revered for his personality as well as for his writings, led a busy life, and wrote many of his works while travelling or in temporary accommodation.
Maimonides was not known as a supporter of mysticism, although a strong intellectual type of mysticism has been discerned in his philosophy.
Maimonides studied Torah under his father Maimon, who had in turn studied under Rabbi Joseph ibn Migash, a student of Isaac Alfasi.
We should not say that "God is One," but we can state that "there is no multiplicity in God's being."
This is not always the case.
Some say, though, that it is likely that Maimonides feigned a conversion to Islam before escaping.
The philosopher/doctor is widely respected in Spain and a statue of him was erected in Córdoba near to the only synagogue in that city to escape destruction during years of persecution.
Maimonides has been memorialized in numerous ways.
Now the greatest advantage at that time will be that we'll have rest from the subjugation of the wicked kingdom, which prevents us from performing that which God has enjoined unto us to do, while knowledge will be vastly increased, as it says: 'For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lo-rd' (Isa.
The meaning of the words is explained and illustrated with examples.
His Jewish texts were:
Meanwhile, battles and wars will come to an end, as it says: 'Nation shall not lift up a sword against nation' (Micha 4:3), while all those who will be in those days will attain to great perfection, by which he will merit the world to come.
Maimonides's Mishneh Torah is considered by Jews even today as one of the chief authoritative codifications of Jewish law and ethics.
Rather, the prophets fervently desired them and the pious men longed for them because of what shall be there of the ingathering of righteous men, and of proper conduct, and wisdom, and the uprightness of the king and his great wisdom and his drawing nigh unto the Creator, just as it was said of him: 'Thou art my son, etc.'
It is acquired as the result of the efforts of the soul to attain a correct knowledge of the absolute, pure intelligence of God.
Eventually, Maimonides felt pressured to write a treatise on the subject, the "''Ma'amar Tehiyyat Hametim''" "The Treatise on Resurrection."
In his discussion of the 13 principles of faith, the first five deal with knowledge of God, the next four deal with prophecy and the Torah, while the last four deal with reward, punishment and the ultimate redemption.
The first type of evil Maimonides states is the rarest form, but arguably of the most necessary—the balance of life and death in both the human and animal worlds itself, he recognizes, is essential to God's plan.
Maimonides admiration for the neo-Platonic commentators led him to doctrines which the later Scholastics did not accept.
Some rabbinic works use this phrase to refer to a messianic era, an era of history here on Earth; in other rabbinic works this phrase refers to a purely spiritual realm.
The intensity of debate spurred Catholic Church interventions against "heresy" and a general confiscation of rabbinic texts.
Maimonides primarily relied upon the science of Aristotle and the teachings of the Talmud, commonly finding basis in the former for the latter.
In 1173/4, Maimonides wrote his famous Iggeret Teman (''Epistle to Yemen'').
Around 1171, Maimonides was appointed the ''Nagid'' of the Egyptian Jewish community.
Maimonides suggested that when people give God anthropomorphic qualities, they do not explain anything more of what God is, because people cannot know the essence.
These are the result of people falling victim to their physical desires.
It was still recognized as a monumental contribution to the systemized writing of halakha.
Therefore, all good is divine invention, and evil both is not and comes secondarily.
He would have completed the mortal chapter related to his existence, and he is then distinguished from the brute beasts; and since he would have become a more perfect man, one of the virtues of man is that no hindrance be found that will hinder him from attaining life for his soul in what is his remaining spiritual existence through her (i.e., the soul's) continued consciousness, and which is the world to come as we have explained.
The loss of this protected status threatened the Jewish and Christian communities with conversion to Islam, death, or exile.
He ridicules the concept that the fate of a man could be dependent upon the constellations; he argues that such a theory would rob life of purpose, and would make man a slave of destiny.
A partial translation of Crescas was produced by Harry Austryn Wolfson of Harvard University in 1929.
In Latin, the Hebrew "ben" (son of) becomes the Greek−style suffix "-ides" to form "Moses Maimonides".
He cites Daniel 12:2 and 12:13 as definitive proofs of physical resurrection of the dead when they state "many of them that sleep in the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life and some to reproaches and everlasting abhorrence" and "But you, go your way till the end; for you shall rest, and will arise to your inheritance at the end of the days."
Maimonides strove to reconcile Aristotelian philosophy and science with the teachings of the Torah.
He was knowledgeable about Greek and Arabic medicine, and followed the principles of humorism in the tradition of Galen.
In return, their opponents claimed that this was outright heresy; for them the afterlife was here on Earth, where God would raise dead bodies from the grave so that the resurrected could live eternally.
Through the ''Guide for the Perplexed'' (which was initially written in Arabic as ''Dalālat al-ḥāʾirīn'') and the philosophical introductions to sections of his commentaries on the Mishna, Maimonides exerted an important influence on the Scholastic philosophers, especially on Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus.
It is remarkable that he managed to write extended treatises, including not only medical and other scientific studies but some of the most systematically thought-through and influential treatises on halakha (rabbinic law) and Jewish philosophy of the Middle Ages.
Here he rejects previous ideas (especially portrayed by Rabbi Yehuda Halevi in "Hakuzari") that in order to become a prophet, God must intervene.
The Treatise duly inventories the terms used by the logician and indicates what they refer to.
Nevertheless, we do not desire the days of the Messiah so that our grain and possessions might increase, or so that we can mount horses, or be engaged in revelry of drink and musical instruments, as those who are confused may think.
In his view, God never violates the laws of nature.
Maimonides's use of apophatic theology is not unique to this time period or to Judaism.
For example, Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite and Maximus the Confessor, Eastern Christian theologians, had developed apophatic theology for Christianity nearly 900 years earlier.
Maimonides was born in Córdoba during what some scholars consider to be the end of the golden age of Jewish culture in the Iberian Peninsula, after the first centuries of the Moorish rule.
Now God has already described his death; he says: 'He shall not tire nor be weary, till he establish judgment in the earth: and the isles shall hope for his law' (Isa.
Maimonidean thought continues to influence traditionally observant Jews.
Maimonides's reconciliation of the philosophical and the traditional has given his legacy an extremely diverse and dynamic quality.
Religious Jews believed in immortality in a spiritual sense, and most believed that the future would include a messianic era and a resurrection of the dead.
In the Holy Land, he prayed at the Temple Mount.
* ''Sefer Hamitzvot'' (trans.
30b), seeing that people will say whenever a man finds something ready and prepared for use in abundance that so-and-so has found baked bread and a cooked dish, the proof of which being what is written: 'And the sons of the stranger shall be your field workers and vine dressers' (Isa.
For example, one of the Learning Communities at the Tufts University School of Medicine bears his name.
Maimonides directed his brother to procure goods only at the Sudanese port of ‘Aydhab.
Meaning, a time of ploughing and a time of reaping will be there; Wherefore, it was for this reason that that erudite man who said these things was angered at his disciple when he failed to understand their import and had thought rather that these things should be understood in their plain sense, and he was compelled to answer him in a way that he'd understand, even though that wasn't the proper response to give him.
The Scholastics agreed that no predicate is adequate to express the nature of God, but they did not say that no affirmative term could be applied to God.
In his work devoted to the Treatise, Rémi Brague stresses the fact that Al-Farabi is the only philosopher mentioned therein.
He read those Greek philosophers accessible in Arabic translations, and was deeply immersed in the sciences and learning of Islamic culture.
However, instead of denying the resurrection, or maintaining the current dogma, Maimonides posited a third way: That resurrection had nothing to do with the messianic era (here in this world) or with Olam Haba (עולם הבא) (the purely spiritual afterlife).
* ''Commentary on the Mishna'' (Hebrew ''Pirush Hamishnayot'', Arabic ''Kitab al-Siraj''),  written in Judeo-Arabic.
At the end of each chapter, the author carefully draws up the list of words studied.
