Maine's original capital was Portland, Maine's largest city, until it was moved to Augusta in 1832 to make it more central within the state.
Spanish is the third-most-spoken language in Maine, after English and French .
Long-standing disagreements over land speculation and settlements led to Maine residents and their allies in Massachusetts proper forcing an 1807 vote in the Massachusetts Assembly on permitting Maine to secede; the vote failed.
In the 1936 presidential election, Franklin D. Roosevelt received the electoral votes of every state other than Maine and Vermont; these were the only two states in the nation that never voted for Roosevelt in any of his presidential campaigns, though Maine was closely fought in 1940 and 1944.
Maine is an alcoholic beverage control state.
Maine receives passenger jet service at its two largest airports, the Portland International Jetport in Portland, and the Bangor International Airport in Bangor.
Maine's U.S. senators are Republican Susan Collins and Independent Angus King.
The ''Downeaster'' passenger train, operated by Amtrak, provides passenger service between Brunswick and Boston's North Station, with stops in Freeport, Portland, Old Orchard Beach, Saco, and Wells.
* The smallest town by population is Frye Island, a resort town which reported zero year-round population in the 2000 Census; one plantation, Glenwood Plantation, Maine, also reported a permanent population of zero.
"MAINE" appears in the Domesday Book of 1086 in reference to the county of Dorset, which is today Broadmayne, just southeast of Dorchester.
* Acadia National Park near Bar Harbor
Maine has voted for the Democratic candidate in six successive presidential elections, casting its votes for Bill Clinton twice, Al Gore in 2000, John Kerry in 2004, and Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012.
Every other state except Nebraska gives all its electoral votes to the candidate who wins the popular vote in the state at large, without regard to performance within districts.
The current attorney general of Maine is Janet Mills.
In the forested areas of the interior lies much uninhabited land, some of which does not have formal political organization into local units (a rarity in New England).
As of 2013 the organized municipalities of Maine consist of 23 cities, 431 towns, and 34 plantations.
The remainder of the state, including the North Woods, is covered by the New England-Acadian forests.
The French named the entire area Acadia, including the portion that later became the state of Maine.
Both are served daily by many major airlines to destinations such as New York, Atlanta, and Orlando.
These airports are served by Cape Air with Cessna 402s and Penair with Saab 340s.
A number of English settlements were established along the coast of Maine in the 1620s, although the rugged climate, deprivations, and conflict with the local peoples caused many to fail over the years.
The Northwest Aroostook, Maine unorganized territory in the northern part of the state, for example, has an area of  and a population of 10, or one person for every .
Maine's industrial outputs consist chiefly of paper, lumber and wood products, electronic equipment, leather products, food products, textiles, and bio-technology.
Over one quarter of the population of Lewiston, Waterville, and Biddeford are Franco-American.
There is a continental climate throughout the state, even in coastal areas such as its most populous city of Portland.
The first English settlement was the short-lived Popham Colony, established by the Plymouth Company in 1607.
Maine is one of seven states that do not have a lieutenant governor.
French-speakers are the state's chief linguistic minority; the 2000 Census reported 92.25% of Maine residents aged five and older spoke only English at home.
American and British forces contended for Maine's territory during the American Revolution and the War of 1812, and British forces occupied eastern Maine in both conflicts.
The governor is Republican Paul LePage.
* The largest town by population is Brunswick (pop.
The first English settlement in Maine was established by the Plymouth Company at Popham in 1607, the same year as the settlement at Jamestown, Virginia.
Inland are lakes, rivers, forests, and mountains.
During the 18th and 19th centuries, wooden shipbuilding of this sort made up a sizable portion of the economy.
They were relocated at St. Francis, Canada, which was destroyed by Rogers' Rangers in 1759, and is now Odanak.
+Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for selected cities in Maine
The secession and formation of the state of Maine as the 23rd state occurred on March 15, 1820, as part of the Missouri Compromise, which geographically limited the spread of slavery and enabled the admission to statehood of Missouri the following year, keeping a balance between slave and free states.
Coastal areas are moderated somewhat by the Atlantic Ocean, resulting in milder winters and cooler summers in immediate coastal areas.
Precipitation in Maine is evenly distributed year-round, but with a slight summer maximum in northern/northwestern Maine and a slight late-fall or early-winter maximum along the coast due to "nor'easters" or intense cold-season storms.
Maine rarely sees tropical cyclones.
Maine's general sales tax rate is 5.5%.
In 1819, Massachusetts agreed to permit secession if voters in Maine approved.
The coastal areas of western Maine first became the Province of Maine in a 1622 land patent.
50 at the 2010 census).
The UT land area is slightly over one half the entire area of the State of Maine.
Daytime highs are generally in the  range throughout the state in July, with overnight lows in the high 50s °F (around 15&nbsp;°C).
Although Democrats have carried the state in presidential elections in recent years, Republicans have largely maintained their control of the state's U.S. Senate seats, with Edmund Muskie, William Hathaway and George J. Mitchell being the only Maine Democrats serving in the U.S. Senate in the past fifty years.
The Androscoggin were a tribe in the Abenaki nation.
The next smallest town with a population listed in that census is Beddington (pop.
The extreme depth and steep drop-off allow large ships to navigate almost the entire length of the sound.
European contact with what is now called Maine started around 1200 CE when Norwegians interacted with the native Penobscot in present-day Hancock County, most likely through trade.
Maine is the number one US producer of low-bush blueberries (Vaccinium angustifolium).
The state is a popular destination for sport hunting (particularly deer, moose and bear), sport fishing, snowmobiling, skiing, boating, camping and hiking, among other activities.
The territory of Maine was confirmed as part of Massachusetts when the United States was formed, although the final border with British territory was not established until the Webster–Ashburton Treaty of 1842.
January temperatures range from highs near  on the southern coast to overnight lows averaging below  in the far north.
* Appalachian National Scenic Trail
UMaine was founded in 1865 and is the state's only land grant and sea grant college.
Private schools are less common than public schools.
In 2011, 89.0% of all births in the state were to non-Hispanic white parents.
* Roosevelt Campobello International Park near Lubec
Maine was much fought over by the French, English and allied natives during the 17th and early 18th centuries, who conducted raids against each other, taking captives for ransom or, in some cases, adoption by Native American tribes.
For instance, in early 1692, the Abenaki raided York, killing about 100 of the English settlers and taking another estimated 80 villagers hostage.
Areas under the protection and management of the National Park Service include:
There are jagged rocks and cliffs and many bays and inlets.
Interstate&nbsp;95 (I-95) travels through Maine, as well as its easterly branch I-295 and spurs 195, 395 and the unsigned I-495.
The capital is Augusta.
It also has the highest percentage of non-Hispanic whites of any state, at 94.4% of the total population, according to the 2010 Census.
After the British defeated the French in Acadia in the 1740s, the territory from the Penobscot River east fell under the nominal authority of the Province of Nova Scotia, and together with present-day New Brunswick formed the Nova Scotia county of Sunbury, with its court of general sessions at Campobello.
Beginning around 1880, Portland's rail link and ice-free port made it Canada's principal winter port, until the aggressive development of Halifax, Nova Scotia, in the mid-1900s.
They captured the governor's office as well as majorities in both chambers of the state legislature for the first time since the early 1970s.
- News|accessdate=May 5, 2015}}
Along the famous rock-bound coast of Maine are lighthouses, beaches, fishing villages, and thousands of offshore islands, including the Isles of Shoals which straddle the New Hampshire border.
Probate judges serve part-time and are elected by the voters of each county for four-year terms.
The University of Maine is located in the town of Orono and is the flagship of Maine.
It is known for its jagged, rocky coastline; low, rolling mountains; heavily forested interior, and picturesque waterways; and also its seafood cuisine, especially clams and lobster.
Maine does not have an official language, but the most widely spoken language in the state is English.
Essential Air Service also subsidizes service to a number of smaller airports in Maine, bringing small turboprop aircraft to regional airports such as the Augusta State Airport, Hancock County-Bar Harbor Airport, Knox County Regional Airport, and the Northern Maine Regional Airport at Presque Isle.
In 1625, Charles de Saint-Étienne de la Tour erected Fort Pentagouet to protect Castine.
'''Maine''' (; ) is a state in the New England region of the United States.
A new theory, put forward by Carol B. Smith Fisher in 2002, is that Sir Ferdinando Gorges chose the name in 1622 to honor the village where his ancestors first lived in England, rather than the province in France.
Maine also has 3 Reservations: Indian Island, Indian Township Reservation, and Pleasant Point Indian Reservation.
Maine has had two independent governors recently (James B. Longley, 1975–1979 and Angus King, 1995–2003).
Maine has fewer days of thunderstorms than any other state east of the Rockies, with most of the state averaging less than 20&nbsp;days of thunderstorms a year.
Annual precipitation varies from  in Presque Isle, to  in Acadia National Park.
* Saint Croix Island International Historic Site at Calais
West Quoddy Head, in Lubec, Maine, is the easternmost point of land in the 48 contiguous states.
Some of the larger companies that do maintain headquarters in Maine include Fairchild Semiconductor in South Portland; IDEXX Laboratories, in Westbrook; Hannaford Bros. Co. in Scarborough, Unum in Portland; TD Bank, in Portland; L.L.Bean in Freeport; Cole Haan and DeLorme, both located in Yarmouth.
* Maine Acadian Culture in St. John Valley
On May 6, 2009, Maine became the fifth state to legalize same-sex marriage; however, the law was repealed by voters on November 3, 2009.
Collectively these 488 organized municipalities cover less than half of the state's territory.
The state also levies charges of 7% on lodging and prepared food and 10% on short-term auto rentals.
Bowdoin College is a liberal arts college founded in 1794 in Brunswick, making it the oldest institution of higher learning in the state.
Carved by glaciers, Somes Sound is considered to be the only fjord on the eastern seaboard and reaches depths of .
* The largest municipality in Maine, by population, is the city of Portland (pop.
Census figures show that Maine has the highest percentage of people speaking French at home of any state: 5.28% of Maine households are French-speaking, compared with 4.68% in Louisiana, which is the second highest state.
The French established two Jesuit missions: one on Penobscot Bay in 1609, and the other on Mount Desert Island in 1613.
Maine's agricultural outputs include poultry, eggs, dairy products, cattle, wild blueberries, apples, maple syrup and maple sugar.
He made the unsubstantiated allegation that the Province of Maine was a compliment to the queen of Charles I, Henrietta Maria, who once "owned" the Province of Maine in France.
A second settlement was attempted at a place called York, in 1623 by English explorer and naval Captain Christopher Levett, granted  by King Charles I of England.
The municipalities of Eastport and Lubec are, respectively, the easternmost city and town in the United States.
In 1623, the English naval captain Christopher Levett, exploring the New England coast, wrote: "The first place I set my foote upon in New England was the Isle of Shoals, being Ilands  in the sea, above two Leagues from the Mayne."
The Strong Wood Products plant produced 20 million toothpicks a day.
Maine is also the home of The Jackson Laboratory, the world's largest non-profit mammalian genetic research facility and the world's largest supplier of genetically purebred mice.
The first known record of the name appears in an August 10, 1622, land charter to Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain John Mason, English Royal Navy veterans, who were granted a large tract in present-day Maine that Mason and Gorges "intend to name the Province of Maine".
The state's record high temperature is , set in July 1911, at North Bridgton.
Western Maine aquifers and springs are a major source of bottled water.
The three colleges collectively form the Colby-Bates-Bowdoin Consortium and are ranked among the best colleges in the United States; often placing in the top 10% of all liberal arts colleges.
In 1992, as an independent candidate, Perot came in second to Democrat Bill Clinton, despite the longtime presence of the Bush family summer home in Kennebunkport.
Whatever the origin, the name was fixed for English settlers in 1665 when the English King's Commissioners ordered that the "Province of Maine" be entered from then on in official records.
Geologists describe this type of landscape as a "drowned coast", where a rising sea level has invaded former land features, creating bays out of valleys and islands out of mountain tops.
Preliminary data from the USDA for 2012 also indicate Maine was the largest blueberry producer of the major blueberry producing states in the US, with 91,100,000 lbs.
The state legislature in 2001 adopted a resolution establishing Franco-American Day, which stated that the state was named after the former French province of Maine.
Bates College in Lewiston was founded in 1855 making it the third oldest institution in the state and the oldest coeducational college in New England.
* The smallest municipality by land area is the plantation of Monhegan Island, at .
Archeological evidence suggests that Norwegians in Greenland returned to North America for several centuries after the initial discovery to collect timber and to trade, with the most relevant evidence being the Maine Penny, a 10th-century Norwegian coin found at a Native American dig site in 1954.
Tourism and outdoor recreation play a major and increasingly important role in Maine's economy.
In 2010, a study named Maine as the least religious state in the United States.
As Maine entered the 18th century, only a half dozen European settlements had survived.
The executive branch is responsible for the execution of the laws created by the Legislature and is headed by the Governor of Maine (currently Paul LePage).
One of these yards was located in Pennellville Historic District in what is now Brunswick, Maine.
Maine has a longstanding tradition of being home to many shipbuilding companies.
The judicial branch is responsible for interpreting state laws.
Brunswick Landing, formerly Naval Air Station Brunswick, is also in Maine.
This visual contrast of forested slopes sweeping down to the sea has been summed up by American poet Edna St. Vincent Millay of Rockland and Camden, Maine, in "Renascence":
The upper Saint John River valley area was once part of the so-called Republic of Madawaska, before the frontier was decided in the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842.
To the south and east is the Atlantic Ocean and to the north and northeast is New Brunswick, a province of Canada.
A large number of private elementary schools with under 20 students exist, but most private high schools in Maine can be described as "semi-private."
Maine is the only state to border only one other state (New Hampshire to the west).
Private schools in Maine are funded independently of the state and its furthered domains.
In addition, U.S. Route&nbsp;1 (US&nbsp;1) starts in Fort Kent and travels to Florida.
A citizen of Maine is known as a "Mainer", though the term is often reserved for those whose roots in Maine go back at least three generations.
Winters are cold and snowy throughout the state, and are especially severe in the northern parts of Maine.
As with other state legislatures, the Maine Legislature can by a two-thirds majority vote from both the House and Senate override a gubernatorial veto.
The Iapetus Suture runs through the north and west of the state, being underlain by the ancient Laurentian terrane, and the south and east underlain by the Avalonian terrane.
It closed in May 2003.
Acadia National Park is the only national park in New England.
Other such examples of shipbuilding families were the Skolfields and the Morses.
All judges except for probate judges serve full-time, are nominated by the Governor and confirmed by the Legislature for terms of seven years.
At the time of European arrival in what is now Maine, several Algonquian-speaking peoples inhabited the area.
In coastal Maine, the late spring and summer months are usually driest&nbsp;– a rarity across the Eastern United States.
There are particularly high concentrations of French in the northern part of Maine in Aroostook County, which is part of a cultural region known as Acadia that goes over the border into New Brunswick.
The history of the name of Maine began with James Sullivan's 1795 "History of the District of Maine".
US&nbsp;2A connects Old Town and Orono, primarily serving the University of Maine campus.
Some early spellings are: MAINE 1086, MEINE 1200, MEINES 1204, MAYNE 1236.
Commercial fishing, once a mainstay of the state's economy, maintains a presence, particularly lobstering and groundfishing.
Freight service throughout the state is provided by a handful of regional and shortline carriers: Pan Am Railways (formerly known as Guilford Rail System), which operates the former Boston & Maine and Maine Central railroads; St. Lawrence and Atlantic Railroad; Maine Eastern Railroad; Central Maine and Quebec Railway; and New Brunswick Southern Railway.
A reconfirmed and enhanced April 3, 1639, charter from England's King Charles I gave Sir Ferdinando Gorges increased powers over his new province and stated that it "shall forever hereafter, be called and named the PROVINCE OR COUNTIE OF MAINE, and not by any other name or names whatsoever..."  Maine is the only state whose name has exactly one syllable.
Maine is the 39th most extensive and the 42nd most populous of the 50 U.S. states.
(For more information see extreme points of the United States.)
Initially, several tracts along the coast of New England were referred to as ''Main'' or ''Maine'' (cf.
The treaty concluding revolution was ambiguous about Maine's boundary with British North America.
Maine is the easternmost state in the contiguous United States, and the northernmost east of the Great Lakes.
Naval shipbuilding and construction remain key as well, with Bath Iron Works in Bath and Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery.
Eastern Maine north of the Kennebec River was more sparsely settled and was known in the 17th century as the Territory of Sagadahock.
The state's two members of the United States House of Representatives are Democrat Chellie Pingree and Republican Bruce Poliquin.
* The largest municipality by land area is the town of Allagash, at .
Maine state politicians, Republicans and Democrats alike, are noted for having more moderate views than many in the national wings of their respective parties.
Aroostook County is known for its potato crops.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that Maine's total gross state product for 2010 was $52 billion.
:I turned and looked the other way,
Maine has very few large companies that maintain headquarters in the state, and that number has fallen due to consolidations and mergers, particularly in the pulp and paper industry.
There are thirty institutions of higher learning in Maine.
Mount Katahdin is both the northern terminus of the Appalachian Trail, which extends southerly to Springer Mountain, Georgia, and the southern terminus of the new International Appalachian Trail which, when complete, will run to Belle Isle, Newfoundland and Labrador.
Maine is the least densely populated U.S. state east of the Mississippi River.
In the 1930s, Maine was one of very few states which retained Republican sentiments.
The state also has the highest percentage of French-speakers of any state.
These features also have made it attractive for boat builders, such as the prestigious Hinckley Yachts.
The same year, Castine was established by Claude de La Tour.
Maine is the easternmost state in the United States in both its extreme points and its geographic center.
For thousands of years, indigenous peoples were the only inhabitants of the territory that is now Maine.
That settlement also failed.
Maine was physically separate from the rest of Massachusetts.
By analyzing the type of granite, geologists were able to discover that glaciers carried Bubble Rock to its present location from near the town of Lucerne, Maine —  away.
The 20th Maine, under the command of Colonel Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain, defended Little Round Top at the Battle of Gettysburg.
The term "Mainiac" is considered by some to be derogatory, but embraced with pride by others, and is used for a variety of organizations and for events such as the YMCA Mainiac Sprint Triathlon & Duathlon.
Smaller numbers of various other groups, including Irish, Italian and Polish, have settled throughout the state since the late 19th and early 20th century immigration waves.
Much of Maine's geomorphology was created by extended glacial activity at the end of the last ice age.
Maine has an income tax structure containing two brackets, 6.5% to 7.95% of personal income.
The largest toothpick manufacturing plant in the United States used to be located in Strong, Maine.
There are also branch campuses in Augusta, Farmington, Fort Kent, Machias, and Presque Isle.
Ross Perot achieved a great deal of success in Maine in the presidential elections of 1992 and 1996.
Historically, Maine ports played a key role in national transportation.
The administration of property taxes is handled by the local assessor in incorporated cities and towns, while property taxes in the unorganized territories are handled by the State Tax Assessor.
Maine is in the temperate broadleaf and mixed forests biome.
In the 1960s, Maine began to lean toward the Democrats, especially in presidential elections.
Since 1969, two of Maine's four electoral votes have been awarded based on the winner of the statewide election; the other two go to the highest vote-getter in each of the state's two congressional districts.
Other theories mention earlier places with similar names, or claim it is a nautical reference to the mainland.
About 200 years earlier, from the settlements of Iceland and Greenland, Norwegians had discovered America and attempted to settle areas such as Newfoundland, but failed to establish a permanent settlement there.
Administration, services, licensing, and ordinances are handled by the state government.
The main function of these ships was to transport either cargos or passengers overseas.
Prominent glacial features include Somes Sound and Bubble Rock, both part of Acadia National Park on Mount Desert Island.
The term "Downeaster" may be applied to residents of the northeast coast of the state.
Maine is both the northernmost state in New England and the largest, accounting for almost half the region's entire land area.
Formerly a large support base for the U.S. Navy, the BRAC campaign initiated the Naval Air Station's closing, despite a government-funded effort to upgrade its facilities.
The collegiate system of Maine also includes numerous baccalaureate colleges such as: the Maine Maritime Academcy (MMA), Unity College, and Thomas College.
The Eastport Municipal Airport, for example, is a city-owned public-use airport with 1,200 general aviation aircraft operations each year from single-engine and ultralight aircraft.
* The smallest city by population is Eastport (pop.
This was quoted by Maine historians until the 1845 biography of that queen by Agnes Strickland established that she had no connection to the Province of Maine in France; further, King Charles I married Henrietta Maria in 1625, three years after the name Maine first appeared on the charter.
:Was three long mountains and a wood;
An organized municipality has a form of elected local government which administers and provides local services, keeps records, collects licensing fees, and can pass locally binding ordinances, among other responsibilities of self-government.
