Malawi is among the world's least-developed countries.
Many analysts believe that economic progress for Malawi depends on its ability to control population growth.
In 1964 the protectorate over Nyasaland was ended and Nyasaland became an independent country under Queen Elizabeth II with the new name Malawi.
Centuries later in 1891 the area was colonized by the British.
Malawi is among the world's least-developed countries.
Malawi has been making progress on decreasing child mortality and reducing the incidences of HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases; however, the country has been "performing dismally" on reducing maternal mortality and promoting gender equality.
Cape Maclear is a part of the Lake, however the water in this area is considerably different compared to other parts of the lake.
The country's heavy reliance on tobacco places a heavy burden on the economy as world prices decline and the international community increases pressure to limit tobacco production.
The industrial production growth rate is estimated at 10% (2009).
, there were 3.952 million cell phones and 173,500&nbsp;landline telephones in Malawi.
If created, the Senate would provide representation for traditional leaders and a variety of geographic districts, as well as special interest groups including the disabled, youth and women.
In 2008, Malawi began testing cars that ran solely on ethanol, and initial results are promising, and the country is continuing to increase its use of ethanol.
It is bordered by Zambia to the northwest, Tanzania to the northeast, and Mozambique on the east, south and west.
The main industries are tobacco, tea and sugar processing, sawmill products, cement and consumer goods.
Corruption within security forces is also an issue.
A second vice president may be appointed by the president if so chosen, although they must be from a different party.
There are currently nine political parties, with the Democratic Progressive Party acting as the ruling party and the Malawi Congress Party and the United Democratic Front acting as the main opposition parties in the National Assembly.
89,000), evangelicals and Seventh-day Adventists.
The Malawi army originated from British colonial units formed before independence, and is now made up of two rifle regiments and one parachute regiment.
Traditional music and dances can be seen at initiation rites, rituals, marriage ceremonies and celebrations.
The concept of a Malawian nationality has begun to form around a predominantly rural people who are generally conservative and traditionally nonviolent.
Two years later it became a republic.
By 1700, however, the empire had broken up into areas controlled by many individual ethnic groups, which was noted by the Portuguese in their information gathering.
In the mountainous sections of Malawi surrounding the Rift Valley, plateaus rise generally  above sea level, although some rise as high as  in the north.
To the south of Lake Malawi lie the Shire Highlands, gently rolling land at approximately  above sea level.
Sugar, coffee, corn, potatoes, sorghum, cattle and goats are also important components of the cuisine and economy.
In December 2000, the IMF stopped aid disbursements due to corruption concerns, and many individual donors followed suit, resulting in an almost 80% drop in Malawi's development budget.
These influxes of refugees have placed a strain on the Malawian economy but have also drawn significant inflows of aid from other countries.
This discipline has since evaporated as shown by the purchase in 2009 of a private presidential jet followed almost immediately by a nationwide fuel shortage which was officially blamed on logistical problems, but was more likely due to the hard currency shortage caused by the jet purchase.
However, oppositional parties like the Malawi Freedom Movement of Orton Chirwa or the Socialist League of Malawi existed but were founded in exile.
The main agricultural products of Malawi include tobacco, sugarcane, cotton, tea, corn, potatoes, sorghum, cattle and goats.
It consists of army, navy and air force elements.
Following the collapse of apartheid in 1994, diplomatic relationships were made and maintained into 2011 between Malawi and all other African countries.
The name "Malawi" comes from the Maravi, a Bantu people who emigrated from the southern Congo around 1400&nbsp;AD.
This increase is primarily attributed to improved learning materials in schools, better infrastructure and feeding programs that have been implemented throughout the school system.
Education in Malawi comprises eight years of primary education, four years of secondary school and four years of university.
Malawi held its most recent elections in May 2014, with challenger Peter Muthrika defeating incumbent President Joyce Banda.
, Malawi has 31&nbsp;airports, 7 with paved runways and 24 with unpaved runways.
However attendance in secondary school falls to approximately 25%, with attendance rates being slightly higher for males.
Malawi maintains a small standing military of approximately 25,000 men, the Malawian Defence Force.
Raising Malawi also works with the Millennium Villages Project to improve education, health care, infrastructure and agriculture in Malawi.
There are many investment barriers in Malawi, which the government has failed to address, including high service costs and poor infrastructure for power, water, and telecommunications.
The name Malawi comes from the Maravi, an old name of the Nyanja people that inhabit the area.
Missionary and explorer David Livingstone reached Lake Malawi (then Lake Nyasa) in 1859 and identified the Shire Highlands south of the lake as an area suitable for European settlement.
The high rate of infection has resulted in an estimated 5.8% of the farm labor force dying of the disease.
Local government is administered by central government-appointed regional administrators and district commissioners.
Lake Malawi National Park was first listed in 1984 and the Chongoni Rock Art Area was listed in 2006.
Dropout rates are higher for girls than boys, attributed to security problems during the long travel to school, as girls face a higher prevalence of gender-based violence.
However, attendance rates for all children are improving, with enrollment rates for primary schools increased from 58% in 1992 to 75% in 2007, while the number of students who begin in standard one and complete standard five has increased from 64% in 1992 to 86% in 2006.
The protests left 18 people dead and at least 44 others suffering from gunshot wounds.
The surface of Lake Malawi is located at  above sea level, with a maximum depth of , which means the lake bottom is over  below sea level at some points.
It has been reported that this program, championed by the country's president, is radically improving Malawi's agriculture, and causing Malawi to become a net exporter of food to nearby countries.
The main countries that Malawi imports from are South Africa, India, Zambia, Tanzania, the US and China.
The public sector offers free health services and medicines, while non-government organisations offers services and medicines for fees.
Malawi is over  with an estimated population of 16,777,547 (July 2013 est.).
Upon gaining independence it became a one-party state under the presidency of Hastings Banda, who remained president until 1994, when he lost an election.
Despite his political severity, however, Malawi's economy while Banda was president was often cited as an example of how a poor, landlocked, heavily populated, mineral-poor country could achieve progress in both agriculture and industrial development.
The executive includes a president who is both chief of state and head of government, first and second vice presidents and a cabinet.
Lake Malawi is sometimes called the Calendar Lake as it is about  long and  wide.
Over the past century, ethnic distinctions have diminished to the point where there is no significant inter-ethnic friction, although regional divisions still occur.
'''Malawi''' is a democratic, multi-party government, currently under the leadership of Peter Mutharika, who defeated former president Joyce Banda in the 2014 elections, despite alleged poll rigging.
The economy is based on agriculture, and more than one-third of GDP and 90% of export revenues come from this.
According to the Malawi Religion Project run by the University of Pennsylvania in 2010, approximately 68% of the population identify as Christians, 25% as Muslim and 5% as "other".
Malawi has a democratic, multi-party government.
The country is also nicknamed "'''The Warm Heart of Africa'''".
Even though the Federation was semi-independent, the linking provoked opposition from African nationalists, and the NAC gained popular support.
From 1964–2010, and again since 2012, the Flag of Malawi is made up of three equal horizontal stripes of black, red and green with a red rising sun superimposed in the center of the black stripe.
Banda was elected president of the NAC and worked to mobilise nationalist sentiment before being jailed by colonial authorities in 1959.
In 2008, President Mutharika had implemented reforms to address the country's major corruption problem, with at least five senior UDF party members facing criminal charges.
There are four public universities in Malawi namely;Mzuzu, Lilongwe University of Agriculture, UNICAF University,  and natural Resources, University of Malawi and Malawi University of Science and Technology.
, homosexuality has been illegal in Malawi, and in one recent case, a couple perceived as homosexual faced extensive jail time when convicted.
Its highest scores were for safety and rule of law, and its lowest scores were for sustainable economic opportunity, with a ranking of 47th on the continent for educational opportunities.
Most of the Muslim population is Sunni, of either the Qadriya or Sukkutu groups, with few Ahmadiyya Muslims.
There is a high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, which is a drain on the labour force and government expenditures.
Nsima is a food staple made from ground corn and served with side dishes of meat and vegetable.
There is a diverse population of native peoples, Asians and Europeans, with several languages spoken and an array of religious beliefs.
In late 1993 a presidential council was formed, the life presidency was abolished and a new constitution was put into place, effectively ending the MCP's rule.
Peter Mutharika is the current president.
The country also relies heavily on tea, sugar and coffee, with these three plus tobacco making up more than 90% of Malawi's export revenue.
The Federation was dissolved in 1963, and on 6 July 1964, Nyasaland became independent from British rule and renamed itself Malawi.
Malawi also has  of waterways on Lake Malawi and along the Shire River.
However, in 2005, Malawi was the recipient of over US$575&nbsp;million in aid.
there was one government-run radio station and approximately a dozen more owned by private enterprise.
Malawi has two sites listed on the UNESCO World Heritage List.
Malawi tends to view economic and political stability in southern Africa as a necessity, and advocates peaceful solutions through negotiation.
The country makes no significant use of natural gas.
The country was the first in southern Africa to receive peacekeeping training under the African Crisis Response Initiative.
It can be eaten for lunch and dinner.
There were 716,400 Internet users in 2009, and 1099&nbsp;Internet hosts .
Excessive force was seen to be used by police forces, security forces were able to act with impunity, mob violence was occasionally seen, and prison conditions continued to be harsh and sometimes life-threatening.
In the past, the economy has been dependent on substantial economic aid from the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and other countries.
The transition from a one-party state to a multi-party democracy strengthened Malawian ties with the United States.
In April 2012, Mutharika died of a heart attack; the presidential title was taken over by former Vice-President Joyce Banda.
Other exported goods are cotton, peanuts, wood products and apparel.
Agriculture accounts for 35% of GDP, industry for 19% and services for the remaining 46%.
In 1953, Britain linked Nyasaland with Northern and Southern Rhodesia in what was the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, often called the Central African Federation (CAF), for mainly political reasons.
The CCAP is the biggest Protestant denomination in Malawi with 1.3 million members.
In 2011, relations between Malawi and the United Kingdom were damaged when a document was released in which the British ambassador to Malawi criticised President Mutharika.
Ethnic conflict and continuing migration prevented the formation of a society that was uniquely and cohesively Malawian until the dawn of the 20th&nbsp;century.
In May 2012, President Joyce Banda pledged to repeal laws criminalising homosexuality.
Soon after 1600, with the area mostly united under one native ruler, native tribesmen began encountering, trading with and making alliances with Portuguese traders and members of the military.
Its capital is Lilongwe, which is also Malawi's largest city; the second largest is Blantyre, the third is Mzuzu and the fourth largest is its old capital Zomba.
There are also smaller numbers of Anglicans, Baptists, Jehovah's Witnesses (approx.
Basketball is also growing in popularity.
Malawi had one of the highest rates of child marriage in the world.
The country has a pharmaceutical manufacturing industry consisting of four privately owned pharmaceutical companies.
In 2016, the Malawi eHealth Research Centre in partnership with  Mzuzu University and  Luke International will establish Malawi's first fully dedicated eHealth Research Centre.
This new research facility will contribute to improve health and social outcomes for communities in Malawi, by enhancing the quality of research and education in eHealth and healthcare.
The Malawi Air Force was established with German help in 1976, and operates a small number of transport aircraft and multi-purpose helicopters.
Other religious groups within the country include Rastafarians, Hindus, Baha'is (0.2%) and around 300 Jews.
Between November and April the temperature is warm with equatorial rains and thunderstorms, with the storms reaching their peak severity in late March.
The judicial system has been changed several times since Malawi gained independence in 1964.
Other legal issues included limits on free speech and freedom of the press, lengthy pretrial detentions, and arbitrary arrests and detentions.
Lake Malawi takes about a third of Malawi's area.
Although most of the Bantu peoples continued south, some remained permanently and founded ethnic groups based on common ancestry.
The economy is heavily based in agriculture, with a largely rural population.
The country has a Malawian Defence Force that includes an army, a navy and an air wing.
Conventional courts and traditional courts have been used in varying combinations, with varying degrees of success and corruption.
The Portuguese government was also interested in the area so, to prevent Portuguese occupation, the British government sent Harry Johnston as British consul with instructions to make treaties with local rulers beyond Portuguese jurisdiction.
Because of a rise in costs and a decline in sales prices, Malawi is encouraging farmers away from tobacco towards more profitable crops, including spices such as paprika.
, Malawi exports an estimated US$945&nbsp;million in goods per year.
By 1500&nbsp;AD, the tribes had established the Kingdom of Maravi  that reached from north of what is now Nkhotakota to the Zambezi River and from Lake Malawi to the Luangwa River in what is now Zambia.
For the first time in the multi-party era, local elections took place on 21 November 2000, with the UDF party winning 70% of the available seats.
However, the government was seen to make some effort to prosecute security forces who used excessive force.
Around 85% of the population live in rural areas.
The president is elected every five years, and the vice president is chosen by the president.
The country is separated from Tanzania and Mozambique by Lake Malawi.
Malawi has one of the lowest per capita incomes in the world, although economic growth was estimated at 9.7% in 2008 and strong growth is predicted by the International Monetary Fund for 2009.
These floods affected more than a million people across the country, including 336,000 who were displaced, according to UNICEF.
Malawi is a majority Christian country, with a significant Muslim minority, although the exact figures are disputed.
The move away from tobacco is further fueled by likely World Health Organization moves against the particular type of tobacco that Malawi produces, burley leaf.
Malawian cuisine is diverse, with tea and fish being popular features of the country's cuisine.
This concern is especially important because the cultivation of Malawian cannabis, known as Malawi Gold, as a drug has increased significantly.
The Malawian government depends heavily on outside aid to meet development needs, although this need (and the aid offered) has decreased since 2000.
Under pressure for increased political freedom, Banda agreed to a referendum in 1993, where the populace voted for a multi-party democracy.
The members of the cabinet are appointed by the president and can be from either inside or outside of the legislature.
Malawi currently imports an estimated US$1.625&nbsp;billion in goods per year, with the main commodities being food, petroleum products, consumer goods and transportation equipment.
Although the political environment is described as "challenging", , the multi-party system still exists in Malawi.
In 1889, a British protectorate was proclaimed over the Shire Highlands, which was extended in 1891 to include the whole of present-day Malawi as the British Central Africa Protectorate.
Although there was periodic regional conflict fuelled in part by ethnic divisions in the past, by 2008 it had diminished considerably and the concept of a Malawian nationality had re-emerged.
Malawi's dependence on tobacco is growing, with the product jumping from 53% to 70% of export revenues between 2007 and 2008.
The FISP fertilizer subsidy programs ended with President Bingu wa Mutharika's death; the country quickly faced food shortages again, and farmers developed reluctance to purchase fertilizers and other agricultural inputs on the open markets that remained.
The area of Africa now known as Malawi had a very small population of hunter-gatherers before waves of Bantu peoples began emigrating from the north around the 10th century.
In 2012, Malawi was ranked 7th of all countries in sub-Saharan Africa in the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, an index that measures several variables to provide a comprehensive view of the governance of African countries.
In 1944, the Nyasaland African Congress (NAC) was formed by the Africans of Nyasaland to promote local interests to the British government.
Corruption within the government is seen as a major issue, despite the Malawi Anti-Corruption Bureau's (ACB) attempts to reduce it.
Malawi's foreign policy is pro-Western and includes positive diplomatic relations with most countries and participation in several international organisations, including the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Southern African Development Community (SADC), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa COMESA and the African Union AU.
Health insurance schemes have been established since 2000.
There is a very high degree of risk for major infectious diseases, including bacterial and protozoal diarrhoea, hepatitis A, typhoid fever, malaria, plague, schistosomiasis, and rabies.
After March, the rainfall rapidly diminishes and from May to September wet mists float from the highlands into the plateaus, with almost no rainfall during these months.
In 2014 Joyce Banda lost elections (coming third) and was replaced by Peter Mutharika, the brother of the third elected president of Malawi.
The ACB appears to be successful at finding and prosecuting low level corruption, but higher level officials appear to be able to act with impunity.
Malawi is among the smallest countries in Africa.
Malawi has central hospitals, regional and private facilities.
The new document also formally made Malawi a one-party state with the MCP as the only legal party.
The Shire River flows from the south end of the lake and joins the Zambezi River  farther south in Mozambique.
A breath-taking sunset.
In Banda's own words "''I do not want my boys and girls to do what I had to do — to leave their homes and their families and go away from Malawi to get an education''", was the reason for gifting this school to Malawi.
The government spends over $120,000 each year on funerals for civil servants who die of the disease.
The Federation was dissolved in 1963.
There is a high adult prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS, with an estimated 930,000&nbsp;adults (or 11.9% of the population) living with the disease in 2007.
'''Malawi''' (,  or ;  or International Phonetic Alphabet|maláwi), officially the '''Republic of Malawi''', is a landlocked country in southeast Africa that was formerly known as Nyasaland.
, international observers noted issues in several human rights areas.
In 2006, in response to disastrously low agricultural harvests, Malawi began a program of fertiliser subsidies, the Fertilizer Input Subsidy Program (FISP) that were designed to re-energize the land and boost crop production.
Significant numbers of students from Malawi travel to the US for schooling, and the US has active branches of the Peace Corps, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Department of Health and Human Services and the Agency for International Development in Malawi.
In 1961, Banda's Malawi Congress Party (MCP) gained a majority in the Legislative Council elections and Banda became Prime Minister in 1963.
On 26 July 2011, the United States followed suit, freezing a US$350 million grant, citing concerns regarding the government's suppression and intimidation of demonstrators and civic groups, as well as restriction of the press and police violence.
Youth literacy has also increased, moving from 68% in 2000 to 82% in 2007.
Societal issues found included violence against women, human trafficking, and child labour.
In Malawi, primary education is not compulsory, but the Constitution requires that all people be entitled to at least five years of primary education.
Female genital mutilation (FGM), while not widespread, is practiced in some local communities.
Former President Hastings Banda established a pro-Western foreign policy that continued into early 2011.
Donors to Malawi include the United States, Canada, Germany, Iceland, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Ireland, the UK and Flanders (Belgium), as well as international institutions such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the European Union, the African Development Bank and UN organisations.
Other issues that have been raised are lack of adequate legal protection of women from sexual abuse and harassment, very high maternal mortality rate, and abuse related to accusations of witchcraft.
In this area, the Zomba and Mulanje mountain peaks rise to respective heights of .
1800s, when approximately 20,000 people were enslaved and considered to be carried yearly from Nkhotakota to Kilwa where they were sold.
In January 2015 southern Malawi was devastated by the worst floods in living memory, stranding at least 20,000 people.
It is seen to be more harmful to human health than other tobacco products.
Over 100 people were killed and an estimated 64,000 hectares of cropland were washed away.
The Malawian Navy has 3 vessels operating on Lake Malawi, based in Monkey Bay.
There are smaller Presbyterian denominations like the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Malawi and the Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Malawi.
The overall cost to the economy (and healthcare system) is unknown.
An influential opponent of the CAF was Dr. Hastings Banda, a European-trained doctor working in Ghana who was persuaded to return to Nyasaland in 1958 to assist the nationalist cause.
It included good diplomatic relationships with many Western countries.
Malawi's population is made up of the Chewa, Nyanja, Tumbuka, Yao, Lomwe, Sena, Tonga, Ngoni, and Ngonde native ethnic groups, as well as populations of Asians and Europeans.
President Mutharika was seen by some as increasingly autocratic and dismissive of human rights, and in July 2011 protests over high costs of living, devolving foreign relations, poor governance and a lack of foreign exchange reserves erupted.
Improved financial discipline had been seen since 2005 under the leadership of President Mutharika and Financial Minister Gondwe.
Besides these, there are also private universities like; Livingstonia, Malawi Lakeview, Catholic University of Malawi,MIM etc.
The indigenous ethnic groups of Malawi have a rich tradition of basketry and mask carving, and some of these goods are used in traditional ceremonies still performed by native peoples.
The Swahili-Arab slave trade reached its height in the mid-
The main destination locations for the country's exports are South Africa, Germany, Egypt, Zimbabwe, the United States, Russia and the Netherlands.
Since 2005, Malawi has developed several programs that focus on these issues, and the country's outlook appears to be improving, with a rise in the economy, education and healthcare seen in 2007 and 2008.
For almost 30 years, Banda presided over a rigidly authoritarian regime, which ensured that Malawi did not suffer armed conflict.
Malawi maintained close relations with South Africa throughout the Apartheid era, which strained Malawi's relationships with other African countries.
In 2006, international superstar Madonna started Raising Malawi, a foundation that helps AIDS orphans in Malawi, and also financed a documentary about the hardships experienced by Malawian orphans, called I Am Because We Are.
Slightly more dated CIA statistics from 1998 indicate that 82% of the population was Christian, with 13% Muslim.
All money earned by Banda was ploughed back into developing Malawi and was symbolized by the building of a top boarding school called Kamuzu Academy (Eton of Africa).
The Malawian government faces challenges in building and expanding the economy, improving education, healthcare, environmental protection, and becoming financially independent.
As the result of Livingstone's visit, several Anglican and Presbyterian missions were established in the area in the 1860s and 1870s, the African Lakes Company Limited was established in 1878 to set up a trade and transport concern working closely with the missions, and a small mission and trading settlement was established at Blantyre in 1876 and a British Consul took up residence there in 1883.
Malawi is known for growing "the best and finest" cannabis in the world for recreational drug use, according to a recent World Bank report, and cultivation and sales of the crop may contribute to corruption within the police force.
