Traditional Malaysian art was mainly centred on the areas of carving, weaving, and silversmithing.
Whether or not it originated from these roots, the word "''melayu''" or "''mlayu''" may have been used in early Malay/Javanese to mean to steadily accelerate or run.
Post-war British plans to unite the administration of Malaya under a single crown colony called the "Malayan Union" met with strong opposition from the Malays, who opposed the weakening of the Malay rulers and the granting of citizenship to the ethnic Chinese.
Rice is popular in many dishes.
The main national road network is the Malaysian Federal Roads System, which span over .
Registered voters of age 21 and above may vote for the members of the House of Representatives and, in most of the states, for the state legislative chamber.
Warm climate with British colonial background made foreigners easy to interact with the locals.
Other South Asian languages are also widely spoken in Malaysia, as well as Thai A small number of Malaysians have Caucasian ancestry and speak creole languages, such as the Portuguese-based Malaccan Creoles, and the Spanish-based Chavacano language.
The head of state is the Yang&nbsp;di-Pertuan&nbsp;Agong, commonly referred to as the King.
Secondary education is conducted for five years.
About half the population is ethnically Malay, with large minorities of Malaysian Chinese, Malaysian Indians, and indigenous peoples.
The Chinese make up about one-quarter of the population, but accounts for 70 per cent of the country's market capitalisation.
Malaysian life expectancy, relatively high level of schooling, and above average fertility rate will help in its rapid expansion".
Malaysia is the 66th largest country by total land area, with a land area of .
70 per cent of the population is urban.
There are 200 industrial parks along with specialised parks such as Technology Park Malaysia and Kulim Hi-Tech Park.
Separate from and running parallel to the civil courts are the Syariah Courts, which apply Shariah law to Muslims in the areas of family law and religious observances.
They play a dominant role politically.
Malaysia has over  of highways and the longest highway, the North–South Expressway, extends over  on the West Coast of Peninsular Malaysia, connecting major urban centres like Kuala Lumpur, Penang and Johor Bahru.
Voting is not mandatory.
Federal intervention in state affairs, lack of development, and disputes over oil royalties have occasionally led to statements about secession from leaders in several states such as Johor, Kelantan, Sabah and Sarawak, although these have not been followed up and no serious independence movements exist.
Malaysia signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 12 June 1993, and became a party to the convention on 24 June 1994.
In 2015, Malaysia ranked in fourth position on The World's Best Retirement Havens while getting in the first place as the best place in Asia to retire.
''Bumiputera'' status is also accorded to certain non-Malay indigenous peoples, including ethnic Thais, Khmers, Chams and the natives of Sabah and Sarawak.
The word "''melayu''" in Malay may derive from the Tamil words "''malai''" and "''ur''" meaning "mountain" and "city, land", respectively.
Over 620 species of birds have been recorded in Peninsular Malaysia, with many endemic to the mountains there.
Malaysia is a federation of 13 states and three federal territories.
Its telecommunications network is second only to Singapore's in Southeast Asia, with 4.7&nbsp;million fixed-line subscribers and more than 30&nbsp;million cellular subscribers.
The economy has traditionally been fuelled by its natural resources, but is expanding in the sectors of science, tourism, commerce and medical tourism.
Traditional Malay music and performing arts appear to have originated in the Kelantan-Pattani region with influences from India, China, Thailand and Indonesia.
The sole monorail line in the country is also used for public transport in Kuala Lumpur, while the only funicular railway line is in Penang.
The 3rd Hockey World Cup was hosted at Merdeka Stadium in Kuala Lumpur, as well as the 10th cup.
The country also has its own Formula One track–the Sepang International Circuit.
The state plays a significant but declining role in guiding economic activity through macroeconomic plans.
In the final year of secondary education, students sit for the Malaysian Certificate of Education examination.
During this time, mostly Chinese rebels under the leadership of the Malayan Communist Party launched guerrilla operations designed to force the British out of Malaya.
The system of government is closely modelled on that of the Westminster parliamentary system, a legacy of British colonial rule.
The overall infrastructure of Malaysia is one of the most developed in Asia and ranked 8th in Asia and 25th in the world.
Malaysia has its origins in the Malay kingdoms present in the area which, from the 18th century, became subject to the British Empire.
Many cultures from within the country and from surrounding regions have greatly influenced the cuisine.
In Sabah and Sarawak districts are grouped into divisions.
Malaya united with North Borneo, Sarawak, and Singapore on 16 September 1963.
It involves joint military exercises held among Malaysia, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom.
In 1971, the government took the step of defining the literature of different languages.
In 1991, former Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mahathir Mohamad outlined his ideal in Vision 2020, in which Malaysia would become a self-sufficient industrialised nation by 2020.
The Philippines has a dormant claim to the eastern part of Sabah.
Deforestation is a major problem for animals, fungi and plants, as the forest is cut to make room for plantations.
Illegal fishing is another major threat, with fishing methods such as dynamite fishing and poisoning depleting marine ecosystems.
Hunting has also been an issue for some animals, with overconsumption and the use of animal parts for profit endangering many animals, from marine life to tigers.
Malaysia has once been the largest producer of tin, rubber and palm oil in the world.
The infant mortality rate in 2009 was 6 deaths per 1000 births, and life expectancy at birth in 2009 was 75 years.
Each state is divided into districts, which are then divided into mukim.
Politicians in the Philippines contemplated renaming their state "Malaysia" before the modern country took the name.
Malaysia's exclusive economic zone is 1.5 times larger than its land area, and some of its waters are in the Coral Triangle, a biodiversity hotspot.
Chili is commonly found in local cuisine, although this does not necessarily make them spicy.
Around these two halves of Malaysia are numerous islands, the largest of which is Banggi.
However, it has generated greater interethnic resentment.
It has land borders with Thailand in West Malaysia, and Indonesia and Brunei in East Malaysia.
Many other languages are used in Malaysia, which contains speakers of 137 living languages.
However, in the late 1990s the Asian financial crisis almost caused the collapse of the currency and the stock and property markets.
In 2015, the government announced a RM27 billion (US$8.23 billion) Pan-Borneo Highway project to upgrade all trunk roads to dual carriage expressways, bringing the standard of East Malaysian highways to the same level of quality of Peninsular highways.
The official and national language of Malaysia is Malaysian, a standardised form of the Malay language.
Brunei and Malaysia in 2009 announced an end to claims of each other's land, and committed to resolve issues related to their maritime borders.
As a result, tourism has become Malaysia's third largest source of foreign exchange, although it is threatened by the negative effects of the growing industrial economy, with large amounts of air and water pollution along with deforestation affecting tourism.
Malaysia has 118 airports, of which 38 are paved.
Malaysia hosts a population of refugees and asylum seekers numbering approximately 171,500.
Malaysia is a relatively open state-oriented and newly industrialised market economy.
Each state has a unicameral State Legislative Assembly whose members are elected from single-member constituencies.
The coastal plains surrounding the peninsula reach a maximum width of , and the peninsula's coastline is nearly  long, although harbours are only available on the western side.
Chinese Malaysians predominantly speak Chinese dialects from the southern provinces of China.
Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam have agreed to host joint security force exercises to secure their maritime border and tackle issues such as illegal immigration, piracy and smuggling.
Malay poetry is highly developed, and uses many forms.
There also exist aboriginal groups in much smaller numbers on the peninsula, where they are collectively known as the Orang Asli.
In town areas, federal roads may become 4-lane roads to increase traffic capacity.
Although rural areas have been the focus of great development, they still lag behind areas such as the West Coast of Peninsular Malaysia.
The government attaches a high priority to the security and stability of Southeast Asia, and seeks to further develop relations with other countries in the region.
Malaya was restructured as the Federation of Malaya in 1948, and achieved independence on 31 August 1957.
The first Malay literature was in the Arabic script.
It first participated in the 1956 Melbourne Olympic Games.
Less than two years later in 1965, Singapore was expelled from the federation.
Malaysia's foreign policy is officially based on the principle of neutrality and maintaining peaceful relations with all countries, regardless of their political system.
Indigenous East Malaysians are known for their wooden masks.
The two parts of Malaysia, separated from each other by the South China Sea, share a largely similar landscape in that both Peninsular and East Malaysia feature coastal plains rising to hills and mountains.
This means that although much of Malaysian food can be traced back to a certain culture, they have their own identity.
Marine life is also detrimentally affected by uncontrolled tourism.
The King's role has been largely ceremonial since changes to the constitution in 1994, picking ministers and members of the upper house.
The federal constitution puts local authorities outside of the federal territories under the exclusive jurisdictions of the state government, although in practice the federal government has intervened in the affairs of state local governments.
Muslim holidays are prominent as Islam is the state religion; ''Hari Raya Puasa'' (also called ''Hari Raya Aidilfitri'', Malay for Eid al-Fitr), ''Hari Raya Haji'' (also called ''Hari Raya Aidiladha'', Malay for Eid ul-Adha), ''Maulidur Rasul'' (birthday of the Prophet), and others being observed.
Malaysia is a federal constitutional elective monarchy, and the only federation in Southeast Asia.
Malaysia remains one of the world's largest producers of palm oil.
Due to the rise in labour-intensive industries, the country is estimated to have over 3&nbsp;million migrant workers; about 10 per cent of the population.
Sarawak contains the Mulu Caves, the largest cave system in the world, in the Gunung Mulu National Park which is also a World Heritage Site.
The military uses 1.5% of the country's GDP, and employs 1.23% of Malaysia's manpower.
There are fears that extremist militants activities in the Muslim areas of the southern Philippines and southern Thailand would spill over into Malaysia.
In an effort to diversify the economy and make it less dependent on export goods, the government has pushed to increase tourism to Malaysia.
The Malayan Emergency lasted from 1948 to 1960, and involved a long anti-insurgency campaign by Commonwealth troops in Malaya.
The jurisdiction of Syariah courts is limited to Muslims in matters such as marriage, inheritance, divorce, apostasy, religious conversion, and custody among others.
Each state has a unicameral legislature known as the State Legislative Assembly, and its own written constitution.
The telecommunication network, although strong in urban areas, is less available to the rural population.
These mountains are heavily forested, and mainly composed of granite and other igneous rocks.
Of the two fungal groups with the largest number of species in Malaysia, the Ascomycota and their asexual states have been surveyed in some habitats (decaying wood, marine and freshwater ecosystems, as parasites of some plants, and as agents of biodegradation), but have not been or have been only poorly surveyed in other habitats (as endobionts, in soils, on dung, as human and animal pathogens); the Basidiomycota are only partly surveyed: bracket fungi, and mushrooms and toadstools have been studied, but Malaysian rust and smut fungi remain very poorly known.
Food from one culture is sometimes also cooked using styles taken from another culture, For example, ''sambal belacan'' (shrimp paste) are commonly used as ingredients by Chinese restaurants to create the stir fried water spinach (''kangkung belacan'').
Sabah and Sarawak have considerably more autonomy than the other states, most notably having separate immigration policies and controls, and a unique residency status.
Malaysia has a strong oral tradition that has existed since before the arrival of writing, and continues today.
The men's national field hockey team ranked 13th in the world as of December 2015.
The parliament follows a multi-party system and the government is elected through a first-past-the-post system.
Under Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad there was a period of rapid economic growth and urbanisation beginning in the 1980s.
It is linked to Singapore by a narrow causeway and a bridge.
There are about 210 mammal species in the country.
The most common martial arts are ''Silat Melayu'' and kickboxing or ''tomoi''.
The head of government is the prime minister.
part of a series of mountain ranges running down the centre of the peninsula.
After this a plan was put in place to federate Malaya with the crown colonies of North Borneo (which joined as Sabah), Sarawak, and Singapore.
The 222-member House of Representatives is elected for a maximum term of five years from single-member constituencies.
It consists of thirteen states and three federal territories and has a total landmass of  separated by the South China Sea into two similarly sized regions, Peninsular Malaysia and East Malaysia (Malaysian Borneo).
One theory posits the name was chosen so that "si" represented the inclusion of Singapore, North Borneo, and Sarawak to Malaya in 1963.
The privatisation has created defence industry, which in 1999 was brought under the Malaysia Defence Industry Council.
Every citizen is issued a biometric smart chip identity card known as ''MyKad'' at the age of 12, and must carry the card at all times.
Historically the government has tried to portray Malaysia as a progressive Islamic nation while strengthening relations with other Islamic states.
The territories on Peninsular Malaysia were first unified as the Malayan Union in 1946.
The Islamic judges are expected to follow the Shafi'i legal school of Islam, which is the main ''madh'hab'' of Malaysia.
24.6 per cent of the population are of Chinese descent, while those of Indian descent comprise 7.3 per cent of the population.
Much of it has been eroded, creating a karst landscape.
Malaysian citizens are divided along ethnic lines, with 67.4 per cent considered ''bumiputera'' The largest group of ''bumiputera'' are Malays, who are defined in the constitution as Muslims who practice Malay customs and culture.
In East Malaysia, gong-based musical ensembles such as agung and kulintang are commonly used in ceremonies such as funerals and weddings.
The government system is closely modelled on the Westminster parliamentary system and the legal system is based on common law.
East Malaysians also celebrate a harvest festival known as ''Gawai'', and another one known as ''Kaamatan''.
The Malaysian Lawn Bowls Federation was registered in 1997.
The Spratly Islands are disputed by many states in the area, and a large portion of the South China Sea is claimed by China.
In 2007, a government agency issued a directive to all private television and radio stations to refrain from broadcasting speeches made by opposition leaders, a move condemned by politicians from the opposition Democratic Action Party.
The media have been blamed for increasing tension between Indonesia and Malaysia, and giving Malaysians a bad image of Indonesians.
The King is elected to a five-year term by and from among the nine hereditary rulers of the Malay states; the other four states, which have titular Governors, do not participate in the selection.
The Malaysian Armed Forces have three branches, the Royal Malaysian Navy, the Malaysian Army, and the Royal Malaysian Air Force.
Each ethnic group have distinct performing arts, with little overlap between them.
Manufacturing has a large influence in the country's economy, although Malaysia's economic structure has been moving away from it.
The highest mountain ranges form the border between Malaysia and Indonesia.
Iban is the main tribal language in Sarawak while Dusunic and Kadazan languages are spoken by the natives in Sabah.
After the riots, the controversial New Economic Policy was launched by Prime Minister Tun Abdul Razak, trying to increase the share of the economy held by the ''bumiputera''.
The constitution declares Islam the state religion while allowing freedom of religion for non-Muslims.
Chinese businesses in Malaysia are part of the larger bamboo network, a network of overseas Chinese businesses in the Southeast Asian market sharing common family and cultural ties.
The bicameral federal parliament consists of the lower house, the House of Representatives and the upper house, the Senate.
Squash was brought to the country by members of the British army, with the first competition being held in 1939.
A founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), the country participates in many international organisations such as the United Nations, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the Developing 8 Countries, and the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
The British obtained the town of Singapore in 1819, and in 1824 took control of Malacca following the Anglo-Dutch Treaty.
The council was renamed the Olympic Council of Malaysia in 1964, and has participated in all but one Olympic games since its inception.
According to the Population and Housing Census 2010 figures, ethnicity and religious beliefs correlate highly.
At higher altitudes, oaks, chestnuts, and rhododendrons replace dipterocarps.
Peninsular-based media gives low priority to news from the East, and often treats the eastern states as colonies of the Peninsula.
Major international routes and domestic routes crossing between West Malaysia and East Malaysia are served by Malaysia Airlines, AirAsia and Malindo Air while smaller domestic routes are supplemented by smaller airlines like MASwings, Firefly and Berjaya Air.
The different states have varied dishes, and often the food in Malaysia is different from the original dishes.
Science policies in Malaysia are regulated by the Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation.
The incumbent, Najib Razak, appointed in 2009, is the sixth prime minister.
However, after the enroachment of Chinese ships in Malaysian territorial waters, Malaysia has become active in condemning China.
This King appoints governors serving a four-year term for the states without monarchies, after consultations with the chief minister of that state.
Following the expedition of French navigator Jules Dumont d'Urville to Oceania in 1826, he later proposed the terms of "Malaysia", "Micronesia" and "Melanesia" to the ''Société de Géographie'' in 1831, distinguishing these Pacific cultures and island groups from the existing term "Polynesia".
28 national parks have been established; 23 in East Malaysia and five in the Peninsular.
Affirmative actions such as the New Economic Policy and the National Development Policy which superseded it, were implemented to advance the standing of the ''bumiputera'', consisting of Malays and the indigenous tribes who are considered the original inhabitants of Malaysia, over non-''bumiputera'' such as Malaysian Chinese and Malaysian Indians.
Malaysia has proposed a Southeast Asian football league.
Joint exercises and war games also been held with Brunei, China, Indonesia and the United States.
In 2014, it was the world's 13th busiest airport by international passenger traffic, recording over 25.4 million international passenger traffic.
The economy shifted from being agriculturally based to one based on manufacturing and industry.
Mount Kinabalu is located in the Kinabalu National Park, which is protected as one of the four UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Malaysia.
Common artworks included ornamental kris, beetle nut sets, and woven batik and songket fabrics.
Malaysia's Christian community celebrates most of the holidays observed by Christians elsewhere, most notably Christmas and Easter.
The terminology as per government policy is ''Bahasa Malaysia'' (literally "Malaysian language") but legislation continues to refer to the official language as ''Bahasa Melayu'' (literally "Malay language").
English has also become a common literary language.
Port of Tanjung Pelepas is Malaysia's second busiest port, and the 19th busiest port in the world in 2013, handling over 7.6 million TEUs.
It is divided between its east and west coasts by the Titiwangsa Mountains, rising to a peak elevation of  at Mount Korbu,
This government intervention into culture has caused resentment among non-Malays who feel their cultural freedom was lessened.
Parliamentary elections are held at least once every five years, the most recent of which took place in May 2013.
Climate change is likely to affect sea levels and rainfall, increasing flood risks and leading to droughts.
Without doubt, many more fungal species in Malaysia have not yet been recorded, and it is likely that many of those, when found, will be new to science.
There two commuter rail services linking Kuala Lumpur with the Kuala Lumpur International Airport.
Other minorities lack ''bumiputera'' status.
The Five Power Defence Arrangements is a regional security initiative which has been in place for almost 40 years.
The economy recovered from the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis earlier than neighbouring countries did, and has since recovered to the levels of the pre-crisis era with a GDP per capita of $14,800.
Fresh water is available to over 95 per cent of the population.
91.8 per cent of the population are Malaysian citizens.
Drums and other traditional percussion instruments and are often made from natural materials.
Numerous mega-projects were completed, such as the Petronas Towers, the North-South Expressway, the Multimedia Super Corridor, and the new federal administrative capital of Putrajaya.
Islamic criminal laws passed by the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party with the support of UMNO state assemblymen in the state legislative assembly of Kelantan have been blocked by the federal government on the basis that criminal laws are the responsibility of the federal government.
Malaysian athletes have won a total of six Olympic medals, five in Badminton, one in Platform diving.
Tourism has been limited in biodiverse areas such as Sipadan island.
Nearly all federal roads are paved with tarmac except parts of the Skudai–Pontian Highway which is paved with concrete, while parts of the Federal Highway linking Klang to Kuala Lumpur, is paved with asphalt.
Literature written in Malay was called "the national literature of Malaysia", literature in other ''bumiputera'' languages was called "regional literature", while literature in other languages was called "sectional literature".
Dumont d'Urville described Malaysia as "an area commonly known as the East Indies".
The Malaysian constitution says it guarantees freedom of religion while making Islam the state religion.
During this time, ethnic tensions were raised and nationalism grew.
It was once used as a form of long-distance communication.
Immigrants from India, the majority of them Tamils, began arriving in Malaysia early in the 19th century.
Governance of the states is divided between the federal and the state governments, with different powers reserved for each, and the Federal government has direct administration of the federal territories.
Malaysian English is widely used in business, along with Manglish, which is a colloquial form of English with heavy Malay, Chinese, and Tamil influences.
The forests of East Malaysia are estimated to be the habitat of around 2,000 tree species, and are one of the most biodiverse areas in the world, with 240 different species of trees every hectare.
Lowland forest covers areas below , and formerly East Malaysia was covered in such rainforest, which is supported by its hot wet climate.
In Sarawak, English is an official state language alongside Malaysian.
"''Malayadvipa''" was the word used by ancient Indian traders when referring to the Malay Peninsula.
Some are federally gazetted public holidays and some are observed by individual states.
Between the 7th and 13th centuries, much of the southern Malay Peninsula was part of the maritime Srivijaya Empire.
The prime minister must be a member of the house of representatives, who in the opinion of the King, commands a majority in parliament.
The report also says "The electronic equipment, petroleum, and liquefied natural gas producer will see a substantial increase in income per capita.
