"We know such ignorant, foolish teachings would bring him to his own end."
On February12, he visited Smethwick, near Birmingham, where the Conservative Party had won the parliamentary seat in the 1964 general election.
Muhammad confirmed the rumors in 1963, attempting to justify his behavior by referring to precedents set by Biblical prophets.
In a ''60 Minutes'' interview that aired during May 2000, Farrakhan stated that some things he said may have led to the assassination of MalcolmX.
In October, MalcolmX sent an angry telegram to the police commissioner.
He taught that Wallace Fard Muhammad, the founder of the Nation, was Allah incarnate, and that Elijah Muhammad was his Messenger, or Prophet.
The Black Power movement, the Black Arts Movement, and the widespread adoption of the slogan "Black is beautiful" can all trace their roots to MalcolmX.
After a short time in Flint, Michigan, he moved to New York City's Harlem neighborhood in 1943, where he engaged in drug dealing, gambling, racketeering, robbery, and pimping.
The ''Daily Times of Nigeria'' wrote that MalcolmX "will have a place in the palace of martyrs."
In his speeches at the Militant Labor Forum, which was sponsored by the Socialist Workers Party, MalcolmX criticized capitalism.
Well, I've lived to regret that incident.
He said that the Nation of Islam followed Islam as it was practiced around the world, but the Nation's teachings varied from those of other Muslims because they were adapted to the "uniquely pitiful" condition of black people in America.
He inspired the boxer Cassius Clay (later known as Muhammad Ali) to join the Nation, and they soon formed a relationship which Clay's cornerman Ferdie Pacheco later described as "like very close brothers".
In June 1953 he was named assistant minister of the Nation's Temple Number One in Detroit.
The house was torn down in 1965 by new owners who did not know of its connection with MalcolmX.
By March 1964, MalcolmX had grown disillusioned with the Nation of Islam and its leader Elijah Muhammad.
He called the 1963 March on Washington "the farce on Washington", and said he did not know why so many black people were excited about a demonstration "run by whites in front of a statue of a president who has been dead for a hundred years and who didn't like us when he was alive".
While we did not always see eye to eye on methods to solve the race problem, I always had a deep affection for Malcolm and felt that he had a great ability to put his finger on the existence and root of the problem.
John Ali, national secretary of the Nation of Islam, was believed to have been an FBI undercover agent.
* Lindsay Owen Pierre, in the 2013 television movie ''Betty and Coretta''.
Police initially denied that any Muslims were being held, but when the crowd grew to about five hundred, they allowed MalcolmX to speak with Johnson.
Within days, the question of who bore responsibility for the assassination was being publicly debated.
Many whites and some blacks were alarmed by MalcolmX and the statements he made during this period.
Your mills, your cities, your rape of a continent started all this."
Expressing many regrets about his time with them, which he had come to regard as largely wasted, he embraced Sunni Islam.
MalcolmX later said that white violence killed three of his father's brothers.
In the last months of his life, however, MalcolmX began to reconsider his support for black nationalism after meeting northern African revolutionaries who, to all appearances, were white.
No consensus has been reached on who was responsible for the assassination.
During these visits he met officials, gave interviews, and spoke on radio and television in Egypt, Ethiopia, Tanganyika, Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea, Sudan, Senegal, Liberia, Algeria, and Morocco.
In late 1945, Little returned to Boston, where he and four accomplices committed a series of burglaries targeting wealthy white families.
According to recent biographies, he also occasionally had sex with other men, usually for money.
Johnson's injuries were treated and by the time he was returned to the police station, some four thousand people had gathered outside.
Alerted by a witness, MalcolmX and a small group of Muslims went to the police station and demanded to see Johnson.
MalcolmX taught that black people were the original people of the world, and that white people were a race of devils who were created by an evil scientist named Yakub.
To MalcolmX, the desecration and violence demanded action, and he used what Farrakhan later called his "gangsterlike past" to rally the more hardened of the New York members to go to Los Angeles for direct action against the police.
Did you ever really listen to him?
In the weeks after he left the Nation of Islam, several Sunni Muslims encouraged MalcolmX to learn about their faith.
In 1955, Betty Sanders met MalcolmX after one of his lectures, then again at a dinner party; soon she was regularly attending his lectures.
Friends took up the gravediggers' shovels to complete the burial themselves.
He had received Abdul Rahman Hassan Azzam's book ''The Eternal Message of Muhammad'' with his visa approval, and he contacted the author.
Rumors that white racists were responsible for his father's death were widely circulated, and were very disturbing to Malcolm X as a child.
Actor and activist Ruby Dee and Juanita Poitier (wife of Sidney Poitier) established the Committee of Concerned Mothers to raise money for a home for his family and for his children's educations.
Washington had previously played the part of MalcolmX in the 1981 Off-Broadway play ''When the Chickens Came Home to Roost''.
one of the officers turned on Johnson, beating him so severely that he suffered brain contusions and subdural hemorrhaging.
One writer described him as "powerfully built", and another as "mesmerizingly handsome … and always spotlessly well-groomed".
The memorial is located in the Audubon Ballroom, where MalcolmX was assassinated.
He also expressed a desire to work with other civil rights leaders, saying that Elijah Muhammad had prevented him from doing so in the past.
To his admirers he was a courageous advocate for the rights of blacks, a man who indicted white America in the harshest terms for its crimes against black Americans; detractors accused him of preaching racism and violence.
'''MalcolmX''' (; May19, 1925February21, 1965), born '''Malcolm Little''' and later also known as '''el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz''' (), was an African-American Muslim minister and human rights activist.
The movement could then bring its complaints before the United Nations, where MalcolmX said the emerging nations of the world would add their support.
In 1946, at age 20, he went to prison for larceny and breaking and entering.
In 1956 she joined the Nation of Islam, changing her name to BettyX.
He also rejected the civil rights movement's strategy of nonviolence, advocating instead that black people should defend themselves.
He was an eloquent spokesman for his point of view and no one can honestly doubt that Malcolm had a great concern for the problems that we face as a race.
Many of those speeches, especially from the last year of his life, were recorded and have been published.
MalcolmX argued for the affirmative, and interest in the debate was so high that it was televised nationally by the BBC.
He rejected the civil rights movement's strategy of nonviolence, expressing the opinion that black people should defend and advance themselves "by any means necessary".
In late 1948, Little wrote to Elijah Muhammad, the leader of the Nation of Islam.
* Ben Holt, in the 1986 opera ''X, The Life and Times of Malcolm&nbsp;X'' at the New York City Opera.
In a telegram to Betty Shabazz, Martin Luther King Jr. expressed his sadness at "the shocking and tragic assassination of your husband."
In Cairo, he attended the second meeting of the Organization of African Unity as a representative of the Organization of Afro-American Unity.
He is credited with raising the self-esteem of black Americans and reconnecting them with their African heritage.
After returning to the U.S., MalcolmX addressed a wide variety of audiences.
In September 1960, at the United Nations General Assembly in New York City, MalcolmX was invited to the official functions of several African nations.
He also reproduced five of his speeches, but featured only one of Muhammad'sall of which greatly upset Muhammad and made him envious.
In 1997, Oakland Avenue in Dallas, Texas, was renamed MalcolmX Boulevard.
A week later, on November30, MalcolmX flew to the United Kingdom, and on December3 took part in a debate at the Oxford Union Society.
Elijah Muhammad told the annual Savior's Day convention on February26, "MalcolmX got just what he preached", but denied any involvement with the murder.
Afterward, MalcolmX insisted on arranging for an ambulance to take Johnson to Harlem Hospital.
Others accused the NYPD, the FBI, or the CIA, citing the lack of police protection, the ease with which the assassins entered the Audubon Ballroom, and the failure of the police to preserve the crime scene.
On April26, Johnson and two other passersbyalso Nation of Islam memberssaw the officers beating an African-American man with nightsticks.
On February23, James Farmer, the leader of the Congress of Racial Equality, announced at a news conference that local drug dealers, and not the Nation of Islam, were to blame.
Main Street in Lansing, Michigan, was renamed MalcolmX Street in 2010.
I did many things as a Black Muslim that I'm sorry for now.
In a famous letter from Mecca, he wrote that his experiences with white people during his pilgrimage convinced him to "rearrange" his thinking about race and "toss aside some of his previous conclusions".
In late 1961, there were violent confrontations between NOI members and police in South Central Los Angeles, and numerous Muslims were arrested.
The school is located in the building where Little attended elementary school.
You are not guilty, but you did it....
By the end of this third visit, he had met with essentially all of Africa's prominent leaders; Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, and Ahmed Ben Bella of Algeria had all invited MalcolmX to serve in their governments.
Earl was local leader of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) and Louise served as secretary and "branch reporter", sending news of local UNIA activities to ''Negro World''; they inculcated self-reliance and black pride in their children.
1962, named after Elijah Muhammad); Gamilah Lumumba (b.
MalcolmX mentored and guided LouisX (later known as Louis Farrakhan), who eventually became the leader of the Nation of Islam.
In 1996, the first library named after MalcolmX was opened, the MalcolmX Branch Library and Performing Arts Center of the San Diego Public Library system.
Malcolm X was referred to as "Detroit Red" because of the reddish hair he inherited from his Scots maternal grandfather.
Was he ever himself associated with violence or any public disturbance?
In 1987 the site was added to the Nebraska register of historic sites and marked with a state plaque.
* James Earl Jones, in the 1977 film ''The Greatest''.
Later MalcolmX recalled feeling that the white world offered no place for a career-oriented black man, regardless of talent.
Released in 1987, he maintained his innocence until his death in August 2009.
MalcolmX proposed during a telephone call from Detroit in January 1958, and they married two days later.
During the late 1980s and early 1990s, there was a resurgence of interest in his life among young people.
When the reporter told him it seemed to be, MalcolmX told him, "Then I'm for it."
In the December4 issue of ''Muhammad Speaks'', LouisX wrote that "such a man as Malcolm is worthy of death."
To make ends meet Louise rented out part of her garden, and her sons hunted game.
Ali had a meeting with Talmadge Hayer, one of the men convicted of killing MalcolmX, the night before the assassination.
MalcolmX also served as a mentor and confidant to Elijah Muhammad's son, Wallace D. Muhammad; the son told Malcolm X about his skepticism toward his father's "unorthodox approach" to Islam.
Inside the station, MalcolmX and an attorney were making bail arrangements for two of the Muslims.
In a conversation with Gordon Parks, two days before his assassination, Malcolm said:
"For me, my 'X' replaced the white slavemaster name of 'Little' which some blue-eyed devil named Little had imposed upon my paternal forebears."
He served as the public face of the controversial group for a dozen years.
On July9 Muhammad aide John Ali (suspected of being an undercover FBI agent) referred to MalcolmX by saying, "Anyone who opposes the Honorable Elijah Muhammad puts their life in jeopardy."
In many parts of the African continent I saw white students helping black people.
MalcolmX had by now become a media favorite, and some Nation members believed he was a threat to Muhammad's leadership.
MalcolmX argued that if the U.S. government was unwilling or unable to protect black people, black people should protect themselves.
The children were separated and sent to foster homes.
Denzel Washington played the title role in ''MalcolmX''named one of the ten best films of the 1990s by both critic Roger Ebert and director Martin Scorsese.
He is largely responsible for the spread of Islam in the black community in the United States.
While in prison, MalcolmX became a member of the Nation of Islam, and after his parole in 1952, quickly rose to become one of the organization's most influential leaders.
In 1946, he was arrested while picking up a stolen watch he had left at a shop for repairs, and in February began serving an eight-to-ten-year sentence at Charlestown State Prison for larceny and breaking and entering.
After his Hajj, MalcolmX articulated a view of white people and racism that represented a deep change from the philosophy he had supported as a minister of the Nation of Islam.
In his autobiography, MalcolmX wrote proudly of some of the social achievements the Nation made while he was a member, particularly its free drug rehabilitation program.
Although he no longer called for the separation of black people from white people, MalcolmX continued to advocate black nationalism, which he defined as self-determination for the African-American community.
After leaving the Nation of Islam, MalcolmX announced his willingness to work with leaders of the civil rights movement, though he advocated some changes to their policies.
The first known celebration of MalcolmX Day took place in Washington, D.C., in 1971.
The September 1964 issue of ''Ebony'' dramatized MalcolmX's defiance of these threats by publishing a photograph of him holding a rifle while peering out a window.
Civil rights organizations denounced him and the Nation as irresponsible extremists whose views did not represent African Americans.
A few days later Farrakhan denied that he "ordered the assassination" of MalcolmX, although he again acknowledged that he "created the atmosphere that ultimately led to MalcolmX's assassination."
His philosophy is known almost entirely from the many speeches and interviews he gave from 1952 until his death.
Hip-hop groups such as Public Enemy adopted MalcolmX as an icon, and his image was displayed in hundreds of thousands of homes, offices, and schools, as well as on T-shirts and jackets.
MalcolmX said that Islam was the "true religion of black mankind" and that Christianity was "the white man's religion" that had been imposed upon African Americans by their slave-masters.
Many of themtired of being told to wait for freedom, justice, equality and respectfelt that he articulated their complaints better than did the civil rights movement.
After his parole in August 1952, MalcolmX visited Elijah Muhammad in Chicago.
Rumors were circulating that Muhammad was conducting extramarital affairs with young Nation secretarieswhich would constitute a serious violation of Nation teachings.
Did you ever touch him, or have him smile at you?
The ''Ghanaian Times'' likened him to John Brown and Patrice Lumumba, and counted him among "a host of Africans and Americans who were martyred in freedom's cause".
He also spoke of the NOI starting to work with civil rights organizations, local black politicians, and religious groups.
Malcolm and his siblings secured her release 24 years later.
After a visit in which Reginald described the group's teachings, including the belief that white people are devils, Little concluded that every relationship he'd had with whites had been tainted by dishonesty, injustice, greed, and hatred.
A grand jury declined to indict the officers who beat Johnson.
Seven Muslims were shot; one, Ronald Stokes, a Korean War veteran, was shot fatally after surrendering to police.
Postal Service issued a MalcolmX postage stamp in 1999.
It featured interviews with several people who worked with him, including A. Peter Bailey and Earl Grant, as well as the daughter of MalcolmX, Ilyasah Shabazz.
The autopsy identified 21 gunshot wounds to the chest, left shoulder, arms and legs, including ten buckshot wounds from the initial shotgun blast.
The remarks prompted a widespread public outcry.
(nominally $1,000about $,000 in  dollars) in payments of $18 per month; the issuer of another, larger policy refused to pay, claiming her husband Earl had committed suicide.
On March8, 1964, MalcolmX publicly announced his break from the Nation of Islam.
Castro was sufficiently impressed with MalcolmX to suggest a private meeting, and after two hours of talking, Castro invited MalcolmX to visit Cuba.
He responded with indignation towards the reporters interviewing him, shouting, "You did it!
And if we dealt with him like a nation deals with a traitor, what the ''hell'' business is it of yours?
MalcolmX had confided to a reporter that Ali exacerbated tensions between him and Elijah Muhammad, and that he considered Ali his "archenemy" within the Nation of Islam leadership.
"I acknowledge that and regret that any word that I have said caused the loss of life of a human being."
One biographer says that by giving expression to their frustration, MalcolmX "made clear the price that white America would have to pay if it did not accede to black America's legitimate demands."
In 2005, Columbia University announced the opening of the Malcolm&nbsp;X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center.
* Mario Van Peebles, in the 2001 film ''Ali''.
He added that "chickens coming home to roost never did make me sad; they've always made me glad."
When Ali left the group in 1975 and became a Sunni Muslim, he wrote, "turning my back on Malcolm was one of the mistakes that I regret most in my life."
After leaving the Nation of Islam, MalcolmX founded Muslim Mosque, Inc., a religious organization, and the Organization of Afro-American Unity, a secular group that advocated Pan-Africanism.
They had six daughters:
His father was killed when he was six and his mother was placed in a mental hospital when he was thirteen, after which he lived in a series of foster homes.
He proposed that African Americans should return to Africa and that, in the interim, a separate country for black people in America should be created.
Something like this kills a lot of argument.
"We didn't want to kill Malcolm and didn't try to kill him", Muhammad said.
It's brought bloodbaths to about every nation on earth at one time or another.
The site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1984 and is now identified by a historic marker.
He continued to emphasize Pan-Africanism, black self-determination, and black self-defense.
The ''New York Post'' wrote that "even his sharpest critics recognized his brillianceoften wild, unpredictable and eccentric, but nevertheless possessing promise that must now remain unrealized."
He later called this his most treasured honor.
On February5, 1965, MalcolmX flew to Britain again, and on February8 he addressed the first meeting of the Council of African Organizations in London.
LouisX saw this as an important turning point in the deteriorating relationship between MalcolmX and Muhammad.
Many African Americans, especially those who lived in cities in the Northern and Western United States, felt that MalcolmX articulated their complaints concerning inequality better than did the mainstream civil rights movement.
::Listening to leaders like Nasser, Ben Bella, and Nkrumah awakened me to the dangers of racism.
Wallace Muhammad was excommunicated from the Nation of Islam several times, although he was eventually readmitted.
His daughter, Ilyasah Shabazz, and Ta-Nehisi Coates questioned the accuracy of these accounts.
Dozens of schools have been named after MalcolmX, including Malcolm&nbsp;X Shabazz High School in Newark, New Jersey, Malcolm Shabazz City High School in Madison, Wisconsin, and Malcolm&nbsp;X College in Chicago, Illinois.
He returned to the United States in late May and flew to Africa again in July.
He was accused of being antisemitic.
He and the Nation of Islam were described as hatemongers, black supremacists, racists, violence-seekers, segregationists, and a threat to improved race relations.
After first discounting the rumors, MalcolmX came to believe them after he spoke with Muhammad's son Wallace and with the women making the accusations.
Haley completed and published it some months after the assassination.
In April, MalcolmX gave a speech titled "The Ballot or the Bullet", in which he advised African Americans to exercise their right to vote wisely but cautioned that if the government continued to prevent African Americans from attaining full equality, it might be necessary for them to take up arms.
* Al Freeman, Jr., in the 1979 television miniseries ''Roots: The Next Generations''.
In 1937 a man Louise had been datingmarriage had seemed a possibilityvanished from her life when she became pregnant with his child.
On December1, 1963, when asked for a comment about the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, MalcolmX said that it was a case of "chickens coming home to roost".
On March26, 1964, he met Martin Luther King Jr. for the first and only timeand only long enough for photographs to be takenin Washington, D.C., as both men attended the Senate's debate on the Civil Rights bill.
Did he ever do a mean thing?
One police officer told the ''New York Amsterdam News'': "No one man should have that much power."
In August 2014, an online petition was started using the White House online petition mechanism to call on the government to release without alteration any files they still held relating to the murder of Malcolm X.
* Gary Dourdan, in the 2000 television movie ''King of the World''.
::Brother, remember the time that white college girl came into the restaurantthe one who wanted to help the Black Muslims and the whites get togetherand I told her there wasn't a ghost of a chance and she went away crying?
Many cities have renamed streets after MalcolmX.
1958, named after Attila the Hun);
MalcolmX retained his post and rank as minister, but was prohibited from public speaking for 90 days.
Malcolm Little excelled in junior high school but dropped out after a white teacher told him that practicing law, his aspiration at the time, was "no realistic goal for a  nigger".
He met Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt, Ahmed Sékou Touré of Guinea, and Kenneth Kaunda of the Zambian African National Congress.
Considering the situation to be at an impasse, MalcolmX stepped outside the station house and gave a hand signal to the crowd.
He has been called one of the greatest and most influential African Americans in history.
At this time, several of his siblings wrote to him about the Nation of Islam, a relatively new religious movement preaching black self-reliance and, ultimately, the return of the African diaspora to Africa, where they would be free from white American and European domination.
The Nation of Islam, which had sent a message of condolence to the Kennedy family and ordered its ministers not to comment on the assassination, publicly censured their former shining star.
In 1987, New York mayor Ed Koch proclaimed Lenox Avenue in Harlem to be MalcolmX Boulevard.
The Nation of Islam proposed the establishment of a separate country for African Americans in the southern or southwestern United States as an interim measure until African Americans could return to Africa.
1965 after their father's death, and named in his honor).
In the late 1960s, increasingly radical black activists based their movements largely on MalcolmX and his teachings.
1964, named after Patrice Lumumba); and twins Malikah and Malaak (b.
* Nigel Thatch, in the 2014 film ''Selma''.
There are those who will consider it their duty, as friends of the Negro people, to tell us to revile him, to flee, even from the presence of his memory, to save ourselves by writing him out of the history of our turbulent times.
That year, Little also began signing his name "MalcolmX".
In Smethwick he compared the treatment of colored residents with the treatment of Jews under Hitler, saying: "I would not wait for the fascist element in Smethwick to erect gas ovens."
MalcolmX was effectively orphaned early in life.
On November23, 1964, on his way home from Africa, MalcolmX stopped in Paris, where he spoke in the Salle de la Mutualité.
One gunman, Nation of Islam member Talmadge Hayer (also known as Thomas Hagan), was beaten by the crowd before police arrived.
