The People's Majlis, located in Male, houses members from all over the country.
This is why the formal titles of Maldive kings until 1968 contained references to "''kula sudha ira''", which means "descended from the Moon and the Sun".
A series of coup attempts (in 1980, 1983, and 1988) by Nasir supporters and business interests tried to topple the government without success.
Most visitors arrive at Malé International Airport, on Hulhulé Island, adjacent to the capital Malé.
Although Bell asserted that the ancient Maldivians had followed Theravada Buddhism, many local Buddhist archaeological remains now in the Malé Museum in fact also display elements of Mahayana and Vajrayana iconography.
The elections in late 2013 were highly contested.
Somali travellers discovered the island for gold in the 13th century, before the Portuguese.
Buddhism came to the Maldives at the time of Emperor Ashoka's expansion, and became the dominant religion of the people of the Maldives until the 12th&nbsp;century AD.
Differences in terms of fishing pressure (including poaching) could be the cause.
Instead of a complex caste system, there was merely a distinction between noble (bēfulhu) and common people in the Maldives.
As a result, the Maldives are at high risk of being submerged due to rising sea levels.
On 23 February 2012, the Commonwealth suspended the Maldives from its democracy and human rights watchdog while the ousting was being investigated, and backed Nasheed's call for elections before the end of 2012.
The Coast Guard plays a vital role in carrying out these function.
Members of the social elite are concentrated in Malé.
The Indian paratroopers landed at Hulule and secured the airfield and restored the government rule at Malé within hours.
The Maldivian people are called ''Dhivehin''.
He is also referred to as Tabrizugefaanu.
The ancient Sri Lankan chronicle ''Mahawamsa'' refers to an island called ''Mahiladiva'' ("Island of Women", महिलादिभ) in Pali, which is probably a mistranslation of the same Sanskrit word meaning "garland".
They are mentioned in ancient legends and local folklore about the establishment of the capital and kingly rule in Malé.
On 5 November 2015 (the next day), as per the ''State of Emergency'' bill made by the  President, the people's Majlis decided to rush the process for the removal of Vice president Ahmed Adeeb by a no confidence vote that was submitted by PPM Parliament than the originally intended period.
In an effort to induce the regrowth of the reefs, scientists placed electrified cones anywhere from  below the surface to provide a substrate for larval coral attachment.
Since Koimala's reign, the Maldive throne was also known as the ''Singaasana'' (Lion Throne).
Nasheed's vice president, Mohammed Waheed Hassan, was sworn in as President in accordance with the Constitution at the Peoples majlis in front of the Chief Justice.
At the 2009 International Climate Talks, President Mohamed Nasheed explained that: For us swearing off fossil fuels is not only the right thing to do, it is in our economic self-interest...
Previously known as the Maldives College of Higher Education, it was established on 1 January 1999, as part of a restructuring and rationalisation of all government-run post-secondary education in Maldives.
Seaweeds grow on the skeletons of dead coral.
The Maldives is a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, SAARC.
The ancient Maldivian Kings promoted Buddhism, and the first Maldive writings and artistic achievements, in the form of highly developed sculpture and architecture, are from that period.
The Maldives have been historically and culturally linked to the Indian subcontinent since the fourth century BCE.
Tourism accounts for 28% of the GDP and more than 60% of the Maldives' foreign exchange receipts.
There are also locally run ferries by large dhoni boats.
Maritime pollution control exercises are conducted regularly on an annual basis for familiarisation and handling of such hazardous situations.
It is not rigid, since rank is based on varied factors, including occupation, wealth, Islamic virtue, and family ties.
The Maldives remained largely unknown to tourists until the early 1970s.
There are 40,000 Bangladeshis in Maldives making them the largest group of foreigners working in that country.
Fisheries were also the second-largest foreign exchange earner after tourism.
On the night of 3 November 1988, the Indian Air Force airlifted a parachute battalion group from Agra and flew them over  to the Maldives.
He called for more climate change mitigation action while on the American television shows ''The Daily Show''  and the ''Late Show with David Letterman''.
By then, the ''Aadeetta'' (Sun) Dynasty (the Suryavanshi ruling cast) had for some time ceased to rule in Malé, possibly because of invasions by the Cholas of Southern India in the 10th century.
Article 15 of the Act Number 1/81 (Penal Code) gives provision for hudud punishments.
The ensuing decades have been characterised by political instability, efforts at democratic reform, and environmental challenges posed by climate change.
Privately owned MEGA Maldives Airlines has Boeing 757 and 767 aircraft and operates frequent services to Beijing, Shanghai, and Hong Kong.
Independence from the United Kingdom was achieved in 1965 and a presidential republic was established in 1968 with an elected People's Majlis.
Under such circumstances it is hard to know which is the correct name to use.
On 23 December 2011, the opposition held a mass symposium with as many as 20,000 people in the name of protecting Islam, which they believed Nasheed's government was unable to maintain in the country.
The government reportedly considered locations in Sri Lanka and India due to cultural and climate similarities, and as far away as Australia.
Recently (Oct. 2015) Nasheed has appealed to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, suggesting Modi has the ability to “disentangle” the Maldives from the “mess we are in”.
A third Constitution was ratified in 2008, which separated the judiciary from the head of state.
The coir gives the boat greater elasticity, so that it doesn't break up."
Following the introduction of a new constitution in 2008, direct elections for the President take place every five years, with a limit of two terms in office for any individual.
In March 2013 the former president Nasheed was convicted under the country's terrorism laws for ordering the arrest of an allegedly corrupt judge in 2012 and jailed for 13 years.
17 of Adheeb's supporters were also arrested for "public order offences".
The development of tourism fostered the overall growth of the country's economy.
The presence of this landmass causes differential heating of land and water.
102 Maldivians and 6 foreigners reportedly died in the tsunami.
Historically Maldives provided enormous quantities of cowry shells, an international currency of the early ages.
The word ''Theevu'' (archaic ''Dheevu'', related to Tamil தீவு ''dheevu'') means "island", and ''Dhives'' (''Dhivehin'') means "islanders" (i.e., Maldivians).
Maumoon Abdul Gayoom began his 30-year role as President in 1978, winning six consecutive elections without opposition.
Only near the southern end of this natural coral barricade do two open passages permit safe ship navigation from one side of the Indian Ocean to the other through the territorial waters of Maldives.
The first archaeological study of the remains of early cultures in the Maldives began with the work of H.C.P.
For several years there were two seaplanes companies operating: TMA, Trans Maldivian Airways, and Maldivian Air Taxi, but these merged in 2013 under the name TMA.
Later Nasheed told foreign media that he was deposed by a military coup led by President Waheed.
With support for his administration faltering, Nasir fled to Singapore in 1978, with millions of dollars from the treasury.
Yameen employed Islam as a tool of identity politics, framing religious mobilisation as the solution to perceived Western attempts to undermine Maldivian national sovereignty.
Since the 12th century AD there were also influences from Arabia in the language and culture of the Maldives because of the conversion to Islam and its location as a crossroads in the central Indian Ocean.
The UN's environmental panel has warned that, at current rates, sea level rise would be high enough to make the Maldives uninhabitable by 2100.
While the first two attempts met with little success, the 1988 coup attempt involved a roughly 80-person mercenary force of the PLOTE Tamil militant group who seized the airport and caused Gayoom to flee from house to house until the intervention of 1600 Indian troops airlifted into Malé restored order.
During this period, the southwest winds contribute to the formation of the southwest monsoon, which reaches Maldives in the beginning of June and lasts until the end of August.
British Airways offer direct flights to the Maldives around 2–3 times per week.
According to the ''Mahavansa'', one of the ships that sailed with Prince Vijaya, who went to Sri Lanka around 500&nbsp;BC, went adrift and arrived at an island called ''Mahiladvipika'', which is being identified with the Maldives.
Though the popular image of the Maldives is that of a holiday paradise, its radicalised youths are enlisting in significant numbers to fight for Islamic State militants in the Middle East.
In the early 11th century, the Minicoy and Thiladhunmathi, and possibly other northern Atolls, were conquered by the medieval Chola Tamil emperor Raja Raja Chola I, thus becoming a part of the Chola Empire.
Speedboats and seaplanes tend to be more expensive, while travel by dhoni, although longer, is relatively cheaper and convenient.
Bell was first ordered to the islands in late 1879 he returned twice to the Maldives to investigate ancient ruins.
The brief, bloodless operation, labelled ''Operation Cactus'', also involved the Indian Navy.
Police came out to protest against the government instead.
The Maldives received rice in exchange for cowry shells.
At the time Nasheed was jailed, President Mohammed Waheed Hassan announced a presidential election would be held in 2013.
On 10 November 2008, Nasheed announced an intent to create a sovereign wealth fund with money earned from tourism that could be used to purchase land elsewhere for the Maldives people to relocate should rising sea levels due to climate change inundate the country.
Tourism gave a major boost to the country's fledgling traditional cottage industries such as mat weaving, lacquer work, handicraft, and coir rope making.
The people of the archipelago were described as gentle, civilised and hospitable.
One study appears to show that the sea level in the Maldives dropped  throughout the 1970s and '80s, although later studies failed to back this up.
The President has explained his intentions: "We do not want to leave the Maldives, but we also do not want to be climate refugees living in tents for decades".
A fish canning plant was installed on Felivaru in 1977, as a joint venture with a Japanese firm.
The first reference to an Iranian origin dates to an 18th-century Persian text.
On 10 November 2015, President Yameen revoked the ''State of Emergency'' citing that no imminent threats remain in the country.
The United States Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor claims in their 2012 report on human rights practices in the country that the most significant problems are corruption, lack of religious freedom, and abuse and unequal treatment of women.
''Monetaria moneta'' were used for centuries as a currency in Africa, and huge amounts of Maldivian cowries were introduced into Africa by western nations during the period of slave trade.
The Maldives consists of 1,192 coral islands grouped in a double chain of 26 atolls, along the north-south direction, spread over roughly , making this one of the world's most dispersed countries.
A November 1988 coup was headed by Muhammadu Ibrahim Lutfee, a small-businessman.
The mechanisation of the traditional fishing boat called ''dhoni'' in 1974 was a major milestone in the development of the fisheries industry.
The number of resorts increased from 2 to 92 between 1972 and 2007. , over 8,380,000 tourists had visited Maldives.
Government owned Island Aviation Services (branded as Maldivian) operates to nearly all of Maldives domestic airports with several Dash-8 aircraft and one A320 with international service to Chennai and Thiruvananthapuram, India, and Dhaka, Bangladesh.
It created direct and indirect employment and income generation opportunities in other related industries.
Maldivian coir was exported to Sindh, China, Yemen, and the Persian Gulf.
This was due to the long trading history between the far east and the middle east.
Yameen’s policy of connecting Islam with anti-Western rhetoric represented a new development.
Article 156 of the constitution states that law includes the norms and provisions of sharia.
Article nineteen states that "citizens are free to participate in or carry out any activity that is not expressly prohibited by sharia Islamic law or by the law".
In Tamil, "Garland of Islands" can be translated as ''MalaiTheevu'' (மாலைத்தீவு).
They are linguistically and ethnically related to the people in the Indian subcontinent.
The population was projected to have reached 317,280 in 2010.
In March and April 2012, Nasheed stated, "If carbon emissions were to stop today, the planet would not see a difference for 60 to 70 years."
None of these names is mentioned in any literature, but classical Sanskrit texts dating back to the Vedic period mention the "Hundred Thousand Islands" (''Lakshadweepa''), a generic name which would include not only the Maldives, but also the Laccadives, Aminidivi Islands, Minicoy and the Chagos island groups.
Some medieval travellers such as Ibn Batuta called the islands ''Mahal Dibiyat'' (محل دبيأت) from the Arabic word ''Mahal'' ("palace"), which must be how the Berber traveller interpreted the local name, having been through Muslim North India, where Perso-Arabic words were introduced to the local vocabulary.
In November 2008, President Mohamed Nasheed announced plans to look into purchasing new land in India, Sri Lanka, and Australia because of his concerns about global warming, and the possibility of much of the islands being inundated with water from rising sea levels.
The current President is Abdulla Yameen.
The first resort in the Maldives was Kurumba Maldives which welcomed the first guests on 3 October 1972.
Comparative studies of Maldivian oral, linguistic and cultural traditions and customs indicate that early settlers were Dravidian people from ancient Tamilakam in the Sangam period (300&nbsp;BC–AD 300), most probably fishermen from the southwest coasts of what is now the south of the Indian Subcontinent and the western shores of Sri Lanka.
The annual rainfall averages  in the north and  in the south.
The first accurate census was held in December 1977 and showed 142,832 persons residing in Maldives.
According to a legend from Maldivian folklore, in the early 12th&nbsp;century AD, a medieval prince named Koimala, a nobleman of the Lion Race from Sri Lanka, sailed to Rasgetheemu island (literally "Town of the Royal House", or figuratively "King's Town") in the North Maalhosmadulu Atoll, and from there to Malé, and established a kingdom.
On 15 November 1967, a vote was taken in parliament to decide whether the Maldives should continue as a constitutional monarchy or become a republic.
These Maulūdu festivals were held in ornate tents specially built for the occasion.
In Kannada, "Garland of Islands" can be translated as ''Maaledweepa'' (ಮಾಲೆದ್ವೀಪ).
When deciding matters on which the Constitution or the law is silent, judges must consider Islamic Shari'ah".
We had always taken for granted that these animals would be there, that this reef would be there forever.
At the 2006 census, the population had reached 298,968, although the census in 2000 showed that the population growth rate had declined to 1.9%.
Maldives’ international partners including the EU, US, UK and the United Nations had said his rushed trial was seriously flawed following a UN panel ruling in the former president’s favour.
The population doubled by 1978, and the population growth rate peaked at 3.4% in 1985.
As of April 2008, more than 70,000 foreign employees, along with 33,000 illegal immigrants, comprised more than one third of the Maldivian population..
Contrary to the assessment of international election observers, the Supreme Court cited irregularities and annulled it.
The other essential product of the Maldives was ''coir'', the fibre of the dried coconut husk.
Tourism began to be developed on the archipelago by the beginning of the 1970s.
that ''Vijaya'' visited ''Bharukaccha'' (Bharuch in Gujarat) in his ship on the voyage down south.
Fishing is the second leading sector.
In 1959, objecting to Ibrahim Nasir's centralism, the inhabitants of the three southernmost atolls protested against the government.
Members of the unicameral Majlis serve five-year terms, with the total number of members determined by atoll populations.
The  Maldivian archipelago was Islamised in the 12th century and consolidated as a sultanate, developing strong commercial and cultural ties with Asia and Africa.
Fishing has historically been the dominant economic activity, and remains the largest sector by far, followed by the rapidly growing tourism industry.
The Dutch referred to the islands as the "Maldivische Eilanden" (), while the British anglicised the local name for the islands first to the "Maldive Islands" and later to "Maldives."
They formed the United Suvadive Republic and elected Abdullah Afeef as president and chose Hithadhoo as capital of this republic.
The status of the islands were akin to other British protectorates in the Indian Ocean region, including Zanzibar and the Trucial States.
Real GDP growth averaged over 7.5% per year for more than a decade.
Therefore, the duties assigned to the MNDF of maintaining surveillance over Maldives' waters and providing protection against foreign intruders poaching in the EEZ and territorial waters, are immense tasks from both logistical and economic view points.
Later a script called Dhives akuru was used for a long period.
However, Gayoom's rule was controversial, with some critics saying Gayoom was an autocrat who quelled dissent by limiting freedoms and political favouritism.
The total damage was estimated at more than US$400&nbsp;million, or some 62% of the GDP.
Maldivians converted to Islam by the mid-12th century.
Maldives is the lowest country in the world, with maximum and average natural ground levels of only  and  above sea level, respectively.
From the 2nd century AD the islands were known as the 'Money Isles' by the Arabs.
The other islands are used entirely for economic purposes, of which tourism and agriculture are the most dominant.
The Maldives is a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).
It lies between latitudes 1°S and 8°N, and longitudes 72° and 74°E.
Recent scientific studies suggest that the faunistic composition can vary greatly between neighbour atolls, especially in terms of benthic fauna.
Most trash from Male and other resorts is simply dumped at Thilafushi.
In areas where construction exists, however, this has been increased to several metres.
From the mid 16th-century, the region came under the increasing influence of colonial powers, with the Maldives becoming a British protectorate in 1887.
It is also a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Non Aligned Movement.
(The United States backtracked in late 2012 in response to widespread criticism.)
At present Sunni Islam is the official religion of the entire population, as adherence to it is required for citizenship.
To provide timely security its patrol boats are stationed at various MNDF Regional Headquarters.
However, unlike the Sinhalese of Sri Lanka and most of the Arabs, Africans and Europeans whose influence can be seen in borrow-words, material culture, and the diversity of Maldivian phenotype, Maldivians do not have the highly embedded patriarchal codes of honour, purity, corporate marriage, and sedentary private property that are typical of places where agriculture is the key form of subsistence and social relations have been built, historically, around tribute taking.
The present-day script is called Thaana and is written from right to left.
Thaana is said to have been introduced by the reign of Mohamed Thakurufaanu.
The official and common language is Dhivehi, an Indo-Aryan language having some similarities with Elu, the ancient Sinhalese language.
The observed rate of sea level rise is only 1.7–1.8 millimetres per year.
As the King had held little real power, this was seen as a cosmetic change and required few alterations in the structures of government.
The growth of these electrified corals was five times faster than ordinary corals.
"It is stronger than hemp", wrote Ibn Battuta, "and is used to sew together the planks of Sindhi and Yemeni dhows, for this sea abounds in reefs, and if the planks were fastened with iron nails, they would break into pieces when the vessel hit a rock.
Shell currency imported from the Maldives was used as legal tender in the Bengal Sultanate and Mughal Bengal, alongside gold and silver.
These local industries must have depended on imported raw materials.
The tallest waves were reported to be  high.
In addition to a name, every administrative division is identified by the Maldivian code letters, such as "Haa Alif" for Thiladhunmati Uthuruburi (Thiladhunmathi North); and by a Latin code letter.
The Maldives National University was inaugurated on 15 February 2011.
The '''Maldives''' (, ,  or ), officially the '''Republic of Maldives'''  (, ''Dhivehi Raa'jeyge Jumhooriyya''), is a South Asian island country, located in the Indian Ocean.
Three people were injured, including his wife, but the President managed to escape unhurt.
Another link to North Africa was the Maliki school of jurisprudence, used throughout most of North Africa, which was the official one in the Maldives until the 17th century.
Some argue (from the presence of Jat, Gujjar Titles and Gotra names) that Sindhis also accounted for an early layer of migration.
This kingdom pre-dated Koimala's reign.
For administrative purposes the Maldivian government organised these atolls into twenty one administrative divisions.
Of the 44 members of parliament, forty voted in favour of a republic.
Although the Maldives are kept relatively pristine and little litter can be found on the islands, no good waste disposal sites exist.
Some social stratification exists on the islands.
They are ethnically known as Dhivehis.
Islam is the official religion of the Maldives and open practice of any other religion is forbidden and liable to prosecution.
The republican constitution came into force in 1968, and was amended in 1970, 1972, and 1975.
Seafaring from Debal began during the Indus valley civilisation.
In late December 2004, the major tsunami left more than 100 dead, 12,000 displaced, and property damage exceeding $400&nbsp;million.
No official record exists of the Aadeetta dynasty's reign.
The Maldives enjoys close ties with Commonwealth members Seychelles and Mauritius.
The first tourist resorts were opened in 1972 with Bandos island resort and Kurumba Village (the current name is Kurumba Maldives), which transformed the Maldives economy.
The shift from the dry northeast monsoon to the moist southwest monsoon occurs during April and May.
, fisheries contributed over 15% of the country's GDP and engaged about 30% of the country's work force.
According to the Constitution of Maldives, "the judges are independent, and subject only to the Constitution and the law.
Economic decline followed the closure of the British airfield at Gan and the collapse of the market for dried fish, an important export.
For instance, historically Arabic has been the prime language of administration there, instead of the Persian and Urdu languages used in the nearby Muslim states.
Social welfare benefits were given to those above 65 years of age, single parents, and those with special needs.
They were used until as recently as the 1980s for seeking the help of buried saints.
Some scholars have suggested the possibility of Ibn Battuta misreading Maldive texts, and have posited another scenario where this Abu Barakat might have been a native of Berbera, a significant trading port on the north western coast of Somalia.
The Maldivian economy is to a large degree based on tourism.
Along with Sri Lanka, it is one of only two South Asian countries rated "high" on the Human Development Index (HDI), with its per capita income the highest among SAARC nations.
It lies southwest of India and Sri Lanka.
The government instituted a broader crackdown against political dissent.
On 4 November 2015, President Abdulla Yameen declared a 30-day state of emergency ahead of a planned anti-government rally.
The typical Maldivian boat is called dhoni.
The cowry is now the symbol of the Maldives Monetary Authority.
In 1979, a Fisheries Advisory Board was set up with the mandate of advising the government on policy guidelines for the overall development of the fisheries sector.
As a result, the Majlis passed the ''no confidence vote'' with a majority of 61 members favouring it, removing Adeeb from the post of Vice President in the process.
Another interpretation, held by some of the islanders, is that Abu Barakat was an Iranian from Tabriz.
