For the first time, a particular period is given in the legend for the arrival of a group, by mentioning the fact that this arrival took place about three centuries before the establishment of the kingdom of Emperor Ashoka.
The names Suvadive and Suvadivian suggest that the origin of the names lye in the ancient name for the three southernmost atolls of Huvadhu, Fuvahmulah and Addu which was Suvadiva.
It was from Gujarat that North Indian civilisation impinged upon the Maldives and Sri Lanka.
According to figures 100% of the Maldivian population are ethnic Maldivians excluding the foreigners in the country.
They may have been called Redhin, if their description corresponded with that given in folk-stories to the Redhin.
One day, while a hunter king of Sri Lanka was hunting, he caught a man-beast in his net.
The genetic study confirmed that the most likely origin of the Maldivian population is in South Asia with possible gene flow from the Middle East.
This study showed one mutation that probably originated in the Middle East, another mutation which could have been derived from Portuguese or Algerians, and another which probably originated from South Asia and Malays.
Islands are still called ''dhu'' in Maldivian, and the inhabitant of an island is called a ''dhoovehi''.
The Suvadivians, living in the three southernmost atolls of the equatorial zone (Huvadhu, Fuvahmulah and Addu atolls) number approximately 60,000 and constitute about 20% of the total population of Maldivians.
The title of former Maldivian kings was ''kattiri bovana mahaa radun'', 'Kattiri' (ކައްތިރި) meaning Kshatriya in Maldivian language.
* Kaliyaa Kuri Kattala
: Each of the 3 atolls of this region speak their own distinctive forms of the Maldivian language (''Huvadhu bas'', ''Mulaku bas'', ''Addu bas''), which are much different from the rest and as researchers suggest having a closer affinity to what may have been the original.
The export of this civilisation to all coasts of South Asia and South-east Asia began about 500 B.C., but during the Mauryan period and the diffusion of Buddhism, sea traffic in the Bay of Bengal supplemented and, to some extent, surpassed that originating along the coasts of Western India.
They brought their religion, Hinduism, customs and language.
A significant number of Maldivian emigrant communities can be found in several countries.
Frequent Maldivian family names include Bee, Beefan, Boo, Didi, Fan, Fulhu, Kader, Kalaminja, Kalinga, Kalo, Kavah, Kavya, Koi, Koya, Manik, Manika, Manike, Manikfan, Naha, Raha, Rana, Tarkan, Thakhan, Thakur, Thakurfan, Veer.
This ruler's daughter married the chief minister and reigned as a nominal Sultana.
Most Mahls live in their native land of Maliku (Minicoy).
The secession of Minicoy from Maldivian rule and affiliating with the Indian government gradually led to the emergence of a Maldivian population holding Indian citizenship.
Analysis of this data by Dr. Wynfrid Duckworth, suggested that there were three major sources of immigration into the country.
Unlike the other group of Maldivians, this group was not affected by the Portuguese rule in the Maldives as it does not exceed the Suvadiva channel.
Each of the 3 atolls of the Suvadiva region speak their own distinctive forms of the Maldivian language (''Huvadhu bas'', ''Mulaku bas'' and ''Addu bas''), which are much different from the rest and as suggested by researchers, having a closer affinity to what may have been the original.
Thus, the native features of the original Maldivian people are preserved in this group greater than any other group of Maldivians.
These people are said to have arrived in these islands during Ashoka's reign, probably when he sent Buddhist missionaries to all the neighbouring countries, in the 3rd century BC.
The following version was recorded by Bell in 1922:
They are said to have been fair-skinned and light eyed, and are said to have built large monuments.
There is no historical evidence about the origin of Maldivians; there is also no indication that there was any negrito or other aboriginal population, such as the Andamanese.
The law of the country prohibits the practice of any other religion by the country's citizens.
There are some folk stories associated with the Redhin that give them almost supernatural powers.
This sweet will keep for two to three months without spoiling.
All Mahl communities in India emerged from Minicoy.
Wrapped entirely with banana leaf and placed jasmine flowers over the sweets.
Left the cooked kubus parcels overnight in the hole.
For all the Maldivian communities across the world (including the people of Minicoy) their origin lies in the Maldives.
Therefore, the coconut tree is said to have an anthropomorphic origin according to Maldive lore.
A group of people came to the Maldives from Bairat in order to teach the religion of Buddha.
This may be the reason that the Dhivehi kinship system is partly of Dravidian origin, and bears evidence of some matriliny, like the Nayar and other matrilineal groups of Kerala.
The Maldive Islanders, learning that the two chief visitors were of Ceylon Royal descent invited them to remain; and ultimately proclaimed Koimala their king at Rasgetheemu, the original 'King's Island'.
In the Muslim traditions recorded in the ''Lōmāfānu'' and ''Rādavaḷi'' chronicles all the pre-Muslim royalty are represented by a king, whose successor was converted to Islam.
According to this version, which Maloney heard in Male', Koimala's parents came from India, not Sri Lanka: The Indian king was angry with his son, and sent him off with his wife in two boats; they had 700 soldiers.
They also found 66 different Y-STR haplotypes in 10 Y chromosome haplogroups, predominantly R1a1, R2, H, L and J2.
Women wore libaas  at the time.
'''''Karukuri Ala'''''
The present situation of the arts has come about because of a lack of critical and theoretical interpretation and a lack of dialogue and discourse in an organized, sustained or documented form.
The king had a daughter who fell in love with this creature (in an alternate version, the king forced his daughter to marry the creature).
According to researchers, this group of Maldivians have the closest proximity to the original Maldivian people in terms of linguistics as well as on ethnic grounds.
These people are said to have been dark-skinned and used a different idiom, using words such as ''varam'' for the islands in which they lived.
The other Jataka tales suggest that ships from Gujarat going to South-east Asia stopped in the Maldives, and that merchants in search of treasures sailed in several seas called – maala (or maara).
Historical records show that in the southern and central atolls of the Maldives, occupations such as farming and weaving were important in the early days.
They had no king, but the leader of the tribe was their religious leader who was called ''sawamiah'' by the people who regarded him as an agent of God.
Renewed interest in these arts have also led to various individuals to pursue on their own whatever education they can obtain, whether through distance learning courses from foreign universities, or via books and magazines.
Until recently, fine arts in the Maldives have been usually defined as the various crafts and skills of craft making.
From this group, it is the standard dialect of Maldivian language which is spoken in the Maldives capital Male' along with the central atolls.
The man-beast then married the king's daughter, but he made political trouble in Sri Lanka, so was forced to leave.
The direct transport between Minicoy and the Maldives was forbidden by the Indian government.
Slighter variants which are very closely related to the former are spoken in rest of the islands from the far north of Maldives down to Laamu Atoll.
The king took the creature to the palace and looked after him well, and because he knew no language, the king taught him language, which took a long time.
All Maldivians are Muslims with 100% of the whole population adhering to the Sunni school of thought.
A myth Maloney heard in Manadhoo, Noon Atoll, is, in condensed form, as follows:
Also it has pointed out that the Dhivehi language of the Maldives being the southernmost Indo-Aryan language, and sharing of specific haplogroups with Indo-Aryan populations mostly from India and from Sri Lanka, could point to a common origin of these populations.
The Hindu religion was introduced, and the Indic Prakrit that finally evolved into present Maldivian language was probably adopted at this time, both brought from the Indian sub-continent.
Smoked and dried the leaves spread with the sweet over the fireplace.
Immigration from the littoral areas of Malabar and the Coromandel Coast would have brought families of fishermen to these northern atolls where fishing was the main occupation of the people.
Added in the crushed taro in to the sugar and coated well.
In a larger scale, the third group also comes under this group.
for this reason The word naashi(coconut shell) is also the word used for skull in dhivehi language.
Placed the charcoals and coconut fibres and coconut shells over it and burned the coconut fibres and shells for half an hour.
Also there were no interference from traders and travellers as much as in the case of the other.
The term ''kalō'' is a common word of man, used as a term of endearment.
In the Maldivian legend, the prince who arrived in the Maldives, was the son of ''Brahmaditiya'', king of Kalinga (Brahmadatta, King of Kalinga at the time of Buddha's death c. 500 – 350 BC), a kingdom on the south-east of India (modern Orissa).
They came to Rasgetheemu in Raa Atoll, and when he became king there, people called that island Rasgetheemu "King's Landing".
In the morning scraped off the burnt ashes and charcoals aside and the sand covering the banana leaf and slowly lifted the wrapped kubus parcels.
This group has its own dialect (called ''Maliku bas or Mahl'') which retains some features of an older Maldivian, and shows Malayalam influences as well.
Removed from heat, allowed cooling and kept in an airtight container.
One of the important characteristics of the Dheyvi language seems to have been a letter and sound unique to the language, called ''Rhaviyani'', a soft sibilant still present in Maldivian language.
The story of the ''Tivarun'', the linguistics of the people in Minicoy and many other factors prove this side of the story.
One day, the king, with the help of many men, put the net over the creature, which could not get out because of the large stone weights.
Also, there are graves in a cemetery of Madifushi in Mulaku Atoll, which are said to be that of Redhin.
Various fine art practices exist in the Maldives at present.
Made of Patna Rice flour, coconut (grated), Rihaakuru, Rihaakuru Bondi (blended), eggs, onion (sliced thinly), curry leaves (chopped), cherry pepper, juice of two limes, ginger, salt to season and oil by crushing the onion, curry leaves, cherry pepper, ginger with salt.
Once, while out hunting with a net, he saw a creature which is like a human, but which walked on all fours, and which disturbed the people.
Made of coconut palm syrup by boiling the syrup over a moderate heat and cooked by stirring continuously until it starts to thicken.
However the language shows some influences of neighbouring Dravidian languages on it, and have a number of loanwords from Dravidian vocabulary.
'''''Karukuri Banbukeyo'''''
Because she was a princess of royal lineage, people asked her husband to rule.
This provides the much needed contact with artists that is so necessary to the development of any art form.
Islam is the country's state religion as well as the backbone of the society with daily life in the country being regulated according to the tenets of Islam and government regulations too being based on the regulations of Islamic law (Shari'a).
* '''The main group of Maldivians''', numbering more than 250,000.
As a result of some political activities which occurred in the South during the early 1960s, the term ''Suvadivian'' has been adopted by some authors to refer to the southern group of Maldivians.
They settled in what is now Sultan Park (site of the former palace) and started a kingdom.
'''''Kulhi Bis Fathafolhi'''''
In 2013, genetic study about the Maldivian population by department of Human Genetics, Liden University, which was published online on the ''American Journal of Physical Anthropology'' has revealed very interesting facts about the genetic origin of Maldivian people.
The origin of this group like any other group of Maldivians lye in the Maldives.
Made of coconut sap (collected at noon) by boiling the sap over a moderate heat and cooked by stirring continuously until it comes to ribbon stage.
The observations are consistent with the historical records of Maldives, showing that early travellers from India, Indonesia, North Africa, the Red Sea and Persian Gulf areas, settled in the Maldives.
http://www.presidencymaldives.gov.mv/Index.aspx?lid=1
Cut using a round cutter of 3 – inch diameter and pre-heated oil.
This would place the arrival of the Aryans during the 6th century BC.
The ''Aryas'' came from India, although tradition says that they were not really from India, but from a place outside India.
'''''Veli Hakuru'''''
Sculpture and crafts that overlap with art making also exist in the country.
''Mahls'' are the third subgroup of Maldivians centred in the island of Minicoy making up the only community of ethnic Maldivians in India.
It is said that a beautiful woman named Malakamana from the Maldives was one of the early people who settled Sri Lanka."
Then the king and queen came to Male', and Koimala was born from that Indian couple.
Due to reasons such as politics, having to live in great isolation from the remaining Maldivian people, the Minicoians are steadily undergoing a process of acculturation.
The coconut tree occupies a central place in the present-day Maldive national emblem.
Poured a table spoonful of the mixture into the oil and deep-fried until golden.
* The western shores of the Malay Peninsula, and the islands of the Malaya  Archipelago.
In 1899, Professor John Stanley Gardiner visited Maldives, during which time; he collected anthropometrical data of a number of Maldivians from many islands.
Removed from heat, allowed cooling and put into jars and seal well.
Made of Patna Rice (soaked overnight, washed and blended to a smooth paste), coconut – semi-firm (grated), coconut palm syrup, caster sugar, banana leaf by cooking over a moderate heat the grated coconut, palm sugar and caster sugar until the mixture has thickened.
The researchers  found a total of 63 different mtDNA haplotypes that could be allocated to 29 mtDNAs, mostly within the M, R and U clades.
There are ancient mounds on some islands with names associated with the Redhin such as the Havitta in Fuvahmulah.
Drained on absorbent kitchen paper and kept airtight container.
However, due to various limitations, they have not flourished as art forms.
The Mahls make up the third subgroup of Maldivians.
Removed from heat and whisked until frothy and cooled.
There was a king of India who was a hunter.
After the Dheyvis, the next arrivals in the Maldives were people called ''Redhis'' (Maldivian plural ''Redhin''), followed by ''Kunibis'' (Maldivian plural ''Kunibin'').
In the Maldives which is the heartland of Maldivians and home for more than 97% of the Maldivian people, the national religion is Islam.
Removed from heat and allowed cooling and added in the blended rice and kneaded thoroughly and combined all the ingredients well.
One oral tradition says that the Giraavaru people (Tivaru people) are the indigenous people of the Maldives who were in the islands before Koimala arrived.
From them the subsequent rulers of the Maldives were descended.
The man-beast couldn't walk, so the king taught him to do it.
The proximity of the northern atolls to Southern India would have brought settlers from the coastal areas to settle in the Laccadive-Maldive archipelago.
Today, this kind of beliefs are on the verge of vanishing completely from Maldivian communities and can only be observed rarely.
Since 1957, this group of Maldivians in Minicoy are totally off-limits for their Maldivian counterparts in the Maldives.
Rashoveshi, an ancient local poem of Fuvahmulah says: "Havitta uhey haudhahau, Redhin thaneke hedhi ihau" (Meaning: How tall is the Havitta, which was made in the past by the Redhin).
For example, the first name of historian Mohamed Ibrahim Lutfy is "Mohamed;" "Ibrahim" is his father's name, and "Lutfy" is the family name.
The two ships were dispatched to Lanka, and brought over other people of 'the Lion Race' (Sinhalas).
Northern islands were than populated by tribes from Southern India.
This is the period calculated earlier from oral tradition, and the story also corresponds to that from the ''Mahavansa'' chronicle of Sri Lanka, about the king's son who was exiled from his country and arrived in Lanka, one of his ships losing its way and arriving in the Maldives.
This is the group inhabiting the numerous atolls stretching from Ihavandhippolhu (Haa Alif) to Haddhunmathi (Laamu) in Maldives.
For ethnographic and linguistic purposes as well as geo-political reasons anthropologists divide the Maldivian people into 3 subgroups:
Mahls are 15.67% of the total population of Lakshadweep emerging as a separate ethnic group among the rest of the population.
Placed coconut fibres and coconut shells and burned them in the dug hole and removed the charcoals.
A short time after the arrival of the Aryas and the introduction of the Hindu religion, a prince of India is said to have arrived in the Maldives.
A number of Mahls have settled in the districts of Kozhikode, Malappuram, Ernakulam and Thiruvananthapuram (Trivandrum) in the southern state of Kerala.
When they came to these islands, they first settled in Isduva (Isdhoo) of the atoll Isduvammathi (Haddhummathi).
However, with the establishment of private galleries and with various exhibitions organized by the government and the artists themselves, in the last 15 years, the awareness that painting can be an expressive art form apart from also being a lucrative commercial activity has provided encouragement for several young Maldivians to pursue painting, and to an extent sculpture and other public and commercial art forms.
The king considered how he might capture this creature.
Primary among them is drawing and painting.
The name Koimala Kalo is also suggestive: ''koi'' or ''koyi'' in Maldivian language means son, lad or prince (derived from Malayalam ''koya'', son, prince, master, cf.
Unlike the southern minority, this group of Maldivians were subject to foreign intercourse.
In 1997, a Maldivian NGO, Society for Health Education, conducted a study on the mutations of thalassaemia found in the Maldives.
Instead they were called by an alternative name such as Dohuttu, Lahuttu, Tutteedi, Kudamaniku, or Don Goma.
The research studied autosomal DNA-, mitochondrial DNA-, and Y-chromosomal DNA markers in a representative sample of 141 unrelated Maldivians, with 119 from six major settlements.
Added and mixed the rice flour and coconut to make sandy texture.
* '''The southern group of Maldivians''', living in the three southernmost atolls of the equatorial zone (Huvadhu, Fuvahmulah and Addu atolls) in Maldives.
They were adept at travelling at very high speeds on the sea.
Thalassaemia is the commonest genetically transmitted blood disease found in Maldives, and the results of this study suggest that many of the people now living in Maldives had ancestors who came from the above-mentioned countries.
the Dravidian root ''kō'', king).
To Koimala and his queen was born a male child who was called Kalaminja.
A generation ago, most Maldivian people were not commonly known by their birth names.
Made of plantain (peeled and cut length-wise) and oil by frying the bananas until crisped.
Since ethnic Maldivians of Minicoy are only no more than 0.0015% of the total population of India compared to 100% for their counterparts in the Maldives, it is only from the Maldivian embassies across the world that this information could be gathered.
Maloney says Gujarat, with its indented coastline and its proximity to the old navigation routes of the Mesopotamian and Indus civilisations, has apparently maintained a tradition of navigation over the past 4000 years.
Made of Patna Rice flour, coconut palm syrup, eggs and coconut oil by whisking the egg and the syrup and added in the rice flour and beaten further.
The tradition says that at a later date, people arrived from ''Sarandiva'' (Serendib) and settled there, corrupting the atoll's Dheyvi language and characters in the usage.
It may be, therefore, that shipwrecked Gujaratis, as well as exiles, were early settlers on the islands of the Laccadive-Maldives archipelago.
A legend says that the first inhabitants of the Maldives died in great numbers, but a great sorcerer or ''fandita'' man made coconut trees grow out of the skulls of the buried corpses of the first settlers.
King Brahmaditiya was displeased with his son and sent him to Dheeva Maari (Maldives).
Still, the dialect is mutually intelligible with the standard Maldivian dialect and is more related to the slighter variants of northern Maldives from the first group.
When Koimala and his wife came, there were already people here.
The long story of the cultural and economic expansion of North Indian civilisation by sea cannot be told here.
From 1959 to 1963 there was a short-lived breakaway government named United Suvadive Republic which was formed by the Southerners, from which the name originated though there are no such native names.
Maldives was then Dheeva Maari.
Martial arts among Maldivians are known as ''hevikamuge kulhivaruthak'', while ''gulhamathi hifun'' is traditional wrestling among Maldivians.
She gave birth to a son also called Kalaminja, who, in turn, married a lady of the country.
* The peninsula of Hindustan with Ceylon,
The Dheyvis called all islands ''duva''.
He made big weights for his net, which no ordinary human could lift, and which would prevent the creature from taking the hunting net.
They make up about 3% of the total population of all Maldivians.
Made of fried bread fruit (crushed coarsely), coconut palm syrup, jasmine water by bringing the syrup and the jasmine water to boil and cooked it over a moderate heat until it comes to ribbon stage.
After fifteen years, a jinni began to come from the ocean every once a month and disturbed the people... (from here follows the story of the saint who came and dispelled the ''jinni'' and caused all the people to become converted to Islam from Buddhism and Hinduism).
This group numbers approximately 60,000 and constitute about 20% of the total population of all Maldivians.
Removed from heat, allowed cooling and kept in an airtight container.
This group has its own dialect (called ''Maliku bas or Mahl'') which retains some features of archaic Maldivian language, and shows Malayalam influences as well.
This suggests that not only did seafarers emanating from Bharukaccha and Suppara visit the Maldives, but Gujaratis actually settled there in pre-Buddhist times.
'''''Thela Kubus'''''
There is, however, a Dravidian substratum, in addition to other later cultural influences in the islands.
Mixed/kneaded the dough and divided the dough into 15&nbsp;gram balls.
Still, the dialect is mutually intelligible with the standard dialect of Maldivian and is more related to the slighter variants of northern Maldives.
However, the secession of Minicoy from Maldivian rule and gradually becoming part of India, thus becoming the only group of ethnic Maldivians with a non-Maldivian citizenship made anthropologists to label the Mahls among the subgroups.
With the arrival of the Aryas, the religion and the language of Dheyvis of the Maldives underwent changes.
Another version Maloney heard in Hulhumeedhoo, Addu Atoll, in the far south of the country, is as follows:
Made of fried taro (crushed coarsely), coconut palm syrup and jasmine water by boiling the syrup and the jasmine water and cooked it over a moderate heat until it comes to ribbon stage.
Spread each ball to about ¼ inch thickness.
Unlike the other languages of South India, it is an Indo-European language, while other South Indian languages are Dravidian languages.
Covered the dough parcels placed in the hole with another large piece of banana leaf and covered the leaf with two-inch white sand.
They constitute over 70% of the total population of all Maldivians.
Thus, this Indian group of Maldivians are steadily undergoing a process of acculturation owing to lack of contact with the remaining Maldivian people and pressure to use other languages such as Malayalam, English and Hindi.
The king, being angry, put the couple on a ship and sent them off into exile.
There were numerous occasions of reported interference from outsiders such as traders, travellers, etc... Also, the Portuguese rule and many other factors pushed this group into a state that imported materials got mixed into their linguistics as well as ethnic background to a large extent.
The component ''malā'' may or may not be derived from ''māla'' as in Māla-dīv, but, if so, the name would mean 'prince of the Maldives'.
Many of the old terms used by Maldivian fishermen come from the Dravidian languages, leading one to the assumption that these terms were brought by people from southern coastal India in ancient times.
It is said that after the people from Sarandiva arrived and settled in Suvadimmathi, this character in the Dheyvi language lost its purity and was pronounced as the "Sh" sound.
However ancient Maldivian naming system is similar to that of Gujaratis and Marathas.
Koimala sent ships to Sri Lanka and brought back more people.
