These Sahelian kingdoms had neither rigid geopolitical boundaries nor rigid ethnic identities.
In 2000, 62–65 percent of the population was estimated to have access to safe drinking water and only 69 percent to sanitation services of some kind.
Mali is a part of "French Zone" (''Zone Franc''), which means that it uses CFA franc.
The president serves as a chief of state and commander in chief of the armed forces.
The Adrar des Ifoghas massif lies in the northeast.
His efforts were frustrated by political turmoil and a devastating drought between 1968 and 1974, in which famine killed thousands of people.
In January 2012, an armed conflict broke out in northern Mali, which Tuareg rebels took control of by April and declared the secession of a new state, Azawad.
15 percent of Malian workers are employed in the service sector.
Informal games are often played by youths using a bundle of rags as a ball.
Keïta quickly established a one-party state, adopted an independent African and socialist orientation with close ties to the East, and implemented extensive nationalization of economic resources.
At its peak in 1300, the Mali Empire covered an area about twice the size of modern-day France and stretched to the west coast of Africa.
Mali was once part of three famed West African empires which controlled trans-Saharan trade in gold, salt, slaves, and other precious commodities.
During its golden age, there was a flourishing of mathematics, astronomy, literature, and art.
Other natural resources include kaolin, salt, phosphate, and limestone.
In response to growing demands for multi-party democracy, the Traoré regime allowed some limited political liberalization.
The Traoré regime faced student unrest beginning in the late 1970s and three coup attempts.
Malaria and other arthropod-borne diseases are prevalent in Mali, as are a number of infectious diseases such as cholera and tuberculosis.
French Sudan (then known as the Sudanese Republic) joined with Senegal in 1959, achieving independence in 1960 as the Mali Federation.
Opposition to the corrupt and dictatorial regime of General Moussa Traoré grew during the 1980s.
Mali consists of eight regions and its borders on the north reach deep into the middle of the Sahara Desert, while the country's southern part, where the majority of inhabitants live, features the Niger and Senegal rivers.
Mali is connected with the French government by agreement since 1962 (creation of BCEAO).
For example, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and the Aga Khan Foundation, trained women's groups to make ''equinut'', a healthy and nutritional version of the traditional recipe ''di-dèguè'' (comprising peanut paste, honey and millet or rice flour).
Efforts have been made to improve nutrition, and reduce associated health problems, by encouraging women to make nutritious versions of local recipes.
An estimated 90 percent of Malians are Muslim (mostly Sunni and Ahmadiyya), approximately 5 percent are Christian (about two-thirds Roman Catholic and one-third Protestant) and the remaining 5 percent adhere to indigenous or traditional animist beliefs.
Dance parties are common events among friends, and traditional mask dances are performed at ceremonial events.
Malian music is diverse and has several different genres.
The programme increased social and economic conditions, and led to Mali joining the World Trade Organization on 31 May 1995.
In the late 19th century, during the Scramble for Africa, France seized control of Mali, making it a part of French Sudan.
The aim was to boost nutrition and livelihoods by producing a product that women could make and sell, and which would be accepted by the local community because of its local heritage.
The Songhai people originated in current northwestern Nigeria.
The population of Mali is 14.5&nbsp;million.
Mali's highest courts are the Supreme Court, which has both judicial and administrative powers, and a separate Constitutional Court that provides judicial review of legislative acts and serves as an election arbiter.
On 6 April 2012, the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad unilaterally declared their secession from Mali as Azawad, an act that neither Mali nor the international community recognised.
On 2 February, the French President, François Hollande, joined Mali's interim President, Dioncounda Traoré, in a public appearance in recently recaptured Timbuktu.
Electricity and water are maintained by the Energie du Mali, or EDM, and textiles are generated by Industry Textile du Mali, or ITEMA.
The average worker's annual salary is approximately US$1,500.
During 2002, 620,000 tons of cotton were produced in Mali but cotton prices declined significantly in 2003.
Mali lies in the torrid zone and is among the hottest countries in the world.
The emergence of gold as Mali's leading export product since 1999 has helped mitigate some of the negative impact of the cotton and Ivory Coast crises.
In 1960, the population of Mali was reported to be about 4.1&nbsp;million.
Late June to early December is the rainy season in the southernmost area.
Mali's literary tradition is passed mainly by word of mouth, with ''jalis'' reciting or singing histories and stories known by heart.
The empire expanded throughout West Africa from the 8th century until 1078, when it was conquered by the Almoravids.
During this time strict programs, imposed to satisfy demands of the International Monetary Fund, brought increased hardship upon the country's population, while elites close to the government supposedly lived in growing wealth.
The coup is remembered as Mali's March Revolution of 1991.
Anti-government protests in 1991 led to a coup, a transitional government, and a new constitution.
Public education in Mali is in principle provided free of charge and is compulsory for nine years between the ages of seven and sixteen.
They refused to usher in a full-fledged democratic system.
Mali underwent economic reform, beginning in 1988 by signing agreements with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
By 1905, most of the area was under firm French control as a part of French Sudan.
Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 53.06 years in 2012.
After the 2012 imposition of sharia rule in northern parts of the country, however, Mali came to be listed high (number 7) in the Christian persecution index published by Open Doors, which described the persecution in the north as severe.
The earliest of these empires was the Ghana Empire, which was dominated by the Soninke, a Mande-speaking people.
The varied everyday culture of Malians reflects the country's ethnic and geographic diversity.
General insecurity along borders in the north, including cross-border banditry and terrorism, remain troubling issues in regional relations.
During this democratic period Mali was regarded as one of the most politically and socially stable countries in Africa.
The Songhai Empire's eventual collapse was largely the result of a Moroccan invasion in 1591, under the command of Judar Pasha.
Mali's population also suffers from a high rate of child malnutrition and a low rate of immunization.
Mali was active in regional organizations such as the African Union until its suspension over the 2012 Malian coup d'état.
Nowadays, the day is a national holiday in order to remember the tragic events and the people that were killed.
The system encompasses six years of primary education beginning at age 7, followed by six years of secondary education.
Cotton is the country's largest crop export and is exported west throughout Senegal and Ivory Coast.
The Traoré regime repressed all dissenters until the late 1980s.
In Bamako, in response to mass demonstrations organized by university students and later joined by trade unionists and others, soldiers opened fire indiscriminately on the nonviolent demonstrators.
According to John Iliffe, "The worst crises were in the 1680s, when famine extended from the Senegambian coast to the Upper Nile and 'many sold themselves for slaves, only to get a sustenance', and especially in 1738–56, when West Africa's greatest recorded subsistence crisis, due to drought and locusts, reportedly killed half the population of Timbuktu."
Each is spoken as a first language primarily by the ethnic group with which it is associated.
Traditional wrestling (''la lutte'') is also somewhat common, though popularity has declined in recent years.
In 2002 Amadou Toumani Touré, a retired general who had been the leader of the military aspect of the 1991 democratic uprising, was elected.
Mali has 12 national languages beside French and Bambara, namely Bomu, Tieyaxo Bozo, Toro So Dogon, Maasina Fulfulde, Hassaniya Arabic, Mamara Senoufo, Kita Maninkakan, Soninke, Koyraboro Senni, Syenara Senoufo, Tamasheq and Xaasongaxango.
The military is underpaid, poorly equipped, and in need of rationalization.
'''Mali''' (; ), officially the '''Republic of Mali''' (), is a landlocked country in West Africa.
Mali's military forces consist of an army, which includes land forces and air force, as well as the paramilitary Gendarmerie and Republican Guard, all of which are under the control of Mali's Ministry of Defense and Veterans, headed by a civilian.
The government later regained control over these areas.
The MNLA quickly took control of the north, declaring independence as Azawad.
The Mali Empire later formed on the upper Niger River, and reached the height of power in the 14th century.
Urban areas are known for their large quantity of green and white taxicabs.
Mali's foreign policy orientation has become increasingly pragmatic and pro-Western over time.
Mali's key industry is agriculture.
He and three associates were later tried and convicted and received the death sentence for their part in the decision-making of that day.
Most towns and cities have regular games; the most popular teams nationally are Djoliba AC, Stade Malien, and Real Bamako, all based in the capital.
Eighty percent of Malian workers are employed in agriculture.
The gross domestic product (GDP) has risen since.
Senegal withdrew from the federation in August 1960, which allowed the Sudanese Republic to become the independent Republic of Mali on 22 September 1960.
Estimates of literacy rates in Mali range from 27–30 to 46.4 percent, with literacy rates significantly lower among women than men.
A significant sum of the population is dependent on public transportation.
Amadou Hampâté Bâ, Mali's best-known historian, spent much of his life writing these oral traditions down for the world to remember.
Mali's constitution provides for an independent judiciary, but the executive continues to exercise influence over the judiciary by virtue of power to appoint judges and oversee both judicial functions and law enforcement.
The Telecommunications in Mali include 869,600 mobile phones, 45,000 televisions and 414,985 internet users.
Slavery persists in Mali today with as many as 200,000 people held in direct servitude to a master.
26 March 1991 is the day that marks the clash between military soldiers and peaceful demonstrating students which climaxed in the massacre of dozens under the orders of then President Moussa Traoré.
In early 1959, French Sudan (which changed its name to the Sudanese Republic) and Senegal united to become the Mali Federation.
The little southern band possesses a tropical wet and dry climate (Köppen climate classification (''Aw'') very high temperatures year-round with a dry season and a rainy season.
In 2001, the general government expenditures on health totalled about US$4 per capita at an average exchange rate.
Mali's actual primary school enrollment rate is low, in large part because families are unable to cover the cost of uniforms, books, supplies, and other fees required to attend.
Its capital is Bamako.
Mali is estimated to have in excess of 17,400 tonnes of uranium (measured + indicated + inferred).
Some of Mali's prominent natural resources include gold, being the third largest producer of gold in the African continent, and salt.
In Mali, there is a railway that connects to bordering countries.
Working to control and resolve regional conflicts, such as in Ivory Coast, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, is one of Mali's major foreign policy goals.
About half the population lives below the international poverty line of $1.25 (U.S.) a day.
Malians frequently participate in traditional festivals, dances, and ceremonies.
Basketball is another major sport; the Mali women's national basketball team, led by Hamchetou Maiga, competed at the 2008 Beijing Olympics.
Only 55% of the population in cities have access to EDM.
Mali feels threatened by the potential for the spillover of conflicts in neighboring states, and relations with those neighbors are often uneasy.
One of the worst famines in the region's recorded history occurred in the 18th century.
The constitution provides for a separation of powers among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government.
The death rate in 2007 was 16.5 deaths per 1,000.
Some famous Malian influences in music are kora virtuoso musician Toumani Diabaté, the late roots and blues guitarist Ali Farka Touré, the Tuareg band Tinariwen, and several Afro-pop artists such as Salif Keita, the duo Amadou et Mariam, Oumou Sangare, Rokia Traore, and Habib Koité.
A month later, Malian and French forces recaptured most of the north.
Executive power is vested in a president, who is elected to a five-year term by universal suffrage and is limited to two terms.
A prime minister appointed by the president serves as head of government and in turn appoints the Council of Ministers.
The constitution establishes a secular state and provides for freedom of religion, and the government largely respects this right.
In 1992, Alpha Oumar Konaré won Mali's first democratic, multi-party presidential election, before being re-elected for a second term in 1997, which was the last allowed under the constitution.
Barricades as well as roadblocks were erected and Traoré declared a state of emergency and imposed a nightly curfew.
Seasonal variations lead to regular temporary unemployment of agricultural workers.
Mali is a landlocked country in West Africa, located southwest of Algeria.
This conflict also plays a role in the continuing Northern Mali conflict where there is a tension between both Tuaregs and the Malian government, and the Tuaregs and radical Islamists who are trying to establish sharia law.
Mali is mostly flat, rising to rolling northern plains covered by sand.
Modibo Keïta was elected the first president.
Malian cuisine varies regionally.
The birth rate in 2014 is 45.53 births per 1,000, and the total fertility rate (in 2012) was 6.4 children per woman.
Riots broke out briefly following the shootings.
In 2002, 700 GWh of hydroelectric power were produced in Mali.
Under the Mali Empire, the ancient cities of Djenné and Timbuktu were centers of both trade and Islamic learning.
Mali faces numerous environmental challenges, including desertification, deforestation, soil erosion, and inadequate supplies of potable water.
It lies between latitudes 10° and 25°N, and longitudes 13°W and 5°E.
An estimated 85–91 percent of Mali's girls and women have had female genital mutilation (2006 and 2001 data).
In the late 14th century, the Songhai gradually gained independence from the Mali Empire and expanded, ultimately subsuming the entire eastern portion of the Mali Empire.
From 22 March through 26 March 1991, mass pro-democracy rallies and a nationwide strike was held in both urban and rural communities, which became known as les evenements ("the events") or the March Revolution.
Mali fell under the control of France during the late 19th century.
On 11 January 2013, the French Armed Forces intervened at the request of the interim government.
The Songhai had long been a major power in West Africa subject to the Mali Empire's rule.
Though Mali's literature is less famous than its music, Mali has always been one of Africa's liveliest intellectual centers.
Mali faces numerous health challenges related to poverty, malnutrition, and inadequate hygiene and sanitation.
The fall of the Songhai Empire marked the end of the region's role as a trading crossroads.
An estimated 1.9 percent of the adult and children population was afflicted with HIV/AIDS that year, among the lowest rates in Sub-Saharan Africa.
In the late 1990s, the secondary school enrollment rate was 15 percent (20 percent of males and 10 percent of females).
Malian musical traditions are derived from the griots, who are known as "Keepers of Memories".
Life expectancy at birth was 53.06 years total (51.43 for males and 54.73 for females).
In the Tuareg Rebellion of 2012, ex-slaves were a vulnerable population with reports of some slaves being recaptured by their former masters.
Following the 2007 elections, the Alliance for Democracy and Progress held 113 of 160 seats in the assembly.
In response to Islamist territorial gains, the French military launched Opération Serval in January 2013.
Mali's health and development indicators rank among the worst in the world.
The game wari, a mancala variant, is a common pastime.
During this time, flooding of the Niger River is common, creating the Inner Niger Delta.
Mali is also a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA).
The conflict was complicated by a military coup that took place in March and later fighting between Tuareg and Islamist rebels.
In 2007, about 48 percent of Malians were younger than 12 years old, 49 percent were 15–64 years old, and 3 percent were 65 and older.
Shortly thereafter, following Senegal's withdrawal from the federation, the Sudanese Republic declared itself the independent Republic of Mali.
Rice and millet are the staples of Malian cuisine, which is heavily based on cereal grains.
The Central Bank of West African States handles the financial affairs of Mali and additional members of the Economic Community of West African States.
Islam was introduced to West Africa in the 11th century and remains the predominant religion in much of the region.
Medical facilities in Mali are very limited, and medicines are in short supply.
As a consequence, opposition parties were legalized and a national congress of civil and political groups met to draft a new democratic constitution to be approved by a national referendum.
Mali is bordered by Algeria to the north, Niger to the east, Burkina Faso and Côte d'Ivoire to the south, Guinea to the south-west, and Senegal and Mauritania to the west.
Although Mali has enjoyed a reasonably good inter-ethnic relationships based on the long history of coexistence, some hereditary servitude and bondage relationship exist, as well as ethnic tension between settled Songhai and nomadic Tuaregs of the north.
In 2002, the GDP amounted to US$3.4&nbsp;billion, and increased to US$5.8&nbsp;billion in 2005, which amounts to an approximately 17.6 percent annual growth rate.
Mali is the eighth-largest country in Africa, with an area of just over .
There are also approximately 29 airports of which 8 have paved runways.
Two major companies, Societé de Telecommunications du Mali (SOTELMA) and the Cotton Ginning Company (CMDT), were expected to be privatized in 2008.
By 26 March, the growing refusal of soldiers to fire into the largely nonviolent protesting crowds turned into a full-scale tumult, and resulted in thousands of soldiers putting down their arms and joining the pro-democracy movement.
The education system is plagued by a lack of schools in rural areas, as well as shortages of teachers and materials.
The subsequent military-led regime, with Traoré as president, attempted to reform the economy.
Since the institution of a democratic form of government in 2002, Mali's relations with the West in general and with the United States in particular have improved significantly.
In March 2012, the Malian government lost control over Tombouctou, Gao and Kidal Regions and the north-eastern portion of Mopti Region.
The assembly holds two regular sessions each year, during which it debates and votes on legislation that has been submitted by a member or by the government.
In 1990, cohesive opposition movements began to emerge, and was complicated by the turbulent rise of ethnic violence in the north following the return of many Tuaregs to Mali.
The country's economy centers on agriculture and fishing.
Islam as historically practiced in Mali has been moderate, tolerant, and adapted to local conditions; relations between Muslims and practitioners of minority religious faiths have generally been amicable.
The system of government can be described as "semi-presidential".
Mali is one of the poorest countries in the world.
Presidential elections were held on 28 July 2013, with a second round run-off held on 11 August, and legislative elections were held on 24 November and 15 December 2013.
Despite an estimated loss of 300 lives over the course of four days, nonviolent protesters continued to return to Bamako each day demanding the resignation of the dictatorial president and the implementation of democratic policies.
At , including the disputed region of Azawad, Mali is the world's 24th-largest country and is comparable in size to South Africa or Angola.
Peaceful student protests in January 1991 were brutally suppressed, with mass arrests and torture of leaders and participants.
Grains are generally prepared with sauces made from edible leaves, such as spinach or baobab, with tomato peanut sauce, and may be accompanied by pieces of grilled meat (typically chicken, mutton, beef, or goat).
Most of Mali receives negligible rainfall and droughts are very frequent.
Various lower courts exist, though village chiefs and elders resolve most local disputes in rural areas.
Mali has a longstanding yet ambivalent relationship with France, a former colonial ruler.
The thermal equator, which matches the hottest spots year-round on the planet based on the mean daily annual temperature, crosses the country.
Since the agreement, sixteen enterprises were privatized, 12 partially privatized, and 20 liquidated.
On 19 November 1968, following progressive economic decline, the Keïta regime was overthrown in a bloodless military coup led by Moussa Traoré, a day which is now commemorated as Liberation Day.
Energie du Mali is an electric company that provides electricity to Mali citizens.
Most Malians wear flowing, colorful robes called boubous that are typical of West Africa.
In Mali, there are several newspapers such as ''Les Echos'', ''L'Essor'', ''Info Matin'', ''Nouvel Horizon'', and ''Le Républicain''.
In July 2009, Mali's population was an estimated 14.5&nbsp;million.
The government continued to attempt economic reforms, and the populace became increasingly dissatisfied.
Other well-known Malian writers include Baba Traoré, Modibo Sounkalo Keita, Massa Makan Diabaté, Moussa Konaté, and Fily Dabo Sissoko.
Atheism and agnosticism are believed to be rare among Malians, most of whom practice their religion on a daily basis.
In March, military officer Amadou Sanogo seized power in a coup d'état, citing Touré's failures in quelling the rebellion, and leading to sanctions and an embargo by the Economic Community of West African States.
However, Islamist groups including Ansar Dine and Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), who had helped the MNLA defeat the government, turned on the Tuareg and took control of the North with the goal of implementing sharia in Mali.
Present-day Mali was once part of three West African empires that controlled trans-Saharan trade: the Ghana Empire, the Mali Empire (for which Mali is named), and the Songhai Empire.
Between 1992 and 1995, Mali implemented an economic adjustment programme that resulted in economic growth and a reduction in financial imbalances.
In 2005, the Malian government conceded a railroad company to the Savage Corporation.
The Mali Federation gained independence from France on 20 June 1960.
In addition to cotton, Mali produces rice, millet, corn, vegetables, tobacco, and tree crops.
The unicameral National Assembly is Mali's sole legislative body, consisting of deputies elected to five-year terms.
Following the establishment of sea routes by the European powers, the trans-Saharan trade routes lost significance.
Other popular dishes include fufu, jollof rice, and maafe.
Scattered acts of rioting and vandalism of public buildings followed, but most actions by the dissidents remained nonviolent.
