Maltese clubs participate in the European Club competitions organised by LEN, are seen as being in the top 10 waterpolo leagues in Europe.
Because of its position, several culinary and botanical products were introduced in Malta; some examples (derived from the National Book of Trade Customs found in the National Library) include wheat (for bread making) and bacon.
There are also a number of cave churches, including the grotto at Mellieħa, which is a Shrine of the Nativity of Our Lady where, according to legend, St. Luke painted a picture of the Madonna.
Malta adopted a policy of neutrality in 1980.
However, it is no longer worn in modern Malta.
By comparison, the average population density for the "World (land only, excluding Antarctica)" was 54&nbsp;pop./km² as of July 2014.
The total fertility rate (TFR)  was estimated at 1.53 children born/woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2,1.
Also the local Roman coinage, which ceased in the first century BC, indicates the slow pace of the island's Romanization, since the very last locally minted coins still bear inscriptions in Ancient Greek on the obverse (like "MEΛΙΤΑΙΩ", meaning "of the Maltese") and Punic motifs, showing the resistance of the Greek and Punic cultures.
The highest point in Malta is Ta' Dmejrek, at , near Dingli.
Public education was organised along principles laid down by Bonaparte himself, providing for primary and secondary education.
The sixth form course lasts for two years, at the end of which students sit for the Matriculation examination.
Mobile telephone numbers have the prefix '''79''', '''77''', '''98''' or '''99'''.
In prose, Frans Sammut (The National Modern Author of Malta), Paul P. Borg and Joe J. Camilleri led the avant-garde meanwhile among the prominent names in theatre are Francis Ebejer, Alfred Sant, Doreen Micallef, Oreste Calleja, Joe Friggieri and Martin Gauci.
However, where a party wins an absolute majority of votes, but does not have a majority of seats, that party is given additional seats to ensure a parliamentary majority.
Advertising, sales and subsidies are the three main methods of financing newspapers and magazines.
As the islands were much desired due to their strategic importance, it was during this time the men of Malta were militarised to fend off capture attempts; early counts were skilled Genoese privateers.
Between 1883 and 1931, Malta had a railway line that connected Valletta to the army barracks at Mtarfa via Mdina and a number of towns and villages.
The company took over the bus service on 8 January 2015, while retaining the name ''Malta Public Transport''.
Pottery from the Għar Dalam phase is similar to pottery found in Agrigento, Sicily.
Phytogeographically, Malta belongs to the Liguro-Tyrrhenian province of the Mediterranean Region within the Boreal Kingdom.
Romanticism, tempered by the naturalism introduced to Malta by Giuseppe Calì, informed the "salon" artists of the early 20th century, including Edward and Robert Caruana Dingli.
Since then, Malta became ''Foederata Civitas'', a designation that meant it was exempt from paying tribute or the rule of Roman law, and fell within the jurisdiction of the province of Sicily.
The economy is dependent on foreign trade (serving as a freight trans-shipment point), manufacturing (especially electronics and textiles) and tourism.
Fixed line telephone numbers have the prefix '''21''' and '''27''', although businesses may have numbers starting '''22''' or '''23'''.
The bravery of the Maltese people during the second Siege of Malta moved King George VI to award the George Cross to Malta on a collective basis on 15 April 1942 "to bear witness to a heroism and devotion that will long be famous in history".
Malta has a regulator, the MFSA, with a strong business development mindset, and the country has been successful in attracting gaming businesses, aircraft and ship registration, credit-card issuing banking licences and also fund administration.
Large fluctuations in temperature are rare.
Maltese architecture has been influenced by many different Mediterranean cultures and British architecture over its history.
The favourite Maltese beverage was documented to be the Kinnie according to the National Statistics Office.
During winter time most of the beaches transform into surfer hangouts.
*Islands of St. Paul/Selmunett Island (Mellieħa)
Isle of MTV is a one-day music festival produced and broadcast on an annual basis by MTV.
During 2006, a total of 1,800 illegal immigrants reached Malta making the crossing from the North African coast.
From 454 to 464 the islands was subdued by the Vandals, and after 464 by the Ostrogoths.
In the 19th century, most emigration from Malta was to North Africa and the Middle East, although rates of return migration to Malta were high.
Between 1946 and the late 1970s, over 140,000 people left Malta on the assisted passage scheme, with 57.6% migrating to Australia, 22% to the UK, 13% to Canada and 7% to the United States.
During this time the people on Malta mainly cultivated olives and carob and produced textiles.
Malta's old-age-dependency-ratio rose from 17.2% in 1995 to 19.8% in 2005, reasonably lower than the EU's 24.9% average; 31.5% of the Maltese population is aged under 25 (compared to the EU's 29.1%); but the 50–64 age group constitutes 20.3% of the population, significantly higher than the EU's 17.9%.
However, a recently unearthed love ballad testifies to literary activity in the local tongue from the Medieval period.
Malta is an Apostolic See; the Acts of the Apostles tells of how St. Paul, on his way from Jerusalem to Rome to face trial, was shipwrecked on the island of "Melite", which many Bible scholars identify with Malta, an episode dated around AD 60.
Traffic in Malta drives on the left.
Primary schooling has been compulsory since 1946; secondary education up to the age of sixteen was made compulsory in 1971.
The country covers just over , with a population of just under 450,000 (despite an extensive emigration programme since the Second World War), making it one of the world's smallest and most densely populated countries.
Relatives of the kings of Aragon ruled the island until 1409, when it formally passed to the Crown of Aragon.
In December 2005, the European Council adopted ''The Global Approach to Migration: Priority Actions focusing on Africa and the Mediterranean''; but the deployment of said actions has been limited to the western Mediterranean, thus putting further pressure on the central Mediterranean route for irregular immigration of which Malta forms a part.
Numerous bays along the indented coastline of the islands provide good harbours.
The Christians on the island were allowed freedom of religion; they had to pay jizya, a tax for non-Muslims, but were exempt from the tax that Muslims had to pay (zakat).
Maltese folktales include various stories about mysterious creatures and supernatural events.
Previously, Italian was the official and cultural language of Malta, in its Sicilian variant from the 12th century, and in its Tuscan variant from the 16th century.
The Norman leader, Roger I of Sicily, was welcomed by the native Christians.
Malta's location has historically given it great strategic importance as a naval base, and a succession of powers, including the Phoenicians, Carthaginians, Romans, Moors, Normans, Sicilians, Spanish, Knights of St. John, French and British, have ruled the islands.
Other choices include German, Russian, Spanish, Latin, Chinese and Arabic.
The Eurobarometer states that 100% of the population speak Maltese.
Maltese and English are both used to teach pupils at primary and secondary school level, and both languages are also compulsory subjects.
Towards the end of the 15th century, Maltese artists, like their counterparts in neighbouring Sicily, came under the influence of the School of Antonello da Messina, which introduced Renaissance ideals and concepts to the decorative arts in Malta.
*Cominotto, (''Kemmunett'')
Malta followed a Romantic literary tradition, culminating in the works of Dun Karm Psaila, Malta's National Poet.
It has been a place of pilgrimage since medieval times.
The origin of the term ''Malta'' is uncertain, and the modern-day variation derives from the Maltese language.
Since 1808 all bishops of Malta have been Maltese.
The Neolithic temple builders 3800–2500 BC endowed the numerous temples of Malta and Gozo with intricate bas relief designs, including spirals evocative of the tree of life and animal portraits, designs painted in red ochre, ceramics and a vast collection of human form sculptures, particularly the Venus of Malta.
During this period, when Frederick II of Hohenstaufen began to reorganise his Sicilian kingdom, Western culture and religion began to exert their influence more intensely.
TVM, TVM2 and Parliament TV are operated by Public Broadcasting Services, the national broadcaster and member of the EBU.
The mobile penetration rate in Malta stood at 101.3% as at the end of 2009.
The festival has been arranged annually in Malta since 2007, with major pop artists performing each year.
Over 50,000 people attended, which marked the biggest attendance so far.
However, the Baroque movement that followed was destined to have the most enduring impact on Maltese art and architecture.
Malta is popular with British medical tourists, pointing Maltese hospitals towards seeking UK-sourced accreditation, such as with the Trent Accreditation Scheme.
The first settlers on the island constructed Ġgantija, one of the oldest manmade freestanding structures in the world.
A resurgent interest in the traditional wedding was evident in May 2007, when thousands of Maltese and tourists attended a traditional Maltese wedding in the style of the 16th century, in the village of Żurrieq.
Other writers, born in Malta or of Maltese descent, have established careers abroad.
Several dozen Maltese Jews may have converted to Christianity at the time to remain in the country.
For a brief period the kingdom passed to the Capetian House of Anjou, but high taxes made the dynasty unpopular in Malta, due in part to Charles of Anjou's war against the Republic of Genoa, and the island of Gozo was sacked in 1275.
Most university courses are in English.
Approximately 11,000 people out of a population of 60,000 died of plague in 1675.
Of the estimated 3,000 Muslims in Malta, approximately 2,250 are foreigners, approximately 600 are naturalised citizens, and approximately 150 are native-born Maltese.
There are more than 360 churches in Malta, Gozo and Comino, or one church for every 1,000 residents.
Car ownership in Malta is exceedingly high, considering the very small size of the islands; it is the fourth-highest in the European Union.
Tancred, King of Sicily, the last Norman monarch, made Malta a fief of the kingdom and installed a count of Malta.
The Medical Association of Malta represents practitioners of the medical profession.
The railway fell into disuse and eventually closed altogether, following the introduction of electric trams and buses.
For luck, many of the brides would attend in their wedding gown and veil, although this custom has long since disappeared from the islands.
Subject to their performance, students may then apply for an undergraduate degree or diploma.
According to the WWF, the territory of Malta belongs to the ecoregion of "Mediterranean Forests, Woodlands and Scrub".
Boxer Jeff Fenech is of Maltese descent.
The native Christian community that welcomed Roger I of Sicily was further bolstered by immigration to Malta from Italy, in the 12th and 13th centuries.
They also established watchtowers along the coasts&nbsp;– the Wignacourt, Lascaris and De Redin towers&nbsp;– named after the Grand Masters who ordered the work.
Education in Malta is based on the British model.
During this period, local sculptor Melchior Gafà (1639–1667) emerged as one of the top Baroque sculptors of the Roman School.
Nonetheless, Maltese communities formed in these regions.
Abela's writings describe Malta as a divinely ordained "bulwark of Christian, European civilization against the spread of Mediterranean Islam".
Catholicism is the official religion in Malta.
), St John Ambulance and Red Cross Malta who provide first aid/nursing services during events involving crowds.
In most cases there are small chambers here, with the cover made of a large slab placed on upright stones.
Money refers to a rich future while a book expresses intelligence and a possible career as a teacher.
However, by 1397 the bearing of the title "Count of Malta" reverted to a feudal basis with two families fighting over the distinction, which caused some conflict.
The regions are divided into local councils, of which there are currently 68 (54 in Malta and 14 in Gozo).
All censuses since 1842 have shown a slight excess of females over males.
Private schools prefer to use English for teaching, as is also the case with most departments of the University of Malta; this has a limiting effect on the capacity and development of the Maltese language.
Malta was admitted to the United Nations in 1964 and to the European Union in 2004; in 2008, it became part of the Eurozone.
The Roman period introduced highly decorative mosaic floors, marble colonnades and classical statuary, remnants of which are beautifully preserved and presented in the Roman Domus, a country villa just outside the walls of Mdina.
*Xrobb l-Għaġin Rock (Marsaxlokk)
It is said that under the Knights, this was the one day in the year when the Maltese were allowed to hunt and eat wild rabbit, which was otherwise reserved for the hunting pleasures of the Knights.
The ancient Greeks called the island  (''Melitē'') meaning "honey-sweet" (which was also, inter alia, the name of a Nereid), possibly due to Malta's unique production of honey; an endemic species of bee lives on the island.
*Small Blue Lagoon Rocks (Comino)
On another level, the AFM establishes and/or consolidates bilateral co-operation with other countries to reach higher operational effectiveness related to AFM roles.
1922), Antoine Camilleri (b.
Historically Malta gave refuge (and assisted in their resettlement) to eight hundred or so East African Asians who had been expelled from Uganda by Idi Amin and to just under a thousand Iraqis fleeing Saddam Hussein's regime.
A defence agreement signed soon after independence (and re-negotiated in 1972) expired on 31 March 1979.
New wives would wear the għonnella, a traditional item of Maltese clothing.
Primary school lasts six years.
The festival is usually held in the last week of April every year.
The islands offer a wide range of options for both beginners and elite players.
On 16 July 1990, Malta, through its foreign minister, Guido de Marco, applied to join the European Union.
Another conjecture suggests that the word ''Malta'' comes from the Phoenician word ''Maleth'' "a haven" or "port" in reference to Malta's many bays and coves.
Although there are some small rivers at times of high rainfall, there are no permanent rivers or lakes on Malta.
Today, there is one Jewish congregation.
However, there are minorities, the largest of which are Britons, many of whom are retirees.
The country's bilateral relations in other continents are very limited, with some having non-existent bilateral relations.
Malta's population density of 1,282 per square km (3,322/sq&nbsp;mi) is by far the highest in the EU and one of the highest in the world.
There are also some churches of other denominations, including St. Andrew's Scots Church in Valletta (a joint Presbyterian and Methodist congregation) and St Paul's Anglican Cathedral, and a Seventh-day Adventist church in Birkirkara.
Still, Italian television channels from Italy-based broadcasters, such as Mediaset and RAI, reach Malta and remain popular.
Infants who select a pencil or pen will be writers.
The life expectancy in 2013 was estimated at 79.98 years (77.69 years male, 82.41 years female).
The largest proportion of persons7.5 per centwere aged 25–29, while there were 7.3% falling into each of the 45–49 and 55–59 age brackets.
Paul the Apostle remained on the islands three months, preaching the Christian faith, which has since thrived on Malta.
Mnarja today is one of the few occasions when participants may hear traditional Maltese "għana".
Few other etymological mentions appear in classical literature, with the term ''Malta'' appearing in its present form in the ''Antonine Itinerary'' (Itin.
At the moment, females slightly outnumber males, making up 50.3 per cent of the population.
In literary criticism, Peter Serracino Inglott, Oliver Friggieri and Charles Briffa introduced perceptive historical, philosophical and psycho-social themes into Maltese theory.
The government in early 2012 called for a national FttH network to be built, with a minimum broadband service being upgraded from 4Mbit/s to 100Mbit/s.
On a child's first birthday, in a tradition that still survives today, Maltese parents would organise a game known as ''il-quċċija'', where a variety of symbolic objects would be randomly placed around the seated child.
The Knights' reign ended when Napoleon captured Malta on his way to Egypt during the French Revolutionary Wars in 1798.
The Maltese people created a Declaration of Rights in which they agreed to come "under the protection and sovereignty of the King of the free people, His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland".
Ships stopping at Malta's docks for refuelling helped the Entrepôt trade, which brought additional benefits to the island.
Most science students in Malta graduate from the University of Malta and are represented by S-Cubed (Science Student's Society), UESA (University Engineering Students Association) and ICTSA (University of Malta ICT Students' Association).
People who are eligible to vote in the election of the Maltese House of Representatives as well as resident citizens of the EU are eligible to vote.
The population's age composition is similar to the age structure prevalent in the EU.
In preparation for Malta's membership in the European Union, which it joined on 1 May 2004, it privatised some state-controlled firms and liberalised markets.
Malta produces only about 20% of its food needs, has limited freshwater supplies because of the drought in the summer and has no domestic energy sources, aside from the potential for solar energy from its plentiful sunlight.
The national stadium is called Ta' Qali Stadium.
These can be viewed at the temples themselves (most notably, the Hypogeum and Tarxien Temples), and at the National Museum of Archaeology in Valletta.
The culture of Malta reflects the various cultures that have come into contact with the Maltese Islands throughout the centuries, including neighbouring Mediterranean cultures, and the cultures of the nations that ruled Malta for long periods of time prior to its independence in 1964.
Malta is a republic whose parliamentary system and public administration are closely modelled on the Westminster system.
The Declaration also stated that "his Majesty has no right to cede these Islands to any power...if he chooses to withdraw his protection, and abandon his sovereignty, the right of electing another sovereign, or of the governing of these Islands, belongs to us, the inhabitants and aborigines alone, and without control."
It has one of the largest medical buildings in Europe.
Occasionally, couples will try to incorporate elements of the traditional Maltese wedding in their celebration.
Many immigrants have perished in the journey across the Mediterranean, with one notable incident being the May 2007 Malta migrant boat disaster.
These discussions are also undergoing between Malta and Libya for similar arrangements.
The first film was shot in Malta in 1925 (''Sons of the Sea''); over 100 feature films have been entirely or partially filmed in the country since then.
The Constitution (clause 5 -2) also provides for the introduction of another official language; this was originally intended as a loophole for the possible reintroduction of Italian as the traditional partner of Maltese at an opportune time.
Maltese historian Giovanni Francesco Abela states that following their conversion to Christianity at the hand of St. Paul, the Maltese retained their Christian religion, despite the Fatimid invasion.
Malta International Airport (Ajruport Internazzjonali ta' Malta) is the only airport serving the Maltese islands.
The landscape consists of low hills with terraced fields.
In 2nd century, Emperor Hadrian (r. 117–38) upgraded the status of Malta to ''municipium'' or free town: the island local affairs were administered by four ''quattuorviri iuri dicundo'' and a municipal senate, while a Roman procurator, living in Mdina, represented the proconsul of Sicily.
The Malta International Fireworks Festival is an annual festival that has been arranged in the Grand Harbour of Valletta since 2003.
Over the years preceding Napoleon's capture of the islands, the power of the Knights had declined and the Order had become unpopular.
The government chose Autobuses Urbanos de León as its preferred bus operator for the country in October 2014.
During the period of the Republic of Venice, several Maltese families emigrated to Corfu.
Malta is a good place for surfing and offers a lot of different surf spots.
At the end of 2007 the population of the Maltese Islands stood at 410,290 and is expected to reach 424,028 by 2025.
Post-War politics dealt with constitutional questions on the relations with Britain (first with integration then independence) and, eventually, relations with the European Union.
The state and political parties subsidise most of the funding of these television stations.
Malta is a popular tourist destination, with 1.6&nbsp;million tourists per year.
In the first half of 2006, 967 irregular immigrants arrived in Maltaalmost double the 473 who arrived in the same period in 2005.
The rest are privately owned.
There are eight terrestrial television channels in Malta: TVM, TVM2, Parliament TV, One, NET Television, Smash Television, F Living and Xejk.
The Romans, who also much later inhabited Mdina, referred to it (and the island) as ''Melita''.
For a long time it remained solely a fortified garrison.
Overall Arriva Malta operated 264 buses.
Malta is an archipelago in the central Mediterranean (in its eastern basin), some  south of the Italian island of Sicily across the Malta Channel.
Three times more tourists visit than there are residents.
The number of pay TV subscribers fell in 2012 as subscribers cut the cord and began to rely increasingly on IPTV: the number of IPTV subscribers doubled in the six months to June 2012.
The patron saints of Malta are Saint Paul, Saint Publius and Saint Agatha.
Malta and Tunisia are currently discussing the commercial exploitation of the continental shelf between their countries, particularly for petroleum exploration.
A large revolt on Sicily known as the Sicilian Vespers followed these attacks, that saw the Peninsula separating into the Kingdom of Naples.
Sixteen "hamlets", which form part of larger councils, have their own Administrative Committee.
The management structure changed from having self-employed drivers driving their own vehicles to a service being offered by a single company through a public tender (in Gozo, being considered as a small network, the service was given through direct order).
The Labour Party is currently at the helm of the government, the Prime Minister being Joseph Muscat.
After the Suez Canal opened in 1869, Malta's position halfway between the Strait of Gibraltar and Egypt proved to be its main asset, and it was considered an important stop on the way to India, a central trade route for the British.
In 533 Belisarius, on his way to conquer the Vandal Kingdom in North Africa, reunited the islands under Imperial (Eastern) rule.
They have recently been achieving great success, defeating teams including Sweden, Croatia and Latvia.
Rural Malta shares in common with Mediterranean society a number of superstitions regarding fertility, menstruation and pregnancy, including the avoidance of cemeteries during the months leading up to childbirth, and avoiding the preparation of certain foods during menses.
The Rococo movement was greatly enhanced by the relocation to Malta of Antoine de Favray (1706–1798), who assumed the position of court painter to Grand Master Pinto in 1744.
His legacy is evident in the works of local artists Giulio Cassarino (1582–1637) and Stefano Erardi (1630–1716).
The ferry makes numerous runs each day.
The event, known as Sette Giugno (Italian for ''7 June''), is commemorated every year and is one of five National Days.
Traditional Maltese weddings featured the bridal party walking in procession beneath an ornate canopy, from the home of the bride's family to the parish church, with singers trailing behind serenading the bride and groom.
However, the Constitution states that if there is any conflict between the Maltese and the English texts of any law, the Maltese text shall prevail.
Further evidence of Christian practices and beliefs during the period of Roman persecution appears in catacombs that lie beneath various sites around Malta, including St Paul's Catacombs and St Agatha's Catacombs in Rabat, just outside the walls of Mdina.
The number of registered cars in 1990 amounted to 182,254, giving an automobile density of .
Carnival (Maltese: ''il-karnival ta' Malta'') has had an important place on the cultural calendar after Grand Master Piero de Ponte introduced it to the islands in 1535.
These coins continue an existing national practice of minting of silver and gold commemorative coins.
The French forces left behind became unpopular with the Maltese, due particularly to the French forces' hostility towards Catholicism and pillaging of local churches to fund Napoleon's war efforts.
Established in 1905, they operated in the Maltese islands up to 2011 and became popular tourist attractions in their own right.
Competing against countries like Ireland and Luxembourg, Malta has a unique combination of a multi-lingual workforce and a strong legal system.
Holy Week (Maltese: ''il-Ġimgħa Mqaddsa'') starts on Palm Sunday (''Ħadd il-Palm'') and ends on Easter Sunday (''Ħadd il-Għid'').
FinanceMalta is the quasi-governmental organisation tasked with marketing and educating business leaders in coming to Malta and runs seminars and events around the world highlighting the emerging strength of Malta as a jurisdiction for banking and finance and insurance.
, there are two international schools, Verdala International School and QSI Malta.
Officially, it is a national festival dedicated to the feast of Saints Peter and St. Paul.
