*****Magnorder Xenarthra: xenarthrans
**Order Tubulidentata: aardvark (Africa south of the Sahara)
Sometimes, this color variation is determined by age variation, however, in other cases, it is determined by other factors.
They fly through the air at a constant speed by moving their wings up and down (usually with some fore-aft movement as well).
'''Class Mammalia'''
It has been suggested that the original function of lactation (milk production) was to keep eggs moist.
Most mammals, including the six most species-rich orders, belong to the placental group.
******Superorder Anagalida: lagomorphs, rodents and elephant shrews
Size relating to weight affects gliding animals such as the sugar glider.
This tiny primate weighed 20&ndash;30 grams (0.7&ndash;1.1 ounce) and could fit within a human palm.
The surface of their wings is equipped with touch-sensitive receptors on small bumps called Merkel cells, also found on human fingertips.
The exceptions are the manatee and the two-toed sloth, which have just six, and the three-toed sloth which has nine cervical vertebrae.
According to ''Mammal Species of the World'', 5,416 species were known in 2006.
Mammals that have 'passed' the mirror test are:
The majority of mammals have seven cervical vertebrae (bones in the neck), including bats, giraffes, whales and humans.
The size of an animal is also a factor in determining diet type (Allen's rule).
These selective pressures favor certain colors in order to increase survival.
By the Jurassic, the dinosaurs had come to dominate the large terrestrial herbivore niches as well.
'''Group III: Magnaorder Boreoeutheria'''
It is a definitive characteristic of the class.
At the end of the Carboniferous period, this group diverged from the sauropsid line that led to today's reptiles and birds.
For quadrupeds, there are three main categories: walking gaits, running gaits and leaping gaits.
The sea otter uses rocks as essential and regular parts of its foraging behaviour (smashing abalone from rocks or breaking open shells), with some populations spending 21% of their time making tools.
**Infraclass Holotheria: modern live-bearing mammals and their prehistoric relatives
Placental mammals have a corpus callosum, unlike monotremes and marsupials.
Other semi-aquatic mammals include beavers, hippopotamuses, otters and platypuses.
''Ambondro'' is more closely related to monotremes than to therian mammals while ''Amphilestes'' and ''Amphitherium'' are more closely related to the therians; as fossils of all three genera are dated about  in the Middle Jurassic, this is a reasonable estimate for the appearance of the crown group.
Epipubic bones, a feature that strongly influenced the reproduction of most mammal clades, are first found in Tritylodontidae, suggesting that it is a synapomorphy between them and mammaliformes.
An omnivore eats both prey and plants.
Some animals such as horses are unguligrade, walking on the tips of their toes.
Sloths sometimes appear to have green fur and blend into their green jungle environment, but this color is caused by algal growths.
A later eutherian, ''Eomaia'', dated to 125 million years ago in the early Cretaceous, possessed some features in common with the marsupials but not with the placentals, evidence that these features were present in the last common ancestor of the two groups but were later lost in the placental lineage.
In particular, the epipubic bones extend forwards from the pelvis.
Giant anteaters and platypuses are also knuckle-walkers.
The fossil is nearly complete and includes tufts of fur and imprints of soft tissues.
The monotremes have a sex determination system different from that of most other mammals.
Lek mating occurs in harems, wherein one or a few males protect their harem of females from other males who would otherwise mate with the females, as in elephant seals; or males congregate around females and try to attract them with various courtship displays and vocalizations, as in harbor seals.
External ears flaps are also very small or absent.
All mammalian brains possess a neocortex, a brain region unique to mammals.
Its outermost cells are constantly lost; its bottommost cells are constantly dividing and pushing upward.
Even non-placental eutherians probably reproduced this way.
As a result, some breeds, like Heck cattle, are vague look-alikes of the extinct wildtype aurochs.
Most of these findings have been independently validated by retrotransposon presence/absence data.
The dermis is made up of many components, such as bony structures and blood vessels.
The young lick the milk from a mammary patch on the mother's belly.
Usually insects, such as bees, ants and termites, have eusocial behavior, but it is demonstrated in two rodent species: the naked mole-rat and the Damaraland mole-rat.
Fully aquatic mammals, the cetaceans and sirenians, have lost their legs and have a tail fin to propel themselves through the water.
Other mammals, called herbivores, eat plants.
Findings from molecular genetics, for example, have prompted adopting new groups, such as the Afrotheria, and abandoning traditional groups, such as the Insectivora.
Another mechanism for coat color variation is selection for physiological response, such as temperature regulation in tropical or arctic environments, as with seasonal color change in snowshoe hares (''Lepus americanus'').
For example, horses show four natural gaits, the slowest horse gait is the walk, then there are three faster gaits which, from slowest to fastest, are the trot, the canter and the gallop.
*'''Subclass Theriiformes''': live-bearing mammals and their prehistoric relatives
If Mammalia is considered as the crown group, its origin can be roughly dated as the first known appearance of animals more closely related to some extant mammals than to others.
Three female elephants were tested, but only one passed, and two other elephants tested in another study also failed to pass.
Studies have shown that in some cases, differences in female and male coat color could indicate information nutrition and hormone levels, which are important in the mate selection process.
Walking is the most common gait, where some feet are on the ground at any given time, and found in almost all legged animals.
Though field work gradually made Simpson's classification outdated, it remains the closest thing to an official classification of mammals.
The majority of the mammal species that existed in the Mesozoic Era were multituberculates, eutriconodonts and spalacotheriids.
*Bottlenose dolphins, since they don't have arms and can't touch the marked areas, decreased latency to approach the mirror, repetitious head circling and close viewing of the marked areas were considered signs of self-recognition
The next three biggest orders, depending on the biological classification scheme used, are the Primates including the great apes and monkeys; the Cetartiodactyla including whales and even-toed ungulates; and the Carnivora which includes cats, dogs, weasels, bears and seals.
When two animals mate, they both share an interest in the success of the offspring, though often to different extremes, unless the male and female are perfectly monogamous, meaning that they mate for life and take no other partners (even after the original mate’s death), as with wolves, Eurasian beavers, and otters.
Hybrids are offspring resulting from the breeding of two genetically distinct individuals, which usually will result in a high degree of heterozygosity, though hybrid and heterozygous are not synonymous.
**Order Hyracoidea: hyraxes or dassies (Africa, Arabia)
The three largest orders in number of species are Rodentia: mice, rats, porcupines, beavers, capybaras and other gnawing mammals; Chiroptera: bats; and Soricomorpha: shrews, moles and solenodons.
However, this type of grip depends upon the angle of the frictional force, thus upon the diameter of the branch, with larger branches resulting in reduced gripping ability.
Brain size was previously considered a major indicator of the intelligence of an animal.
*Humans, which show signs of self-recognition at 18 months (mirror stage)
In a fission–fusion society, the main parent group can fracture (fission) into smaller stable subgroups or individuals to adapt to environmental or social circumstances.
This allows the claws to hook into the rough surface of the bark, opposing the force of gravity.
The oldest known fossil among the Eutheria ("true beasts") is the small shrewlike '' Juramaia sinensis'', or "Jurassic mother from China", dated to 160 million years ago in the late Jurassic.
Fossorial mammals have a fusiform body, thickest at the shoulders and tapering off at the tail and nose.
The mammalian heart has four chambers, two upper atria, the receiving chambers, and two lower ventricles, the discharging chambers.
While mammal classification at the family level has been relatively stable, several contending classifications regarding the higher levels—subclass, infraclass and order, especially of the marsupials—appear in contemporaneous literature.
**Infraclass †Eutriconodonta: eutriconodonts
Those stages were characterized by:
'''Group II: Superorder Xenarthra'''
******Order Carnivora: carnivores (cosmopolitan), including cats and dogs
Hippos are very large semi-aquatic mammals, and their barrel-shaped bodies have graviportal skeletal structures, adapted to carrying their enormous weight, and their specific gravity allows them to sink and move along the bottom of a river.
Carnivora have a simple stomach adapted to digest primarily meat, as compared to the elaborate digestive systems of herbivorous animals, which are necessary to break down tough, complex plant fibers.
Some species of primate, bat and all species of sloth achieve passive stability by hanging beneath the branch.
In 2008 the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) completed a five-year, 1,700-scientist Global Mammal Assessment for its IUCN Red List, which counted 5,488 species.
These sensitive areas are different in bats, as each bump has a tiny hair in the center, making it even more sensitive and allowing the bat to detect and collect information about the air flowing over its wings, and to fly more efficiently by changing the shape of its wings in response.
Mammals that weigh less than about 18&nbsp;oz (500 g) are mostly insectivorous because they cannot tolerate the slow, complex digestive process of an herbivore.
A solitary animal, while foraging, can also be less conspicuous to predators or prey.
*Order Pilosa: sloths and anteaters (neotropical)
This suggests that the placenta was a later development.
These societies have an overlap of adult generations, the division of reproductive labor and cooperative caring of young.
*****Magnorder Australidelphia: Australian marsupials and the monito del monte
****''Clade'' Zooamata
In addition to their streamlined bodies, they have smooth networks of muscle bundles in their skin that may increase laminar flow and make it easier for them to slip through water.
For example, some primates and marsupials have shades of violet, green, or blue skin on parts of their bodies, which indicates some distinct advantage in their largely arboreal habitat due to convergent evolution.
They also lack arrector pili, so their fur can be streamlined as they swim.
Hence, amniotes can lay eggs on dry land, while amphibians generally need to lay their eggs in water.
Permanent social networks consist of all individual members of a community and often varies to track changes in their environment.
The word "mammal" is modern, from the scientific name ''Mammalia'', coined by Carl Linnaeus in 1758, derived from the Latin ''mamma'' ("teat, pap").
Modern monotremes have lower body temperatures and more variable metabolic rates than marsupials and placentals, but there is evidence that some of their ancestors, perhaps including ancestors of the therians, may have had body temperatures like those of modern therians.
The relationships between these three lineages is contentious, and all three possible different hypotheses have been proposed with respect to which group is basal.
*****''Clade'' Ferae
Most, if not all, are thought to have remained nocturnal (the Nocturnal bottleneck), accounting for much of the typical mammalian traits.
*'''Superorder: Euarchontoglires (Supraprimates)'''
The caecum is either absent or short and simple, and the large intestine is not sacculated or much wider than the small intestine.
Most have large incisors to prevent dirt from flying into their mouth.
The middle layer, the dermis, is 15 to 40 times thicker than the epidermis.
Many mammals exhibit this, such as primates (for example orangutans and spider monkeys), elephants, hyenas, lions, and dolphins.
Natural hybrids will occur in hybrid zones, where two populations of species within the same genera or species living in the same or adjacent areas will interbreed with each other.
*******Mirorder Eparctocyona: †condylarths, whales and artiodactyls (even-toed ungulates)
Hybrids between different genera (such as between sheep and goats) are known as intergeneric hybrids.
In 2008 the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) completed a five-year Global Mammal Assessment for its IUCN Red List, which counted 5,488 species.
The authors worked together as paleontologists at the American Museum of Natural History, New York.
Intelligence itself is not easy to define, but indications of intelligence include the ability to learn, matched with behavioral flexibility.
When endothermy first appeared in the evolution of mammals is uncertain, though it is generally agreed to have first evolved in non-mammalian therapsids.
The first mammals (in Kemp's sense) appeared in the Late Triassic epoch (about 225 million years ago), 40 million years after the first therapsids.
A despotic hierarchy is where one individual is dominant while the others are submissive, as in wolves and lemurs, and a pecking order is a linear ranking of individuals where there is a top individual and a bottom individual.
**Order Afrosoricida: tenrecs and golden moles (Africa)
A rare exception, the naked mole-rat produces little metabolic heat, so it is considered an operational poikilotherm.
This even further increases their stride length and thus their speed.
*Progression towards an erect limb posture, which would increase the animals' stamina by avoiding Carrier's constraint.
Flipper movement is continuous.
All female mammals nurse their young with milk, which is secreted from special glands, the mammary glands.
The upwards components of these counteract gravity, keeping the body in the air, while the forward component provides thrust to counteract both the drag from the wing and from the body as a whole.
The genetic sites where pigmentation genes are found are known to affect phenotype by altering the spatial distribution of pigmentation of the hairs, and altering the density and distribution of the hairs, but it is largely unknown how these genes are expressed.
Tool use by animals may indicate different levels of learning and cognition.
Studies on Permian coprolites suggest that non-mammalian synapsids of the epoch already had fur, setting the evolution of hairs possibly as far back as dicynodonts.
T. S. Kemp has provided a more traditional definition: "synapsids that possess a dentary&ndash;squamosal jaw articulation and occlusion between upper and lower molars with a transverse component to the movement" or, equivalently in Kemp's view, the clade originating with the last common ancestor of ''Sinoconodon'' and living mammals.
A breeding-back (intraspecific) hybrid may be very similar to the extinct wild type in phenotype, ecological niche and to some extent genetics, but the initial gene pool of that wild type is lost forever with its extinction.
Light-dark color variation is common in the mammalian taxa.
The first amniotes apparently arose in the Late Carboniferous.
**Order Proboscidea: elephants (Africa, Southeast Asia)
The placentals are unusual among mammals in giving birth to complete and fully developed young, usually after long gestation periods.
The bacteria are either housed in the multichambered stomach or in a large cecum.
The monotremes branched early from other mammals and do not have the nipples seen in most mammals, but they do have mammary glands.
Viviparous mammals are in the subclass Theria; those living today are in the marsupial and placental infraclasses.
******Superorder Lipotyphla: insectivorans
*'''Subclass Prototheria''': monotremes: echidnas and the platypus
Larger animals, on the other hand, generate more heat and less of this heat is lost.
The modern mammalian orders arose in the Paleogene and Neogene periods of the Cenozoic era, after the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs, and have been among the dominant terrestrial animal groups from 66 million years ago to the present.
Since small mammals have a high ratio of heat-losing surface area to heat-generating volume, they tend to have high energy requirements and a high metabolic rate.
The lungs of mammals are spongy and honeycombed.
The hypodermis is made up of adipose tissue, which stores lipids and provides cushioning and insulation.
Birds are also endothermic, so endothermy is not unique to mammals.
*****Magnorder Ameridelphia: New World marsupials.
In particular, the sex chromosomes of a platypus are more like those of a chicken than those of a therian mammal.
Solitary animals defend a territory and avoid social interactions with the members of its species, except during breeding season.
Marsupials have a short gestation period, typically shorter than its estrous cycle and gives birth to an undeveloped newborn that then undergoes further development; in many species, this takes place within a pouch-like sac, the marsupium, located in the front of the mother's abdomen.
Comparison of a particular animal's brain size with the expected brain size based on such allometric analysis provides an encephalisation quotient that can be used as another indication of animal intelligence.
There are three types of polygamy: either one or multiple dominant males have with breeding rights (polygyny), multiple males that females mate with (polyandry), or multiple males have exclusive relations with multiple females (polygynandry).
Estimates for the divergence times between these three placental groups range from 105 to 120 million years ago, depending on type of DNA (such as nuclear or mitochondrial) and varying interpretations of paleogeographic data.
These were grouped in 1,229 genera, 153 families and 29 orders.
In some classifications, extant mammals are divided into two subclasses: the Prototheria, that is, the order Monotremata; and the Theria, or the infraclasses Metatheria and Eutheria.
*****Magnorder Epitheria: epitheres
Now considered paraphyletic, with shrew opossums being closer to australidelphians.
Herbivores have developed a diverse range of physical structures to facilitate the consumption of plant material.
The thickness of this layer varies widely from species to species; marine mammals require a thick hypodermis (blubber) for insulation, and right whales have the thickest blubber at .
Within a few million years, two important amniote lineages became distinct: the synapsids, which would later include the common ancestor of the mammals; and the sauropsids, which now include turtles, lizards, snakes, crocodilians, dinosaurs and birds.
The three largest orders in numbers of species are Rodentia: mice, rats, porcupines, beavers, capybaras and other gnawing mammals; Chiroptera: bats; and Soricomorpha: shrews, moles and solenodons.
Compared to terrestrial carnivorans, the fore-limbs are reduced in length, which gives the locomotor muscles at the shoulder and elbow joints greater mechanical advantage; the hind-flippers serve as stabilizers.
Grazing animals that tend to eat hard, silica-rich grasses, have high-crowned teeth, which are capable of grinding tough plant tissues and do not wear down as quickly as low-crowned teeth.
One synapsid group, the pelycosaurs, included the largest and fiercest animals of the early Permian.
McKenna inherited the project from Simpson and, with Bell, constructed a completely updated hierarchical system, covering living and extinct taxa that reflects the historical genealogy of Mammalia.
Fore-flipper movement is not continuous, and the animal glides between each stroke.
however it has been reclassified as a non-placental eutherian.
The marsupials constitute the crown group of the Metatheria, and include all living metatherians as well as many extinct ones; the placentals are the crown group of the Eutheria.
*Asian elephants, however not all subjects have passed.
Molecular studies based on DNA analysis have suggested new relationships among mammal families over the last few years.
***Order Scandentia: treeshrews (Southeast Asia).
Though some mammals have very little, careful examination reveals the characteristic, often in obscure parts of their bodies.
They are apparently an ancestral feature, which subsequently disappeared in the placental lineage.
***''Clade'' Pegasoferae
Frictional gripping is used by primates, relying upon hairless fingertips.
The only large insectivorous mammals are those that feed on huge colonies of insects (ants or termites).
Their 1997 book, ''Classification of Mammals above the Species Level'', is a comprehensive work on the systematics, relationships and occurrences of all mammal taxa, living and extinct, down through the rank of genus, though molecular genetic data challenge several of the higher level groupings.
The word "mammal" is modern, from the scientific name ''Mammalia'' coined by Carl Linnaeus in 1758, derived from the Latin ''mamma'' ("teat, pap").
Furthermore, mammals that weigh more than 18&nbsp;oz (500 g) usually cannot collect enough insects during their waking hours to sustain themselves.
Other tool use, such as chimpanzees using twigs to "fish" for termites, may be developed by watching others use tools and may even be a true example of animal teaching.
Synapsids have a single hole (temporal fenestra) low on each side of the skull.
Therapsids descended from pelycosaurs in the Middle Permian, about 265 million years ago, and became the dominant land vertebrates.
George Gaylord Simpson's "Principles of Classification and a Classification of Mammals" (AMNH ''Bulletin'' v. 85, 1945) provides systematics of mammal origins and relationships that were universally taught until the end of the 20th century.
'''Group I: Superorder Afrotheria'''
Pinnipeds have several adaptions for reducing drag.
However, the five species of monotreme, the platypus and the four species of echidna, lay eggs.
Claws can be used to interact with rough substrates and re-orient the direction of forces the animal applies.
Squeezing the branch between the fingertips generates frictional force that holds the animal's hand to the branch.
Artificial selection, the deliberate selective breeding of domestic animals, is being used to breed back recently extinct animals in an attempt to achieve an animal breed with a phenotype that resembles that extinct wildtype ancestor.
They expanded out of their nocturnal insectivore niche from the mid-Jurassic onwards; The Jurassic ''Castorocauda'', for example, had adaptations for swimming, digging and catching fish.
Rats, for example, are considered to be highly intelligent, as they can learn and perform new tasks, an ability that may be important when they first colonize a fresh habitat.
The flukes of sirenians are raised up and down in long strokes to move the animal forward, and can be twisted to turn.
Unable to see in the dark burrows, most have degenerated eyes, but degeneration varies between species; pocket gophers, for example, are only semi-fossorial and have very small yet functional eyes, in the fully fossorial marsupial mole the eyes are degenerated and useless, talpa moles have vestigial eyes and the cape golden mole has a layer of skin covering the eyes.
They rely on their fore-flippers for locomotion in a wing-like manner similar to penguins and sea turtles.
Extinct groups are represented by a dagger (†).
Recalibrations of genetic and morphological diversity rates have suggested a terminal Maastrichtian origin for placentals, and a Paleocene origin for most modern clades.
Then mammals diversified very quickly; both birds and mammals show an exponential rise in diversity.
For example, the main human gaits are bipedal walking and running, but they employ many other gaits occasionally, including a four-legged crawl in tight spaces.
Most mammals also have hair to help keep them warm.
***Order Dermoptera: flying lemurs or colugos (Southeast Asia)
The earliest known metatherian is ''Sinodelphys'', found in 125 million-year-old Early Cretaceous shale in China's northeastern Liaoning Province.
That is, presocial animals can display communal living, cooperative care of young, or primitive division of reproductive labor, but they do not display all of the three essential traits of eusocial animals.
Camouflage is the most predominant mechanism for color variation, as it aids in the concealment of the organisms from predators or from their prey.
Harry Harlow set up an experiment with rhesus monkeys, presocial primates, in 1958; the results from this study showed that social encounters are necessary in order for the young monkeys to develop both mentally and sexually.
For the most part, these characteristics were not present in the Triassic ancestors of the mammals.
In the early Triassic, most medium to large land carnivore niches were taken over by archosaurs which, over an extended period of time (35 million years), came to include the crocodylomorphs, the pterosaurs and the dinosaurs; however, large cynodonts like ''Trucidocynodon'' and traversodontids still occupied large sized carnivorous and herbivorous niches respectively.
