Lake Xolotlán contains the same fish species as larger Lake Cocibolca in southeastern Nicaragua, except for the freshwater sharks found exclusively in the latter.
The Rubén Dario National Theater is Nicaragua's most important theater, and is one of the most modern theaters in Central America.
Many fruits such as mangos, "jocotes", and "mamones" are a common snack.
Nicaragua was inhabited by Paleo-Americans as far back as 6,000&nbsp;years ago.
Other regional destinations such as San José and San Salvador are also popular layover stops due to Nicaragüense de Aviación's membership in Grupo TACA.
Canopy rides provide a panoramic view of the old downtown where only a few buildings survived the 1972 earthquake that destroyed 90% of the capital city.
It starts on the morning of August 1, when the "Bajada del Santo" (walk down of the saint) involves many joyful people walking and carrying the old statue of Santo Domingo from Las Sierritas Church in south Managua to another church across the city to the north, in the area destroyed by the 1972 earthquake.
The Dennis Martínez National Stadium was built in 1948 and was the largest stadium in Central America at the end of its construction, it survived the 1972 earthquake.
Traveling by airplane is more efficient than traveling by these roads due to the poor conditions, especially in the rainy season.
Some of these include the centrally located Art-Deco gazebo crowned with a white-washed naked muse and with superb acoustics.
In 2007, after a successful literacy campaign, Managua was declared by the Mayor of Managua and the Sandinista party newspaper to be the first capital city in Central America to be rid of illiteracy.
Street cabs, those that can be hailed without calling a dispatcher, are widely available and cost somewhat less than their counterparts.
Salsa dancing is a national pastime.
In 2006, after the FSLN came back into power, literacy, health and reconstruction programs were expanded.
Usually, passengers that wish to opt out of such practice do so by advising the driver not to pick up additional passengers.
The ''Doctor Roberto Incer Barquero Library'', located in Managua, is designated to promote Nicaraguan culture.
New governmental buildings, galleries, museums, apartment buildings, squares, promenades, monuments, boat tours in Lake Xolotlan, restaurants, night entertainment, and broad avenues have resurrected part of Managua's downtown former vitality.
Taxi cabs may be hailed or called over by radio dispatch.
Both national and international artists present shows, concerts, exhibitions, and cultural performances such as El Güegüense among many others.
Aside from these activities, Managua has a wide selection to offer in luxurious shopping malls, boutiques and department stores as well as local markets.
It then reopened in 1990 after democracy was restored in Nicaragua; however, the main campus remained in Alajuela.
Surviving fire squadrons and ambulance companies were not able to handle the skyrocketing demand for their services.
The New Cathedral was built to replace the Old Cathedral downtown that had been damaged during the earthquake of 1972.
and a small collection of pottery among other archaeological objects.
Leading up to the lagoon is ''Calle del Comercio'', which leads to the ''Monumento al Liberalismo'', built in the late 1930s by the Liberal party in honor to President Anastasio Somoza-Garcia.
Taxi tends to be the transportation method of choice for tourists.
A disastrous earthquake in 1931 and large fire in 1936 destroyed much of the city.
It was not until the mid-1990s that Managua began to see a resurgence.
The Old St James Cathedral was designed and shipped from Belgium in 1920 by Belgian architect residing in Managua Pablo Dambach who got the inspiration from St Sulspice in Paris.
Thus, many new governmental buildings, apartment complexes, shopping malls, green squares, leafy promenades, lake tours, restaurants, entertainment venues, broadened avenues, monuments, and fountains, have sprung up; awakening the metropolis' heart after a long subreal dream since 1972.
The monument stands 59&nbsp;feet tall.
Plaza de la Revolución (Revolution Square), formerly known as Plaza de la República (Republic Square) is home to Managua's historical center located on the shores of Lake Xolotlan has been partially rebuilt and many old buildings refurbished.
Tiscapa Lagoon, located within the Tiscapa Lagoon Natural Reserve is just south of the Managua's Historical Center.
The Chamorro government closed the system and sold the cars and rails for scrap.
Fortunately, in recent years, the restoration of the old cathedral of Santiago has appeared to be possible and is currently awaiting renovation.
For more than 50&nbsp;years, the National Palace housed the Congress, today it houses the National Archive, the National Library, as well as the National Museum which is open to the public.
The capital is conspicuously dotted with many American restaurant chains such as Burger King, Pizza Hut, McDonald's, Papa John's, and Subway which have sprung up in the last two decades.
This also tends to be true for cities and towns that are served or are in close distance with the freeways.
As of March 2008, homosexuality is no longer illegal and no longer carries a prison sentence.
''TransNica'' is a Nicaraguan bus company that operates international bus services throughout Central America.
The capital is also in need of more office space in downtown Managua as the city's economy continues to grow.
The Pan-American Highway enters the city from the north, connecting Managua to Nicaragua's northern and central departments.
The airport, known as Aeropuerto Sandino or MGA to locals, serves as the primary hub for connections at both domestic and international levels.
The city was declared the national capital in 1852.
The museum features pre-Columbian paintings,  statues, ceramics, etc.
It is home to many factories which produce diverse products.
At the time of its construction in the late 1960s, it was the most modern stadium in Central America.
Artifacts such as mammoth footprints, pre-Columbian tools, a skull from León Viejo,
However, encouraged by the country's improved economy, Managua's downtown began reconstruction since the mid-1990s.
Such a building whose intention was to serve as a place of worship was expected to have some sort of vibrant color.
Managua enjoys an array of international cuisine including a some Italian and Spanish restaurants as well as French.
Also part of the exhibit is the hall of National History and the hall of National Symbols.
New private courts have played a big role in the promotion of amateur games and tournaments.
At the time, Managua's limited resources had to be directed to other disaster relief purposes.
On the professional level, the National Nicaraguan Football team has still not had the public support nor the international exposure as the regional counterparts like the Costa Rican, Honduran or Salvadoran teams.
Managua is the home of most national broadcasting television channels as well as the major national newspapers.
History museums include the Museo de la Revolución, Museo Casa Hacienda San Jacinto and Museo Parque Loma de Tiscapa.
To make matters worse, a series of natural disasters, including Hurricane Mitch in 1998, made economic recovery more difficult.
There are no railroads that operate in Managua nor in Nicaragua.
A distinct dry season exists between November and April, while most of the rainfall is received between May and October.
A transport map of the city's 44 bus routes was created in 2016 in a crowdsourcing initiative by the Nicaraguan OpenStreetMap community.
The German government funded the construction of a water treatment plant with plans to process the city's sewage and clean the Managua lake.
Managua is home to an array of art galleries which feature pieces by both national and international artists.
Buses are the most economical way to get around the city and thus contributes to high numbers of ridership.
Managua, like much of Western Nicaragua, except for the Sierras to the South, has a tropical climate with constant temperatures averaging between .
In 2003, the National Police of Nicaragua recognized gangs committed only 0.51% of all crimes.
Founded by a pre-Columbian fishing town, the city was incorporated in 1819 and given the name ''Leal Villa de Santiago de Managua''.
Foreigners, mainly from Anglo-America and Europe, are becoming interested in considering post-retirement life in Nicaragua, as the country has been mentioned by various media outlets due to its safety performance on major indexes and inexpensive lifestyle for tourists.
All of Nicaragua's main roads lead to Managua, and there are good public transportation connections to and from the capital.
A third road, currently under construction, will connect Bluefields, South Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region with Managua via Nueva Guinea.
Baseball is, by far, Nicaragua's most popular sport followed by soccer and boxing.
The Nicaraguan Civil War of 1979 to overthrow the Somoza regime and the 11-year-long Contra War of the 1980s further devastated the city and its economy.
Nicaragua's higher education system consists of 48 universities and 113 colleges, vocational and technical institutes which serve students in the areas of electronics, computer systems and sciences, agroforestry, construction and trade-related services.
Traces of traditional German cuisine can be found in Selva Negra, an estate near the city of Matagalpa which is a prominent tourist attraction, as well as in the city of Granada.
Also, the tomb of Comandante Carlos Fonseca, founder of the FSLN, which is guarded by an eternal flame.
Many Asian restaurants (South Korean, Chinese, and Taiwanese) can be found in the area of the capital and other major cities.
It is often accompanied by a special sauce known as Chimichurri, composed of oil, garlic and herbs.
All of these highways are in good condition, with little traffic congestion.
In 1991, there were 110 gangs in Managua, in 2001 the number of gangs reduced to 96 gangs with a total of 1,725 members.
By government decree in 1983 the campus of the National Autonomous University of Nicaragua in León and Managua, became two separate entities; UNAN and UNAN-León.
The name Managua originates from the term ''Mana-ahuac'', which in the indigenous ''Nahuatl'' language translates to "adjacent to the water" or site "surrounded by water".
The number of gang members was estimated at 4,500 throughout the country, lower than all of its Northern neighbors in the region except Belize.
Managua and Puerto Cabezas, located in the North Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region are also connected via road.
The three national Two newspapers are ''El Nuevo Diario'', ''La Prensa'', and HOY, which have offices based in Managua along with other smaller newspapers.
The 1972 Nicaragua earthquake and years of civil war in the 1980s severely disrupted and stunted Managua's growth.
It competes extensively with its counterpart, ''TicaBus'', a Costa Rican bus company.
Since the late 1990s and early 2000, many casinos and karaoke bars opened and have remained popular attractions for Nicaraguans and foreign visitors.
The city's development caught the attention of Irving Fields and Albert Gamse, who composed a musical piece about the city that became popular in the 1940s through the performances of Freddy Martin, Guy Lombardo and Kay Kyser.
The educational system includes 1 United States accredited English language university, 3 bilingual university programs, 5 bilingual secondary schools and dozens of English Language Institutes.
The city, with a population exceeding one million inhabitants, houses many large national and international businesses.
This is usually done as a safety precaution, as there have been robberies committed due to this practice of "cab sharing."
Inside the National Palace of Culture is the National Museum, containing archaeological finds with some examples of pre-Columbian pottery, statues, and other findings.
Across from the Central Park, on the north side, it is Rubén Darío park and monument, dedicated to Nicaragua's greatest poet and one of the most influential literary figures in the Spanish speaking world.
Managua's progress came to a sudden halt after it suffered a second major earthquake on December 23, 1972, which destroyed 90% of the city's downtown and killed more than 19,120 people.
Managua serves as the company's hub, with buses departing from Managua to San José, Costa Rica, Tegucigalpa, San Salvador and Choluteca.
Under Köppen's climate classification, the city has a tropical wet and dry climate.
Within the Plaza of the Revolution is the ''Parque Central'' (Central Park) which contains many historical monuments, many dedicated to national heroes and poets.
Managua is also Nicaragua's main political, social, cultural, educational and economic hub.
Popular music includes the Palo de Mayo, Merengue, Cumbia and Latin pop among other Latin music genres, as well as American pop and rock.
Foreign embassies in Managua also sponsor film festivals.
The lakeshore is at an altitude of  above sea level, and the city climbs as it gets towards the Sierras de Managua further south where it is over  above sea level.
The Polytechnic University of Nicaragua (UPOLI) (Spanish: ''Universidad Politécnica de Nicaragua'') is a university located in Managua, Nicaragua.
Some of the more important buildings which managed to survive the earthquake of 1972 include the ''Catedral de Santiago'', known colloquially as the old cathedral, the Rubén Dario National Theater and the National Palace of Culture.
Steak preparation is one of the strong points of the local cuisine.
Residential and commercial buildings have been constructed on the outskirts of the city, in the same locales that were once used as refuge camps for those who were homeless after the earthquake.
The Dennis Martínez National Stadium is home to many baseball games of Managua's Boer team.
Prior, the capital alternated between the cities of León and Granada.
The most recent inauguration being the Edificio Invercasa.
Nearby is the ''Monument to Sandino'' which is a silhouette of Augusto C. Sandino, one of Nicaragua's national heroes.
Built in Carrara marble, Dario's monument is one of the greatest in the country.
Infrastructure was severely damaged and rehabilitation or restoration of buildings was nearly impossible.
Thousands of people attend this event which involves dancing, eating, drinking and the marching of musical bands, mainly for traditions that date back to pre-colonial times, or to ask for personal miracles, make promises, or give thanks to the saint.
There are cinemas in all major shopping centers; screening both English- and Spanish-language films.
University level institutions account for 6% of 18%.
The construction of a new sewer system and the redirecting of waste water to a new water treatment plant at Las Mercedes in Eastern Managua in May 2009 (US$36.000.000) have relieved old concerns over water pollution and native wildlife and has brought some residents closer to the old city center and the rest of the mainland.
Most bus coaches in Managua are fabricated by DINA S.A. and Mercedes-Benz.
Managua's population is composed predominantly of mestizos and whites who are mainly of Spanish descent, with a minority being of French, Jewish Nicaraguan, German Nicaraguan, Italian, Russian and Turkish descent.
There are numerous radio stations in Managua, some of which tend to have political, social, or religious affiliations.
In Managua there are two golf courses, the better-known of which is Nejapa Golf & Country Club.
Natural history museums include the Museo del Departamento de Malacología UCA, Museo Gemológico de la Concha y el Caracol, and Museo Paleontológico "El Hato".
The library has 67,000 books, free internet, a newspaper archive, and economic information from the Central Bank.
Restaurants and stores line the walls of the lagoon.
Hotels, restaurants, and commercial centers are all accessible by car, taxi, or bus.
A strong tradition of preparing local sweets such as "Cajeta de leche", a sweet condensed milk as well as sugared coconut and nuts can be found.
New government buildings were erected, industry developed, and universities were established.
Popular destinations include Miami, Fort Lauderdale, San Salvaldor, Panama City and Atlanta.
Air Madrid had intentions of having flights to Madrid, but following their bankruptcy and eventual dissolution, their plans for flights and having a hangar were ultimately erased.
In addition there are two bus routes that formerly connected to outside parts of Managua, but these became now are part of the city (Esquipulas and Los Vanegas).
This highway is commonly referred to as the ''Northern Highway.''
Transportation-wise, Managua is one of Nicaragua's best positioned cities.
As well as many hotels, Managua has opened four western style shopping centers or malls, such as Plaza Inter, Centro Comercial Metrocentro, , and Multicentro Las Americas, with many more being constructed.
The Dennis Martínez National Stadium has a capacity for 40,000 making it the largest stadium in Nicaragua.
The latter was made the main campus following the lack of government support during the 1980s; in fact the Managua campus was actually closed for most of this time.
The city was hampered by major floods in 1876 and 1885.
A new sewer system and the redirecting of waste water to a new waste water treatment plant at Las Mercedes funded by the German government to decontaminate the lake is expected to be the largest in Central America and was inaugurated in 2009.
Her main trading products are beef, coffee, cotton, and other crops.
Transportation infrastructure has grown outside of Managua and other Pacific coast cities and departments in recent years.
Mangoes and jocotes are often consumed while unripe with salt and vinegar.
The library also has a gallery in the same building, where famous Nicaraguan paintings, as well as pieces from new promising artists, are exhibited.
The stadium was named in honor of Nicaragua first baseball player to play in Major League Baseball, it serves as a venue for baseball and soccer games, as well as concerts and religious events.
Many different types of trees, some of which are not found elsewhere in the world, appear, including ''chilamate''s, ''ceibo''s, ''pochote''s, ''genízaro''s, ''tigüilote''s, royal palms, ''piñuela''s and ''madroño''s (Nicaragua's national tree) surround the city.
Managua is the national education center, with most of the nation's prestigious universities and higher education institutions based there.
There has been growing amateur interest in little football or "futbolin" among teens and adults.
Some of the larger television channels include: Canal 2, Telenica, Canal 10, Canal 15 (100% Noticias), and several others.
Managua features many bars, nightclubs, casinos, theaters and cinemas.
The airport used to serve as the hub for the Nicaragüenses de Aviación airline, which was bought by TACA Airlines the El Salvador national airline, that bought all of the airlines in Central America.
There is a large established local market system that caters to the majority of Nicaraguans.
During the rainy season (May to November), Managua becomes a lush city due to many palms, bushes, and other plants and trees which dominate the city's appearance.
The National Palace is one of Managua's oldest buildings undamaged by the 1972 Nicaragua earthquake.
It remains here for ten days until the morning of August 10, when the "Subida del Santo" (walking up of the saint) returns the statue to Las Sierritas Church where it remains for the rest of the year.
Not able to rebuild quickly, the city directed emergency workers to clear away much of the city's ruins quickly while burying the deceased in mass graves.
The airport is located near the northern highway and is about  east of the city's downtown.
The National Palace was one of the few building that survived the 1972 earthquake.
Managua's prime location between the Northern Pan-American highway and the Southern Highway make it an ideal hub for local, national and international buses.
In 2005, almost 400,000 (7%) of Nicaraguans held a university degree.
Nightclubs and bars are abound in Managua, particularly, in the popular areas called "Zona Viva" located in the shopping mall "Galerías Santo Domingo", as well as very close by "Plaza Mi Viejo Santo Domingo" and "Plaza Familiar".
Efforts to make Managua the capital of Nicaragua began in 1824, after the Central American nations formally attained their independence from Spain.
Santiago survived the 1931 earthquake, but was extremely damaged during the 1972 earthquake, which led to the construction of the new Cathedral of the Conception to the southeast.
Monuments include the monument of El Guerrillero sin Nombre (The Nameless Guerrilla Soldier) and Monumento à la Paz (Monument for Peace).
The airport was remodeled by architect Roberto Sansón and has now been converted into one of the region's most modern airports.
Temperatures are highest in March and April, when the sun lies directly overhead and the summer rainfall has yet to begin.
Also on the crater lip of Tiscapa are the ''Mazmorras'', a prison where current President Daniel Ortega and many other political prisoners were tortured during the Somoza regime.
A road from the river port city of El Rama to Pearl Lagoon, located in the South Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region, was completed in 2007.
The Augusto C. Sandino International Airport (formerly Managua International Airport) is the largest and only international airport in Nicaragua.
Managua is also currently experiencing an upsurge in real estate prices and as well as a housing shortage.
The ancient footprints of Acahualinca are 2,100-year-old fossils discovered along the shores of Lake Managua.
Nicaraguan bus companies, often referred to as ''Chicken Buses'', serve both urban and rural areas to remedy the lack of sufficient infrastructure that plagues these towns or villages.
There's a different slogan or theme every year.
It recently inaugurated its over US$52 million extension and renovation partly financed by Spain.
Also pending is a mega-project to reconstruct the old center of Managua, and to introduce a monorail system, to alleviate future transportation problems in Managua.
Managua's location between the rival cities of León and Granada made it a logical compromise site.
Another festival taking place since 2003 is the ''Alegria por la Vida'' (Happiness for Life) Carnaval is celebrated in Managua at the beginning of the month of March.
Multinational companies such as Wal-Mart, Telefonica, Union Fenosa, and Parmalat have offices and operations in Managua.
Some buildings burned to the ground, while the foundations of others simply gave way.
The ''Southern Highway'', the southern part of the Pan-American highway, connects Managua to southern departments Carazo, Rivas and others.
And seven bus routes connect to the nearby Ciudad Sandino.
However, with support of the FIFA, the first national soccer stadium in Managua is under construction.
Cultural centers in Managua include the Centro Cultural Nicaragüense Norteamericano (CCNN) (Nicaraguan-North American Culture Center), the Centro Cultural Chino Nicaragüense (Chinese Nicaraguan Culture Center), the  Alliance Française de Managua (French Alliance of Managua), among others.
To add insult to injury, corruption within the Somoza regime which allocated part of the relief funds hindered the reconstruction of the city's center which remains somewhat isolated from the rest of the capital.
Also, many pre-Columbian artifacts have been found in and around Tiscapa, adding to Managua's pre-Columbian legacy.
It was founded in 1967.
Due to the influence of immigrants and tourists, it is frequent to find food specialties of the diverse regions of Nicaragua jointly with international ones.
During the parade many people dress up in typical costumes, masks and painted bodies.
After winning the elections of 1990, UNO the reconstruction of Managua began in earnest.
Commercial activity, however, remains low.
Upon the completion of its construction, the Cathedral generated controversy among tourists and locals because of its bland and dull appearance.
Today's references differentiate the pre-1970s Managua by labeling it as ''La Antigua Ciudad,'' which in English translates to "The Ancient City" or "The Old City".
This event is celebrated with parades, floats, live music, food and dancing as well as the march of the Carnival Queen.
Managua is the economic center and a generator of services for the majority of the nation.
There is a local tradition of cheese-making and it is not unusual to encounter fried cheese as a side dish with many of the most popular dishes such as fried plantain medallions and "gallo pinto", a regional traditional rice and bean dish.
It was commissioned by President Juan Bautista Sacasa in 1935 and built by architect Pablo Dambach, who also built Santiago's Cathedral.
Eventually, the church's original concrete and gray surface became accepted and Catholic pilgrims began to embrace the church as it was.
Nacatamales, the Nicaraguan version of the tamale, is a local delicacy.
Managua's most famous festival is that of its patron saint Santo Domingo de Guzmán.
Residences, government buildings and entire avenues were demolished.
The country's railroads fell into disrepair during the 1980s.
Pali, La Union, and La Colonia are conventional supermarkets, which are in several areas of the city and sell local and imported ingredients.
The ''Museo Sitio Huellas de Acahualinca'' is located in west Managua in the Acahualinca neighborhood.
Managua is also home to all of the major banks of the nation, Banco de la Producción (BANPRO), Banco de América Central (BAC), Banco de Finanzas (BDF), Banco de Crédito Centroamericano (Bancentro) and its parent company the Lafise Group.
Managua is home to the annual Miss Nicaragua pageant; it is the national beauty pageant of Nicaragua.
