Manchester was the regional base for BBC One North West Region programmes before it relocated to MediaCityUK in nearby Salford Quays.•  The Manchester television channel, Channel M, owned by the Guardian Media Group operated from 2000 but closed in 2012.
The economy grew relatively strongly between 2002 and 2012, where growth was 2.3% above the national average.
Manchester's museums celebrate Manchester's Roman history, rich industrial heritage and its role in the Industrial Revolution, the textile industry, the Trade Union movement, women's suffrage and football.
Known for developing many talented 80s influential acts, it also influenced the graphic design industry via Factory artists such as Peter Saville (PSA), Octavo (8vo), Central Design Station, etc.
Manchester also hosted the World Squash Championships in 2008, and also hosted the 2010 World Lacrosse Championship in July 2010.
The town of Manchester was granted a charter by Thomas Grelley in 1301, but lost its borough status in a court case of 1359.
It was this separation that resulted in Salford becoming the judicial seat of Salfordshire, which included the ancient parish of Manchester.
The University of Manchester is the largest full-time non-collegiate university in the United Kingdom and was created in 2004 by the merger of Victoria University of Manchester founded in 1904 and UMIST, founded in 1956, though the university's logo appears to claim it was established in 1824.
Manchester is home to the largest group of consuls in the UK outside London.
The National Cycling Centre includes a velodrome, BMX Arena and Mountainbike trials and is the home of British Cycling, UCI ProTeam Team Sky and Sky Track Cycling.
The City of Manchester is governed by the Manchester City Council.
A larger-than-life statue of Abraham Lincoln by George Gray Barnard in the eponymous Lincoln Square (having stood for many years in Platt Fields) was presented to the city by Mr. and Mrs. Charles Phelps Taft of Cincinnati, Ohio, to mark the part that Lancashire played in the cotton famine and American Civil War of 1861–1865.
Manchester has a history of attacks attributed to Irish Republicans, including the Manchester Martyrs of 1867, arson in 1920, a series of explosions in 1939, and two bombs in 1992.
Manchester is a centre for musical education, with the Royal Northern College of Music, which celebrates its 40th Anniversary since its merger, and Chetham's School of Music.
The Manchester LUZ is the second largest within the United Kingdom, behind that of London.
First Greater Manchester also operates a three route zero-fare bus service, called Metroshuttle, which carries 2.8 million commuters a year around Manchester's business districts.
Manchester's civic leadership has a reputation for business acumen.
*  Chemnitz, Germany (1983)
The city experienced the greatest percentage population growth outside London, with an increase of 19% to over 500,000.
Although its influence has waned Granada had been described as 'the best commercial television company in the world'.
Housing two theatre spaces, five cinemas and an art exhibition space, it replaced the  Cornerhouse and The Library Theatre
An estimated 2,702,200 people live in Greater Manchester (2012 est.,).
Today the city is well served by the rail network, and is at the centre of an extensive countywide railway network, including the West Coast Main Line, with two mainline stations: Manchester Piccadilly and Manchester Victoria.
Spurred by the investment after the 1996 bomb, and aided by the XVII Commonwealth Games, Manchester's city centre has undergone extensive regeneration.• •  New and renovated complexes such as The Printworks and The Triangle have become popular shopping and entertainment destinations.
In 2014, the Globalization and World Cities Research Network ranked Manchester as a beta world city, the highest-ranked British city apart from London.
In 1974, by way of the Local Government Act 1972, the City of Manchester became a metropolitan district of the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester.
It gained university status in 1992, and in the same year absorbed Crewe and Alsager College of Higher Education in South Cheshire.
Manchester's unplanned urbanisation was brought on by a boom in textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution, and resulted in it becoming the world's first industrialised city.• •
The night-time economy of Manchester has expanded significantly since about 1993, with investment from breweries in bars, public houses and clubs, along with active support from the local authorities.
The "Manchester City Zone", "Manchester post town" and the "Manchester Congestion Charge" are all examples of this.
A stroke of a Norman baron's pen is said to have divorced Manchester and Salford, though it was not Salford that became separated from Manchester, it was Manchester, with its humbler line of lords, that was separated from Salford.
Large sections of the city dating from the 1960s have been either demolished and re-developed or modernised with the use of glass and steel.
In the 19th century, Manchester featured in works highlighting the changes that industrialisation had brought to Britain.
Manchester is known for possessing a "radical literary history".
Trafford Park in the neighbouring borough of Trafford is home to Imperial War Museum North.
Large quantities of machinery, including cotton processing plant, were exported around the world.
The MEN group distributes several local weekly free papers.•  For many years most of the national newspapers had offices in Manchester: ''The Daily Telegraph'', ''Daily Express'', ''Daily Mail'', ''The Daily Mirror'', ''The Sun''.
Manchester has formal twinning arrangements (or "friendship agreements") with several places.
It lies within the United Kingdom's second-most populous urban area,  with a population of 2.55 million.
Throughout the Middle Ages Manchester remained a manorial township but began to expand "at an astonishing rate" around the turn of the 19th century.
In 1988, Manchester was often referred to as Madchester for its rave scene.
Central Manchester has been permanently settled since this time.
The economics books Marx was reading at the time can be seen in the library, as can the window seat where Marx and Engels would meet.
The biggest took place during the "Christmas Blitz" on the nights of 22/23 and 24 December 1940, when an estimated  of high explosives plus over 37,000 incendiary bombs were dropped.
The ''Metro North West'' is available free at Metrolink stops, rail stations and other busy locations.
Between 1890 and 1933, more areas were added to the city which had been administered by Lancashire County Council, including former villages such as Burnage, Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Didsbury, Fallowfield, Levenshulme, Longsight, and Withington.
The period was the subject of the film ''24 Hour Party People''.
Charles Dickens is reputed to have set his novel ''Hard Times'' in the city, and while it is partly modelled on Preston, it shows the influence of his friend Mrs Gaskell.
The works of Stretford-born painter , known for his "matchstick" paintings of industrial Manchester and Salford, can be seen in both the city and Whitworth Manchester galleries, and at the Lowry art centre in Salford Quays (in the neighbouring borough of Salford) devotes a large permanent exhibition to his works.
The city's cosmopolitan atmosphere contributed to a vibrant culture, which included the Hallé Orchestra.
In Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, the term "manchester" is still used for household linen: sheets, pillow cases, towels, etc.
Since the opening of new bars and clubs, the area attracts 20,000 visitors each weekend and has hosted a popular festival, Manchester Pride, each August since 1991.
It was historically a part of Lancashire, although areas of Cheshire south of the River Mersey were incorporated during the 20th century.
First class sporting facilities were built for the 2002 Commonwealth Games, including the City of Manchester Stadium, the National Squash Centre and the Manchester Aquatics Centre.
One of the earliest instructors and classical music pianists/conductors at the RMCM, shortly after its founding was the famous Russian-born Arthur Friedheim, (1859–1932), who later had the music library at the famed Peabody Institute conservatory of music in Baltimore, Maryland, named for him.
The number of cotton mills in Manchester itself reached a peak of 108 in 1853.
Manchester became the dominant marketplace for textiles produced in the surrounding towns.
The largest open space in the city, at around , is Heaton Park.
notably the A62 road via Oldham and Standedge, the A57 (Snake Pass) towards Sheffield, and the M62 over Saddleworth Moor.
Similarly, the chemical industry started by producing bleaches and dyes, but expanded into other areas.
It is ranked as a beta world city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.
The expansion of international trade links during the Industrial Revolution led to the introduction of the first consuls in the 1820s and since then over 800, from all parts of the world, have been based in Manchester.
The ''Cutting It'' series set in the city's Northern Quarter and ''The Street'' were set in Manchester as was ''Life on Mars''.
The city's average annual rainfall is  compared to the UK average of , and its mean rain days are 140.4 per annum, compared to the UK average of 154.4.
Much of the inner city, especially in the south, is flat, offering extensive views from many highrise buildings in the city of the foothills and moors of the Pennines, which can often be capped with snow in the winter months.
Poet, novelist and academic Jackie Kay also lives in the city.
Although from southern England, The Chemical Brothers subsequently formed in Manchester.
With a GDP of $88.3bn (2012 est., PPP) the wider metropolitan economy is the third-largest in the United Kingdom.
Brass band music, a tradition in the north of England, is an important part of Manchester's musical heritage; some of the UK's leading bands, such as the CWS Manchester Band and the Fairey Band, are from Manchester and surrounding areas, and the Whit Friday brass band contest takes place annually in the neighbouring areas of Saddleworth and Tameside.
Manchester became an important centre for the manufacture and trade of woollens and linen, and by about 1540, had expanded to become, in John Leland's words, "The fairest, best builded, quickest, and most populous town of all Lancashire."
Manchester however has a relatively high humidity level and this, along with the abundant supply of soft water, was one of the factors that led to the localisation of the textile industry in the area.
The suffix -chester is a survival of Old English ''ceaster'' ("fort; fortified town").
On the other hand, Greater Manchester is home to more multi-millionaires than anywhere outside London, with the City of Manchester taking up most of the tally.
At its height,  journalists were employed, though in the 1980s office closures began and today the "second Fleet Street" is no more.
It is free in the city centre on Thursdays and Fridays, but paid for in the suburbs.
The economic school of Manchester capitalism developed there, and Manchester was the centre of the Anti-Corn Law League from 1838 onward.
Manchester suffered greatly from the Great Depression and the underlying structural changes that began to supplant the old industries, including textile manufacture.
Until the 19th century local government was largely in the hands of manorial courts, the last of which was dissolved in 1846.
Between the beginning of July 2011 and end of June 2012 (Mid-Year Estimate date), births exceeded deaths by 4,800.
Its fortunes declined after the Second World War, owing to deindustrialisation.
Gaskell penned all her novels, with the exception of ''Mary Barton'', at her residence on Plymouth Grove.
In Chancellor George Osborne's 2014 autumn statement he announced a £78 million grant to fund a new "large-scale, ultra-flexible arts space" for the city.
Elsewhere in the city, the John Rylands Library holds an extensive collection of early printing.
Manchester achieved city status in 1853.
This represents a slower rate of growth than the previous decade.
However, the Pennine and Rossendale Forest hills that surround the city to its east and north receive more snow and roads leading out of the city can be closed due to snow.
'''Manchester''' () is a major city and metropolitan borough in Greater Manchester, England, with a population of 514,414 .
The Rylands Library Papyrus P52, believed to be the earliest extant New Testament text, is on permanent display in the library.
The Museum of Transport displays a collection of historic buses and trams.
Manchester is  north-east of Liverpool and  north-west of Sheffield, making the city the halfway point between the two.
A commodities exchange, opened in 1729, and numerous large warehouses, aided commerce.
The first Trades Union Congress was held in Manchester (at the Mechanics' Institute, David Street), from 2 to 6 June 1868.
Subsequently the council stated that they had managed to secure a further £32 million from "a variety of sources", The £110 million venue was confirmed in July 2016.
Its previous premises are now used by Chetham's School of Music.
The cenotaph in St Peter's Square, by Edwin Lutyens, is Manchester's main memorial to its war dead.
Manchester was thus the target of bombing by the Luftwaffe, and by late 1940 air raids were taking place against non-military targets.
Manchester has a notable place in the history of Marxism and left-wing politics; being the subject of Friedrich Engels' work ''The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844''; Engels spent much of his life in and around Manchester, and when Karl Marx visited Manchester, they met at Chetham's Library.
Anglo-American author Frances Hodgson Burnett was born in the city's Cheetham Hill district in 1849, and wrote much of her classic children's novel ''The Secret Garden'' while visiting nearby Salford's Buile Hill Park.
The Manchester Museum opened to the public in the 1880s, has notable Egyptology and natural history collections.
Snowfalls are not common in the city, due to the urban warming effect.
Manchester was dubbed "Cottonopolis" and "Warehouse City" during the Victorian era.
The -network consists of six lines with 69 stations (including five on-street tram stops in the centre).
In 1889, when county councils were created in England, the municipal borough became a county borough with even greater autonomy.
Manchester United play its home games at Old Trafford, in the neighbouring Greater Manchester borough of Trafford, the largest club football ground in the United Kingdom.•  Manchester City's home ground is the City of Manchester Stadium (also known as the Etihad Stadium for sponsorship purposes); its former ground, Maine Road was demolished in 2003.
In 1853, Manchester was granted "city status" in the United Kingdom.
At ,  northwest of London, Manchester lies in a bowl-shaped land area bordered to the north and east by the Pennines, a mountain chain that runs the length of northern England, and to the south by the Cheshire Plain.
Its main pop music venue is the Manchester Arena with over 21,000 seats, the largest arena of its type in Europe which was voted ''International Venue of the Year'' in 2007.• In terms of concert goers, it is the busiest indoor arena in the world ahead of Madison Square Garden in New York and The O2 Arena in London, the second and third busiest respectively.
The Brigantes were the major Celtic tribe in what is now known as Northern England; they had a stronghold in the locality at a sandstone outcrop on which Manchester Cathedral now stands, opposite the banks of the River Irwell.
The strong office market in Manchester has been partly attributed to 'Northshoring', (from offshoring) which entails the relocation or alternative creation of jobs away from the overheated South to areas where office space is possibly cheaper and workforce market may not be as saturated.
The night-time economy has a value of about  and supports  jobs.
Manchester has remained (in consular terms at least) the second city of the UK for two centuries, and hosts consular services for most of the north of England.••
Manchester's geographic features were highly influential in its early development as the world's first industrial city.
The widespread use of red brick characterises the city, much of the architecture of which harks back to its days as a global centre for the cotton trade.
Manchester was credited as the main regional driving force behind indie bands of the 1980s including Happy Mondays, Inspiral Carpets, James, and The Stone Roses.
Manchester Town Hall, in Albert Square, was built in the Gothic revival style and is considered to be one of the most important Victorian buildings in England.
Kidd identifies Moss Side, Longsight, Cheetham Hill, Rusholme, as centres of population for ethnic minorities.
From a very early time, the township of Manchester lay within the historic or ceremonial county boundaries of Lancashire.
Recent sporting events hosted by Manchester include the 2013 Ashes series, 2013 Rugby League World Cup and the 2015 Rugby World Cup.
The largest to be detonated on British soil, the bomb injured over 200 people, heavily damaged nearby buildings, and broke windows  away.
In the post-war period, it was a direct grant grammar school (i.e.
Of the schools in the LEA with 30 or more pupils, four had 90% or more pupils achieving at least five A*–C grades at GCSE including maths and English: (Manchester High School for Girls, St Bede's College, Manchester Islamic High School for Girls, and The King David High School) while three managed 25% or below (Plant Hill Arts College, North Manchester High School for Boys, Brookway High School and Sports College).
There is regular but generally light precipitation throughout the year.
In the early 1800s, John Dalton formulated his atomic theory in Manchester.
The River Mersey flows through the south of Manchester.
It includes the Manchester Business School, which offered the first MBA course in the UK in 1965.
The municipally owned Manchester Art Gallery on Mosley Street houses a permanent collection of European painting, and has one of Britain's most significant collections of Pre-Raphaelite paintings.
The size of the Jewish population in Greater Manchester is the largest in Britain outside London.
These included Elizabeth Gaskell's novel ''Mary Barton: A Tale of Manchester Life'' (1848), and studies such as ''The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844'', written by Friedrich Engels while living and working in Manchester.
The first edition of ''Top of the Pops'' was broadcast from a studio in Rusholme on New Year's Day 1964.
The area also attracts large numbers of Chinese students to the city who, in attending the local universities, contribute to Manchester having the third-largest Chinese population in Europe.
KPMG's competitive alternative report also found that Manchester was Europe's most affordable city featured, ranking slightly better than Dutch cities, Rotterdam and Amsterdam, who all have a cost of living index less than 95.
A stabilised fragment of foundations of the final version of the Roman fort is visible in Castlefield.
The Manchester Ship Canal opened in 1894, creating the Port of Manchester and linking the city to sea,  to the west.
Manchester has competed twice to host the Olympic Games, beaten by Atlanta for 1996 and Sydney for 2000.
Manchester began expanding "at an astonishing rate" around the turn of the 19th century as people flocked to the city for work from Scotland, Wales, Ireland and other areas of England as part of a process of unplanned urbanisation brought on by the Industrial Revolution.
The Mayor would have fiscal control over health, transport, housing and police in the area.
Defunct radio stations include Sunset 102, which became Kiss 102, then Galaxy Manchester), and KFM which became Signal Cheshire (now Imagine FM).
Manchester, Northern England and North Wales are served by Manchester Airport.
Programmes including ''Mastermind'', and ''Real Story'', were made at New Broadcasting House.
According to the 2010 Indices of Multiple Deprivation Manchester is the 4th most deprived local council in the England.
In January 2007, the independent Casino Advisory Panel awarded Manchester a licence to build the only supercasino in the UK, however plans were officially abandoned in February 2008.
The Manchester Ship Canal was built between 1888 and 1894, in some sections by canalisation of the Rivers Irwell and Mersey, running  from Salford to Eastham Locks on the tidal Mersey.
The city experienced a relatively sharp increase in the number of business deaths, the largest increase of all the Core Cities, however this was offset by strong growth in new businesses which resulted in a strong net growth.
Although not long-lasting, Cromwell granted it the right to elect its own MP.
Manchester's Irish Festival, including a St Patrick's Day parade, is one of Europe's largest.
Manchester has hosted domestic, continental and international football competitions at Fallowfield Stadium, Maine Road, Old Trafford and the City of Manchester Stadium.
Regeneration began in the late 1980s, with initiatives such as the Metrolink, the Bridgewater Concert Hall, the Manchester Arena, and (in Salford) the rebranding of the port as Salford Quays.
In terms of ethnic composition, the City of Manchester has the highest non-white proportion of any district in Greater Manchester.
Unemployment throughout 2012–13 averaged 11.9%, which was above the national average, but lower than some of the country's other comparable large cities.
*  Bilwi, Nicaragua
Stagecoach Manchester is the Stagecoach Group's largest subsidiary and operates around 690 buses.
The Museum of Science and Industry, housed in the former Liverpool Road railway station, has a large collection of steam locomotives, industrial machinery, aircraft and a replica of the world's first stored computer program (known as The Baby).
*  Wuhan, China (1986)
There were 76,095 under- and post-graduate students at the Manchester Metropolitan University, the University of Manchester and Royal Northern College of Music during the academic year 2011/12.
Manchester was one of the BBC's three main centres in England.
The Alan Turing Memorial in Sackville Park commemorates his role as the father of modern computing.
These stations and pirate radio played a significant role in the city's house music culture, the Madchester scene, which was based in clubs like The Haçienda.
Manchester is mentioned as having a market in 1282.
The name Manchester, though officially applied only to the metropolitan district within Greater Manchester, has been applied to other, wider divisions of land, particularly across much of the Greater Manchester county and urban area.
The main classical music venue was the Free Trade Hall on Peter Street, until the opening in 1996 of the 2,500 seat Bridgewater Hall.
The LEA also had the highest occurrence of absences, with 11.11% of "half-day sessions missed by pupils", above the national average of 5.8%.
This was an increase of 7,900, or 1.6%, since the 2011 MYE.
In 1931, the Cheshire civil parishes of Baguley, Northenden and Northen Etchells from the south of the River Mersey were added.
After the Roman withdrawal and Saxon conquest, the focus of settlement shifted to the confluence of the Irwell and Irk sometime before the arrival of the Normans after 1066.
The National Indoor BMX Arena (2,000 capacity) adjacent to the velodrome opened in 2011.
Together they have a combined population of 76,025 students in higher education as of 2015, although almost 6,000 of them were based at Manchester Metropolitan University's campuses at Crewe and Alsager in Cheshire.
Since the 2001 census, the proportion of Christians in Manchester has decreased by 22% from 62.4% to 48.7%.
From September 2010 the airport became one of only 17 airports in the world and the only UK airport other than Heathrow Airport to operate the Airbus A380.
A reconstructed part of the Roman fort of Mamucium is open to the public in Castlefield.
The BBC reports that redevelopment of recent years has heightened claims that Manchester is the second city of the UK.•• Manchester and Birmingham have traditionally competed as frontrunners for this unofficial title.
partially state funded), but it reverted to independent status in 1976 after abolition of the direct-grant system.
Forerunners of the RNCM were the Northern School of Music (founded 1920) and the Royal Manchester College of Music (founded 1893), which were merged in 1973.
The Manchester Velodrome was built as a part of the bid for the 2000 games and has become a catalyst for British success in cycling.
Thereafter the number began to decline and Manchester was surpassed as the largest centre of cotton spinning by Bolton in the 1850s and Oldham in the 1860s.
The Roman habitation of Manchester probably ended around the 3rd century; its civilian settlement appears to have been abandoned by the mid-3rd century, although the fort may have supported a small garrison until the late 3rd or early 4th century.
*  Saint Petersburg, Russia (1962)
Singer-songwriter Ren Harvieu is also from Greater Manchester.
A second runway was opened in 2001 and there have been continued terminal improvements.
Among 20th century writers from Manchester is Anthony Burgess, who wrote the dystopian satire ''A Clockwork Orange'' in 1962.
The Bridgewater Canal, Britain's first wholly artificial waterway, was opened in 1761, bringing coal from mines at Worsley to central Manchester.
*  Leskovac, Serbia
Traffic declined, and the port closed in 1982.
Cotton processing and trading continued to fall in peacetime, and the exchange closed in 1968.
In 1878 the GPO (the forerunner of British Telecom) provided its first telephones to a firm in Manchester.
Competition between the various forms of transport kept costs down.
As the UK economy continues to recover from the downturn experienced in 2008–10, Manchester compares favourably to other geographies according to the latest figures.
During the English Civil War Manchester strongly favoured the Parliamentary interest.
Manchester is contiguous on all sides with several large settlements, except for a small section along its southern boundary with Cheshire.
These are generally thought to represent a Latinisation of an original Brittonic name, either from ''mamm-'' ("breast", in reference to a "breast-like hill") or from ''mamma'' ("mother", in reference to a local river goddess).
Similarly, Osaka is nicknamed as ''"The Manchester of Japan"'', Joinville, Brazil is known as ''"the Manchester of Santa Catarina (state)"''.
The city has one of the most extensive bus networks outside London with over 50 bus companies operating in the Greater Manchester region radiating from the city.
In 2013 Manchester was ranked 6th in the UK for quality of life, according to a rating of the UK's 12 largest cities.
Manchester has a disproportionately high number of gay and lesbian people.
The earlier Greater Manchester County Council was abolished in 1986 so it is effectively a unitary authority.
Charles Worsley, who sat for the city for only a year, was later appointed Major General for Lancashire, Cheshire and Staffordshire during the Rule of the Major Generals.
There is a mixture of high-density urban and suburban locations in Manchester.
The Greater Manchester Built-up Area had a population of 2,553,400 (2011 est.,).
The final insurance payout was over £400&nbsp;million; many affected businesses never recovered from the loss of trade.
Many of the great public buildings (including Manchester Town Hall) date from then.
Much of the wider area was laid waste in the subsequent Harrying of the North.
