It saw some use in jug band music, since that craze began as the mandolin fad was waning, and there were plenty of instruments available at relatively low cost.
Some 20th century composers also used the mandolin as their instrument of choice (amongst these are: Schoenberg, Webern, Stravinsky and Prokofiev).
Partee characterized the early instrument as being larger than the European instruments he was used to, with a "peculiar shape" and "crude construction," and said that the quality improved, until American instruments were "superior" to imported instruments.
The former are often too soft-toned to hold their own in a session (as well as having a tendency to not stay in place on the player's lap), whilst the latter tend to sound harsh and overbearing to the traditional ear.
Doris was the musical director and conductor of this orchestra for many years.
Since the mid-nineties, several public-school mandolin-based guitar programs have blossomed around the country, including Fretworks Mandolin and Guitar Orchestra, the first of its kind.
The bridge is a movable length of hardwood.
Mandolin awareness in the United States blossomed in the 1880s, as the instrument became part of a fad that continued into the mid-1920s.
Today ''banjolin'' describes an instrument with four strings, while the version with the four courses of double strings is called a ''mandolin-banjo''.
The action of the strings on the bridge causes the soundboard to vibrate, producing sound.
As early as the beginning of the 14th century, strings were doubled into courses on the miniature lute or gittern, used throughout Europe.
Noteworthy Irish mandolinists include Andy Irvine (who, like Johnny Moynihan, almost always tunes the top E down to D, to achieve an open tuning of GDAD), Paul Brady, Mick Moloney, Paul Kelly and Claudine Langille.
This type of mandolin is also used in Bhangra, dance music popular in Punjabi culture.
Another pioneering African American musician and director who made his start with a mandolin orchestra was composer James Reese Europe.
In the early 1970s English luthier Stefan Sobell developed a large-bodied, flat-backed mandolin with a carved soundboard, based on his own cittern design; this is often called a 'Celtic' mandolin.
The mandolin orchestras never completely went away, however.
Bowlback mandolins (also known as roundbacks), are used worldwide.
Some well-known players include Marty Stuart, Vince Gill, and Ricky Skaggs.
The export market for mandolins from Italy dried up around 1815, and when Carmine de Laurentiis wrote a mandolin method in 1874, the ''Music World'' magazine wrote that the mandolin was "out of date."
Phil Skinner played a key role in 20th century development of the mandolin movement in Australia, and was awarded an MBE in 1979 for services to music and the community.
The F-5's more complicated woodwork also translates into a more expensive instrument.
He favored the four single strings of the Cremonese instrument, which were tuned the same as the Neapolitan.
Other Japanese manufacturers include Oona, Kawada, Noguchi, Toichiro Ishikawa, Rokutaro Nakade, Otiai Tadao, Yoshihiko Takusari, Nokuti Makoto, Watanabe, Kanou Kadama and Ochiai.
More recently, the Glasgow-based band Sons and Daughters featured the mandolin, played by Ailidh Lennon, on tracks such as ''Fight,'' ''Start to End,'' and ''Medicine.''
When Cowan Powers and his family recorded their old-time music from 1924-1926, his daughter Orpha Powers was one of the earliest known southern-music artists to record with the mandolin.
The mandolin has also featured in the playing of Matthew Bellamy in the rock band Muse.
Another family of bowlback mandolins came from Milan and Lombardy.
The mandolin came into Brazil by way of Portugal.
An Italian musician, Carlo Curti,  hastily started a musical ensemble after seeing the Figaro Spanish Students perform; his group of Italian born Americans called themselves the "Original Spanish Students," counting on the American public to not know the difference between the Spanish bandurrias and Italian mandolins.
When the Moors conquered Andalusia in 711 AD, they brought their ud along, into a country that had already known a lute tradition under the Romans, the pandura.
Today representatives of Italian classical music and Italian classical-contemporary music include Ugo Orlandi, Carlo Aonzo, Dorina Frati, Mauro Squillante and Duilio Galfetti.
Other names include Valentine Abt, Samuel Adelstein, William Place, Jr.,  and Aubrey Stauffer.
By the 11th century, Muslim Iberia had become a center for the manufacture of instruments.
1 in D major'' and ''Sonata No.
Thousands were taking up the instrument as a pastime, and it became an instrument of ''society'', taken up by young men and women.
In Indian classical music and Indian light music, the mandolin, which bears little resemblance to the European mandolin, is usually tuned E-B-E-B.
Like the bowlback, the flatback has a round sound hole.
Intertwined with the Neapolitan style is the Roman style mandolin, which has influenced it.
Other modern manufacturers include Lorenzo Lippi (Milan), Hendrik van den Broek (Netherlands), Brian Dean (Canada), Salvatore Masiello and Michele Caiazza (La Bottega del Mandolino) and Ferrara, Gabriele Pandini.
The mandore was not a final form, and the design was tinkered with wherever it was built.
The 19th century produced some prominent players, including Bartolomeo Bortolazzi of Venice and Pietro Vimercati.
The earliest extant mandolin was built in 1744 by Antonio's son, Gaetano Vinaccia.
A round or oval sound hole may be covered or bordered with decorative rosettes or purfling.
Some players have sought out contemporary composers to solicit new works.
Yasuo Kuwahara (1946–2003) used German techniques.
The players, teachers and composers included Giovanni Fouchetti, Eduardo Mezzacapo, Gabriele Leon, and Gervasio.
However, professional virtuosity was in decline, and the mandolin music changed as the mandolin became a folk instrument; "the large repertoire of notated instrumental music for the mandolino and the mandoline was completely forgotten".
Modern players David Grisman, Sam Bush, and Mike Marshall, among others, have worked since the early 1970s to demonstrate the mandolin's versatility for all styles of music.
The '''mandolin''' is the soprano member of the mandolin family, as the violin is the soprano member of the violin family.
Levon Helm of the Band occasionally moved from his drum kit to play mandolin, most notably on "Rag Mama Rag", "Rockin' Chair", and "Evangeline".
A handful of contemporary luthiers build piccolo mandolins.
These players often mix traditional folk elements with bluegrass.
The instruments have 6 strings, 3 wire treble-strings and 3 gut or wire-wrapped-silk bass-strings.
A developer of the Milanese stye was Antonio Monzino (Milan) and his family who made them for 6 generations.
The transition from the mandolino to the mandolin began around 1744 with the designing of the metal-string mandolin by the Vinaccia family, 3 brass strings and one of gut, using friction tuning pegs on a fingerboard that sat "flush" with the sound table.
The bridge is kept in contact with the soundboard by the downward pressure from the strings.
Furthermore, of the works that have been written for mandolin from the 18th century onward, many have been lost or forgotten.
Antonio Vivaldi composed a mandolin concerto (''Concerto in C major Op.3 6'') and two concertos for two mandolins and orchestra.
The instrument's popularity continued to increase during the 1890s and mandolin popularity was at its height in "early years of the 20th century."
Greatly preferred for formal performance and recording are flat-topped "Irish-style" mandolins (reminiscent of the WWI-era Martin Army-Navy mandolin) and carved (arch) top mandolins with oval soundholes, such as the Gibson A-style of the 1920s.
A variety of different tunings are used.
During the Golden age itself (1880s-1920s), the mandolin had a strong presence in France.
The instrument has been heavily used in baila, a genre of Sri Lankan music formed from a mixture of Portuguese, African and Sinhala music.
However, Japanese luthiers also make them.
The Roman mandolin had a fingerboard that was more curved and narrow.
A resonator mandolin or "resophonic mandolin" is a mandolin whose sound is produced by one or more metal cones (resonators) instead of the customary wooden soundboard (mandolin top/face).
Some players use As up to 10&nbsp;Hz above or below a 440, mainly outside of the United States.
The Neapolitan style of mandolin construction was adopted and developed by others, notably in Rome, giving two distinct but similar types of mandolin – Neapolitan and Roman.
Various design variations and amplification techniques have been used to make mandolins comparable in volume with louder instruments and orchestras, including the creation of mandolin-banjo hybrid with the louder banjo, adding metal resonators (most notably by Dobro and the National String Instrument Corporation) to make a resonator mandolin, and amplifying electric mandolins through amplifiers.
American forms include the Army-Navy mandolin, the flatiron and the pancake mandolins.
It has enjoyed a privileged position as the main melodic instrument in several different regions of the country.
Skinner founded the Sydney Mandolin Orchestra, the oldest surviving mandolin orchestra in Australia.
The instrument has also found its way into British rock music.
The courses are normally tuned in a succession of perfect fifths.
He initially played an 8-string Gibson but switched after 1952 to a 5-string solidbody electric instrument built by Paul Bigsby.
The soundboard comes in many shapes—but generally round or teardrop-shaped, sometimes with scrolls or other projections.
Important performers in the Italitan tradition include Raffaele Calace (luthier, virtuoso and composer of 180 works for many instruments including mandolin), Pietro Denis (whole also composed ''Sonata for mandolin & continuo No.
Different variants of the mandolin, such as the "mantola," were used to accompany the lyra, the violin, and the laouto.
Like the teacher-dealers, they traveled the U.S., recording records, giving performances and teaching individuals and mandolin orchestras.
The instrument was primarily used in a classical tradition with Mandolin orchestras, so called ''Estudiantinas'' or in Germany ''Zupforchestern'' appearing in many cities.
Frontman Colin Meloy and guitarist Chris Funk of the Decemberists regularly employ the mandolin in the band's music.
One professional musician to use the mandolin is Sumru Ağıryürüyen who is known for singing and playing many styles of music including world music, Klezmer, Turkish folk, Balkan folk, blues, jazz, krautrock, protest rock and maqam.
It also forms the basis of Paul McCartney's 2007 hit "Dance Tonight."
Reasons cited include the rise of Jazz, for which the instrument was too quiet.
Ronnie McCoury of the Del McCoury Band has won numerous awards for his Monroe-influenced playing.
She also gives various concerts each year in different ensembles.
Current bands are also beginning to use the Mandolin and its unique sound - such as South London's Indigo Moss who use it throughout their recordings and live gigs.
Luthiers created the resonator mandolin, the flatback mandolin, the carved-top or arched-top mandolin, the mandolin-banjo and the electric mandolin.
The cavaquinho, a steel stringed instrument similar to a ukulele provides chordal accompaniment.
Mandolin magazines included ''L'Estudiantina'', ''Le Plectre'', ''École de la mandolie''.
This is especially true of violin music, since the mandolin has the same tuning as the violin.
Historic brands include Dobro and National.
In the western city of Maracaibo the Mandolin has been played in Decimas, Danzas and Contradanzas Zulianas; in the capital, Caracas, the Merengue Rucaneao, Pasodobles and Waltzes have also been played with mandolin for almost a century.
The success of the Figaro Spanish Students spawned other groups who imitated their musical style and costumes.
Connections to the West, including cultural connections with World War II ally Italy, were forming.
Ian Anderson of Jethro Tull played mandolin on "Fat Man", from their second album, ''Stand Up'', and also occasionally on later releases.
The evolution of the repertoire for choir and mandolins (''kantádes'') occurred during Venetian rule over the islands.
The body is a staved bowl, the saddle-less bridge glued to the flat face like most ouds and lutes, with mechanical tuners, steel strings, and tied gut frets.
He taught and has been credited with adding a fifth string to his oud and with establishing one of the first schools of music in Córdoba.
John Sheahan and the late Barney McKenna, respectively fiddle player and tenor banjo player with the Dubliners, are also accomplished Irish mandolin players.
Rod Stewarts 1971 No.&nbsp;1 hit "Maggie May" features a significant mandolin riff.
Led Zeppelin's bassist John Paul Jones is an accomplished mandolin player and has recorded numerous songs on mandolin including ''Going to California'' and ''That's the Way''; the mandolin part on ''The Battle of Evermore'' is played by Jimmy Page, who composed the song.
Samuel Adelstein described the Lombardi mandolin in 1893 as wider and shorter than the Neapolitan mandolin, with a shallower back and a shorter and wider neck, with six single strings to the regular mandolin's set of 4.
The band explains that these instruments accentuate the growling sound they favor.
The tradition of so-called "classical music" for the mandolin has been somewhat spotty, due to its being widely perceived as a "folk" instrument.
Gerda Abts is a well known mandolin virtuoso in Belgium.
Specifically, the eastern states of Sucre, Nueva Esparta, Anzoategui and Monagas have made the mandolin the main instrument in their versions of Joropo as well as Puntos, Jotas, Polos, Fulias, Merengues and Malagueñas.
Instruments were marketed by teacher-dealers, much as the title character in the popular musical ''The Music Man''.
He joined the Grand Ole Opry in 1939 and its powerful clear-channel broadcast signal on WSM-AM spread his style throughout the South, directly inspiring many musicians to take up the mandolin.
:See American mandolinists, American bluegrass mandolinists, Canadian mandolinists, and Canadian bluegrass mandolinists
Prominent modern mandolinists and composers for mandolin in the classical music tradition include Samuel Firstman, Howard Fry, Rudy Cipolla, Dave Apollon, Neil Gladd, Evan Marshall, Marilynn Mair and Mark Davis (the Mair-Davis Duo), Brian Israel, David Evans, Emanuil Shynkman, Radim Zenkl, David Del Tredici and Ernst Krenek.
The mandolin has been used occasionally in rock music, first appearing in the psychedelic era of the late 1960s.
During the 8th and 9th centuries, many musicians and artists from across the Islamic world flocked to Iberia.
Australian popular groups such as My Friend The Chocolate Cake use the mandolin extensively.
The single peaked at No.&nbsp;4 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart (#1 on the rock and alternative charts), Luther Dickinson of North Mississippi Allstars and the Black Crowes has made frequent use of the mandolin, most notably on the Black Crowes song "Locust Street."
The Greek '''laouto''' or laghouto (long-necked lute) is similar to a mandocello, ordinarily tuned C3/C2-G3/G2-D3/D3-A3/A3 with half of each pair of the lower two courses being tuned an octave high on a lighter gauge string.
Generally, in the United States, Gibson F-hole F-5 mandolins and mandolins influenced by that design are strongly associated with bluegrass, while the A-style is associated other types of music, although it too is most often used for and associated with bluegrass.
To fill this gap in the literature, mandolin orchestras have traditionally played many arrangements of music written for regular orchestras or other ensembles.
Players include Avi Avital, Alon Sariel, Jacob Reuven, and Tom Cohen.
Among the most important European mandolin composers of the 20th century are Raffaele Calace (composer, performer and luthier) and Giuseppe Anedda (virtuoso concert pianist and professor of the first chair of the Conservatory of Italian Mandolin, Padua, 1975).
Mandolins evolved from the lute family in Italy during the 17th and 18th centuries, and the deep bowled mandolin, produced particularly in Naples, became common in the 19th century.
Others include Tadashi Hattori (1908–2008), and Hiroshi Ohguri (1918–1982).
The total number of works these works is rather small in comparison to—say—those composed for violin.
Some makers instead employ "x-bracing," which is two tone bars mortised together to form an X.
Fernando's baila song, "Bola Bola Meti".
Chris Thile of California is a well-known player, and has accomplished many feats of traditional bluegrass, classical, contemporary pop and rock; the band Nickel Creek featured his playing in its blend of traditional and pop styles, and he now plays in his band Punch Brothers.
* fourth (lowest tone) course: G3 ( Hz)
One result of this dearth being that there were few positions for mandolinists in regular orchestras.
From the musical bow, families of stringed instruments developed; since each string played a single note, adding strings added new notes, creating bow harps, harps and lyres.
Another composer, Jiro Nakano (1902–2000), arranged many of the Italian works for regular orchestras or winds composed before World War II as new repertoires for Japanese mandolin orchestras.
Most commonly associated with bluegrass, mandolin has been used a lot in country music over the years.
Parts for mandolin are included in works by Schoenberg (Variations op.
David Grisman played mandolin on two Grateful Dead songs on the ''American Beauty'' album, "Friend of the Devil" and "Ripple", which became instant favorites among amateur pickers at jam sessions and campground gatherings.
Samuel Siegel played mandolin in Vaudeville and became one of America's preeminent mandolinists.
Internal bracing to support the top in the F-style mandolins is usually achieved with parallel tone bars, similar to the bass bar on a violin.
Other folk punk acts include Blackbird Raum, and Johnny Hobo and the Freight Trains.
One of the more prominent early mandolin players in popular music was Robin Williamson in the Incredible String Band.
The ''mandore'', appeared in the late 16th century and although known here under a French name, was used elsewhere as indicated by the names in other European languages (German ''mandoer'', Spanish ''vandola'', and Italian ''mandola'').
Along with the energy and awareness created by the day's hit sensation, a wave of Italian mandolinists travelled Europe in the 1880s and 1890s and in the United States by the mid-1880s, playing and teaching their instrument.
The French and Germans called it a Portuguese mandolin, although they also developed it locally.
In addition to electric guitar, bass, and drums, the band uses several instruments associated with traditional Celtic music, including mandolin, tin whistle, and Great Highland bagpipes.
The Portuguese influence brought the mandolin to Brazil.
The mandolin's popularity in the United States was spurred by the success of a group of touring young European musicians known as the Estudiantina Figaro, or in the United States, simply the "Spanish Students."
Diogo Gomes is known as the first mandolin player to study the instrument in a professional course in the whole country, at the Conservatoire School of Arts of Madeira.
The strings in each of its double-strung courses are tuned in unison, and the courses use the same tuning as the violin:  G3-D4-A4-E5.
Other major bluegrass mandolinists who emerged in the early 1950s and are still active include Jesse McReynolds (of Jim and Jesse) who invented a syncopated banjo-roll-like style called crosspicking—and Bobby Osborne of the Osborne Brothers, who is a master of clarity and sparkling single-note runs.
Some modern Brazilian instruments feature an extra fifth course tuned a fifth lower than the standard fourth course.
The shape of the back of the neck was different, less rounded with an edge, the bridge was curved making the g strings higher.
The famous Lloyd Loar Master Model from Gibson (1923) was designed to boost the flagging interest in mandolin ensembles, with little success.
The mandolin was tuned in fifths, like the Neapolitan mandolin.
1 on both the British charts and the Billboard Hot 100, also featured Jackson's playing.
In 1969, she formed a small ensemble for her pupils.
Israel has four especially prominent mandolinists: Avi Avital, Alon Sariel, Jacob Reuven, and Tom Cohen.
The early history of the mandolin in New Zealand is currently being researched by members of the Auckland Mandolinata.
He also perfected a sparse, percussive blues style, especially up the neck in keys that had not been used much in country music, notably B and E. He emphasized a powerful, syncopated right hand at the expense of left-hand virtuosity.
Mandolin has been a prominent instrument in the recordings of Johnny Clegg and his bands Juluka and Savuka.
*The '''mandocello''', which is classically tuned to an octave plus a fifth below the mandolin, in the same relationship as that of the cello to the violin: C2-G2-D3-A3.
The mandolin was brought to Sri Lanka by the Portuguese, who colonized Sri Lanka from 1505-1658.
Monroe's style involved playing lead melodies in the style of a fiddler, and also a percussive chording sound referred to as "the chop" for the sound made by the quickly struck and muted strings.
It has long been played in the Aegean islands outside of the control of the Ottoman Empire.
An Australian Mandolin Orchestra toured Germany in May 1980.
Highly respected and influential modern bluegrass players include Herschel Sizemore, Doyle Lawson, and the multi-genre Sam Bush, who is equally at home with old-time fiddle tunes, rock, reggae, and jazz.
Smaller ensembles, such as quartets composed of two mandolins, mandola, and mandocello, may also be found.
The small zigzag-shaped soundhole became a round soundhole covered with a decoration.
Some luthiers now using a "modified x-bracing" that incorporates both a tone bar and x-bracing.
Nowadays it is played mainly as a solo instrument in personal and family events on the Ionian islands and Crete.
John Paul Jones and Jimmy Page both played mandolin on Led Zeppelin songs.
* third course: D4 ( Hz)
There is usually one or more ''sound holes'' in the soundboard, either round, oval, or shaped like a calligraphic ''F'' (f-hole).
The neck is either flat or has a slight radius, and is covered with a fingerboard with frets.
Many folk punk bands also feature the mandolin.
The Italians redesigned it and produced the ''mandolino'' or ''Baroque mandolin'', a small catgut-strung mandola, strung in 4, 5 or 6 courses tuned in fourths (e' a' d" g"); (b e' a' d" g"); (g b e' a' d" g") and played finger-style.
Salvador Léonardi mentioned this decline in his 1921 book,  ''Méthode pour Banjoline ou Mandoline-Banjo'', saying that the mandolin had been declining in popularity from previous times.
In the Classical style, performers such as Hugo D'Alton, Alison Stephens and Michael Hooper have continued to play music by British composers such as Michael Finnissy, James Humberstone and Elspeth Brooke.
Ohguri was influenced by Béla Bartók and composed many symphonic works for Japanese mandolin orchestras.
A typical violoncello scale is 27" (686&nbsp;mm).
She is in close contact to the Brasschaat mandolin Orchestra.
Stelios Foustalierakis reported that the mandolin and the ''mpoulgari'' were used to accompany the lyra in the beginning of the 20th century in the city of Rethimno.
The type was developed in Europe in the 1850s.
The international repertoire of music for mandolin is almost unlimited, and musicians use it to play various types of music.
The ''bandolim'' (Portuguese for "mandolin") was a favourite instrument within the Portuguese bourgeoisie of the 19th century, but its rapid spread took it to other places, joining other instruments.
The instrument sound does not punch through the other players' sound like a carved top does.
Musicians began playing it in Celtic, Bluegrass, Jazz and Rock-n-Roll styles —  and ''Classical'' too.
The mandolin has a long and rich tradition in Brazilian folk music (''bandolim'' in Portuguese), especially in the style called choro.
Another visiting mandolin virtuoso, Samuel Adelstein, toured from his home in the United States.
Most of these works have been released on Compact Disks and can regularly be heard on radio stations on the ABC and MBS networks.
The strings are suspended over the neck and soundboard and pass over a floating bridge.
Simon Mayor is a prominent British player who has produced six solo albums, instructional books and DVDs, as well as recordings with his mandolin quartet the Mandolinquents.
The f-hole mandolin, however, does come into its own in a traditional session, where its brighter tone cuts through the sonic clutter of a pub.
Also, he felt they had a "less pleasing...hard, zither-like tone" as compared to the gut string's "softer, full-singing tone."
Another prevalent tuning with these intervals is C-G-C-G, which corresponds to Sa-Pa-Sa-Pa in the Indian carnatic classical music style.
In the early 20th century several mandolin orchestras (Estudiantinas) were active in Belgium.
Modern American mandolins modelled after Gibsons have a longer scale, about 13-7/8" (352&nbsp;mm).
The Lombardic mandolins were tuned g b e' a' d" g" (shown in Helmholtz pitch notation).
The resonating body may be shaped as a bowl (necked bowl lutes) or a box (necked box lutes).
John Duffey of the original Country Gentlemen and later the Seldom Scene did much to popularize the bluegrass mandolin among folk and urban audiences, especially on the east coast and in the Washington, D.C. area.
Pete Townshend of the Who played mandolin on the track ''Mike Post Theme'', along with many other tracks on Endless Wire.
After the Napoleonic Wars of 1815, however, its popularity began to fall.
Prominent names include Petri Hakala, Seppo Sillanpää and Heikki Lahti, who have taught and recorded albums.
More contemporary composers for the mandolin include Giuseppe Anedda (a virtuoso performer and teacher of the first chair of the Conservatory of Italian mandolin), Carlo Aonzo and Dorina Frati.
