Belize City and San Pedro) was relatively high.
The United Nations Environment Program & Hamilton (2013), estimate that shrimp farming causes approximately a quarter of the destruction of mangrove forests.
It was inscribed as a UNESCO world heritage site in 1997, but while the Bangladeshi and Indian portions constitute the same continuous ecotope, they are separately listed in the UNESCO world heritage list as the Sundarbans and Sundarbans National Park, respectively.
Although mangrove loss appears to have halted in this estuary and mangrove regrowth driven by local fisherman is now occurring.
Australia has about 11,500&nbsp;km2 of mangroves, primarily on the northern and eastern coasts of the continent, with occurrences as far south as Millers Landing in Wilsons Promontory, Victoria (38°54′S) and Barker Inlet in Adelaide, South Australia.
Red mangroves can also store salt in cell vacuoles.
Unlike most plants, whose seeds germinate in soil, many mangroves (e.g.
This area covers a National Park, Tiger reserve and a Biosphere Reserve.
Mangrove swamps protect coastal areas from erosion, storm surge (especially during hurricanes), and tsunamis.
Sundarbans is home to many different species of birds, mammals, insects, reptiles and fish.
These findings can also be interpreted to indicate Belize's mangrove regulations (under the nation's) have largely been effective.
Asia has the largest amount (42%) of the world’s mangroves, followed by Africa (21%), North/Central America (15%), Oceania (12%) and South America (11%).
In this way, mangroves build their own environments.
It is estimated that there may be found more than 120 species of fish and over 260 species of birds and more than fifty species of reptiles and eight amphibians.
Venezuela has 4% of the world's mangroves, with an extension of 6735&nbsp;km2.
The mangroves in this estuary are some of the most degraded in Ecuador with only 19% of 1971 mangrove area remaining as of 1998, although mangrove has recovered since this date.
However, recent research suggests the older, yellowing leaves have no more measurable salt content than the other, greener leaves.
The mangrove forests that cover thousands of hectares of land along the UAE shoreline form an integral part of its coastal ecosystem.
Many tourists go there to see the Bengal tigers, saltwater crocodiles, leopards and snakes cobra.
The unique ecosystem found in the intricate mesh of mangrove roots offers a quiet marine region for young organisms.
Mangroves have been reported to be able to help buffer against tsunami, cyclones, and other storms.
Mangrove forests can decay into peat deposits because of fungal and bacterial processes as well as by the action of termites.
The nature of these deposits depends on the environment and the types of mangrove involved.
Pichavaram mangrove is one of the largest mangrove in India, situated at Pichavaram near Chidambaram in the state of Tamil Nadu.
Small environmental variations within a mangal may lead to greatly differing methods for coping with the environment.
Mangroves live in many parts of the tropical and subtropical coastal zones of North and South America.
The greatest biodiversity occurs in the mangal of New Guinea, Indonesia and Malaysia.
In the Ganga-Brahmaputra delta, Sundari trees are found, which provide durable hard timber.
These provinces, respectively, from southwest to southeast of Iran, include Bushehr, Hormozgan, and Sistan and Balouchestan.
Palm, Coconut, keora, agar, also grow in some parts of the delta.
Because of the uniqueness of mangrove ecosystems and the protection against erosion they provide, they are often the object of conservation programs, including national biodiversity action plans.
On the border of Esmeraldas province and Manabí province is a formerly large area of mangrove within Cojimies Estuary.
The roots also contain wide aerenchyma to facilitate transport within the plants.
They contain a complex salt filtration system and complex root system to cope with salt water immersion and wave action.
Once established, mangrove roots provide an oyster habitat and slow water flow, thereby enhancing sediment deposition in areas where it is already occurring.
Mangrove forests are an important part of the cycling and storage of carbon in tropical coastal ecosystems.
For comparison, the tropical rainforest biome contains thousands of tree species, but this is not to say mangrove forests lack diversity.
As seen in the photograph on the right, white or grey mangroves can secrete salts directly; they have two salt glands at each leaf base (correlating with their name—they are covered in white salt crystals).
It is also home of salt-water crocodiles and  nesting beach olive ridley sea turtle.
These forests exist in the north part of the Persian Gulf and Sea of Oman, along three maritime provinces in the south of Iran.
Shrimps and mud lobsters use the muddy bottoms as their home.
In this position, it is more likely to lodge in the mud and root.
Instead, the assessment showed, between 1980 and 2010, under  of mangroves had been cleared, although clearing of mangroves near Belize's main coastal settlements (e.g.
Termites are an important part of this decay, and so an understanding of their action on the organic matter is crucial to the chemical stabilization of mangrove peats.
In Puerto Rico there is a clear succession of these three trees from the lower elevations which are dominated by red mangroves to farther inland with a higher concentration of white mangroves.
Mangrove environments in the Eastern Hemisphere harbor six times as many species of trees and shrubs as do mangroves in the New World.
If it does not root, it can alter its density and drift again in search of more favorable conditions.
Geographical data of Sundarban Latitude: 25.7667
A breakthrough success is the Re-introduction of Rhizophora mucronata into the Indus Delta, which had become extinct there.
There are six types of mangroves, namely two types of parwa or black mangroves, three types of red mangroves (mangro) and a small mangrove species (white mangrove, akira or tjila).
It is not uncommon for a mangrove forest in the Caribbean to feature only three or four tree species.
Of the recognized 110 mangrove species, only about 54 species in 20 genera from 16 families constitute the "true mangroves", species that occur almost exclusively in mangrove habitats.
The most extensive mangrove forests of the Ryukyu Islands in East China Sea occur on Iriomote Island of the Yaeyama Islands, Okinawa, Japan.
The three most important mangrove forests of Taiwan are: Tamsui River in Taipei, Jhonggang River in Miaoli and the Sihcao Wetlands in Tainan.
In Thailand, community management has been effective in restoring damaged mangroves.
In Mexico four species of mangrove predominate: ''Rhizophora mangle, Laguncularia racemosa, Avicennia germinans'' and ''Conocarpus erectus''.
Red mangroves are the most common choice for cultivation, used particularly in marine aquariums in a sump to reduce nitrates and other nutrients in the water.
The fertile soils of the delta have been subject to intensive human use for centuries, and the ecoregion has been mostly converted to intensive agriculture, with few enclaves of forest remaining.
, after six years of planting, 700,000 mangroves are growing; providing stock feed for sheep and habitat for oysters, crabs, other bivalves, and fish.
Because the soil is perpetually waterlogged, little free oxygen is available.
Mangrove removal disturbs these underlying sediments, often creating problems of trace metal contamination of seawater and biota.
The Manzanar Mangrove Initiative is an ongoing experiment in Arkiko, Eritrea, part of the Manzanar Project founded by Gordon H. Sato, establishing new mangrove plantations on the coastal mudflats.
About 110 species are considered "mangroves", in the sense of being a tree that grows in such a saline swamp, though only a few are from the mangrove plant genus, ''Rhizophora''.
The term is also used for tropical coastal vegetation consisting of such species.
Colombia possesses large mangrove forests on both its Caribbean and Pacific coasts.
In Trinidad and Tobago as well, efforts are underway to protect a mangrove threatened by the construction of a steelmill and a port.
A small mangrove area is present in the Kingdom of Bahrain.
In addition, large forest of mangrove surround the coast to the south of Qatif (Siahat Beach).
Wave energy is typically low in areas where mangroves grow, so their effect on erosion can only be measured over long periods.
Because of the limited fresh water available in salty intertidal soils, mangroves limit the amount of water they lose through their leaves.
Erosion often occurs on the outer sides of bends in river channels that wind through mangroves, while new stands of mangroves are appearing on the inner sides where sediment is accruing.
The Environment Agency – Abu Dhabi (EAD) is currently working on rehabilitation, conservation and protection of mangrove forests in seven key sites in Abu Dhabi including: Saadiyat Island, Jubail Island, Marawah Marine Biosphere Reserve (which also comprises famous Bu Tinah Island), Bu Syayeef Protected Area, Ras Gharab, the Eastern Corniche and Ras Ghanada.
Nonetheless, because of sea land re-claiming the mangrove is being cut down which makes lots of sea fish losses their natural habitats.
On the Malayan Peninsula mangroves cover an estimated , while most of the remaining  mangroves in Malaysia are on the island of Borneo.
The largest percentage of mangroves is found between the 5° N and 5° S latitudes.
The following listing (modified from Tomlinson, 1986) gives the number of species of mangroves in each listed plant genus and family.
Genetic divergence of mangrove lineages from terrestrial relatives, in combination with fossil evidence, suggests mangrove diversity is limited by evolutionary transition into the stressful marine environment, and the number of mangrove lineages has increased steadily over the Tertiary with little global extinction.
of Sindh, Pakistan, with the help of 300 local coastal volunteer planters set the Guinness World through 847,250 mangrove saplings planted at Kharo Chan, Thatta, Sindh, Pakistan in a little over 12 hours.
Knee and ribbon types may be combined with buttress roots at the base of the tree.
Mangroves can be found in over 118 countries and territories in the tropical and subtropical regions of the world.
The area is known for the eponymous Royal Bengal Tiger (Panthera tigris tigris), as well as numerous fauna including species of birds, spotted deer, crocodiles and snakes.
In the Indonesian Archipelago, mangroves occur around much of Sumatra, Borneo, Sulawesi, and the surrounding islands, while further north, they are found along the coast of the Malay Peninsula.
During this period, through concerted efforts and a rigorous conservation policy adopted by the Sindh Forest Department, Govt.
In Senegal, Haïdar El Ali has started the  project, which (amongst others) focuses on reforesting several areas with mangroves.
Thus, for a plant to survive in this environment, it must tolerate broad ranges of salinity, temperature, and moisture, as well as a number of other key environmental factors — thus only a select few species make up the mangrove tree community.
The forest lies at the foot of the Ganges The seasonally-flooded Sundarbans freshwater swamp forests lie inland from the mangrove forests.
Significant mangals include the Marismas Nacionales-San Blas mangroves found in Sinaloa and Nayarit.
Title: Lugar Poblado
Additionally, the Sundarbans serves a crucial function as a protective flood barrier for the millions of inhabitants in and around Kolkata (Calcutta) against the result of cyclone activity.
The Bhitarkanika Mangroves Forest of Odisha, by the Bay of Bengal, is India's second largest mangrove forest.
In Arabic, mangrove trees are known as ''qurm'', thus the mangrove area in Oman is known as Qurm Park.
Grassroots efforts to save mangroves from development are becoming more popular as their benefits become more widely known.
'''Mangroves''' are shrubs or small trees that grow in coastal saline or brackish water.
New Zealand also has mangrove forests extending to around 38°S (similar to Australia's southernmost mangrove incidence): the furthest geographical extent on the west coast is Raglan Harbour (37°48′S); on the east coast, Ohiwa Harbour (near Opotiki) is the furthest south mangroves are found (38°00′S).
File:Mangrove swamp, Iriomote Island, Okinawa, Japan.jpg|Iriomote Island, Japan
They can restrict the opening of their stomata (pores on the leaf surfaces, which exchange carbon dioxide gas and water vapour during photosynthesis).
The mangroves in-and-around the estuaries of Muisne have decreased in area from 3222 ha in 1971 to 1065 ha as of 2005, during this time commercial shrimp aquaculture has become the dominant land-cover within this estuary environment.
Mangroves are salt tolerant trees, also called halophytes, and are adapted to life in harsh coastal conditions.
In a frequently cited concept that has become known as the "sacrificial leaf", salt which does accumulate in the shoot (sprout) then concentrates in old leaves, which the plant then sheds.
Indonesia has around 9.36 million hectares of mangrove forests, but 48% is categorized as 'moderately damaged' and 23% as 'badly damaged'.
In the Bahamas, for example, active efforts to save mangroves are occurring on the islands of Bimini and Great Guana Cay.
In order to understand peat formation by mangroves, it is important to understand the conditions they grew in, and how they decayed.
Mangroves can also be found in many of the Antilles including Puerto Rico, Cuba, and Hispaniola, as well as other islands in the West Indies such as the Bahamas.
However, of those areas for which data has been collected, it appears that 35% of the Mangroves have been destroyed.
This is the highest number of saplings planted within a day under the Guinness World Record category of "''Maximum Number of Trees Planted in a Day''”..
Analysis of water inside mangroves has shown 90% to 97% of salt has been excluded at the roots.
Adequate data is only available for about half of the global area of Mangrove swamp.
It was earlier "mangrow" (from Portuguese '''' or Spanish ''''), but this word was corrupted via folk etymology influence of the word "grove".
The mangroves' massive root systems are efficient at dissipating wave energy.
The Pichavaram mangroves in Tamil Nadu is India's one of the largest mangrove forests.
Mangrove is also widely seen in Tarut Island, east of Qatif in Saudi Arabia.
Each species has its own solutions to these problems; this may be the primary reason why, on some shorelines, mangrove tree species show distinct zonation.
In Karachi, land reclamation projects have led to the cutting down of mangrove forests for commercial and urban development.. On 22 June 2013, Sindh Forest Department, Govt.
International organizations like IUCN and WWF are also playing critical role to support this initiative of the government.
Within Manabí the major mangrove holding estuary is the Chone estuary situated near the city of Bahía de Caráquez.
The fine, anoxic sediments under mangroves act as sinks for a variety of heavy (trace) metals which colloidal particles in the sediments have scavenged from the water.
They also vary the orientation of their leaves to avoid the harsh midday sun and so reduce evaporation from the leaves.
Mangrove Swamps of Baratang Island are situated between Middle and South Andamans, capital city Port Blair.
The mature propagule then drops into the water, which can transport it great distances.
These "breathing tubes" typically reach heights of up to 30&nbsp;cm, and in some species, over 3 m. The four types of pneumatophores are stilt or prop type, snorkel or peg type, knee type, and ribbon or plank type.
Pichavaram ranks amongs one of the most exquisite scenic spots in Tamil Nadu and home of many species of aquatic birds.
During an inventory conducted by CONABIO between 2006 and 2008, 770,057 hectares of mangrove were counted.
Seven types of mangroves are recognised on Iriomote Island.
a mangrove resource base of 150,000 plus Hectares has been created, with the support of local coastal communities.
Because of their sensitivity to subfreezing temperatures, mangroves in the continental United States are very limited to the Florida peninsula (see Florida mangroves) and some isolated growths of black mangrove (''Avicennia germinans'') at the southmost coast of Louisiana and South Texas.
Mangroves are also present extensively in neighbouring Yemen.
Bhitarkanika is created by the two river deltas of Brahmani and Baitarani river and one of the important Ramsar Wetland in India.
In 1980, by contrast, mangrove cover stood at 188,417 acres (76,250 hectares)—also 3.4% of Belize's territory, although based on the work of mangrove researcher Simon Zisman, Belize's mangrove cover in 1980 was estimated to represent 98.7% of the precolonial extent of those ecosystems.
Mangrove plants require a number of physiological adaptations to overcome the problems of anoxia, high salinity and frequent tidal inundation.
The northern limit of mangrove forests in the Indo-Malaya ecozone is considered to be Tanegashima Island, Kyushu, Japan.
Mangroves also appear in home aquariums, and as ornamental plants, such as in Japan.
At low tide, organisms are also exposed to increases in temperature and desiccation, and are then cooled and flooded by the tide.
A recent, satellite-based study—funded by the World Wildlife Fund and conducted by the Water Center for the Humid Tropics of Latin America and the Caribbean (CATHALAC)—indicates Belize's mangrove cover declined by a mere 2% over a 30-year period.
Venezuela's northern Caribbean island, Margarita, possesses mangrove forests in the Parque nacional Laguna de La Restinga.
The intertidal existence to which these trees are adapted represents the major limitation to the number of species able to thrive in their habitat.
Bhitarkanika Mangroves is India’s second largest forest, located in the state of Odisha.
A third species, Aegiceras corniculatum, is under trails at the nursery stage.
Oman, near Muscat, supports large areas of mangroves, in particular at Shinas, Qurm Park and Mahout Island.
Baratang Island Mangroves is a swamp, located at Great Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Belize's mangrove cover in 2010 was thus estimated to represent 96.7% of the precolonial cover.
It becomes peat in good geochemical, sedimentary and tectonic conditions.
The term "mangrove" comes to English from Spanish (perhaps by way of Portuguese), and is likely to originate from Guarani.
The rate of loss of Belize's mangroves—at 0.07% per year between 1980 and 2010—was much lower than Belize's overall rate of forest clearing (0.6% per year in the same period).
Sundarbans was designated a Ramsar site on May 21, 1992.
''Aegialitis'', ''Avicennia'' and ''Aegiceras''), or out through the fruit (e.g.
Within northern Ecuador mangrove regrowth is reported in almost all estuaries and stems primarily from local actors responding to earlier periods of deforestation in the Esmeraldas region.
They are adapted to the low oxygen (anoxic) conditions of waterlogged mud.
Of this total, 55% are located in the Yucatán Peninsula.
of Sindh and the federal govt.
A gigantic initiative is under in the Sindh, Pakistan, to rehabilitate the degraded and blank mangrove mudflats.
Again, Chone has undergone substantial mangrove deforestation since the advent of commercial aquaculture in Ecuador.
When the tsunami struck, much of the land around the village was flooded, but the village itself suffered minimal damage.
The only other major mangrove holding in Esmeraldas is in-and-around the community of Muisne and the Rio Muisne Estuary Swampland Wildlife Refuges.
The remaining forests, together with the Sundarbans mangroves, are important habitat for the endangered tiger.
The Mangrove forests of Suriname have a height of 20–25 m and are found mainly in the coastal area.
In areas where roots are permanently submerged, the organisms they host include algae, barnacles, oysters, sponges, and bryozoans, which all require a hard surface for anchoring while they filter feed.
Ecuador has substantial remaining mangrove forests in the provinces of El Oro, Guayas, Manabi and Esmeraldas with limited forest remaining in Santa Elena.
Trials with the Eritrean Ministry of Fisheries followed, and a planting system was designed to provide the nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron missing from seawater.
However, a given mangrove swamp typically features only a small number of tree species.
Anthony Calfo, a noted aquarium author, observed anecdotally a red mangrove in captivity only grows if its leaves are misted with fresh water several times a week, simulating frequent tropical rainstorms.
According to research, four types of mangrove exist in Taiwan.
Mangroves occur in certain muddy swampy islands of the Maldives.
The study was born out of the need to verify the popular conception that mangrove clearing in Belize was rampant.
This forest is the most preserved within Ecuador and likely the most pristine forest along the Pacific Coast of the Americas.
Other achievements include: (1) Declaring all the mangrove forests in the Indus Delta as Protected Forests in December 2010; Constitution of a Mangrove Conservation Committee at the provincial level which includes all stakeholders as members and overall awareness of the importance of mangroves and its ecosystem.
The return of tide can flush out these soils, bringing them back to salinity levels comparable to that of seawater.
The Godavari-Krishna mangroves lies in the delta of the Godavari and Krishna rivers in the state of Andhra Pradesh.
This created a kilometre-wide belt of trees of various varieties.
Mangrove crabs munch on the mangrove leaves, adding nutritients to the mangal muds for other bottom feeders.
Once germinated, the seedling grows either within the fruit (e.g.
In at least some cases, export of carbon fixed in mangroves is important in coastal food webs.
Both species are considered invasive species and classified as pests by the University of Hawaii Botany Department.
Plant biodiversity is generally low in a given mangal.
Despite restoration efforts, developers and others have removed over half of the world's mangroves in recent times.
Their capacity to limit high-energy wave erosion is limited to events such as storm surges and tsunamis.
Likewise, they slow down tidal water enough so its sediment is deposited as the tide comes in, leaving all except fine particles when the tide ebbs.
Initial plantings failed, but observation of the areas where mangroves did survive by themselves led to the conclusion that nutrients in water flow from inland were important to the health of the mangroves.
Sindh Forest Department, Government of Sindh Mangrove has played pioneer role for the conservation and protection of the mangroves in the Indus Delta since late 1950s when it was handed over the areas.
Nevertheless, the need to protect Belize's mangroves is imperative, as a 2009 study by the World Resources Institute (WRI) indicates the ecosystems contribute US$174–249 million per year to Belize's national economy.
Time Zone: Asia / Dhaka
Mangroves occur on the Pacific and Caribbean coasts of Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
Pneumatophores (aerial roots) allow mangroves to absorb gases directly from the atmosphere, and other nutrients such as iron, from the inhospitable soil.
''Rhizophora'', ''Ceriops'', ''Bruguiera'' and ''Nypa'') to form a propagule (a ready-to-go seedling) which can produce its own food via photosynthesis.
Approximately 75% of world’s mangroves are found in just 15 countries.
Using this it is possible to attempt to reconstruct the environment and investigate changes to the coastal ecosystem for thousands of years by using sediment cores.
Mangrove plantations in Vietnam, Thailand, Philippines and India host several commercially important species of fishes and crustaceans.
Though the trees themselves are few in species, the ecosystem that these trees create provides a home (habitat) for a great variety of other organisms.
Anaerobic bacteria liberate nitrogen gas, soluble ferrum (iron), inorganic phosphates, sulfides and methane, which make the soil much less nutritious.
In Puerto Rico the red (Rhizophora mangle), white (Laguncularia racemosa) and black (Avicennia germinans) mangroves occupy different ecological niches and have slightly different chemical compositions so the carbon content varies between the species as well between the different tissues of the plant e.g.
In some areas, mangrove reforestation and mangrove restoration is also underway.
The Sundarbans is intersected by a complex network of tidal waterways, mudflats and small islands of salt-tolerant mangrove forests.
Likewise, the 2010 update of the World Mangrove Atlas indicated a fifth of the world's mangrove ecosystems have been lost since 1980.
Once a propagule is ready to root, its density changes so the elongated shape now floats vertically rather than horizontally.
Other major mangals occur on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the Gulf of Kutch in Gujarat.
Mangroves are not native to Hawaii, but the red mangrove, ''Rhizophora mangle'', and Oriental mangrove, ''Bruguiera sexangula'', have been introduced and are now naturalized.
Mangrove seeds are buoyant and are therefore suited to water dispersal.
The mangrove biome, or mangal, is a distinct saline woodland or shrubland habitat characterized by depositional coastal environments, where fine sediments (often with high organic content) collect in areas protected from high-energy wave action.
In Vietnam, mangrove forests grow along the southern coast, including two forests: the Can Gio Mangrove Forest biosphere reserve and the U Minh mangrove forest in the sea and coastal region of Kiên Giang, Cà Mau and Bạc Liêu provinces.
The mangrove forests of Kompong Sammaki in Cambodia are of major ecological and cultural importance, as the human population relies heavily on the crabs and fish that live in the roots.
One village in Tamil Nadu was protected from tsunami destruction—the villagers in Naluvedapathy planted 80,244 saplings to get into the Guinness Book of World Records.
