Several colorful oxides of manganese, for example manganese dioxide, are abundant in nature have been used as pigments since the Stone Age.
This feminine ''magnes'' was later called ''magnesia'', known now in modern times as pyrolusite or manganese dioxide.
Manganese compounds where manganese is in oxidation state +7, which are restricted to the unstable oxide Mn2O7 and compounds of the intensely purple permanganate anion MnO4−, are powerful oxidizing agents.
The essential minimum intake is unknown since manganese deficiency is so rare.
'''Manganese''' is a chemical element with symbol '''Mn''' and atomic number 25.
Manganese occurs principally as pyrolusite (MnO2), braunite, (Mn2+Mn3+6)(SiO12), psilomelane (Ba,H2O)2Mn5O10, and to a lesser extent as rhodochrosite (MnCO3).
Scheele and others were aware that pyrolusite (now known to be manganese dioxide) contained a new element, but they were unable to isolate it.
Although Mn concentrations at or below 300&nbsp;µg Mn/L were considered safe at the time of the study by the US EPA and 400&nbsp;µg Mn/L by the World Health Organization, the 92 children sampled (between 11 and 13 years of age) from this province displayed lower performance on tests of manual dexterity and rapidity, short-term memory, and visual identification, compared to children from an uncontaminated area.
The manganese dioxide is reduced to the manganese oxide-hydroxide MnO(OH) during discharging, preventing the formation of hydrogen at the anode of the battery.
Manganese contained in all manganese imports: South Africa, 31%; Gabon, 21%; Australia, 13%; Mexico, 8%; and other, 27%.
Steel containing 8 to 15% of manganese has a high tensile strength of up to 863&nbsp;MPa.
For further purification, the manganese can then be sent to an electrowinning facility.
Manganate (VI) salts can be produced by dissolving Mn compounds, such as manganese dioxide, in molten alkali while exposed to air.
However, there are a few examples of low-spin, S =1/2 manganese(II).
The best-known manganese-containing polypeptides may be arginase, the diphtheria toxin, and Mn-containing superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD).
The iron reacts with the manganese dioxide to form iron hydroxide and elemental manganese.
In 2002, more than 230,000&nbsp;tons of manganese dioxide was used for this purpose.
Estimates for females and children are generally less.
The most stable oxidation state for manganese is +2, which has a pale pink color, and many manganese(II) compounds are known, such as manganese(II) sulfate (MnSO4) and manganese(II) chloride (MnCl2).
Mn–Cr isotopic ratios reinforce the evidence from 26Al and 107Pd for the early history of the solar system.
Ionized manganese is used industrially as pigments of various colors, which depend on the oxidation state of the ions.
The classes of enzymes that have manganese cofactors is large and includes oxidoreductases, transferases, hydrolases, lyases, isomerases, ligases, lectins, and integrins.
Larger quantities of manganese are used to produce pink colored glass.
The proposed mechanism for manganese toxicity is that dysregulation leads to oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, glutamate-mediated excitoxicity, and aggregation of proteins.
The earliest study was conducted in the Chinese province of Shanxi.
People can be exposed to manganese in the workplace by breathing it in or swallowing it.
The fatal dose is about 10&nbsp;g, and several fatal intoxications have occurred.
The metal is occasionally used in coins; until 2000, the only United States coin to use manganese was the "wartime" nickel from 1942 to 1945.
The reverse transcriptases of many retroviruses (though not lentiviruses such as HIV) contain manganese.
In 1972 the CIA's Project Azorian, through billionaire Howard Hughes, commissioned the ship ''Hughes Glomar Explorer'' with the cover story of harvesting manganese nodules from the sea floor.
Before year 2000, more than 1.6 million tonnes of those alloys were used; at 1% manganese, this consumed 16,000 tonnes of manganese.
Until the development batteries with nickel-cadmium and lithium, most batteries contained manganese.
Manganese overexposure is most frequently associated with manganism, a rare neurological disorder associated with excessive manganese ingestion or inhalation.
Manganese(III) reacts with iron(II) to induce a strong green color in glass by forming less-colored iron(III) and slightly pink manganese(II), compensating for the residual color of the iron(III).
Manganese(IV) oxide was used in the original type of dry cell battery as an electron acceptor from zinc, and is the blackish material in carbon–zinc type flashlight cells.
Such fuels, directly or in mixture with non-reformed distillates, are universal in developed countries (0EU, Japan, etc.).
Waterborne manganese has a greater bioavailability than dietary manganese.
At levels of 500&nbsp;mg/m3, manganese is immediately dangerous to life and health.
Psilomelane (manganese ore)
Increased ferroportin protein expression in human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells is associated with decreased intracellular Mn concentration and attenuated cytotoxicity, characterized by the reversal of Mn-reduced glutamate uptake and diminished lactate dehydrogenase leakage.
To fulfill this requirement, most broad-spectrum plant fertilizers contain manganese.
It is hard and very brittle, difficult to fuse, but easy to oxidize.
Solutions of potassium permanganate were among the first stains and fixatives to be used in the preparation of biological cells and tissues for electron microscopy.
Drinking water there had been contaminated through improper sewage irrigation and contained 240–350&nbsp;µg Mn/L.
The origin of the name manganese is complex.
A more progressive extraction process involves directly reducing manganese ore in a heap leach.
It reduces engine knock agent through the action of the carbonyl groups.
That triggered a rush of activity to collect manganese nodules, which was not actually practical.
In larger amounts, and apparently with far greater effectiveness through inhalation, it can cause a poisoning  in mammals with neurological damage that is sometimes irreversible.
For the production of ferromanganese, the manganese ore is mixed with iron ore and carbon, and then reduced either in a blast furnace or in an electric arc furnace.
The soft tissue remainder is concentrated in the liver and kidneys.
Symptoms include weakness, monotone and slowed speech, an expressionless face, tremor, forward-leaning gait, inability to walk backwards without falling, rigidity, and general problems with dexterity, gait and balance.
The current maximum safe concentration under EPA rules is 50&nbsp;µg Mn/L.
Hence, 53Mn provides additional evidence for nucleosynthetic processes immediately before coalescence of the solar system.
The resulting ferromanganese has a manganese content of 30 to 80%.
Manganese exposure in United States is regulated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
MMT contains 24.4–25.2% manganese.
The most important manganese ore is pyrolusite (MnO2).
:MnO2 + H2O + e− → MnO(OH) +
Manganese is part of the iron group of elements, which are thought to be synthesized in large stars shortly before the supernova explosion.
Land-based resources are large but irregularly distributed.
Manganese is an important element for human health, essential for development, metabolism, and the antioxidant system.
The primary decay mode before the most abundant stable isotope, 55Mn, is electron capture and the primary mode after is beta decay.
Nevertheless, excessive exposure or intake may lead to a condition known as manganism, a neurodegenerative disorder that causes dopaminergic neuronal death and symptoms similar to Parkinson's disease.
In the 20th century, manganese dioxide was widely used as the cathodic for commercial disposable dry batteries of both the standard (zinc-carbon) and alkaline types.
OSHA has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for manganese exposure in the workplace as 5&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday.
Children in the experimental group showed increased hyperactive and oppositional behavior.
However, exposure to manganese dusts and fumes should not exceed the ceiling value of 5&nbsp;mg/m3 even for short periods because of its toxicity level.
The permanganates of alkali and alkaline earth metals are powerful oxidizers.
This is done by percolating natural gas through the bottom of the heap; the natural gas provides the heat (needs to be at least 850&nbsp;°C) and the reducing agent (carbon monoxide).
The human body contains about 12&nbsp;mg of manganese, mostly in the bones.
Johan Gottlieb Gahn was the first to isolate an impure sample of manganese metal in 1774, which he did by reducing the dioxide with carbon.
Manganese compounds have been used as pigments and for the coloring of ceramics and glass.
53Mn decays to 53Cr with a half-life of 3.7 million years.
Seawater has only 10&nbsp;ppm manganese and the atmosphere contains 0.01&nbsp;µg/m3.
Aluminium with roughly 1.5% manganese has increased resistance to corrosion through grains that absorb impurities which would lead to galvanic corrosion.
About 80% of the known world manganese resources are in South Africa; other important manganese deposits are in Ukraine, Australia, India, China, Gabon and Brazil.
The production of chlorine and hypochlorite bleaching agents was a large consumer of manganese ores.
Unlike Parkinson's disease, manganism is not associated with loss of smell and patients are typically unresponsive to treatment with L-DOPA.
The element is a required trace mineral for all known living organisms but is a neurotoxin.
Oxidation states of manganese
Several recent studies attempt to examine the effects of chronic low-dose manganese overexposure on child development.
Manganese compounds were used by Egyptian and Roman glassmakers, either to add to, or remove color from glass.
Manganese isotopic contents are typically combined with chromium isotopic contents and have found application in isotope geology and radiometric dating.
The need for lead or manganese additives is merely historic because the modern reformation processes create fuels with increased octane ratings.
Manganese poisoning has been linked to impaired motor skills and cognitive disorders.
In its early stages, an intoxicated person may experience depression, mood swings, compulsive behaviors, and psychosis.
Since 2000, dollar coins, for example the Sacagawea dollar and the Presidential $1 coins, are made from a brass containing 7% of manganese with a pure copper core.
An alloy of 75% copper and 25% nickel was traditionally used for the production of nickel coins.
Manganese(IV) oxide (manganese dioxide, MnO2) is used as a reagent in organic chemistry for the oxidation of benzylic alcohols (where the hydroxyl group is adjacent to an aromatic ring).
MnO2 is also used in the manufacture of oxygen and chlorine and in drying black paints.
By the mid-18th century, Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele had used pyrolusite to produce chlorine.
The male ''magnes'' attracted iron, and was the iron ore now known as lodestone or magnetite, and which probably gave us the term magnet.
Manganese also has three meta states.
The invention of the Leclanché cell in 1866 and the subsequent improvement of the batteries containing manganese dioxide as cathodic depolarizer increased the demand of manganese dioxide.
Compared to 1953, levels of manganese in air have dropped.
Manganese also functions in the oxygen-evolving complex of photosynthetic plants.
The manganese content of some iron ores used in Greece led to speculations that steel produced from that ore contains additional manganese, making the Spartan steel exceptionally hard.
Manganese enzymes are particularly essential in detoxification of superoxide free radicals in organisms that must deal with elemental oxygen.
Manganese is essential to iron and steel production by virtue of its sulfur-fixing, deoxidizing, and alloying properties, as first recognized by the British metallurgist Robert Forester Mushet (1811 - 1891) who, in 1856, introduced the element, in the form of Spiegeleisen, into steel for the specific purpose of removing excess dissolved oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus in order to improve its malleability.
The brown color of ceramic is sometimes the result of manganese compounds.
Manganese oxide dendrites on limestone from Solnhofen, Germany – a kind of pseudofossil.
Attempts to find economically viable methods of harvesting manganese nodules were abandoned in the 1970s.
Around the beginning of the 19th century, manganese was used in steelmaking and several patents were granted.
The second largest application for manganese is in aluminum alloys.
other uses, manganese is a key component of low-cost stainless steel.
The real mission of ''Hughes Glomar Explorer'' was to raise a sunken Soviet submarine, the K-129, with the goal of retrieving Soviet code books.
All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives of less than three hours, and the majority of less than one minute.
Because of its relatively short half-life, 53Mn is relatively rare, produced by cosmic rays impact on iron.
It is not found as a free element in nature; it is often found in minerals in combination with iron.
Manganese is a metal with important industrial metal alloy uses, particularly in stainless steels.
In 1837, British academic James Couper noted an association between miners' heavy exposure to manganese with a form of Parkinson's disease.
Mn-SOD is the type of SOD present in eukaryotic mitochondria, and also in most bacteria (this fact is in keeping with the bacterial-origin theory of mitochondria).
DMT1 also transports inhaled manganese across the nasal epithelium.
Manganese is mined in South Africa, Australia, China, Brazil, Gabon, Ukraine, India, Fiji and Ghana and Kazakhstan.
Spiegeleisen is an iron alloy with a manganese content of approximately 15%
Use as "glassmakers soap" continued through the Middle Ages until modern times and is evident in 14th-century glass from Venice.
The female ''magnes'' ore did not attract iron, but was used to decolorize glass.
Steel with 12% manganese was discovered in 1882 by Robert Hadfield and is still known as Hadfield steel.
The isotopes of manganese range in atomic weight from 46 u (46Mn) to 65 u (65Mn).
For example, the esophagus is affected if the permanganate is swallowed.
By the mid-18th century, the Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele used manganese dioxide to produce chlorine.
Compounds with oxidation states +5 (blue) and +6 (green) are strong oxidizing agents and are vulnerable to disproportionation.
Symptoms of late-stage manganism become more severe over time even if the source of exposure is removed and brain manganese levels return to normal.
This reduces all of the manganese ore to manganese oxide (MnO), which is a leachable form.
The disorder was first described in 1837 by British academic John Couper, who studied two patients who were manganese grinders.
The ore is then added to a leach tank of sulfuric acid and ferrous iron (Fe2+) in a 1.6:1 ratio.
The exceptions, which are all bacteria, include ''Lactobacillus plantarum'' and related lactobacilli, which use a different nonenzymatic mechanism with manganese (Mn2+) ions complexed with polyphosphate, suggesting a path of evolution for this function in aerobic life.
Neither this mineral nor elemental manganese is magnetic.
Steelmaking, including its ironmaking component, has accounted for most manganese demand, presently in the range of 85% to 90% of the total demand.
Methylcyclopentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl (MMT) is a gasoline additive used to replace lead compounds for unleaded gasolines to improve the octane rating of low octane petroleum distillates.
Ferromanganese: South Africa, 47%; France, 22%; Mexico, 8%; Australia, 8%; and other, 15%.
A third study conducted in Quebec examined school children between the ages of 6 and 15 living in homes that received water from a well containing 610&nbsp;µg Mn/L; controls lived in homes that received water from a 160&nbsp;µg Mn/L well.
The oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) is a part of photosystem II contained in the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts; it is responsible for the terminal photooxidation of water during the light reactions of photosynthesis, and has a metalloenzyme core containing four atoms of manganese.
The manganese dietary reference intake for a 44 year old human male is 2.3&nbsp;mg per day from food, with 11&nbsp;mg estimated as the tolerable upper limit for daily intake to avoid toxicity.
Only a limited amount is absorbed by the intestines, but this small amount shows severe effects on the kidneys and on the liver.
More recently, a study of 10-year-old children in Bangladesh showed a relationship between Mn concentration in well water and diminished IQ scores.
Historically, manganese is named for various black minerals (such as pyrolusite) from the same region of Magnesia in Greece which gave names to similar-sounding magnesium, Mg, and magnetite, an ore of the element iron, Fe.
Manganese has no satisfactory substitute in its major applications in metallurgy.
According to results from a 2010 study, higher levels of exposure to manganese in drinking water are associated with increased intellectual impairment and reduced intelligence quotients in school-age children.
In South Africa, most identified deposits are located near Hotazel in the Northern Cape Province, with a 2011 estimate of 15 billion tons.
Solid compounds of manganese(III) are characterized by its strong purple-red color and a preference for distorted octahedral coordination resulting from the Jahn-Teller effect.
Scheele and other chemists were aware that manganese dioxide contained a new element, but they were not able to isolate it.
Fuels containing manganese tend to form manganese carbides, which damage exhaust valves.
Potassium permanganate, sodium permanganate, and barium permanganate are all potent oxidizers.
Manganese dioxide is used as the cathode (electron acceptor) material in zinc-carbon and alkaline batteries.
Generally, exposure to ambient Mn air concentrations in excess of 5 μg Mn/m3 can lead to Mn-induced symptoms.
The ore then travels through a grinding circuit to reduce the particle size of the ore to between 150–250 μm, increasing the surface area to aid leaching.
In both cases of nickel and dollar, the use of manganese in the coin was to duplicate the electromagnetic properties of a previous identically sized and valued coin in the mechanisms of vending machines.
Mn2+ often competes with Mg2+ in biological systems.
In 2011 South Africa produced 3.4 million tons, topping all other nations.
Elevated atmospheric manganese concentrations are strongly correlated with automobile traffic density.
Permanganate (+7 oxidation state) compounds are purple, and can give glass a violet color.
Small amounts of manganese improve the workability of steel at high temperatures by forming a high-melting sulfide and preventing the formation of a liquid iron sulfide at the grain boundaries.
Manganese compounds are less toxic than those of other widespread metals, such as nickel and copper.
US Import Sources (1998–2001): Manganese ore: Gabon, 70%; South Africa, 10%; Australia, 9%; Mexico, 5%; and other, 6%.
Manganism is a biphasic disorder.
There are no spin-allowed d–d transitions in manganese(II), explaining why manganese(II) compounds are typically pale to colorless.
Potassium permanganate, also called Condy's crystals, is a commonly used laboratory reagent because of its oxidizing properties; it is used as a topical medicine (for example, in the treatment of fish diseases).
Eighteen radioisotopes have been isolated and described, the most stable being 53Mn with a half-life of 3.7 million years, 54Mn with a half-life of 312.3 days, and 52Mn with a half-life of 5.591 days.
A protein called DMT1 is the major transporter in manganese absorption from the intestine, and may be the major transporter of manganese across the blood–brain barrier.
Manganese is a silvery-gray metal that resembles iron.
In biology, manganese(II) ions function as cofactors for a large variety of enzymes with many functions.
The same material also functions in newer alkaline batteries (usually battery cells), which use the same basic reaction, but a different electrolyte mixture.
In 1912, United States patents were granted for protecting firearms against rust and corrosion with manganese phosphate electrochemical conversion coatings, and the process has seen widespread use ever since.
In the USA, the imperative to provide the lowest price per volume on motor fuels and the lowest taxation rate, combined with lax legislation of fuel content before the year 2000, encouraged refineries to use MMT.
In the human brain, the manganese is bound to manganese metalloproteins, most notably glutamine synthetase in astrocytes.
In the glass industry, manganese compounds are used for two effects.
In the 16th century, manganese dioxide was called ma'''n'''ga'''n'''esum (note the two n's instead of one) by glassmakers, possibly as a corruption and concatenation of two words, since alchemists and glassmakers eventually had to differentiate a ''mag'''n'''esia '''n'''egra'' (the black ore) from ''mag'''n'''esia alba'' (a white ore, also from Magnesia, also useful in glassmaking).
Naturally occurring manganese is composed of one stable isotope, 55Mn.
Historically, persons employed in the production or processing of manganese alloys have been at risk for developing manganism; however, current health and safety regulations protect workers in developed nations.
Manganese phosphating is used for rust and corrosion prevention on steel.
The +3 oxidation state is known in compounds like manganese(III) acetate, but these are quite powerful oxidizing agents and also prone to disproportionation in solution, forming manganese(II) and manganese(IV).
The zinc-carbon battery and the alkaline battery normally use industrially produced manganese dioxide because natural occurring manganese dioxide contains impurities.
Manganese is also important in photosynthetic oxygen evolution in chloroplasts in plants.
In minor applications, (e.g., manganese phosphating), zinc and sometimes vanadium are viable substitutes.
The most common oxidation states of manganese are +2, +3, +4, +6, and +7, though all oxidation states from −3 to +7 have been observed.
Manganese dioxide has been used since antiquity to oxidize and neutralize the greenish tinge in glass from trace amounts of iron contamination.
Manganese comprises about 1000&nbsp;ppm&nbsp;(0.1%) of the Earth's crust, the 12th most abundant of the crust's elements.
Manganese(II) most commonly exists with a high spin, S = 5/2 ground state because of the high pairing energy for manganese(II).
In 1816, it was documented that iron alloyed with manganese was harder but not more brittle.
The oxidation state 5+ can be produced by dissolving manganese dioxide in molten sodium nitrite.
Many racing competitions specifically ban manganese compounds in racing fuel for carts and minibikes.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 1&nbsp;mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday and a short term limit of 3&nbsp;mg/m3.
The corrosion-resistant aluminium alloys 3004 and 3104 (0.8 to 1.5% manganese) are used for most beverage cans.
However, data indicates that the human body can recover from certain adverse effects of overexposure to manganese if the exposure is stopped and the body can clear the excess.
In some preparations, it is a brown pigment for paint and is a constituent of natural umber.
The embrittlement decreases at higher manganese concentrations and reaches an acceptable level at 8%.
Manganese metal and its common ions are paramagnetic.
If the manganese content reaches 4%, the embrittlement of the steel becomes a dominant feature.
It is hypothesized that long-term exposure to the naturally occurring manganese in shower water puts up to 8.7 million Americans at risk.
Early neurological symptoms give way to late-stage manganism, which resembles Parkinson's disease.
According to 1978 estimate, the ocean floor has 500 billion tons of manganese nodules.
In the case of the later U.S. dollar coins, the manganese alloy was intended to duplicate the properties of the copper/nickel alloy used in the previous Susan B. Anthony dollar.
Johan Gottlieb Gahn was the first to isolate an impure sample of manganese metal in 1774, by reducing the dioxide with carbon.
The cave paintings in Gargas that 30,000 to 24,000 years old contain manganese pigments.
It was used for British military steel helmets and later by the U.S. military.
However, because of shortage of nickel metal during the war, it was substituted by more available silver and manganese, thus resulting in an alloy of 56% copper, 35% silver and 9% manganese.
First, hydrochloric acid, or a mixture of dilute sulfuric acid and sodium chloride was made to react with manganese dioxide, later hydrochloric acid from the Leblanc process was used and the manganese dioxide was recycled by the Weldon process.
The Mn-SOD enzyme is probably one of the most ancient, for nearly all organisms living in the presence of oxygen use it to deal with the toxic effects of superoxide (), formed from the 1-electron reduction of dioxygen.
