Several tunnels also link Manhattan Island to New York City's outer boroughs and New Jersey.
Manhattan is a world center for training and education in medicine and the life sciences.
By 2005, about 60% of residents were college graduates and some 25% had earned advanced degrees, giving Manhattan one of the nation's densest concentrations of highly educated people.
, 52.3% of Manhattan residents over age 25 have a bachelor's degree, the fifth highest of all counties in the country.
The 41-story Singer Building, constructed in 1908 as the headquarters of the eponymous sewing machine manufacturer, stood  high until 1967, when it became the tallest building ever demolished.
Hudson came across Manhattan Island and the native people living there in 1609, and continued up the river that would later bear his name, the Hudson River, until he arrived at the site of present day Albany.
The New York Giants played side-by-side with their baseball namesakes from the time they entered the National Football League in 1925, until crossing over to Yankee Stadium in 1956.
The phrase ''a New York minute'' is meant to convey a very short time, sometimes in hyperbolic form, as in "perhaps faster than you would believe is possible".
The Henry Hudson Parkway is the corresponding parkway on the West Side north of 57th Street.
Both buildings were soon surpassed, with the May 1931 completion of the 102-story Empire State Building with its Art Deco tower soaring  to the top of the building.
Manhattan has the third-largest population of New York City's five boroughs, after Brooklyn and Queens, and is the smallest borough in terms of land area.
They are the two busiest rail stations in the United States.
The former Twin Towers of the World Trade Center were located in Lower Manhattan.
Federal Hall was also the site of where the United States Supreme Court met for the first time, the United States Bill of Rights were drafted and ratified, and where the Northwest Ordinance was adopted, establishing measures for adding new states to the Union.
Based on 2005 data, New York City has the lowest crime rate among the ten largest cities in the United States.
Central Park, which opened to the public in 1858, became the first landscaped public park in an American city.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, New York County has a total area of , of which  is land and  (32%) is water.
In the seven major crime categories tracked by the system, overall crime has declined by more than 75% since 1990, and year-to-date statistics through May 2009 show continuing declines.
The NYSE MKT (formerly the American Stock Exchange, AMEX), New York Board of Trade, and the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) are also located downtown.
Manhattan's many neighborhoods are not named according to any particular convention.
The trip is notoriously frustrating for drivers because of heavy congestion on narrow local streets laid out by the Commissioners' Plan of 1811, absence of express roads other than the Trans-Manhattan Expressway at the far north end of Manhattan Island, and only 4 crosstown roads for travel through Central Park, which is between 59th Street and 110th Street.
It is commonly found in telephone directories, New York City guide books, and MTA Manhattan bus maps.
Manhattan, surrounded by two brackish rivers, had a limited supply of fresh water.
Koreatown is roughly bounded by 5th and 6th Avenues, between 31st and 36th Streets.
There are 7-day and 30-day MetroCards that allow unlimited trips on all subways (except PATH) and MTA bus routes (except for express buses).
The disaster eventually led to overhauls of the city's fire department, building codes, and workplace regulations.
The name "''Manhattan"'' derives from the word ''Manna-hata'', as written in the 1609 logbook of Robert Juet, an officer on Henry Hudson's yacht ''Halve Maen'' (''Half Moon'').
Public schools in the borough are operated by the New York City Department of Education, the largest public school system in the United States.
The City University of New York (CUNY), the municipal college system of New York City, is the largest urban university system in the United States, serving more than 226,000 degree students and a roughly equal number of adult, continuing and professional education students.
Manhattan's population was spread out with 16.8% under the age of 18, 10.2% from 18 to 24, 38.3% from 25 to 44, 22.6% from 45 to 64, and 12.2% who were 65 years of age or older.
In 2015, Silicon Alley generated over US$7.3 billion in venture capital investment, most based in Manhattan, as well as in Brooklyn, Queens, and elsewhere in the region.
According to The Broadway League, shows on Broadway sold approximately US$1.27 billion worth of tickets in the 2013–2014 season, an increase of 11.4% from US$1.139 billion in the 2012–2013 season; attendance in 2013–2014 stood at 12.21 million, representing a 5.5% increase from the 2012–2013 season's 11.57 million.
The area that is now Manhattan was long inhabited by the Lenape Native Americans.
Manhattan real estate has since become among the most expensive in the world, with the value of Manhattan Island, including real estate, estimated to exceed US$3 trillion in 2013; residential property sale prices in Manhattan typically exceeded US as of 2016.
As the city's demographics stabilized, labor unionization brought new protections and affluence to the working class, the city's government and infrastructure underwent a dramatic overhaul under La Guardia.
In 1664, the English conquered New Netherland and renamed it "New York" after the English Duke of York and Albany, the future King James II.
Tenements were usually five-stories high, constructed on the then-typical 25x100 lots, with "cockroach landlords" exploiting the new immigrants.
In Central Park, outcrops of Manhattan Schist occur and Rat Rock is one rather large example.
Con Edison's electric business traces its roots back to Thomas Edison's Edison Electric Illuminating Company, the first investor-owned electric utility.
In 1952, the UN relocated from its first headquarters near Queens, to the East Side of Manhattan.
'''82.1%''' ''526,765
It also has some of the first hybrid taxis, most of which operate in Manhattan.
The  high pinnacle was later added bringing the total height of the building to .
The 1980s saw a rebirth of Wall Street, and Manhattan reclaimed its role at the center of the worldwide financial industry.
The Democratic Party holds most public offices.
Others, such as Greenwich Village, the Lower East Side, Alphabet City and the East Village, have long been associated with the Bohemian subculture.
The New York Mets played in the Polo Grounds in 1962 and 1963, their first two seasons, before Shea Stadium was completed in 1964.
The school-age population is expected to grow 4.4% by 2030, in contrast to a small decline in the city as a whole.
In 1912, about 20,000 workers, a quarter of them women, marched upon Washington Square Park to commemorate the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire, which killed 146 workers on March 25, 1911.
Important new sectors, such as Silicon Alley, emerged in Manhattan's economy.
Proposals in the mid-1900s to build express roads through the city's densest neighborhoods, namely the Mid-Manhattan Expressway and Lower Manhattan Expressway, did not go forward.
It is also one of the most densely populated areas in the world, with a census-estimated 2015 population of 1,644,518 living in a land area of , or 72,033 residents per square mile (27,812/km2), higher than the density of any individual American city.
Marble Hill is one example of how Manhattan's land has been considerably altered by human intervention.
The African Burial Ground National Monument at Duane Street preserves a site containing the remains of over 400 Africans buried during the 17th and 18th centuries.
Manhattan also has the highest per capita income of any county in the United States.
The New York World Building on Park Row, was the first to take the title in 1890, standing  until 1955, when it was demolished to construct a new ramp to the Brooklyn Bridge.
Some are geographical (the Upper East Side), or ethnically descriptive (Little Italy).
The Stonewall riots were a series of spontaneous, violent demonstrations by members of the gay community against a police raid that took place in the early morning hours of June 28, 1969, at the Stonewall Inn in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan.
'''62.4%''' ''275,742
WLIB began broadcasts for the African-American community in 1949 and regularly interviewed civil rights leaders like Malcolm X and aired live broadcasts from conferences of the NAACP.
The construction of the New York City Subway, which opened in 1904, helped bind the new city together, as did additional bridges to Brooklyn.
In a city of tenements packed with poorly paid laborers from dozens of nations, the city was a hotbed of revolution (including anarchists and communists among others), syndicalism, racketeering, and unionization.
Murder rates that had reached 2,245 in 1990 plummeted to 537 by 2008, and the crack epidemic and its associated drug-related violence came under greater control.
The state legislature rejected the proposal in June 2008.
In 1647, Peter Stuyvesant was appointed as the last Dutch Director General of the colony.
The new European immigration brought further social upheaval.
The rate of immigration from Europe grew steeply after the Civil War, and New York became the first stop for millions seeking a new life in the United States, a role acknowledged by the dedication of the Statue of Liberty on October 28, 1886, a gift from the people of France.
As Italian immigration grew in the early 20th century many joined ethnic gangs, including Al Capone, who got his start in crime with the Five Points Gang.
A small amount of trash processed at transfer sites in New Jersey is sometimes incinerated at waste-to-energy facilities.
The park is a popular oasis for migrating birds, and thus is popular with bird watchers.
Manhattan's workforce is overwhelmingly focused on white collar professions, with manufacturing nearly extinct.
The ferry terminal is located near Battery Park at Manhattan's southern tip.
However, many rescue workers and residents of the area developed several life-threatening illnesses that have led to some of their subsequent deaths.
Fifth Avenue roughly bisects Manhattan Island and acts as the demarcation line for east/west designations (e.g., East 27th Street, West 42nd Street); street addresses start at Fifth Avenue and increase heading away from Fifth Avenue, at a rate of 100 per block on most streets.
The borough hosts many world-renowned bridges, such as the Brooklyn Bridge; skyscrapers such as the Empire State Building, one of the tallest skyscrapers in the world; and parks, such as Central Park.
Manhattan's most important economic sector lies in its role as the headquarters for the U.S. financial industry, metonymously known as Wall Street.
The wealthiest fifth of Manhattanites made more than 40 times what the lowest fifth reported, a widening gap (it was 38 times, the year before) surpassed by only a few developing countries".
Today, Manhattan is the only borough in New York City that does not have a professional baseball franchise.
Registered Republicans are a minority in the borough, constituting 9.88% of the electorate as of April 2016.
After arriving in New York, many new arrivals ended up living in squalor in the slums of the Five Points neighborhood, an area between Broadway and the Bowery, northeast of New York City Hall.
From 1920–1933, Prohibition helped create a thriving black market in liquor, upon which the Mafia was quick to capitalize.
, 59.98% (902,267) of Manhattan residents, ages five and older, spoke only English at home, while 23.07% (347,033) spoke Spanish, 5.33% (80,240) Chinese, 2.03% (30,567) French, 0.78% (11,776) Japanese, 0.77% (11,517) Russian, 0.72% (10,788) Korean, 0.70% (10,496) German, 0.66% (9,868) Italian, 0.64% (9,555) Hebrew, and 0.48% (7,158) African languages as a main language.
The remains were found in 1991 during the construction of the Foley Square Federal Office Building.
Approximately 59.4% of the population over the age of 25 have a bachelor's degree or higher.
It also has twelve administrative districts, each served by a local Community Board.
Many of the women wore fitted tucked-front blouses like those manufactured by the Triangle Shirtwaist Company, a clothing style that became the working woman's uniform and a symbol of women's liberation, reflecting the alliance of labor and suffrage movements.
While 88% of Americans nationwide drive to their jobs, with only 5% using public transport, mass transit is the dominant form of travel for residents of Manhattan, with 72% of borough residents using public transport to get to work, while only 18% drove.
Broadway theatre is often considered the highest professional form of theatre in the United States.
Manhattan is unique in the U.S. for intense use of public transportation and lack of private car ownership.
Like New York City, New Jersey and much of Greater New York relies on exporting its trash to far-flung areas.
The United States Postal Service prefers that mail addressed to Manhattan use "New York, NY" rather than "Manhattan, NY".
The PATH QuickCard is being phased out, having been replaced by the SmartLink.
The four major American broadcast networks, ABC, NBC, CBS, and Fox, as well as Univision, are all headquartered in Manhattan, as are many cable channels, including MSNBC, MTV, Fox News, HBO and Comedy Central.
Before World War I, the section of the original Harlem River channel separating Marble Hill from The Bronx was filled in, and Marble Hill became part of the mainland.
Con Edison operates the world's largest district steam system, which consists of  of steam pipes, providing steam for heating, hot water, and air conditioning by some 1,800 Manhattan customers.
7 World Trade Center collapsed due to fires and structural damage caused by heavy debris falling from the collapse of the Twin Towers.
Marble Hill at one time was part of Manhattan Island, but the Harlem River Ship Canal, dug in 1895 to improve navigation on the Harlem River, separated it from the remainder of Manhattan as an island between the Bronx and the remainder of Manhattan.
In 2010, Manhattan's daytime population was swelling to 3.94 million, with commuters adding a net 1.48&nbsp;million people to the population, along with visitors, tourists, and commuting students.
The organizations Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC) and AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP) were founded to advocate on behalf of those stricken with the disease.
Spring and fall in New York City are mild, while summer is very warm and humid, with temperatures of  or higher recorded from 18 to 25 days on average during the season.
'''66.2%''' ''354,326
Since 1990, the largely powerless Borough President has acted as an advocate for the borough at the mayoral agencies, the City Council, the New York state government, and corporations.
The New York Rangers of the National Hockey League have played in the various locations of Madison Square Garden since their founding in the 1926–1927 season.
Each weekday, five vessels transport about 65,000 passengers on 109 boat trips.
Many districts and landmarks in Manhattan have become well known, as New York City received a record of nearly 60 million tourists in 2015, and Manhattan hosts three of the world's 10 most-visited tourist attractions in 2013: Times Square, Central Park, and Grand Central Terminal.
The Theater District around Broadway at Times Square, New York University, Columbia University, Flatiron Building, the Financial District around Wall Street, Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, Little Italy, Harlem, the American Museum of Natural History, Chinatown, and Central Park are all located on this densely populated island.
Bard High School Early College, a hybrid school created by Bard College, serves students from around the city.
The skyscraper, which has shaped Manhattan's distinctive skyline, has been closely associated with New York City's identity since the end of the 19th century.
According to the 2009 American Community Survey, the average household size was 2.11, and the average family size was 3.21.
Although the city of New York has the highest average cost for rent in the United States, it simultaneously hosts a higher average of income per capita.
Temperature records have been set as high as  on July 9, 1936, and as low as  on February 9, 1934.
German Americans and Russian Americans make up 7.2% and 6.2% of the population respectively.
17.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them.
The United States Postal Service operates post offices in Manhattan.
New York was the first capital under the newly enacted Constitution of the United States, from March 4, 1789, to August 12, 1790, at Federal Hall.
Manhattan has many energy-efficient green office buildings, such as the Hearst Tower, the rebuilt 7 World Trade Center, and the Bank of America Tower—the first skyscraper designed to attain a Platinum LEED Certification.
'''Manhattan''' (, ) is the most densely populated borough of New York City, its economic and administrative center, and the city's historical birthplace.
Some 20,000 workers crafted the topography to create the English-style pastoral landscape Olmsted and Vaux sought to create.
The mayor's staff and thirteen municipal agencies are located in the nearby Manhattan Municipal Building, completed in 1916, one of the largest governmental buildings in the world.
Manhattan was on track to have an estimated 90,000 hotel rooms at the end of 2014, a 10% increase from 2013.
The Financial District alone has witnessed growth in its population to approximately 43,000 , nearly double the 23,000 recorded at the 2000 Census.
Brewer replaced Scott Stringer, who went on to become New York City Comptroller.
Silicon Alley, centered in Manhattan, has evolved into a metonym for the sphere encompassing the New York City metropolitan region's high tech industries including, the Internet, new media, telecommunications, digital media, software development, biotechnology, game design, financial technology (''fintech''), and other fields within information technology that are supported by the area's entrepreneurship ecosystem and venture capital investments.
As the host of the UN, the borough is home to the world's largest international consular corps, comprising 105 consulates, consulates general and honorary consulates.
While a resurgence in the financial industry greatly improved the city's economic health in the 1980s, New York's crime rate continued to increase through the decade and into the beginning of the 1990s.
The Lincoln Tunnel, which carries 120,000 vehicles a day under the Hudson River between New Jersey and Midtown Manhattan, is the busiest vehicular tunnel in the world.
No Republican has won the presidential election in Manhattan since 1924, when Calvin Coolidge won a plurality of the New York County vote over Democrat John W. Davis, 41.20%–39.55%.
New York City became the most populous city in the world in 1925, overtaking London, which had reigned for a century.
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company Tower, standing  at the foot of Madison Avenue, wrested the title in 1909, with a tower reminiscent of St Mark's Campanile in Venice.
At , 40 Wall Street, completed in May 1930 in an astonishing eleven months as the headquarters of the Bank of Manhattan, seemed to have secured the title.
There are several intermittent avenues east of First Avenue, including four additional lettered avenues running from Avenue A eastward to Avenue D in an area now known as Alphabet City in Manhattan's East Village.
On business days, the influx of commuters increases that number to over 3.9 million, or more than 170,000 people per square mile (65,600/km2).
Moreover, the numbering system continues even in The Bronx, north of Manhattan, despite the fact that the grid plan is not so regular there, and the last numbered street is 263rd Street.
'''76.1%''' ''385,675
These intense war-time riots are counted among the worst incidents of civil disorder in American history, with an estimated 119 participants and passersby massacred.
Charter schools include Success Academy Harlem 1 through 5, Success Academy Upper West, and Public Prep.
The park was designed by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux.
The borough is also home to two private schools that are known as the most diverse in the nation, Manhattan Country School and United Nations International School.
New York's iconic yellow taxicabs, which number 13,087 city-wide and must have the requisite medallion authorizing the pick up of street hails, are ubiquitous in the borough.
Manhattan's current Borough President is Gale Brewer, elected as a Democrat in November 2013 with 82.9% of the vote.
Manhattan had approximately 520 million square feet (48.1 million m²) of office space in 2013, making it the largest office market in the United States.
'''52.20%''' ''380,310
Tammany Hall dominated local politics for decades.
Manhattan is also the United States county with the highest per capita income, being the sole county whose per capita income exceeded $100,000 in 2010.
It refers to the rapid pace of life in Manhattan.
The team moved to the Polo Grounds with the 1913 season, where they were officially christened the ''New York Yankees'', remaining there until they moved across the Harlem River in 1923 to Yankee Stadium.
More than 35 other branch libraries are located in the borough.
Off-Broadway theatres feature productions in venues with 100–500 seats.
'''55.74%''' ''377,856
The rise of immigration near the turn of the 20th century left major portions of Manhattan, especially the Lower East Side, densely packed with recent arrivals, crammed into unhealthy and unsanitary housing.
In 2011, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg had announced his choice of Cornell University and Technion-Israel Institute of Technology to build a US$2 billion graduate school of applied sciences on Roosevelt Island, Manhattan, with the goal of transforming New York City into the world's premier technology capital.
CUNY senior colleges located in Manhattan include: Baruch College, City College of New York, Hunter College, John Jay College of Criminal Justice, and the CUNY Graduate Center (graduate studies and doctoral granting institution).
The George Washington Bridge, the world's busiest motor vehicle bridge, connects Washington Heights, in Upper Manhattan, to Bergen County, in New Jersey.
The city's strong commercial ties to the American South, its growing immigrant population (prior to then largely from Germany and Ireland; beginning in the late 1850s waves of Italian; and Central, and Eastern European Jews began flowing in en-masse), anger about conscription sizzled and resentment at those who could afford to pay $300 to avoid service, led to resentment against Lincoln's war policies, plus the racial element, fomented paranoia about free Blacks taking the poor immigrants' jobs, culminated in the three-day-long New York Draft Riots of July 1863.
The outflow of population turned around, as the city once again became the destination of immigrants from around the world, joining with low interest rates and Wall Street bonuses to fuel the growth of the real estate market.
The borough is the most important source of funding for presidential campaigns in the United States; in 2004, it was home to six of the top seven ZIP codes in the nation for political contributions.
'''79.8%''' ''449,300
and NoMad ("NOrth of MADison Square Park").
Manhattan Island is bounded by the Hudson River to the west and the East River to the east.
Manhattan is served by the New York Public Library, which has the largest collection of any public library system in the country.
Though both of New York City's football teams play today across the Hudson River in MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford, New Jersey, both teams started out playing in the Polo Grounds.
WBAI, with news and information programming, is one of the few socialist radio stations operating in the United States.
The first national college-level basketball championship, the National Invitation Tournament, was held in New York in 1938 and remains in the city.
The stadium was demolished in 2002 to make way for the $45&nbsp;million, 4,754-seat Icahn Stadium, which includes an Olympic-standard 400-meter running track and, as part of Pele's and the Cosmos' legacy, includes a FIFA-approved floodlit soccer stadium that hosts matches between the 48 youth teams of a Manhattan soccer club.
In 1975, the team signed Pelé, officially recorded by FIFA as the world's greatest soccer player, to a $4.5&nbsp;million contract, drawing a capacity crowd of 22,500 to watch him lead the team to a 2–0 victory.
South of Waverly Place, Fifth Avenue terminates and Broadway becomes the east/west demarcation line.
Several other private institutions maintain a Manhattan presence, among them St. John's University, The College of New Rochelle and Pratt Institute.
Various private transportation network companies compete in Manhattan with each other and with the city's taxicabs.
The average household size was two and the average family size was 2.99.
Though the grid does start with 1st Street, just north of Houston Street (the southernmost street divided in west and east portions; pronounced HOW-stin), the grid does not fully take hold until north of 14th Street, where nearly all east-west streets are numerically identified, which increase from south to north to 220th Street, the highest numbered street on the island.
He entered the tidal strait now known as The Narrows aboard his ship ''La Dauphine'' and named the land around Upper New York Harbor ''"New Angoulême"'', in reference to the family name of King Francis I that was derived from Angoulême in France; he sailed far enough into the harbor to sight the Hudson River, which he referred to in his report to the French king as a "very big river"; and he named the ''Bay of Santa Margarita'' – what is now Upper New York Bay – after Marguerite de Navarre, the elder sister of the king.
A co-founder of Inner City was Percy Sutton, a former Manhattan borough president and long one of the city's most powerful black leaders.
An extensive network of express bus routes serves commuters and other travelers heading into Manhattan.
They are followed by Protestants, with 139,732 adherents (9.1%) and Muslims, with 37,078 (2.4%).
By 1929, stricter fire codes and the increased use of elevators in residential buildings, were the impetus behind a new housing code that effectively ended the tenement as a form of new construction, though many tenement buildings survive today on the East Side of the borough.
On September 11, 2001, two of four hijacked planes were flown into the Twin Towers of the original World Trade Center, and the towers subsequently collapsed.
'''78.2%''' ''416,142
The Minor League Baseball Brooklyn Cyclones play in Brooklyn, while the Staten Island Yankees play in Staten Island.
In 1842, Charles Dickens visited the area and was appalled at the horrendous living conditions he had seen.
Lower Manhattan is home to the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), on Wall Street, and the NASDAQ, at 165 Broadway, representing the world's largest and second largest stock exchanges, respectively, when measured both by overall share trading value and by total market capitalization of their listed companies in 2013.
The nearby Park Row Building, with its 29 stories standing  high took the title in 1899.
By the 1990s, crime rates started to drop dramatically due to revised police strategies, improving economic opportunities, gentrification, and new residents, both American transplants and new immigrants from Asia and Latin America.
48% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.
The Democrats account for 68.41% of those registered to vote, while 17.94% of voters are unaffiliated.
On separate occasions in late May and early July, the sunset is aligned with the street grid lines, with the result that the sun is visible at or near the western horizon from street level.
While much of the park looks natural, it is almost entirely landscaped and contains several artificial lakes.
Manhattan is also home to some of the most extensive art collections in the world, both contemporary and historical, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), the Frick Collection, the Whitney Museum of American Art, and the Frank Lloyd Wright-designed Guggenheim Museum.
Manhattan has three public heliports: the East 34th Street Heliport (also known as the Atlantic Metroport) at East 34th Street, owned by New York City and run by the New York City Economic Development Corporation ("NYCEDC")); the Port Authority Downtown Manhattan/Wall Street Heliport, owned by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and run by the NYCEDC; and the West 30th Street Heliport, a privately owned heliport that is owned by the Hudson River Park Trust.
New Amsterdam was formally incorporated as a city on February 2, 1653.
In July 2013, NYSE Euronext, the operator of the New York Stock Exchange, took over the administration of the London interbank offered rate from the British Bankers Association.
Perhaps no other artist is as associated with the downtown pop art movement of the late 1970s as Andy Warhol, who socialized at clubs like Serendipity 3 and Studio 54.
In 1971, WLIB became New York's first black-owned radio station and the crown jewel of Inner City Broadcasting Corporation.
Manhattan has two central business districts, the Financial District at the southern tip of the island, and Midtown Manhattan.
Water comes to Manhattan through New York City Water Tunnel No.
The "Big Apple" dates back to the 1920s, when a reporter heard the term used by New Orleans stablehands to refer to New York City's racetracks and named his racing column "Around The Big Apple."
Harlem is a name from the Dutch colonial era after Haarlem, a city in the Netherlands.
A 1610 map depicts the name as Manna-hata, twice, on both the west and east sides of the Mauritius River (later named the Hudson River).
The New York Jets, originally known as the ''Titans'', started out in 1960 at the Polo Grounds, staying there for four seasons before joining the Mets in Queens in 1964.
The New York Cosmos of the North American Soccer League played their home games at Downing Stadium for two seasons, starting in 1974.
A second subway, the Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH) system, connects six stations in Manhattan to northern New Jersey.
