Tolman and Conant, in their role as the project's scientific advisers, drew up a list of candidate scientists and had them rated by scientists already working on the project.
Greenewalt favored the bismuth phosphate process due to the corrosive nature of lanthanum fluoride, and it was selected for the Hanford separation plants.
Beams, Urey and Cohen then began work on a series of improvements which promised to increase the efficiency of the process.
Edward Teller pushed for discussion of a more powerful bomb: the "super", now usually referred to as a "hydrogen bomb", which would use the explosive force of a detonating fission bomb to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction in deuterium and tritium.
Fermi contacted Chien-Shiung Wu, who identified the cause of the problem as neutron poisoning from xenon-135, which has a half-life of 9.2 hours.
Moreover, it could be built in stages, and rapidly reach industrial capacity.
Commander Frederick L. Ashworth from Alberta met with Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz on Guam in February 1945 to inform him of the project.
Hiroshima, the headquarters of the 2nd General Army and Fifth Division and a port of embarkation, was the primary target of the mission, with Kokura and Nagasaki as alternatives.
A minor fire at Los Alamos in January 1945 led to a fear that a fire in the plutonium laboratory might contaminate the whole town, and Groves authorized the construction of a new facility for plutonium chemistry and metallurgy, which became known as the DP-site.
Sir John Dill died in Washington, D.C., in November 1944 and was replaced both as Chief of the British Joint Staff Mission and as a member of the Combined Policy Committee by Field Marshal Sir Henry Maitland Wilson.
Three more hemispheres followed on 23 July and were delivered three days later.
They were pickled to remove dirt and impurities, dipped in molten bronze, tin, and aluminum-silicon alloy, canned using hydraulic presses, and then capped using arc welding under an argon atmosphere.
Later that day, he attended a meeting called by Stimson, which established a Military Policy Committee, responsible to the Top Policy Group, consisting of Bush (with Conant as an alternate), Styer and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell.
The process was neither scientifically elegant nor industrially efficient.
It was believed that the Japanese nuclear weapons program was not far advanced because Japan had little access to uranium ore, but it was initially feared that Germany was very close to developing its own weapons.
The British, who had made significant contributions early in the war, did not have the resources to carry through such a research program while fighting for their survival.
Additional three short tons of uranium metal was supplied by Westinghouse Lamp Plant which was produced in a rush with makeshift process.
The second Alpha I was not operational until the end of January 1944, the first Beta and first and third Alpha I's came online in March, and the fourth Alpha I was operational in April.
In August 1943 Churchill and Roosevelt negotiated the Quebec Agreement, which resulted in a resumption of cooperation between scientists working on the same problem.
They spoke to officials at Union Minière du Haut Katanga about uranium shipments to Germany.
After the bombings at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, a number of Manhattan Project physicists founded the ''Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists'', which began as an emergency action undertaken by scientists who saw urgent need for an immediate educational program about atomic weapons.
Ether was then added in a liquid–liquid extraction process to separate the impurities from the uranyl nitrate.
By April 1945, K-25 had attained a 1.1% enrichment and the output of the S-50 thermal diffusion plant began being used as feed.
Groves therefore authorized DuPont to establish heavy water facilities at the Morgantown Ordnance Works, near Morgantown, West Virginia; at the Wabash River Ordnance Works, near Dana and Newport, Indiana; and at the Alabama Ordnance Works, near Childersburg and Sylacauga, Alabama.
One Oak Ridge worker stated that "if you got inquisitive, you were called on the carpet within two hours by government secret agents.
The production plant commenced operation in February 1945, and as cascade after cascade came online, the quality of the product increased.
Britain, however, agreed to restrictions on data on the building of large-scale production plants necessary for the bomb.
The scientists had originally considered this overengineering a waste of time and money, but Fermi realized that by loading all 2,004 tubes, the reactor could reach the required power level and efficiently produce plutonium.
The British bargaining position had worsened; the American scientists had decided that the United States no longer needed outside help, and they wanted to prevent Britain exploiting post-war commercial applications of atomic energy.
Briggs held a meeting on 21 October 1939, which was attended by Szilárd, Wigner and Edward Teller.
Plans called for the installation of 2,142  diffusion columns arranged in 21 racks.
This and other scientific missions to Japan would provide valuable scientific and historical data.
Although progress on the reactor design at Metallurgical Laboratory and DuPont was not sufficiently advanced to accurately predict the scope of the project, a start was made in April 1943 on facilities for an estimated 25,000 workers, half of whom were expected to live on-site.
In order to maintain the supply of polonium for the urchin initiators, production was curtailed and the oldest unit, B pile, was closed down so at least one reactor would be available in the future.
The first batch was processed at 40% efficiency but over the next few months this was raised to 90%.
Warned that disclosing the project's secrets was punishable by 10 years in prison or a $10,000 ($ today) fine, they saw enormous quantities of raw materials enter factories with nothing coming out, and monitored "dials and switches while behind thick concrete walls mysterious reactions took place" without knowing the purpose of their jobs.
Another worker told of how, working in a laundry, she every day held "a special instrument" to uniforms and listened for "a clicking noise".
Lieutenant Colonel Boris T. Pash, the head of the Counter Intelligence Branch of the Western Defense Command, investigated suspected Soviet espionage at the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley.
The first plutonium core went in a special C-54.
By July 1944, some 1,200 buildings had been erected and nearly 51,000 people were living in the construction camp.
At first contamination was believed to be the cause, but it was soon determined that there were multiple allotropes of plutonium.
Conant personally persuaded the explosives expert George Kistiakowsky to join the project.
It established civilian control over atomic development, and separated the development, production and control of atomic weapons from the military.
Two more were established by Groves soon after the war, the Brookhaven National Laboratory at Upton, New York, and the Sandia National Laboratories at Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Nowhere was demobilization more of a problem than at Los Alamos, where there was an exodus of talent.
The interrogation of German prisoners indicated that uranium and thorium were being processed in Oranienburg, 20 miles north of Berlin, so Groves arranged for it to be bombed on 15 March 1945.
The Chief of Engineers, Major General Eugene Reybold, selected Colonel James C. Marshall to head the Army's part of the project in June 1942.
Construction began in February 1943.
There were still many unknown factors.
Groves considered the risk that the Germans might attempt to disrupt the Normandy landings with radioactive poisons was sufficient to warn General Dwight D. Eisenhower and send an officer to brief his chief of staff, Lieutenant General Walter Bedell Smith.
They investigated the possibility of an independent nuclear program, but determined that it could not be ready in time to affect the outcome of the war in Europe.
Technicians and skilled workers drafted into the Army were assigned to the SED.
Located on the Ottawa River, it had access to abundant water.
At the time, there was a limited source of pure uranium.
A special Counter Intelligence Corps detachment was formed to handle the project's security issues.
The Chief of Army Intelligence, Major General George V. Strong, appointed Boris Pash to command the unit, which was codenamed "Alsos", a Greek word meaning "grove".
The British considered ending the supply of Canadian uranium and heavy water to force the Americans to again share, but Canada needed American supplies to produce them.
The greatest difficulty was encountered with the uranium slugs produced by Mallinckrodt and Metal Hydrides.
Groves attempted to combat the dissatisfaction caused by the lack of amenities with a construction program that included an improved water supply, three hundred houses, and recreation facilities.
Groves expected to have another atomic bomb ready for use on 19 August, with three more in September and a further three in October.
The cells could be operated independently, or consecutively within a section.
As 30 percent of Union Minière's stock was controlled by British interests, the British took the lead in negotiations.
Teller proposed scheme after scheme, but Bethe refused each one.
Other spies like George Koval and Theodore Hall remained unknown for decades.
The Canadian Government did not officially learn of the project until August 1942.
The bombs used on Hiroshima and Nagasaki were like laboratory pieces; work would be required to make them simpler, safer and more reliable.
For this purpose, it was estimated that  of heavy water would be required per month.
The uranium-238 is transmuted into uranium-239, which rapidly decays, first into neptunium-239 and then into plutonium-239.
As area engineer, Matthias exercised overall control of the site.
After the war, the operations that remained at Red Gate moved to the new Argonne National Laboratory about  away.
Groves did not relish the prospect of explaining the loss of a billion dollars worth of plutonium to a Senate committee, so a cylindrical containment vessel codenamed "Jumbo" was constructed to recover the active material in the event of a failure.
Finally, they were subjected to a series of tests to detect holes or faulty welds.
Over 20 awards of the Presidential Medal for Merit were made to key contractors and scientists, including Bush and Oppenheimer.
Oliphant's mission was therefore a success; key American physicists were now aware of the potential power of an atomic bomb.
Marshall and Nichols discovered that the electromagnetic isotope separation process would require  of copper, which was in desperately short supply.
About  of uranium enriched to 89% uranium-235 was delivered to Los Alamos by July 1945.
The hemispheres for the first plutonium pit (or core) were produced and delivered on 2 July 1945.
The difficulties became apparent when attempts to measure the density of plutonium gave inconsistent results.
On 16 November, Oppenheimer, Groves, Dudley and others toured the site.
The chemically identical uranium-235 has to be physically separated from the more plentiful isotope.
S-50 became the first stage, enriching from 0.71% to 0.89%.
Cominco had produced electrolytic hydrogen at Trail, British Columbia, since 1930.
The calutrons were initially operated by scientists from Berkeley to remove bugs and achieve a reasonable operating rate.
Nelson initially balked but quickly caved in when Groves threatened to go to the President.
Although the bombs' existence was public, secrecy continued, and many workers remained ignorant of their jobs; one stated in 1946, "I don't know what the hell I'm doing besides looking into a ——— and turning a ——— alongside a ———.
The gamma ray source was placed in the center of a metal sphere surrounded by the explosive lenses, which in turn were inside in an ionization chamber.
Nor were they impressed with estimates to the nearest order of magnitude, which Groves compared with telling a caterer to prepare for between ten and a thousand guests.
In September 1943 the administration of community facilities was outsourced to Turner Construction Company through a subsidiary, the Roane-Anderson Company (for Roane and Anderson Counties, in which Oak Ridge was located).
The design of lenses that detonated with the proper shape and velocity turned out to be slow, difficult and frustrating.
To avoid dependence on the British and Canadians for ore, Groves also arranged for the purchase of US Vanadium Corporation's stockpile in Uravan, Colorado.
The accelerated effort on an implosion design, codenamed Fat Man, began in August 1944 when Oppenheimer implemented a sweeping reorganization of the Los Alamos laboratory to focus on implosion.
The entire 50&nbsp;kg, along with some 50%-enriched, averaging out to about 85% enriched, were used in Little Boy.
The biggest problem was the design of the barrier, which would have to be strong, porous and resistant to corrosion by uranium hexafluoride.
This made reactor plutonium unsuitable for use in a gun-type weapon.
Compton reported the success to Conant in Washington, D.C., by a coded phone call, saying, "The Italian navigator Fermi has just landed in the new world."
By 1943, it was clear that the Soviet Union was attempting to penetrate the project.
In parallel with the work on uranium was an effort to produce plutonium.
While there were some problems believed to be the result of careless or disgruntled employees, there were no confirmed instances of Axis-instigated sabotage.
Kellex's design for K-25 called for a four-story  long U-shaped structure containing 54 contiguous buildings.
Marshall created a liaison office in Washington, D.C., but established his temporary headquarters on the 18th floor of 270 Broadway in New York, where he could draw on administrative support from the Corps of Engineers' North Atlantic Division.
This presented an enormous challenge, because workers were handling a variety of toxic chemicals, using hazardous liquids and gases under high pressures, working with high voltages, and performing experiments involving explosives, not to mention the largely unknown dangers presented by radioactivity and handling fissile materials.
Nichols compared unit production data, and pointed out to Lawrence that the young "hillbilly" girl operators were outperforming his PhDs.
The Medical Section was responsible for medical research, but also for the MED's health and safety programs.
Roosevelt chose the Army to run the project rather than the Navy, as the Army had the most experience with management of large-scale construction projects.
At the instigation of the Manhattan Project, a bombing and sabotage campaign was carried out against heavy water plants in German-occupied Norway.
By comparison, the project's total cost by the end of 1945 was about 90% of the total spent on the production of US small arms (not including ammunition) and 34% of the total spent on US tanks during the same period.
Two new groups were created at Los Alamos to develop the implosion weapon, X (for explosives) Division headed by George Kistiakowsky and G (for gadget) Division under Robert Bacher.
The most successful Soviet spy was Klaus Fuchs, a member of the British Mission who played an important part at Los Alamos.
By March 1943 Conant decided that British help would benefit some areas of the project.
Chemical engineers, including William J. Wilcox Jr. and Warren Fuchs, were part of "frantic efforts" to make 10% to 12% enriched uranium 235, known as the code name "tuballoy tetroxide", with tight security and fast approvals for supplies and materials.
At its peak, the construction camp was the third most populous town in Washington state.
Groves met with the Chief of United States Army Air Forces (USAAF), General Henry H. Arnold, in March 1944 to discuss the delivery of the finished bombs to their targets.
Implosion used explosives to crush a subcritical sphere of fissile material into a smaller and denser form.
A separate corporate entity called Kellex was created for the project, headed by Percival C. Keith, one of Kellogg's vice presidents.
Research into the process was carried out at Columbia University by a group that included Harold Urey, Karl P. Cohen and John R. Dunning.
The X-10 Graphite Reactor consisted of a huge block of graphite,  long on each side, weighing around , surrounded by  of high-density concrete as a radiation shield.
They were then turned over to trained Tennessee Eastman operators who had only a high school education.
The United States had already spent more than $1 billion ($ today), while in 1943, the United Kingdom had spent about £0.5 million.
Urey suggested in 1941 that it could produce heavy water.
They remained in Hiroshima until 14 September and then surveyed Nagasaki from 19 September to 8 October.
He went on to write a series of articles extolling the virtues of the new weapon.
Somervell and Styer selected Groves for the post, informing him on 17 September of this decision, and that General Marshall ordered that he be promoted to brigadier general, as it was felt that the title "general" would hold more sway with the academic scientists working on the Manhattan Project.
On handing over control to the Atomic Energy Commission, Groves bid farewell to the people who had worked on the Manhattan Project:
As construction activity fell off, the workforce declined to 100,000 a year later, but the number of military personnel increased to 5,600.
In November 1942 the Military Policy Committee approved the construction of a 600-stage gaseous diffusion plant.
On 28 June 1941, Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8807, which created the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD), with Vannevar Bush as its director.
In June the Office of Censorship asked newspapers and broadcasters to avoid discussing "atom smashing, atomic energy, atomic fission, atomic splitting, or any of their equivalents.
The community was located on the slopes of Black Oak Ridge, from which the new town of Oak Ridge got its name.
The Baruch Plan, unveiled in a speech to the newly formed United Nations Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC) in June 1946, proposed the establishment of an international atomic development authority, but was not adopted.
He negotiated with Eldorado Gold Mines for the purchase of ore from its refinery in Port Hope, Ontario, and its shipment in 100-ton lots.
Bomb engineering was carried out by the Z Division, named for its director, Dr. Jerrold R. Zacharias from Los Alamos.
An Associate Professor of Radiology at the University of Rochester School of Medicine, Stafford L. Warren, was commissioned as a colonel in the United States Army Medical Corps, and appointed as chief of the MED's Medical Section and Groves' medical advisor.
Oppenheimer returned to his job at the University of California and Groves appointed Norris Bradbury as an interim replacement.
Lawrence and his team at the University of California, Berkeley, investigated electromagnetic separation, while Eger Murphree and Jesse Wakefield Beams's team looked into gaseous diffusion at Columbia University, and Philip Abelson directed research into thermal diffusion at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and later the Naval Research Laboratory.
In June 1945, Wilson agreed that the use of nuclear weapons against Japan would be recorded as a decision of the Combined Policy Committee.
The British wartime participation was crucial to the success of the United Kingdom's independent nuclear weapons program after the war when the McMahon Act of 1946 temporarily ended American nuclear cooperation.
The brittle α phase that exists at room temperature changes to the plastic β phase at higher temperatures.
By December 1942 there were concerns that even Oak Ridge was too close to a major population center (Knoxville) in the unlikely event of a major nuclear accident.
The design called for five first-stage processing units, known as Alpha racetracks, and two units for final processing, known as Beta racetracks.
The gadget was assembled under the supervision of Norris Bradbury at the nearby McDonald Ranch House on 13 July, and precariously winched up the tower the following day.
While he was there, Ashworth selected North Field on the Pacific Island Tinian as a base for the 509th Composite Group, and reserved space for the group and its buildings.
When the plant was started up for testing on schedule in October, the 14-ton vacuum tanks crept out of alignment because of the power of the magnets, and had to be fastened more securely.
The committee supported, and Roosevelt agreed to, restricting the flow of information to what Britain could use during the war—especially not bomb design—even if doing so slowed down the American project.
The final design resembled a soccer ball, with 20 hexagonal and 12 pentagonal lenses, each weighing about .
Measuring  long and  wide, it was fabricated at great expense from  of iron and steel by Babcock & Wilcox in Barberton, Ohio.
The first step was to obtain a high priority rating for the project.
Total allocation was $2.4&nbsp;billion.
It was therefore decided to use exploding-bridgewire detonators, a new invention developed at Los Alamos by a group led by Luis Alvarez.
Groves then sent a personal letter to the head of their university or company asking for them to be released for essential war work.
Because it was secret, Los Alamos was referred to as "Site Y" or "the Hill".
On the morning of 9 August 1945, a second B-29 (''Bockscar''), piloted by the 393d Bombardment Squadron's commander, Major Charles W. Sweeney, lifted off with Fat Man on board.
In June 1944, the Manhattan Project employed some 129,000 workers, of whom 84,500 were construction workers, 40,500 were plant operators and 1,800 were military personnel.
''Atomic Energy for Military Purposes'', better known as the "Smyth Report", was released to the public on 12 August 1945.
Their March 1940 Frisch–Peierls memorandum initiated the British atomic bomb project and its Maud Committee, which unanimously recommended pursuing the development of an atomic bomb.
In 1943, the MED created the Special Engineer Detachment (SED), with an authorized strength of 675.
Bethe calculated that it could not happen, and a report co-authored by Teller showed that "no self-propagating chain of nuclear reactions is likely to be started."
The use for military purposes of radium or radioactive materials, heavy water, high voltage discharge equipment, cyclotrons."
The bomb detonated at an altitude of  with a blast that was later estimated to be the equivalent of 13 kilotons of TNT.
Initially the output of S-50 was fed into Y-12, but starting in March 1945 all three enrichment processes were run in series.
When presented with Public Proclamation Number Two, which declared Oak Ridge a total exclusion area that no one could enter without military permission, the Governor of Tennessee, Prentice Cooper, angrily tore it up.
The ultimate task of the metallurgists was to determine how to cast plutonium into a sphere.
In the former state, the plutonium was precipitated; in the latter, it stayed in solution and the other products were precipitated.
The name was derived from the words ''California'', ''university'' and ''cyclotron''.
Observers included Bush, Chadwick, Conant, Farrell, Fermi, Groves, Lawrence, Oppenheimer and Tolman.
The gas leaving the container is somewhat enriched in the lighter molecules, while the residual gas is somewhat depleted.
Mallinckrodt Incorporated in St. Louis, Missouri, took the raw ore and dissolved it in nitric acid to produce uranyl nitrate.
Groves recruited DuPont in November 1942 to be the prime contractor for the construction of the plutonium production complex.
To improve morale among such workers Oak Ridge created an extensive system of intramural sports leagues, including 10 baseball teams, 81 softball teams, and 26 football teams.
Testing required up to 500 curies per month of polonium, which Monsanto was able to deliver.
Groves suspended the third core's shipment on his own authority on 13 August.
Within the explosives was the  thick aluminum pusher, which provided a smooth transition from the relatively low density explosive to the next layer, the  thick tamper of natural uranium.
At first all appeared well but around 03:00 the power level started to drop and by 06:30 the reactor had shut down completely.
A survey party began construction by marking out the  site in May 1943.
While the British were shocked by the abrogation of the Churchill-Roosevelt agreement, head of the Canadian National Research Council C. J. Mackenzie was less surprised, writing "I can't help feeling that the United Kingdom group over emphasizes the importance of their contribution as compared with the Americans."
The value of the espionage is difficult to quantify, as the principal constraint on the Soviet atomic bomb project was a shortage of uranium ore.
Similarly, the sections could be operated separately or as part of a single cascade.
To the existing $10&nbsp;million plant consisting of 3,215 cells consuming 75&nbsp;MW of hydroelectric power, secondary electrolysis cells were added to increase the deuterium concentration in the water from 2.3% to 99.8%.
Another source was the Women's Army Corps (WAC).
This was primarily due to doubts about its technical feasibility, but the inter-service rivalry between the Army and Navy also played a part.
Two Fat Man assemblies travelled to Tinian in specially modified 509th Composite Group B-29s.
Groves then ordered the racetracks to be torn down and the magnets sent back to the factory to be cleaned.
Initially intended for clerical tasks handling classified material, the WACs were soon tapped for technical and scientific tasks as well.
The richest source of ore was the Shinkolobwe mine in the Belgian Congo, but it was flooded and closed.
In September 1943, John von Neumann, who had experience with shaped charges used in armor-piercing shells, argued that not only would implosion reduce the danger of predetonation and fizzle, but would make more efficient use of the fissionable material.
Brought in a special railroad car to a siding in Pope, New Mexico, it was transported the last  to the test site on a trailer pulled by two tractors.
Under the codename Operation Peppermint, special equipment was prepared and Chemical Warfare Service teams were trained in its use.
A similar group of Air Force personnel arrived at Oak Ridge in September 1946 with the aim of developing nuclear aircraft.
He proposed using a spherical configuration instead of the cylindrical one that Neddermeyer was working on.
K-25 and K-27 achieved their full potential in the early postwar period, when they eclipsed the other production plants and became the prototypes for a new generation of plants.
The second line of development pursued by the Manhattan Project used the fissile element plutonium.
Fermi, Woods, Donald J. Hughes and John Archibald Wheeler then calculated the nuclear cross section of xenon-135, which turned out to be 30,000 times that of uranium.
Some part of it might fission as well.
A cost plus fixed fee contract was negotiated, eventually totaling $2.5&nbsp;million.
Groves promised not to use the AAA rating unless it was necessary.
Groves and Nichols presented Army–Navy "E" Awards to key contractors, whose involvement had hitherto been secret.
Detonation in the air maximized the energy applied directly to the target, and generated less nuclear fallout.
The need for land for a new road, and later for a right of way for a  power line, eventually brought wartime land purchases to , but only $414,971 was spent.
With the authorization to use the bomb against Japan already given, no alternatives were considered after the Japanese rejection of the Potsdam Declaration.
A small mission was created, jointly staffed by the Office of Naval Intelligence, OSRD, the Manhattan Project, and Army Intelligence (G-2), to investigate enemy scientific developments.
They would be in the vanguard of the kind of large-scale research that Alvin Weinberg, the director of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, would call Big Science.
