Perhaps the simplest way to construct a manifold is the one used in the example above of the circle.
In particular, the same underlying topological manifold can have several mutually incompatible classes of differentiable functions and an infinite number of ways to specify distances and angles.
Similarly, a differentiable manifold can be described using mathematical maps, called ''coordinate charts'', collected in a mathematical ''atlas''.
Indeed, several branches of mathematics, such as homology and homotopy theory, and the theory of characteristic classes were founded in order to study invariant properties of manifolds.
The manifold is constructed by specifying an atlas, which is itself defined by transition maps.
As the transition map is a smooth function, this atlas defines a smooth manifold.
Some key criteria include the ''simply connected'' property and orientability (see below).
If one of the factors has a boundary, the product manifold also has a boundary.
It is possible to define different points of a manifold to be same.
Four-dimensional manifolds were brought to the forefront of mathematical research in the 1980s by Michael Freedman and in a different setting, by Simon Donaldson, who was motivated by the then recent progress in theoretical physics (Yang–Mills theory), where they serve as a substitute for ordinary 'flat' spacetime.
All invariants of a smooth closed manifold are thus global.
This is much harder in higher dimensions: higher-dimensional manifolds cannot be directly visualized (though visual intuition is useful in understanding them), nor can their diffeomorphism classes be enumerated, nor can one in general determine if two different descriptions of a higher-dimensional manifold refer to the same object.
As continuous examples, Riemann refers to not only colors and the locations of objects in space, but also the possible shapes of a spatial figure.
This structure is preserved by homeomorphisms, invertible maps that are continuous in both directions.
Twist one end 180°, making the inner surface face out, and glue the ends back together seamlessly.
Similarly, two boundaries of a single manifold can be glued together.
Non-Euclidean geometry considers spaces where Euclid's parallel postulate fails.
Formally, a topological manifold is a topological space locally homeomorphic to  a  Euclidean space.
Similarly for a differentiable manifold it has to be a diffeomorphism.
Carl Friedrich Gauss may have been the first to consider abstract spaces as mathematical objects in their own right.
Similarly, there are charts for the bottom (red), left (blue), and right (green) parts of the circle:
This is an ''n''-dimensional Euclidean space consisting of the tangent vectors of the curves through the point.
Analytic manifolds are smooth manifolds with the additional condition that the transition maps are analytic (they can be expressed as power series).
''Locally homeomorphic'' to Euclidean space means that every point has a neighborhood homeomorphic to an open Euclidean ''n''-ball,
Henri Poincaré pioneered the study of three-dimensional manifolds and raised a fundamental question about them, today known as the Poincaré conjecture.
If these atlases define a differential structure on the factors, the corresponding atlas defines a differential structure on the product manifold.
Charts map equivalence classes to points of a single patch.
An ''n''-sphere '''S'''''n'' can be constructed by gluing together two copies of '''R'''''n''.
In technical language, a manifold with boundary is a space containing both interior points and boundary points.
Any Riemannian manifold is a Finsler manifold.
For two dimensional manifolds a key invariant property is the genus, or the "number of handles" present in a surface.
In geometric topology, most commonly studied are Morse functions, which yield handlebody decompositions, while in mathematical analysis, one often studies solution to partial differential equations, an important example of which is harmonic analysis, where one studies harmonic functions: the kernel of the Laplace operator.
This abstract point of view is called the ''intrinsic view''.
There are also topological manifolds, i.e., locally Euclidean spaces, which possess no differentiable structures at all.
The ''n''-sphere '''S'''''n'' is a generalisation of the idea of a circle (1-sphere) and sphere (2-sphere) to higher dimensions.
After nearly a century of effort by many mathematicians, starting with Poincaré himself, a consensus among experts (as of 2006) is that Grigori Perelman has proved the Poincaré conjecture (see the Solution of the Poincaré conjecture).
When a manifold is constructed from multiple overlapping charts, the regions where they overlap carry information essential to understanding the global structure.
Such a surface would, in modern terminology, be called a manifold; and in modern terms, the theorem proved that the curvature of the surface is an intrinsic property.
To measure distances and angles on manifolds, the manifold must be Riemannian.
Begin with a sphere centered on the origin.
''second countable'' excludes spaces which are in some sense 'too large' such as the long line, while ''Hausdorff'' excludes spaces such as "the line with two origins" (these generalizations of manifolds are discussed in non-Hausdorff manifolds).
The dimension of the product manifold is the sum of the dimensions of its factors.
In addition to continuous functions and smooth functions generally, there are maps with special properties.
If a manifold has a fixed dimension, it is called a '''pure manifold'''.
The '''boundary''' of ''M'', denoted &part;''M'', is the complement of Int ''M'' in ''M''.
Two points are identified if one is moved onto the other by some group element.
Charts in an atlas may overlap and a single point of a manifold may be represented in several charts.
It can make it harder to imagine what a tangent vector might be, and there is no intrinsic notion of a normal bundle, but instead there is an intrinsic stable normal bundle.
Unfortunately, it is known that for manifolds of dimension 4 and higher, no program exists that can decide whether two manifolds are diffeomorphic.
In the first section of Analysis Situs, Poincaré defines a manifold as the level set of a continuously differentiable function between Euclidean spaces that satisfies the nondegeneracy hypothesis of the implicit function theorem.
The Euclidean space itself carries a natural structure of Riemannian manifold (the tangent spaces are naturally identified with the Euclidean space itself and carry the standard scalar product of the space).
In that case every topological manifold has a topological invariant, its dimension.
A '''manifold with boundary''' is a manifold with an edge.
For symplectic manifolds, the transition functions must be symplectomorphisms.
A torus is a sphere with one handle, a double torus is a sphere with two handles, and so on.
For an unconstrained movement of free particles the manifold is equivalent to the Euclidean space, but various conservation laws constrain it to more complicated formations, e.g.
Polar coordinates, for example, form a chart for the plane '''R'''2 minus the positive ''x''-axis and the origin.
In geometric topology a basic type are embeddings, of which knot theory is a central example, and generalizations such as immersions, submersions, covering spaces, and ramified covering spaces.
Using induction, Riemann constructs an ''n-fach ausgedehnte Mannigfaltigkeit'' (''n times extended manifoldness'' or ''n-dimensional manifoldness'') as a continuous stack of (n−1) dimensional manifoldnesses.
This can be easily generalized to higher-dimensional spheres.
The spherical Earth is navigated using flat maps or charts, collected in an atlas.
The transition map between them is defined as
A finite cylinder may be constructed as a manifold by starting with a strip 0, 1&nbsp;&times;&nbsp;0, 1 and gluing a pair of opposite edges on the boundary by a suitable diffeomorphism.
Such functions along with the open regions they map are called ''charts''.
maps the northern hemisphere to the open unit disc by projecting it on the (''x'', ''y'') plane.
This construction is possible for any manifold and hence it is often used as a characterisation, especially for differentiable and Riemannian manifolds.
For others, this is impossible.
For a topological manifold, the simple space is a subset of some Euclidean space '''R'''''n'' and interest focuses on the topological structure.
In the third section, he begins by remarking that the graph of a continuously differentiable function is a manifold in the latter sense.
Such atlases are called '''compatible'''.
Thus, an atlas for the product manifold can be constructed using atlases for its factors.
Its topology is the product topology, and a Cartesian product of charts is a chart for the product manifold.
Usually additional technical assumptions on the topological space are made to exclude pathological cases.
If the local charts on a manifold are compatible in a certain sense, one can define directions, tangent spaces, and differentiable functions on that manifold.
The Euler characteristic of other surfaces is a useful topological invariant, which can be extended to higher dimensions using Betti numbers.
The simplest kind of manifold to define is the topological manifold, which looks locally like some "ordinary" Euclidean space '''R'''''n''.
In higher-dimensional manifolds genus is replaced by the notion of Euler characteristic, and more generally Betti numbers and homology and cohomology.
Manifolds may have additional features.
A '''coordinate map''', a '''coordinate chart''', or simply a '''chart''', of a manifold is an invertible map between a subset of the manifold and a simple space such that both the map and its inverse preserve the desired structure.
Thus 2 is a topological invariant of the sphere, called its '''Euler characteristic'''.
Let ''M'' be a manifold with boundary.
A single manifold can be constructed in different ways, each stressing a different aspect of the manifold, thereby  leading to a slightly different viewpoint.
Viewed using calculus, the circle transition function ''T'' is simply a function between open intervals, which gives a meaning to the statement that ''T'' is differentiable.
Riemann's intuitive notion of a ''Mannigfaltigkeit'' evolved into what is today formalized as a manifold.
After a line, the circle is the simplest example of a topological manifold.
This space is, in fact, a high-dimensional manifold, whose dimension corresponds to the degrees of freedom of the system and where the points are specified by their generalized coordinates.
Its boundary is no longer a pair of circles, but (topologically) a single circle; and what was once its "inside" has merged with its "outside", so that it now has only a ''single'' side.
For example, a sheet of paper is a 2-manifold with a 1-dimensional boundary.
The transition map ''T'', and all the others, are differentiable on (0, 1); therefore, with this atlas the circle is a ''differentiable manifold''.
First, a subset of '''R'''2 is identified, and then an atlas covering this subset is constructed.
the map sending each point to the dimension of its neighbourhood over which a chart is defined, is locally constant), each connected component has a fixed dimension.
Every interior point has a neighborhood homeomorphic to the open ''n''-ball {(''x''1,&nbsp;''x''2,&nbsp;…,&nbsp;''x''''n'') | Σ ''x''''i''2&nbsp;1,&nbsp;''x''2,&nbsp;…,&nbsp;''x''''n'') | Σ ''x''''i''2&nbsp;1&nbsp;≥&nbsp;0}.
If the transition functions of an atlas for a topological manifold preserve the natural differential structure of '''R'''''n'' (that is, if they are diffeomorphisms), the differential structure transfers to the manifold and turns it into a differentiable manifold.
In the case ''n'' = 1, the example simplifies to the circle example given earlier.
The function χ defined by
During the 1930s Hassler Whitney and others clarified the foundational aspects of the subject, and thus intuitions dating back to the latter half of the 19th century became precise, and developed through differential geometry and Lie group theory.
The concept of ''manifold'' grew historically from constructions like this.
Topology ignores bending, so a small piece of a circle is treated exactly the same as a small piece of a line.
Manifolds naturally arise as solution sets of systems of equations and as graphs of functions.
Other circle properties allow it to meet the requirements of more specialized types of manifold.
If all the transition maps are compatible with this structure, the structure transfers to the manifold.
Overlapping charts are not required to agree in their sense of ordering, which gives manifolds an important freedom.
(See also Boundary (topology)).
The dot (or scalar) product is a typical example of an inner product.
Saccheri first studied such geometries in 1733 but sought only to disprove them.
His theorema egregium gives a method for computing the curvature of a surface without considering the ambient space in which the surface lies.
Manifolds which can be constructed by identifying points include tori and real projective spaces (starting with a plane and a sphere, respectively).
Riemannian manifolds and Riemann surfaces are named after Riemann.
There are usually strong demands on the consistency of the transition maps.
Two atlases are said to be C''k''-equivalent if their union is also a C''k'' atlas.
It focuses on an atlas, as the patches naturally provide charts, and since there is no exterior space involved it leads to an intrinsic view of the manifold.
This function is its own inverse and thus can be used in both directions.
If these manifolds overlap (''a une partie commune''), then he requires that the coordinates  depend continuously differentiably on the coordinates  and vice versa ('''...les  sont fonctions analytiques des  et inversement''').
For most applications a special kind of topological manifold, namely a '''differentiable manifold''', is used.
Indeed, it is possible to fully characterize compact, two-dimensional manifolds on the basis of genus and orientability.
This gives a circle.
In terms of constructing manifolds via patching, a manifold has an additional structure if the transition maps between different patches satisfy axioms beyond just continuity.
A manifold can be constructed by gluing together pieces in a consistent manner, making them into overlapping charts.
In order to discuss such properties for a manifold, one needs to specify further structure and consider differentiable manifolds and Riemannian manifolds discussed below.
Complex manifolds are introduced in an analogous way by requiring that the transition functions of an atlas are holomorphic functions.
Generally manifolds are taken to have a fixed dimension (the space must be locally homeomorphic to a fixed ''n''-ball), and such a space is called an '''''n''-manifold'''; however, some authors admit manifolds where different points can have different dimensions.
Orientable surfaces can be visualized, and their diffeomorphism classes enumerated, by genus.
This means that every point has a neighbourhood for which there exists a homeomorphism (a bijective continuous function whose inverse is also continuous) mapping that neighbourhood to '''R'''''n''.
Its boundary is a circle, a 1-manifold.
Another important source of manifolds in 19th century mathematics was analytical mechanics, as developed by Siméon Poisson, Jacobi, and William Rowan Hamilton.
Important work on higher-dimensional manifolds, including analogues of the Poincaré conjecture, had been done earlier by René Thom, John Milnor, Stephen Smale and Sergei Novikov.
There is, however, no reason to expect such quotient spaces to be manifolds.
Gauss, Bolyai and Lobachevsky independently discovered them 100 years later.
For other manifolds other structures should be preserved.
Charts need not be geometric projections, and the number of charts is a matter of some choice.
This omits the point-set axioms, allowing higher cardinalities and non-Hausdorff manifolds; and it omits finite dimension, allowing structures such as Hilbert manifolds to be modeled on Hilbert spaces, Banach manifolds to be modeled on Banach spaces, and Fréchet manifolds to be modeled on Fréchet spaces.
He distinguishes between ''stetige Mannigfaltigkeit'' and ''diskrete'' ''Mannigfaltigkeit'' (''continuous manifoldness'' and ''discontinuous manifoldness''), depending on whether the value changes continuously or not.
This allows one to define various notions such as length, angles, areas (or volumes), curvature and divergence of vector fields.
Manifold theory has come to focus exclusively on these intrinsic properties (or invariants), while largely ignoring the extrinsic properties of the ambient space.
This is the standard way differentiable manifolds are defined.
Every line through the origin pierces the sphere in two opposite points called ''antipodes''.
In Riemannian geometry, one may ask for maps to preserve the Riemannian metric, leading to notions of isometric embeddings, isometric immersions, and Riemannian submersions; a basic result is the Nash embedding theorem.
The inverse mapping from ''s'' to (''x'',&nbsp;''y'') is given by
The boundary points can be characterized as those points which land on the boundary hyperplane (''x''''n'' = 0) of '''R'''''n''+ under some coordinate chart.
The '''interior''' of ''M'', denoted Int ''M'', is the set of points in ''M'' which have neighborhoods homeomorphic to an open subset of '''R'''''n''.
Smooth closed manifolds have no local invariants (other than dimension), though geometric manifolds have local invariants, notably the curvature of a Riemannian manifold and the torsion of a manifold equipped with an affine connection.
In this way he introduces a precursor to the notion of a chart and of a transition map.
The classification of smooth closed manifolds is well-understood ''in principle'', except in dimension 4: in low dimensions (2 and 3) it is geometric, via the uniformization theorem and the solution of the Poincaré conjecture, and in high dimension (5 and above) it is algebraic, via surgery theory.
Any point of this arc can be uniquely described by its ''x''-coordinate.
It is also ''smooth'' and ''analytic'' because the transition functions have these properties as well.
Just as there are various types of manifolds, there are various types of maps of manifolds.
For example, the sphere has a constant dimension of 2 and is therefore a pure manifold whereas the disjoint union of a sphere and a line in three-dimensional space is ''not'' a pure manifold.
This leads to such functions as the spherical harmonics, and to heat kernel methods of studying manifolds, such as hearing the shape of a drum and some proofs of the Atiyah–Singer index theorem.
The study of manifolds combines many important areas of mathematics: it generalizes concepts such as curves and surfaces as well as ideas from linear algebra and topology.
If the matrix entries are real numbers, this will be an ''n''2-dimensional disconnected manifold.
However, one can determine if two manifolds are ''different'' if there is some intrinsic characteristic that differentiates them.
The resultant map, like the map ''T'' in the circle example above, is called a '''change of coordinates''', a '''coordinate transformation''', a '''transition function''', or a '''transition map'''.
Now, glue both copies together by identifying the point ''t'' on the second copy with the point ''s'' = 1⁄''t'' on the first copy (the points ''t'' = 0 and ''s'' = 0 are not identified with any point on the first and second copy, respectively).
Some authors require that all charts of a topological manifold map to Euclidean spaces of same dimension.
For example, the circle has a notion of distance between two points, the arc-length between the points; hence it is a ''Riemannian manifold''.
Here ''s'' is the slope of the line through the point at coordinates (''x'',''y'') and the fixed pivot point (−1,&nbsp;0); ''t'' follows similarly, but with pivot point (+1,&nbsp;0).
The patchwork construction does not use any embedding, but simply views the manifold as a topological space by itself.
A disk (circle plus interior) is a 2-manifold with boundary.
''Second countable'' and ''Hausdorff'' are point-set conditions;
The name ''manifold'' comes from Riemann's original German term, ''Mannigfaltigkeit'', which William Kingdon Clifford translated as "manifoldness".
Another, more topological example of an intrinsic property of a manifold is its Euler characteristic.
Consider the northern hemisphere, which is the part with positive ''z'' coordinate (coloured red in the picture on the right).
So, projection onto the first coordinate is a continuous, and invertible, mapping from the upper arc to the open interval (&minus;1,1):
Building a Klein bottle which is not self-intersecting requires four or more dimensions of space.
If this is done the right way, the result is also a manifold.
The ''dimension'' of the manifold at a certain point is the dimension of the Euclidean space that the charts at that point map to (number ''n'' in the definition).
The reason the circle can be represented by a graph in the neighborhood of every point is because the left hand side of its defining equation  has nonzero gradient at every point of the circle.
Here is another example, applying this method to the construction of a sphere:
A "+" is not homeomorphic to a closed interval (line segment), since deleting the center point from the "+" gives a space with four components (i.e.
This distinction between local invariants and no local invariants is a common way to distinguish between geometry and topology.
Two-dimensional manifolds are also called surfaces.
classic algebraic topology, and geometric topology.
Putting these freedoms together, other examples of manifolds are a parabola, a hyperbola (two open, infinite pieces), and the locus of points on a cubic curve ''y''2&nbsp;=&nbsp;''x''3−''x'' (a closed loop piece and an open, infinite piece).
It is not generally possible to describe a manifold with just one chart, because the global structure of the manifold is different from the simple structure of the charts.
For topological manifolds they are required to be homeomorphisms; if they are also diffeomorphisms, the resulting manifold is a differentiable manifold.
If ''M'' is a manifold with boundary of dimension ''n'', then Int ''M'' is a manifold (without boundary) of dimension ''n'' and &part;''M'' is a manifold (without boundary) of dimension ''n'' &minus; 1.
One of the most pervasive and flexible techniques underlying much work on the topology of manifolds is Morse theory.
For example, the unit circle in the plane can be thought of as the graph of the function  or else the function  in a neighborhood of every point except the points (1,0) and (−1,0); and in a neighborhood of those points, it can be thought of as the graph of, respectively,  and .
Consider, for instance, the top part of the unit circle, ''x''2&nbsp;+&nbsp;''y''2&nbsp;=&nbsp;1, where the ''y''-coordinate is positive (indicated by the yellow circular arc in ''Figure 1'').
And they are never countable, unless the dimension of the manifold is&nbsp;0.
The sphere can be given analytic structure, as can most familiar curves and surfaces.
In the first construction, the manifold is seen as embedded in some Euclidean space.
The two charts χtop and χright each map this part into the interval (0,&nbsp;1).
For a topological manifold this bijection should be a homeomorphism, otherwise the result will not be a topological manifold.
A projective plane may be obtained by gluing a sphere with a hole in it to a Möbius strip along their respective circular boundaries.
Note that in three-dimensional space, a Klein bottle's surface must pass through itself.
In the modern theory of manifolds, these notions correspond to Riemannian manifolds with constant negative and positive curvature, respectively.
Although a manifold locally resembles Euclidean space, globally it may not.
an equivalence class containing that given atlas (under the already defined equivalence relation given in the previous paragraph)).
This results in a strip with a permanent half-twist: the Möbius strip.
This example is historically significant, as it has motivated the terminology; it became apparent that the whole surface of the Earth cannot have a plane representation consisting of a single map (also called "chart", see nautical chart), and therefore one needs atlases for covering the whole Earth surface.
Examples include the plane, the sphere, and the torus, which can all be embedded (formed without self-intersections) in three dimensional real space, but also the Klein bottle and real projective plane which will always self-intersect when immersed in real space.
pieces), whereas deleting a point from a closed interval gives a space with at most two pieces; topological operations always preserve the number of pieces.
The latter possibility is easy to overlook, because any closed surface embedded (without self-intersection) in three-dimensional space is orientable.
Poincaré's notion of a 'chain of manifolds' is a precursor to the modern notion of atlas.
Other authors allow disjoint unions of topological manifolds with differing dimensions to be called manifolds.
Since dimension is a local invariant (i.e.
For some manifolds, like the sphere, charts can be chosen so that overlapping regions agree on their "handedness"; these are ''orientable'' manifolds.
It can easily be confirmed that ''x''2&nbsp;+&nbsp;''y''2&nbsp;=&nbsp;1 for all values of the slope ''s''.
However, excluded are examples like two touching circles that share a point to form a figure-8; at the shared point a satisfactory chart cannot be created.
