Gaan-Ngai is the greatest festival of the Zeliangrong people.
Kut is not restricted to a community or tribe — the whole state populace participates in merriment.
It is a festival of peace and thanksgiving to the Almighty for the harvests.
The pace of theatrical movement was geared up with the institution of groups such as Manipur Dramatic Union (MDU) (1930), Arian Theatre (1935), Chitrangada Natya Mandir (1936), Society Theatre (1937), Rupmahal (1942), Cosmopolitan Dramatic Union (1968), and the Chorus Repertory Theatre of Ratan Thiyam (1976).
The average worldwide violent unnatural death rate between 2004 and 2009 was 7.9 per 100,000 per year.
In 1901 Meetei were listed as main tribe of Manipur.
There was a total of 1,822 who had graduated in addition to 86 technical and professional graduates.
Manipur has the highest number of handicrafts units and the highest number of craftspersons in the northeastern region of India.
The ancient Sanskrit texts such as the Mahabharata epic mentions Manipur, where Arjuna meets and falls in love with Chitragada.
Manipur's climate and soil conditions make it ideally suited for horticultural crops.
The socio-political turmoil and wars affected the cultural and religious demography of Manipur, particularly the persistent and devastating Manipur-Burma wars.
Shiva and Parvati are part of the legendary Khamba-Thoibi love story in Manipur tradition.
Meitei mythology believes that UmangLai Heloi-Taret (seven deities–seven fairies) played this game on the Courtyard of the temple of Umang Lai Lairembi.
National Highway NH-39 links Manipur with the rest of the country through the railway stations at Dimapur in Nagaland at a distance of  from Imphal.
It is a five-day festival and is usually performed on the 13th day of the Meetei month of Wakching as per the Meetei calendar of the lunar year.
In 1980, the Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP) was formed.
Some cash crops suited for Manipur include litchi, cashew nuts, walnuts, orange, lemon, pineapple, papaya, passion fruit, peach, pear and plum.
It was made a Union Territory in 1956. and a fully-fledged State in 1972.
By the late 1930s, the princely state of Manipur negotiated with the British administration its preference to be part of India, rather than Burma.
Over time, many more groups formed in Manipur, each with different goals, and deriving support from diverse ethnic groups in Manipur.
Sanamahi worship is concentrated around the Sun God/Sanamahi.
There are seasonal flowers and a number of flora and fauna.
Today Manipuri theatre is well respected because of excellent productions shown in India and abroad.
Dzükou derives its meaning from the Angami/Mao word that translates to "Cold Water", referring to the cold stream that flows through the valley.
National Highway 53 (India) connects Manipur with another railway station at Silchar in Assam, which is  away from Imphal.
Besides the feast, gifts are given to the women/invitees and to their children.
During the World War II, Manipur was the scene of many fierce battles between the Japanese invaders and the British Indian forces.
As India's second largest airport in the northeast, it serves as a key logistical centre for northeastern states.
Rain distribution varies from  in Imphal to  in Tamenglong.
The main universities are Manipur University, Central Agricultural University.
This was the Vaishnavism of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, the Bhakti preacher of Bengal, which stressed Krishna Bhakti.
Under the 10+2+3 plan, students may enroll in general or professional degree programs after passing the Higher Secondary Examination (the grade 12 examination).
Christianity is the religion of 41.3% of the people in the state.
''Chakravyuha'' deals with the story of Abhimanyu (son of Arjun) of his last battle and approaching death, whereas ''Uttarpriyadashi'' is an 80-minute exposition of Emperor Ashoka's redemption.
The state is drenched in rains from May until mid-October.
These groups began a spree of bank robberies and attacks on police officers and government buildings.
However, a large minority of Meetei people practices Sanamahism (traditional Meetei religion) and Christianity.
The world of Phampak lila (stage drama) performed in the proscenium theatre is similar, in form, to the Western theatrical model and Indian Natyasastra model though its contents are indigenous.
It is owned and managed by Kamlun Telien of Ichum Keirap.
Examples using the term "Kanglei"
They adopted its rules, calling the game polo, and playing it on their horses.
The mountain ranges create a moderated climate, preventing the cold winds from the north from reaching the valley and barring cyclonic storms originating from the Bay of Bengal.
Kukis and Nagas are the major tribe conglomerates.
After the war, the Manipur Constitution Act of 1947 established a democratic form of government, with the Maharaja as the executive head.
Thereafter the legislative assembly was dissolved, and Manipur became part of the Republic of India in October 1949.
The auditorium of the theatre is on the outskirts of Imphal and the campus stretches for about .
Hinduism is mostly professed by Meetei people, who are majority in the state.
It is in the district of Bishnupur.
The valley region has hills and mounds rising above the flat surface.
It is the only floating national park of the world.
Few of them live in the plain area; most of them live in the hill area from generation to generation.
During the Langbachak era, it became ''Tilli Koktong Leikoiren'', and finally ''Muwapali'' in the Konnachak epoch.
It is at an altitude of  above sea level, behind the Japfü Peak in Nagaland.
By comparison, indigenous tribal peoples constitute 20% of the state population; they are distinguished by dialects and culture that are often village-based.
The Dzükou Valley is in Senapati district bordering with Kohima.
Other than UNLF, PLA and PREPAK, Manipuri insurgent groups include Revolutionary Peoples Front (RPF), Manipur Liberation Front Army (MLFA), Kanglei Yawol Kanna Lup (KYKL), Revolutionary Joint Committee (RJC), Kangleipak Communist Party (KCP), Peoples United Liberation Front (PULF), Manipur Naga People Front (MNPF), National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN-K), National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN-I/M), United Kuki Liberation Front (UKLF), Kuki National Front (KNF), Kuki National Army (KNA), Kuki Defence Force (KDF), Kuki Democratic Movement (KDM), Kuki National Organisation (KNO), Kuki Security Force (KSF), Chin Kuki Revolutionary Front (CKRF), Kom Rem Peoples Convention (KRPC), Zomi Revolutionary Volunteers (ZRV), Zomi Revolutionary Army (ZRA), Zomi Reunification Organisation (ZRO), and Hmar Peoples Convention (HPC).
The wetland is swampy and is favourable for a number of species.
Manipuri dance also known as Jagoi, is one of the major Indian classical dance forms, named after the state of Manipur.
Some of the traditional deities (''Lais'') whom Manipuri worship are Atiya Sidaba, Pakhangba, Sanamahi, Leimaren, Oknarel, Panganba, Thangjing, Marjing, Wangbaren, and Koubru.
The festivals of Manipur are Lui-ngai-ni Ningol Chakouba, Yaoshang, Gan-ngai, Chumpha, Cheiraoba, Kang and Heikru Hidongba, as well as the broader religious festivals Eid-Ul-Fitr, Eid-Ul-Adha and Christmas.
'''Female Population'''
It was brought by missionaries to Manipur in the 19th century.
It is  from Imphal.
The overwhelming majority of the population in the Hill districts are Christian.
Almost every festival celebrated in other states of India is observed here, and it makes Manipur a mini metropolis.
It is bounded by Nagaland to the north, Mizoram to the south, and Assam to the west; Burma lies to its east.
In addition, tribal peoples have demanded division of the present state into two or three Indian states along ethnic lines.
There is a Sendra Tourist Home with an attached cafeteria in the middle of the lake.
Floating islands are made out of the tangle of watery weeds and other plants.
The Kuki insurgent groups are under two umbrella organisations: Kuki National Organisation (KNO) and United Peoples Forum.
Tulihal Airport, Changangei, Imphal, the only airport of Manipur, connects directly with Delhi, Kolkata, Guwahati, and Agartala.
The world average annual death rate from intentional violence has been 7.9 per 100,000 people.
Manipur has primarily an agrarian economy, with significant hydroelectric power generation potential.
Between 1917 and 1939, the people of Manipur pressed for their rights against the British Rule.
This cave is an hour's trek from Khangkui village.
The normal pH value ranges from 5.4 to 6.8.
This merger is disputed by groups in Manipur as having been completed without consensus and under duress.
These two areas are distinct in physical features and are conspicuous in flora and fauna.
The district is divided into East and West.
''Chakravyuha'' taken from the Mahabharat epic had won Fringe Firsts Award, 1987 at the Edinburgh International Theater Festival.
These negotiations were cut short with the outbreak of World War II.
However, the dance is also performed to themes related to Shaivism,  Shaktism and regional deities such as Umang Lai during Lai Haraoba.
The precipitation ranges from light drizzle to heavy downpour.
The Meitei insurgent groups seek independence from India.
Also known as Sajibugi Nongma Panba and held in March or April, ''Cheiraoba'' is the new year of Manipur.
According to 1891 census Meetei were recorded as a forest tribe.
After its junction with the Tuivai, the Barak River turns north, forms the border with Assam State, and then enters the Cachar Assam just above Lakhipur.
It also contains a cyclists' velodrome.
The Meetei ethnic group, represents 53% of the population of Manipur state.
Important rivers draining the western area include the Maku, Barak, Jiri, Irang and Leimatak.
According to 2011 census, Hinduism is the major religion in the state closely followed by Christianity.
Style of Kangleipak/Manipur
It is particularly known for its Hindu Vaishnavism themes, and exquisite performances of love-inspired dance drama of Radha-Krishna called Raslila.
People of Kangleipak/Manipur
The number of participants is not fixed but are divided into two groups (size as per agreement).
It uses one table and two chairs, kept on one side of the performance space.
There were many tensions between the tribes and numerous clashes between Naga and Kukis, Meeteis and Muslims.
Nowadays, other communities have started celebrating this kind of a family-bonding festival.
In winter the temperature often falls below , bringing frost.
The Nagas wish to annex part of Manipur and merge with a greater Nagaland or Nagalim, which is in conflict with Meetei insurgent demands for the integrity of their vision of an independent state.
However, there were 76 explosions in 2013, compared to 107 explosions in 2012.
Foreign travellers must gain permission from the government to enter the state.
A separatist movement has been active in Manipur since 1964, when United National Liberation Front was founded.
They have formed splinter groups who disagree with each other.
It is observed on the first lunar day of the lunar month ''Sajibu'' (March/April) and so it is also popularly known as ''Sajibu Cheiraoba''.
After the feast, as a part of the rituals, people climb hill tops; in the belief that it would excel them to greater heights in their worldly life.
The Barak River, the largest of Manipur, originates in the Manipur Hills and is joined by tributaries, such as the Irang, Maku, and Tuivai.
Rivers draining the eastern part of the state, the Yu River Basin, include the Chamu, Khunou and other short streams.
According to SATP, there has been a dramatic decline in fatalities in Manipur since 2009.
Over 2010–2013, the militant insurgency was responsible for the violent death of about 1 civilian per 100,000 people, each year.
In these are ''Shumang lila'' and ''Phampak lila'' (stage drama).
It is performed in an area of 13×13&nbsp;ft in the centre of any open space, in a very simple style without a raised stage, set design, or heavy props such as curtains, background scenery, and visual effects.
The climate of Manipur is largely influenced by the topography of this hilly region.
According to one tradition, the Manipuri people are the Gandharvas – musicians and dancers – in the Vedic texts, and historic texts of Manipuri people calls the region as ''Gandharva-desa''.
Racially, Manipuri people are unique; they have features similar to Southeast Asian.
They belong to the Sunni group of Hanafi school of thought and there are Arab, Bangladesh, Turani, Bengali and Mughal or Chaghtai Turk sections among Manipuri Muslims.
The stadium is used for a sports venue.
They are played especially during the Khmer New Year.
It is connected to other areas by daily flights through Imphal airport, the second largest in northeastern India.
Almost all the rivers in the valley area are in the mature stage and therefore deposit their sediment load in the Loktak lake.
Iso Peak near Mao Songsong.
Rice, a staple food for Manipuris, and other cash crops make up the main vegetation cover in the valley.
The rivers draining the Manipur Hills are comparatively young, due to the hilly terrain through which they flow.
Held in February or March, Yaosang is one of the biggest festivals of Manipur.
Most of these festivals are celebrated on the basis of lunar calendar.
The South Westerly Monsoon picks up moisture from the Bay of Bengal and heads toward Manipur, hits the eastern Himalaya ranges and produces a massive amount of rain.
Its people include the Meetei, Kuki, Naga, and Pangal peoples, who speak Sino-Tibetan languages.
The climate is salubrious with approximate average annual rainfall varying from  at Imphal to  at Tamenglong.
Secular theatre is mostly confined to themes that are not religious; it is performed in the secular or profane spheres.
Shumang lila is very popular.
There are rules of the game, as with all Manipur sports.
The term ''Kanglei'', meaning "of Manipur/Kangleipak", is used to refer to items associated with the state where the term ''Manipuri'' is a recent given name.
The hills are inhabited mainly by the Kuki, Naga, and Zomi, and smaller tribal communities and the valley mainly by the Meetei Sanamahi,Meetei Hindu,Meetei Christian, Meetei Brahmin and Meetei Pangal (Meetei Muslim).Naga and Kuki settlements are found in the valley region.
It is like the game of rugby, or American football.
It has been upgraded as an International airport.
Manipur's ethnic groups practice a variety of religions.
Thalon Cave (around  above sea level) is one of the historical sites of Manipur under Tamenglong district.
Neighbouring cultures each had differing names for Manipur and its people.
'''Manipur''' () is a state in northeastern India, with the city of Imphal as its capital.
These religions have a long history in Manipur.
The Manipur river basin has eight major rivers: the Manipur, Imphal, Iril, Nambul, Sekmai, Chakpi, Thoubal and Khuga.
The legend is that, Shri Govindajee appeared in the dream of his devotee, Shri Jai Singh Maharaja, and asked the saintly king to install in a temple, an image of Shri Govindajee.
The districts of Bishnupur, Thoubal, Imphal East and Imphal West are all Hindu majorities averaging 67.62% (range 62.27–74.81%) according to the 2011 census data.
Manipur is sometimes called alternative names such as '''Kangleipak''' or '''Sanaleibak'''.
It was to be carved out of a jack fruit tree, which was then growing at Kaina.
Life on the lake includes small islands that are floating weed on which live the Lake people, the blue waters of the lake, and colourful water plants.
There were 51 Class I Muslim officers including three women, 101 Class II officers and 1,270 and 1,663 employees belonging to Class III and IV categories respectively.
People of Manipur clean and decorate their houses and make a sumptuous variety of dishes to feast upon after offering food to the deity on this day.
It is the festival that binds and revives the family relations between the girls married away and the parental family.
These groups started experimenting with types of plays apart from historical and pauranic ones.
Snow sometimes falls in hilly regions due to the Western Disturbance.
The state government appealed to the central government in New Delhi for support in combating this violence.
Its 25 years of existence in theatre had disciplined its performers to a world of excellence.
The aim is to run while carrying the greased coconut and physically cross over the goal line, while the other team tackles and blocks any such attempt as well as tries to grab the coconut and score on its own.
This is considered one of India's "sensitive areas", due to its political troubles and isolated geography.
'''Male Population'''
It is celebrated every year in the month of September–October after harvesting.
The state lies at a latitude of 23°83'N&nbsp;– 25°68'N and a longitude of 93°03'E&nbsp;– 94°78'E.
Vaishnavism school of Hinduism became a dominant force in Manipur in the eighteenth century when the king, Garib Niwas (1708–48), declared it as the official State religion.
The maximum temperature in the summer months is .
The first armed opposition group in Manipur, the United National Liberation Front (UNLF), was founded in 1964, which declared that it wanted to gain independence from India and form Manipur as a new country.
According to the 2011 population census the "Other religions and persuasions" category, which included minor Indian religions (other than Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, Sikhism, Buddhism and Jainism), accounted for 8.19% of the population.
The road network of Manipur, with a length of  connects all the important towns and distant villages.
From 2010 onwards, about 25 civilians have died in militants-related violence (about 1 per 100,000 people), dropping further to 21 civilian deaths in 2013 (or 0.8 per 100,000 people).
Keibul Lamjao National Park,  away from Imphal is an abode of the rare and endangered species of brow antlered deer.
During the British Rule, the Kingdom of Manipur was one of the princely states.
It receives an average annual rainfall of .
The coconut serves the purpose of a ball and is offered to the king, the chief guest or the judges before the game begins.
The distribution of area, population and density, and literacy rate as per the 2001 Census provisional figures are as below:
Manipuri plays, both Shumang lila and stage lila, have been a regular feature in the annual festival of the National School of Drama, New Delhi.
The proposed Trans-Asian Railway (TAR), if constructed, will pass through Manipur, connecting India to Burma, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore.
'''Total Population'''
to the west of Imphal, at the foot of the pine growing hillocks at Iroisemba on the Imphal-Kangchup Road are the Zoological Gardens.
The rare Dzükou lily is found only in this valley.
# Thangal dialect spoken by Thangal
On 21 September 1949, Maharaja Budhachandra signed a Treaty of Accession merging the kingdom into India.
The word '''Pawi''' means festival in Tedim Zomi language.
There is violence between the Meeteis, Nagas, Kukis and other tribal groups.
Manipur was annexed and became a part of the British Empire, but as a princely state.
The so-called modern theatre descended on Manipuri theatre culture with the performance of Pravas Milan (1902) under the enthusiastic patronage of Sir Churchand Maharaj (1891–1941).
It has housing and working quarters to accommodate a self-sufficiency of life.
This northeastern corner of India enjoys a generally amiable climate, though the winters can be a chilly.
Sendra park and resort is opening on the top of Sendra hills and attracting the tourist.
The soil cover can be divided into two broad types, viz.
Ranganiketan (literally "House of Colorful Arts") is a group of more than 20 dancers, musicians, singers, martial artists, choreographers and craft artisans.
The top soil on the steep slopes is very thin.
The capital lies in an oval-shaped valley of approximately  surrounded by blue mountains and is at an elevation of  above sea level.
From Thalon village, this cave is .
Manipur has had a long record of insurgency and inter-ethnic violence.
Instruction is mainly in English.
Its claim as the "theatre of the masses" is underlined by the way it is performed in the middle of an audience that surrounds it, leaving one passage as entrance and exit.
The festival is marked by cultural events such as traditional dances, folk dances, songs, sports and the Miss Kut contest.
They influenced Manipuri Muslims.
Khangkhui Cave is a natural limestone cave in Ukhrul district.
The game spread among the British in Calcutta and then to England.
The seasonal Shirui Lily plant at Ukhrul (district), Dzukou valley at Senapati, Sangai (Brow antlered deer) and the floating islands at Loktak Lake are among the rarities of the area.
Another manuscript suggests that Muslims arrived in Manipur in the 17th century, from what is now Bangladesh, during the reign of Meidingu Khagemba.
The total area covered by the state is .
Folk religions are practised by about 8% of the state's people.
The violence in Manipur extend beyond those between Indian security forces and insurgent armed groups.
