The Court of Queen's Bench is the highest trial court in the province.
Like all Canadian provinces, Manitoba is governed by a unicameral legislative assembly.
Manitoba's traditional music has strong roots in Métis and Aboriginal culture, in particular the old-time fiddling of the Métis.
In 1990, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney attempted to pass the Meech Lake Accord, a series of constitutional amendments to persuade Quebec to endorse the Canada Act 1982.
Rupert's Land was ceded to Canada by the Hudson's Bay Company in 1869 and incorporated into the Northwest Territories; a lack of attention to Métis concerns caused Métis leader Louis Riel to establish a local provisional government as part of the Red River Rebellion.
Facing racism from the new flood of white settlers from Ontario, large numbers of Métis moved to what would become Saskatchewan and Alberta.
In 1997, the "Flood of the Century" caused over  in damages in Manitoba, but the floodway prevented Winnipeg from flooding.
201,825 Manitobans (18.3%) reported no religious affiliation.
The federal Conservatives proposed remedial legislation to override Manitoba, but they were blocked by the Liberals, led by Wilfrid Laurier, who opposed the remedial legislation because of his belief in provincial rights.
The base is home to flight operations support divisions and several training schools, as well as the 1 Canadian Air Division and Canadian NORAD Region Headquarters.
Manitoba is especially noted for its northern polar bear population; Churchill is commonly referred to as the "Polar Bear Capital".
Gabrielle Roy, a Franco-Manitoban writer, won the Governor General's Award three times.
Other cities in the province are Brandon, Portage la Prairie, Steinbach, Thompson, Winkler, Selkirk, Dauphin, Morden, and Flin Flon.
In the summer, air masses sometimes come out of the Southern United States, as warm humid air is drawn northward from the Gulf of Mexico.
The average individual income in Manitoba in 2006 was C$25,100 (compared to a national average of C$26,500), ranking fifth-highest among the provinces.
Other large animals, including moose, white-tailed deer, black bears, cougars, lynx, and wolves, are common throughout the province, especially in the provincial and national parks.
There are sixty-five funded independent schools in Manitoba, including three boarding schools.
Major watercourses include the Red, Assiniboine, Nelson, Winnipeg, Hayes, Whiteshell and Churchill rivers.
The first lending library in Manitoba was founded in 1848.
Municipalities also operate localized transit bus systems.
The first school in Manitoba was founded in 1818 by Roman Catholic missionaries in present-day Winnipeg; the first Protestant school was established in 1820.
The Manitoba Schools Question led to funding for French Catholic schools largely being withdrawn in favour of the English Protestant majority.
This region is the most humid area in the prairie provinces, with moderate precipitation.
The prescribed amount of land promised to the native peoples was not always given; this led aboriginal groups to assert rights to the land through aboriginal land claims, many of which are still ongoing.
January dailymaximum
Manitoba's largest employers are government and government-funded institutions, including crown corporations and services like hospitals and universities.
The French Catholic minority asked the federal government for support; however, the Orange Order and other anti-Catholic forces mobilized nationwide to oppose them.
A new, larger terminal opened in October 2011.
Its Gross Domestic Product was C$50.834&nbsp;billion in 2008.
The Manitoba French Language Services Policy of 1999 is intended to provide a comparable level of provincial government services in both official languages.
Unanimous support in the legislature was needed to bypass public consultation.
The Université de Saint-Boniface, established in 1818 and now affiliated with the University of Manitoba, is the oldest university in Western Canada.
Permanent dikes were erected in eight towns south of Winnipeg, and clay dikes and diversion dams were built in the Winnipeg area.
Manitoba is the nation's largest producer of sunflower seed and dry beans, and one of the leading sources of potatoes.
There is a significant indigenous community: aboriginals (including Métis) are Manitoba's fastest-growing ethnic group, representing 13.6 percent of Manitoba's population as of 2001 (some reserves refused to allow census-takers to enumerate their populations).
All three teams compete in the Canada West Universities Athletic Association (the regional division of Canadian Interuniversity Sport).
Fellow rocker Neil Young, lived for a time in Manitoba, played with Stephen Stills in Buffalo Springfield, and again in supergroup Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young.
Le Cercle Molière (founded 1925) is the oldest French-language theatre in Canada, and Manitoba Theatre Centre (founded 1958) is Canada's oldest English-language regional theatre.
The damage caused by the flood led then-Premier Duff Roblin to advocate for the construction of the Red River Floodway; it was completed in 1968 after six years of excavation.
It is one of the three prairie provinces (with Alberta and Saskatchewan) and Canada's fifth-most populous province with its estimated 1.3 million people.
The area is drier and more prone to droughts than other parts of southern Manitoba.
Native Communications is devoted to Aboriginal programming and broadcasts to many of the isolated native communities as well as to larger cities.
Manitoba's early economy depended on mobility and living off the land.
It has four deep-sea berths for the loading and unloading of grain, general cargo and tanker vessels.
The collapse of the world market combined with a steep drop in agricultural production due to drought led to economic diversification, moving away from a reliance on wheat production.
Manitoba has a strong literary tradition.
The Ojibwe, Cree, Dene, Sioux, Mandan, and Assiniboine peoples founded settlements, and other tribes entered the area to trade.
In April 1890, the Manitoba legislature attempted to abolish the official status of French, and ceased to publish bilingual legislation.
The Provincial Court is primarily for criminal law; 95 percent of criminal cases in Manitoba are heard here.
Over 18,000 Manitoba residents enlisted in the first year of the war; by the end of the war, 14 Manitobans had received the Victoria Cross.
The province is represented in university athletics by the University of Manitoba Bisons, the University of Winnipeg Wesmen, and the Brandon University Bobcats.
The province has a saltwater coastline bordering Hudson Bay and more than 110,000 lakes, covering approximately 15.6 percent or  of its surface area.
Most of Manitoba's inhabited south has developed in the prehistoric bed of Glacial Lake Agassiz.
The terminal was relocated from downtown Winnipeg to the airport in 2009, and is a Greyhound hub.
Winnipeg is a major sorting facility for both FedEx and Purolator, and receives daily trans-border service from UPS.
It celebrates Canada's fur-trading past and French-Canadian heritage and culture.
Other museums feature the history of aviation, marine transport, and railways in the area.
CFB Winnipeg is a Canadian Forces Base at the Winnipeg International Airport.
Manitoba politician Elijah Harper, a Cree, opposed because he did not believe First Nations had been adequately involved in the Accord's process, and thus the Accord failed.
During the 1990s, Canadian Forces Base Shilo was designated as an Area Support Unit, acting as a local base of operations for Southwest Manitoba in times of military and civil emergency.
Government efforts to violently crush the strike, including a Royal Northwest Mounted Police charge into a crowd of protesters that resulted in multiple casualties and one death, had led to the arrest of the movement's leaders.
Summers are warm with a moderate length.
Numbered Treaties were signed in the late 19th century with the chiefs of various First Nations that lived in the area.
These include the great grey owl, the province's official bird, and the endangered peregrine falcon.
These schools must follow the Manitoban curriculum and meet other provincial requirements.
Overnight temperatures as low as  occur on several days each winter.
As a result, a reserve system was established under the jurisdiction of the Federal Government.
The largest Christian denominations by number of adherents were the Roman Catholic Church with 292,970 (27%); the United Church of Canada with 176,820 (16%); and the Anglican Church of Canada with 85,890 (8%).
Baldy Mountain is the province's highest point at  above sea level, and the Hudson Bay coast is the lowest at sea level.
Numerous small regional and short-line railways also run trains within Manitoba: the Hudson Bay Railway, the Southern Manitoba Railway, Burlington Northern Santa Fe Manitoba, Greater Winnipeg Water District Railway, and Central Manitoba Railway.
In 2007, on 22 and 23 June, numerous tornadoes touched down, the largest an F5 tornado that devastated parts of Elie (the strongest recorded tornado in Canada).
Together, these smaller lines operate approximately  of track in the province.
In response, Prime Minister John A. Macdonald introduced the Manitoba Act in the Canadian House of Commons, the bill was given Royal Assent and Manitoba was brought into Canada as a province in 1870.
These treaties made specific promises of land for every family.
The first farming in Manitoba was along the Red River, where corn and other seed crops were planted before contact with Europeans.
Aboriginal Nations (Cree, Ojibwa, Dene, Sioux and Assiniboine) followed herds of bison and congregated to trade among themselves at key meeting places throughout the province.
The name ''Manitoba'' is believed to be derived from the Cree, Ojibwe or Assiniboine languages.
Manitoban writer Bertram Brooker won the first-ever Governor General's Award for Fiction in 1936.
Major films shot in Manitoba include ''The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford'' and ''Capote'', both of which received Academy Award nominations.
In that year, the Red River reached its highest level since 1861 and flooded most of the Red River Valley.
Manitoba's capital and largest city, Winnipeg, is Canada's eighth-largest Census Metropolitan Area.
In 1611, Henry Hudson was one of the first Europeans to sail into what is now known as Hudson Bay, where he was abandoned by his crew.
Winnipeg has three daily newspapers: the ''Winnipeg Free Press'', a broadsheet with the highest circulation numbers in Manitoba, as well as the ''Winnipeg Sun'' and ''Metro'', both smaller tabloid-style papers.
Southwestern Manitoba, though under the same climate classification as the rest of Southern Manitoba, is closer to the semi-arid interior of Palliser's Triangle.
Because of the generally flat landscape, it is exposed to cold Arctic high-pressure air masses from the northwest during January and February.
In 1867, negotiations for the creation of the province of Manitoba led to an armed uprising of the Métis people against the Government of Canada, a conflict known as the Red River Rebellion.
The most common agricultural activity is cattle husbandry (34.6%), followed by assorted grains (19.0%) and oilseed (7.9%).
The first European to reach present-day central and southern Manitoba was Sir Thomas Button, who travelled upstream along the Nelson River to Lake Winnipeg in 1612 in an unsuccessful attempt to find and rescue Hudson.
Grain represented 90 percent of the port's traffic in the 2004 shipping season.
Total employment in the industry is estimated at 34,500, or around 5 percent of Manitoba's population.
''Falcon Beach'', an internationally broadcast television drama, was filmed at Winnipeg Beach, Manitoba.
Margaret Laurence's ''The Stone Angel'' and ''A Jest of God'' were set in Manawaka, a fictional town representing Neepawa; the latter title won the Governor General's Award in 1966.
After the arrival of the first European traders in the 17th century, the economy centred on the trade of beaver pelts and other furs.
Manitoba has a moderately strong economy based largely on natural resources.
It serves as a base for support units of 3rd Canadian Division, also including 3 CDSG Signals Squadron, Shared Services Unit (West), 11 CF Health Services Centre, 1 Dental Unit, 1 Military Police Regiment, and an Integrated Personnel Support Centre.
Southern parts of the province just north of Tornado Alley, experience tornadoes, with 15 confirmed touchdowns in 2006.
It supports 113 units from Thunder Bay to the Saskatchewan/Alberta border, and from the 49th parallel north to the high Arctic.
Once elected Prime Minister in 1896, Laurier implemented a compromise stating Catholics in Manitoba could have their own religious instruction for 30 minutes at the end of the day if there were enough students to warrant it, implemented on a school-by-school basis.
Around 12 percent of Canadian farmland is in Manitoba.
There is a significant Franco-Manitoban minority (148,370) and a growing aboriginal population (192,865, including the Métis).
The inaugural Winnipeg Folk Festival was held in 1974 as a one-time celebration to mark Winnipeg's 100th anniversary.
The Festival du Voyageur is an annual ten-day event held in Winnipeg's French Quarter, and is Western Canada's largest winter festival.
The event featured a simulated Nazi invasion and occupation of Manitoba, and eventually raised over C$65 million.
In that year, over  of agricultural products were shipped through the port.
Agriculture has replaced much of the natural prairie but prairie still can be found in parks and protected areas; some are notable for the presence of the endangered western prairie fringed orchid,.
The head of state, Queen Elizabeth&nbsp;II, is represented by the Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba, who is appointed by the Governor General of Canada on advice of the Prime Minister.
The tallgrass prairie once dominated the south central and southeastern parts including the Red River Valley.
It may also be from the Assiniboine for "Lake of the Prairie".
The Canadian Fossil Discovery Centre houses the largest collection of marine reptile fossils in Canada.
The rebellion's resolution led to the Parliament of Canada passing the Manitoba Act in 1870 that created the province.
In addition to the Brandon and Winnipeg stations, radio service is provided in rural areas and smaller towns by Golden West Broadcasting, Corus Entertainment, and local broadcasters.
Eleven regional passenger airlines and nine smaller and charter carriers operate out of the airport, as well as eleven air cargo carriers and seven freight forwarders.
The two 17 Wing squadrons based in the city are: the 402 ("City of Winnipeg" Squadron), which flies the Canadian designed and produced de Havilland Canada CT-142 Dash 8 navigation trainer in support of the 1 Canadian Forces Flight Training School's Air Combat Systems Officer and Airborne Electronic Sensor Operator training programs (which trains all Canadian Air Combat Systems Officer); and the 435 ("Chinthe" Transport and Rescue Squadron), which flies the Lockheed C-130 Hercules tanker/transport in airlift search and rescue roles, and is the only Air Force squadron equipped and trained to conduct air-to-air refuelling of fighter aircraft.
The Port of Churchill, owned by OmniTRAX, is the only Arctic deep-water port in Canada.
It is nautically closer to ports in Northern Europe and Russia than any other port in Canada.
The province's economy grew 2.4 percent in 2008, the third consecutive year of growth; in 2009, it neither increased nor decreased.
When the British ship ''Nonsuch'' sailed into Hudson Bay in 1668–1669, she became the first trading vessel to reach the area; that voyage led to the formation of the Hudson's Bay Company, to which the British government gave absolute control of the entire Hudson Bay watershed.
The province has produced some of the world's best female speed skaters including Susan Auch and the country's top Olympic medal earners Cindy Klassen and Clara Hughes.
Pierre Gaultier de Varennes, sieur de La Vérendrye, visited the Red River Valley in the 1730s to help open the area for French exploration and trade.
CBC Radio broadcasts local and national programming throughout the province.
Much of the province's sparsely inhabited north and east lie on the irregular granite Canadian Shield, including Whiteshell, Atikaki, and Nopiming Provincial Parks.
Manitoban museums document different aspects of the province's heritage.
Since then, the Conservatives and the NDP have been the dominant parties.
Four of these universities are in Winnipeg: the University of Manitoba, the largest and most comprehensive; the University of Winnipeg, a liberal arts school primarily focused on undergrad studies located downtown; Université de Saint-Boniface, the province's only French-language university; and the Canadian Mennonite University, a religious-based institution.
Curling is an important winter sport in the province with Manitoba producing more men's national champions than any other province, while additionally in the top 3 women's national champions, as well as multiple world champions in the sport.
Although French is an official language for the purposes of the legislature, legislation, and the courts, the Manitoba Act does not require it to be an official language for the purpose of the executive branch (except when performing legislative or judicial functions).
Transportation and warehousing contribute approximately  to Manitoba's GDP.
According to Environment Canada, Manitoba ranked first for clearest skies year round, and ranked second for clearest skies in the summer and for the sunniest province in the winter and spring.
The Global Television Network (owned by Canwest) is headquartered in the city.
The province also hosts the world's largest curling tournament in the MCA Bonspiel.
Modern-day Manitoba was inhabited by the First Nations people shortly after the last ice age glaciers retreated in the southwest about 10,000 years ago; the first exposed land was the Turtle Mountain area.
Manitoba Theatre for Young People was the first English-language theatre to win the Canadian Institute of the Arts for Young Audiences Award, and offers plays for children and teenagers as well as a theatre school.
The Minister of Culture, Heritage, Tourism and Sport is responsible for promoting and, to some extent, financing Manitoban culture.
Annualprecipitation
Today, the five-day festival is one of the largest folk festivals in North America with over 70 acts from around the world and an annual attendance that exceeds 80,000.
of Manitoba's GDP comes directly or indirectly from trucking.
Winnipeg is home to twenty-one AM and FM radio stations, two of which are French-language stations.
Though not as prominent as hockey and curling, long track speed skating also features as a notable and top winter sport in Manitoba.
Legislation making education compulsory for children between seven and fourteen was first enacted in 1916, and the leaving age was raised to sixteen in 1962.
However, in 1985 the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in the Reference re Manitoba Language Rights that §23 still applied, and that legislation published only in English was invalid (unilingual legislation was declared valid for a temporary period to allow time for translation).
The province is represented in federal politics by 14 Members of Parliament and six Senators.
Trucks haul 95 percent of land freight in Manitoba, and trucking companies account for 80 percent of Manitoba's merchandise trade to the United States.
Several Manitoba-based regiments were deployed overseas, including Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry.
Brandon University, formed in 1899 and located in Brandon, is the province's only university not in Winnipeg.
The original province of Manitoba was a square one-eighteenth of its current size, and was known colloquially as the "postage stamp province".
Winnipeg is the seat of government, home to the Legislative Assembly of Manitoba and the Provincial Court.
Manitoba's culture has been influenced by traditional (Aboriginal and Métis) and modern Canadian artistic values, as well as by the cultures of its immigrant populations and American neighbours.
This region features long and extremely cold winters and brief, warm summers with little precipitation.
The Canadian Museum for Human Rights will on completion be the first Canadian national museum outside of the National Capital Region.
Aboriginal peoples have inhabited what is now Manitoba for thousands of years.
Several prominent Canadian films were produced in Manitoba, such as ''The Stone Angel'', based on the Margaret Laurence book of the same title, ''The Saddest Music in the World'', ''Foodland'', ''For Angela'', and ''My Winnipeg''.
In the aftermath, eight leaders went on trial, and most were convicted on charges of seditious conspiracy, illegal combinations, and seditious libel; four were aliens who were deported under the Canadian Immigration Act.
Manitoba is at the heart of the giant Hudson Bay watershed, once known as Rupert's Land.
The head of state is primarily a ceremonial role, although the Lieutenant Governor has the official responsibility of ensuring that Manitoba has a duly constituted government.
Manitoba's lakes host 18 species of game fish, particularly species of trout, pike, and goldeye, as well as many smaller fish.
The Legislative Assembly consists of the 57 Members elected to represent the people of Manitoba.
CFB Shilo is the home of the 1st Regiment, Royal Canadian Horse Artillery, both battalions of the 1 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group, and the Royal Canadian Artillery.
Carol Shields won both the Governor General's Award and the Pulitzer Prize for ''The Stone Diaries''.
Both the North West Company and the Hudson's Bay Company built fur-trading forts; the two companies competed in southern Manitoba, occasionally resulting in violence, until they merged in 1821 (the Hudson's Bay Company Archives in Winnipeg preserve the history of this era).
Summers are generally warm to hot, with low to moderate humidity.
Major private-sector employers are The Great-West Life Assurance Company, Cargill Ltd., and James Richardson and Sons Ltd. Manitoba also has large manufacturing and tourism sectors.
Most Manitobans belong to a Christian denomination: on the 2001 census, 758,760 Manitobans (68.7%) reported being Christian, followed by 13,040 (1.2%) Jewish, 5,745 (0.5%) Buddhist, 5,485 (0.5%) Sikh, 5,095 (0.5%) Muslim, 3,840 (0.3%) Hindu, 3,415 (0.3%) Aboriginal spirituality and 995 (0.1%) pagan.
Manitoba's economy relies heavily on agriculture, tourism, energy, oil, mining, and forestry.
In the late 17th century, fur traders arrived in the area when it was part of Rupert's Land and owned by the Hudson's Bay Company.
The province is bordered by the provinces of Ontario to the east and Saskatchewan to the west, the territories of Nunavut to the north, and Northwest Territories to the northwest, and the US states of North Dakota and Minnesota to the south.
This basin's rivers reach far west to the mountains, far south into the United States, and east into Ontario.
Manitoba is the only province with an Arctic deep-water seaport, which links to the shortest shipping route between North America, Europe and Asia.
Canada entered the Second World War in 1939.
Two sections of the province are not dominated by forest.
Riding Mountain, the Pembina Hills, Sandilands Provincial Forest, and the Canadian Shield are also upland regions.
It was a vital area of the Hudson's Bay Company, with many rivers and lakes that provided excellent opportunities for the lucrative fur trade.
There are five universities in Manitoba, regulated by the Ministry of Advanced Education and Literacy.
Diversification of the economy came when Lord Selkirk brought the first agricultural settlers in 1811, though the triumph of the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) over its competitors ensured the primacy of the fur trade over widespread agricultural colonization.
Thomas Spence attempted to be President of the Republic of Manitobah in 1867, that he and his council named.
Political parties first emerged between 1878 and 1883, with a two-party system (Liberals and Conservatives).
The executive branch is formed by the governing party; the party leader is the premier of Manitoba, the head of the executive branch.
As French explorers entered the area, a Montreal-based company, the North West Company, began trading with the Métis.
Louis Riel was pursued by British army officer Garnet Wolseley because of the rebellion, and Riel fled into exile.
The Manitoba Schools Question showed the deep divergence of cultural values in the territory.
Winnipeg James Armstrong Richardson International Airport, Manitoba's largest airport, is one of only a few 24-hour unrestricted airports in Canada and is part of the National Airports System.
The Port of Churchill is Canada's only Arctic deep-water port and the shortest shipping route between North America and Asia.
A second incarnation of the Winnipeg Jets returned, after True North Sports & Entertainment bought the Atlanta Thrashers and moved the team to Winnipeg in time for the 2011 hockey season.
The Manitoba Children's Museum at The Forks presents exhibits for children.
This area is cold and windy in the winter and has frequent blizzards because of the open landscape.
Manitoba Opera, founded in 1969, also performs out of the Centennial Concert Hall.
According to the 2006 Canadian census, the largest ethnic group in Manitoba is English (22.9%), followed by German (19.1%), Scottish (18.5%), Ukrainian (14.7%), Irish (13.4%), North American Indian (10.6%), Polish (7.3%), Métis (6.4%), French (5.6%), Dutch (4.9%), and Russian (4.0%).
Manitoba's judiciary consists of the Court of Appeal, the Court of Queen's Bench, and the Provincial Court.
It has four jurisdictions: family law (child and family services cases), civil law, criminal law (for indictable offences), and appeals.
Many small towns have local newspapers.
Métis leader Louis Riel also chose the name, and it was accepted in Ottawa under the Manitoba Act of 1870.
Portage la Prairie is a major potato processing centre, and is home to the McCain Foods and Simplot plants, which provide French fries for McDonald's, Wendy's, and other commercial chains.
Twenty colonists, including the governor, and one Métis were killed in the Battle of Seven Oaks in 1816.
The last provincial general election was held on 19 April 2016.
It adjoins Hudson Bay to the northeast, and is the only prairie province to have a saltwater coastline.
The lake was known to French explorers as ''Lac des Prairies.''
Greyhound Canada and Grey Goose Bus Lines offer domestic bus service from the Winnipeg Bus Terminal.
Manitoba has two Class&nbsp;I railways: Canadian National Railway (CN) and Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR).
There are forty-four non-funded independent schools, which are not required to meet those standards.
Extensive agriculture is found only in the province's southern areas, although there is grain farming in the Carrot Valley Region (near The Pas).
Thomas Spence chose the name to refer to a new republic he proposed for the area south of the lake.
