During the administration of Ferdinand Marcos, the region of Metro Manila was created as an integrated unit with the enactment of Presidential Decree No.
Several government agencies have set up their headquarters in Quezon City but several key government offices still reside in Manila.
It established a new dynasty under the local leader, who accepted Islam and became Rajah Salalila or Tariq Sulayman I.
Almost all of the structures in the city, particularly in Intramuros, were destroyed.
The national health department also operates the San Lazaro Hospital, a special referral tertiary hospital.
After the war, the United States took control, switched the official language from Spanish to English, and made changes in education, local laws and urban planning.
With a population of  in , Manila is the second largest city in the Philippines, after Quezon City.
''Manila Bulletin'', the Philippines' largest broadsheet newspaper by circulation, is headquartered in Intramuros.
Manila, being the seat of political power of the Philippines, has several national government offices headquartered at the city.
Other museums in the city are the Museum of Manila, the city-owned museum that exhibits the city's culture and history, Museo Pambata, a children's museum, the Museum of Philippine Political History, which exhibits notable political events in the country, the Parish of the Our Lady of the Abandoned and the San Agustin Church Museum, which houses religious artifacts, and Plaza San Luis, a public museum.
Planning for the development for being the center of government started during the early years of American colonization when they envisioned a well-designed city outside the walls of Intramuros.
Members of Islam and other religions comprises the remaining 10.4% of the city's population.
Diverse manufacturers within the city produce industrial-related products such as chemicals, textiles, clothing, and electronic goods.
Its proximity to the equator means that the temperature range is very small, rarely going below  or above .
Manila has endured several deadly earthquakes, notably in 1645 and in 1677 which destroyed the stone and brick medieval city.
It is also the most densely populated city in the world, with 41,515 people per square kilometer.
The urban planning of the Manila and the whole metropolis was based on the Metro Manila Dream Plan, which seeks to address the problems of Metro Manila's urban planning and transportation.
The city's, and in general the country's main sport is basketball, and most barangays have a makeshift basketball court, with court markings drawn on the streets.
The Philippine Ports Authority is the government agency responsible to oversee the operation and management of the ports.
The main terminal of the Philippine National Railways lies within the city.
As ''nilad'' products were distributed in other places, people came to refer to the area as "Sa may Nilad", Tagalog for "the place where there are ''nilads''".
In addition, the Catholic Church recognized five parishes—Gagalangin, Trozo, Balic-Balic, Santa Mesa and Singalong—as part of Manila.
Also, the main campus of the Cathedral of Praise is located along Taft Avenue.
He was the city's mayor for 3 terms (9 years) before being termed out of office.
However, many of the plans were substantially altered after the devastation of Manila during World War II and by subsequent administrations.
According to Waze's 2015 "Global Driver Satisfaction Index", Manila is the town with the worst traffic worldwide.
Plans have been laid out to rehabilitate several neglected historic buildings and places such as Plaza Del Carmen, San Sebastian Church and the Manila Metropolitan Theater and soon Spanish-era shops and houses in Quiapo, Binondo, and San Nicolas will be restored to its former splendor, as a part of a movement to restore Manila to its former glory.
A new attraction called Paseo de Manila is expected to rise in the park.
During his term, Estrada has paid more than ₱5 billion in city debts and increased the city's revenues from ₱6.2 billion in 2012 to ₱14.6 billion by 2016, resulting in increased infrastructure spending and the betterment of the welfare of the people of Manila.
* The '''4th District''' (2015 population: 265,046) covers Sampaloc.
The legislative arm which is composed of six elected city councilors, is headed by the vice mayor.
It is situated on the eastern shore of Manila Bay and is home to many landmarks, some of which date back to the 16th century.
It was the second most devastated city in the world, after Warsaw, during the Second World War.
The city also hosts other religions.
The relationship of both parties turned bitter, with the two pitting again during the 2010 city elections in which Lim won against Atienza.
The Manila Health Department is responsible for the planning and implementation of the health care programs provided by the city government.
Following the aftermath of Typhoon Ketsana, the city began to dredge its rivers and improve its drainage network.
Bahay Tsinoy, one of Manila's most prominent museums, documents the Chinese lives and contributions in the history of the Philippines.
Lim was succeeded by Lito Atienza, who served as his vice-mayor.
The city plans to distribute 10,000 e-trikes to qualified tricycle drivers from the city.
The mall was the second and by far the largest Robinsons Mall built by John Gokongwei.
The Pasig River Rehabilitation Commission is in charge of cleaning up the Pasig River and tributaries for transportation, recreation and tourism purposes.
The 1960 ABC Championship and the 1973 ABC Championship, forerunners of the FIBA Asia Championship, was hosted by the complex, with the national basketball team winning on both tournaments.
Another cluster of colleges lies along the southern bank of the Pasig River, mostly at the Intramuros and Ermita districts, and still a smaller cluster is found at the southernmost part of Malate near the border with Pasay such as the private co-educational institution of De La Salle University, the largest of all De La Salle University System of schools.
The city is also served by the Ninoy Aquino International Airport and Clark International Airport.
During the reign of Sultan Bolkiah from 1485 to 1521, the Bruneian Empire invaded, wanting to take advantage of Tondo's trade with China by attacking its environs and establishing the Kingdom of Maynilà (كوتا سلودوڠ; ''Kota Seludong'').
Spanish-era horse-drawn calesas are still a popular tourist attraction and mode of transportation in the streets of Binondo and Intramuros.
MWSS was privatized in 1997, which split the water concession into the east and west zones.
Owing to its history and cultural value, Intramuros and Rizal Park are designated as flagship destination to become a tourism enterprise zone in the Tourism Act of 2009.
It was then settled by the Indianized empire of Majapahit, as recorded in the epic eulogy poem "Nagarakretagama", which described the area's conquest by Maharaja Hayam Wuruk.
Later, two more would be added: Balut and San Andres.
Humidity levels are usually very high all year round.
The city has several well-known sports venues, such as the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex and San Andres Gym, the home of the now defunct Manila Metrostars.
The new charter proclaimed that Manila was composed of eleven municipal districts: presumably Binondo, Ermita, Intramuros, Malate, Paco, Pandacan, Sampaloc, San Miguel, Santa Ana, Santa Cruz and Tondo.
This contributes to the ranking of Metro Manila as the second riskiest capital to live in, according to Swiss Re.
Manila serves as the headquarters of the Central Bank of the Philippines which is located along Roxas Boulevard.
It consists of a list of short term priority projects and medium to long term infrastructure projects that will last up to 2030.
Other collegiate sports are still held at the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex.
Philam Life Insurance Company, currently the largest life insurance company in the Philippines in terms of assets, net worth, investment and paid-up capital, has its headquarters along United Nations Avenue in Ermita.
In some areas, especially in Divisoria, motorized pedicabs are popular.
Development of the railway system began in the 1970s under the presidency of Ferdinand Marcos, when Line 1 was built, making it the first light rail transport in Southeast Asia.
Among the local government units, Manila has the highest budget allocation to health.
Another popular sport in the city are cue sports, and billiard halls are a feature in most barangays.
The Philippine Capitol was to rise at the Taft Avenue end of the field, facing toward the sea.
Binondo, the oldest Chinatown in the world, is the city's center of commerce and trade for all types of businesses run by Filipino-Chinese merchants with a wide variety of Chinese and Filipino shops and restaurants.
It now provides the supply and delivery of potable water and sewerage system in Manila, but it does not provide service to the southeastern part of the city which belongs to the east zone that is served by Manila Water.
Before the Spanish–American War, it saw the rise of the Philippine Revolution.
In the Tourism Act of 2009, Rizal Park and Intramuros were designated as flagship destination to become a tourism enterprise zone.
Several Mainline Protestant denominations are headquartered in the city.
''Maynilà'', the Filipino name for the city, originated from the word ''nilad'', referring to a flowering mangrove tree that grew on the delta of the Pasig River and the shores of Manila Bay.
Selurong (षेलुरोन्ग्), a historical name for Manila, is listed in Canto 14 alongside Sulot, which is now Sulu, and Kalka.
Due to industrial waste and automobiles, Manila suffers from air pollution, affecting 98% of the population.
The headquarters of the Philippine Bible Society is in Manila.
Upon drafting a new charter for Manila in June 1901, the Americans made official what had long been tacit: that the city of Manila consisted not of Intramuros alone but also of the surrounding areas.
According to a report in 2003, the Pasig River is one of the most polluted rivers in the world with 150 tons of domestic waste and 75 tons of industrial waste dumped daily.
Jesus Is Lord Church also has several branches and campuses in Manila, and celebrates its anniversary yearly at the Burnham Green and Quirino Grandstand in Rizal Park.
Congress previously held office at the Old Congress Building.
Each of the colleges and universities found here are at a short walking distance of each other.
Manila Day, which celebrates the city's founding on June 24, 1571, was first proclaimed by Herminio A. Astorga (then Vice Mayor of Manila) on June 24, 1962 and has been annually commemorated, under the patronage of John the Baptist.
Unilever Philippines has its corporate office along United Nations Avenue in Paco.
The city government have control of the executive and legislative branch.
The 2010 World Cup of Pool was held at Robinsons Place Manila.
On a for-hire basis, the city is served by numerous taxicabs, "tricycles" (motorcycles with sidecars, the Philippine version of the auto rickshaw), and "''trisikads''" or "''sikads''", which are also known as "''kuligligs''" (bicycles with a sidecars, the Philippine version of pedicabs).
30 buildings are already identified to be converted into BPO offices.
Toyota, a company listed in the Forbes Global 2000, also has its regional office along UN Avenue.
Manila was occupied by Japanese forces on January 2, 1942.
On September 25, 2014, the Commission on Audit released its 2013 Annual Financial Report citing the city's income at ₱10.1 billion with an asset worth of ₱18.6 billion.
As a result of Spanish cultural influence, Manila is a predominantly Christian city.
Robinsons Place Manila is the largest shopping mall in the city.
Intramuros is managed by the Intramuros Administration (IA).
Other faiths like The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints maintains a presence in the city.
The Pasig River Ferry Service which runs on the Pasig River is another form of transportation.
It covers the western portion of Tondo that lies along Manila Bay.
Spanish missionaries soon Christianized the city, incorporated Tondo and built some of the oldest churches in the country, including San Agustin Church.
The Burnham Plan included the development of a road system, the use of waterways for transportation, and the beautification of Manila with waterfront improvements and construction of parks, parkways and buildings.
Each district elects one representative to the House of Representatives and six SP members to the council.
File:Pic geo photos - ph=mm=manila=intramuros=manila cathedral - front -philippines--2015-0403--ls-.jpg|Manila Cathedral is the seat of Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Manila
Non-religious holidays include the New Year's Day, National Heroes' Day, Bonifacio Day and Rizal Day.
The line runs in a general north-south direction from Tutuban (Tondo) toward Laguna.
Likewise, wines and olives grown in Europe and North Africa were shipped via Mexico to Manila.
In May 1997, the Senate transferred to a new building it shares with the Government Service Insurance System at reclaimed land at Pasay.
The government of Manila is divided into three branches: executive, legislative and judiciary.
Order was usually quickly restored and the city returned to the business of trade.
The Earthquake Baroque style was used by architects during the Spanish colonial period in order to adapt to the frequent earthquakes.
Manila became famous during the Manila–Acapulco galleon trade, which lasted for three centuries and brought goods from Europe, Africa and Latin America across the Pacific Islands to Southeast Asia (which was already an entrepôt for goods coming from India, Indonesia and China), and vice versa.
The Metropolitan Museum of Manila exhibits the Filipino arts and culture.
In the wet season, it rarely rains all day, but rainfall is very heavy during short periods.
Ana Hospital, and Justice Jose Abad Santos General Hospital.
Patterned after U.S. Army jeeps, these have been in use since the years immediately following World War II.
The Division of the City Schools of Manila, a branch of the Department of Education, refers to the city's three-tier public education system.
Manila's population density dwarfs that of Kolkata (27,774 inhabitants per km), Mumbai (22,937 inhabitants per km), Paris (20,164 inhabitants per km), Dhaka (19,447 inhabitants per km), Shanghai (16,364 inhabitants per km, with its most dense district, Nanshi, having a density of 56,785 inhabitants per km), and Tokyo (10,087 inhabitants per km).
Recto Avenue is where lots of department stores are located.
All types of public road transport plying Manila are privately owned and operated under government franchise.
The city is also the site of the Polytechnic University of the Philippines, the largest university in the country in terms of student population.
However, Estrada nearly lost to Lim in the 2016 elections.
There are an estimated four million slum dwellers living in Manila as of 2014.
As a result, relatively little remains of Manila's prewar and colonial architecture, although there are ongoing restoration projects, especially within the old walled city, Intramuros.
The city is serviced by the LRT Line 1 and Line 2, which form the Manila Light Rail Transit System.
The National Museum of the Philippines operates a chain of museums in Rizal Park, such as the National Museum of Fine Arts, the National Museum of Anthropology and the National Museum of Natural History.
On June 24, 1571, the conquistador Miguel López de Legazpi arrived in Manila and declared it a territory of New Spain, establishing a city council in what is now the district of Intramuros.
Rehabilitation efforts have resulted in the creation of parks along the riverside, along with stricter pollution controls.
The Maynilad Water Services took over the west zone of which Manila is a part.
District 6 is listed as being the most dense with 68,266 inhabitants per km, followed by District 1 with 64,936 and District 2 with 64,710, respectively.
Manila is criss-crossed by several fault lines.
On the 405th anniversary of the city's foundation on June 24, 1976, Manila was reinstated by Marcos as the capital of the Philippines for its historical significance as the seat of government since the Spanish Period.
The stadium also hosted its first rugby test when it hosted the 2012 Asian Five Nations Division I tournaments.
Prominent Filipino architects such as Antonio Toledo, Felipe Roxas, Juan M. Arellano and Tomás Mapúa have designed significant buildings in Manila such as churches, government offices, theaters, mansions, schools and universities.
The stadium hosts games of Baseball Philippines; Lou Gehrig and Babe Ruth were the first players to score a home run at the stadium at their tour of the country on December 2, 1934.
In 2009, Typhoon Ketsana struck the Philippines.
One of their shopping malls is the SM City Manila, the first SM Supermall in the city, located right beside the Manila City Hall.
File:Ph-mm-manila-intramuros-san agustin church (2014).JPG|San Agustín Church in Intramuros, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Some of the natural variations in topography have been evened out due to the urbanization of the city.
The Chinese were punished for supporting the British invasion, and the small fortress city of Intramuros, mostly populated by Europeans and Mexicans, kept its cannons pointed at Binondo, the world's oldest Chinatown.
Lim once again ran for mayor and defeated Atienza's son Ali in the 2007 city election and immediately reversed all of Atienza's projects claiming Atienza's projects made little contribution to the improvements of the city.
Members of the Indian expatriate population have the option of worshiping at the large Hindu temple in the city, or at the Sikh gurdwara along United Nations Avenue.
In 2006, ''Forbes'' magazine ranked Manila the world's most congested city.
The Manila Cathedral is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Manila and the oldest established church in the country.
Lim was sued by councilor Dennis Alcoreza on 2008 over human rights, charged with graft over the rehabilitation of public schools, and was heavily criticized for his haphazard resolution of the Rizal Park hostage taking incident, one of the deadliest hostage crisis in the Philippines.
Annually, Manila is hit with 6 to 7 typhoons creating floods.
Another religious feasts held in Manila was the Feast of the Nuestra Señora de los Desamparados de Manila (Our Lady of the Abandoned), the patron saint of Santa Ana and was held every May 12.
As the cultural center of the Philippines, Manila is the home to a number of museums.
Together with the rest of the Philippines, Manila lies entirely within the tropics.
There are many Buddhist and Taoist temples serving the Chinese Filipino community.
In 1571, conquistadors arrived from Mexico, across the Pacific Ocean, and founded present-day Manila in what is now the Intramuros district.
Their offices are located at the Manila City Hall.
Manila is located on the eastern shore of the Manila Bay on one of the finest harbors in the country.
After Mexico gained independence in 1821, Spain began to govern Manila directly.
The Port of Manila is the largest seaport in the Philippines, making it the premier international shipping gateway to the country.
Other major publishing companies in the country like ''The Manila Times'', ''The Philippine Star'' and ''Manila Standard Today'' are headquartered in the Port Area.
The seismically active Marikina Valley Fault System poses a threat to Manila and the surrounding regions.
Previously, Manila was the country's most competitive city in 2015, making it the best place to live in and do business.
These zones have no form of local government.
The Tamaraw FX, the third generation Toyota Kijang, which competed directly with jeepneys and followed fixed routes for a set price, once plied the streets of Manila.
Manila's land has been altered substantially by human intervention, with considerable land reclamation along the waterfronts since the American colonial times.
The Department of Tourism designates Manila as the pioneer of medical tourism, expecting it to generate $1 billion in revenue annually.
The site of the first SM Store is located at Carlos Palanca Sr. (formerly Echague) Street in San Miguel.
The Rizal Memorial Sports Complex houses the Rizal Memorial Track and Football Stadium, the Baseball Stadium, Tennis Courts, Memorial Coliseum and the Ninoy Aquino Stadium (the latter two are indoor arenas).
One commuter railway within Metro Manila is in operation.
Some 100,000 civilians were killed in February.
Manila employs 11,919 personnel at the end of 2014.
Some of the projects include: the construction of a new flyover at Sampaloc, the construction of the Metro Manila Skyway Stage 3, the proposed LRT Line 2 (west) extension from Recto to Tondo or the Port Area, and the expansion of several national and local roads.
Manila became the center of Spanish activity in the Far East and one end of the Manila–Acapulco galleon trade route linking Spanish America with Asia, one of the earliest examples of globalization.
At various points during the long colonial period, there were local revolts, Chinese insurrections, pirate attacks, earthquakes, Dutch raids and invasion attempts, and a British occupation of the city.
The San Agustín Church in Intramuros is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and is one of the two fully air-conditioned Catholic churches in the city.
The Rizal Memorial Track and Football Stadium hosted the first FIFA World Cup qualifier in decades when the Philippines hosted Sri Lanka in July 2011.
The center of education since the colonial period, Manila&nbsp;— particularly Intramuros&nbsp;— is home to several Philippine universities and colleges as well as its oldest ones.
In 2012, the Globalization and World Cities Research Network listed Manila as a global city.
The Emperor of China considered the Lakans—the rulers of ancient Manila—"王", or kings.
It governs the 71 public elementary schools, 32 public high schools.
Quiapo is referred to as the "Old Downtown", where tiangges, markets, boutique shops, music and electronics stores are common.
The Cities and Municipalities Competitiveness Index, published by the National Competitiveness Council of the Philippines, ranks the cities, municipalities and provinces of the country according to their economic dynamism, government efficiency and infrastructure.
It is located in Santa Cruz.
Numerous shopping malls are located in this place, which sells products and goods at bargain price.
Atienza was known for his campaign (and city slogan) "''Buhayin ang Maynila''" (''Revive Manila''), which saw the establishment of several parks and the repair and rehabilitation of the city's deteriorating facilities.
Furthermore, the AFP Joint Task Force-National Capital Region was created in 2012 to ensure peace and stability in Metro Manila, of which Manila is a part.
It became a chartered city in 1904 and is composed of 16 districts: Binondo, Ermita, Intramuros, Malate, Paco, Pandacan, Port Area, Quiapo, Sampaloc, San Andres, San Miguel, San Nicolas, Santa Ana, Santa Cruz, Santa Mesa and Tondo.
Larger barangays have covered courts where interbarangay leagues are held every summer (April to May).
Evangelical, Pentecostal and Seventh-day Adventist denominations also thrive within the city.
Local entrepreneurs continue to process primary commodities for export, including rope, plywood, refined sugar, copra, and coconut oil.
Professional basketball also used to play at the city, but the Philippine Basketball Association now holds their games at Araneta Coliseum and Cuneta Astrodome at Pasay; the now defunct Philippine Basketball League played some of their games at the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex.
Former actor Isko Moreno currently serves as the city's vice mayor.
Cruz district is the see of the Episcopal Church in the Philippines' Diocese of Central Philippines, while align Taft Avenue are the main cathedral and central offices of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente (also called the Aglipayan Church, a national church that was a product of the Philippine Revolution).
Water services used to be provided by the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System, which served 30% of the city with most other sewage being directly dumped into storm drains, septic tanks, or open canals.
He was known for his anti-crime crusades.
The six public city-run hospitals are the Ospital ng Maynila Medical Center, Ospital ng Sampaloc, Gat Andres Bonifacio Memorial Medical Center, Ospital ng Tondo, Sta.
The stadium, which was previously unfit for international matches, had undergone a major renovation program prior to the match.
The Department of Health has its main office in Manila.
Manila's healthcare is also provided by private corporations.
Annually, the air pollution causes more than 4,000 deaths.
The oil depot has been a subject of various concerns, including its environmental and health impact to the residents of Manila.
File:Pic geo photos - ph=mm=manila=binondo=binondo church -philippines--2015-0624--ls- (1).JPG|The Binondo Church
However, such projects have yet to make any meaningful impact, and the traffic jams and congestion continue unabated.
The vernacular language is Filipino, based mostly on the Tagalog of surrounding areas, and this Manila form of spoken Tagalog has essentially become the lingua franca of the Philippines, having spread throughout the archipelago through mass media and entertainment.English is the language most widely used in education, business, and heavily in everyday usage throughout the Metro Manila region and the Philippines itself.
It served as the home of the University of Santo Tomas (1611), Colegio de San Juan de Letran (1620), Ateneo de Manila University (1859), Lyceum of the Philippines University and the Mapua Institute of Technology.
For twenty months from 1762 to 1764, Manila was occupied by British forces, who used it as a base for an unsuccessful attempt to conquer the Philippines during the Seven Years' War.
Aside from these, important institutions such as the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Departments of Budget and Management, Finance, Health, Justice, Labor and Employment and Public Works and Highways still call the city home.
They were addressed variously as ''panginuan'' in Maranao or ''panginoón'' in Tagalog ("lords"); ''anák banwa'' ("son of heaven"); or ''lakandula'' ("lord of the palace").
Manila is the site of prominent Catholic churches and institutions.
Other prominent educational institutions include the Manila High School and the University of the City of Manila.
Almost all of Manila sits on top of centuries of prehistoric alluvial deposits built by the waters of the Pasig and on some land reclaimed from Manila Bay.
