In November 1931 he announced the start of a "land verification project" which was expanded in June 1933.
Zhou’s Chronology shows that in October 1958, Mao expressed real concern that 40,000 people in Yunnan had starved to death (p. 173).
China is such a populous nation, it is not as if we cannot do without a few people."
Mao and Kissinger then agreed that their comments on women be removed from public records, prompted by a Chinese official who feared that Mao's comments might incur public anger if released.
Former Party official Su Shachi, has opined that "he was a great historical criminal, but he was also a great force for good."
They will create disasters.
China itself has moved sharply away from Maoism since Mao's death, and most people outside of China who describe themselves as Maoist regard the Deng Xiaoping reforms to be a betrayal of Maoism, in line with Mao's view of "Capitalist roaders" within the Communist Party.
As the Chairman of the CPC's Central Military Commission (CMC), he was also the Supreme Commander in Chief of the PLA and the People's Republic and Chairman of the ruling CPC.
These campaigns took several hundred thousand additional lives, the vast majority via suicide.
The campaign contributed to a widespread famine, whose death toll is estimated at between 15 and 45 million.
*''On Guerrilla Warfare'' (《游擊戰》); 1937
Mao's physician believed that he may have been unaware of the extent of the famine, partly due to a reluctance to criticise his policies, and  the willingness of his staff to exaggerate or outright fake reports regarding food production.
Presenting his conclusions at the Enlarged Land Committee meeting, many expressed reservations, some believing that it went too far, and others not far enough.
During the early 1960s, Mao became concerned with the nature of post-1959 China.
"We took all the furniture, pots, and pans we had in our house, and all our neighbours did likewise.
The Peasant Movement Training Institute under Mao trained cadre and prepared them for militant activity, taking them through military training exercises and getting them to study basic left-wing texts.
Some notable actors include: Han Shi, the first actor ever to have portrayed Mao, in a 1978 drama ''Dielianhua'' and later again in a 1980 film ''Cross the Dadu River''; Gu Yue, who had portrayed Mao 84 times on screen throughout his 27-year career and had won the Best Actor title at the Hundred Flowers Awards in 1990 and 1993; Liu Ye, who played a young Mao in ''The Founding of a Party'' (2011); Tang Guoqiang, who has frequently portrayed Mao in more recent times, in the films ''The Long March'' (1996) and ''The Founding of a Republic'' (2009), and the television series ''Huang Yanpei'' (2010), among others.
They reached Hunan, where they were attacked by the KMT and fled after heavy losses.
I say that if the worst came to the worst and one-half dies, there will still be one-half left, but imperialism would be razed to the ground and the whole world would become socialist.
Mao is a principal character in American composer John Adams' opera ''Nixon in China'' (1987).
Mao now commanded  soldiers, boosted by the arrival of He Long's men from Hunan and the armies of Zhu Den and Zhang Guotao returned from Tibet.
Facing internal problems, members of the Jiangxi Soviet accused him of being too moderate, and hence anti-revolutionary.
On January 21, 1949, Kuomintang forces suffered great losses in decisive battles against Mao's forces.
In addition, at least 1.5 million people, perhaps as many as 4 to 6 million, were sent to "reform through labour" camps where many perished.
They were initially successful, but were forced into retreat after five days, marching south to Shantou, and from there they were driven into the wilderness of Fujian.
His father saw no use in his son's intellectual pursuits, cut off his allowance, and forced him to move into a hostel for the destitute.
It was during this period that Mao chose Lin Biao, who seemed to echo all of Mao's ideas, to become his successor.
Although the CPC temporarily allied with the GMD under the United Front during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–45), after Japan's defeat China's civil war resumed and in 1949 Mao's forces defeated the Nationalists who withdrew to Taiwan.
Deng Xiaoping, who was opposed to the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution, has to a certain extent rejected Mao's legacy, famously saying that Mao was "70% right and 30% wrong".
In 1972, Mao welcomed American President Richard Nixon in Beijing, signalling a policy of opening China, which was furthered under the rule of Deng Xiaoping (1978–1992).
This meant that proper smelting conditions could not be achieved.
They nevertheless adopted three policies he had long championed: the immediate formation of Workers' councils, the confiscation of all land without exemption, and the rejection of the KMT.
In the subsequent reorganization of the provincial administration, Mao was appointed headmaster of the junior section of the First Normal School.
With new orders, Ngabo and his men retreated to a monastery where the People's Liberation Army finally surrounded and captured them, though they were treated with respect.
He only buried alive 460 scholars, while we buried 46,000.
Contrastingly, Zhu complied, and led his armies away.
Mao's time in Beijing ended in the spring of 1919, when he travelled to Shanghai with friends from where he departed for France.
Others, such as Frank Dikötter, hold that Mao launched the Cultural Revolution to wreak revenge on those who had dared to challenge him over the Great Leap Forward.
In order to make the escape, many of the wounded and the ill, as well as women and children, were left behind, defended by a group of guerrilla fighters whom the KMT massacred.
Angered at his armies' failure, Chiang Kai-shek personally arrived to lead the operation.
As the Communists awaited Chiang's arrival, he loosed the White Terror, massacring 5000 with the aid of the Green Gang.
Professor Emeritus Thomas P. Bernstein of Columbia University offered his view on Mao's statement on starvation in the March 25, 1959 meeting:
:The impression of Mao's personality that emerges from the literature is disturbing.
Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping rescued the economy by disbanding the people's communes, introducing elements of private control of peasant smallholdings and importing grain from Canada and Australia to mitigate the worst effects of famine.
The  who escaped headed to southern Hunan, first crossing the Xiang River after heavy fighting, and then the Wu River, in Guizhou where they took Zunyi in January 1935.
Lenin was an advocate of the socio-political theory of Marxism, first developed by the German sociologists Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, and Li's articles brought an understanding of Marxism to the Chinese revolutionary movement.
Short argues, "Mao's tragedy and his grandeur were that he remained to the end in thrall to his own revolutionary dreams&nbsp;...
The PVA was under the overall command of then newly installed Premier Zhou Enlai, with General Peng Dehuai as field commander and political commissar.
In contrast, critics consider him a dictator comparable to Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin who severely damaged traditional Chinese culture, as well as a perpetrator of systematic human rights abuses who was responsible for an estimated 40 to 70 million deaths through starvation, forced labour and executions, ranking his tenure as the top incidence of democide in human history.
The Long March cemented Mao's status as the dominant figure in the party.
His work gave rise to a new form of Chinese calligraphy called "Mao-style" or ''Maoti'', which has gained increasing popularity since his death.
Mao visited Tianjin, Jinan, and Qufu, before moving to Shanghai, where he worked as a laundryman and met Chen Duxiu, noting that Chen's adoption of Marxism "deeply impressed me at what was probably a critical period in my life".
Many revolutionary committees visited the mangoes in Beijing from outlying provinces; approximately half a million people greeted the replicas when they arrived in Chengdu.
Mao's revolutionary tactics continue to be used by insurgents, and his political ideology continues to be embraced by many Communist organizations around the world.
When party leader Sun Yat-sen died in May 1925, he was succeeded by Chiang Kai-shek, who moved to marginalise the left-KMT and the Communists.
Authors such as Jung Chang have alleged that the Hundred Flowers Campaign was merely a ruse to root out "dangerous" thinking.
Chang and Halliday also claim that Mao and other top CPC leaders did not walk the Long March, but were carried on litters&nbsp;– Mao himself told his staff that being carried on the Long March gave him much time to read – with the litter bearers' knees being worn to the bone when forced to carry Mao up mountains.
Given what he had already learned about the costs to the peasants of GLF extremism, the Chairman should have known that the revival of GLF radicalism would exact a similar or even bigger price.
More replica mangoes were created and the replicas were sent on tour around Beijing and elsewhere in China.
They hold that the Cultural Revolution period laid the foundation for the spectacular growth that continues in China.
He has many great-grandchildren alive today.
During the land reform, a significant numbers of landlords and well-to-do peasants were beaten to death at mass meetings organised by the Communist Party as land was taken from them and given to poorer peasants.
Temporarily resting in the city, they held a conference; here, Mao was elected to a position of leadership, becoming Chairman of the Politburo, and ''de facto'' leader of both Party and Red Army, in part because his candidacy was supported by Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin.
Jackson forcibly moved Native Americans, resulting in thousands of deaths, while Mao was at the helm during the violent years of the Cultural Revolution and the Great Leap Forward:
There currently exist various competitions specialising in Mao-style calligraphy.
While he was not willing to acknowledge that only abandonment of the GLF could solve these problems, he did strongly demand that they be addressed.
He defended these killings as necessary for the securing of power.
They attempted to marginalise Mao by taking control of economic policy and asserting themselves politically as well.
Mao found that his articles had achieved a level of fame among the revolutionary movement, and set about soliciting support in overthrowing Zhang.
In the face of discouraging lack of support from the rest of the world, the Dalai Lama on August 1951, sent a telegram to Mao accepting the Seventeen-Point Agreement.
At the Lushan Conference in July/August 1959, several ministers expressed concern that the Great Leap Forward had not proved as successful as planned.
This was initially tolerated and encouraged.
However the delegates signing the agreement were forced to do so and the Tibetan's Government's seal used was forged.
Supporting this position, Mao was elected to the Party Committee, taking up residence in Shanghai.
The Japanese had taken both Shanghai and Nanking (Nanjing)—resulting in the Nanking Massacre, an atrocity Mao never spoke of all his life—and was pushing the Kuomintang government inland to Chungking.
Until the mid-1980s, when official census figures were finally published by the Chinese Government, little was known about the scale of the disaster in the Chinese countryside, as the handful of Western observers allowed access during this time had been restricted to model villages where they were deceived into believing that the Great Leap Forward had been a great success.
Many if not most of the events as later described by Mao and which the CPC claims are true are seen as false by Jung Chang.
In doing so, the Red Army successfully defeated the first and second encirclements.
Coming across newly translated Marxist literature by Thomas Kirkup, Karl Kautsky, and Marx and Engels—notably ''The Communist Manifesto''—he came under their increasing influence, but was still eclectic in his views.
Some historians argue that Mao Zedong was "one of the great tyrants of the twentieth century", and a dictator comparable to Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin, with a death toll surpassing both.
As a result, in August and September 1966, there were a reported 1,772 people murdered by the Red Guards in Beijing alone.
The idea that the state mistakenly took too much grain from the countryside because it assumed that the harvest was much larger than it was is largely a myth—at most partially true for the autumn of 1958 only.
From this point onward, Mao was the Communist Party's undisputed leader, even though he would not become party chairman until 1943.
In December, they tried to overthrow Mao, resulting in the Futian incident, during which Mao's loyalists tortured many and executed between 2000 and 3000 dissenters.
Mao also has a presence in China and around the world in popular culture, where his face adorns everything from T-shirts to coffee cups.
*''In Memory of Norman Bethune'' (《紀念白求恩》); 1939
Alexander Pantsov and Steven I. Levine claimed that Mao was a "man of complex moods", who "tried his best to bring about prosperity and gain international respect" for China, being "neither a saint nor a demon."
Increasingly interested in the techniques of war, he took a keen interest in World War I, and also began to develop a sense of solidarity with workers.
*''On Contradiction'' (《矛盾論》); 1937
Mao enthusiastically agreed with this decision, arguing for an alliance across China's socio-economic classes.
It was the culmination of over two decades of civil and international wars.
On August 4, 1968, Mao was presented with some mangoes by the Pakistani foreign minister, Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, in an apparent diplomatic gesture.
He also orchestrated education programs and implemented measures to increase female political participation.
Historian Daniel Leese notes that in the 1950s Mao's personality was hardening:
Altars were erected to prominently display the fruit; when the mango peel began to rot after a few days, the fruit was peeled and boiled in a pot of water.
Having grown up in Hunan, Mao spoke Mandarin with a marked Hunanese accent.
Mao suffered two major heart attacks in 1976, one in March and another in July, before a third struck on September 5, rendering him an invalid.
The Communist Party of China delayed the announcement of his death until 16:00 later that day, when a radio message broadcast across the nation announced the news of Mao's passing while appealing for party unity.
He was inspired by Friedrich Paulsen, whose liberal emphasis on individualism led Mao to believe that strong individuals were not bound by moral codes but should strive for the greater good, and that the "end justifies the means" conclusion of Consequentialism.
The monarchy would be abolished, creating the Republic of China, but the monarchist Yuan would become president.
The final service on that day was concluded by Hua Guofeng's 20-minute-long eulogy atop Tiananmen Gate.
On the Long March, Mao's wife He Zizen had been injured by a shrapnel wound to the head.
It reveals a certain temporal development from a down-to-earth leader, who was amicable when uncontested and occasionally reflected on the limits of his power, to an increasingly ruthless and self-indulgent dictator.
He was involved in the movement for Hunan autonomy, in the hope that a Hunanese constitution would increase civil liberties and make his revolutionary activity easier.
Just like Che Guevara's image, his has become a symbol of revolutionary culture."
Lorenz M. Lüthi argues:
He joined the university's Philosophy and Journalism Societies and attended lectures and seminars by the likes of Chen Duxiu, Hu Shi, and Qian Xuantong.
Mao insisted that minor offenders be criticised and reformed or sent to labour camps, "while the worst among them should be shot".
He established base in Jinggangshan City, an area of the Jinggang Mountains, where he united five villages as a self-governing state, and supported the confiscation of land from rich landlords, who were "re-educated" and sometimes executed.
He continued organizing workers to strike against the administration of Hunan Governor Zhao Hengti.
The CPC introduced price controls as well as a Chinese character simplification aimed at increasing literacy.
Large-scale industrialization projects were also undertaken.
Like Yang Kaihui, both Zemin and Zetan were killed in warfare during Mao Zedong's lifetime.
In the West, his name is generally associated with tyranny and his economic theories are widely discredited—though to some political activists he remains a symbol against capitalism, imperialism and western influence.
Li authored a series of ''New Youth'' articles on the October Revolution in Russia, during which the Communist Bolshevik Party under the leadership of Vladimir Lenin had seized power.
Mao published his first article in ''New Youth'' in April 1917, instructing readers to increase their physical strength to serve the revolution.
Viewing himself as an intellectual, years later he admitted that at this time he thought himself better than working people.
The fruit was shared among all institutions that had been a part of the propaganda team, and large processions were organised in support of the ''zhengui lipin'' ("precious gift"), as the mangoes were known as.
During the negotiation, the Chinese negotiator laid the cards straight on the table, "It is up to you to choose whether Tibet would be liberated peacefully or by force.
Supporters generally credit and praise him for having unified China and for ending the previous decades of civil war.
State Chairman Liu Shaoqi and General Secretary Deng Xiaoping favoured the idea that Mao be removed from actual power but maintain his ceremonial and symbolic role, with the party upholding all of his positive contributions to the revolution.
The question was rendered moot when the Wuhan government expelled all Communists from the KMT on July 15.
When Mao was informed of such losses, particularly that people had been driven to suicide, he is alleged to have commented: "People who try to commit suicide&nbsp;— don't attempt to save them!&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.
When there is not enough to eat, people starve to death.
They were initially successful, but the KMT counter-attacked, and pushed the CPC back; over the next few weeks, they fought an entrenched guerrilla war in the mountains.
But at the 1958 Party congress in Chengdu, Mao expressed support for the personality cults of people whom he labelled as genuinely worthy figures; not those that expressed "blind worship".
This period is often looked at in official circles in China and in the West as a great stagnation or even of reversal for China.
Mao gave contradicting statements on the subject of personality cults.
He refused to open state granaries, and instead launched a series of "anti-grain concealment" drives that resulted in numerous purges and suicides.
Students in Shanghai now only learn about Mao in junior high school.
It is better to let half of the people die so that the other half can eat their fill."
One dentist in a small village compared a mango to a sweet potato; he was put on trial for malicious slander and executed.
There followed several months of "mango fever", as the fruit became a focus of a "boundless loyalty" campaign for Chairman Mao.
Thomas Bernstein of Columbia University argues that this quotation is taken out of context, claiming:
He too faced setbacks and retreated to deal with the further Japanese incursions into China.
The Revolutionary Communist Party, USA also claims Marxism–Leninism-Maoism as its ideology, as do other Communist Parties around the world which are part of the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement.
Censuses were carried out in China in 1953, 1964 and 1982.
It is only a matter of sending a telegram to the PLA group to recommence their march to Lhasa."
Given the freedom to express themselves, liberal and intellectual Chinese began opposing the Communist Party and questioning its leadership.
Mao called the mangoes a "spiritual time bomb" and shortly afterwards, Mao had his aide divide them up and send them to Mao Zedong Propaganda Teams across Beijing, starting with one started at Tsinghua University on August 5.
They replaced him with Soviet-educated Chinese Communists, known as the "28 Bolsheviks", two of whom, Bo Gu and Zhang Wentian, took control of the Central Committee.
Mao had successfully applied Mobile Warfare in the Korean War, and was able to encircle, push back and then halt the UN forces in Korea, despite the clear superiority of UN firepower.
By 1971, however, a divide between the two men became apparent.
The extent of Mao's knowledge of the severity of the situation has been disputed.
The CPC continued supporting the Wuhan KMT government, a position Mao initially supported, but by the time of the CPC's Fifth Congress he had changed his mind, deciding to stake all hope on the peasant militia.
Studying independently, he spent much time in Changsha's library, reading core works of classical liberalism such as Adam Smith's ''The Wealth of Nations'' and Montesquieu's ''The Spirit of the Laws'', as well as the works of western scientists and philosophers such as Darwin, Mill, Rousseau, and Spencer.
On May 4, 1919, students in Beijing gathered at the Gate of Heavenly Peace to protest the Chinese government's weak resistance to Japanese expansion in China.
His ideas were not Marxist, but heavily influenced by Kropotkin's concept of mutual aid.
Mao's preparedness to accept criticism decreased continuously.
In late 1924, Mao returned to Shaoshan, perhaps to recuperate from an illness.
In his first school year, Mao befriended an older student, Xiao Zisheng; together they went on a walking tour of Hunan, begging and writing literary couplets to obtain food.
One of the mangoes was sent to the Beijing Textile Factory, whose revolutionary committee organised a rally in the mangoes' honour.
The Central Committee again ordered Mao to march to south Hunan, but he refused, and remained at his base.
There they were joined by a defecting KMT regiment and Peng Dehuai's Fifth Red Army.
Mao was also a skilled Chinese calligrapher with a highly personal style.
For example, in his biography of Mao, Philip Short notes that in the Yan'an Rectification Movement, Mao gave explicit instructions that "no cadre is to be killed", but in practice allowed security chief Kang Sheng to drive opponents to suicide and that "this pattern was repeated throughout his leadership of the People's Republic."
When Mao stepped down as head of state in April 1959, further state visits and travels abroad were undertaken by president Liu Shaoqi rather than Mao personally.
Yang thought Mao exceptionally "intelligent and handsome", securing him a job as assistant to the university librarian Li Dazhao, an early Chinese Communist.
However, Mao has many Chinese critics, both those who live inside and outside China.
He is also credited for having improved the status of women in China and for improving literacy and education.
Revolutionary sentiment was strong in the city, where there was  widespread animosity towards Emperor Puyi's absolute monarchy and many were advocating republicanism.
*''The Foolish Old Man Who Removed the Mountains'' (《愚公移山》); 1945
Mao graduated in June 1919, ranked third in the year.
Mao led another group to put together a "Draft Resolution on the Land Question", which called for the confiscation of land belonging to "local bullies and bad gentry, corrupt officials, militarists and all counter-revolutionary elements in the villages".
Both men are thought of as having done terrible things yet this does not necessarily prevent them from being used as positive symbols.
He reunited with the decimated Zhu's army, and together they returned to Jinggangshan and retook the base.
Shortly after the March 25 meeting, he worried about 25.2 million people who were at risk of starvation.
During the Cultural Revolution, China exploded its first H-Bomb (1967), launched the Dong Fang Hong satellite (January 30, 1970), commissioned its first nuclear submarines and made various advances in science and technology.
The combined effect of the diversion of labour to steel production and infrastructure projects, and cyclical natural disasters led to an approximately 15% drop in grain production in 1959 followed by a further 10% decline in 1960 and no recovery in 1961.
Supporting the revolution, Mao joined the rebel army as a private soldier, but was not involved in fighting.
She traveled to Moscow for medical treatment; Mao proceeded to divorce her and marry an actress, Jiang Qing.
The revolutionary committee also made a wax replica of the mango, and displayed this as a centrepiece in the factory.
Insisting that they operate as a guerrilla force, he laid out a destination: the Shenshi Soviet in Shaanxi, Northern China, from where the Communists could focus on fighting the Japanese.
The number of deaths by starvation during the Great Leap Forward is deeply controversial.
Smoking may have played an important role in his declining health, for Mao was a heavy smoker during most of his adult life.
Mao told Edgar Snow in 1936 that he had started the study of the Confucian Analects and the Four Books at a village school when he was eight, but that the books he most enjoyed reading were ''Water Margin'', ''Journey to the West'', the ''Romance of the Three Kingdoms'' and ''Dream of the Red Chamber''.
Mao played a personal role in organizing the mass repressions and established a system of execution quotas, which were often exceeded.
Some scholars believe that this shows Mao’s readiness to accept mass death on an immense scale.
The only glitch in this plan came when Mao refused to follow the easy route into Sichuan where he was to meet up with a red army much larger than his own and led by a more senior CPC member, Chang Kuo Tao.
In March 1927, Mao appeared at the Third Plenum of the KMT Central Executive Committee in Wuhan, which sought to strip General Chiang of his power by appointing Wang Jingwei leader.
Jung Chang and Jon Halliday claim that the uprising was in fact sabotaged by Mao to allow him to prevent a group of KMT soldiers from defecting to any other CPC leader.
At age 13, Mao finished primary education, and his father united him in an arranged marriage to the 17-year-old Luo Yigu, thereby uniting their land-owning families.
Some also attributed Mao's decline in health to the betrayal of Lin Biao.
During the Cultural Revolution, nearly all of the schools and universities in China were closed and the young intellectuals living in cities were ordered to the countryside to be "re-educated" by the peasants, where they performed hard manual labour and other work.
The KMT armies adopted a policy of encirclement and annihilation of the Red armies.
There are 2.7 billion people in the world, and a third could be lost.
In January 1929, Mao and Zhu evacuated the base with 2,000 men and a further 800 provided by Peng, and took their armies south, to the area around Tonggu and Xinfeng in Jiangxi.
He disapproved of their actions as morally wrong, but claimed sympathy for their situation.
On March 13, 2006, a story in the ''People's Daily'' reported that a proposal had been made to print the portraits of Sun Yat-sen and Deng Xiaoping.
In Shanghai, Mao met an old teacher of his, Yi Peiji, a revolutionary and member of the Kuomintang (KMT), or Chinese Nationalist Party, which was gaining increasing support and influence.
Sinologist Stuart Schram emphasised Mao's ruthlessness, but also noted that he showed no sign of taking pleasure in torture or killing in the revolutionary cause.
Communist Party members joined the KMT, hoping to push its politics leftward.
While there, they developed links with local communities, redistributed and farmed the land, offered medical treatment, and began literacy programs.
In other contexts, Mao did not in fact accept mass death.
In ''Hungry Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine'', Jasper Becker notes that Mao was dismissive of reports he received of food shortages in the countryside and refused to change course, believing that peasants were lying and that rightists and kulaks were hoarding grain.
The first attempt to analyse this data to estimate the number of famine deaths was carried out by American demographer Dr. Judith Banister and published in 1984.
Mao's first and second daughters were left to local villagers because it was too dangerous to raise them while fighting the Kuomintang and later the Japanese.
In April 1927, Mao was appointed to the KMT's five-member Central Land Committee, urging peasants to refuse to pay rent.
Mao moved to Beijing, where his mentor Yang Changji had taken a job at Peking University.
In 1966, he initiated the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, a program to remove "counter-revolutionary" elements of Chinese society that lasted 10 years and which was marked by violent class struggle, widespread destruction of cultural artifacts and unprecedented elevation of Mao's personality cult.
