The length of an Olympic marathon was not precisely fixed at first, but the marathon races in the first few Olympic Games were about , roughly the distance from Marathon to Athens by the longer, flatter route.
In 2004, "the disease had left him unable to walk.
Christian Hottas is meanwhile the first runner who ever completed 2000 marathons.
In 2006, a study of 60 non-elite marathon participants tested runners for certain proteins (see Troponin) which indicate heart damage or dysfunction after they had completed the marathon, and gave them ultrasound scans before and after the race.
If anything goes wrong, first aid workers can use the weight information to tell if the patient had consumed too much water.
For many years the race finished inside the Olympic stadium; however, at the 2012 London games, the start and finish were on The Mall, and at the 2016 Rio games, the start and finish were in the Sambódromo, the parade area that serves as a spectator mall for Carnival.
Kathrine Switzer was the first woman to run the Boston Marathon "officially" (with a number).
Following the 1908 Olympics, the first five amateur marathons in New York City were held on days that held special meanings to ethnic communities: Thanksgiving Day, the day after Christmas, New Year's Day, Washington's Birthday, and Lincoln's Birthday.
Singh's age was also reported to be 93 by other sources.
They need to be consumed with a certain amount of water.
Some marathon organizers set aside a portion their limited entry slots for charity organizations  to sell to members in exchange for donations.
The marathons of Berlin, Boston, Chicago, London, New York City and Tokyo form the biennial World Marathon Majors series, awarding $500,000 annually to the best overall male and female performers in the series.
Many runners experiment with consuming energy supplements during training runs to determine what works best for them.
The Olympic men's record is 2:06:32, set at the 2008 Summer Olympics by Samuel Kamau Wanjiru of Kenya (average speed about ).
Norm Frank of the United States is credited with 945 marathons.
When the modern Olympics began in 1896, the initiators and organizers were looking for a great popularizing event, recalling the ancient glory of Greece.
However, by 1986 14 wheelchair athletes were competing, and an official wheelchair division was added to the marathon in 2000.
Sigrid Eichner, Christian Hottas and Hans-Joachim Meyer have also all completed over 1000 marathons each.
In 2015, 92-yr-old Harriette Thompson of Charlotte, North Carolina, completed the Rock 'n' Roll San Diego Marathon in 7 hours 24 minutes 36 seconds, thus becoming the oldest woman to complete a marathon.
The marathon of the 2004 Summer Olympics was run on the traditional route from Marathon to Athens, ending at Panathinaiko Stadium, the venue for the 1896 Summer Olympics.
Budhia is now at a state-run sports academy.
However, marathon routes still vary greatly in elevation, course, and surface, making exact comparisons impossible.
The exact length depended on the route established for each venue.
Edwards was 49 at the time.
In 2004, Chuck Bryant of Miami, Florida, who lost his right leg below the knee, became the first amputee to finish this circuit.
In 1980, in what was termed the Marathon of Hope, Terry Fox, who had lost a leg to cancer and so ran with one artificial leg, attained  of his proposed cross-Canada cancer fundraising run, maintaining an average of over , close to the planned marathon distance, for each of 143 consecutive days.
There is debate about the historical accuracy of this legend.
The rules make no mention of the use of miles.
In 2006, the editors of Runner's World selected a "World's Top 10 Marathons", in which the Amsterdam, Honolulu, Paris, Rotterdam, and Stockholm marathons were featured along with the five original World Marathon Majors events (excluding Tokyo).
This feat has since been eclipsed by Irish ultramarathon runner Richard Donovan who in 2009 completed seven marathons on seven continents in under 132 hours (five and a half days).
Twenty-seven people have run a marathon on each of the seven continents, and 31 people have run a marathon in each of the Canadian provinces.
Marathon participation may result in various medical, musculoskeletal, and dermatological complaints.
While rare, even death is a possibility during a race.
The latter and more obvious route matches almost exactly the modern Marathon-Athens highway, which follows the lie of the land southwards from Marathon Bay and along the coast, then takes a gentle but protracted climb westwards towards the eastern approach to Athens, between the foothills of Mounts Hymettus and Penteli, and then gently downhill to Athens proper.
In 1879, Robert Browning wrote the poem ''Pheidippides''.
In some Herodotus manuscripts, the name of the runner between Athens and Sparta is given as Philippides.
The New York City Marathon banned wheelchair entrants in 1977, citing safety concerns, but then voluntarily allowed Bob Hall to compete after the state Division of Human Rights ordered the marathon to show cause.
Other notable large marathons include United States Marine Corps Marathon, Los Angeles, and Rome.
According to a study presented in 2010, running a marathon can result in decreased function of more than half the segments in the heart's main pumping chamber, but other parts of the heart will take over.
In 2005, the average marathon time in the U.S. was 4 hours 32 minutes 8 seconds for men, 5 hours 6 minutes 8 seconds for women.
This can be compared to 143,000 in 1980.
Often, the men's marathon medals are awarded during the closing ceremony (including the 2004 games,   2012 games and  2016 games).
Some of these belong to the Association of International Marathons and Distance Races (AIMS) which has grown since its foundation in 1982 to embrace over 300 member events in 83 countries and territories.
The fitter the runner the less the effect.
Other goals are to attempt to run marathons on a series of consecutive weekends (Richard Worley on 159 weekends), or to run the most marathons during a particular year or the most in a lifetime.
Arlene Pieper became the first woman to officially finish a marathon in the United States when she completed the Pikes Peak Marathon in Manitou Springs, Colorado, in 1959.
Singh, a British citizen, finished the race on 16 October 2011 with a time of 8:11:05.9, making him the oldest marathoner.
At mile 22, Lucero complained of feeling "dehydrated and rubber-legged."
Many training programs last a minimum of five or six months, with a gradual increase in the distance run and finally, for recovery, a period of tapering in the weeks preceding the race.
Beverly Paquin, a 22-year-old nurse from Iowa, was the youngest woman to run a marathon in all 50 states in 2010.
When this happens, the runner will experience dramatic fatigue and is said to "hit the wall".
The Athens Classic Marathon traces the route of the 1896 Olympic course, starting in Marathon on the eastern coast of Attica, site of the Battle of Marathon of 490 B.C.E., and ending at the Panathenaic Stadium in Athens.
For major events, it is customary to publish competitors' timings at the midway mark and also at 5&nbsp;km splits; marathon runners can be credited with world records for lesser distances recognised by the IAAF (such as 20&nbsp;km, 30&nbsp;km and so on) if such records are established while the runner is running a marathon, and completes the marathon course.
The paper went on to say that since the risk was so small, cardiac screening programs for marathons were not warranted.
Per capita, the Kalenjin ethnic group of Rift Valley Province in Kenya has produced a highly disproportionate share of marathon and track-and-field winners.
Fluid intake should be adjusted individually as factors such as body weight, sex, climate, pace, fitness (VO2 max), and sweat rate are just a few variables that change fluid requirements between people and races.
A study in the ''New England Journal of Medicine'' found that 13% of runners completing the 2002 Boston Marathon had hyponatremia.
Brian Mills completed his 800th marathon on 17 September 2011.
In the Detroit Free Press Marathon, participants cross the US/Canada border twice.
Runners are given the option to sign up to run particular races, especially when marathon entries are no longer available to the general public.
It is also often advised to maintain a consistent running program for six weeks or so before beginning a marathon training program, to allow the body to adapt to the new stresses.
NSAIDS block the COX-2 enzyme pathway to prevent the production of prostaglandins.
Runners are advised not to ingest a new food or medicine just prior to or during a race.
The Intercontinental Istanbul Eurasia Marathon is the only marathon where participants run over two continents (Europe and Asia) during the course of a single event.
The long run is an important element in marathon training.
Typically, the fastest times are set over relatively flat courses near sea level, during good weather conditions and with the assistance of pacesetters.
The winner of the first Olympic marathon, on 10 April 1896 (a male-only race), was Spyridon Louis, a Greek water-carrier, in 2 hours 58 minutes and 50 seconds.
The oldest annual marathon in Europe is the Košice Peace Marathon, held since 1924 in Košice, Slovakia.
In 2003 British adventurer Sir Ranulph Fiennes completed seven marathons on seven continents in seven days.
It is also important to refrain from taking any of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory class of pain relievers (NSAIDs, e.g., aspirin, ibuprofen, naproxen), as these drugs may change the way the kidneys regulate their blood flow and may lead to serious kidney problems, especially in cases involving moderate to severe dehydration.
Because of an injury he had to resort to a handbike near the end of January 2010.
Larry Macon celebrated his 1,000th career marathon at the Cowtown Marathon in Ft. Worth on 24 February 2013.
Recreational runners commonly try to reach a maximum of about  in their longest weekly run and a total of about  a week when training for the marathon, but wide variability exists in practice and in recommendations.
Steve Edwards, a member of the 100 Marathon Club, set the world record for running 500 marathons in the fastest average finish time of 3 hours 15 minutes, at the same time becoming the first man to run 500 marathons with an official time below 3 hours 30 minutes, on 11 November 2012 at Milton Keynes, England.
The Midnight Sun Marathon is held in Tromsø, Norway at 70 degrees north.
Typically, there is a maximum allowed time of about six hours after which the marathon route is closed, although some larger marathons keep the course open considerably longer (eight hours or more).
Drinking excessive amounts of fluid during a race can lead to dilution of sodium in the blood, a condition called exercise-associated hyponatremia, which may result in vomiting, seizures, coma and even death.
For example, Dr. Cynthia Lucero died at the age of 28 while participating in the 2002 Boston Marathon.
The modern 42.195&nbsp;km standard distance for the marathon was set by the International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) in May 1921 directly from the length used at the 1908 Summer Olympics in London.
The New York City Marathon also requires a qualifying time for guaranteed entry, at a significantly faster pace than Boston's.
The Division ruled in 1979 that the New York City Marathon and New York Road Runners club had to allow wheelchair athletes to compete, and confirmed this at appeal in 1980, but the State Supreme Court ruled in 1981 that a ban on wheelchair racers was not discriminatory as the marathon was historically a foot race.
Some charities seek to associate with various races.
Dr. Lewis G. Maharam, medical director for the New York City Marathon, has stated, "There are no reported cases of dehydration causing death in the history of world running, but there are plenty of cases of people dying of hyponatremia."
Strategies for completing a marathon include running the whole distance and a run–walk strategy.
A patient suffering hyponatremia can be given a small volume of a concentrated salt solution intravenously to raise sodium concentrations in the blood.
Other benchmarks are the qualifying times for major marathons.
Other unusual marathons include the Great Wall Marathon on The Great Wall of China, the Big Five Marathon among the safari wildlife of South Africa, the Great Tibetan Marathon – a marathon in an atmosphere of Tibetan Buddhism at an altitude of , and the Polar Circle Marathon on the permanent ice cap of Greenland.
In less than 5% of the whole population that take NSAIDS, individuals may be more negatively sensitive to renal prostaglandin synthesis inhibition.
The Boston Marathon awards $10,000 to the winning push-rim athlete.
While EAH is sometimes referred to as "water intoxication," Lucero drank large amounts of Gatorade during the race, demonstrating that runners who consume sodium-containing sports drinks in excess of thirst can still develop EAH.
Greater weekly training mileages can offer greater results in terms of distance and endurance, but also carry a greater risk of training injury.
At least 10 of these events must be United Kingdom or Ireland Road Marathons.
Carbohydrate-based "energy gels" are used by runners to avoid or reduce the effect of "hitting the wall", as they provide easy to digest energy during the run.
However, Switzer's entry, which was accepted through an "oversight" in the screening process, was in "flagrant violation of the rules", and she was treated as an interloper once the error was discovered.
Courses must conform to IAAF standards for a record to be recognized.
Johnny Hayes' victory at the 1908 Summer Olympics contributed to the early growth of long-distance running and marathoning in the United States.
Full recovery is reached within three months or less.
The IMMDA and HSL Harpur Hill give recommendations to drink fluid in small volumes frequently at an approximate rate falling between  every 15 minutes.
Glycogen burns rapidly to provide quick energy.
Fauja Singh, then 100, finished the Toronto Waterfront Marathon, becoming the first centenarian ever to officially complete that distance.
He completed this feat despite suffering from a heart attack and undergoing a double heart bypass operation just four months before.
Anyone slower than the limit will be picked up by a sweeper bus.
The records of the Association of Road Racing Statisticians, at that time, however, suggested that Singh was overall the oldest marathoner, completing the 2004 London Marathon at the age of 93 years and 17 days, and that Burrill was the oldest female marathoner, completing the 2010 Honolulu Marathon at the age of 92 years and 19 days.
Bryant has completed a total of 59 marathons on his prosthesis.
The course was later altered to use a different entrance to the stadium, followed by a partial lap of 385 yards to the same finish.
Later that year, races around the holiday season including the Empire City Marathon held on New Year's Day 1909 in Yonkers, New York, marked the early running craze referred to as "marathon mania".
Most participants do not run a marathon to win.
In 2014 Amy Hughes, from England, ran 53 marathons in 53 days, thus setting the record for the most marathons run on consecutive days by any person, male or female.
Gladys Burrill, a 92-year-old Prospect, Oregon woman and part-time resident of Hawaii, previously held the ''Guinness World Records'' title of oldest person to complete a marathon with her 9 hours 53 minutes performance at the 2010 Honolulu Marathon.
When glycogen runs low, the body must then obtain energy by burning stored fat, which does not burn as readily.
The marathon training program itself would suppose variation between hard and easy training, with a periodization of the general plan.
Energy gels usually contain varying amounts of sodium and potassium and some also contain caffeine.
The current world record time for men over the distance is 2 hours 2 minutes and 57 seconds, set in the Berlin Marathon by Dennis Kimetto of Kenya on 28 September 2014, an improvement of 26 seconds over the previous record also set in the Berlin Marathon by Wilson Kipsang, also of Kenya on 29 September 2013.
Jean Driscoll won eight times (seven consecutively) and holds the women's world record at 1:34:22.
Lucero's cause of death was determined to be hyponatremic encephalopathy, a condition that causes swelling of the brain due to an imbalance of sodium in the blood known as exercise-associated hyponatremia (EAH).
For events governed by IAAF rules, it is mandatory that the route be marked so that all competitors can see the distance covered in kilometres.
Hall competed in the 1975 Boston Marathon and finished in 2:58, inaugurating the introduction of wheelchair divisions into the Boston Marathon.
He trained under the coach Biranchi Das, who saw potential in him.
Lucian of Samosata (2nd century AD) also gives the story, but names the runner Philippides (not Pheidippides).
The immune system is reportedly suppressed for a short time.
This idea was heavily supported by Pierre de Coubertin, the founder of the modern Olympics, as well as by the Greeks.
It has been argued that the ancient runner took the more difficult northern road because at the time of the battle there were still Persian soldiers in the south of the plain.
Many runners report that running becomes noticeably more difficult at that point.
After long training runs and the marathon itself, consuming carbohydrates to replace glycogen stores and protein to aid muscle recovery is commonly recommended.
The marathon was one of the original modern Olympic events in 1896, though the distance did not become standardized until 1921.
With the growth in popularity of marathoning, many marathons across the United States and the world have been filling to capacity faster than ever before.
This route, as it existed when the Olympics were revived in 1896, was approximately  long, and this was the approximate distance originally used for marathon races.
There are two roads out of the battlefield of Marathon towards Athens, one more mountainous towards the north whose distance is about , and another flatter but longer towards the south with a distance of .
Overconsumption is the most significant concern associated with water consumption during marathons.
The aim of training for the marathon, according to many coaches, is to maximize the limited glycogen available so that the fatigue of the "wall" is not as dramatic.
The account of the run from Marathon to Athens first appears in Plutarch's ''On the Glory of Athens'' in the 1st century AD, which quotes from Heraclides Ponticus's lost work, giving the runner's name as either Thersipus of Erchius or Eucles.
However, this study was not an attempt to assess the overall benefit or risk to cardiac health of marathon running.
Delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS) is a common condition affecting runners during the first week following a marathon.
Starting 1 February 2012 he improved on this by completing the 7 on 7 in under 120 hours or in less than five days.
However, there have been suggestions that Philippides might have followed another route: a westward climb along the eastern and northern slopes of Mount Penteli to the pass of Dionysos, and then a straight southward downhill path to Athens.
The organisers decided on a course of 26 miles from the start at Windsor Castle to the royal entrance to the White City Stadium, followed by a lap (586 yards 2 feet; 536 m) of the track, finishing in front of the Royal Box.
In 2010, Stefaan Engels, a Belgian, set out to run the marathon distance every day of the year.
Mount Penteli stands between Marathon and Athens, which means that, if Philippides actually made his famous run after the battle, he had to run around the mountain, either to the north or to the south.
World records were not officially recognized by the IAAF until 1 January 2004; previously, the best times for the marathon were referred to as the 'world best'.
The International Marathon Medical Directors Association (IMMDA) advises that runners drink a sports drink that includes carbohydrates and electrolytes instead of plain water and that runners should "drink to thirst" instead of feeling compelled to drink at every fluid station.
Alternatives to gels include various forms of concentrated sugars, and foods high in simple carbohydrates that can be digested easily.
The Greek historian Herodotus, the main source for the Greco-Persian Wars, mentions Philippides as the messenger who ran from Athens to Sparta asking for help, and then ran back, a distance of over  each way.
Training programs can be found at the websites of Runner's World, Hal Higdon, Jeff Galloway,  and the Boston Athletic Association, and in numerous other published sources, including the websites of specific marathons.
Runners can store about 8 MJ or 2,000 kcal worth of glycogen in their bodies, enough for about 30&nbsp;km/18–20 miles of running.
Dermatological issues frequently include "jogger's nipple", "jogger's toe", and blisters.
Lucero was admitted to Brigham and Women's Hospital and died two days later.
In 2011, Running USA reported that there were approximately 518,000 marathon finishers in the United States, while other sources reported around 550,000 finishers.
In addition, soaking the lower half of the body for approximately 20 minutes in cold or ice water may force blood through the leg muscles to speed recovery.
In many cases the marathon organizers are required to reopen the roads to the public so that traffic can return to normal.
The Olympic women's record is 2:23:07, set at the 2012 Summer Olympics by Tiki Gelana of Ethiopia.
Frank Shorter's victory in the marathon at the 1972 Summer Olympics would spur national enthusiasm for the sport more intense than that which followed Hayes' win 64 years earlier.
For example, Johnny Kelley completed 61 Boston Marathons.
Marathon running has various health risks.
The Boston Marathon is the world's oldest annual marathon, inspired by the success of the 1896 Olympic marathon and held every year since 1897 to celebrate Patriots Day, a holiday marking the beginning of the American Revolution, thereby purposely linking Athenian and American struggle for democracy.
As of 5 February 2011, Engels had run 365 marathon distances in as many days.
For a long time after the Olympic marathon started, there were no long-distance races, such as the marathon, for women.
Ricardo Abad Martínez, from Spain, later ran 150 marathons in 150 consecutive days in 2009, and subsequently 500 marathons in a row, from October 2010 to February 2012.
The 100 Marathon Club is intended to provide a focal point for all runners, particularly from the United Kingdom or Ireland, who have completed 100 or more races of marathon distance or longer.
She soon wobbled and collapsed to the ground, and was unconscious by the time the paramedics reached her.
For beginners wishing to merely finish a marathon, a minimum of four months of running four days a week is recommended.
Budhia Singh, a boy from Odisha, India, completed his first marathon at age three.
Bobbi Gibb had completed the Boston race unofficially the previous year (1966), and was later recognized by the race organizers as the women's winner for that year, as well as 1967 and 1968.
As of 30 June 2007, Horst Preisler of Germany had successfully completed 1214 marathons plus 347 ultramarathons, a total of 1561 events at marathon distance or longer.
More than 500 marathons are held throughout the world each year, with the vast majority of competitors being recreational athletes as larger marathons can have tens of thousands of participants.
That men's marathon was won by Italian Stefano Baldini in 2 hours 10 minutes and 55 seconds, a record time for this route until the non-Olympics Athens Classic Marathon of 2014, when Felix Kandie lowered the course record to 2 hours 10 minutes and 37 seconds.
A study published in 1996 found that the risk of a fatal heart attack during or up to 24 hours after a marathon was approximately 1 in 50,000 over an athlete's racing career—which the authors characterised as an "extremely small" risk.
Many are categorised as overuse injuries.
Over 350 individuals have completed a marathon in each state of the United States plus Washington, D.C. and some have done it as many as eight times.
Because hyponatremia is caused by excessive water retention, and not just loss of sodium, consumption of sports drinks or salty foods may not prevent hyponatremia.
In some cases, charities organize their own marathon as a fund-raiser (gaining funds via entry fees or through sponsorships).
Marie-Louise Ledru has been credited as the first woman to race a marathon.
It is said that he ran the entire distance without stopping and burst into the assembly, exclaiming νενικήκαμεν (''nenikekamen'', "we have won!
Some runners weigh themselves before running and write the results on their bibs.
Most male elite marathon runners will have weekly mileages of over .
The International Olympic Committee agreed in 1907 that the distance for the 1908 London Olympic marathon would be about 25 miles or 40 kilometres.
In May 2006, Budhia was temporarily banned from running by the ministers of child welfare, as his life could be at risk.
Many trainers recommend a weekly increase in mileage of no more than 10%.
It is recommended that those new to running should get a checkup from their doctor, as there are certain warning signs and risk factors that should be evaluated before undertaking any new workout program, especially marathon training.
The first wheelchair marathon was in 1974 in Toledo, Ohio, won by Bob Hall in 2:54.
By 2009, an estimated 467,000 runners completed a marathon within the United States.
Heat exposure leads to diminished thirst drive and thirst may  not be a sufficient incentive to drink in many situations.
Many marathons around the world have such time limits by which all runners must have crossed the finish line.
The men's London 2012 Summer Olympic marathon winner was Stephen Kiprotich of Uganda (2:08:01).
These prostaglandins may act as inflammation factors throughout the body, but they also play a crucial role in maintenance of water retention.
The Greeks staged a selection race for the Olympic marathon on 10 March 1896 (Julian) that was won by Charilaos Vasilakos in 3 hours and 18 minutes (with the future winner of the introductory Olympic Games marathon,  Spyridon "Spyros" Louis, coming in fifth).
But unwilling to endure a life of infirmity, Finney managed to regain his ability to balance on two feet, to walk – and eventually to run – through extensive rehabilitation therapy and new medications."
The legend states that he was sent from the battlefield of Marathon to Athens to announce that the Persians had been defeated in the Battle of Marathon (in which he had just fought), which took place in August or September, 490 BC.
Annually, more than 500 marathons are organized worldwide.
The name ''Marathon'' comes from the legend of  Philippides or Pheidippides, the Greek messenger.
Browning's poem, his composite story, became part of late 19th century popular culture and was accepted as a historic legend.
Various types of mild exercise or massage have been recommended to alleviate pain secondary to DOMS.
Some runners compete to run the same marathons for the most consecutive years.
From 1977 the race was declared the US National Wheelchair championship.
Today marathons are held all around the world on a nearly weekly basis.
Because Singh could not produce a birth certificate from rural 1911 Colonial India, the place of his birth, his age could not be verified and his record was not accepted by the official governing body World Masters Athletics.
Recommendations for how often to take an energy gel during the race range widely.
The IAAF will only recognise world records that are established at events that are run under IAAF rules.
Currently, the longest consecutive streak of Boston Marathon finishes—45 in a row—is held by Bennett Beach, of Bethesda, Maryland.
The Niagara Falls International Marathon includes one international border crossing, via the Peace Bridge from Buffalo, New York, United States to Fort Erie, Ontario, Canada.
A pioneer in running multiple marathons was Sy Mah of Toledo, Ohio, who ran 524 before he died in 1988.
