The Central Indiana Track Show Association hosts contests in Indiana during the summer.
University fight songs are often closely associated with a university's band.
Some wear more formal outfits or costumes that match the theme of the music, or most commonly a differently-designed version of the regular band uniform, often employing different colors (especially white) or features such as capes.
Unlike the military band style, drum corps style step sizes are constantly changing to accommodate the differing forms the band is creating on the field.
Percussion players, whose large drum harnesses often prevent them from twisting their torsos, and sometimes tuba and sousaphone players, instead uses a ''crab step'' when moving sideways.
The first halftime show at an American football game was performed by the University of Illinois Marching Illini also in 1907 at a game against the University of Chicago.
It evolved and became more structured within the armies of early city-states, becoming the basis for the military band, from which the modern marching band emerged.
Military style Corps of Drums are also seen in schools, colleges, and universities in Mexico and in Mexican schools in the US merely using only the snare drum and the bugle (in some schools the instrumentation can be larger).
Ensemble tears can occur when musicians on the field listen to the pit.
* instructing players to watch field conductors, to get a uniform idea of tempo;
Some circuits in the United States continue to hold field show competitions during the summer months.
Sports Illustrated considered the activity a sport in 1987, describing the Drum Corps International World Championships “one of the biggest sporting events of the summer.” In the same article, Sports Illustrated quoted basketball coach Bobby Knight, "If a basketball team trained as hard as these kids do, it would be unbelievable.
Unlike in the United States, military style marching bands have a strong presence in Latin American countries, especially those that have strong military traditions, most importantly of Prussian, French, Spanish and Portuguese origins.
In addition to traditional parade performances, many marching bands also perform field shows at special events like competitions.
Some band scores have parts for bass guitar, but in the event that a score does not, the bass guitarist normally plays tuba/sousaphone, bassoon, baritone-bass clef, euphonium-bass clef, or trombone music.
In The United States, specifically Southern California, carnival bands (known as Parade bands in the states) perform regularly in parades and parade competitions.
Some bands are even using small plastic pouches that hang about their neck on an adjustable strap, which has a zipper pocket for holding drill, flags to mark sets, and a pencil.
Aural commands—such as vocal orders, clapping, or a whistle—may be used to issue commands as well.
WAMSB (World Association of Marching Show Bands) is an international organization holding many competitions throughout the world.
The things that do not count towards the 8 hours are competitions, parades, football games, and rehearsals during the scheduled school day.
The size of the band may not only determine how many drum majors there are, but how many section instructors are needed as well.
Instead of each member having an individual move, moves are then learned on a squad-by-squad (rank-by-rank) basis.
Unlike a military band's use of baton twirlers, Corps Style bands may include a "color guard" that spin flags, rifles, sabres—and may also incorporate dance.
Occasionally, a band forgos traditional uniforms in favor of costumes that fit the theme of its field show.
Competition exists at all levels, but is most common in the U.S. among secondary school bands and drum and bugle corps.
Even-numbered time signatures like 4/4 aid in staying in step because they assign odd-numbered counts to the left foot, and even-numbered counts to the right foot.
It is also common for band uniforms to have a stripe down the leg and light-colored shoes, or spats over dark shoes to emphasize the movement of the legs while marching.
Other bands can practice a single show upwards of 20 hours per week (or more, for some competitive drum and bugle corps, who have been known to practice as much as 16 hours a day) for an entire season.
All of these instruments have been adapted for mobile, outdoor use.
Show Band, more commonly known as Traditional Style Band, refers primarily to marching bands geared towards crowd entertainment that perform on fields (for example, a football field).
Marching bands are otherwise uncommon at the professional level.
Other elements unique to the Corps Style bands are the incorporation of the ''front ensemble''.
This is because most marching band music is in the time signature of 4/4.
They contain brass and percussion, but may or may not use woodwinds.
I like to take my players to watch drum corps to show them what they can accomplish with hard work and teamwork.
Many auxiliary groups change the outfits they use from season to season based on the needs of the band, although some that do also have a "base" uniform for occasions such as parades or other ceremonies.
A large majority of bands ''step off'' with, or start marching on, the left foot.
This kind of specialized uniform change is usually confined to competitive marching bands.
Spanish band traditions include military style brass bands, marching bands (using brass, woodwinds and percussion) and bugle bands and the Asturias region's unique pipe bands.
Unusual percussive instruments are sometimes used, including brake drums, empty propane tanks, trashcans, railroad ties, stomping rigs, and other interesting sounds.
There are also numerous dance competitions in the off-season.
In the early 1970s, color guards began to hold their own competitions in the winter (after the American football season, and before the beginning of the summer drum and bugle corps season).
The most recognizable style of show band would be that fielded by Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
* instructing players to ignore the delay and realize that listeners hear the sound waves in phase.
The three-day event concludes with the top 12 highest scoring high school bands, out of the more than 90 who participate, performing in Grand National Finals on Saturday night.
The men's and women's guard uniforms are usually designed in one of two ways: nearly identically, but with gender-specific parts (i.e.
Typically, in this case, listeners perceive that one section of the band is playing their parts slightly after another section.
For ceremonial bands, this could be a traditional color guard or honor guard.
A '''marching band''' is a group in which instrumental musicians perform for entertainment, and prepare for a competition.
These contain pages of ''drill charts'', which often either give a picture or list coordinates that band members use to find 'pages' or 'sets' on the field.
In the United States, modern marching bands are most commonly associated with performing during American football games.
Many U.S. university marching bands aim for maximum sound impact" on the audience.
Such bands (military bands and Corps of Drums) are found in Chile, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Uruguay, Colombia and Peru.
To make the electric instruments usable, external power in the stadium is normally used, but some groups may use a car-battery mechanism that requires a car battery and a converter to give the instruments and amplifiers remote power.
During the 20th century, marching bands added pageantry elements, including baton twirlers, majorettes, dance lines, and color guard.
In most university bands, band camp means an earlier move-in date for university students in the band.
Others avoid repeating a performance in front of the same crowd.
There are several ways to back march, one of which is to walk backwards, putting each foot down and rolling from the toe to the heel (the exact reverse of the roll step).
Competitive bands however, many times opt for matching pants and shoes (usually white or black) to hide the visual effect of members who are out of step as seen from a distance.
In show bands, particularly in HBCU and Big Ten bands, drum majors often have a visual on-field role with a baton or mace, with the job of conducting relegated to the director(s).
Most show bands of either type include the traditional military band instrumentation of woodwinds, brass, and battery percussion.
The upper body may or may not turn with the lower body.
Band members at many Ivy League schools wear a jacket and tie while performing.
WAMSB sanctioned events happen in 32 nations.
For parades, bands usually line up in a marching block composed of ranks (or rows) and files (or company fronts).
But in Ecuador and Venezuela, Corps of Drums are the main military style band for schools.
This step involves bringing the heel gently to the ground with the toe pointed up, and then rolling forward onto the toes before lifting the foot (or walking on the ball of the foot with heel elevated when backwards marching).
The director also selects venues for public performance and oversees the staff that help provide funding and equipment.
In modern bands, other props are often used: flags of all sizes, horizontal banners, vertical banners, streamers, pom-poms, even tires, balls, and hula hoops or custom built props.
Admittance is based on a first-come, first-served basis.
Nearly all marching band personnel wear some kind of uniform.
These US bands are also modeled on the country's military band tradition.
Scramble bands (also referred to as 'Scatter' bands) are a variation on show bands.
Band camp usually lasts 1–2 weeks, but in the case of a more advanced marching band, camp may last up to a month.
The United Kingdom keeps the military style tradition with many civil and youth bands in all of the UK keeping the military band traditions of the country, either as marching wind bands, Corps of Drums, bugle bands, pipe bands, and in Northern Ireland, fife and drum bands.
The findings were that the performers metabolic rates matched those of marathon runners halfway through a marathon, while the heart rate was more along the lines of someone who was running a "400 or 800 meter dash."
* instructing the percussion to call out counts, or do rimshots (sometimes called ''cheaters'') when they are not playing;
Typically, each member tries to stay within his or her given rank and file, and to maintain even spacing with neighboring musicians.
Sousaphone players may use a military-style beret or entirely forgo the use of a head covering, as most hats may be in the way of the bell.
The heel should hit the ground on the beat.
Some bands forgo marking time and instead come to a complete halt when not marching.
The color guard of a marching band or drum and bugle corps may contain sabers, mock rifles, and tall flags.
Most of the bands in the Ivy League use this style, excepting only Cornell University.
Carnival bands typically march in time to the music, and may also participate in parades and competitions..
Having music memorized is usually considered an advantage for competitive bands, and at competitions, there is usually a penalty for the use of the sheet music on the field written into the scoring rubric.
Bassoons and oboes are very seldom found on a field due to the risk of incidental damage, the impracticality of marching with an exposed double reed, and high sensitivity to weather.
Four university fight songs commonly used by high schools are the University of Michigan's ''The Victors'', The University of Illinois' ''Illinois Loyalty'', the University of Notre Dame's ''Victory March'', and the United States Naval Academy's ''Anchors Aweigh''.
The size and composition of a marching band can vary greatly.
Some bands perform primarily for the enjoyment of their own members.
Some bands practice marking time during concert arch with the toes coming off of the ground to give the marcher a greater sense of marching while actually standing still.
Military style bands have, in the Netherlands and Belgium, gave birth to yet another type of marching band, the fanfare orchestra, which is like a brass band but with differences in instrumentation.
Performances designed for a competition setting usually include more esoteric music (including but not limited to adaptations of modern orchestral pieces).
These are typically wrapped in such a way that allow the bell to face toward the audience at all times.
The school or organization's name, symbol, and/or colors are commonly applied to uniforms.
In either case, the amount of rehearsal required varies greatly depending on the number and complexity of the formations, and the difficulty of the music.
They generally do not march in time with the music, but, as their name implies, scramble from design to design and often incorporate comedic elements into their performances.
This creates a fluid look and a natural feel for the marchers, provided it is taught correctly.
These groups perform a theme-based show in competitions after the outdoor marching band season ends.
Texas has an 'Eight Hour Rule' that states that no competitive part of a marching band may spend more than eight hours per week, including full band rehearsals, sectionals, and time before competitions, rehearsing.
Commercial arrangements that are tailored for the average band instrumentation are also available.
The Sudler Trophy and Sudler Shields are awards bestowed each year by the John Philip Sousa Foundation on one university marching band and one high school marching band.
Over 700 high school bands compete during the Fall season with bands of similar size and talent.
When the band and percussion are not playing, rhythm may be maintained in a variety of ways: a drummer may play clicks or rim shots, the drum major may clap or use a wood block, a drum major or band member may vocalize a sharp syllable like "hit," "hut," or "dhut," (the latter is usually characteristic of the drum line, and often said before playing in the rhythm; dhut, dhut, dhut-dhut-dhut-dhut one, three, one two three four ) or band members may chant the military call of "Left, left, left right left."
* instructing players located near the back of the field watch the drum major, and all other players to ''listen back'', playing along with those watching the drum major;
During a crab step, the musician crosses one leg over the other, either marching on the toes or rolling the foot sideways.
A step size of 30&nbsp;inches is called ''6-to-5'' because five yards are covered in six steps.
This includes the usage of keyboard percussion such as: xylophone, marimba, and bells; and/or any other color percussion instruments such as: timpani, cymbals, conga, tambourine, triangle, drum set, etc.
Significant support staff for college bands and independent corps are typically paid by the university or the corps organization, respectively.
This ''delay'' effect is informally referred to as ''ensemble tear'' or ''phasing'' (not to be confused with the music composition technique of the same name).
Historically, the percussion section also employed mounted timpani that featured manual controls.
Additional staff may be utilized when the band hosts functions such as competitions and reviews.
If the distance between musicians is large enough, listeners may perceive waves to be out of phase.
At the season's end the top 50 bands are invited to compete in the US Scholastic Band Championship, which is hosted at a college or professional stadium.
Military bands and field music or corps of drums were historically the first marching bands.
Another variation involves marching on the platforms of the feet, dragging the toe of the moving foot on the ground.
Band members also try to keep a constant pace or step size while marching in parade.
This is how the band keeps time.
The modern-day concept of the Drum Major has been exponentially expanded upon by George N. Parks, often known as the "Dynamic Drum Major," through his Drum Major Academy.
That is, no winner is crowned during the event.
Some bands mark time by bringing their feet all the way up to their knee—known as ''high-mark time''.
Forms may be linear, curvilinear, or scatter.
However, there are some common elements in almost all band performances.
Most bands have the guitars in the pit with keyboard and auxiliary percussion, but some guitarists do march in the field show.
It may even be memorized before any of the marching steps are learned.
The waves from each musician, traveling at the speed of sound, reach the other musicians, field conductors and listeners at slightly different times.
Three National Football League teams designate an official marching band: the Washington Redskins, Buffalo Bills and Baltimore Ravens.
), ''music warm-up'' (generally consisting of breathing exercises, scales, technical exercises, chorales, and tuning), ''basics'' (simple marching in a block to practice proper technique), and ''sectionals'' (in which either staff or band members designated ''section leaders'' rehearse individual sections).
Music may be memorized, or it may be carried on flip folders, which are held by lyres that clip onto the instruments.
Spotts had seen a flock of birds fly in a "V" formation and decided that a band could replicate the action in the form of show formations on a field.
When band members are marching in one direction but want to focus their sound in another, they may rotate their bodies at the waist, so that only the upper portion of the body faces in the direction of play.
* using compact formations;
One of the most notable depictions of HBCU bands is the film ''Drumline''.
College-level military bands may use the term "section sergeant" or "section officer" in place of "section leader."
Military style marching bands are also commonplace in Germany, Austria, the Russian Federation, Ukraine, Belarus, Italy, Spain, Portugal and France.
The components of a band uniform are numerous.
For drum & bugle corps and corps-style field bands, this could include Dance lines, majorettes, Auxiliary units may be collectively referred to as color guard or visual ensemble.
Military-style uniforms are most common, but there are bands that use everything from matching T-shirts and shorts to formal wear.
This involves learning basic marching fundamentals such as the type of marching step the band uses, commands from the drum major, and how to move on field.
Instrumentation varies but generally contains brass, woodwinds, and percussion.
The band often stay the entire game, playing the school's fight song and alma mater at the end of the game regardless of the outcome.
Cadence tempo varies from group to group, but is generally between 112 and 144 beats per minute.
With the assistance of section instructors, the director also teaches performance technique—musical, martial, and visual—and assesses the pool of talent, choosing leaders and soloists as needed.
Some bands perform the same field show at all appearances in a season.
Many opportunities for member improvement are present: the director may organize clinics with various professionals, send representatives to specialty schools or camps, and/or plan trips abroad for education or exhibition.
Using peripheral vision to align oneself to formations or field markings is even more important during backward marching.
Spring and early summer parade marching (or street marching) is popular in the northern midwest and Upstate New York, where temperatures are moderate enough for students to march distances in standard uniforms.
Styled on the UK military tradition, Fiji's Military Forces also have a marching band.
The USC Spirit of Troy Marching Band and Troy University's Sound of the South Marching Band wear traditional Trojan helmets.
Marching bands then perform a show during halftime.
Although its legitimacy is often called into question, competitive marching band is sometimes considered a sport, due in large part to the physical exertion required in combination with teamwork.
The camp takes place outdoors on field for marching, and in a band hall for music-only rehearsals.
German and French military style band types can even extend to Corps of Drums and fanfare bands staffed full-time by civilian musicians, and even to the Bagad bands in Brittany and outside France made up of bagpipers.
Because they are commonly previous members of the section they teach, they are able to provide better instruction to combine the needs of the show with the characteristics of the given instrument.
A marching band is typically led by one to three or, occasionally, four drum majors, also called field commanders, who are responsible for conducting the band (sometimes using a large baton or mace, though such tools are used rarely in modern marching bands for conducting) and commonly referred to as the leader of the band.
Many of these bands may have a twirler line and/or a dancer line, but not necessarily flag twirlers.
Notable users include The Cavaliers and the Santa Clara Vanguard, two DCI World Class Drum and Bugle Corps.
Some bands assign drum majors the dual role of leading and conducting the ensemble on the field.
Traditionally, the drumline would put their feet in a V-shape and lift their feet fully off the ground a few inches.
The Southern Methodist University band wear a different combination of jackets, vests, ties, shirts, and pants for each half (changing before halftime) of each game and no clothing or uniform combinations are repeated during the marching season.
* Marching band competitions are judged using criteria similar to criteria used in drum corps competitions, with emphasis on individual aspects of the band (captions for music performance, visual performance, percussion, guard (auxiliary), and general effect are standard).
There is a huge marching scene in Northern Ireland with most of the parades being organized by loyalist bands and the Orange Order.
Many traditional style bands compete in contest known as a Battle of the Bands, similar to the Atlanta Classic from the movie Drumline.
Marching percussion (often referred to as the drumline, battery, or back battery) typically includes snare drums, tenor drums, bass drums, and cymbals and are responsible for keeping tempo for the band.
Even when marking time, it is often considered good form for all band members to stay ''in step''—that is, step with the same foot at the same time.
In 1907, breaking from traditional rank and file marching, the first pictorial formation on a football field was produced as a "Block P" created by Paul Spotts Emrick, director of the Purdue All-American Marching Band.
It's World Championships are held annually in the summer in a different country.
These bands also are present in Guatemala, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Panama, while military style bands are in service in Commonwealth and ex-French nations in the Caribbean and in Belize, given British and French influences.
Bands cheer with the cheerleaders, and some bands create their own cheers.
Seemingly contradictory to the name, Honda's "battle" is not a competition in the traditional sense.
Drum Majors, the field commanders and band leaders, usually do not wear the regular band uniform, to better distinguish them from the rest of the band.
Grand Nationals takes place in Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis, Indiana in early to mid November.
Some bands do a new field show every week, but only practice drill for two or three hours immediately before the performance.
College bands and some high school bands do not have such breaks, but continue playing in the stands during the entirety of the game.
In addition to traditional drill formations, HBCU bands feature heavily choreographed dance routines as part of their performances.
Some auxiliary groups use uniforms that resemble gymnastics outfits: Often, these uniforms are themed, drawing inspiration from the music.
The memorization of music is usually a matter of pride for the marching band, however bands that regularly pull from expansive libraries and perform dozens of new works each season are more likely to utilize flip folders.
File:Derby_Midshipmen_Band_Parade.JPG|Derby Midshipmen Band
Some bands plant the heel on the prep step rather than the toe, but preserving the angle of the foot.
Many HBCU marching band fans refer to band as ''marching sport.''
There is also a clear plastic window in front to display the current part of drill being worked on at that point in time.
Large bands also require a number of support staff who can move equipment, repair instruments and uniforms, create and manipulate props used in performances, and provide food, water and medical assistance.
The section leader is responsible for the minute-to-minute instruction of his or her section members, and reports to the drum majors and the band director.
HBCU bands are a significant part of African-American musical culture and HBCU bands often surpass their associated football teams in popularity, a phenomenon that is uncommon among collegiate and high school marching bands.
What content is not provided by the director may be contracted from arrangers (who compose original works or adapt existing works) and copyists (who reproduce the parts of the score), choreographers, and drill designers (primarily for field bands).
Military and university bands typically have a repertoire of traditional music associated with the organization they serve.
Percussionists may also substitute roll step when their instruments would interfere with performing the high step.
The front ensemble may also use sound amplification or electronic instruments such as synthesizers.
With this control comes the ability to perform a much broader range of tempos.
Most high school marching bands are accompanied by a colorguard, a group of performers, who add a visual interpretation to the music through the use of props, most often flags and rifles.
Instrumentation typically includes brass instruments, woodwind instruments, percussion instruments, and color guard.
A step size of 22.5&nbsp;inches is called ''8-to-5'' because the marcher covers five yards (about 4.6 m) in eight steps.
For members to learn their positions more quickly, they may be given ''drill charts'', which map their locations relative to the grid or field markings for each formation.
When learning positions for drill, an American football field may be divided into a 5-yard grid, with the yard lines serving as one set of guides.
Marching versions of the glockenspiel (bells), xylophone, and marimba are also rarely used by some ensembles.
HBCU bands utilize the traditional "ankle-knee" high step and music selections are largely based on R&B, hip-hop, and contemporary popular music.
Many states have their own competition circuits, as well as their own rules for competitions in their circuits.
These bands perform a show that is designed to entertain the audience, but feature more traditional symphonic styles of music rather than contemporary music (marches, film scores, jazz, or older pop music).
The director provides general guidance, selects the repertoire, interprets commentary and evaluations from judges, and auditions and/or recruits prospective members.
It is usually the responsibility of the people at the end of each rank and the front of each file to be in the correct location; this allows other band members to ''guide'' to them.
Bands of America is the other major circuit that conducts several competitions throughout the fall season.
