It may also have been intended as a Freudian joke, referring to Leonardo da Vinci's alleged homosexuality.
In addition to displaying works of American artists, this show was the first major exhibition of modern trends coming out of Paris, encompassing experimental styles of the European avant-garde, including Fauvism, Cubism, and Futurism.
It has all the beauty of art—and much more.
He later submitted the painting to the 1913 "Armory Show" in New York City.
Others maintain that it originates from the Romanian artists Tristan Tzara and Marcel Janco's frequent use of the words da, da, meaning yes, yes in the Romanian language.
Calder agreed to use this novel term in his upcoming show.
In this way Duchamp confronted guests entering the exhibition, who were in full evening dress.
American show-goers, accustomed to realistic art, were scandalized, and the ''Nude'' was at the center of much of the controversy.
He designed the 1925 Poster for the Third French Chess Championship, and as a competitor in the event, finished at fifty percent (3–3, with two draws).
The inspiration for the name "Rrose Sélavy" may have been Belle da Costa Greene, J.P. Morgan's librarian of the Pierpont Morgan Library.
New York Dada had a less serious tone than that of European Dadaism, and was not a particularly organized venture.
Duchamp asked that Doucet not exhibit the apparatus as art.
Duchamp showed a larger version of his ''Young Man and Girl in Spring'' 1911, a work that had an Edenic theme and a thinly veiled sexuality also found in Picabia's contemporaneous ''Adam and Eve'' 1911.
The show featured more than 60 artists from different countries, including approximately 300 paintings, objects, collages, photographs, and installations.
Following the death of J.P. Morgan, Sr., Greene became the Library's director, working there for a total of forty-three years.
"Readymades" were found objects which Duchamp chose and presented as art.
Another theory says that the name "Dada" came during a meeting of the group when a paper knife stuck into a French-German dictionary happened to point to 'dada', a French word for 'hobbyhorse'.
Duchamp goes on to explain to the interviewer that "the word art etymologically means to do", that art means activity of any kind, and that it is our society that creates "purely artificial" distinctions of being an artist.
The idea was to question the very notion of Art, and the adoration of art, which Duchamp found "unnecessary"
Poincaré postulated that the laws believed to govern matter were created solely by the minds that "understood" them and that no theory could be considered "true".
The controversy, according to art historian Peter Brooke, was not whether the work should be hung or not, but whether or not it should be hung with the Cubist group.
The piece is partially constructed as a retrospective of Duchamp's works, including a three-dimensional reproduction of his earlier paintings ''Bride'' (1912), ''Chocolate Grinder'' (1914) and ''Glider containing a water mill in neighboring metals'' (1913–1915), which has opened for numerous interpretations.
Until 1969 when the Philadelphia Museum of Art revealed Duchamp's ''Étant donnés'' tableau, ''The Large Glass'' was thought to have been his last major work.
Rrose Sélavy and the other pseudonyms Duchamp used may be read as a comment on the fallacy of romanticizing the conscious individuality or subjectivity of the artist, a theme that is also a prominent subtext of the Readymades.
Poets and writers also participated.
In a BBC interview with Duchamp conducted by Joan Bakewell in 1966 Duchamp compared art with religion, whereby he stated that he wished to do away with art the same way many have done away with religion.
The name, a pun, sounds like the French phrase ''Eros, c'est la vie'', which may be translated as "Eros, such is life".
The group collected modern art works, and arranged modern art exhibitions and lectures throughout the 1930s.
Key figures in the movement included Hugo Ball, Emmy Hennings, Hans Arp, Raoul Hausmann, Hannah Höch, Johannes Baader, Tristan Tzara, Francis Picabia, Richard Huelsenbeck, Georg Grosz, John Heartfield, Marcel Duchamp, Beatrice Wood, Kurt Schwitters, and Hans Richter, among others.
''La Mariée mise à nu par ses célibataires même.
Using enneagram-like charts that fold upon themselves, the authors demonstrated that in this position, the most Black can hope for is a draw.
Grandmasters and endgame specialists have since grappled with the problem, with most concluding that there is no solution.
Duchamp left a legacy to chess in the form of an enigmatic endgame problem he composed in 1943.
as "there is fire down below" in a late interview with Arturo Schwarz.
Interest in Duchamp was reignited in the 1960s, and he gained international public recognition.
Who will ever do anything better than that propeller?
In his studio he mounted a bicycle wheel upside down onto a stool, spinning it occasionally just to watch it.
The work was formally declared "Unfinished" in 1923.
He was invited to lecture on art and to participate in formal discussions, as well as sitting for interviews with major publications.
After moving back to Paris in 1923, at André Breton's urging and through the financing of Jacques Doucet, Duchamp built another optical device based on the first one, ''Rotative Demisphère, optique de précision'' (Rotary Demisphere, Precision Optics).
In 1905, he began his compulsory military service with the 39th Infantry Regiment, working for a printer in Rouen.
Duchamp is commonly regarded, along with Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse, as one of the three artists who helped to define the revolutionary developments in the plastic arts in the opening decades of the twentieth century, responsible for significant developments in painting and sculpture.
The theme of the "endgame" is important to an understanding of Duchamp's complex attitude towards his artistic career.
During this time Duchamp drew and sold cartoons which reflected his ribald humor.
While in Munich in 1912, he painted the last of his Cubist-like paintings and he started "Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even" image, and began making plans for ''The Large Glass'' – scribbling short notes to himself, sometimes with hurried sketches.
"The things themselves are not what science can reach..., but only the relations between things.
However, that same year he painted in a Cubist style, and added an impression of motion by using repetitive imagery.
From 1925 he often traveled between France and the United States, and made New York's Greenwich Village his home in 1942.
"You threw the bottle-rack...".
The following year his work was featured in the Salon des Indépendants.
Duchamp said in an interview,"You think you're doing something entirely your own, and a year later you look at it and you see actually the roots of where your art comes from without your knowing it at all."
Dada rejected reason and logic, prizing nonsense, irrationality and intuition.
In 1913, Duchamp withdrew from painting circles and began working as a librarian in the Bibliothèque Sainte-Geneviève to be able to earn a living wage while concentrating on scholarly realms and working on his ''Large Glass''.
Duchamp's first work to provoke significant controversy was ''Nude Descending a Staircase, No.
Beginning with Société Anonyme, Dreier also depended on Duchamp's counsel in gathering her collection, as did Arensberg.
Dada is the groundwork to abstract art and sound poetry, a starting point for performance art, a prelude to postmodernism, an influence on pop art, a celebration of antiart to be later embraced for anarcho-political uses in the 1960s and the movement that lay the foundation for Surrealism.
Sélavy emerged in 1921 in a series of photographs by Man Ray showing Duchamp dressed as a woman.
It was rumored that Duchamp had chosen a marriage of convenience, because Sarazin-Lavassor was the daughter of a wealthy automobile manufacturer.
His broad interests led him to an exhibition of aviation technology during this period, after which Duchamp said to his friend Constantin Brâncuși, "Painting is washed up.
Duchamp became part of an artist colony in Ridgefield, New Jersey, across the Hudson River from New York City.
The main hall was a simulation of a dark subterranean cave with 1,200 empty coal bags suspended from the ceiling.
He executed the work on two panes of glass with materials such as lead foil, fuse wire, and dust.
Dada or Dadaism was an art movement of the European avant-garde in the early 20th century.
''Bottle Rack'' (1914), a bottle drying rack signed by Duchamp, is considered to be the first "pure" readymade.
Although a marginal note in the letter suggests that Duchamp generally approved of the statement, Richter did not make the distinction clear until many years later.
Other major institutions, including the Philadelphia Art Museum and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, followed with large showings of Duchamp's work.
Although Duchamp was no longer considered to be an active artist, he continued to consult with artists, art dealers and collectors.
The movement influenced later styles like the avant-garde and downtown music movements, and groups including surrealism, Nouveau réalisme, pop art and Fluxus.
In addition to being anti-war, Dada was also anti-bourgeois and had political affinities with the radical left.
He first submitted the piece to appear at the Cubist Salon des Indépendants, but Albert Gleizes (according to Duchamp in an interview with Pierre Cabanne, p.&nbsp;31) asked Duchamp's brothers to have him voluntarily withdraw the painting, or to paint over the title that he had painted on the work and rename it something else.
Duchamp created the Société Anonyme in 1920, along with Katherine Dreier and Man Ray.
At 8 years old, Duchamp followed in his brothers' footsteps when he left home and began schooling at the Lycée Pierre-Corneille, in Rouen.
Along with Henri-Pierre Roché and Beatrice Wood, Duchamp published a Dada magazine in New York, titled ''The Blind Man'', which included art, literature, humor and commentary.
However, initially, the wheel was simply placed in the studio to create atmosphere: "I enjoyed looking at it just as I enjoy looking at the flames dancing in a fireplace."
Duchamp's influence on the art world remained behind the scenes until the late 1950s, when he was "discovered" by young artists such as Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns, who were eager to escape the dominance of Abstract Expressionism.
Duchamp in his later life explicitly expressed negativity towards art itself.
He went on to pretend to abandon art and devote the rest of his life to chess, while secretly continuing to make art.
I also used this procedure in the ''Nude Descending a Staircase''.
However, there was no jury at the Salon des Indépendants and Gleizes was in no position to reject the painting.
To quote Dona Budd's ''The Language of Art Knowledge'', Dada was born out of negative reaction to the horrors of World War I.
In the following years, his participation in chess tournaments declined, but he discovered correspondence chess and became a chess journalist, writing weekly newspaper columns.
Duchamp gave a "loose" translation of L.H.O.O.Q.
In 1968, Duchamp and John Cage appeared together at a concert entitled "Reunion", playing a game of chess and composing Aleatoric music by triggering a series of photoelectric cells underneath the chessboard.
Though he spoke little English, in the course of supporting himself by giving French lessons and through some library work, he quickly learned the language.
In 1918, Duchamp took leave of the New York art scene, interrupting his work on the ''Large Glass'', and went to Buenos Aires, where he remained for nine months and often played chess.
Upon his return to Paris in 1923, Duchamp was, in essence, no longer a practicing artist.
It began in Zurich, Switzerland in 1916, spreading to Berlin shortly thereafter.
According to Duchamp, "our friendship began right there".
In 1958 Duchamp said of creativity,
In 1943, he participated with Maya Deren in her unfinished film ''The Witch's Cradle'', filmed in Peggy Guggenheim's Art of This Century gallery.
As the last surviving member of the Duchamp family of artists, in 1967 Duchamp helped to organize an exhibition in Rouen, France, called ''Les Duchamp: Jacques Villon, Raymond Duchamp-Villon, Marcel Duchamp, Suzanne Duchamp''.
The impression is, Brooke writes, "it was precisely because he wished to remain part of the group that he withdrew the painting; and that, far from being ill treated by the group, he was given a rather privileged position, probably through the patronage of Picabia".
This can be translated as "She has a hot ass", implying that the woman in the painting is in a state of sexual excitement and availability.
Sometime in the early 1930s, Duchamp reached the height of his ability, but realized that he had little chance of winning recognition in top-level chess.
It would be over 10 years before this piece was completed.
In 1920, with help from Man Ray, Duchamp built a motorized sculpture, ''Rotative plaques verre, optique de précision'' ("Rotary Glass Plates, Precision Optics").
His ''Fountain'', a urinal signed with the pseudonym "R. Mutt", shocked the art world in 1917  ''Fountain'' was selected in 2004 as "the most influential artwork of the 20th century" by 500 renowned artists and historians.
The piece, which he did not consider to be art, involved a motor to spin pieces of rectangular glass on which were painted segments of a circle.
It shows elements of both the fragmentation and synthesis of the Cubists, and the movement and dynamism of the Futurists.
He credited the drama with having radically changed his approach to art, and having inspired him to begin the creation of his ''The Bride Stripped Bare By Her Bachelors, Even'', also known as ''The Large Glass''.
Around midnight, the visitors witnessed the dancing shimmer of a scantily dressed girl who suddenly arose from the reeds, jumped on a bed, shrieked hysterically, then disappeared just as quickly.
Duchamp's early art works align with Post-Impressionist styles.
Duchamp painted few canvases after 1912, and in those he did, he attempted to remove "painterly" effects, and instead to use a technical drawing approach.
He studied art at the Académie Julian from 1904 to 1905, but preferred playing billiards to attending classes.
First, there's the idea of the movement of the train, and then that of the sad young man who is in a corridor and who is moving about; thus there are two parallel movements corresponding to each other.
It was really a turning point in my life, I can assure you.
Much to the surrealists' satisfaction, the exhibition scandalized many of the guests.
Between 1946 and 1951 Maria Martins was his mistress.
Outside of these relations there is no knowable reality",Poincaré wrote in 1902.
Duchamp's friend Francis Picabia connected with the Dada group in Zürich, bringing to New York the Dadaist ideas of absurdity and "anti-art".
Even in his death, Duchamp retained a sense of humor (a means for him of reaffirming his freedom, while undermining absolutes and certainties).
Thus, being able to finance the trip, Duchamp decided to emigrate to the United States in 1915.
I have come to the personal conclusion that while all artists are not chess players, all chess players are artists."
When it spins, the circles appear to move backwards and forwards in space.
This treatise describes the Lasker-Reichhelm position, an extremely rare type of position that can arise in the endgame.
He had a printer produce 500 sets of six of the designs, and set up a booth at a 1935 Paris inventors' show to sell them.
Yet Duchamp did appear in the illustrations to ''Du "Cubisme"'', he participated in the ''La Maison Cubiste (Cubist House)'', organized by the designer André Mare for the Salon d'Automne of 1912 (a few months after the Indépendants); he signed the Section d'Or invitation and participated in the Section d'Or exhibition during the fall of 1912.
The ''Coffee Mill'' shows similarity to the "grinder" mechanism of the ''Large Glass'' he was to create years later.
It cannot be commercialized.
It was a formal decomposition; that is, linear elements following each other like parallels and distorting the object.
During this period Duchamp's fascination with transition, change, movement and distance became manifest, and like many artists of the time, he was intrigued with the concept of depicting the fourth dimension in art.
Duchamp produced relatively few artworks, while remaining mostly aloof of the avant-garde circles of his time.
Duchamp was an atheist.
Through the 1920s Man Ray and Duchamp collaborated on more photos of Sélavy.
Tell me, can you do that?".
Duchamp made a secret arrangement with an associate's son to bring young friends to the opening of the show.
In lieu of rent, they agreed that his payment would be ''The Large Glass''.
Of Duchamp's pieces in the show, critic Guillaume Apollinaire—who was to become a friend—criticized what he called "Duchamp's very ugly nudes".
Duchamp is seen, briefly, playing chess with Man Ray in the short film ''Entr'acte'' (1924) by René Clair.
By this time Walter Pach, one of the coordinators of the 1913 Armory Show, sought Duchamp's advice on modern art.
These pieces predate John Cage's Music of Changes (1951), which is often considered the first modern piece to be conceived largely through random procedures.
Music was produced by a series of photoelectric cells underneath the chessboard, triggered sporadically by normal game play.
In 1954, he and Alexina "Teeny" Sattler married, and they remained together until his death.
A quotation erroneously attributed to Duchamp suggests a negative attitude toward later trends in 20th-century art:
By World War I, he had rejected the work of many of his fellow artists (like Henri Matisse) as "retinal" art, intended only to please the eye.
Duchamp's brothers did approach him with Gleizes' request, but Duchamp quietly refused.
In 1966 the Tate Gallery hosted a large exhibit of his work.
Meanwhile, ''Nude Descending a Staircase No.
This international movement was begun by a group of artists and poets associated with the Cabaret Voltaire in Zurich.
''Erratum Musical'', written for three voices, was published in 1934.
However, the show committee insisted that ''Fountain'' was not art, and rejected it from the show.
In order to concentrate on the work free from material obligations, Duchamp found work as a librarian while living in France.
2'' had scandalized Americans at the Armory Show, and helped secure the sale of all four of his paintings in the exhibition.
The Illuminating Gas"), it is a tableau, visible only through a peep hole in a wooden door.
It has also been read as ''arroser la vie'' ("to make a toast to life").
He studied math and physics – areas in which exciting new discoveries were taking place.
The painting depicts the mechanistic motion of a nude, with superimposed facets, similar to motion pictures.
After immigrating to the United States in 1915, he commenced his work on the piece financed by the support of the Arensbergs.
''Prelude to a Broken Arm'' (1915), a snow shovel, also called ''In Advance of the Broken Arm'', followed soon after.
The problem was included in the announcement for Julian Levi's gallery exhibition ''Through the Big End of the Opera Glass'', printed on translucent paper with the faint inscription: "White to play and win".
He carved his own chess set from wood with help from a local craftsman who made the knights.
When questioned, the children were told to say "Mr. Duchamp told us we could play here".
Towards the end of 1912, he traveled with Picabia, Apollinaire and Gabrielle Buffet-Picabia through the Jura mountains, an adventure that Buffet-Picabia described as one of their "forays of demoralization, which were also forays of witticism and clownery ... the disintegration of the concept of art".
Later, in Alexander Calder's studio in 1931, while looking at the sculptor's kinetic works, Duchamp suggested that these should be called "mobiles".
He moved to Paris in 1919, and then back to the United States in 1920.
Duchamp later used the name as the byline on written material and signed several creations with it.
For the next 8 years, he was locked into an educational regime which focused on intellectual development.
He varnished them into place on the blue-black canvas strips and attached them to glass.
When he was later asked about what had influenced him at the time, Duchamp cited the work of Symbolist painter Odilon Redon, whose approach to art was not outwardly anti-academic, but quietly individual.
The torso of the nude figure is based on Duchamp's lover, the Brazilian sculptor Maria Martins, with whom he had an affair from 1946 to 1951.
But I went immediately to the show and took my painting home in a taxi.
He challenged conventional thought about artistic processes and rejected the emerging art market, through subversive anti-art.
Three small leather signs with the title printed in gold were glued to each of the "stoppage" backgrounds.
In 1968, Duchamp played an artistically important chess match with avant-garde composer John Cage, at a concert entitled "Reunion".
These included at least one sculpture, ''Why Not Sneeze Rrose Sélavy?''
He also won a prize for drawing in 1903, and at his commencement in 1904 he won a coveted first prize, validating his recent decision to become an artist.
To make one of his favorite pieces, ''3 Standard Stoppages'' (''3 stoppages étalon''), he dropped three 1-meter lengths of thread onto prepared canvases, one at a time, from a height of 1 meter.
Together with Man Ray, Duchamp contributed his ideas and humor to the New York activities, many of which ran concurrent with the development of his Readymades and 'The Large Glass.'
Work on ''The Large Glass'' continued into 1913, with his invention of inventing a repertoire of forms.
His painting ''Sad Young Man on a Train'' embodies this concern:
Duchamp repaired it, but left the cracks in the glass intact, accepting the chance element as a part of the piece.
To this day, sculptures of this type are called "mobiles".
However, the idea of ''Readymades'' did not fully develop until 1915.
Going home from its first public exhibition, the glass broke in its shipping crate and received a large crack in the glass.
''Surrealist Street'' filled one side of the lobby with mannequins dressed by various surrealists.
Works from this period included his first "machine" painting, ''Coffee Mill (Moulin à café)'' (1911), which he gave to his brother Raymond Duchamp-Villon.
Later Peggy Guggenheim, Museum of Modern Art directors Alfred Barr and James Johnson Sweeney consulted with Duchamp on their modern art collections and shows.
This time the optical element was a globe cut in half, with black concentric circles painted on it.
In 1942, for the ''First Papers of Surrealism'' show in New York, surrealists called on Duchamp to design the exhibition.
Brâncuși later sculpted bird forms, which U.S. Customs officials mistook for aviation parts and for which they attempted to collect import duties.
The origin of the name Dada is unclear; some believe that it is a nonsensical word.
Parts of this family exhibition were later shown again at the Musée National d'Art Moderne in Paris.
At the exhibition's entrance he placed Salvador Dalí's ''Rainy Taxi'', a work consisting of a taxicab rigged to produce a drizzle of water down the inside of its windows, with a shark-headed creature in the driver's seat, and a blond mannequin covered with live snails in the back.
The threads landed in three random undulating positions.
When spinning, the flat disks appeared three-dimensional.
He experimented with classical techniques and subjects.
Dada activities included public gatherings, demonstrations, and publication of art/literary journals; passionate coverage of art, politics, and culture were topics often discussed in a variety of media.
That summer he also painted landscapes in an Impressionist style using oils.
'', a phonetic game which, when read out loud in French quickly sounds like ''"Elle a chaud au cul"''.
The lines follow each other in parallels, while changing subtly to form the movement, or the form of the young man in question.
In 1911, at Jacques' home in Puteaux, the brothers hosted a regular discussion group with Cubist artists including Picabia, Robert Delaunay, Fernand Léger, Roger de La Fresnaye, Albert Gleizes, Jean Metzinger, Juan Gris, and Alexander Archipenko.
He was a co-founder of the international literary group Oulipo in 1960.
A group met almost nightly at the Arensberg home, or caroused in Greenwich Village.
Man Ray set up equipment to photograph the initial experiment, but when they turned the machine on for the second time, a belt broke, and caught a piece of the glass, which after glancing off Man Ray's head, shattered into bits.
When the apparatus spins, an optical illusion occurs, in which the segments appear to be closed concentric circles.
Instead, Duchamp wanted to put art back in the service of the mind.
Uninterested in the Cubists' seriousness or in their focus on visual matters, Duchamp did not join in discussions of Cubist theory, and gained a reputation of being shy.
To make the optical "play toys", he painted designs on flat cardboard circles and spun them on a phonographic turntable.
In 1913, Duchamp installed a ''Bicycle Wheel'' in his studio.
Early in January 1928, Duchamp said that he could no longer bear the responsibility and confinement of marriage, and soon thereafter they were divorced.
