This exposure brought recognition, and a number of wealthy collectors began buying his art.
In 1964 he repainted the ceiling of the Paris Opera using  of canvas.
By 1926 he had his first exhibition in the United States at the Reinhardt gallery of New York which included about 100 works, although he did not travel to the opening.
In 1906, he moved to St. Petersburg which was then the capital of Russia and the center of the country's artistic life with its famous art schools.
In 1967 the UN commemorated this artwork with a postage stamp and souvenir sheet.
Chagall stayed in St. Petersburg until 1910, often visiting Vitebsk where he met Bella Rosenfeld.
Maybe the boy is "crazy", but "crazy" for the sake of art.
The Vichy collaborationist government, directed by Marshal Philippe Pétain, immediately upon assuming power established a commission to "redefine French citizenship" with the aim of stripping "undesirables", including naturalized citizens, of their French nationality.
In those books, notes Leymarie, "The dying Moses repeated Jacob's solemn act and, in a somewhat different order, also blessed the twelve tribes of Israel who were about to enter the land of Canaan...
In 1967 he dedicated a stained-glass window to John D. Rockefeller in the Union Church of Pocantico Hills, New York.
His technique of using theatrical color in this way reached its peak when Chagall returned to Paris and designed the sets for Ravel's ''Daphnis and Chloë'' in 1958.
Since Jews were not permitted into the city without an internal passport, he managed to get a temporary passport from a friend.
In 1973 Israel released a 12-stamp set with images of the stained-glass windows that he created for the Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center Synagogue; each window was made to signify one of the "Twelve Tribes of Israel".
According to Cogniat, "He found he was even more deeply attached than before, not only to the atmosphere of Paris, but to the city itself, to its houses and its views."
Becoming a successful artist now became a goal and inspiration.
He soon began copying images from books and found the experience so rewarding he then decided he wanted to become an artist.
Art critic Edwin Denby wrote of the opening for the ''New York Herald Tribune'' that Chagall's work:
Leymarie has described these drawings by Chagall as "monumental" and,
He would spend his free hours visiting galleries and salons, especially the Louvre; artists he came to admire included Rembrandt, the Le Nain brothers, Chardin, van Gogh, Renoir, Pissarro, Matisse, Gauguin, Courbet, Millet, Manet, Monet, Delacroix, and others.
Chagall summed up his years living in America:
The windows at Tudeley were commissioned by Sir Henry and Lady Rosemary d'Avigdor-Goldsmid as a memorial tribute to their daughter Sarah, who died in 1963 aged 21 in a sailing accident off Rye.
Marc Chagall was born '''Moishe Segal''' in a Lithuanian Jewish family in Liozna, near the city of Vitebsk (Belarus, then part of the Russian Empire) in 1887.
Chagall biographer Franz Meyer, explains that with the connections between his art and early life "the hassidic spirit is still the basis and source of nourishment for his art."
French philosopher Gaston Bachelard commented that "Chagall reads the Bible and suddenly the passages become light."
In Chagall's speech to the audience he explained the meaning of the work:
*The family home on Pokrovskaya Street, Vitebsk, is now the Marc Chagall Museum.
According to Lewis, "The euphoric paintings of this time, which show the young couple floating balloon-like over Vitebsk—its wooden buildings faceted in the Delaunay manner—are the most lighthearted of his career".
They sculpt and animate the volume of the shapes... they indulge in flights of fancy and invention which add new perspectives and graduated, blended tones... His colors do not even attempt to imitate nature but rather to suggest movements, planes and rhythms."
André Breton said that "with him alone, the metaphor made its triumphant return to modern painting".
On the north side of Chichester Cathedral there is a stained glass window designed and created by Chagall at the age of 90.
He adds, "The colors are a living, integral part of the picture and are never passively flat, or banal like an afterthought.
The window was unveiled by the Duchess of Kent in 1978.
The window is about  wide and  high and contains symbols of peace and love along with musical symbols.
He again showed his art at a Moscow exhibition of avant-garde artists.
It was set to begin operation in early 1921 with a number of plays by Sholem Aleichem.
According to Jacob Baal-Teshuva, "he was impressed by the pioneering spirit of the people in the kibbutzim and deeply moved by the Wailing Wall and the other holy places".
Yet throughout these phases of his style "he remained most emphatically a Jewish artist, whose work was one long dreamy reverie of life in his native village of Vitebsk."
*The Marc Chagall Yufuin Kinrin-ko Museum in Yufuin, Kyushu, Japan, holds about 40–50 of his works.
One critic at the time called it "Hebrew jazz in paint".
Chagall then devoted the next two years to the task, and upon completion in 1961 the windows were exhibited in Paris and then the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
By 1907, he had begun painting naturalistic self-portraits and landscapes.
*In 1967, the Louvre in Paris exhibited 17 large-scale paintings and 38 gouaches, under the title of "Message Biblique", which he donated to the nation of France on condition that a museum was to be built for them in Nice.
He also designed the sets and costumes for a new production of ''Die Zauberflöte'' for the company which opened in February 1967 and was used through the 1981/1982 season.
"My homeland exists only in my soul", he once said.
He made repeated trips to the countryside, taking his sketchbook.
Between 1931 and 1934 he worked "obsessively" on "The Bible", even going to Amsterdam in order to carefully study the biblical paintings of Rembrandt and El Greco, to see the extremes of religious painting.
After prodding by their daughter Ida, who "perceived the need to act fast", and with help from Alfred Barr of the New York Museum of Modern Art, Chagall was saved by having his name added to the list of prominent artists whose lives were at risk and who the United States should try to extricate.
He continued painting Jewish motifs and subjects from his memories of Vitebsk, although he included Parisian scenes—- the Eiffel Tower in particular, along with portraits.
The window, his last commissioned work, was inspired by Psalm 150; 'Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord' at the suggestion of Dean Walter Hussey.
In St. Petersburg, he was reunited with two of his sisters, whom he had not seen for more than 50 years.
"Unanimously, the press declared Chagall's new work to be a great contribution to French culture."
One of those was his choice of subjects and the way they were portrayed.
After spending the years between 1921 and 1922 living in primitive conditions, he decided to go back to France so that he could develop his art in a more comfortable country.
In Russia at that time, Jewish children were not allowed to attend regular Russian schools or universities.
;Current exhibitions and permanent displays
*In 2007, an exhibition of his work titled "Chagall of Miracles", was held at Il Complesso del Vittoriano in Rome, Italy.
After Germany invaded and occupied France, the Chagalls naively remained in Vichy France, unaware that French Jews, with the help of the Vichy government, were being collected and sent to German concentration camps, from which few would return.
He would have died without Jewish rites, had not a Jewish stranger stepped forward and said the kaddish, the Jewish prayer for the dead, over his coffin.
World War I, which ended in 1918, had displaced nearly a million Jews and destroyed what remained of the provincial shtetl culture that had defined life for most Eastern European Jews for centuries.
He also began working in larger-scale formats, producing large murals, stained glass windows, mosaics and tapestries.
Baal-Teshuva writes that "the illustrations were stunning and met with great acclaim.
He left France in May 1941, "when it was almost too late", adds Lewis.
He never attempted to present pure reality but always created his atmospheres through fantasy.
At the time of his birth, Vitebsk's population was about 66,000, with half the population being Jewish.
His paintings would later sell for very great prices.
Centuries earlier Mainz had been "the capital of European Jewry", and contained the largest Jewish community in Europe, notes historian John Man.
The countries which issued the stamps included Antigua & Barbuda, Dominica, The Gambia, Ghana, Sierra Leone and Grenada, which together produced 48 stamps and 10 souvenir sheets.
According to Picasso's mistress, Françoise Gilot, Picasso still had a great deal of respect for Chagall, and once told her,
Chagall was friends with Sholom Dovber Schneersohn, and later with Menachem M. Schneerson.
As an adult, he was not a practicing Jew, but through his paintings and stained glass, he continually tried to suggest a more "universal message", using both Jewish and Christian themes.
However, Vollard died that same year.
A picturesque city of churches and synagogues, it was called "Russian Toledo", after a cosmopolitan city of the former Spanish Empire.
As a result, Chagall played an important role in Russian artistic life during that time and "was one of the most important forces in the current urge towards anti-realism" which helped the new Russia invent "astonishing" creations.
However, "night after night he painted until dawn", only then going to bed for a few hours, and resisted the many temptations of the big city at night.
Chagall would become one of many Jewish émigrés who later became noted artists, all of them similarly having once been part of "Russia's most numerous and creative minorities", notes Goodman.
He explains that his chosen themes were usually derived from biblical stories, and frequently portrayed the "obedience and suffering of God's chosen people."
After a while he began to settle in New York, which was full of writers, painters, and composers who, like himself, had fled from Europe during the Nazi invasions.
Chagall took 40 canvases and 160 gouaches, watercolors and drawings to be exhibited.
Beginning during 1937 about twenty thousand works from German museums were confiscated as "degenerate" by a committee directed by Joseph Goebbels.
But Sweeney notes that others often still associate his work with "illogical and fantastic painting", especially when he uses "curious representational juxtapositions".
At the opening of The Chagall Museum in Nice he said 'My painting represents not the dream of one people but of all humanity'.
Although the German press had once "swooned over him", the new German authorities now made a mockery of Chagall's art, describing them as "green, purple, and red Jews shooting out of the earth, fiddling on violins, flying through the air ... representing an assault on Western civilization".
By then he was one of the Russia's most distinguished artists and a member of the modernist avant-garde, which enjoyed special privileges and prestige as the "aesthetic arm of the revolution".
"Shock waves crossed the Atlantic... as Paris had until then been equated with civilization throughout the non-Nazi world."
Chagall designed three tapestries for the state hall of the Knesset in Israel, along with 12 floor mosaics and a wall mosaic.
The images Chagall painted on the canvas paid tribute to the composers Mozart, Wagner, Mussorgsky, Berlioz and Ravel, as well as to famous actors and dancers.
It was not until 1956, when he was nearly 70 years of age, that he designed windows for the church at Assy, his first major project.
After the new ceiling was unveiled, "even the bitterest opponents of the commission seemed to fall silent", writes Baal-Teshuva.
It had five sections which were glued to polyester panels and hoisted up to the  ceiling.
However, after a few weeks, the First World War began, closing the Russian border for an indefinite period.
He was also at pains to distance his work from a single Jewish focus.
During his earlier years his range was limited by his emphasis on form and his pictures never gave the impression of painted drawings.
According to Cogniat, there are certain elements in his art that have remained permanent and seen throughout his career.
Art critic Robert Hughes referred to Chagall as "the quintessential Jewish artist of the twentieth century" (though Chagall saw his work as "not the dream of one people but of all humanity").
A chance post-war meeting in a French café between Ida and intelligence analyst Konrad Kellen led to Kellen carrying more paintings on his return to the United States.
Each of the twelve windows is approximately ll feet high and  wide, much larger than anything he had done before.
Why did I leave you many years ago?
Walther and Metzger try to summarize Chagall's contribution to art:
In 1963 France issued a stamp of his painting, ''The Married Couple of the Eiffel Tower''.
Where did he get it?
His first days were a hardship for the 23-year-old Chagall, who was lonely in the big city and unable to speak French.
Art historian Raymond Cogniat writes that after living and studying art on his own for four years, "Chagall entered into the mainstream of contemporary art.
Years later, at the age of 57 while living in the United States, Chagall confirmed this when he published an open letter entitled, "To My City Vitebsk":
In 1954, he was engaged as set decorator for Robert Helpmann's production of Rimsky-Korsakov's opera ''Le Coq d'Or'' at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, but he withdrew.
Without a moment's hesitation, my courageous mother walks up to a professor."
He spent time visiting galleries and museums, and befriended other artists including Piet Mondrian and André Breton.
He went back for good during the autumn of 1947, where he attended the opening of the exhibition of his works at the Musée National d'Art Moderne.
By 1946, his artwork was becoming more widely recognized.
Religion historian James H. Charlesworth notes that it is "surprising how Christian symbols are featured in the works of an artist who comes from a strict and Orthodox Jewish background."
He managed to blend the real with the fantastic, and combined with his use of color the pictures were always at least acceptable if not powerful.
According to Baal-Teshuva, when the final bar of music ended, "there was a tumultuous applause and 19 curtain calls, with Chagall himself being called back onto the stage again and again."
Chagall was one of over 2,000 who were rescued by this operation.
They had a child together, David McNeil, born 22 June 1946.
It was in Paris that he learned the technique of gouache, which he used to paint Belarusian scenes.
Each frame depicts a different tribe.
During the closing ceremony of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, a Chagall-like float with clouds and dancers passed by upside down hovering above 130 costumed dancers, 40 stilt-walkers and a violinist playing folk music.
For decades, he "had also been respected as the world's preeminent Jewish artist".
He even considered the possibility that their "exile from Europe had sapped her will to live."
*In 2003, a major retrospective of Chagall's career was organized by the Réunion des Musées Nationaux, Paris, in conjunction with the Musée National Message Biblique Marc Chagall, Nice, and the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.
In 1963, Chagall was commissioned to paint the new ceiling for the Paris Opera (Palais Garnier), a majestic 19th-century building and national monument.
Chagall's early life left him with a "powerful visual memory and a pictorial intelligence", writes Goodman.
The windows symbolize the twelve tribes of Israel who were blessed by Jacob and Moses in the verses which conclude Genesis and Deuteronomy.
He became a celebrity mostly against his will, feeling lost in the strange surroundings.
These notions were alien to Paris at that time, and as a result, his first recognition came not from other painters but from poets such as Blaise Cendrars and Guillaume Apollinaire.
*The Museum of Biblical Art in Dallas, Texas currently hosts many of his works as well.
But it was the images and memories of his early years in Belarus that would sustain his art for more than 70 years.
Many of his designs were done for the Jewish Theatre in Moscow which put on numerous Jewish plays by playwrights such as Gogol and Singe.
He walked the streets of the city's Jewish quarter to again feel the earlier atmosphere.
Famine spread after the war ended in 1918.
The final canvas was nearly 2,400 square feet (220 sq.
In Paris, he enrolled at Académie de La Palette, an avant-garde school of art where the painters Jean Metzinger, André Dunoyer de Segonzac and Henri Le Fauconnier taught, and also found work at another academy.
Chagall therefore received his primary education at the local Jewish religious school, where he studied Hebrew and the Bible.
Chagall created it as a "storehouse of symbols and devices", notes Lewis.
Chagall also designed tapestries which were woven under the direction of Yvette Cauquil-Prince, who also collaborated with Picasso.
After leaving Russia, twenty years passed before he was again offered a chance to design theatre sets.
The exhibition was called "Hommage a Marc Chagall", was opened by the French President and "proved an enormous success with the public and critics alike."
In 1978 he began creating windows for St. Stephan's church in Mainz, Germany.
He experienced modernism's "golden age" in Paris, where "he synthesized the art forms of Cubism, Symbolism, and Fauvism, and the influence of Fauvism gave rise to Surrealism".
The pieces, ''The Sources of Music'' and ''The Triumph of Music'', which hang from the top-most balcony level and extend down to the Grand Tier lobby level, were completed in France and shipped to New York, and are covered by a system of panels during the hours in which the opera house receives direct sunlight to prevent fading.
He also began illustrating a number of Yiddish books with ink drawings.
He enrolled in a prestigious art school and studied there for two years.
During this period he created his own mixture and style of modern art based on his idea of Eastern European Jewish folk culture.
Due to Chagall's youth and lack of income, Pen offered to teach him free of charge.
In ''My Life'', Chagall described his first meeting her: "Her silence is mine, her eyes mine.
Art historian and curator James Sweeney notes that when Chagall first arrived in Paris, Cubism was the dominant art form, and French art was still dominated by the "materialistic outlook of the 19th century".
Their only refuge could be America, but "they could not afford the passage to New York" or the large bond that each immigrant had to provide upon entry to ensure that they would not become a financial burden to the country.
Some magazines wrote condescending articles about Chagall and Malraux, about which Chagall commented to one writer:
I don't know why he couldn't find it with us, in the city—in his homeland.
Baal-Teshuva writes that "Chagall's dream of Paris, the city of light and above all, of freedom, had come true."
While Chagall had done stage settings before while in Russia, this was his first ballet, and it would give him the opportunity to visit Mexico.
Many other well-known Russian and Jewish artists eventually sought to escape: these included Chaim Soutine, Max Ernst, Max Beckmann, Ludwig Fulda, author Victor Serge and prize-winning author Vladimir Nabokov, who although not Jewish himself, was married to a Jewish woman.
In 1948, after returning to France from the U.S. after the war, he saw for himself the destruction that the war had brought to Europe and the Jewish populations.
Nonetheless, after returning to Paris he again "rediscovered the free expansion and fulfillment which were so essential to him", writes Lewis.
On his way he stopped in Berlin to recover the many pictures he had left there on exhibit ten years earlier, before the war began, but was unable to find or recover any of them.
Chagall would later say that there was no art of any kind in his family's home and the concept was totally alien to him.
Chagall scholar Susan Tumarkin Goodman describes the links and sources of his art to his early home:
He has unveiled possibilities unsuspected by an art that had lost touch with the Bible, and in doing so he has achieved a wholly new synthesis of Jewish culture long ignored by painting."
The family name, Shagal, is a variant of the name Segal, which in a Jewish community was usually borne by a Levitic family.
Chagall began learning about ceramics and sculpture while living in south France.
He corresponded with Chagall during 1973, and succeeded in persuading the "master of colour and the biblical message" to create a sign for Jewish-Christian attachment and international understanding.
His relationship with his Jewish identity was "unresolved and tragic", Davies states.
Chagall later told a friend that Palestine gave him "the most vivid impression he had ever received".
In a talk that Chagall gave in 1963 while visiting America, he discussed some of those impressions.
However, he was never satisfied with the limits imposed by the square tile segments which Cogniat notes "imposed on him a discipline which prevented the creation of a plastic image."
He was offered a commission by choreographer Leonid Massine, of the New York Ballet Theatre to design the sets and costumes for his new ballet, ''Aleko.''
On 2 September 1944, Bella died suddenly due to a virus infection, which was not treated due to the wartime shortage of medicine.
One of the main murals was  tall by  long and included images of various lively subjects such as dancers, fiddlers, acrobats, and farm animals.
She left Vava and Marc Chagall's home at 4 pm on 28 March after discussing and matching the final colors from the maquette painting for the tapestry.
I will do them all!")
According to Baal-Teshuva, "they had little in common with a folkloristic storyteller of Russo-Jewish extraction with a propensity for mysticism."
Cogniat writes, "Chagall is unrivalled in this ability to give a vivid impression of explosive movement with the simplest use of colors..." Throughout his life his colors created a "vibrant atmosphere" which was based on "his own personal vision."
Nonetheless, Chagall continued the project which took the 77-year-old artist a year to complete.
Chagall's collaborator Charles Marq complemented Chagall's work by adding several stained glass windows using the typical colours of Chagall.
Because he missed his fiancée, Bella, who was still in Vitebsk—"He thought about her day and night", writes Baal-Teshuva—and was afraid of losing her, Chagall decided to accept an invitation from a noted art dealer in Berlin to exhibit his work, his intention being to continue on to Belarus, marry Bella, and then return with her to Paris.
It was presented to the public on 23 September 1964 in the presence of Malraux and 2,100 invited guests.
She became his secretary, and after a few months agreed to stay only if Chagall married her.
*Picasso, Matisse, Chagall, featuring pieces from Chagall's Bible series and more is on display now at the Sangre de Cristo Arts Center in Pueblo, Colorado.
In the years between, his paintings still included harlequins, clowns and acrobats, which Cogniat notes "convey his sentimental attachment to and nostalgia for the theatre".
He adds that although Chagall's art cannot be confined to religion, his "most moving and original contributions, what he called 'his message,' are those drawn from religious or, more precisely, Biblical sources."
Goodman notes, "The fading of traditional Jewish society left artists like Chagall with powerful memories that could no longer be fed by a tangible reality.
Russian author Victor Serge described many of the people living temporarily in Marseille who were waiting to emigrate to America:
*Twelve stained-glass windows are part of Hadassah Hospital Ein Kerem in Jerusalem, Israel.
The Paris School, which was referred to as 'Parisian Surrealism,' meant little to them.
meters) and required  of paint.
In 1923, Chagall left Moscow to return to France.
After Chagall returned to New York in 1943, however, current events began to interest him more, and this was represented by his art, where he painted subjects including the Crucifixion and scenes of war.
However, this choice of artist caused controversy: some objected to having a Russian Jew decorate a French national monument; others disliked the ceiling of the historic building being painted by a modern artist.
In 1945 he was also commissioned to design the sets and costumes for Stravinsky's ''Firebird''.
In 1978, at the age of 91, Chagall created the first window and eight more followed.
Before World War I, he traveled between St. Petersburg, Paris, and Berlin.
Chagall then resigned as commissar and moved to Moscow.
In April 1952, Virginia Haggard left Chagall for the photographer Charles Leirens; she went on to become a professional photographer herself.
But Wullschlager notes that "by then they were trapped".
He presents for our study places, people, and objects from his own life".
Also in New York, the United Nations Headquarters has a stained glass wall of his work.
Leymarie describes the physical and spiritual significance of the windows:
Art historian Jean Leymarie observes that Chagall began thinking of art as "emerging from the internal being outward, from the seen object to the psychic outpouring", which was the reverse of the Cubist way of creating.
There were also several major exhibitions of Chagall's work during his lifetime and following his death.
Sweeney adds that "if you ask Chagall to explain his paintings, he would reply, 'I don't understand them at all.
The marriage took place in July 1952—though six years later, when there was conflict between Ida and Vava, "Marc and Vava divorced and immediately remarried under an agreement more favourable to Vava" (Jean-Paul Crespelle, author of ''Chagall, l'Amour le Reve et la Vie'', quoted in ''Haggard: My Life with Chagall'').
