The clinic was directed by a 15-member advisory board consisting of black doctors, nurses, clergy, journalists, and social workers.
Birth Control Federation of America , The Margaret Sanger Papers Project
Afterward, "Sadie"  begged the attending doctor to tell her how she could prevent this from happening again, to which the doctor simply advised her to remain abstinent.
Her subsequent trial and appeal generated controversy.
Early in 1915, Margaret Sanger's estranged husband, William Sanger, gave a copy of ''Family Limitation'' to a representative of anti-vice politician Anthony Comstock.
Sanger's political interests, emerging feminism and nursing experience led her to write two series of columns on sex education entitled "What Every Mother Should Know" (1911–12) and "What Every Girl Should Know" (1912–13) for the socialist magazine ''New York Call.''
Nine days after the clinic opened, Sanger was arrested.
Between 1920 and 1926, 567,000 copies of ''Woman and the New Race'' and ''The Pivot of Civilization'' were sold.
Sanger, who has been criticized for supporting negative eugenics, remains an admired figure in the American reproductive rights movement.
This court victory motivated the American Medical Association in 1937 to adopt contraception as a normal medical service and a key component of medical school curriculums.
Sanger's eugenic policies included an exclusionary immigration policy, free access to birth control methods, and full family planning autonomy for the able-minded, as well as compulsory segregation or sterilization for the "profoundly retarded".
Sanger felt that in order for women to have a more equal footing in society and to lead healthier lives, they needed to be able to determine when to bear children.
Sanger visited Japan six times, working with Japanese feminist Kato Shidzue to promote birth control.
Sanger is buried in Fishkill, New York, next to her sister, Nan Higgins, and her second husband, Noah Slee.
From 1939 to 1942 Sanger was an honorary delegate of the Birth Control Federation of America, which included a supervisory role—alongside Mary Lasker and Clarence Gamble—in the Negro Project, an effort to deliver birth control to poor black people.
She believed that exercising such control would lead to the "strongest and most sacred passion.
Numerous times in her career, local government officials prevented Sanger from speaking by shuttering a facility or threatening her hosts.
Margaret Sanger's "Deeds of Terrible Virtue" ''Humanities'', National Endowment for the Humanities, September/October 1998, Vol.
Given the connection between contraception and working-class empowerment, Sanger came to believe that only by liberating women from the risk of unwanted pregnancy would fundamental social change take place.
She also recommended that immigration exclude those "whose condition is known to be detrimental to the stamina of the race," and that sterilization and segregation be applied to those with incurable, hereditary disabilities.
In New York, Emma Goldman introduced Sanger to members of the Free Speech League, such as Edward Bliss Foote and Theodore Schroeder, and subsequently the League provided funding and advice to help Sanger with legal battles.
"Engelman cites facsimile edited by Alex Baskin, ''Woman Rebel'', New York: Archives of Social History, 1976.
Sanger was also an inspiration for Wonder Woman, a comic book character introduced by William Marston in 1941.
19/Number 5. and proclaimed that each woman should be "the absolute mistress of her own body.
While researching information on contraception, Sanger read treatises on sexuality including ''The Psychology of Sex'' by the English psychologist Havelock Ellis and was heavily influenced by it.
Du Bois, civil rights legend and author of ''The Souls Of Black Folk'', co-founder of the NAACP and editor of  its magazine, ''Crisis,'' whom Martin Luther King Jr. would eulogize as "unsurpassed as an intellect.
In 1957, the American Humanist Association named her Humanist of the Year.
She was afraid of what would happen, so she fled to Britain until she knew it was safe to return to the US.
40–48; reprinted in ''The Selected Papers of Margaret Sanger, Volume 1'', pp.
Although Sanger continued in the role of president, she no longer wielded the same power as she had in the early years of the movement, and in 1942, more conservative forces within the organization changed the name to Planned Parenthood Federation of America, a name Sanger objected to because she considered it too euphemistic.
Due to her connection with Planned Parenthood Sanger is a frequent target of criticism by opponents of abortion.
Sanger did not tolerate bigotry among her staff, nor would she tolerate any refusal to work within interracial projects.See also p. 45, ''The selected papers of Margaret Sanger, Volume 1'' Sanger's work with minorities earned praise from Martin Luther King, Jr., in his 1966 acceptance speech for the Margaret Sanger award.
Sanger secured funding from the Julius Rosenwald Fund and opened the clinic, staffed with black doctors, in 1930.
During the 1920s, Sanger received hundreds of thousands of letters, many of them written in desperation by women begging for information on how to prevent unwanted pregnancies.
The artwork ''The Dinner Party'' features a place setting for Sanger.
Sanger's talk was well received by the group, and as a result, "a dozen invitations to similar groups were proffered."
During the early years of her activism, Sanger viewed birth control primarily as a free-speech issue, rather than as a feminist issue, and when she started publishing ''The Woman Rebel'' in 1914, she did so with the express goal of provoking a legal challenge to the Comstock laws banning dissemination of information about contraception.
This 1936 contraception court victory was the culmination of Sanger's birth control efforts, and she took the opportunity, now in her late 50s, to move to Tucson, Arizona, intending to play a less critical role in the birth control movement.
She described it as "one of the weirdest experiences I had in lecturing," and added that she had to use only "the most elementary terms, as though I were trying to make children understand."
During her 1914 trip to England, she was also profoundly influenced by the liberation theories of Havelock Ellis, under whose tutelage she sought not just to make sexual intercourse safer for women, but more pleasurable.
In spite of her original intentions, she remained active in the movement through the 1950s.
According to Jill Lepore, several Wonder Women story lines were at least in part inspired by Sanger, like the character's involvement with different labor strikes and protests.
In 1937, Sanger became chairman of the newly formed Birth Control Council of America, and attempted to resolve the schism between the ABCL and the BCCRB.
Though postal authorities suppressed five of its seven issues, Sanger continued publication, all the while preparing ''Family Limitation'', another challenge to anti-birth control laws.
The CRB was the first legal birth control clinic in the United States, staffed entirely by female doctors and social workers.
Only when Sanger pledged that Byrne would never break the law, was she pardoned after ten days.
In New York City, she organized the first birth control clinic staffed by all-female doctors, as well as a clinic in Harlem with an entirely African-American staff.
In 1922, she traveled to China, Korea, and Japan.
Marston was influenced by early feminist thought while in college, and later formed a romantic relationship with Sanger's niece, Olive Byrne.
This 16-page pamphlet contained detailed and precise information and graphic descriptions of various contraceptive methods.
Sanger grew up in a home where orator Robert Ingersoll was admired.
Staffed by a black physician and a black social worker, the clinic was endorsed by ''The Amsterdam News'' (the powerful local newspaper), the Abyssinian Baptist Church, the Urban League, and the black community's elder statesman, W. E. B.
In 1930, Sanger opened a family planning clinic in Harlem that sought to enlist support for contraceptive use and to bring the benefits of family planning to women who were denied access to their city's health and social services.
In Boston in 1929, city officials under the leadership of James Curley threatened to arrest her if she spoke.
During her work among working-class immigrant women, Sanger met women who underwent frequent childbirth, miscarriages and self-induced abortions for lack of information on how to avoid unwanted pregnancy.
She died in 1966, and is widely regarded as a founder of the modern birth control movement.
On October 16, 1916 Sanger opened a family planning and birth control clinic at 46 Amboy Street in the Brownsville neighborhood of Brooklyn, the first of its kind in the United States.Baker, p. 115.
In 1929, James H. Hubert, a black social worker and leader of New York's Urban League, asked Sanger to open a clinic in Harlem.
'''Margaret Higgins Sanger''' (born '''Margaret Louise Higgins''', September 14, 1879September 6, 1966, also known as '''Margaret Sanger Slee''') was an American birth control activist, sex educator, writer, and nurse.
Sanger was a proponent of negative eugenics, which aims to improve human hereditary traits through social intervention by reducing the reproduction of those who were considered unfit.
Sanger was offered a more lenient sentence if she promised to not break the law again, but she replied: "I cannot respect the law as it exists today."
Katō, Shidzue, ''Facing Two Ways: the story of my life'', Stanford University Press, 1984, p. xxviii.
Margaret Sanger worked as a visiting nurse in the slums of the East Side, while her husband worked as an architect and a house painter.
These principles were adopted at the first meeting of the ABCL in late 1921.
Sanger continued seeing some women in the clinic until the police came a second time.
Due to her connection with Planned Parenthood, many who are opposed to abortion frequently condemn Sanger by criticizing her views on racial supremacy, birth control, and eugenics.
Supported by her two older sisters, Margaret Higgins attended Claverack College and Hudson River Institute, before enrolling in 1900 at White Plains Hospital as a nurse probationer.
These problems were epitomized in a (possibly fictional) story that Sanger would later recount in her speeches: while Sanger was working as a nurse, she was called to the apartment of a woman, "Sadie Sachs," who had become extremely ill due to a self-induced abortion.
Already imbued with her husband's leftist politics, Margaret Sanger also threw herself into the radical politics and modernist values of pre-World War I Greenwich Village bohemia.
John D. Rockefeller Jr. donated five thousand dollars to her American Birth Control League in 1924 and a second time in 1925.
She wrote several books in the 1920s which had a nationwide impact in promoting the cause of birth control.
"Sanger's quote from ''The Pivot of Civilization'', p. 100.
Byrne was convicted and sentenced to 30 days in a workhouse but went on hunger strike.
Government authorities and other institutions have memorialized Sanger by dedicating several landmarks in her name, including a residential building on the Stony Brook University campus, a room in Wellesley College's library, and Margaret Sanger Square in New York City's Noho area.
That effort failed to achieve success, so Sanger ordered a diaphragm from Japan in 1932, in order to provoke a decisive battle in the courts.
In "The Morality of Birth Control," a 1921 speech, she divided society into three groups: the "educated and informed" class that regulated the size of their families, the "intelligent and responsible" who desired to control their families in spite of lacking the means or the knowledge, and the "irresponsible and reckless people" whose religious scruples "prevent their exercising control over their numbers."
From 1952 to 1959, Sanger served as president of the International Planned Parenthood Federation.
While New York University's ''Margaret Sanger Papers Project'', argues that in writing that letter, "Sanger recognized that elements within the black community might mistakenly associate the Negro Project with racist sterilization campaigns in the Jim Crow South;" Angela Davis erroneously used the quote to support claims that Sanger intended to exterminate the black population.
Sanger believed sex should be discussed with more candor, and praised Ellis for his efforts in this direction.
The founding principles of the ABCL were as follows:''The Birth Control Review'', Vol.
In 1926, Sanger gave a lecture on birth control to the women's auxiliary of the Ku Klux Klan in Silver Lake, New Jersey.
In "A Plan for Peace", a 1932 essay, she proposed a congressional department to address population problems.
William Sanger was tried and convicted, spending thirty days in jail while attracting interest in birth control as an issue of civil liberty.
"Quotes from Sanger, "What Every Girl should know: Sexual Impulses Part II", in ''New York Call'', December 29, 1912; also in the subsequent book ''What Every Girl Should Know'', pp.
Though she was plagued by a recurring active tubercular condition, Margaret Sanger bore three children, and the couple settled down to a quiet life in Westchester, New York.
Access to contraceptive information was prohibited on grounds of obscenity by the 1873 federal Comstock law and a host of state laws.
Sanger was convicted; the trial judge held that women did not have "the right to copulate with a feeling of security that there will be no resulting conception."
In 1929, she formed the National Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth Control, which served as the focal point of her lobbying efforts to legalize contraception in the United States.
For this, she was sentenced to 30 days in a workhouse.
Her speech  "Children's Era", given in 1925, is listed as #81 in American Rhetoric's Top 100 Speeches of the 20th Century (listed by rank).
Sanger also believed that sexuality, along with birth control, should be discussed with more candor.
Sanger and Ethel went to trial in January 1917.
Sanger wanted the Negro Project to hire black ministers in leadership roles, but other supervisors did not.
Other readers, however, praised the series for its candor, one stated that the series contained "a purer morality than whole libraries full of hypocritical cant about modesty".
Sanger invested a great deal of effort communicating with the general public.
From 1916 onward, she frequently lectured (in churches, women's clubs, homes, and theaters) to workers, churchmen, liberals, socialists, scientists, and upper-class women.
Sanger also supported restrictive immigration policies.
In China she observed that the primary method of family planning was female infanticide, and she later worked with Pearl Buck to establish a family planning clinic in Shanghai.
In contrast with eugenicist William Robinson, who advocated euthanasia for the unfit, Sanger wrote, "we do not believe that the community could or should send to the lethal chamber the defective progeny resulting from irresponsible and unintelligent breeding.
In 1911, after a fire destroyed their home in Hastings-on-Hudson, the Sangers abandoned the suburbs for a new life in New York City.
Sanger was the sixth of eleven surviving children, and spent much of her youth assisting with household chores and caring for her younger siblings.
Seeking to help these women, Sanger visited public libraries, but was unable to find information on contraception.
In addition, Sanger believed the responsibility for birth control should remain in the hands of able-minded individual parents rather than the state, and that self-determining motherhood was the only unshakable foundation for racial betterment.
The affluent and educated already limited their child-bearing, while the poor and ignorant lacked access to contraception and information about birth-control.
D'Itri, Patricia Ward, ''Cross Currents in the International Women's Movement, 1848–1948'', Popular Press, 1999, pp.
"In my personal experience as a trained nurse while attending persons afflicted with various and often revolting diseases, no matter what their ailments, I never found any one so repulsive as the chronic masturbator.
In August 1914 Margaret Sanger was indicted for violating postal obscenity laws by sending the ''The Woman Rebel'' through the postal system.
"From Planned Parenthood: :
She worked with eminent African American leaders and professionals who saw a need for birth control in their communities.
Sanger popularized the term "birth control", opened the first birth control clinic in the United States, and established organizations that evolved into the Planned Parenthood Federation of America.
In the early 1950s, Sanger encouraged philanthropist Katharine McCormick to provide funding for biologist Gregory Pincus to develop the birth control pill which was eventually sold under the name Enovid.Marc A. Fritz, Leon Speroff, ''Clinical Gynecologic Endocrinology and Infertility'', Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010, pp.
She launched a campaign to challenge governmental censorship of contraceptive information through confrontational actions.
Men and women who have it in control and constantly use their brain cells thinking deeply, are never sensual."
She married Michael in 1869.
Sanger opposed abortion, but primarily as a societal ill and public health danger which would disappear if women were able to prevent unwanted pregnancy.
After World War I, Sanger shifted away from radical politics, and she founded the American Birth Control League (ABCL) in 1921 to enlarge her base of supporters to include the middle class.
Although Sanger supported negative eugenics, she asserted that eugenics alone was not sufficient, and that birth control was essential to achieve her goals.
Sanger used her writings and speeches primarily to promote her way of thinking.
Over the course of her career, Sanger was arrested at least eight times for expressing her views during an era in which speaking publicly about contraception was illegal.
There is also a bust of her in the National Portrait Gallery, which was a gift from Cordelia Scaife May.
She also wanted to prevent so-called back-alley abortions, which were common at the time because abortions were usually illegal.
Rather than stand trial, she fled the country.
She believed that they both sought to "assist the race toward the elimination of the unfit."
At the ''Fifth International Neo-Malthusian Conference'' in 1922, she was the first woman to chair a session.
In 1914 Sanger launched ''The Woman Rebel'', an eight-page monthly newsletter which promoted contraception using the slogan "No Gods, No Masters".
She had attempted yet another self-induced abortion.Baker, pp.
Sanger wrote that masturbation was dangerous.
Michael H. Higgins was a Catholic who became an atheist and an activist for women's suffrage and free public education.
To emphasize the benefits of hiring black community leaders to act as spokesmen, she wrote to Gamble, "We should hire three or four colored ministers, preferably with social-service backgrounds, and with engaging personalities.
The clinic received extensive funding from John D. Rockefeller Jr. and his family, which continued to make anonymous donations to Sanger's causes in future decades.—crucial, anonymous Rockefeller grants to the Clinical Research Bureau and support for population control
Sanger opposed censorship throughout her career.
Sanger said that birth control would elevate women away from a position of being an object of lust and elevate sex away from purely being for satisfying lust, saying that birth control "denies that sex should be reduced to the position of sensual lust, or that woman should permit herself to be the instrument of its satisfaction."
Her efforts were successful, and the two organizations merged in 1939 as the Birth Control Federation of America.
This time Sanger and her sister, Ethel Byrne, were arrested for breaking a New York state law that prohibited distribution of contraceptives, Sanger was also charged with running a public nuisance.
Sanger died of congestive heart failure in 1966 in Tucson, Arizona, aged 86, about a year after the U.S. Supreme Court case ''Griswold v. Connecticut'', which legalized birth control in the United States.
Sanger became estranged from her husband in 1913, and the couple's divorce was finalized in 1921.
The publicity surrounding Sanger's arrest, trial, and appeal sparked birth control activism across the United States, and earned the support of numerous donors, who would provide her with funding and support for future endeavors.
Sanger was born Margaret Louise Higgins in 1879 in Corning, New York, to Michael Hennessey Higgins, an Irish-born stonemason and free-thinker, and Anne Purcell Higgins, a Catholic Irish-American.
She joined the Women's Committee of the New York Socialist party, took part in the labor actions of the Industrial Workers of the World (including the notable 1912 Lawrence Textile Strike and the 1913 Paterson Silk Strike) and became involved with local intellectuals, left-wing artists, socialists and social activists, including John Reed, Upton Sinclair, Mabel Dodge and Emma Goldman.
Anne Higgins went through 18 pregnancies (with 11 live births) in 22 years before dying at the age of 49.
Margaret Sanger spent much of her 1914 exile in England, where contact with British neo-Malthusians helped refine her socioeconomic justifications for birth control.
Here she found an area of overlap with eugenicists.
She believed that while abortion was sometimes justified it should generally be avoided, and she considered contraception the only practical way to avoid them.
A few months later, Sanger was called back to "Sadie's" apartment — only this time, "Sadie" died shortly after Sanger arrived.
An initial appeal was rejected, but in a subsequent court proceeding in 1918, the birth control movement won a victory when Judge Frederick E. Crane of the New York Court of Appeals issued a ruling which allowed doctors to prescribe contraception.
Her parents brought the family to Canada during the Potato Famine.
In 1993, the Margaret Sanger Clinic—where she provided birth control services in New York in the mid twentieth century—was designated as a National Historic Landmark by the National Park Service.
Sanger concludes, "There is no doubt in the minds of all thinking people that the procreation of this group should be stopped."
We don’t want the word to go out that we want to exterminate the Negro population, and the minister is the man who can straighten out that idea if it ever occurs to any of their more rebellious members."
She was force-fed, the first woman hunger striker in the US to be so treated.
The diaphragm was confiscated by the United States government, and Sanger's subsequent legal challenge led to a 1936 court decision which overturned an important provision of the Comstock laws which prohibited physicians from obtaining contraceptives.
Michael Hennessey Higgins had emigrated to the USA at age 14 and joined the U.S. Army as a drummer at age 15, during the Civil War.
In response she stood on stage, silent, with a gag over her mouth, while her speech was read by Arthur M. Schlesinger, Sr.Davis, Tom, ''Sacred work: Planned Parenthood and its clergy alliances'' Rutgers University Press, 2005, p. 213 (citing ''A Tradition of Choice'', Planned Parenthood, 1991, p. 18).
She believed that women had the ability to control their sexual impulses, and should utilize that control to avoid sex outside of relationships marked by "confidence and respect."
41–5 (quotes on p. 45).
Sanger would sometimes end the story by saying, "I threw my nursing bag in the corner and announced&nbsp;... that I would never take another case until I had made it possible for working women in America to have the knowledge to control birth."
In 1922 she married her second husband, Noah Slee.
Influenced by Ellis, Sanger adopted his view of sexuality as a powerful, liberating force.
She shared their concern that over-population led to poverty, famine and war.
While traveling in Europe in 1914, Sanger met Ellis.
This was ironic, since ten years earlier Sanger had accused Katō of murder and praised an attempt to kill her.
Sanger's efforts contributed to several judicial cases that helped legalize contraception in the United States.
By the standards of the day, Sanger's articles were extremely frank in their discussion of sexuality, and many ''New York Call'' readers were outraged by them.
Five hundred of these letters were compiled into the 1928 book, ''Motherhood in Bondage.''
She also blamed Christianity for the suppression of such discussion.
Sanger was the organization's first president and served in that role until she was 80 years old.Esser-Stuart, Joan E., "Margaret Higgins Sanger", in ''Encyclopedia of Social Welfare History in North America'', Herrick, John and Stuart, Paul (eds), SAGE, 2005, p. 323.
In February 1917 Sanger began publishing the monthly periodical ''Birth Control Review''.
Sanger has been recognized with several honors.
In these early years of Sanger's activism, she viewed birth control as a free-speech issue, and when she started publishing ''The Woman Rebel'', one of her goals was to provoke a legal challenge to the federal anti-obscenity laws which banned dissemination of information about contraception.
12, December 1921, Margaret Sanger (ed.
After Sanger's appeal of her conviction for the Brownsville clinic secured a 1918 court ruling that exempted physicians from the law prohibiting the distribution of contraceptive information to women (provided it was prescribed for medical reason), she established the Clinical Research Bureau (CRB) in 1923 to exploit this loophole.
She also wrote two autobiographies designed to promote the cause.
One of her surviving brothers was College Football Hall of Fame player and  Pennsylvania State University Head Football coach Bob Higgins.
It would not be difficult to fill page upon page of heart-rending confessions made by young girls, whose lives were blighted by this pernicious habit, always begun so innocently."
After World War I, Sanger increasingly appealed to the societal need to limit births by those least able to afford children.
Sanger's bail was set at $500 and she went back home.
In 1946, Sanger helped found the International Committee on Planned Parenthood, which evolved into the International Planned Parenthood Federation in 1952, and soon became the world's largest non-governmental international women's health, family planning and birth control organization.
She was prosecuted for her book Family Limitation under the Comstock Act in 1914.
Sanger opposed excessive sexual indulgence.
They differed in that "eugenists imply or insist that a woman's first duty is to the state; we contend that her duty to herself is her duty to the state."
Over-population would remain a concern of hers for the rest of her life.
''The Selected Papers, Vol 2'', p. 54.
She organized the ''Sixth International Neo-Malthusian and Birth-Control Conference'' that took place in New York in 1925.
Both were published in book form in 1916.
However, Sanger was not opposed to homosexuality and praised Ellis for clarifying "the question of homosexuals...&nbsp;making the thing a—not exactly a perverted thing, but a thing that a person is born with different kinds of eyes, different kinds of structures and so forth...&nbsp;that he didn't make all homosexuals perverts—and I thought he helped clarify that to the medical profession and to the scientists of the world as perhaps one of the first ones to do that."
Sanger, ''Pivot of Civilization'', 2001 reprint edited by Michael W. Perry, p. 409.
In 1928, conflict within the birth control movement leadership led Sanger to resign as the president of the ABCL and take full control of the CRB, renaming it the Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau (BCCRB), marking the beginning of a schism that would last until 1938.
In 1929, Sanger formed the National Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth Control in order to lobby for legislation to overturn restrictions on contraception.
This view provided another argument in favor of birth control, as it would enable women to fully enjoy sexual relations without fear of unwanted pregnancy.Kennedy, p. 127.
She wrote that  "every normal man and woman has the power to control and direct his sexual impulse.
Anne was born in Ireland.
In 1902, she married the architect William Sanger and gave up her education.
After leaving the army, Michael studied medicine and phrenology, but ultimately became a stonecutter, making stone angels, saints, and tombstones.
In spite of such controversies, Sanger continues to be regarded as a force in the American reproductive rights movement and woman's rights movement.
Sanger, collaborating with anarchist friends, popularized the term "birth control" as a more candid alternative to euphemisms such as "family limitation"Katz, ''The selected papers of Margaret Sanger, Volume 1'', p. 70.
The first, ''My Fight for Birth Control'', was published in 1931 and the second, more promotional version, ''Margaret Sanger: An Autobiography'', was published in 1938.
Although "Sadie Sachs" was possibly a fictional composite of several women Sanger had known, this story marks the beginning of Sanger's commitment to spare women from the pursuit of dangerous and illegal abortions.
Facsimile of original.
Similarly, Sanger denounced the aggressive and lethal Nazi eugenics program.
The clinic was publicized in the African-American press and in black churches, and it received the approval of W. E. B.
