Campbell concludes that Thatcher had "an almost mystical reverence for the institution of the monarchy&nbsp;...
Thatcher's first foreign policy crisis came with the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Thatcher celebrated her 80th birthday at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel in Hyde Park, London, on 13 October 2005; guests included the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh, Princess Alexandra and Tony Blair.
She defeated Heath on the first ballot and he resigned the leadership.
She expressed concern that a united Germany would align itself more closely with the Soviet Union and move away from NATO.
He came from a Liberal family but stood – as was then customary in local government – as an Independent.
She made a series of speeches in the Lords criticising the Maastricht Treaty, describing it as "a treaty too far" and stated "I could never have signed this treaty".
She cited the help he gave Britain during the Falklands War.
The Community Charge was abolished by her successor, John Major.
After a year out on strike, in March 1985, the NUM leadership conceded without a deal.
Opinion polls had indicated that he would give the Conservatives a national lead over Labour.
She had been an advocate of Croatian and Slovenian independence.
She can't remember the beginning of a sentence by the time she reaches the end."
After collapsing at a House of Lords dinner, Thatcher was admitted to St Thomas' Hospital in central London on 7 March 2008 for tests.
She was played by Patricia Hodge in Ian Curteis's long unproduced ''The Falklands Play'' (2002) and by Andrea Riseborough in the TV film ''The Long Walk to Finchley'' (2008).
Margaret Thatcher has been depicted in many television programmes, documentaries, films and plays.
She attracted media attention as the youngest and the only female candidate.
Thatcher's preference for defence ties with the US was demonstrated in the Westland affair of January 1986, when she acted with colleagues to allow the struggling helicopter manufacturer Westland to refuse a takeover offer from the Italian firm Agusta in favour of the management's preferred option, a link with Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation.
Heath was never reconciled to Thatcher's leadership.
Thatcher defined her own political philosophy in a major and controversial break with One Nation Conservatives like her predecessor Edward Heath, in her statement to Douglas Keay, published in ''Woman's Own'' magazine in September 1987:
Shortly before her resignation, she accepted the arguments for privatising British Rail, which her successor John Major implemented in 1994.
Critics on the left describe her as "divisive" and claim she promoted greed and selfishness.
After retiring from the Commons in 1992, she was given a life peerage as Baroness Thatcher, of Kesteven in the county of Lincolnshire, which entitled her to sit in the House of Lords.
The houses were sold at a discount of 33–55 per cent, leading to large profits for some new owners.
Michael White, writing in the ''New Statesman'' in February 2009, challenged the view that her reforms had brought a net benefit.
Thatcher refused to countenance a return to political status for the prisoners, declaring "Crime is crime is crime; it is not political", but nevertheless the UK government privately contacted republican leaders in a bid to bring the hunger strikes to an end.
In October 1961 she was promoted to the front bench as Parliamentary Undersecretary at the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance in Harold Macmillan's administration.
On 31 July 2011, it was announced that her office in the House of Lords had been closed.
The new tax was introduced in Scotland in 1989 and in England and Wales the following year, and proved to be among the most unpopular policies of her premiership.
She also earned $50,000 for each speech she delivered.
In protest the Ulster Says No movement attracted 100,000 to a rally in Belfast, Ian Gow resigned as Minister of State in the HM Treasury, and all fifteen Unionist MPs resigned their parliamentary seats; only one was not returned in the subsequent by-elections on 23 January 1986.
Geoffrey Howe abolished Britain's exchange controls in 1979, allowing more capital to be invested in foreign markets, and the Big Bang of 1986 removed many restrictions on the London Stock Exchange.
Defence Secretary Michael Heseltine, who had supported the Agusta deal, resigned in protest.
The bronze statue stands opposite that of her political hero, Sir Winston Churchill, and was unveiled on 21 February 2007 with Thatcher in attendance; she made a brief speech in the members' lobby of the House of Commons, responding: "I might have preferred iron—but bronze will do&nbsp;...
In February 2007, Thatcher became the first living British prime minister to be honoured with a statue in the Houses of Parliament.
In a 1991 interview for Croatian Radiotelevision, Thatcher had commented on the Yugoslav Wars; she was critical of Western governments for not recognising the breakaway republics of Croatia and Slovenia as independent states and for not supplying them with arms after the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army attacked.
Her father was active in local politics and the Methodist church, serving as an alderman and a local preacher, and brought up his daughter as a strict Wesleyan Methodist attending the Finkin Street Methodist Church.
James Prior proposed her as a member after the Conservatives' 1966 defeat, but party leader Edward Heath and Chief Whip Willie Whitelaw chose Mervyn Pike as the shadow cabinet's sole woman member.
Some critics contend that, despite being Britain's first woman Prime Minister, Thatcher did "little to advance the political cause of women", either within her party or the government, and some British feminists  regarded her as "an enemy".
Pinochet was released in March 2000 on medical grounds by Home Secretary Jack Straw, without facing trial.
She bought the Trident nuclear missile submarine system from the US to replace Polaris, tripling the UK's nuclear forces at an eventual cost of more than £12&nbsp;billion (at 1996–97 prices).
Thatcher's talent and drive caused her to be mentioned as a future Prime Minister in her early 20s although she herself was more pessimistic, stating as late as 1970 that "There will not be a woman prime minister in my lifetime—the male population is too prejudiced."
Thatcher was challenged for the leadership of the Conservative Party by the little-known backbench MP Sir Anthony Meyer in the 1989 leadership election.
'', with Wells in the role of Denis Thatcher.
She gave weak support to US President Jimmy Carter who tried to punish the USSR with economic sanctions.
Following Reagan–Gorbachev summit meetings and reforms enacted by Gorbachev in the USSR, she declared in November 1988 that "We're not in a Cold War now", but rather in a "new relationship much wider than the Cold War ever was".
Despite this, she managed to prerecord a eulogy to Ronald Reagan prior to his death, which was broadcast at his funeral in 2004.
She attempted to preserve trade with South Africa while persuading the government there to abandon apartheid.
He was Mayor of Grantham in 1945–46 and lost his position as alderman in 1952 after the Labour Party won its first majority on Grantham Council in 1950.
The Thatcher government encouraged growth in the finance and service sectors to compensate for Britain's ailing manufacturing industry.
Thatcher's term of office was marked by proposals for more local education authorities to close grammar schools and to adopt comprehensive secondary education.
The Conservatives won a 44-seat majority in the House of Commons, and Thatcher became the first female British prime minister.
A self-described conviction politician, Thatcher always insisted that she did not care about her poll ratings, pointing instead to her unbeaten election record.
In August 1992, Thatcher called for NATO to stop the Serbian assault on Goražde and Sarajevo to end ethnic cleansing during the Bosnian War.
Groups celebrated her death in Brixton, Leeds, Bristol and Glasgow, and a crowd of 3,000 gathered in Trafalgar Square to celebrate her demise and protest against her legacy.
Thatcher was honorary Chancellor of the College of William & Mary in Virginia (1993–2000) and also of the University of Buckingham (1992–99), the UK's first private university, which she had opened in 1975.
Thatcher returned to the backbenches as MP for Finchley for two years after leaving the premiership.
After visiting the Queen, calling other world leaders, and making one final Commons speech, she left Downing Street in tears.
Thatcher was one of the few Conservative MPs to support Leo Abse's Bill to decriminalise male homosexuality.
On 15 November 1985, Thatcher and FitzGerald signed the Hillsborough Anglo-Irish Agreement, the first time a British government had given the Republic of Ireland an advisory role in the governance of Northern Ireland.
Thatcher became Prime Minister on 4 May 1979.
Stone had previously painted portraits of the Queen and the Queen Mother.
In 1998, Thatcher called for the release of former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet when Spain had him arrested and sought to try him for human rights violations.
The television critic Clive James, writing in ''The Observer'' during the voting for the leadership, compared her voice of 1973 to a cat sliding down a blackboard.
Heath's leadership of the Conservative Party looked increasingly in doubt.
In 2009 she was hospitalised again when she fell and broke her arm.
As the recession of the early 1980s deepened she increased taxes, despite concerns expressed in a statement signed by 364&nbsp;leading economists issued towards the end of March 1981.
Margaret Thatcher wanted to prevent the creation of a Scottish assembly.
After the deaths of Sands and nine others, the strike ended.
By 1987, unemployment was falling, the economy was stable and strong, and inflation was low.
During her premiership Thatcher had the second-lowest average approval rating, at 40%, of any post-war Prime Minister.
Earlier that month, Thatcher had been named the most competent British Prime Minister of the past 30 years in an Ipsos MORI poll.
Thatcher succeeded in completely suppressing her Lincolnshire dialect except when under stress, notably after provocation from Denis Healey in the House of Commons in April 1983, when she accused the Labour front bench of being ''frit''.
She supported the retention of capital punishment and voted against the relaxation of divorce laws.
The election saw Thatcher re-elected for a third successive term.
Argentina surrendered on 14 June and the operation was hailed a success, notwithstanding the deaths of 255&nbsp;British servicemen and 3&nbsp;Falkland Islanders.
Thatcher was lampooned by satirist John Wells in several media.
After the Conservatives lost the 1964 election she became spokesman on Housing and Land, in which position she advocated her party's policy of allowing tenants to buy their council houses.
Officials of the association were so impressed by her that they asked her to apply, even though she was not on the Conservative Party's approved list: she was selected in January 1951, aged 25, and added to the approved list ''post ante''.
Thatcherism represented a systematic, decisive rejection and reversal of the post-war consensus, whereby the major political parties largely agreed on the central themes of Keynesianism, the welfare state, nationalised industry, and close regulation of the economy.
Originally a research chemist before becoming a barrister, Thatcher was elected Member of Parliament for Finchley in 1959.
She was voted the fourth-greatest British prime minister of the 20th century in a poll of 139 academics organised by MORI, and in 2002 was ranked number 16 in the BBC poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.
British Steel Corporation, for instance, made great gains in profitability while still a nationalised industry under the government-appointed chairmanship of Ian MacGregor, who faced down trade-union opposition to close plants and reduce the workforce by half.
The Labour government then faced fresh public unease about the direction of the country and a damaging series of strikes during the winter of 1978–79, dubbed the "Winter of Discontent".
The Queen's press secretary leaked anonymous rumors of a rift, which were officially denied by the Palace.
Together with Chancellor of the Exchequer Geoffrey Howe, she lowered direct taxes on income and increased indirect taxes.
Keynesian economics, they believed, was weakening Britain.
After Tony Blair's election as Labour Party leader in 1994, Thatcher praised Blair in an interview as "probably the most formidable Labour leader since Hugh Gaitskell.
Her standing in the polls rose by 11% after a January 1978 interview for ''World in Action'' in which she said "the British character has done so much for democracy, for law and done so much throughout the world that if there is any fear that it might be swamped people are going to react and be rather hostile to those coming in", as well as "in many ways minorities add to the richness and variety of this country.
She did not visit the Earth Summit 1992 and later became sceptical about climate change policy.
She told Conservative MPs to vote against the Scotland and Wales Bill in December 1976, which was defeated, and then when new Bills were proposed she supported amending the legislation to allow the English to vote in the 1979 referendum on devolution.
The "Falklands factor", an economic recovery beginning early in 1982, and a bitterly divided opposition all contributed to Thatcher's second election victory in 1983.
Thatcher's popularity during her first years in office waned amid recession and high unemployment, until victory in the 1982 Falklands War and the recovering economy brought a resurgence of support, resulting in her re-election in 1983.
Five people were killed, including the wife of Cabinet Minister John Wakeham.
She was reportedly more proud of becoming the first Prime Minister with a science degree than the first female Prime Minister.
This included "casting herself as President Botha's candid friend", and inviting him to visit the UK in June 1984, in spite of the "inevitable demonstrations" against his government.
The Thatcher government supported the Khmer Rouge keeping their seat in the UN after they were ousted from power in Cambodia by the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.
Regulation was also significantly expanded to compensate for the loss of direct government control, with the foundation of regulatory bodies such as Ofgas, Oftel and the National Rivers Authority.
Bobby Sands began the 1981 strike, saying that he would fast until death unless prison inmates won concessions over their living conditions.
Political economist Susan Strange called the new financial growth model "casino capitalism", reflecting her view that speculation and financial trading were becoming more important to the economy than industry.
In preparation for the election Roberts moved to Dartford, where she supported herself by working as a research chemist for J. Lyons and Co. in Hammersmith, part of a team developing emulsifiers for ice cream.
She was voiced by Steve Nallon.
Her main support came from the Conservative 1922 Committee, but Thatcher's time in office gave her the reputation of a pragmatist instead of an ideologue.
Thatcher always resisted rail privatisation and was said to have told Transport Secretary Nicholas Ridley "Railway privatisation will be the Waterloo of this government.
Thatcher had favoured Major over Heseltine in the leadership contest, but her support for him weakened in later years.
Thatcher's antipathy towards European integration became more pronounced during her premiership, particularly after her third election victory in 1987.
Influenced at the outset by Keith Joseph, the term "Thatcherism" came to refer to her policies as well as aspects of her ethical outlook and personal style, including moral absolutism, nationalism, interest in the individual, and an uncompromising approach to achieving political goals.
Thatcher was committed to reducing the power of the trade unions, whose leadership she accused of undermining parliamentary democracy and economic performance through strike action.
Thatcher's government provided military forces to the international coalition in the build-up to the Gulf War, but she had resigned by the time hostilities began on 17 January 1991.
GDP and public spendingby functional classification
Denis funded his wife's studies for the bar; she qualified as a barrister in 1953 and specialised in taxation.
Thatcher refused to meet the union's demands and compared the miners' dispute to the Falklands conflict two years earlier, declaring in a speech in 1984: "We had to fight the enemy without in the Falklands.
Even while working on chemistry, she was already thinking towards law and politics.
On 2 April 1982 the ruling military junta in Argentina ordered the invasion of the British-controlled Falkland Islands and South Georgia, triggering the Falklands War.
Some of the privatised industries, including gas, water, and electricity, were natural monopolies for which privatisation involved little increase in competition.
Thatcher's support was stronger among MPs on the right, those from southern England, and those who had not attended public schools or Oxbridge.
''Spitting Image'', a British TV show, satirised Thatcher as a bully who ridiculed her own ministers.
She retired from the House at the 1992 election, aged 66, saying that leaving the Commons would allow her more freedom to speak her mind.
Personal wealth rose by 80 per cent in real terms during the 1980s, mainly due to rising house prices and increased earnings.
We always have to be aware of the enemy within, which is much more difficult to fight and more dangerous to liberty."
On moving into , Thatcher introduced a series of political and economic initiatives intended to reverse high unemployment and Britain's struggles in the wake of the Winter of Discontent and an ongoing recession.
His resignation was fatal to Thatcher's premiership.
Thatcher became party leader and Leader of the Opposition on 11 February 1975; she appointed Whitelaw as her deputy.
During a 1988 speech in Bruges she outlined her opposition to proposals from the European Community (EC), forerunner of the European Union, for a federal structure and increased centralisation of decision making.
Thatcher was initially opposed to German reunification, telling Gorbachev that it "would lead to a change to postwar borders, and we cannot allow that because such a development would undermine the stability of the whole international situation and could endanger our security".
The privatised industries that demonstrated improvement sometimes did so while still under state ownership.
Throughout the 1980s revenue from the 90% tax on North Sea oil extraction was used as a short-term funding source to balance the economy and pay the costs of reform.
She became Prime Minister after winning the 1979 general election.
She was a patron of The Heritage Foundation, which established the Margaret Thatcher Center for Freedom in 2005.
Thatcher returned to 10 Downing Street in late November 2009 for the unveiling of an official portrait by artist Richard Stone, an unusual honour for a living ex-Prime Minister.
Opinion polls showed a comfortable Conservative lead, and local council election results had also been successful, prompting Thatcher to call a general election for 11 June that year, despite the deadline for an election still being 12 months away.
The eventual closure of 150&nbsp;coal mines, not all of which were losing money, resulted in the loss of tens of thousands of jobs and devastated entire communities.
Thatcher's tenure of 11 years and 209 days as Prime Minister was the longest since Lord Salisbury (13 years and 252 days in three spells, starting in 1885) and the longest continuous period in office since Lord Liverpool (14 years and 305 days, starting in 1812).
Her political philosophy and economic policies emphasised deregulation (particularly of the financial sector), flexible labour markets, the privatisation of state-owned companies, and reducing the power and influence of trade unions.
Sir Denis Thatcher died of pancreatic cancer on 26 June 2003 and was cremated on 3 July.
Her stance on immigration was perceived by some as part of a rising racialist public discourse, which Professor Martin Barker  called "new racism".
She promised Britons in 1982, the NHS is "safe in our hands."
A Soviet journalist dubbed her the "Iron Lady", a nickname that became associated with her uncompromising politics and leadership style.
The number of adults owning shares rose from 7 per cent to 25 per cent during her tenure, and more than a million families bought their council houses, giving an increase from 55 per cent to 67 per cent in owner-occupiers from 1979 to 1990.
Thatcher was one of the first Western leaders to respond warmly to reformist Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
The subsequent crisis was "a defining moment of her Thatcher's premiership".
Miners had helped bring down the Heath government, and Thatcher was determined to succeed where he had failed.
Now Prime Minister, Callaghan surprised many by announcing on 7 September that there would be no general election that year and he would wait until 1979 before going to the polls.
She spent her childhood in Grantham, where her father owned two grocery shops.
In 1979 up until Thatcher's last year in office, trade union membership also fell, from 13.5&nbsp;million in 1979 to fewer than 10&nbsp;million.
The Conservative Party under Edward Heath won the 1970 general election, and Thatcher was subsequently appointed to the Cabinet as Secretary of State for Education and Science.
She imposed public expenditure cuts on the state education system, resulting in the abolition of free milk for schoolchildren aged seven to eleven.
In his resignation speech on 13 November, Howe commented on Thatcher's European stance: "It is rather like sending your opening batsmen to the crease only for them to find the moment that the first balls are bowled that their bats have been broken before the game by the team captain."
Margaret Roberts attended Huntingtower Road Primary School and won a scholarship to Kesteven and Grantham Girls' School.
In 2013, she died of another stroke in London at the age of 87.
The government closed 25&nbsp;unprofitable coal mines in 1985, and by 1992 a total of 97&nbsp;had been closed; those that remained were privatised in 1994.
In 1975, Thatcher defeated Heath in the Conservative Party leadership election to become Leader of the Opposition and became the first woman to lead a major political party in the United Kingdom.
One of her Oxford friends was also a friend of the Chair of the Dartford Conservative Association in Kent, who were looking for candidates.
She reportedly considered leaving politics in the aftermath and later wrote in her autobiography: "I learned a valuable lesson from the experience.
Geoffrey Howe, by then Lord Howe of Aberavon, was also present, and said of his former leader: "Her real triumph was to have transformed not just one party but two, so that when Labour did eventually return, the great bulk of Thatcherism was accepted as irreversible."
Total government spending
Shortly after Thatcher's death, Scotland's First Minister, Alex Salmond, argued that her policies had the "unintended consequence" of encouraging Scottish devolution.
During her first year as Prime Minister she supported NATO's decision to deploy US nuclear cruise and Pershing II missiles in Western Europe and permitted the US to station more than 160&nbsp;cruise missiles at RAF Greenham Common, starting on 14 November 1983 and triggering mass protests by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
In 1992, Thatcher was hired by the tobacco company Philip Morris as a "geopolitical consultant" for $250,000 per year and an annual contribution of $250,000 to her foundation.
Thatcher had already begun to work on her presentation on the advice of Gordon Reece, a former television producer.
Of the 374&nbsp;Conservative MPs eligible to vote, 314 voted for Thatcher and 33 for Meyer.
She reportedly regarded her ousting as a betrayal.
Although she was not yet a cabinet or shadow cabinet member, the embassy reportedly described her to the State Department as a possible future prime minister.
Roberts became President of the Oxford University Conservative Association in 1946.
Although Thatcher won the first ballot with 204 to 152 votes and 16 abstentions, Heseltine had attracted sufficient support to force a second ballot.
The number of stoppages across the UK peaked at 4,583 in 1979, when more than 29&nbsp;million working days were lost.
Yet at the same time she was trying to modernise the country and sweep away many of the values and practices which the monarchy perpetuated."
Thatcher dismissed the African National Congress (ANC) in October 1987 as "a typical terrorist organisation".
Shares in the privatised utilities were sold below their market value to ensure quick and wide sales, rather than maximise national income.
In mid-1978, the economy began to improve and opinion polls showed Labour in the lead, with a general election being expected later that year and a Labour win a serious possibility.
Only 39% of union members voted for Labour in the 1983 general election.
Thatcher was staying at the hotel to attend the Conservative Party conference, which she insisted should open as scheduled the following day.
She condemned the invasion, said it showed the bankruptcy of a détente policy, and helped convince some British athletes to boycott the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
Thatcher was born Margaret Hilda Roberts on 13 October 1925, in Grantham, Lincolnshire.
This led to the strike being declared illegal.
She delivered her speech as planned, a move that was widely supported across the political spectrum and enhanced her popularity with the public.
That same year, she suffered several small strokes and was advised by her doctors not to engage in further public speaking.
Thatcher later wrote: "I always found the Queen's attitude towards the work of the Government absolutely correct&nbsp;... stories of clashes between 'two powerful women' were just too good not to make up."
There was no clear pattern to the degree of competition, regulation, and performance among the privatised industries; in most cases privatisation benefited consumers in terms of lower prices and improved efficiency, but the results overall were "mixed".
She had paid tribute to him in ''The Downing Street Years'', writing "Being Prime Minister is a lonely job.
In September 1982 she visited China to discuss with Deng Xiaoping the sovereignty of Hong Kong after 1997.
She moved to the Shadow Treasury team in 1966 and, as Treasury spokesman, opposed Labour's mandatory price and income controls, arguing that they would produce effects contrary to those intended and distort the economy.
Deng stated that the PRC's sovereignty on Hong Kong was non-negotiable, but he was willing to settle the sovereignty issue with Britain through formal negotiations, and both governments promised to maintain Hong Kong's stability and prosperity.
Her father was Alfred Roberts, originally from Northamptonshire, and her mother was Beatrice Ethel (née Stephenson) from Lincolnshire.
Britain's economic situation was precarious, and most of NATO was reluctant to cut trade ties.
In the 1950 and 1951 general elections, Roberts was the Conservative candidate for the safe Labour seat of Dartford.
Thatcher supported an active climate protection policy and was instrumental in the creation of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 and in founding the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the British Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research in Exeter.
She was the longest-serving British prime minister of the 20th century, and the first woman to have held the office.
Thatcher's economic policy was influenced by monetarist thinking and economists such as Milton Friedman and Alan Walters.
In March 1984 the National Coal Board (NCB) proposed to close 20 of the 174&nbsp;state-owned mines and cut 20,000&nbsp;jobs out of 187,000.
She was head girl in 1942–43.
Arriving at Downing Street she said, in a paraphrase of the Prayer of Saint Francis:
On 4 July 2011, Thatcher was to attend a ceremony for the unveiling of a 10-foot statue to former US President Ronald Reagan, outside the American Embassy in London, but was unable to attend due to her frail health.
On 11 June 2004, Thatcher, against doctor's orders, attended the state funeral service for Ronald Reagan.
It was reported that her government secretly supplied Saddam Hussein with military equipment as early as 1981.
Thatcher was not initially the obvious replacement, but she eventually became the main challenger, promising a fresh start.
After the two-year negotiations, Thatcher conceded to the PRC government and signed the Sino-British Joint Declaration in Beijing in 1984, agreeing to hand over Hong Kong's sovereignty in 1997.
She is the title character in two films, portrayed by Lindsay Duncan in ''Margaret'' (2009) and by Meryl Streep in ''The Iron Lady'' (2011), in which she is depicted as suffering from dementia or Alzheimer's disease.
In 1961 she went against the Conservative Party's official position by voting for the restoration of birching as a judicial corporal punishment.
By 1966, party leaders viewed Thatcher as a potential Shadow Cabinet member.
