Mirabeau sincerely wanted to reconcile the queen with the people, and she was happy to see him restoring much of the king's powers, such as his authority over foreign policy, and the right to declare war.
On 24 May 1774, two weeks after the death of Louis XV, her husband gave her an estate, the ''Petit Trianon'', and free rein to renovate it; soon rumours circulated that she plastered the walls with gold and diamonds.
The queen spent heavily on fashion, luxuries and gambling, though the country was facing a grave financial crisis and the population suffering.
A week later, several of the royal family's attendants, among them the ''princesse de Lamballe'', were taken in for interrogation by the Paris Commune.
Died in childhood; no issue.
This led in turn to the French declaration of war in April 1792, which led to the French Revolutionary Wars and to the events of August 1792, which ended the monarchy.
For her, Rose Bertin created dresses, hair styles such as ''pouf''s up to three feet (90&nbsp;cm) high and the ''panache'' (bundle of feathers).
Barnave and the moderates made up about 260 lawmakers in the new Legislative Assembly; the radicals numbered around 136, and the rest around 350.
However, upon Leopold's death in 1792, his son, Francis, a conservative ruler, was ready to support the cause of the French royal couple because he feared the consequences of the French Revolution and its ideas on the monarchies of Europe and, more particularly, on Austria's influence in the continent.
Charged with undermining the First French Republic, Louis XVI was separated from his family and tried in December.
At least once, she received the visit of a Catholic priest.
He had joined the ''tiers état'', and was not against the monarchy, but wanted to reconcile the monarchy with the Revolution.
This was unpopular, particularly with some factions of the nobility who disliked the queen, but also with a growing percentage of the population who disapproved of a Queen of France owning her private residence independently of the king; thus, the purchase of Saint-Cloud contributed to damage the image of the queen even further in the public opinion.
Maria Antonia was born on 2 November 1755, at the Hofburg Palace, in Vienna.
He was found guilty by the Convention led by the Jacobins who rejected the idea of keeping him as a hostage.
Some changes were met with disapproval from the older generation, such as the abandonment of heavy make-up and the popular wide-hooped panniers.
On 20 June 1792, "a mob of terrifying aspect" broke into the Tuileries, made the king wear the ''bonnet rouge'' (red Phrygian cap) to show his loyalty to the Republic, insulted Marie Antoinette, accusing her of betraying France, and threatened her life.
During the Revolution, she became known as ''Madame Déficit'' because the country's financial crisis was blamed on her lavish spending and her opposition to the social and financial reforms of Turgot and Necker.
* Louis-Joseph-Xavier-François, the ''Dauphin'' (22 October 1781 – 4 June 1789)
On 5 October, a crowd from Paris descended upon Versailles and forced the royal family to move to the Tuileries Palace in Paris, where they lived under a form of house arrest under the watch of La Fayette's ''Garde nationale'', while the comte de Provence and his wife were allowed to reside in the Petit Luxembourg, where they remained until going into exile on 20 June 1791.
By showing to the public her attention to the education and care of her children, the queen sought to improve the dissolute image she had acquired in 1785 from the "Diamond Necklace Affair", in which public opinion had falsely accused her of criminal participation in defrauding the jewelers Boehmer and Bassenge of the cost of a very expensive diamond necklace they had created originally for Madame du Barry.
These suspicions of illegitimacy, along with the continued publication of the ''libelles'', and never-ending cavalcades of court intrigues, the actions of Joseph II in the Kettle War, the purchase of Saint-Cloud and the Diamond Necklace scandal combined to turn popular opinion sharply against the queen, and the image of a licentious, spendthrift, empty-headed foreign queen was quickly taking root in the French psyche.
By the time of the Flour War of 1775, a series of riots against the high price of flour and bread, her reputation among the general public was no better than that of the favourites of the previous kings.
The royal family was re-styled as the non-royal "Capets".
On 21 September 1792, the monarchy was abolished.
At least 300,000 persons participated from all over France including 18,000 national guards, with Talleyrand, bishop of Autun, celebrating a mass at the ''autel de la patrie'' ("altar of the fatherland").
As for Fersen, in February 1792, despite the strong restriction imposed on her, he was able to see the queen a final time.
This resulted in the queen being viewed as an enemy, even though she was against Austrian claims to French territories on European soil.
The play was a disaster for the image of the monarchy and aristocracy.
She was under constant surveillance, with no privacy.
However, the queen did play a decisive role in the disgrace and exile of the most powerful of Louis XV's ministers, the Duke of Aiguillon.
The Brunswick Manifesto, issued on 25 July 1792, triggered the events of 10 August when the approach of an armed mob on its way to the Tuileries Palace forced the royal family to seek refuge at the Legislative Assembly.
Around this time, she accumulated a library of 5000 books.
On the night of 1 August, at 1:00 in the morning, Marie Antoinette was transferred from the Temple to an isolated cell in the Conciergerie as 'Prisoner n° 280'.
She died on 19 June 1787, before reaching her first year, and was Marie Antoinette's last child.
After Louis' execution, Marie Antoinette's fate became a central question of the National Convention.
With time, Mirabeau would support the queen even more, going as far as to suggest Louis XVI "adjourn" to Rouen or Compiègne.
Once Louis XVI finally did commit to a plan, its poor execution was the cause of its failure.
In addition, at the insistence of his wife, Louis XVI vetoed several measures that would have further restricted his power, earning the royal couple the nicknames "Monsieur Veto" and "Madame Veto".
At worst, she and her lawyers had expected life imprisonment.
Barnave remained the most important advisor and supporter of the queen, who was willing to work with him as long as he followed her demands, which he did to a large extent.
She also excelled at dancing, had an "exquisite" poise, and loved dolls.
The queen, now called "Widow Capet", plunged into deep mourning.
Marie-Antoinette began to abandon her more carefree activities to become increasingly involved in politics in her role as "Queen of France".
The May Edicts issued on 8 May 1788 were also opposed by the public and parliaments.
Upon her arrival in France, she adopted the French version of her name: Marie Antoinette.
The new fashion called for a more simple feminine look, typified first by the rustic ''robe à la polonaise'' and later by the ''gaulle'', a simple muslin dress Marie Antoinette wore in a 1783 Vigée-Le Brun portrait.
The two strongest members of that government were Jean Marie Roland, who was minister of interior, and General Dumouriez, the minister of foreign affairs.
Due to Joseph's intervention, the marriage was finally consummated in August 1777.
Despite his dislike of the queen - he detested her as much as she detested him and, at one time, had even threatened sending her to a convent - he was persuaded by the mayor of Paris, Jean Sylvain Bailly, to work in collaboration with her, and even allowed her to see Fersen a number of times.
However, this leverage with the Assembly ended with the death of Mirabeau in April 1791, despite the attempt of several moderate leaders of the Revolution to contact the queen to establish some kind of cooperation with her.
The queen's political ideas and her belief in the absolute power of monarchs were based on France's monarchy long established on the divine right of kings.
This change of the queen's political position signalled the end of the Polignacs' influence and their impact on the finances of the Crown.
A significant achievement for Marie Antoinette in that period was the establishment of an alliance with Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau, the most important lawmaker in the assembly.
Preparations began for the trial of the king in a court of law.
The phrase "Let them eat cake" is often attributed to Marie Antoinette, but there is no evidence she ever uttered it, and it is now generally regarded as a "journalistic cliché".
After the death of her brother Joseph in 1790, his successor, Leopold was willing to support her, but only to a limited degree.
Continuing deterioration of the financial situation, despite cutbacks to the royal retinue and court expenses, ultimately forced the king, the queen and the Minister of Finance, Calonne, at the urging of Vergennes, to call the Assembly of Notables, after a hiatus of 160 years.
The Assembly then passed a series of laws concerning the Church, the aristocracy and the formation of new national guard units: all were vetoed by Louis XVI.
Mme de La Motte tricked Rohan into buying the necklace as a gift to Marie-Antoinette, in order for him to get into the favors of the queen.
* Louis-Charles, ''Dauphin'' after the death of his elder brother, future titular king Louis XVII of France (27 March 1785 – 8 June 1795)
When the affair was discovered, those involved (except de La Motte and Réaux de Villette who managed to flee) were arrested, tried, convicted and either imprisoned or exiled.
Marie Antoinette, who had insisted on the arrest of the Cardinal was dealt a heavy personal blow, as was the monarchy, and despite the fact that the guilty parties were tried and convicted, the affair proved to be extremely damaging to her reputation, which never recovered from it.
She still hoped her son, Louis XVII, whom the comte de Provence had, from exile, recognised as Louis XVI's successor, would one day rule France.
Barnave had advised the queen to call back Mercy, who had played such an important role in her life before the Revolution, but Mercy had been appointed to another foreign diplomatic position  and could not return to France.
Until her removal from the Temple, Marie Antoinette spent hours trying to catch a glimpse of her son, who, within weeks, had been made to turn against her, accusing his mother of wrongdoings.
Repayment of the French debt remained a difficult problem, further exacerbated by Vergennes and also Marie Antoinette's prodding Louis XVI to involve France in Great Britain's war with its North American colonies: the queen played a very important role in supporting the American Revolution by securing Austrian and Russian support for France which resulted in the establishment of a neutral league that stopped Great Britain's attack, and by weighing in decisively for the nomination of Philippe Henri, marquis de Ségur, as Minister of War and Charles Eugène Gabriel de La Croix, marquis de Castries, Secretary of the Navy in 1780, who helped George Washington in defeating the British in the American Revolutionary War, which ended in 1783.
His relation with the king was more cordial: being a liberal aristocrat, he did not want the fall of the monarchy but the establishment of a liberal one, similar to that of the United Kingdom, based on collaboration between the king and the people, as was to be defined in the Constitution of 1791.
Marie Antoinette was instrumental in the recall of Jacques Necker as Finance Minister on 26 August, a popular move, even though she herself was worried that the recall would again go against her if Necker proved unsuccessful in reforming the country's finances, and she accepted Necker's proposition to double the representation of the ''Tiers État'' in an attempt to check the power of the aristocracy
Others involved were Nicole Legay, alias ''baronne d'Oliva'', a prostitute who happened to be a lookalike of Marie Antoinette, Rétaux de Villette, a forger, Alessandro Cagliostro, an Italian adventurer, and the comte de La Motte, Jeanne de Valois' husband.
Like La Fayette, Mirabeau was a liberal aristocrat.
During the trip, Barnave, the representative of the moderate party in the Assembly, protected Marie Antoinette from the crowds, and even Pétion took pity on the royal family.
After Madame Roland sent a letter to the king denouncing the queen's role in these matters, pushed by the queen, Louis XVI sacked the government, thus losing his majority in the Assembly.
France's financial problems were the result of a combination of factors: several expensive wars; a large royal family whose expenditures were paid for by the state; and an unwillingness on the part of most members of the privileged classes, aristocracy and clergy, to help defray the costs of the government out of their own pockets by relinquishing some of their financial privileges.
Despite the private tutoring she received, results of her schooling were less than satisfactory.
This decision met with disapproval from the court, as the duchess was considered to be of too modest a birth to occupy such an exalted position.
In the United States, expressions of gratitude to France for its help in the American Revolution included the naming of the city of Marietta, Ohio, founded in 1788.
On 27 March 1785, Marie Antoinette gave birth to a second son, Louis Charles, who bore the title of Duke of Normandy.
Some historians believe the outcome of the trial had been decided in advance by the Committee of Public Safety around the time the Carnation Plot was uncovered.
The queen attempted to fight back with propaganda portraying her as a caring mother, most notably in the painting by Élisabeth Vigée Le Brun exhibited at the ''Royal Académie Salon de Paris'' in August 1787, showing her with her children.
Apart from the fact that Rousseau ascribes these words to an unknown princess, vaguely referred to as a "great princess", the purported writing date precedes Marie Antoinette's arrival in France.
He met his sister and her husband on 18 April 1777 at the château de la Muette, and spoke frankly to his brother-in-law, curious as to why the royal marriage had not been consummated, arriving at the conclusion that no obstacle to the couple's conjugal relations existed, save the queen's lack of interest and the king's unwillingness to exert himself in that arena.
It further deteriorated when Louis XVI tried to use a ''lit de justice'' on 11 November to impose legislation.
She learned to play the harp, the harpsichord and the flute.
In the hours left to her, she composed a letter to her sister-in-law, ''Madame Élisabeth'', affirming her clear conscience, her Catholic faith, and her love and concern for her children.
In an elaborate attempt, known as the Flight to Varennes, to reach the royalist stronghold of Montmédy, some members of the royal family were to pose as the servants of (the imaginary) Mme de Korff, a wealthy Russian baroness, in the role held by Louise-Élisabeth de Croÿ de Tourzel, governess of the royal children.
On the advice of Mercy, Marie Antoinette opened secret negotiations with him and both agreed to meet in secret at the château of Saint-Cloud on 3 July 1790, where the royal family was allowed to spend the summer, free of the radical elements who watched their every move in Paris.
On 10 August 1792, the attack on the Tuileries forced the royal family to take refuge at the Assembly, and on 13 August the family was imprisoned in the Temple.
While some advocated for her death, others proposed exchanging her for French prisoners of war or for a ransom from the Holy Roman Emperor.
He also wanted to be a minister and was not immune to corruption.
Transferred to the ''La Force'' prison, after a rapid judgment, Marie Louise de Lamballe was savagely killed on 3 September.
One of the most important was Necker, the "Prime Minister of Finances" (''Premier ministre des finances'').
After initially having been banned by the king due to its negative portrayal of the nobility, the play was finally allowed to be publicly performed because of the queen's support and its overwhelming popularity at court, where secret readings of it had been given by Marie Antoinette.
The fact that the birth occurred exactly nine months after Fersen's return did not escape the attention of many, leading to doubt as to the parentage of the child, and to a noticeable decline of the queen's reputation in public opinion.
Among the accusations, many previously published in the ''libelles'', were: orchestrating orgies in Versailles, sending millions of livres of treasury money to Austria, planning the massacre of the "gardes françaises" (National Guards) in 1792, declaring her son to be the new king of France, and—by her son Louis Charles himself (pushed by radical elements who controlled him)—of incest.
From time of its very opening on 5 May 1789, the fracture between the democratic Third Estate (consisting of bourgeois and radical aristocrats), and the conservative nobility of the Second Estate widened, and Marie Antoinette knew that her rival, the ''duc d'Orléans'', who had given money and bread to the people during the winter, would be acclaimed by the crowd, much to her detriment.
The Peace of Teschen, signed on 13 May 1779, ended the brief conflict, with the queen imposing French mediation on the demand of her mother, and Austria's gaining a territory of at least 100,000 inhabitants - a strong retreat from the early French position which was hostile towards Austria with the impression, partially justified, that the queen sided with Austria against France .
In April 1793, during the Reign of Terror, a Committee of Public Safety dominated by Robespierre was formed, and men such as Jacques Hébert began to call for Antoinette's trial.
Throughout her imprisonment and up to her execution, Marie-Antoinette could count on the sympathy of conservative factions and social-religious groups which had turned against the Revolution, and also on wealthy individuals ready to corrupt republican officials in order to facilitate her escape; however, all plots failed.
There were even cheers to the queen, particularly when she presented the Dauphin to the public.
For others, Marie Antoinette was a victim of her family ambition and the general situation in France.
In the middle of the queen's pregnancy, two events occurred which had profound impact on her later life: the return of Count Axel von Fersen to Versailles for two years, and her brother's claims on the throne of Bavaria.
Religion played an important role in the life of Marie Antoinette and Louis XVI, both raised in the Roman Catholic faith.
She had played a decisive role in the disgrace of the reformer Ministers of Finance, Turgot (in 1776), and Jacques Necker (first dismissal in 1781).
The abolition of feudal privileges by the National Constituent Assembly on 4 August 1789, and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (''La Déclaration des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen''), drafted by La Fayette with the help of Thomas Jefferson, and adopted on 26 August, led the way to the Constitutional Monarchy (4 September 1791 – 21 September 1792).
However, the majority of Marie-Antoinette's and Louis XVII's biographers believe that the young prince was the biological son of Louis XVI, even Stefan Zweig and Antonia Fraser, who believe that Fersen and Marie Antoinette were romantically involved.
Publication of such calumnies continued to the end, climaxing at her trial with that of incest with her son.
and taken back to Paris within a week.
During the night of 21–22 June, the queen's hair had, according to Mme Campan, Marie Antoinette's first lady-of-the-bedchamber, "in one night it turned white as those of a seventy-year old woman."
For her final confession, a constitutional priest was assigned to her.
He sat by her in the cart, and she ignored him all the way to the scaffold.
Courtiers at Versailles noted in their diaries that the date of the child's conception in fact corresponded perfectly with a period when the king and the queen had spent a lot of time together, but these details were ignored amid attacks on the queen's character.
A second visit from Joseph II, which had taken place in July 1781, to reaffirm the Franco-Austrian alliance and also to see his sister again, was tainted with rumours that Marie Antoinette was sending money from the French treasury to him.
On 14 May she met her husband at the edge of the forest of Compiègne.
Under the teaching of Christoph Willibald Gluck, Maria Antonia developed into a good musician.
Marie Antoinette had a profound dislike for Rohan since the time he had been the French ambassador to Vienna when she was a child.
On the one hand, the Dauphine was beautiful, personable and well-liked by the common people.
The continued poor financial climate of the country resulted in the 25 May dissolution of the Assembly of Notables because of its inability to get things done, and the lack of solutions was blamed on the queen.
In 1783, the queen played a decisive role in the nomination of Charles Alexandre de Calonne, a close friend of the Polignacs, as Controller-General of Finances, and of the baron de Breteuil as the Minister for the ''Maison du Roi'' (Minister of the Royal Household), making him perhaps the strongest and most conservative minister of the reign.
Early on 16 October, Marie Antoinette was declared guilty of the three main charges against her: depletion of the national treasury, conspiracy against the internal and external security of the State, intelligence with the enemy, this one alone being enough to condemn her to death.
The Ohio Company of Associates chose the name Marietta after an affectionate nickname for Marie Antoinette.
She sponsored the arts, in particular music, and also supported some scientific endeavours, encouraging and witnessing the first launch of a hot air balloon (''Montgolfière'').
At the end of 1791, ignoring the danger she faced, the ''princesse de Lamballe'', who was in London, returned to the Tuileries.
This last accusation drew an emotional response from Marie Antoinette, who refused to respond to this charge and, instead, called on all mothers present in the room: their reaction brought her comfort since these women were not sympathetic to her.
More than that, the decree by de Ségur, the minister of war, requiring four quarterings of nobility as a condition for the appointment of officers, blocked the access of commoners to important positions in the armed forces, posing the concept of equality one of the main grievances and causes of the French Revolution.
Her last words were "Pardon me, sir, I meant not to do it", to Henri Sanson the executioner, whose foot she had accidentally stepped on after climbing to the scaffold.
This was the most difficult period of her captivity.
Eight months later, in April 1778, it was suspected that the queen was pregnant, which was officially announced on May 16.
During the Revolution, after the government had placed the royal family under house arrest in the Tuileries Palace in October 1789, several events linked to Marie Antoinette, in particular the June 1791 attempt to flee, and her role in the War of the First Coalition, had disastrous effects on French popular opinion.
Upon learning of the capture of the royal family, the National Constituent Assembly sent three representatives, Antoine Barnave, Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve and Charles César de Fay de La Tour-Maubourg to Varennes to escort Marie Antoinette and her family back to Paris, where they were jeered and insulted by the people as never before.
Despite her attempts to remain out of the public eye, Marie Antoinette was falsely accused in the ''libelles'' of conducting an affair with La Fayette, whom she loathed, and, as was published in "''Le Godmiché Royal''" (translated, "''The Royal Dildo''"), on having a sexual relationship with the English Baroness 'Lady Sophie Farrell' of Bournemouth, a well-known lesbian of the time.
In addition, she was showing her determination to use force to crush the forthcoming revolution.
By the end of May, the ''Girondins'' had been chased from power.
Thanks to Barnave, the royal couple was not brought to trial and was publicly exonerated of any crime in relation with the attempted escape.
Despite the general celebration over the birth of the Dauphin, Marie Antoinette's political influence, such as it was, did greatly benefit Austria.
Over the objections of La Fayette and his allies, the king was given a suspensive veto allowing him to veto any laws for a period of four years.
Preparing for her execution, she had to change clothes in front of her guards.
The lack of consummation of the marriage plagued the reputation of both Louis-Auguste and Marie Antoinette for the next seven years.
Marie Antoinette kept hoping that the military coalition of the European kingdoms would succeed in crushing the Revolution.
In a letter to his brother Leopold, Joseph graphically described them as "a couple of complete blunderers."
In the hour-long trip from the ''Conciergerie'' via the ''rue Saint-Honoré'' thoroughfare to the ''guillotine'' erected ''Place de la Révolution'', (present-day ''Place de la Concorde''), she maintained her composure, despite the insults of the jeering crowd calling her ''Autrichienne'' (''Autri'' referring to her Austrian ethnicity, while ''chienne'' in French is a female dog: ''bitch'').
To carry this out, Louis Charles was separated from his mother on 3 July after a heartwrenching struggle during which his mother fought in vain to retain her son, who was handed to Antoine Simon, a cobbler, and representative of the Paris Commune.
There had been several plots designed to help the royal family escape, which the queen had rejected because she would not leave without the king, or which had ceased to be viable because of the king's indecision.
While from late 1787 up to his death in June 1789, Marie-Antoinette's primary concern was the continued deterioration of the health of the Dauphin, who suffered from tuberculosis, she was directly involved with the exile of the ''Parlement'', the May Edicts and the announcement regarding the Estates General; she did participate in the King Council, the first queen to do this in over 175 years (since Marie de' Medici had been named ''Chef du Conseil du Roi'', between 1614 and 1617), and she was making the major decisions behind the scene and in the King Council.
After their return from Varennes, and until the storming of the Tuileries on 10 August 1792, the queen, her family and entourage were held by the ''Garde nationale'' under tight surveillance within the Tuileries, where the royal couple was guarded night and day.
On 15 January 1793, by vote with a majority of one voice, that of Philippe Égalité, he was condemned to death by guillotine and was executed on 21 January 1793.
Marie Antoinette's actions in refusing to collaborate with the ''Girondins'', in power between April and June 1792, led them to denounce the treason of the Austrian comity, a direct allusion to the queen.
Some think that he invented it altogether.
Marie Antoinette was guillotined at 12:15&nbsp;p.m. on 16 October 1793.
Her health also began to deteriorate, thus further reducing her physical activities.
On 13 August, the royal family was imprisoned in the tower of the Temple in the Marais under conditions considerably harsher than those of their previous confinement in the Tuileries.
At the outset, the new queen had limited political influence with her husband, who with the support of his two most important ministers, Chief Minister Maurepas and Foreign Minister Vergennes, blocked several of her candidates from taking important positions, including Choiseul,.
nicknames then prominently featured in different contexts, including La Carmagnole.
During the family's gatherings in the evenings, she would sing, as she had a beautiful voice.
Leaving the tower without bending, she banged her head against the lintel of the door, which prompted one of her guards to ask her if she was hurt, to which she answered: "No!
* Marie-Thérèse-Charlotte, ''Madame Royale'' (19 December 1778 – 19 October 1851)
On 17 July 1791, with the support of Barnave and his friends, La Fayette's ''Garde nationale'' opened fire on the crowd who had assembled on the ''Champ de Mars'' to sign a petition demanding the deposition of the king.
If the secret expenses of the queen were taken into account, the expense of the court was much higher than the official estimate of 7% of the state budget.
Madame du Barry, for example, was Louis XV's mistress and had considerable political influence over him.
Marie Antoinette was kept from seeing it, but fainted upon learning of it.
On the eve of the opening of the Estates General, the queen attended the mass celebrating its return.
Maria Antonia was raised with her three-year older sister Maria Carolina, with whom she had a lifelong close relationship.
The main actors of the scandal were the Cardinal de Rohan, ''prince de Rohan-Guéméné'', Great Almoner of France, and Jeanne de Valois-Saint-Rémy, ''comtesse de La Motte'', a descendant of an illegitimate child of Henry II of France of the House of Valois.
In her new role and with increasing degree of power as a politically viable entity, the queen tried to help the situation brewing between the assembly and the king.
Marie Antoinette did not attend the meeting and her absence resulted in accusations that the queen was trying to undermine its purpose.
In 1782, after the governess of the ''Enfants de France'', the princesse de Guéméné, went bankrupt and resigned, Marie Antoinette appointed her favourite, the duchesse de Polignac, to the position.
Calls were also made to "retrain" the eight-year old Louis XVII, to make him pliant to revolutionary ideas.
She put on a plain white dress, white being the color worn by widowed queens of France.
The estimated number of those killed varies between 12 and 50.
On 21 September 1792, the fall of the monarchy was officially declared, and the National Convention became the governing body of the French Republic.
On 19 September 1774, she appointed her Superintendent of her Household, a charge she soon gave to her new favourite, the ''duchesse de Polignac''.
As her correspondence shows, while Barnave was taking great political risks with the belief the queen was his political ally, and had managed, despite her unpopularity, to secure a moderate majority ready to work with her, Marie Antoinette was not sincere in her cooperation with the moderate leaders of the French Revolution, which ultimately ended any chance to establish a moderate government.
As the Third Estate declared itself a National Assembly and took the Tennis Court Oath, and as people either spread or believed rumors that the queen wished to bathe in their blood, Marie Antoinette went into mourning for her eldest son.
Died in childhood; no issue.
Marie Antoinette feared that the death of her mother would jeopardise the Franco-Austrian alliance (as well as, ultimately, herself), but her brother, Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor, wrote to her that he had no intention of breaking the alliance.
Around the same time, Jeanne de Valois-Saint-Rémy escaped from prison and fled to London, where she published damaging slander concerning her supposed amorous affair with the queen.
Her body was thrown into an unmarked grave in the Madeleine cemetery located close by, rue d'Anjou.
This incident fortified her in her determination to leave Paris; however, both for affective and political reasons, not alone, but with her family, and even the king, who had been hesitant, accepted his wife's decision to flee with the help of foreign powers and counter revolutionary forces.
As to her relationship with her mother, it was difficult but both the empress and her daughter loved each other.
Brienne, though, was not able to improve the financial situation, and since he was the queen's ally, this failure adversely affected her political position.
At this point, the tide within the population and political parties against the royal authority intensified, while Marie Antoinette encouraged the king to veto the new laws voted by the Legislative Assembly in 1792.
It did inspire Mozart's ''Le nozze di Figaro'', which premiered in Vienna on 1 May 1786.
She also began to participate in amateur plays and musicals, starting in 1780, in a theatre built for her by Mique at the ''Petit Trianon''.
Despite her initial popularity, a growing number of the population eventually came to dislike her, accusing her of being profligate, promiscuous, and of harbouring sympathies for France's enemies, particularly her native Austria.
In March 1791, Pope Pius VI had condemned the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, reluctantly signed by Louis XVI, which reduced the number of bishops from 132 to 93, imposed the election of bishops and all members of the clergy by departmental or district assemblies of electors, and finally reduced the Pope's authority over the Church.
Leopold's and Francis II's aggressive actions on Marie Antoinette's behalf led to France's declaration of war on Austria on 20 April 1792.
This phrase originally appeared in Book VI of the first part (finished in 1767, published in 1782) of Jean-Jacques Rousseau's putative autobiographical work, ''Les Confessions'': "''Enfin je me rappelai le pis-aller d'une grande princesse à qui l'on disait que les paysans n'avaient pas de pain, et qui répondit: Qu'ils mangent de la brioche''" ("Finally I recalled the stopgap solution of a great princess who was told that the peasants had no bread, and who responded: 'Let them eat brioche).
She counted mostly on the support of her Austrian family.
She and her lawyers were given less than one day to prepare her defense.
However, even her critics have recognized her qualities as a mother and her courage in dying.
Prisoners in the tower of the Temple, Marie Antoinette, her children and Élisabeth were insulted, some of the guards going as far as smoking in the ex-queen's face.
Despite her dislike of him, she played a decisive role in his return to office; however, she blamed him for his supporting the Revolution, and did not regret his resignation in 1790.
Finally, on 8 August, Louis XVI announced his intention to bring back the Estates General, the traditional elected legislature of the country, which had not been convened since 1614.
She was attended by Rosalie Lamorlière, who cared for her as much as and as well as she could.
Some of her contemporaries, such as Jefferson, attributed to her the start of the French Revolution.
The death of the Dauphin on 4 June, which deeply affected his parents, was virtually ignored by the French people, who were instead preparing for the next meeting of the Estates General and hoping for a resolution to the bread crisis.
The assembly was held to attempt passing necessary financial reforms, but the Parlements refused to cooperate.
Nothing now can hurt me."
(''En une seule nuit ils étaient devenus blancs comme ceux d'une femme de soixante-dix ans.'')
In 1783, the queen was busy with the creation of her "hamlet", a rustic retreat built by her favoured architect, Richard Mique, according to the designs of the painter Hubert Robert.
