Tallchief is a subject of one of the life-size bronze statues titled "The Five Moons", located at the Tulsa Historical Society.
"I couldn't get over it.
Shortly before ''Ballet Imperial'' was to open, Balanchine informed Tallchief that she would be second lead behind Moylan.
And thank God I knew it."
Our 10-room, terracotta-brick house stood high on a hill overlooking the reservation."
Instead, Tallchief studied the efforts of her more experienced colleagues.
"I always thought Balanchine was more of a musician even than a choreographer, and perhaps that’s why he and I connected," Tallchief recalled.
When she was eight, her family relocated from her birth home of Fairfax, Oklahoma, to Los Angeles, California, to advance the careers of her and her younger sister, Marjorie.
Her individualism and her genius came together to create one of the most vital and beautiful chapters in the history of American dance."
The ballet was a success and Balanchine was offered a contract for the rest of the season.
The role created a sensation and launched her to the top of the ballet world, granting her the prima ballerina title.
As the season wore on, Balanchine grew fond of her both professionally&nbsp;– the ''Washington Post'' called Tallchief his "crucial artistic inspiration"&nbsp;– and personally.
California moved Tall Chief back to the proper grade for her age, but put her in an Opportunity Class for advanced learners.
Working for the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo in 1954-55, she was paid $2,000 a week, reportedly the highest salary ever paid to a dancer at the time.
In particular, she admired Alexandra Danilova who was known for her work ethic and professionalism.
In 1958, she created the lead in Balanchine's ''Gounod Symphony'' before taking a leave of absence to have her first child.
Balanchine was unshaken by her objection, saying that she would come around eventually.
According to Tallchief, "Passion and romance didn’t play a big part in our married life.
"With nothing to do, I often wandered around the school yard by myself."
"I didn't need convincing.
When Tallchief arrived, she was put to work immediately with roles in ''Le baiser de la fée'' and ''Apollo''.
Tallchief agreed and was known as Maria Tallchief for the remainder of her career.
She is among four Indian ballerinas depicted in "Flight of Spirit", a mural in the Oklahoma Capitol building.
After retiring from dance, Tallchief was active in promoting ballet in Chicago.
At first, she was not sure if he was paying much attention to her, but she quickly found out he was.
She combined precise footwork with athleticism.
He answered that it did not matter, and if the marriage only lasted a few years that was all right with him.
In ''Danses Concertantes'', she was part of a jazzy pas de trois created for Mary Ellen Moylan, Nicholas Magallanes, and herself.
In 1954, Tallchief was given the role of Sugar Plum Fairy in Balanchine's newly reworked version of ''The Nutcracker'', then an obscure ballet.
When the big day came, she slipped during rehearsal and was concerned, but Nijinksa dismissed it saying "happens to everybody."
"We saw each other every day and I was convinced it was true love."
I knew he was right."
At the Ballet Russe, the Russian ballerinas frequently feuded with American ballerinas, whom they reportedly viewed as inferior.
''Spectateur'' and ''Les Arts'' joined in, publishing articles attacking Balanchine personally.
In 1930, a ballet teacher from Tulsa, Mrs. Sabin, visited Fairfax looking for students and took on Betty Marie and Marjorie as students.
She spent the next five years with the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, where she met legendary choreographer George Balanchine.
She portrayed Anna Pavlova in the 1952 movie musical ''Million Dollar Mermaid''.
Tallchief was "mortified" by the move, but Denham gave into the demands and increased her salary to $50 per week and promoted her to "soloist."
The clerk recommended Ernest Belcher, father of dancer Marge Champion.
She was unpretentious."
She found tumbling very difficult, and eventually quit the class, but later in life put the skills to good use.
Balanchine  assigned Tallchief a solo in ''Song of Norway'' and on the night before the premiere also informed her that she would be Danilova's understudy.
Tallchief and Balanchine were married on August 16, 1946, when she was 21 years old and he was 42.
Although their relationship became more personal, it was a shock to Tallchief when Balanchine asked her to marry him.
During her career, she danced throughout Europe and South American, in Japan, and in Russia.
Betty Marie was enrolled in summer ballet classes in Colorado Springs at age 3.
"I wanted to die", she recalled.
He created many roles specifically for Tallchief, including the lead of "The Firebird" in 1949.
When Tallchief was surprisingly promoted by Nijinska, she became the primary target of their animosity.
In addition to the problems in her teaching technique, Sabin had put Tallchief on pointe shortly after she joined the school (at 5 years old) while she was far too young to be able to dance on pointe without injury.
She was devastated: "I was hurt and humiliated.
She served as co-artistic director until its demise in 1987.
Glory, however, was short lived as Tallchief returned to the corps when the staging of ''Chopin Concerto'' was complete.
Of her "Firebird" debut, Kirstein wrote "Maria Tallchief made an electrifying appearance, emerging as the nearest approximation to a prima ballerina that we had yet enjoyed."
She created the lead role of "Prodigal Son", "Jones Beach", "''A La Francaix''", and plotless works such as "''Sylvia Pas de Deux,''" "''Allegro Brillante''," "''Pas de Dix''," and "Symphony in C." Her fiery, athletic performances helped establish Balanchine as the era's most prominent and influential choreographer.
Tallchief was well suited for Balanchine's vision.
She refused: "Tallchief was my name, and I was proud of it."
The French press was fascinated by Tallchief's dancing, and even more so her background.
In 1996, Tallchief received a Kennedy Center Honor for lifetime achievements.
Tall Chief had five siblings, three from her father's first marriage to a German immigrant: Alexander; Frances (1913–1999); and Thomas (1919–1981), who played football for the University of Oklahoma, and was drafted by the Pittsburgh Steelers; Gerald (1922–1999), who was injured in childhood when kicked in the head by a horse and never regained normal cognitive function.
When she told her parents about the engagement, her mother was furious: "I've never heard of anything more&nbsp;... ''idiotic''&nbsp;... What's wrong with you?"
"''La Fille du grand chef Indien danse a l'Opera''" The daughter of the great Indian chief dances at the Opera, read another.
She was drawn to Balanchine from the start.
It would have been preposterous to think there was anything personal."
He ignored the company's hierarchy, further angering some dancers.
"I nearly fainted", she recalled.
In 1996, Tallchief received a Kennedy Center Honor for lifetime achievements.
Other notable roles Tall Chief created under Balanchine include the Swan Queen in Balanchine's version of ''Swan Lake'' and Eurydice in ''Orpheus''.
On the urging of Balanchine, she relocated to Germany, briefly becoming the lead dancer of the Hamburg Ballet.
Her sister Marjorie, an accomplished ballerina in her own right, was Ruth's second child and Betty Marie's "best friend".
Her parents continued to oppose the marriage, and did not attend the ceremony.
In so doing, she became the first American dancer to perform at Moscow's famed Bolshoi Theater.
When Tallchief was 15, Nijinska decided to stage three ballets in the Hollywood Bowl.
Upon Tallchief's death, Jacques d'Amboise remarked "When you thought of Russian ballet, it was Ulanova.
Tallchief was known for "dazzling audiences with her speed, energy and fire."
Nijinska saw Tallchief was serious and began devoting great attention to her.
For Ada Broadbent, she danced her first ''pas de deux''.
With English ballet, it was Fonteyn.
She is credited with "breaking down ethnic barriers" and was among the first Americans to flourish in a field long dominated by Russians and Europeans.
Another dancer pulled out of ''Apollo'' shortly before opening night, forcing Tallchief to learn more difficult role on short notice.
In addition to ballet, which she had previously been doing all wrong and went back to square one, she learned tap, Spanish dancing, and acrobatics there.
She created (was the first person to perform) the role of Coquette in ''Night Shadow'', the ballet's most technically challenging role, after Danilova selected the other female lead for herself.
She, however, was unaware of his attraction: "It never occurred to me that there was anything more than dancing on his mind&nbsp;...
She eventually replied, "But, George, I'm not sure I love you.
Describing one of her first experiences with him, she wrote "When I saw what he had done, I was astonished.
Based on a combination of her talent and her passport, Tallchief was taken on as an apprentice.
"Opportunity Class or not, I was still way ahead", she recalled.
"I almost fell out of my seat and was unable to respond", she recalled.
Dancing in the movie was "not gratifying" and Tallchief decided against making a career of it.
In the spring of 1943, Krassovska argued with Denham and left the company.
Her life has been the subject of multiple documentaries and biographies.
The couple divorced two years later.
Tallchief's popularity help grow the fledgeling dance company and she was asked to perform as many as eight times a week.
After six months in Paris, Tallchief and Balanchine returned to New York.
Didn't she love me anymore?"
After some thought, she agreed and the couple wed on August 16, 1946.
"My heart was broken," she recalled.
The local movie theater on Main Street, and the pool hall opposite, belonged to him.
In 1962, Tallchief was Rudolf Nureyev's partner of choice for his American debut which was broadcast on national television.
Tallchief's dancing was not confined to the stage.
One night on tour in 1945, Tallchief was doing her barre when Balanchine remarked "if only you would learn to do ''battement tendu'' properly you wouldn't have to learn anything else."
Within her first two months at Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, Tallchief had appeared in seven different ballets as part of the corps de ballet.
He has been called upon to "save" the famous troupe, but not everyone appreciated his presence.
She soon cast Tallchief as first ballerina Nathalie Krassovska's understudy for the lead role.
Between piano, ballet, and school work, Tall Chief had little free time, but loved the outdoors.
"I looked at her, and I knew this was what I wanted to do."
She remained closely tied to her Osage history until her death, speaking out against stereotypes and misconceptions about Native Americans on many occasions.
She made guest appearances with the Chicago Opera Ballet, the San Francisco Ballet, the Royal Danish Ballet, and the Hamburg Ballet, among others.
She was not just a great dancer, but a real artist—a true interpreter who brought her personality to bear on the dancing."
Danilova devoted a lot of her time to instructing Tallchief in the ballerina's art, helping her transform from a teenage girl into a young woman.
The day they arrived in Los Angeles her mother asked the clerk at a local drugstore if he knew any good dance teachers.
Balanchine opened the car door for her; when she got in he sat in silence for a moment before saying, "Maria, I would like you to become my wife".
While in New York, she took classes at the School of American Ballet, but on tour there were no official classes.
"For both of us it was our first love", Tallchief recalled.
In 1999, Tallchief was awarded the American National Medal of Arts by the National Endowment of the Arts; in 2011, she received the Chicago History Museum's Making History Award for Distinction in the Performing Arts.
"But I had seen the difference between Mary Ellen's who was a pupil of Balanchine dancing and mine.
She had given up piano and wanted to go to college, but her father was against it.
"Above all, I wanted to be appreciated as a prima ballerina who happened to be a Native American, never as someone who was an American Indian ballerina," she wrote.
Sandy and Yasu Osawa of Upstream Productions in Seattle, Washington made a documentary titled ''Maria Tallchief'' in November 2007, that aired on PBS between 2007 and 2010.
Explaining her teaching philosophy she wrote "New ideas are essential, but we must retain respect for the art of ballet–and that means the artist too–or else it is no longer an art form."
Her colleagues never appreciated Tallchief's presence, but French audiences loved her.
A group of supporters of Serge Lifar, who was on leave while accusations of aiding the Nazis during World War II were investigated, led a vocal campaign to get rid of Balanchine.
As a child, Ruth Porter had dreamed about becoming a performer, but her family could not afford dance or music lessons.
I feel that I hardly know you."
When Balanchine co-founded what would become the New York City Ballet in 1946, Tallchief became the company's first star.
Tallchief practiced whenever she could, earning a reputation as a hard worker.
In her autobiography, she reminisced about time spent "wandering around our big front yard" and "rambling around the grounds of our summer cottage hunting for arrowheads in the grass."
"It gave her the illusion of being a diva," said Tallchief protégé Kenneth von Heidecke, "but it was really a keen sense of honesty."
Mia Slavenska took a shine to Tallchief and arranged for her to audition for Serge Denham, director of the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo.
She served as director of ballet for the Lyric Opera of Chicago for most of the 1970s, and debuted the Chicago City Ballet in 1981.
She had in iron will inside&nbsp;... She phrased her curls and extensions as delicately or as strongly as the music itself."
Tallchief was involved with America for Indian Opportunity and was a director of the Indian Council Fire Achievement Award.
The magazine explained the 1960 recognition: "Tallchief is a star with a truly American flavor, whose qualities of elegance, brilliance, and modesty&nbsp;... made a distinguished contribution to the recent cultural mission of American Ballet Theatre in Europe and Russia."
She also removed Tall Chief from pointe, probably saving Tallchief major injury.
The family spent summers in Colorado Springs to escape the Oklahoma heat.
She continued to study piano, appearing as a guest soloist with small symphony orchestras throughout high school.
It was a sensitive subject for Tallchief–Dunham had previously suggested Tallchief change her surname to a Russian-sounding name such as Tallchieva, a practice common among ballet dancers at the time.
She and other family members performed at rodeos and other local events.
Nijinska imparted a strong sense of discipline and the belief that being a ballerina was a full-time task.
Does she have any equals anywhere, inside or outside of fairyland?
Impressed by her reading ability, the teachers allowed her to skip the first two grade levels.
After a pep talk from her mother, Tallchief rededicated herself and soon worked her way into a lead part in ''Chopin Concerto''.
Tallchief rose to the rank of "featured soloist" as Balanchine continued to cast her in important roles.
She was determined that her daughters would not suffer the same fate.
Almost from birth, Tall Chief was involved in dance, starting formal lessons at age three.
In her interpretation of Balanchine’s "Firebird," she was consumed both inside and out.
When her contract expired, she joined Balanchine who was in France as guest choreographer at the Paris Opera Ballet.
Reflecting on her own career, Tallchief wrote "I was in the middle of magic, in the presence of genius.
Balanchine continued to cast Tallchief in important roles.
According to Wheater, she "paved the way for dancers who were not in the traditional mold of ballet&nbsp;... she was crucial in breaking the stigma."
Balanchine "revolutionized ballet" by creating roles that demanded athleticism, speed, and aggressive dancing like nothing before.
She was said to exhibit both "electrifying passion" and great technical ability.
"''Peau Rouge danse a l'Opera pour le Roi de Suede''" Redskin dances at the Opera for the King of Sweden, read a front page headline.
He was glad to get back into ballet after years on Broadway and in Hollywood and accepted the offer.
She and her sister Marjorie are counted as two of a group of five Native American ballet dancers from Oklahoma born in the 1920s.
"He was obviously trying to convince me that our marriage was inevitable", she wrote.
In 1933, the family moved to Los Angeles with the intent of getting the children into Hollywood musicals.
In 1974, she founded Lyric Opera's ballet school, where she taught the Balanchine technique.
During her time in Paris, Tallchief became the first American to perform with the Paris Opera Ballet.
After a day to think it over, Tallchief accepted his proposal.
We saved our emotions for the classroom."
Tallchief was direct when she expressed her opinion, not mincing words.
Tallchief was called "one of the most brilliant American ballerinas of the 20th century" by the ''New York Times''.
The couple remained together, through Paschen's brief imprisonment for tax evasion, until his 2004 death.
Tallchief was ignorant of the personal attraction for a long time and their relationship remained mostly on a professional level.
Her Kennedy Center biography states that Tallchief was "both the inspiration and the living expression of the best the United States has given the world.
Her final performance in America was on television's "Bell Telephone Hour" in 1966.
Her father grew up rich as a result, never working "a day in his life."
Everything seemed so simple yet perfect: An elegant ballet fell into place before my eyes."
Slowly they became friends; then one day, Balanchine asked Tallchief to marry him, much to her surprise.
Tall Chief studied piano and contemplated becoming a concert pianist.
Sensing Tallchief's star was on the rise, her mother demanded a raise for her daughter.
Tallchief was featured in the documentary film, ''Dancing for Mr. B'' in 1989.
Also in 1946, Balanchine joined with arts patron Lincoln Kirstein to establish the Ballet Society, a direct forerunner to the New York City Ballet.
One day, de Mille suggested that Tallchief change her name.
In 2006, the Metropolitan Museum of Art presented a special tribute to Maria Tallchief titled "A Tribute to Ballet Great Maria Tallchief", during which Tallchief officially named Kenneth von Heidecke as her protégé.
Critic Walter Terry remarked "Maria Tallchief, as the Sugar Plum Fairy, is herself a creature of magic, dancing the seemingly impossible with effortless beauty of movement, electrifying us with her brilliance, enchanting us with her radiance of being.
Feeling alone and missing her new husband, she retired, not wishing to dance beyond her prime.
Looking back on Sabin many years later, Tall Chief wrote "She was a wretched instructor who never taught the basics, and it's a miracle I wasn't permanently harmed."
That summer, family friend Tatiana Riabouchinska asked if Tallchief would like to go to New York.
At age five, Tall Chief was enrolled at the nearby Sacred Heart Catholic School.
Tallchief was considered America's first major prima ballerina, and was the first Native American to hold the rank.
While they were engaged, Balanchine made extravagant romantic gestures and treated Tallchief with great affection.
She was grand in the grandest way."
The couple married the following June, and honeymooned with a ballet tour of Europe.
At age 12, Tallchief began to work with Bronislava Nijinska, a renowned choreographer who had recently opened her own studio in Los Angeles, and David Lichine, a choreographer and former dancer.
When the couple returned to the states, Tallchief quickly became one of the first stars, and first prima ballerina, of the New York City Ballet, which opened in October 1948.
She served as director of ballet for the Lyric Opera of Chicago from 1973 to 1979.
"I've paid for your lessons all your life", he said.
"We didn't concentrate only for an hour and a half a day", Tallchief recalled.
Tallchief graduated from Beverly Hills High School in 1942.
It was his way of saying she needed to start all over&nbsp;– ''battement tendu'' is the most basic ballet exercise there is.
Once in New York, Tallchief looked up Serge Denham.
After retiring from dancing, Tallchief moved to Chicago where husband Buzz Paschen resided.
Noting the great technical difficulty of the role, ''New York Times'' critic John Martin wrote that Tallchief was asked "to do everything except spin on her head, and she does it with complete and incomparable brilliance."
However, she described Balanchine as "a warm, affectionate, loving husband."
Tallchief had six months remaining on her contract with Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, so stayed with the company until 1947.
In Oklahoma, Tallchief was honored by the governor for both her ballet achievements and her pride in her American Indian heritage.
Their marriage was annulled in 1952, when both parties were attracted to other people.
William Mason, director emeritus of the Lyric Opera of Chicago, described Tallchief as "a consummate professional&nbsp;...She realized who and what she was, but she didn't flaunt it.
