Gladys, the daughter of two poor Midwestern migrants to California, was a flapper and worked as a film negative cutter at Consolidated Film Industries.
Due to the contrast between her stardom and troubled private life, Monroe is closely linked to broader discussions about modern phenomena such as mass media, fame, and consumer culture.
While the orphanage was "a model institution", and was described in positive terms by her peers, Monroe found being placed there traumatizing, as to her "it seemed that no one wanted me".
The last film that Monroe completed was John Huston's ''The Misfits'', which Miller had written to provide her with a dramatic role.
For example, when she was asked what she had on in the 1949 nude photo shoot, she replied, "I had the radio on".
Similarly, Lois Banner has stated that she was bullied by many of her directors.
In the following four years, she lived with several foster families, and often switched schools.
She had bit parts in ''Love Happy'', ''A Ticket to Tomahawk'', ''Right Cross'' and ''The Fireball'', but also made minor appearances in two critically acclaimed films: John Huston's crime film ''The Asphalt Jungle'' and Joseph Mankiewicz's drama ''All About Eve''.
She has been written about by scholars and journalists interested in gender and feminism, such as Gloria Steinem, Jacqueline Rose, Molly Haskell, Sarah Churchwell, and Lois Banner.
Monroe's unexpected death was front-page news in the United States and Europe.
According to Sarah Churchwell, some of Monroe's behavior especially later in her career was also in response to the condescension and sexism of her male co-stars and directors.
The experience changed Logan's opinion of Monroe, and he later compared her to Charlie Chaplin in her ability to blend comedy and tragedy.
Based on Anita Loos' bestselling novel and its Broadway version, the film focuses on two "gold-digging" showgirls, Lorelei Lee and Dorothy Shaw, played by Monroe and Jane Russell.
Monroe also started undergoing psychoanalysis at the recommendation of Strasberg, who believed that an actor must confront their emotional traumas and use them in their performances.
Monroe was found dead in the bedroom of her Brentwood home by her psychiatrist, Dr. Ralph Greenson, in the early morning hours of August 5, 1962.
While working in a factory as part of the war effort in 1944, she met a photographer and began a successful pin-up modeling career.
Monroe's troubled private life received much attention.
Some, such as Steinem, have viewed her as a victim of the studio system.
It was better received in Europe, where she was awarded the Italian David di Donatello and the French Crystal Star awards, and was nominated for a BAFTA.
She began to occasionally use the name Jean Norman when working, and had her curly brunette hair straightened and dyed blond to make her more employable.
In Howard Hawks' ''Monkey Business'', in which she was featured opposite Cary Grant, she played a secretary who is a "dumb, childish blonde, innocently unaware of the havoc her sexiness causes around her".
Despite the difficulties, the film was completed on schedule by the end of the year.
Following Monroe's success in these roles, Hyde negotiated a seven-year contract with 20th Century-Fox in December 1950.
The shoot lasted for several hours and attracted a crowd of nearly 2,000 spectators, including professional photographers.
After filming for ''Itch'' wrapped in November, Monroe began a new battle for control over her career and left Hollywood for the East Coast, where she and photographer Milton Greene founded their own production company, Marilyn Monroe Productions (MMP) &nbsp;– an action that has later been called "instrumental" in the collapse of the studio system.
While the publicity stunt placed Monroe on front pages all over the world, it also marked the end of her marriage to DiMaggio, who was furious about it.
Monroe next filmed a scene for ''Something's Got to Give'' in which she swam naked in a swimming pool.
During the production, she began an affair with her vocal coach, Fred Karger, who paid to have her slight overbite corrected.
In the 1950s, she also studied comedy in classes given by mime and dancer Lotte Goslar, famous for her comic stage performances, and had her accompany her on film sets to instruct her.
Despite the film's initial failure, in 2015 Geoff Andrew of the British Film Institute described it as a classic.
The second film was the thriller ''Don't Bother to Knock'', in which she starred as a mentally disturbed babysitter and which Zanuck had assigned for her to test her abilities in a heavier dramatic role.
Her drug use increased and, according to Spoto, she became pregnant and miscarried during the production.
The filming took place in Idaho and Arizona in early 1956, with Monroe "technically in charge" as the head of MMP, occasionally making decisions on cinematography and with Logan adapting to her chronic lateness and perfectionism.
''Ladies of the Chorus'' was released in October and was not a success.
Although none of her pictures were used by the FMPU, she quit working at the factory in January 1945 and began modeling for Conover and his friends.
She also remains a valuable brand: her image and name have been licensed for hundreds of products, and she has been featured in advertising for multinational corporations and brands such as Max Factor, Chanel, Mercedes-Benz, and Absolut Vodka.
Her funeral, held at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery on August 8, was private and attended by only her closest associates.
In it, Monroe is standing on a subway grate with the air blowing up the skirt of her white dress, which became one of the most famous scenes of her career.
Truman Capote lobbied for her to play Holly Golightly in a film adaptation of ''Breakfast at Tiffany's'', but the role went to Audrey Hepburn as its producers feared that Monroe would complicate the production.
''The Misfits'' was released the following month, failing at the box office.
She played Chérie, a saloon singer whose dreams of stardom are complicated by a naïve cowboy who falls in love with her.
Monroe's contract was not renewed in August 1947, and she returned to modeling while also doing occasional odd jobs at the studio.
In 1943, Dougherty enlisted in the Merchant Marine.
Her gynecological problems were largely caused by endometriosis, a disease from which she suffered throughout her adult life.
Its filming in the Nevada desert between July and November 1960 was again difficult.
Born and raised in Los Angeles, Monroe spent most of her childhood in foster homes and an orphanage and married for the first time at the age of sixteen.
My husband and I hardly spoke to each other.
Her publicity stunts often revolved around her clothing exposing large amounts of her body or even malfunctioning, such as when one of the shoulder straps of her dress suddenly snapped during a press conference.
Marilyn Monroe has finally proved herself an actress."
''Bus Stop'' became a box office success, grossing $4.25 million, and received mainly favorable reviews.
They raised their foster children according to the principles of evangelical Christianity.
At 4:25a.m., they notified the Los Angeles Police Department.
During the hiatus, she dismissed Greene from MMP and bought his share of the company as they could not settle their disagreements and she had begun to suspect that he was embezzling money from the company.
The difficulties of the film's production have since become "legendary".
She struggled with addiction, depression, and anxiety.
According to Spoto all four films featured her "essentially as a sexy ornament", but she received some praise from critics: Bosley Crowther of ''The New York Times'' described her as "superb" in ''As Young As You Feel'' and Ezra Goodman of the ''Los Angeles Daily News'' called her "one of the brightest up-and-coming actresses" for ''Love Nest''.
Despite the risk to her career, Monroe refused to end the relationship, later calling the studio heads "born cowards".
Historian Fiona Handyside writes that the French female audiences associated whiteness/blondness with American modernity and cleanliness, and so Monroe came to symbolize a modern, "liberated" woman whose life takes place in the public sphere.
In contrast, according to Peter Bradshaw, Monroe was a talented comedian who "understood how comedy achieved its effects", and  Roger Ebert wrote that "Monroe's eccentricities and neuroses on sets became notorious, but studios put up with her long after any other actress would have been blackballed because what they got back on the screen was magical".
The affair between Monroe and Miller became increasingly serious after October 1955, when her divorce from DiMaggio was finalized, and Miller separated from his wife.
The first film that Monroe chose to make under the new contract was the drama ''Bus Stop'', released in August 1956.
Greenson had been called there by her housekeeper Eunice Murray, who was staying overnight and had awoken at 3:00a.m.
Encouraged by the orphanage staff, who thought that Monroe would be happier living in a family, Grace became her legal guardian in 1936, although she was not able to take her out of the orphanage until the summer of 1937.
She was replaced by Lee Remick, but after Martin refused to make the film with anyone other than Monroe, Fox sued him as well and shut down the production.
Fox soon regretted its decision, and re-opened negotiations with Monroe later in June; a settlement about a new contract, including re-commencing ''Something's Got to Give'' and a starring role in the black comedy ''What a Way to Go!''
She often wore white to emphasize her blondness, and drew attention by wearing revealing outfits that showed off her figure.
The possibility of Monroe having accidentally overdosed was ruled out as the dosages found in her body were several times over the lethal limit.
She was briefly suspended in early 1954 for refusing a film project, but returned to star in one of the biggest box office successes of her career, ''The Seven Year Itch'' (1955).
Monroe herself privately likened the production to a sinking ship and commented on her co-stars and director saying "but why should I worry, I have no phallic symbol to lose."
Monroe dedicated 1955 to studying her craft.
The Los Angeles County Coroners Office was assisted in their investigation by experts from the Los Angeles Suicide Prevention Team.
On the other, she is also remembered for her troubled private life, unstable childhood, struggle for professional respect, and her death and the conspiracy theories surrounding it.
Gladys married her second husband Martin Edward Mortensen in 1924, but they separated before she became pregnant with Monroe; they divorced in 1928.
Although only on the screen for five minutes, she gained a mention in ''Photoplay'' and according to Spoto "moved effectively from movie model to serious actress".
She received positive reviews for her performance: ''The Hollywood Reporter'' stated that "she deserves starring status with her excellent interpretation", and ''Variety'' wrote that she "has an ease of delivery which makes her a cinch for popularity".
According to Sarah Churchwell, ''Niagara'' was one of the most overtly sexual films of Monroe's career, and it included scenes in which her body was covered only by a sheet or a towel, considered shocking by contemporary audiences.
According to ''The Guide to United States Popular Culture'', "as an icon of American popular culture, Monroe's few rivals in popularity include Elvis Presley and Mickey Mouse&nbsp;... no other star has ever inspired such a wide range of emotions&nbsp;– from lust to pity, from envy to remorse."
She was helped by her ex-husband Joe DiMaggio, with whom she now rekindled a friendship.
In ''All About Eve'', Monroe played Miss Caswell, a naïve young actress.
In late 1955, Fox awarded her a new contract, which gave her more control and a larger salary.
The cover image was a shot of her at the Miss America Pageant parade in 1952, and the centerfold featured one of her 1949 nude photographs.
Art historian Gail Levin has stated that Monroe may have been "the most photographed person of the 20th century", and The American Film Institute has named her the sixth greatest female screen legend in American film history.
Due to the elderly Lower's health issues, Monroe returned to live with the Goddards in Van Nuys in either late 1940 or early 1941.
Despite the difficulties of its production, when ''Some Like It Hot'' was released in March 1959, it became a critical and commercial success.
Although she considered the role of Sugar Kane another "dumb blonde", she accepted it due to Miller's encouragement and the offer of receiving ten percent of the film's profits in addition to her standard pay.
This became an obstacle in her later career, when she wanted to change her public image and pursue other kinds of roles, or to be respected as a businesswoman.
In August, filming was halted for her to spend a week detoxing in a Los Angeles hospital.
She had an affair with Yves Montand, her co-star, which was widely reported by the press and used in the film's publicity campaign.
She reached a settlement with the studio in March: it included a new contract to be made later in the year, and a starring role in the film version of the Broadway play ''The Seven Year Itch'', for which she was to receive a bonus of $100,000.
David Thomson called her body of work "insubstantial" and Pauline Kael wrote that she could not act, but rather "used her lack of an actress's skills to amuse the public.
Monroe's three other films in 1952 continued her typecasting in comic roles which focused on her sex appeal.
To generate advance publicity, the press were invited to take photographs of the scene, which were later published in ''Life''; this was the first time that a major star had posed nude while at the height of their career.
After graduating from Emerson, she began attending Van Nuys High School.
While Monroe remains a cultural icon, critics are divided on her legacy as an actress.
Monroe continued to attract attention with her revealing outfits in publicity events, most famously at the ''Photoplay'' awards in January 1953, where she won the "Fastest Rising Star" award.
Monroe was declared a ward of the state, and her mother's friend, Grace McKee Goddard, took responsibility over her and her mother's affairs.
She received a Golden Globe for Best Actress nomination for her performance.
According to Dyer, Monroe became "virtually a household name for sex" in the 1950s and "her image has to be situated in the flux of ideas about morality and sexuality that characterised the fifties in America", such as Freudian ideas about sex, the Kinsey report (1953), and Betty Friedan's ''The Feminine Mystique'' (1963).
She also officially changed her name to Marilyn Monroe in March.
She spent the rest of her life in and out of hospitals, and was rarely in contact with Monroe.
Empty bottles containing these medicines were found next to her bed.
This began a year-long legal battle between her and the studio.
The studio would pay her $100,000 for each movie, and granted her the right to choose her own projects, directors and cinematographers.
Monroe was also briefly hospitalized during this time due to a barbiturate overdose.
Spoto likewise describes her as the embodiment of "the postwar ideal of the American girl, soft, transparently needy, worshipful of men, naïve, offering sex without demands", which is echoed in Molly Haskell's statement that "she was the fifties fiction, the lie that a woman had no sexual needs, that she is there to cater to, or enhance, a man's needs."
The following month, a scandal broke when she revealed in an interview that she had posed for nude pictures in 1949, which were featured in calendars.
They shared it with lodgers, actors George and Maude Atkinson and their daughter, Nellie.
Although Monroe's screen persona as a dim-witted but sexually attractive blonde was a carefully crafted act, audiences and film critics believed it to be her real personality and that she was not acting in her comedies.
Despite the starring role and a subsequent screen test for the lead role in ''Born Yesterday'' (1950), Monroe's contract was not renewed.
''The Seven Year Itch'' was released the following June, and grossed over $4.5 million at the box office, making it one of the biggest commercial successes that year.
She was enrolled in Emerson Junior High School and was taken to weekly Christian Science services with Lower.
After leaving Columbia in September 1948, Monroe became a protégée of Johnny Hyde, vice president of the William Morris Agency.
According to Lois Banner, "it's said that the suicide rate in Los Angeles doubled the month after she died; the circulation rate of most newspapers expanded that month", and the ''Chicago Tribune'' reported that they had received hundreds of phone calls from members of the public requesting information about her death.
Monroe's trip to New York caused even more irritation in Fox executives, who had wanted her to cancel it.
When beginning to develop her star image, 20th Century-Fox wanted Monroe to replace the aging Betty Grable, their most popular "blonde bombshell" of the 1940s.
In retaliation to what she considered Olivier's "condescending" behavior, Monroe started arriving late and became uncooperative, stating later that "if you don't respect your artists, they can't work well."
After ''Some Like It Hot'', Monroe took another hiatus until late 1959, when she returned to Hollywood to star in the musical comedy ''Let's Make Love'', about an actress and a millionaire who fall in love when performing in a satirical play.
Monroe also continued modeling, and in May 1949 posed for nude photos taken by Tom Kelley.
Determined to make it as an actor, Monroe continued studying at the Actors' Lab, and in October appeared as a blonde vamp in the short-lived play ''Glamour Preferred'' at the Bliss-Hayden Theater, but the production was not reviewed by any major publication.
The first film she made after returning to Fox was the musical ''There's No Business Like Show Business'', which she strongly disliked but the studio required her to do in exchange for dropping ''The Girl in Pink Tights''.
Monroe was too ill to work for the majority of the next six weeks, but despite confirmations by multiple doctors, the studio tried to put pressure on her by alleging publicly that she was faking it.
Her doctors and psychiatrists stated that she had been prone to "severe fears and frequent depressions" with "abrupt and unpredictable" mood changes, and had overdosed several times in the past, possibly intentionally.
Her roles were almost always chorus girls, secretaries, or models; occupations where "the woman is on show, there for the pleasure of men."
Monroe and Miller's four-year marriage was effectively over, and he began a new relationship.
According to the agency's owner, Emmeline Snively, Monroe was one of its most ambitious and hard-working models; by early 1946, she had appeared on 33 magazine covers for publications such as ''Pageant'', ''U.S.
Despite her grief, 1951 became the year in which she gained more visibility.
Monroe and Miller separated after filming wrapped, and she was granted a quick divorce in Mexico in January 1961.
She called it a "Z-grade cowboy movie in which the acting finished second to the scenery and the CinemaScope process", although it was popular with audiences.
Others, such as Haskell, Rose, and Churchwell, have instead stressed Monroe's proactive role in her career and her participation in the creation of her public persona.
In September 1954, Monroe began filming Billy Wilder's comedy ''The Seven Year Itch'', in which she starred opposite Tom Ewell as a woman who becomes the object of her married neighbor's sexual fantasies.
To alleviate her anxiety and chronic insomnia, she began to use barbiturates, amphetamines and alcohol, which also exacerbated her problems, although she did not become severely addicted until 1956.
The Smithsonian Institution has included her on their list of "100 Most Significant Americans of All Time", and both ''Variety'' and VH1 have placed her in the top ten in their rankings of the greatest popular culture icons of the twentieth century.
Lois Banner has written that she often subtly parodied her status as a sex symbol in her films and public appearances.
In March, she was a presenter at the 23rd Academy Awards, and in September, ''Collier's'' became the first national magazine to publish a full-length profile of her.
Monroe appeared in six films released in 1950.
When the studio was still reluctant to change her contract, Monroe founded a film production company in late 1954, Marilyn Monroe Productions (MMP).
He angered her with the patronizing statement "All you have to do is be sexy", and by wanting her to replicate Leigh's interpretation.
For ''Vogue'', she and photographer Bert Stern collaborated for two series of photographs, one a standard fashion editorial and another of her posing nude, which were both later published posthumously with the title ''The Last Sitting''.
'''Marilyn Monroe''' (born '''Norma Jeane Mortenson'''; June 1, 1926&nbsp;– August 5, 1962) was an American actress and model.
Monroe disliked that he had based her role partly on her life, and thought it inferior to the male roles; she also struggled with Miller's habit of re-writing scenes the night before filming.
Several conspiracy theories about Monroe's death have been proposed in the decades afterwards, including murder and accidental overdose.
According to academic Susanne Hamscha, because of her continued relevance to ongoing discussions about modern society, Monroe is "never completely situated in one time or place" but has become "a surface on which narratives of American culture can be (re-)constructed", and "functions as a cultural type that can be reproduced, transformed, translated into new contexts, and enacted by other people".
The musical was unsuccessful upon its release in December, and Monroe's performance was considered vulgar by many critics.
She dedicated 1955 to building her company and began studying method acting at the Actors Studio.
In her private life, Monroe continued her relationship with DiMaggio despite the ongoing divorce proceedings while also dating actor Marlon Brando and playwright Arthur Miller.
California laws prevented the Goddards from taking Monroe out of state, and she faced the possibility of having to return to the orphanage.
To promote herself, she frequented producers' offices, befriended gossip columnist Sidney Skolsky, and entertained influential male guests at studio functions, a practice she had begun at Fox.
To repair her public image, Monroe engaged in several publicity ventures, including interviews for ''Life'' and ''Cosmopolitan'' and her first photo shoot for ''Vogue''.
Henry's Full House'', her final film of the year, she had a minor role as a prostitute.
She moved to New York and began taking acting classes with Constance Collier and attending workshops on method acting at the Actors Studio, run by Lee Strasberg.
As a solution, she married their neighbors' son, 21-year-old factory worker James "Jim" Dougherty, on June 19, 1942, just after her 16th birthday.
Her contract was renewed in February 1947, and she was soon given her first two  film roles: nine lines of dialogue as a waitress in the drama ''Dangerous Years'' (1947) and a one-line appearance in the comedy ''Scudda Hoo!
Monroe's early childhood was stable and happy.
Days before filming began, Monroe caught sinusitis; despite medical advice to postpone the production, Fox began it as planned in late April.
She played a recently divorced woman who becomes friends with three aging cowboys, played by Clark Gable, Eli Wallach and Montgomery Clift.
Monroe was later interred at crypt No.
Although she played a significant role in the creation and management of her public image throughout her career, she was disappointed at being typecast and underpaid by the studio.
The studio feared that Monroe would be blacklisted and urged her to end the affair, as Miller was being investigated by the FBI for allegations of communism and had been subpoenaed by the House Un-American Activities Committee.
Besides Grable, she was often compared to another iconic blonde, 1930s film star Jean Harlow.
By appearing vulnerable and unaware of her sex appeal, Monroe was the first sex symbol to present sex as natural and without danger, in contrast to the 1940s ''femme fatales''.
People have scope, you know."
Monroe's enduring popularity is linked to her conflicted public image.
Monroe's problems have been attributed to a combination of perfectionism, low self-esteem, and stage fright; she disliked the lack of control she had on her work on film sets, and never experienced similar problems during photo shoots, in which she had more say over her performance and could be more spontaneous instead of following a script.
Monroe was born Norma Jeane Mortenson at the Los Angeles County Hospital on June 1, 1926, as the third child of Gladys Pearl Baker (née Monroe, 1902–84).
Her last completed film was the drama ''The Misfits'' (1961).
To further develop her acting skills, Monroe began taking classes with Michael Chekhov and mime Lotte Goslar.
She wore a skin-tight gold lamé dress, which prompted veteran star Joan Crawford to describe her behavior as "unbecoming an actress and a lady" to the press.
French artist Jean Cocteau commented that her death "should serve as a terrible lesson to all those, whose chief occupation consists of spying on and tormenting film stars", her former co-star Laurence Olivier deemed her "the complete victim of ballyhoo and sensation", and ''Bus Stop'' director Joshua Logan stated that she was "one of the most unappreciated people in the world".
Monroe devised many of her publicity strategies, cultivated friendships with gossip columnists such as Sidney Skolsky and Louella Parsons, and controlled the use of her images.
Despite mixed reviews, the film was Monroe's biggest box office success so far, earning $8 million in world rentals.
According to Banner, she sometimes challenged prevailing racial norms in her publicity photographs; for example, in an image featured in ''Look'' in 1951, she was shown in revealing clothes while practicing with African-American singing coach Phil Moore.
It was clear that MMP would not be able to finance films alone, and the studio was eager to have Monroe working again.
In late 1944, Monroe met photographer David Conover, who had been sent by the U.S. Army Air Forces' First Motion Picture Unit (FMPU) to the factory to shoot morale-boosting pictures of female workers.
When she was fifteen, Gladys married a man nine years her senior, John Newton Baker, and had two children by him, Robert (1917–33) and Berniece (born 1919).
Monroe stated that she was influenced by Mae West, saying that she "learned a few tricks from her&nbsp;– that impression of laughing at, or mocking, her own sexuality".
Dyer has also argued that platinum blonde hair became such a defining feature of Monroe because it made her "racially unambiguous" and exclusively white just as the Civil Rights Movement was beginning, and that she should be seen as emblematic of racism in twentieth-century popular culture.
Monroe had no film roles during the first months of her contract and instead dedicated her days to acting, singing and dancing classes.
Its reviews were mixed, with Bosley Crowther calling Monroe "completely blank and unfathomable" and stating that "unfortunately for the film's structure, everything turns upon her".
Monroe was listed in the annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll in both 1953 and 1954, and according to Fox historian Aubrey Solomon became the studio's "greatest asset" alongside CinemaScope.
In her private life, Monroe was in a relationship with director Elia Kazan, and also briefly dated several other men, including director Nicholas Ray and actors Yul Brynner and Peter Lawford.
Monroe added to her reputation as a new sex symbol with other publicity stunts that year, such as wearing a revealing dress when acting as Grand Marshal at the Miss America Pageant parade, and by stating to gossip columnist Earl Wilson that she usually wore no underwear.
After staying with various of her and Grace's relatives and friends in Los Angeles and Compton, Monroe found a more permanent home in September 1938, when she began living with Grace's aunt, Ana Atchinson Lower, in the Sawtelle district.
She would also be free to make one film with MMP per each completed film for Fox.
In the former, Monroe played Angela, the young mistress of an aging criminal.
She chose George Cukor to direct and Miller re-wrote portions of the script, which she considered weak; she accepted the part solely because she was behind on her contract with Fox, having only made one of four promised films.
In press stories, Monroe was portrayed as the embodiment of the American Dream, as a girl who had risen from a miserable childhood to Hollywood stardom.
''Time'' called her a "shrewd businesswoman" and ''Look'' predicted that the win would be "an example of the individual against the herd for years to come".
In the last weeks of her life, she was also planning on starring in a biopic of Jean Harlow.
Although the film was shot in Hollywood, the studio decided to generate advance publicity by staging the filming of one scene on Lexington Avenue in New York.
Regardless of the popularity her sex appeal brought, Monroe wished to present more of her acting range, and in the summer of 1952 appeared in two commercially successful dramas.
Monroe faced a scandal when it was revealed that she had posed for nude photos before becoming a star, but rather than damaging her career, the story increased interest in her films.
She moved out of her in-laws' home, and defying them and her husband, signed a contract with the Blue Book Model Agency in August 1945.
It featured Monroe in the role of a naïve model who teams up with her friends to find rich husbands, repeating the successful formula of ''Gentlemen Prefer Blondes''.
In the end, Wilder was happy with Monroe's performance, stating: "Anyone can remember lines, but it takes a real artist to come on the set and not know her lines and yet give the performance she did!"
It was to be co-produced by MMP, directed by George Cukor and to co-star Dean Martin and Cyd Charisse.
Some months later, in January 1934, Gladys had a mental breakdown and was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia.
Its production was delayed by her frequent absences from set.
Monroe's hairline was raised by electrolysis and her hair was bleached even lighter, to platinum blond.
Announcing its foundation in a press conference in January 1955, Monroe stated that she was "tired of the same old sex roles.
Monroe converted to Judaism with the marriage, which led Egypt to ban all of her films.
