They were introduced by the Polish physicist, Professor Józef Wierusz-Kowalski, who had learned that Marie was looking for a larger laboratory space, something that Wierusz-Kowalski thought Pierre had access to.
An artistic installation celebrating "Madame Curie" filled the Jacobs Gallery at San Diego's Museum of Contemporary Art.
In August 1922, Marie Curie became a member of the newly created International Commission for Intellectual Cooperation of the League of Nations.
The Marie Curie Actions fellowship program of the European Union for young scientists wishing to work in a foreign country is named after her.
The Institute's development was interrupted by the coming war, as most researchers were drafted into the French Army, and it fully resumed its activities in 1919.
After Russian authorities eliminated laboratory instruction from the Polish schools, he brought much of the laboratory equipment home, and instructed his children in its use.
On 19 April 1906, Pierre was killed in a road accident.
Albert Einstein reportedly remarked that she was probably the only person who could not be corrupted by fame.
In 1896, Henri Becquerel discovered that uranium salts emitted rays that resembled X-rays in their penetrating power.
If Curie's work helped overturn established ideas in physics and chemistry, it has had an equally profound effect in the societal sphere.
In 1895, Wilhelm Roentgen discovered the existence of X-rays, though the mechanism behind their production was not yet understood.
Led by Curie, the Institute produced four more Nobel Prize winners, including her daughter Irène Joliot-Curie and her son-in-law, Frédéric Joliot-Curie.
In 1922 she became a fellow of the French Academy of Medicine.
Polish nuclear research reactor Maria is named after her.
They did not realize at the time that what they were searching for was present in such minute quantities that they would eventually have to process tons of the ore.
In spite of all her humanitarian contributions to the French war effort, Curie never received any formal recognition of it from the French government.
She returned to her laboratory only in December, after a break of about 14 months.
Eventually Pierre proposed marriage, but at first Marie did not accept as she was still planning to go back to her native country.
It is estimated that over a million wounded soldiers were treated with her X-ray units.
A month after accepting her 1911 Nobel Prize, she was hospitalised with depression and a kidney ailment.
It was adapted from a play of the same name.
She subsisted on her meager resources, suffering from cold winters and occasionally fainting from hunger.
Marie had begun her scientific career in Paris with an investigation of the magnetic properties of various steels, commissioned by the Society for the Encouragement of National Industry (''Société d'encouragement pour l'industrie nationale'' ).
Curie (then in her mid-40s) was five years older than Langevin and was misrepresented in the tabloids as a foreign Jewish home-wrecker.
Greer Garson and Walter Pidgeon starred in the 1943 U.S. Oscar-nominated film, ''Madame Curie'', based on her life.
Upon Pierre's complaint, the University of Paris relented and agreed to furnish a new laboratory, but it would not be ready until 1906.
On 13 May 1906 the  physics department of the University of Paris decided to retain the chair that had been created for Pierre and to offer it to Marie.
Curie's likeness also has appeared on banknotes, stamps and coins around the world.
In Britain, Marie Curie Cancer Care was organized in 1948 to care for the terminally ill.
To attain her scientific achievements, she had to overcome barriers that were placed in her way because she was a woman, in both her native and her adoptive country.
Eventually, it became one of four major radioactivity research laboratories, the others being the Cavendish Laboratory, with Ernest Rutherford; the Institute for Radium Research, Vienna, with Stefan Meyer; and the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry, with Otto Hahn and Lise Meitner.
The Curies did not have a dedicated laboratory; most of their research was carried out in a converted shed next to the School of Physics and Chemistry.
Meanwhile, she continued studying at the University of Paris, and with the aid of a fellowship she was able to earn a second degree in 1894.
Curie's quest to create a new laboratory did not end with the University of Paris, however.
While a French citizen, Marie Skłodowska Curie (she used both surnames) never lost her sense of Polish identity.
Curie is the subject of the play ''False Assumptions'' by Lawrence Aronovitch, in which the ghosts of three other women scientists observe events in her life.
The School did not sponsor her research, but she would receive subsidies from metallurgical and mining companies and from various organizations and governments.
Curie and her husband declined to go to Stockholm to receive the prize in person; they were too busy with their work, and Pierre, who disliked public ceremonies, was feeling increasingly ill. As Nobel laureates were required to deliver a lecture, the Curies finally undertook the trip in 1905.
The deaths of Maria's mother and sister caused her to give up Catholicism and become agnostic.
During World War I, Curie saw a need for field radiological centres near the front lines to assist battlefield surgeons.
In 1935, Michalina Mościcka, wife of Polish President Ignacy Mościcki, unveiled a statue of Marie Curie before Warsaw's Radium Institute.
Three radioactive minerals are also named after the Curies: curite, sklodowskite, and cuprosklodowskite.
In 1910, Marie Curie isolated pure radium metal.
During the French Academy of Sciences elections, she was vilified by the right wing press who criticised her for being a foreigner and an atheist.
Her paper, giving a brief and simple account of her work, was presented for her to the ''Académie'' on 12 April 1898 by her former professor, Gabriel Lippmann.
She died of tuberculosis in May 1878, when Maria was ten years old.
This hypothesis was an important step in disproving the ancient assumption that atoms were indivisible.
A contemporary quip would call Marie, "Pierre's biggest discovery."
Curie's systematic studies included two uranium minerals, pitchblende and torbernite (also known as chalcolite).
Two museums are devoted to Marie Curie.
In 2011 Lauren Redniss published ''Radioactive: Marie and Pierre Curie, a Tale of Love and Fallout ''.
By mid-1898 he was so invested in it that he decided to drop his work on crystals and to join her.
From a ton of pitchblende, one-tenth of a gram of radium chloride was separated in 1902.
She used an innovative technique to investigate samples.
Several works of art bear her likeness.
A delegation of celebrated Polish men of learning, headed by novelist Henryk Sienkiewicz, encouraged her to return to Poland and continue her research in her native country.
She became the director of the Red Cross Radiology Service and set up France's first military radiology centre, operational by late 1914.
Assisted at first by a military doctor and by her 17-year-old daughter Irène, Curie directed the installation of 20 mobile radiological vehicles and another 200 radiological units at field hospitals in the first year of the war.
She was the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris.
In Paris, Maria (or Marie, as she would be known in France) briefly found shelter with her sister and brother-in-law before renting a garret closer to the university, in the Latin Quarter, and proceeding with her studies of physics, chemistry, and mathematics at the University of Paris, where she enrolled in late 1891.
Maria's father was an atheist; her mother a devout Catholic.
Meanwhile, a new industry began developing, based on radium.
In July 1898, Curie and her husband published a joint paper announcing the existence of an element which they named "polonium", in honour of her native Poland, which would for another twenty years remain partitioned among three empires (Russian, Austrian, and Prussian).
A number of biographies are devoted to her.
In 2007, a metro station in Paris was renamed to honour both of the Curies.
All that time she continued to educate herself, reading books, exchanging letters, and being tutored herself.
These distractions from her scientific labours and the attendant publicity caused her much discomfort but provided resources needed for her work.
Marie's dark blue outfit, worn instead of a bridal gown, would serve her for many years as a laboratory outfit.
In December 1903, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded Pierre Curie, Marie Curie, and Henri Becquerel the Nobel Prize in Physics, "in recognition of the extraordinary services they have rendered by their joint researches on the radiation phenomena discovered by Professor Henri Becquerel."
Also in 2011, a new Warsaw bridge over the Vistula was named after her.
In 1921, she was awarded the Iota Sigma Pi National Honorary Member for her significant contribution.
At the beginning of 1890, Bronisława — who a few months earlier had married Kazimierz Dłuski, a Polish physician and social and political activist — invited Maria to join them in Paris.
Numerous locations around the world are named after her.
His parents rejected the idea of his marrying the penniless relative, and Kazimierz was unable to oppose them.
In 1955 Jozef Mazur created a stained glass panel of her, the Maria Skłodowska-Curie Medallion, featured in the University at Buffalo Polish Room.
Using Pierre's electrometer, she discovered that uranium rays caused the air around a sample to conduct electricity.
In 1910 Curie succeeded in isolating radium; she also defined an international standard for radioactive emissions that was eventually named for her and Pierre: the curie.
She studied at Warsaw's clandestine Floating University and began her practical scientific training in Warsaw.
She was featured on the Polish late-1980s 20,000-''złoty'' banknote as well as on the last French 500-franc note, before the franc was replaced by the euro.
* Nobel Prize in Chemistry (1911)
She was acutely aware of the importance of promptly publishing her discoveries and thus establishing her priority.
In 1925, she visited Poland, to participate in the ceremony that laid foundations for the Radium Institute in Warsaw.
On the 2011 centenary of Marie Curie's second Nobel Prize (1911), an allegorical mural was painted on the façade of her Warsaw birthplace.
She named the first chemical element that she discoveredpolonium, which she isolated in 1898after her native country.
She was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, the first person and only woman to win twice, the only person to win twice in multiple sciences, and was part of the Curie family legacy of five Nobel Prizes.
Maria's paternal grandfather, Józef Skłodowski, had been a respected teacher in Lublin, where he taught the young Bolesław Prus, who would become a leading figure in Polish literature.
'''Marie Skłodowska Curie''' (; ; ; 7 November 18674 July 1934), born '''Maria Salomea Skłodowska''' , was a Polish and naturalized-French physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering research on radioactivity.
To prove their discoveries beyond any doubt, the Curies sought to isolate polonium and radium in pure form.
While working for the latter family, she fell in love with their son, Kazimierz Żorawski, a future eminent mathematician.
She won the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
On 7 November, Google celebrated the anniversary of her birth with a special Google Doodle.
In 1893, she was awarded a degree in physics and began work in an industrial laboratory of Professor Gabriel Lippmann.
She visited Poland in 1913 and was welcomed in Warsaw but the visit was mostly ignored by the Russian authorities.
She did buy war bonds, using her Nobel Prize money.
She hypothesized that the radiation was not the outcome of some interaction of molecules but must come from the atom itself.
She provided the radium from her own one-gram supply.
Later, she began training other women as aides.
A KLM McDonnell Douglas MD-11 (registration PH-KCC) is named in her honour.
Pitchblende is a complex mineral; the chemical separation of its constituents was an arduous task.
Sixty years later, in 1995, in honour of their achievements, the remains of both were transferred to the Panthéon, Paris.
She received numerous honorary degrees from universities across the world.
It depicts an infant Maria Skłodowska holding a test tube from which emanate the elements that she would discover as an adult: polonium and radium.
They shared two pastimes:  long bicycle trips, and journeys abroad, which brought them even closer.
Curie chose the same rapid means of publication.
She is the patron of Maria Curie-Skłodowska University, in Lublin, founded in 1944; and of Pierre and Marie Curie University (Paris VI), France's pre-eminent science university.
Meanwhile, for the 1894 summer break, Marie returned to Warsaw, where she visited her family.
In 1897, her daughter Irène was born.
She also travelled to other countries, appearing publicly and giving lectures in Belgium, Brazil, Spain, and Czechoslovakia.
The curie (symbol '''Ci'''), a unit of radioactivity, is named in honour of her and Pierre (although the commission which agreed on the name never clearly stated whether the standard was named after Pierre, Marie or both of them).
He demonstrated that this radiation, unlike phosphorescence, did not depend on an external source of energy but seemed to arise spontaneously from uranium itself.
* Actonian Prize (1907)
The laboratory was run by her cousin Józef Boguski, who had been an assistant in Saint Petersburg to the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev.
Though Pierre did not have a large laboratory, he was able to find some space for Marie where she was able to begin work.
Skłodowska studied during the day and tutored evenings, barely earning her keep.
Nevertheless, in 1911 the French Academy of Sciences did not elect her to be a member by one or two votes.
In late 1891, she left Poland for France.
She continued working as a governess, and remained there till late 1891.
Following the award of the Nobel Prize, and galvanized by an offer from the University of Geneva, which offered Pierre a position, the University of Paris gave Pierre a professorship and the chair of physics, although the Curies still did not have a proper laboratory.
She and her husband often refused awards and medals.
Because of their levels of radioactive contamination, her papers from the 1890s are considered too dangerous to handle.
That same year Pierre Curie entered her life; it was their mutual interest in natural sciences that drew them together.
Marie Curie's 1898 publication with her husband M. P. Curie and also with M. G. Bémont for their discovery of radium and polonium was honored by a Citation for Chemical Breakthrough Award  from the Division of History of Chemistry of the American Chemical Society presented to the ESPCI Paris (Ecole supérieure de physique et de chimie industrielles de la Ville de Paris) in 2015.
Marie Curie themed postage stamps from Mali, the Republic of Togo, Zambia, and the Republic of Guinea actually show a picture of Susan Marie Frontczak portraying Curie in a 2001 picture by Paul Schroeder.
Pierre, however, declared that he was ready to move with her to Poland, even if it meant being reduced to teaching French.
Curie has also been portrayed by Susan Marie Frontczak in her play ''Manya: The Living History of Marie Curie'', a one-woman show performed in 30 US states and nine countries, by 2014.
Less than three years earlier, Maria's oldest sibling, Zofia, had died of typhus contracted from a boarder.
She was interred at the cemetery in Sceaux, alongside her husband Pierre.
* Nobel Prize in Physics (1903, with Pierre)
In her later years, she headed the Radium Institute (''Institut du radium'', now Curie Institute, ''Institut Curie''), a radioactivity laboratory created for her by the Pasteur Institute and the University of Paris.
In her last year, she worked on a book, ''Radioactivity'', which was published posthumously in 1935.
Before the meeting, recognising her growing fame abroad, and embarrassed by the fact that she had no French official distinctions to wear in public, the French government offered her a Legion of Honour award, but she refused.
On 10 December, the New York Academy of Sciences celebrated the centenary of Marie Curie's second Nobel prize in the presence of Princess Madeleine of Sweden.
Her achievements included the development of the theory of ''radioactivity'' (a term that she coined), techniques for isolating radioactive isotopes, and the discovery of two elements, polonium and radium.
This award was "in recognition of her services to the advancement of chemistry by the discovery of the elements radium and polonium, by the isolation of radium and the study of the nature and compounds of this remarkable element."
Poland and France declared 2011 the Year of Marie Curie, and the United Nations declared that this would be the International Year of Chemistry.
When she was ten years old, Maria began attending the boarding school of J. Sikorska; next she attended a ''gymnasium'' for girls, from which she graduated on 12 June 1883 with a gold medal.
In 1891, aged 24, she followed her older sister Bronisława to study in Paris, where she earned her higher degrees and conducted her subsequent scientific work.
Using this technique, her first result was the finding that the activity of the uranium compounds depended only on the quantity of uranium present.
Pierre was an instructor at the School of Physics and Chemistry, the ''École supérieure de physique et de chimie industrielles de la ville de Paris'' (ESPCI).
In a 2009 poll carried out by ''New Scientist'', Marie Curie was voted the "most inspirational woman in science".
Her daughter later remarked on the public hypocrisy as the French press often portrayed Curie as an unworthy foreigner when she was nominated for a French honour, but would portray her as a French hero when she received a foreign one such as her Nobel Prizes.
She was still laboring under the illusion that she would be able to work in her chosen field in Poland, but she was denied a place at Kraków University because she was a woman.
Mrs. William Brown Meloney, after interviewing Marie, created a ''Marie Curie Radium Fund'' and raised money to buy radium, publicising her trip.
In Pierre, Marie had found a new love, a partner, and a scientific collaborator on whom she could depend.
Walking across the Rue Dauphine in heavy rain, he was struck by a horse-drawn vehicle and fell under its wheels, causing his skull to fracture.
In 1987 Françoise Giroud wrote ''Marie Curie: A Life''.
A doctoral student of Curie, Marguerite Perey, became the first woman elected to membership in the Academy&nbsp;– over half a century later, in 1962.
She was known for her honesty and moderate life style.
Their mutual passion for science brought them increasingly closer, and they began to develop feelings for one another.
Several institutions bear her name, starting with the two Curie institutes – the Maria Skłodowska–Curie Institute of Oncology, in Warsaw; and the ''Institut Curie'' in Paris.
Busy with this work, she carried out very little scientific research during that period.
She was helped by her father, who was able to secure a more lucrative position again.
In 1921, US President Warren G. Harding received her at the White House to present her with the 1&nbsp;gram of radium collected in the United States.
Marie was the first woman to be awarded a Nobel Prize.
She became the first woman to be honoured with interment in the Panthéon on her own merits.
After a collapse, possibly due to depression, she spent the following year in the countryside with relatives of her father, and the next year with her father in Warsaw, where she did some tutoring.
After the war, she summarized her war time experiences in a book ''Radiology in War'' (1919).
The element with atomic number 96 was named curium.
Pierre was increasingly intrigued by her work.
She later hired Polish governesses to teach her daughters her native language, and sent or took them on visits to Poland.
Maria's loss of the relationship with Żorawski was tragic for both.
In early 1889 she returned home to her father in Warsaw.
Marie Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel prize, the first person to win two Nobel Prizes, the only woman to win in two fields, and the only person to win in multiple sciences.
When the scandal broke, she was away at a conference in Belgium; on her return, she found an angry mob in front of her house and had to seek refuge, with her daughters, in the home of a friend.
Her electrometer showed that pitchblende was four times as active as uranium itself, and chalcolite twice as active.
She was born in Warsaw, in what was then the Kingdom of Poland, part of the Russian Empire.
A few months later, on 4 July 1934, she died at the Sancellemoz Sanatorium in Passy, in Haute-Savoie, from aplastic anemia believed to have been contracted from her long-term exposure to radiation.
That month the couple were invited to the Royal Institution in London to give a speech on radioactivity; being a woman, she was prevented from speaking, and Pierre alone was allowed to.
In 1967, the Maria Skłodowska-Curie Museum was established in Warsaw's "New Town", at her birthplace on ''ulica Freta'' (Freta Street).
She had carried test tubes containing radioactive isotopes in her pocket, and she stored them in her desk drawer, remarking on the faint light that the substances gave off in the dark.
The father was eventually fired by his Russian supervisors for pro-Polish sentiments, and forced to take lower-paying posts; the family also lost money on a bad investment, and eventually chose to supplement their income by lodging boys in the house.
She gave much of her first Nobel Prize money to friends, family, students, and research associates.
Curie visited Poland for the last time in early 1934.
Curie died in 1934, aged 66, at a sanatorium in Sancellemoz (Haute-Savoie), France, due to aplastic anemia brought on by exposure to radiation while carrying test tubes of radium in her pockets during research, and in the course of her service in World War I mobile X-ray units that she had set up.
In 1938 her daughter, Ève Curie, published ''Madame Curie''.
International recognition for her work had been growing to new heights, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, overcoming opposition prompted by the Langevin scandal, honored her a second time, with the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Curie was also exposed to X-rays from unshielded equipment while serving as a radiologist in field hospitals during the war.
To support her family, Curie began teaching at the École Normale Supérieure.
In 2015, two other women were also interred on their own merits.
The initiative for creating the Radium Institute had come in 1909 from Pierre Paul Émile Roux, director of the Pasteur Institute, who had been disappointed that the University of Paris was not giving Curie a proper laboratory and had suggested that she move to the Pasteur Institute.
* Franklin Medal of the American Philosophical Society (1921)
They were unaware of the deleterious effects of radiation exposure attendant on their continued unprotected work with radioactive substances.
She founded the Curie Institutes in Paris and in Warsaw, which remain major centres of medical research today.
In Poland, she had received honorary doctorates from the Lwów Polytechnic (1912), Poznań University (1922), Kraków's Jagiellonian University (1924), and the Warsaw Polytechnic (1926).
A letter from Pierre convinced her to return to Paris to pursue a Ph.D. At Marie's insistence, Pierre had written up his research on magnetism and received his own doctorate in March 1895; he was also promoted to professor at the School.
She later would recall how she felt "a passionate desire to verify this hypothesis as rapidly as possible."
She tutored, studied at the Flying University, and began her practical scientific training (1890–91) in a chemical laboratory at the Museum of Industry and Agriculture at ''Krakowskie Przedmieście 66'', near Warsaw's Old Town.
On 26 July 1895 they were married in Sceaux (Seine); neither wanted a religious service.
This resulted in a press scandal that was exploited by her academic opponents.
As one of the most famous women scientists to date, Marie Curie has become an icon in the scientific world and has received tributes from across the globe, even in the realm of pop culture.
In the course of their research, they also coined the word "radioactivity".
After a quick study of radiology, anatomy, and automotive mechanics she procured X-ray equipment, vehicles, auxiliary generators, and developed mobile radiography units, which came to be popularly known as ''petites Curies'' ("Little Curies").
At first, the Committee intended to honour only Pierre and Becquerel, but one of the committee members and an advocate of woman scientists, Swedish mathematician Magnus Goesta Mittag-Leffler, alerted Pierre to the situation, and after his complaint, Marie's name was added to the nomination.
She was also the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris, and in 1995 became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Panthéon in Paris.
During World War I, she established the first military field radiological centres.
The award money allowed the Curies to hire their first laboratory assistant.
In 1920, for the 25th anniversary of the discovery of radium, the French government established a stipend for her; its previous recipient was Louis Pasteur (1822–95).
She was the first person to win or share two Nobel Prizes, and remains alone with Linus Pauling as Nobel laureates in two fields each.
In 1912 the Warsaw Scientific Society offered her the directorship of a new laboratory in Warsaw but she declined, focusing on the developing Radium Institute to be completed in August 1914, and on a new street named Rue Pierre-Curie.
In connection with this, Maria took a position as governess: first as a home tutor in Warsaw; then for two years as a governess in Szczuki with a landed family, the Żorawskis, who were relatives of her father.
