The same year, she founded the Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress to "promote eugenic birth control", in part because "the Society refused to place birth control prominently on its platform".
She unsuccessfully petitioned Neville Chamberlain to gain for Douglas a civil list pension; the petition was signed by Arthur Quiller-Couch, John Gielgud, Evelyn Waugh and Virginia Woolf, among others.
Her recipe proved very effective.
This was a serious issue for Roe; after their marriage, he and Stopes planned to open a clinic for poor mothers in London.
When we remember that millions are being spent by the Ministry of Health and by Local Authorities – on pure milk for necessitous expectant and nursing mothers, on Maternity Clinics to guard the health of mothers before and after childbirth, for the provision of skilled midwives, and on Infant Welfare Centres – it is truly amazing that this monstrous campaign of birth control should be tolerated by the Home Secretary.
Stopes was born in Edinburgh.
Her first major success was ''Our Ostriches'', a play that dealt with society's approach to working class women being forced to produce babies throughout their lives.
She must have read the wrong edition.
Scott died during the 1912 Terra Nova Expedition,  but fossils of plants from the Queen Maud Mountains found near Scott's and his companions'  bodies provided this evidence.
Later the same year, her marriage to Gates was annulled.
Stopes's passion to prove Suess's theory led her to discuss the possibility of joining Scott's next expedition to Antarctica.
Stopes arrived in North America before Christmas to start her research.
Her sex manual ''Married Love'' (1918) was controversial and influential, and brought the subject of birth control into wide public discourse.
According to historian Richard Soloway's The Galton Lecture in 1996:If Stopes' general interest in birth control was a logical consequence of her romantic preoccupation with compatible sexuality within blissful marriage, her particular efforts to provide birth control for the poor had far more to do with her eugenic concerns about the impending "racial darkness" that the adoption of contraception promised to illuminate.
According to June Rose, Stopes was "an elitist, an idealist, interested in creating a society in which only the best and the beautiful should survive".
The bishops were not receptive; among the resolutions carried during the conference was one aimed against "the deliberate cultivation of sexual union" and another against "indecent literature, suggestive plays and films and the open or secret sale of contraceptives".
A few months later, she asked Norman Haire, a young Australian doctor, whether he would be interested in running a clinical trial of the device, as she had two correspondents who wanted to use it.
#Were they true in substance and in fact?
When Stopes had sufficiently recovered she returned to work in 1920; she engaged in public speaking and responding to letters seeking advice on marriage, sex and birth control.
The Government of Canada published her results in 1914.
Stopes made major contributions to knowledge of the earliest angiosperms, the formation of coal balls and the nature of coal macerals.
In mid-1912 she delivered her results, finding for the Pennsylvanian period of the Carboniferous.
She sent Mrs. E. B. Mayne to disseminate the ''Letter to Working Mothers'' to the slums of East London.
The couple married in March and returned to England on 1 April that year.
She founded and curated the Portland Museum, which opened in 1930.
In July 1915, she met Margaret Sanger, who had just given a talk on birth control at a Fabian Society meeting.
The success of ''Married Love'' encouraged Stopes to provide a follow-up; the already written ''Wise Parenthood: a Book for Married People'', a manual on birth control that was published later that year.
After another year, she sought legal advice about ending the marriage.
When Stopes learnt that one of Avro Manhattan's friends had had an abortion, Stopes accused him of "murdering" the unborn child.
The clinic was run by midwives and supported by visiting doctors.
Following this, Stopes earned a D.Sc.
In 1922, Stopes wrote ''A New Gospel to All Peoples''.
He was not persuaded.
However, according to Rose, any sympathy she may have had would have dissipated when Hitler closed the clinics.
At six weeks old, her parents took Stopes from Scotland; the family stayed briefly in Colchester then moved to London, where in 1880 her father bought 28 Cintra Park in Upper Norwood.
The free clinic was open to all married women for knowledge about reproductive health.
She did not join the expedition, but Scott promised to bring back samples of fossils to provide evidence for the theory.
A conference of Anglican bishops was due to be held in June; not long before the conference, Stopes had a vision.
He failed to assert his position as head of the household and was frustrated.
Stopes attended the inaugural congress of the Eugenics Society in 1912 and became a fellow in 1921.
In 1903 she published a study of the botany of the recently dried-up Ebbsfleet River.
In August 1939, Stopes sent a copy of her book ''Love Songs for Young Lovers'' to Adolf Hitler with the following cover letter:
It is part of the Early Pennsylvanian epoch Lancaster Formation.
She was more than once accused of being anti-Semitic by other pioneers of the birth control movement.
Not receiving useful help, she read the legal code seeking a way to get a divorce.
In 1920, she sent a copy of "Radiant Motherhood" to Prime Minister Lloyd George's secretary and drew attention to the chapter on eugenics (Chapter XX) In 1922, she sent a declaration to the candidates in the upcoming  parliamentary election, asking them to sign it.
The jury found in favour of Stopes, answering the judge's four questions:
The island's Jurassic fossil forests provided her with endless interest.
Eugenics was central to her birth control vision.
She tested many of her contraceptives on patients at her clinics.
Stopes opposed abortion; she tried to discover alternatives for families and increase knowledge about birth control and the reproductive system.
Many readers wrote to Stopes for personal advice, which she energetically endeavoured to give.
She offered it to Blackie and Son, who declined.
The cottage housing the museum was an inspiration behind ''The Well-Beloved'', a novel by Thomas Hardy, who was a friend of Marie Stopes.
Stopes died on 2 October 1958, aged 77, from breast cancer at her home in Dorking, Surrey.
She called in her secretary and dictated a message addressed to the bishops which began: "My Lords, I speak to you in the name of God.
According to W. G. Chaloner (2005), "between 1903 and 1935 she published a series of palaeobotanical papers that placed her among the leading half-dozen British palaeobotanists of her time".
This lack of success made Stopes contemplate a different approach to taking her message to the poor.
The issue of the gold pin device resurfaced in the Stopes-Sutherland libel case a few years later.
When Binnie Dunlop, secretary of the Malthusian League, introduced her to Humphrey Verdon Roe—Stopes' future second husband—in 1917, she received the boost that helped her publish her book.
Stopes' work had been associated with Charles Bradlaugh, who had been convicted of obscenity 45 years earlier when he had republished an American Malthusian text in Britain, which "advocated and gave explicit information about contraceptive methods".
The "unfit" included "the inferior, the depraved, and the feeble-minded".
But, to judge from her condition,
Stopes was strongly against the termination of a pregnancy; during her lifetime her clinics did not offer abortions.
Those who are grown up in the present active generations, the matured and hardened, with all their weaknesses and flaws, cannot do very much, though they may do something with themselves.
The relationship ended.
''Married Love'' was published on 26 March 1918; that day, Stopes was visiting Humphrey Roe, who had just returned with a broken ankle from service during the First World War after his aeroplane crashed.
During Stopes's time at Manchester, she studied coal and coal balls and researched the collection of Glossopteris (Permian seed ferns).
He proposed all patients would be married and that no abortions would be done, but his offer was declined.
I hope too that you yourself may find something to enjoy in the book.
Statistics show that every year the birth rate from the worst end of our community is increasing in proportion to the birth rate at the better end, and it was in order to try to right that grave social danger that I embarked upon this work.”
Stopes was furious and said her baby had been murdered.
When Harry announced their engagement in October 1947, his mother set about "to try to sabotage the union".
Mayne approached twenty families a day, but after several months she concluded the working class was mistrustful of well-intentioned meddlers.
Stopes rediscovered the use of  olive oil-soaked sponges as an alternative birth control.
Nurses at Stopes' clinic had to sign a declaration not to "impart any information or lend any assistance whatsoever to any person calculated to lead to the destruction ''in utero'' of the products of conception".
I speak to you of the mysteries of man and woman."
#Were the words complained of defamatory of the plaintiff?
The global partnership took over responsibility for the main clinic, and in 1978 it began its work overseas in New Delhi, India.
Stopes and the doctors clashed over the method of birth—she was not allowed to give birth on her knees.
Stopes was acquainted with many literary figures of the day.
Options included the cervical cap—which was the most popular—coitus interruptus, and spermicides based on soap and oil.
Starting her work on the Fern Ledges in earnest in February 1911, she did geological field work and researched at geological collections in museums, and shipped specimens to England for further investigation.
An English Heritage blue plaque commemorates Stopes at 28 Cintra Park, Upper Norwood, where she lived from 1880 to 1892.
Haire became involved in another birth control clinic that opened in Walworth in November 1921; later a rivalry between Stopes and Haire erupted in ''The Lancet''.
Stopes was even remembered in a playground rhyme:
Around the start of her divorce proceedings in 1913, Stopes began to write a book about the way she thought marriage should work.
In the chapter, Stopes says the leading causes of "racial degeneration" are overcrowding and sexually transmitted disease.
The reference to "doctor of German philosophy" sought to undermine Stopes because she was not a medical doctor and, being so soon after the First World War, sought to harness anti-German sentiment.
It offered mothers birth control advice, taught them birth control methods and dispensed Stopes own "Pro-Race" brand cervical cap.
She had longstanding correspondences with George Bernard Shaw and Aylmer Maude, and argued with  H. G. Wells.
Stopes had a relationship, mainly through correspondence, with Japanese botanist Kenjiro Fujii, whom she met at the University of Munich in 1904 while researching her Ph.D.
She had shown little interest in, or respect for, the working classes; the ''Letter'' was aimed at redressing her bias.
Gates left England the following year and did not contest the divorce.
Stopes showed Sanger her writings and sought her advice about a chapter on contraception.
It read: I agree with the present position of breeding chiefly from the C3 population and burdening and discouraging the A1 is nationally deplorable, and if I am elected to Parliament, I will press the Ministry of Health to give such scientific information through the Ante-natal Clinics, Welfare Centres and other institutions in its control as will curtail the C3 and increase the A1 She received 150 replies.
As a child she met the founder of the Eugenics movement, Francis Galton, both through the British Association for the Advancement of Science and socially through her father.
Under the headings "Specially Hurtful to the Poor" and "Exposing the Poor to Experiment", it read:In the midst of a London slum a woman, who is a doctor of German philosophy (Munich), has opened a Birth Control Clinic, where working women are instructed in a method of contraception described by Professor McIlroy as ‘The most harmful method of which I have had experience’.
Later, believing "he had betrayed her by this marriage", Stopes cut him out of any substantial inheritance.
Stopes challenged Sutherland to a public debate.
Charles Bradlaugh was condemned to jail for a less serious crime.
In 1935 Stopes attended the International Congress for Population Science in Berlin.
In 1925, the Mothers' Clinic moved to Central London, where it remains .
The following year, Stopes published  ''A Letter to Working Mothers on how to have healthy children and avoid weakening pregnancies'', a condensed version of ''Wise Parenthood'' aimed at the poor.
During the Second World War, Stopes received a letter from friends whom she had invited to lunch asking whether they could bring with them a Jewish refugee from Nazi Germany in their care; Stopes replied they could not; it would offend her other guests.
Stopes published several volumes of poetry in her later years.
On 20 July, the Court of Appeal reversed the previous decision, awarding the £100 to Stopes, but the Catholic community mobilised to support Sutherland—himself a Catholic—for a final appeal to the House of Lords on 21 November 1924.
In 1917, before meeting Marie Stopes, Humphrey Roe offered to endow a birth control clinic attached to St Mary's Hospital in Manchester.
The Lords' irrevocable decision was in Sutherland's favour.
Stopes' enthusiasm for eugenics was in line with many of the intellectuals and public figures of the time, for example, Havelock Ellis, John Maynard Keynes, Cyril Burt and George Bernard Shaw.
She opened clinics in Leeds in April 1934; Aberdeen in October 1934; Belfast in October 1936; Cardiff in October 1937; and Swansea in January 1943.
Noël Coward wrote a poem  about her, and she edited Lord Alfred Douglas' letters.
Canadian scholars were divided between dating it to the Devonian period or to the Pennsylvanian/Upper Carboniferous period.
When Sutherland did not respond, she brought a writ for libel against him.
A chance meeting with Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott during one of his fund-raising lectures in 1904 brought a possibility of proving Suess's theory.
Both of her parents were members of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, where they had met.
Stopes' book was finished by the end of 1913.
The play ran for three months at the Royal Court Theatre.
Stopes opposed abortion, arguing that the prevention of conception was all that was needed.
The judge ignored the general tenor of the jury's response and found in Sutherland's favour based on the response to #2.
Stopes wrote poems and plays; during the First World War she wrote increasingly didactic plays.
You are his priests.
After carrying out research on Carboniferous plants at the Royal Botanic Gardens,Kew, and at University College, London, she studied the reproduction of living cycads at the University of Munich, receiving a Ph.D. in botany in 1904.
She found fault with Mary and wrote to Mary's father to complain.
The success of Stopes' work on marriage issues and birth control led her to reduce her scholarly work; her last scientific publications were in 1935.
The young must learn love from the particular 'till they are wise enough for the universal.
Following attacks on "the essential fallacies of Malthusian teaching", Sutherland's book attacked Stopes.
On 29 December, she met the Canadian researcher Reginald Ruggles Gates in St. Louis, Missouri; they became engaged two days later.
She had maintained her name out of principle; her work was blooming while his was struggling.
“...to counteract the steady evil which has been growing for a good many years of the reduction of the birth rate just on the part of the thrifty, wise, well-contented, and the generally sound members of our community, and the reckless breeding from the C.3 end, and the semi-feebleminded, the careless, who are proportionately increasing in our community because of the slowing of the birth rate at the other end of the social scale.
Roe was a philanthropist interested in birth control; he paid Fifield & Co. to publish the work.
At first, she was home-schooled, but from 1892 to 1894 she attended St George's School for Girls in Edinburgh.
The trial had made birth control a public topic and the number of clients visiting the clinic doubled.
Her mother was Charlotte Carmichael Stopes, a Shakespearean scholar and women's rights campaigner from Edinburgh.
On 12 July 1940 she wrote to Winston Churchill to offer a slogan, "Fight the Battle of Britain in Berlin's Air".
The general secretary of the Poetry Society, Muriel Spark, had an altercation with Stopes; according to Mark Bostridge, Spark "found herself lamenting that Stopes's mother had not been better informed on birth control".
Stopes was later sent to the North London Collegiate School, where she was a close friend of Olga Fröbe-Kapteyn.
The Catholic Church's reaction was more strident, marking the start of a conflict that lasted the rest of Stopes' life.
In 1910, the Geological Survey of Canada commissioned Stopes to determine the age of the Fern Ledges, a geological structure at Saint John, New Brunswick.
In 1918 she married Humphrey Verdon Roe, the financial backer of her most famous work, ''Married Love: A New Contribution to the Solution of the Sex Difficulties''.
Stopes explained that the object of the Society was:
Stopes thought birth control was the only means families should use to limit their number of offspring.
It was a moral victory for Stopes as the press saw it, and she appealed.
They can, however, study the conditions under which they came into being, discover where lie the chief sources of defect, and eliminate those sources of defect from the coming generation so as to remove from those who are still to be born the needless burdens the race has carried.
On 11 May 1913, Stopes filed for divorce on the grounds that the marriage had never been consummated.
This was an attempt to prove the theory of Eduard Suess concerning the existence of Gondwana or Pangaea.
In 1926, Stopes had ''Vectia'' printed under the title ''A Banned Play and a Preface on Censorship''.
It concludes somewhat vaguely, that racial consciousness needs to be increased so that, "women of all classes may have the fear and dread of undesired maternity removed from them ..." to usher in the promised utopia, described throughout.
Stopes's intended audience had—until this work—been the middle classes.
Margaret Sanger, another birth-control pioneer, had opened a birth control clinic in New York but the police closed it.
Read a book by Marie Stopes,
In 1907, Stopes went to Japan on a scientific mission.
The cost for Stopes was vast; but publicity and book sales partially compensated her losses.
Their son, Harry Stopes-Roe, was born in 1924.
''Vectia'' is an autobiographical attempt to analyse the failure of Stopes' first marriage.
Jeanie, Jeanie, full of hopes,
Her will left her clinic to the Eugenics Society; most of her estate went to the Royal Society of Literature.
Olive oil's use as a spermicide dates to Greek and Roman times.
Less than two months later they were married and Stopes had her first opportunity to practise what she preached in her book.
in 1902 after only two years by attending both day and night schools.
Stopes was incensed.
Her father, Henry Stopes, was a brewer, engineer, architect and palaeontologist from Colchester.
She tried to get Humphrey's support against the marriage, arguing that any grandchildren might inherit Mary's myopia.
He was disturbed by what he considered her suffragette support.
Her son Harry received her copy of the ''Greater Oxford Dictionary'' and other small items.
She published her Japanese experiences as a diary, called "Journal from Japan: a daily record of life as seen by a scientist", in 1910.
In 1907, during her 1904–1910 tenure at Manchester University, she arranged to research in Japan, allowing her to be with Fujii.
Stopes attended University College, London as a scholarship student, where she studied botany and geology; she graduating with a first class B.Sc.
The marriage had fallen apart amid squabbling over the house and rent.
The clinics continued to operate after Stopes' death, but by the early 1970s they were in financial difficulties and in 1975 they went into voluntary receivership.
On 16 July 1919, Stopes—pregnant and a month overdue—entered a nursing home.
Stopes gradually built up a small network of clinics across Britain, working to fund them.
In Stopes' book ''Radiant Motherhood'', she advocated "the sterilisation of those totally unfit for parenthood to be made an immediate possibility, indeed made compulsory".
Stopes disliked Harry's companion, Mary Eyre Wallis, who was the daughter of the noted engineer Barnes Wallis.
Stopes edited the newsletter ''Birth Control News'', which gave explicit practical advice.
She was also Fellow and sometime Lecturer in Palaeobotany at University College, London until 1920.
None of her later plays reached the stage.
Three months later she and Roe opened the Mothers' Clinic at 61 Marlborough Road, Holloway, North London, on 17 March 1921.
Stopes also campaigned to get eugenic ideas adopted by those in power.
The Mother's Clinic was established in 1921 to further eugenic aims; it dispensed the so-called "Pro-Race" cervical cap.
It was a 16-page pamphlet and was to be distributed free of charge.
Stopes used terminology in accordance with the Mental Deficiency Act 1913, which categorised people with mental health problems and disabilities as "idiots", "imbeciles", "moral defectives" and "feeble-minded".
The book was an instant success, requiring five editions in the first year, and elevated Stopes to national prominence.
Stopes resigned her lectureship at University College, London at the end of 1920 to concentrate on the clinic; She founded the Society for Constructive Birth Control and Racial Progress, a support organisation for the clinic.
Haire had already investigated the device and found it to be dangerous.
Because of its themes of sex and impotence, it was denied a licence to be performed, despite Stopes's frequent efforts.
Love is the greatest thing in the world: so will you accept from me these poems that you may allow the young people of your nation to have them?
It hurriedly produced in place of ''Vectia'' another of Stopes' plays.
She contributed a chapter to ''The Control of Parenthood'' (1920), comprising a manifesto for her circle of Eugenicists, arguing for a "utopia" to be achieved through "racial purification":
Haire brought up the gold-pin episode, even though Stopes' clinic had never used it.
#Were they fair comment?
In 1911, Stopes married Canadian geneticist Reginald Ruggles Gates.
The child was stillborn; the doctors suggested the incident was due to syphilis, but an examination excluded the possibility.
Several publishers refused the book because they thought it too controversial.
She spent eighteen months at the Imperial University, Tokyo and explored coal mines on Hokkaido for fossilised plants.
She wanted her poems to be distributed through the German birth control clinics, but the letter has been interpreted as showing sympathy for Hitler.
With her second husband, Humphrey Verdon Roe, Stopes founded the first birth control clinic in Britain.
Since then the organisation has grown steadily; today it works in over forty countries, has 452 clinics and has offices in London, Brussels, Melbourne and in the US.
The classification scheme and terminology she devised for coal are still being used.
Marie was taken to meetings where she met the famous scholars of the day.
