It flowed also from irreproachable musicianship.
This was because after her renunciation, she was only a Greek citizen, and under Greek law a Greek could only legally marry in a Greek Orthodox church.
Vassilis's death from meningitis in the summer of 1922 dealt another blow to the marriage.
In 2005, Ewa Podleś said of Callas, "Maybe she had three voices, maybe she had three ranges, I don't know—I am a professional singer.
I was a very heavy voice, that is my nature, a dark voice shall we call it, and I was always kept on the light side.
* Verdi, ''Nabucco'', conducted by Vittorio Gui, live performance, Napoli, December 20, 1949
* Verdi, ''Un ballo in maschera'', conducted by Antonino Votto, studio recording for EMI, September 1956
A change has also come over Voigt's voice lately, though it's hard to tell if it's from weight loss or normal aging—controversy still rages over whether Maria Callas's drastic diets contributed to her rapid vocal decline.
* Cherubini, ''Medea'', conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for Ricordi in stereo, September 1957
However, the tour was an enormous popular success.
It lacked those elements which, in a singer's jargon, are described as velvet and varnish... yet I really believe that part of her appeal was precisely due to this fact.
Her debut in America was five years later in Chicago in 1954, and "with the Callas ''Norma'', Lyric Opera of Chicago was born."
However, writing about Dramatic soprano Deborah Voigt in 2006 shortly after her 135-pound weight loss after gastric bypass surgery, music critic Peter G. Davis brings up comparisons with Callas and notes an increasing acidity and thinning in Voigt's voice that recall the changes in Callas's voice after her weight loss:
It was at the Royal Opera House where, on July 5, 1965, Callas ended her stage career in the role of ''Tosca'', in a production designed and mounted for her by Franco Zeffirelli and featuring her friend and colleague Tito Gobbi.
This is never a sloppy swoop, because its intention is as musically precise as it is in great string playing.
As well, various sources dismiss Gage's claim, as they note that the birth certificates Gage used to prove this "secret child" were issued in 1998, twenty-one years after Callas's death.
At an event hosted by the journal ''Il Saggiatore Musicale'', Fussi and Paolillo presented documentation showing when and how her voice changed over time.
They were literally defects of her voice; she bent them into advantages of her singing."
Callas stated that she lost the weight by eating a sensible low-calorie diet of mainly salads and chicken.
And then I was tired of playing a game, for instance playing this beautiful young woman, and I was heavy and uncomfortable to move around.
* Jason Mraz lists her performance of "O mio babbino caro" as a romantic musical influence for him.
Alternately dismayed and impressed by the students who parade before her, she retreats into recollections about the glories of her own life and career, culminating in a monologue about sacrifice taken for art.
She sight-read the opera's second act for Serafin, who praised her for knowing the role so well, whereupon she admitted to having bluffed and having sight-read the music.
Callas herself appears to have been in agreement not only with Ardoin's assertions that she started as a natural mezzo-soprano, but also saw the similarities between herself and Pasta and Malibran.
Critically, this was a musical disaster owing to both performers' worn-out voices.
The track samples the 1956 recording of ''La bohème''.
Fussi and Paolillo cite an initial report by physician Mario Giacovazzo, who in 2002 revealed he had diagnosed Callas with dermatomyositis in 1975.
And she took the big sound right up to the top."
This continual change in posture has been cited as visual proof of a progressive loss of breath support.
Callas made her professional debut in February 1941, in the small role of Beatrice in Franz von Suppé's ''Boccaccio''.
I never lost my voice, but I lost strength in my diaphragm.&nbsp;... Because of those organic complaints, I lost my courage and boldness.
But her sensitivity!
And it was twice as strong as Toti Dal Monte's!"
Sir Rudolf Bing, who remembered Callas as being "monstrously fat" in 1951, stated that after the weight loss, Callas was an "astonishing, svelte, striking woman" who "showed none of the signs one usually finds in a fat woman who has lost weight: she looked as though she had been born to that slender and graceful figure, and had always moved with that elegance."
Wainwright is known to be an opera fan, particularly passionate about Callas's work.
Bing and Callas later reconciled their differences, and she returned to the house in 1965 to sing the title role in two performances as Tosca opposite Franco Corelli as Cavaradossi for one performance (March 19, 1965) and Richard Tucker (March 25, 1965) with Tito Gobbi as Scarpia for her final performances at the Met.
* Puccini, ''Madama Butterfly'', conducted by Herbert von Karajan, studio recording for EMI, August 1955
Callas later recalled, "I was made to sing when I was only five, and I hated it."
In 2012, Callas was voted into ''Gramophone Magazine''s Hall of Fame.
In recitatives, she always knew which word to emphasize and which syllable in that word to bring out.
She further consolidated this company's standing when, in 1958, she gave "a towering performance as Violetta in ''La traviata'', and that same year, in her only American performances of ''Medea'', gave an interpretation of the title role worthy of Euripides."
Callas maintained that the Met offered her ''Madama Butterfly'' and ''Fidelio'', to be performed in Philadelphia and sung in English, both of which she declined, feeling she was too fat for ''Butterfly'' and did not like the idea of opera in English.
* Bellini, ''La sonnambula'', conducted by Antonino Votto, studio recording for EMI, March 1957
* Verdi, ''La traviata'', conducted by Carlo Maria Giulini, live performance, La Scala, Milan, May 28, 1955
Callas was notably instrumental in arranging Franco Corelli's debut at La Scala in 1954, where he sang Licinio in Spontini's ''La vestale'' opposite Callas's Julia.
There were a breadth, an expressiveness in her roulades, an evenness and solidity in her shake, which imparted to every passage a significance totally beyond the reach of lighter and more spontaneous singers...
And of her performance of Medea a year later, John Ardoin writes, "The performance displays Callas in as secure and free a voice as she will be found at any point in her career.
I knew in a big outdoor theatre like Verona's, this girl, with her courage and huge voice, would make a tremendous impact."
I always felt I heard her saying something—it was never just singing notes.
She found all she needed in the notes.Ewa Podleś likewise stated that "It's enough to hear her, I'm positive!
La Scala mounted many new productions specially for Callas by directors such as Herbert von Karajan, Margherita Wallmann, Franco Zeffirelli and, most importantly, Luchino Visconti.
Her arms would move as if they had no bones, like the great ballerinas.
mention Callas in their song "E-Bow the Letter" from the album ''New Adventures in Hi-Fi''.
And at her performance of the same opera in London in 1957 (her first performance at Covent Garden after the weight loss), critics again felt her voice had changed for the better, that it had now supposedly become a more precise instrument, with a new focus.
Callas expert Dr. Robert Seletsky, however, stated that since the finale of ''Armida'' is in the key of E, the final note could not have been an F, as it would have been dissonant.
By applying spectrographic analysis to film from that night's performance, the researchers observed her voice was tired and she lacked control.
To this great interpreter of universal language of music, with gratitude."
In 2002, Franco Zeffirelli produced and directed a film in Callas's memory.
Despite this, La Scala announced a fifth performance, with Callas billed as Amina.
Edward Downes recalled Callas watching and observing her colleagues with such intensity and concentration as to make it seem that the drama was all unfolding in her head.
He avers that like Pasta and Malibran, Callas was a natural mezzo-soprano whose range was extended through training and willpower, resulting in a voice which "lacked the homogeneous color and evenness of scale once so prized in singing.
She usually had a tremendous effect on audiences and on people.
This rivality ''sic'' was really building from the people of the newspapers and the fans.
However, they made no statements to the media, and the endless stream of press coverage aggravated the situation.
Callas brought a lawsuit against the Rome Opera House, but by the time the case was settled thirteen years later and the Rome Opera was found to be at fault for having refused to provide an understudy, Callas's career was already over.
Callas's voice has been difficult to place in the modern vocal classification or Fach system, especially since in her prime, her repertoire contained the heaviest dramatic soprano roles as well as roles usually undertaken by the highest, lightest and most agile coloratura sopranos.
Musicologist and critic  adds, "Callas's 'faults' were in the voice and not in the singer; they are so to speak, faults of departure but not of arrival.
* Verdi, ''Aida'', conducted by Tullio Serafin, studio recording for EMI, August 1955
had a French method, which was placing the voice in the nose, rather nasal... and I had the problem of not having low chest tones, which is essential in ''bel canto''... And that's where I learned my chest tones.
I really hate listening to myself!
At the audition, her voice, still untrained, failed to impress, while the conservatoire's director  refused to accept her without her satisfying the theoretic prerequisites (solfege).
There was another troublesome spot&nbsp;... between the middle and upper registers.
* Verdi, ''Macbeth'', conducted by Victor de Sabata, live performance, La Scala, Milan, December 7, 1952
Using modern audio technology, they analyzed live Callas studio recordings from the 1950s through the 1970s, looking for signs of deterioration.
Because for all its natural lack of varnish, velvet and richness, this voice could acquire such distinctive colours and timbres as to be unforgettable."
Later in 1958, Callas and Rudolf Bing were in discussion about her season at the Met.
Here she gave bud, blossom and fruit to that harmony of sound that also ennobled the art of the prima donne.
Anthony Tommasini wrote that Corelli had "earned great respect from the fearsomely demanding Callas, who, in Mr Corelli, finally had someone with whom she could act."
These and others were precisely the accusations made at the time against Pasta and Malibran, two geniuses of song (as they were then called), sublime, yet imperfect.
And you can't estimate the toll that emotional turmoil will take as well.
But she was capable of standing 10 minutes without moving a hand or finger, compelling everyone to look at her."
Walter Legge, who produced nearly all of Callas's EMI/Angel recordings, states that Callas "ran into a patch of vocal difficulties as early as 1954": during the recording of ''La forza del destino'', done immediately after the weight loss, the "wobble had become so pronounced" that he told Callas they "would have to give away seasickness pills with every side".
Louise Caselotti, who worked with Callas in 1946 and 1947, prior to her Italian debut, felt that it was not the heavy roles that hurt Callas's voice, but the lighter ones.
It is a cruel thing to make a child feel ugly and unwanted...
* Verdi, ''La traviata'', conducted by Franco Ghione, live performance, Lisbon, March 27, 1958
Soprano Galatea Amaxopoulou, who sang in the chorus, later recalled, "Even in rehearsal, Maria's fantastic performing ability had been obvious, and from then on, the others started trying ways of preventing her from appearing."
Although no definite recording of Callas singing high F's has surfaced, the presumed E-natural at the end of Rossini's ''Armida''—a poor-quality bootleg recording of uncertain pitch—has been referred to as a high F by Italian musicologists and critics Eugenio Gara and Rodolfo Celletti.
In the same vein, Joan Sutherland, who heard Callas throughout the 1950s, said in a BBC interview,
In this aria, Callas uses more portamento, and in greater variety, than any other singer&nbsp;... Callas is not creating "effects", as even her greatest rivals do.
In 1958, a feud with Rudolf Bing led to Callas's Metropolitan Opera contract being cancelled.
In an April 1977 interview with journalist Philippe Caloni, she stated, My best recordings were made when I was skinny, and I say ''skinny'', not slim, because I worked a lot and couldn't gain weight back; I became even too skinny&nbsp;...
Her contract was for four performances, but due to the great success of the series, La Scala decided to put on a fifth performance.
Critic Henry Pleasants has stated that it was a loss of physical strength and breath-support that led to Callas's vocal problems, saying,
She was at the top of a career that a human being could desire, and she felt enormous responsibility.
The production was grueling, and according to the account in Ardoin's ''Callas, the Art and the Life'', Callas is said to have fainted after a day of strenuous running back and forth on a mudflat in the sun.
The volume as such was average: neither small nor powerful.
Many critics praised her bel canto technique, wide-ranging voice and dramatic interpretations.
Heart failure is a possible outcome of dermatomyositis or side effect of the steroids and immunosuppressants which she took for the disease.
Here, too, around the treble F and G, there was often something in the sound itself which was not quite right, as though the voice were not functioning properly.
In 2014, Warner Classics (formerly EMI Classics) released the ''Maria Callas Remastered Edition'', consisting of her complete studio recordings totaling 39 albums in a boxed set remastered at Abbey Road Studios in 24-bit/96&nbsp;kHz digital sound from original master tapes.
The great turning point in Callas's career occurred in Venice in 1949.
Callas studied with Trivella for two years before her mother secured another audition at the Athens Conservatoire with de Hidalgo.
During an interview with Norman Ross in Chicago, Callas said, "I admire Tebaldi's tone; it's beautiful—also some beautiful phrasing.
From October 1971 to March 1972, Callas gave a series of master classes at the Juilliard School in New York.
The film was not a commercial success, but as Callas's only film appearance, it documents her stage presence.
Evangelia was convinced that her third child would be a boy; her disappointment at the birth of another daughter was so great that she refused to even look at her new baby for four days.
Fussi observed video recordings in which Callas's posture seemed strained and weakened.
Her final public performance was on November 11, 1974, in Sapporo, Japan.
On the other hand, biographer Petsalis-Diomidis asserts that it was actually Evangelia's hateful treatment of George in front of their young children which led to resentment and dislike on Callas's part.
De Hidalgo recalled hearing "tempestuous, extravagant cascades of sounds, as yet uncontrolled but full of drama and emotion".
Her chromatic runs, particularly downwards, were beautifully smooth and staccatos almost unfailingly accurate, even in the trickiest intervals.
My diaphragm function, the way my throat feels, is not compromised in any way.
Several singers have suggested that Callas's heavy use of the chest voice led to stridency and unsteadiness with the high notes.
But after just a few minutes, when you get used to, when you become friends with this kind of sound, then the sound becomes a magical quality.
Much of what I did with my weight was very natural, vocally.
Audiences thronged to hear the two performers, who had so often appeared together in their prime.
In these aspects of bel canto she was supreme mistress of that art.
* Spontini, ''La vestale'', conducted by Antonino Votto, live performance, La Scala, Milan, December 7, 1954
In 1966, Callas renounced her U.S. citizenship at the American Embassy in Paris, to facilitate the end of her marriage to Meneghini.
In 1952, she made her London debut at the Royal Opera House in ''Norma'' with veteran mezzo-soprano Ebe Stignani as Adalgisa, a performance which survives on record and also features the young Joan Sutherland in the small role of Clotilde.
Many who heard Pasta, for example, remarked that her uppermost notes seemed produced by ventriloquism, a charge which would later be made against Callas".
My vocal cords were and still are in excellent condition, but my 'sound boxes' have not been working well even though I have been to all the doctors.
The family left for New York in July 1923, moving first into an apartment in Astoria, Queens.
However, in his review of Callas's 1951 live recording of ''I vespri siciliani'', Ira Siff writes, "Accepted wisdom tells us that Callas possessed, even early on, a flawed voice, unattractive by conventional standards—an instrument that signaled from the beginning vocal problems to come.
According to both Callas's husband and her close friend Giulietta Simionato, Callas related to them that her mother, who did not work, pressed her to "go out with various men", mainly Italian and German soldiers, to bring home money and food during the Axis occupation of Greece during World War II.
Callas told the La Scala officials that she was physically exhausted and that she had already committed to a previous engagement, a party thrown for her by her friend Elsa Maxwell in Venice.
Callas herself said that she would go to "the ''conservatoire'' at 10 in the morning and leave with the last pupil&nbsp;... devouring music" for 10 hours a day.
Because all of her voices, her registers, she used how they should be used—just to tell us something!"
Ardoin points to the writings of Henry Fothergill Chorley about Pasta which bear an uncanny resemblance to descriptions of Callas: "There was a portion of the scale which differed from the rest in quality and remained to the last 'under a veil.
Callas was not one of them.
In performance, Callas's vocal range was just short of three octaves, from F-sharp (F3) below middle C (C4) heard in "Arrigo!
She'd never make a soft gesture; even the walk she used was like a tiger's walk."
Opera director Sandro Sequi, who witnessed many Callas performances close-up, states, "For me, she was extremely stylized and classic, yet at the same time, human—but humanity on a higher plane of existence, almost sublime.
* Bellini, ''Norma'', conducted by Vittorio Gui, live performance, Covent Garden, London, November 18, 1952
Now I've got a different body—there's not as much of me around.
In the same vein, mezzo-soprano Giulietta Simionato said: "The first time we sang together was in Mexico in 1950, where she sang the top E-flat in the second-act finale of ''Aida''.
Her image is shown in the obverse of the coin, while on the reverse the National Emblem of Greece with her signature is depicted.
* Donizetti, ''Anna Bolena'', conducted by Gianandrea Gavazzeni, live performance, La Scala, Milan, April 14, 1957
Her musical and dramatic talents led to her being hailed as ''La Divina''.
Legge adds, "Even in the most difficult fioriture there were no musical or technical difficulties in this part of the voice which she could not execute with astonishing, unostentatious ease.
Music critic John Ardoin wrote that in this performance “Callas’ use of her voice to expressive ends amounts to an amalgamation of the best in previous Traviatas.
It was in this role that Callas made her Italian debut.
Tebaldi was quoted as saying, "I have one thing that Callas doesn't have: a heart" while Callas was quoted in ''Time'' magazine as saying that comparing her with Tebaldi was like "comparing Champagne with Cognac.
But then Callas sought to capture in her singing not just beauty but a whole humanity, and within her system, the flaws feed the feeling, the sour plangency and the strident defiance becoming aspects of the canto.
Callas's performance as Marta received glowing reviews.
* Verdi, ''La traviata'', conducted by Gabriele Santini, studio recording for Fonit Cetra, September 1953
During 1953 and early 1954, she lost almost 80&nbsp;pounds (36&nbsp;kg), turning herself into what Rescigno called "possibly the most beautiful lady on the stage".
Treatment includes corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents, which affect heart function.
They believe she was showing signs of this disease as early as the 1960s.
Whether in her florid singing or in her ''canto spianato'', that is, in long held notes without ornamentation, her ''mezza-voce'' could achieve such moving sweetness that the sound seemed to come from on high&nbsp;...
This would occur in the most delicate and troublesome areas of a soprano's voice—for instance where the lower and middle registers merge, between G and A. I would go so far as to say that here her voice had such resonances as to make one think at times of a ventriloquist&nbsp;... or else the voice could sound as though it were resonating in a rubber tube.
Soprano Renée Fleming has stated that videos of Callas in the late 1950s and early 1960s reveal a posture that betrays breath-support problems:
There were innumerable exquisite felicities—minuscule portamentos from one note to its nearest neighbor, or over widespread intervals—and changes of color that were pure magic.
There is hardly a bar in the whole range of nineteenth-century music for high soprano that seriously tested her powers."
Callas's relationship with La Scala had also started to become strained after the Edinburgh incident, and this effectively severed her major ties with her artistic home.
And teaching the scales, trills, all the ''bel canto'' embellishments, which is a whole vast language of its own.
After ''La Gioconda'', Callas had no further offers, and when Serafin, looking for someone to sing Isolde, called on her, she told him that she already knew the score, even though she had looked at only the first act out of curiosity while at the conservatory.
Before the performance actually took place, one incredulous critic snorted, "We hear that Serafin has agreed to conduct ''I puritani'' with a dramatic soprano ...
and Callas", which appears to be about songwriter Chris Colbourn's reflections on Callas.
Subsequently, they began working on raising the tessitura of her voice and to lighten its timbre.
In ''Medea'', everything was angular.
The marriage continued to deteriorate and in 1937 Evangelia decided to return to Athens with her two daughters.
Regarding her ability to sing the heaviest as well as the lightest roles, she told James Fleetwood, It's study; it's Nature.
The result was that I overstrained my voice, and that caused it to wobble.
Tonight, for me, is a very difficult night, and I will need the help of ''every'' one of you.'
Callas herself stated that, in opera, acting must be based on the music, quoting Tullio Serafin's advice to her: When one wants to find a gesture, when you want to find how to act onstage, all you have to do is  to the music.
Although no written evidence of this offer exists in the Met's records, in a 1958 interview with the ''New York Post'', Johnson corroborated Callas's story: "We offered her a contract, but she didn't like it—because of the contract, not because of the roles.
Michael Scott notes, "If we listen attentively, we note how her perfect legato enables her to suggest by musical means even the exclamation marks and commas of the text."
Serafin thereafter served as Callas's mentor and supporter.
* The Mountain Goats mention Callas in their song "Horseradish Road" from the album ''The Coroner's Gambit''.
Although the singers agreed that neither would perform encores, Tebaldi took two, and Callas was reportedly incensed.
Around the age of three, Maria's musical talent began to manifest itself, and after Evangelia discovered that her youngest daughter also had a voice, she began pressing "Mary" to sing.
Made of Carrara marble and engraved in Italy, the plaque reads, "Maria Callas was born in this hospital on December 2, 1923.
Callas had the perfect face for it.
But Callas you could not get around.
* Cherubini, ''Medea'', conducted by Leonard Bernstein, live performance, La Scala, Milan, December 10, 1953
In the early years of her career, Callas was a heavy woman; in her own words, "Heavy—one can say—yes I was; but I'm also a tall woman, 5' 8½" 174 centimeters, and I used to weigh no more than 200&nbsp;pounds 91 kilograms."
This is Nature and also because I had a wonderful teacher, the old kind of teaching methods...
Callas considered her Greek career as the foundation of her musical and dramatic upbringing, saying, "When I got to the big career, there were no surprises for me."
Her progress was phenomenal.
* Bellini, ''La sonnambula'', conducted by Antonino Votto, live performance, Cologne, July 4, 1957
The renunciation also helped her finances, as she no longer had to pay US taxes on her income.
Callas's vocal registers, however, were not seamlessly joined; Walter Legge writes, "Unfortunately, it was only in quick music, particularly descending scales, that she completely mastered the art of joining the three almost incompatible voices into one unified whole, but until about 1960, she disguised those audible gear changes with cunning skill."
* Verdi ''Il trovatore'', live performance conducted by Votto, La Scala February 23, 1953
In recordings from 1954 (immediately after her 80-pound weight loss) and thereafter, "not only would the instrument lose its warmth and become thin and acidulous, but the altitudinous passages would to her no longer come easily."
It's not the weight loss ''per se''—you know, Deborah Voigt has lost a lot of weight and still sounds glorious.
You just got shivers up and down the spine.
In an interview to the Spanish newspaper ''El País'', he declared that one of the things anyone should do at least once in a lifetime was to listen to a Maria Callas album after a night out, if possible during sunrise.
* ''Mad Scenes'' (excerpts from ''Anna Bolena'', Bellini's ''Il pirata'' and Ambroise Thomas's ''Hamlet''), conducted by Nicola Rescigno, studio recording for EMI in stereo, September 1958
In any case, it was uncomfortable and I didn't like it.
However, witnesses to the interview stated that Callas only said "champagne with cognac", and it was a bystander who quipped, "No, with Coca-Cola", but the ''Time'' reporter attributed the latter comment to Callas.
Some time later, watching Callas rehearse Beethoven's ''Fidelio'', erstwhile rival soprano Anna Remoundou asked a colleague, "Could it be that there ''is'' something divine and we haven't realized it?"
Oh, but it was oh so exciting.
Hearing Callas in Norma in 1952 was a shock, a wonderful shock.
Regarding Callas's soft singing, Celletti says, "In these soft passages, Callas seemed to use another voice altogether, because it acquired a great sweetness.
The alleged rivalry aside, Callas made remarks appreciative of Tebaldi, and vice versa.
Michael Scott has proposed that Callas's loss of strength and breath support was directly caused by her rapid and progressive weight loss, something that was noted even in her prime.
A live television transmission of act 2 of the Covent Garden ''Tosca'' of 1964 was broadcast in Britain on February 9, 1964, giving a rare view of Callas in performance and, specifically, of her on-stage collaboration with Tito Gobbi.
He recalls that during Callas's performances of ''La traviata'', "reality was onstage.
Being fully aware of the alleged rivalry, he recommended Zinka Milanov's version.
