Business description, Business process, Business strategy, Revenue model, Business expansion, Return of Investment, Financial analysis (Company History, Financial assumption, Cost/Benefit Analysis, Projected profit & Loss, Cashflow, Balance sheet & business Ratio,etc.
With respect to other factors like Advertising expenditure, sales promotion etc.
A small number of business schools also offer a more specialized Master of Marketing Research (MMR) degree.
The research analyst responsibilities include checking all data for accuracy, comparing and contrasting new research with established norms, and analyzing primary and secondary data for the purpose of market forecasting.
Exploratory research information is collected by focus group interviews, reviewing literature or books, discussing with experts, etc.
Field services collect data through the internet, traditional mail, in-person, or telephone interviewing, and firms that specialize in interviewing are called field service organizations.
Collect secondary information on the country under study from reliable international source e.g.
There are two main sources of data&nbsp;— primary and secondary.
#Vice-President of Marketing Research: This is the senior position in marketing research.
The Starch Readership Survey is the most widely used service for evaluating print advertisements; another well-known service is the Gallup and Robinson Magazine Impact Studies.
Small scale surveys and focus groups are low cost ways to gather information from potential and existing customers.
This led to the development of various tools like online focus groups and pop-up or website intercept surveys.
Below are some steps that could be done by SME (Small Medium Entreprise) to analyze the market:
The typical entry-level position in a business firm would be junior research analyst (for BBAs) or research analyst (for MBAs or MMRs).
Finding the right respondents is crucial in B2B research since they are often busy, and may not want to participate.
They may start with secondary research to get background information, then conduct a focus group (qualitative research design) to explore the issues.
Further complications are added by uncontrollable environmental factors such as general economic conditions, technology, public policies and laws, political environment, competition, and social and cultural changes.
* Business-to-business (B2B) marketing research
It was no longer sufficient to follow trends in web behaviour or track sales data; companies now needed access to consumer behaviour throughout the entire purchase process.This meant the Marketing Research Industry, again, needed to adapt to the rapidly changing needs of the marketplace, and to the demands of companies looking fora competitive edge.
Some organizations maintain extensive interviewing facilities across the country for interviewing shoppers in malls.
Basic Cultural and Market intelligence information will be needed to maximize the research effectiveness.
#Junior Analyst: Handles routine assignments such as secondary data analysis, editing and coding of questionnaires, and simple statistical analysis.
Exploratory research is also conducted to simplify the findings of the conclusive or descriptive research, if the findings are very hard to interpret for the marketing managers.
Initially most data analysis firms supplied only tabulations (frequency counts) and cross tabulations (frequency counts that describe two or more variables simultaneously).
Gathering the primary data can be hindered by language, literacy and access to technology.
#Analyze market trends, growth, market size, market share, market competition (e.g.
Primary research is conducted from scratch.
With the proliferation of software, many firms now have the capability to analyze their own data, but, data analysis firms are still in demand.
A similar distinction exists between exploratory research and conclusive research.
Consumer marketing research is a form of applied sociology that concentrates on understanding the preferences, attitudes, and behaviors of consumers in a market-based economy, and it aims to understand the effects and comparative success of marketing campaigns.
#Provide secondary and or primary data (if necessary);
It asks, “Are we measuring what we intended to measure?”
* Acquire effective written and verbal communication skills.
Conceptualization means the process of converting vague mental images into definable concepts.
#Implement the marketing mix concept, which is consist of: Place, Price, Product,Promotion, People, Process, Physical Evidence and also Political & social situation to analyze global market situation);
Business to business (B2B) research is inevitably more complicated than consumer research.
Other positions, such as research director, call for managing the work of others and require more general skills.
Today, Marketing Research has adapted to innovations in technology and the corresponding ease with which information is available.
In the absence of relevant information, consumers' response to marketing programs cannot be predicted reliably or accurately.
An MMR typically prepares students for a wide range of research methodologies and focuses on learning both in the classroom and the field.
These people are responsible for supervising a well-defined set of operations, including field work, data editing, and coding, and may be involved in programming and data analysis.
Such research is deliberately biased so as to result in predetermined findings.
Retail outlets were appearing online and the previous need for bricks-and-mortar stores was diminishing at a greater pace than online competition was growing.With so many online channels for consumers to make purchases, companies needed newer and more compelling methods, in combination with messages that resonated more effectively, to capture the attention of the average consumer.
Sound decisions are not based on gut feeling, intuition, or even pure judgment.
Standardized services are research studies conducted for different client firms but in a standard way.
*The decision making unit is far more complex in B2B markets than in consumer markets
The National Purchase Diary panel (NPD) maintains the largest diary panel in the United States.
Marketing research does not only occur in huge corporations with many employees and a large budget.
B2B and B2C companies are working hard to stay competitive and they now demand both quantitative (“What”) and qualitative (“Why?”) marketing research in order to better understand their target audience and the motivations behind customer behaviours.
The field of consumer marketing research as a statistical science was pioneered by Arthur Nielsen with the founding of the ACNielsen Company in 1923.
*B2B marketers address a much smaller number of customers who are very much larger in their consumption of products than is the case in consumer markets
*Price elasticity testing&nbsp;— to determine how sensitive customers are to price changes
* Consumer marketing research, and
Precision refers to the exactness of any given measure.
These organizations may range from small proprietary organizations which operate locally to large multinational organizations with WATS line interviewing facilities.
#Determine market segment, market target, market forecast and market position;
is available to the public in libraries or on the internet and can be easily accessed by a small business owner.
Validity refers to the extent to which a measure provides data that captures the meaning of the operationalized construct as defined in the study.
Many researchers have ethical misgivings about doing applied research.
Another factor in this mix is the complexity of consumers.
In this case, Marketing Research relies more on primary data rather than secondary information.
International Marketing Research follows the same path as domestic research, but there are a few more problems that may arise.
*Analytical services include designing and pretesting questionnaires, determining the best means of collecting data, designing sampling plans, and other aspects of the research design.
Competitive marketing environment and the ever-increasing costs attributed to poor decision making require that marketing research provide sound information.
It should draw definitive conclusions only with extreme caution.
Customers in international markets may have very different customs, cultures, and expectations from the same company.
Researchers often use more than one research design.
Services offered by such suppliers are classified as field services, coding and data entry, data analysis, analytical services, and branded products.
The term is commonly interchanged with market research; however, expert practitioners may wish to draw a distinction, in that ''market'' research is concerned specifically with markets, while ''marketing'' research is concerned specifically about marketing processes.
This is unstructured and qualitative in nature.
It may serve as the input to conclusive research.
For example, The findings of problem solving research are used in making decisions which will solve specific marketing problems.
* Take courses in psychology and consumer behavior.
*Data analysis services are offered by firms, also known as tab houses, that specialize in computer analysis of quantitative data such as those obtained in large surveys.
Profiling & SWOT analysis of potential partners, evaluating business partnership.)
Web analytics were born out of the need to track the behaviour of site visitors and, as the popularity of e-commerce and web advertising grew,businesses demanded details on the information created by new practices in web data collection, such as click-through and exit rates.
The primary responsibility for meeting time and cost constraints rests with the senior analyst.
The VP is responsible for the entire marketing research operation of the company and serves on the top management team.
With the explosive growth of the online marketplace came new competition for companies; no longer were businesses merely competing with the shop down the road&nbsp;— competition was now represented by a global force.
Prepares the final report.
Marketing Research Clients are beginning to demand highly personalized and specifically-focused products from the MR firms; big data is great for identifying general market segments, but is less capable of identifying key factors of niche markets, which now defines the competitive edge companies are looking for in this mobile-digital age.
In the new millennium, as the Internet continued to develop and websites became more interactive, data collection and analysis became more commonplace for those Marketing Research Firms whose clients had a web presence.
The junior analyst position includes a training program to prepare individuals for the responsibilities of a research analyst, including coordinating with the marketing department and sales force to develop goals for product exposure.
Problem identification research is undertaken to help identify problems which are, perhaps, not apparent on the surface and yet exist or are likely to arise in the future like company image, market characteristics, sales analysis, short-range forecasting, long range forecasting, and business trends research.
*Sales forecasting&nbsp;— to determine the expected level of sales given the level of demand.
Ongoing marketing research programs provide information on controllable and non-controllable factors and consumers; this information enhances the effectiveness of decisions made by marketing managers.
Ask questions to get better understanding of reasons behind any recommendations for a specific methodology
* Take courses in statistics and quantitative methods.
As these job titles indicate, people with a variety of backgrounds and skills are needed in marketing research.
The task of marketing research (MR) is to provide management with relevant, accurate, reliable, valid, and current market information.
SWOT analysis, B/C Analysis,channel mapping identities of key channels, drivers of customers loyalty and satisfaction, brand perception, satisfaction levels, current competitor-channel relationship analysis, etc.),etc.
However, the roles are changing and marketing researchers are becoming more involved in decision making, whereas marketing managers are becoming more involved with research.
Marketing information can be derived by observing the environment of their location and the competitions location.
This method is often used for quality control or for researching competitors' products.
*Applied research sets out to prove a specific hypothesis of value to the clients paying for the research.
They make decisions about potential opportunities, target market selection, market segmentation, planning and implementing marketing programs, marketing performance, and control.
*Viral Marketing Research - refers to marketing research designed to estimate the probability that specific communications will be transmitted throughout an individual's Social Network.
First, marketing ''research is systematic''.
#Statistician/Data Processing Specialist: Serves as an expert on theory and application of statistical techniques.
As the Internet boomed,websites became larger and more complex and the possibility of two-way communication between businesses and their consumers became a reality.
*Coding and data entry services include editing completed questionnaires, developing a coding scheme, and transcribing the data on to diskettes or magnetic tapes for input into the computer.
Some complex marketing research projects require knowledge of sophisticated procedures, including specialized experimental designs, and analytical techniques such as conjoint analysis and multidimensional scaling.
* Qualitative marketing research, and
#Formulating market strategy & also investigating the possibility of partnership/ collaboration (e.g.
*B2B products and their applications are more complex than consumer products
Mobile devices present the perfect channel for Research Firms to retrieve immediate impressions from buyers and to provide their clients with a holistic view of the consumers within their target markets, and beyond.
Collect secondary information on the product/service under study from available sources
All of these forms of marketing research can be classified as either problem-identification research or as problem-solving research.
*Segmentation research - to determine the demographic, psychographic, cultural, and behavioural characteristics of potential buyers
*Sugging (from SUG, for "selling under the guise" of market research) forms a sales technique in which sales people pretend to conduct marketing research, but with the real purpose of obtaining buyer motivation and buyer decision-making information to be used in a subsequent sales call.
These procedures are patented, given brand names, and marketed like any other branded product.
These decisions are complicated by interactions between the controllable marketing variables of product, pricing, promotion, and distribution.
Conclusive research is conducted to draw some conclusion about the problem.
Experts in marketing research have shown that studies featuring multiple and often competing hypotheses yield more meaningful results than those featuring only one dominant hypothesis.
Innovative research firms, such as ''OnResearch'' with their ''OnMobile'' app, are now providing businesses with the means to reach consumers from the point of initial investigation through to the decision and, ultimately, the purchase.
As personal mobile devices become more capable and widespread, the Marketing Research Industry will look to further capitalize on this trend.
It is original and collected to solve the problem in hand.
The procedures followed at each stage are methodologically sound, well documented, and, as much as possible, planned in advance.
* Acquire computer skills.
Operationalization is the process of converting concepts into specific observable behaviors that a researcher can measure.
Encouraging them to “open up” is yet another skill required of the B2B researcher.
For example, a cigarette company might commission research that attempts to show that cigarettes are good for one's health.
#Senior Analyst: Participates in the development of projects and directs the operational execution of the assigned projects.
Finally they might do a full nationwide survey (quantitative research design) in order to devise specific recommendations for the client.
Meta-analysis (also called the Schmidt-Hunter technique) refers to a statistical method of combining data from multiple studies or from several types of studies.
Marketing research is ''objective''.
Or, alternatively, by methodological approach:
These types of services allowed companies to dig deeper into the motivations of consumers, augmenting their insights and utilizing this data to drive market share.
It attempts to provide accurate information that reflects a true state of affairs.
The researchers need to know what type of multi-faceted approach will answer the objectives, since seldom is it possible to find the answers using just one method.
Collect secondary information on product manufacturers and service providers under study in relevant country
Sets the objectives and goals of the marketing research department.
While research is always influenced by the researcher's research philosophy, it should be free from the personal or political biases of the researcher or the management.
*Test marketing&nbsp;— a small-scale product launch used to determine the likely acceptance of the product when it is introduced into a wider market
Also, researchers should always be objective with regard to the selection of information to be featured in reference texts because such literature should offer a comprehensive view on marketing.
Research of this type provides information about the marketing environment and helps diagnose a problem.
An assistant project manager will learn and assist in questionnaire design, review field instructions, and monitor timing and costs of studies.
#Field Work Director: Responsible for the selection, training, supervision, and evaluation of interviewers and other field workers.
* Think creatively.
The junior analyst and the research analyst learn about the particular industry and receive training from a senior staff member, usually the marketing research manager.
Marketing research uses the scientific method in that data are collected and analyzed to test prior notions or hypotheses.
As information around the world became more accessible, increased competition led companies to demand more of Market Researchers.
Those with MBA or equivalent degrees are likely to be employed as project managers.
Secondary research already exists since it has been collected for other purposes.
Collect secondary information on culture and common business practices
Some of the steps that would help overcoming barriers include;
Traditionally, marketing researchers were responsible for providing the relevant information and marketing decisions were made by the managers.
Research has shown, however, that many marketing textbooks do not feature important principles in marketing research.
It should be conducted impartially.
Designs and pretests the questionnaires and conducts a preliminary analysis of the data.
:Note as important : Overall analysis should be based on 6W+1H (What, When, Where, Which, Who, Why and How) question.
The role of marketing research in managerial decision making is explained further using the framework of the "DECIDE" model.
Conclusive research draws conclusions: the results of the study can be generalized to the whole population.
It is conducted on data published previously and usually by someone else.
Secondary research costs far less than primary research, but seldom comes in a form that exactly meets the needs of the researcher.
Thus systematic planning is required at all the stages of the marketing research process.
Now, more than ever,innovation is the key to success for Marketing Researchers.
Most secondary data (statistics, demographics, etc.)
Responsibilities include experimental design, data processing, and analysis.
Estimates of Social Networking Potential (SNP) are combined with estimates of selling effectiveness to estimate ROI on specific combinations of messages and media.
The goal of marketing research is to identify and assess how changing elements of the marketing mix impacts customer behavior.
* Take all the marketing courses.
This kind of expertise can be obtained from firms and consultants specializing in analytical services.
*Frugging comprises the practice of soliciting funds under the pretense of being a research organization.
Provided with the capacity to interact with online customers, Researchers were able to collect large amounts of data that were previously unavailable, further propelling the Marketing Research Industry.
*Personal relationships are of critical importance in B2B markets.
#Analyze Macro & Micro Economic data (e.g.
- what does the brand stand for?
#Combine those analysis with the SME's business plan/ business model analysis (e.g.
#Assistant Director of Research: Serves as an administrative assistant to the director and supervises some of the other marketing research staff members.
Thus, marketing research may also be described as the systematic and objective identification, collection, analysis, and dissemination of information for the purpose of assisting management in decision making related to the identification and solution of problems and opportunities in marketing.
Last, but not least, most business research leads to strategic decisions and this means that the business researcher must have expertise in developing strategies that are strongly rooted in the research findings and acceptable to the client.
It helps remove some of the uncertainty by providing relevant information about the marketing variables, environment, and consumers.
Each marketing research project is treated uniquely.
Managers make numerous strategic and tactical decisions in the process of identifying and satisfying customer needs.
*Customized services offer a wide variety of marketing research services customized to suit a client's specific needs.
To prepare for a career in marketing research, students usually:
The objective nature of marketing research underscores the importance of ethical considerations.
Research which is motivated by personal or political gain involves a breach of professional standards.
Marketing research helps the marketing manager link the marketing variables with the environment and the consumers.
*Store audit&nbsp;— to measure the sales of a product or product line at a statistically selected store sample in order to determine market share, or to determine whether a retail store provides adequate service
In the marketing research industry, however, there is a growing preference for people with master's degrees.
The most common entry-level position in marketing research for people with bachelor's degrees (e.g., BBA) is as operational supervisor.
The Stanford Research Institute, on the other hand, conducts an annual survey of consumers that is used to classify persons into homogeneous groups for segmentation purposes.
It is essentially, structured and quantitative research, and the output of this research is the input to management information systems (MIS).
It is the systematic gathering, recording, and analysis of qualitative and quantitative data about issues relating to marketing products and services.
Technical specialists such as statisticians obviously need strong backgrounds in statistics and data analysis.
#Analyst: Handles the details involved in executing the project.
Mobile devices such as SmartPhones are the best example of an emerging platform that enables businesses to connect with their customers throughout the entire buying process.
Marketing research is often partitioned into two sets of categorical pairs, either by target market:
Having access to web data did not automatically provide companies with the rationale behind the behaviour of users visiting their sites,which provoked the marketing research industry to develop new and better ways of tracking, collecting and interpreting information.
Another entry-level position for BBAs is assistant project manager.
*Mystery consumer or mystery shopping - An employee or representative of the market research firm anonymously contacts a salesperson and indicates he or she is shopping for a product.
Exploratory research provides insights into and comprehension of an issue or situation.
If a secondary source of data is unable to serve the purpose, a convenience sample of small size can be collected.
This demand is driving Marketing Researchers to develop new platforms for interactive, two-way communication between their firms and consumers.
#(Senior) Project Manager: Has overall responsibility for design, implementation, and management of research projects.
*Limited-service suppliers specialize in one or a few phases of the marketing research project.
Market research techniques resemble those used in political polling and social science research.
*Branded marketing research products and services are specialized data collection and analysis procedures developed to address specific types of marketing research problems.
