Tiberius Julius Ininthimeus, King of the Bosporan Kingdom, died 240 AD, had 1 child
The young Cleopatra became Caesar's mistress and bore him a son, Caesarion.
Tensions escalated into open war, however, when Octavian divorced Clodia Pulchra, Fulvia's daughter from her first husband Publius Clodius Pulcher.
The Senate, and Cicero in particular, viewed Antony as the greater danger of the two.
During the festival's activities, Antony publicly offered Caesar a diadem, which Caesar refused.
In addition, they divided amongst themselves military command of the Republic's armies and provinces: Antony received Gaul, Lepidus Spain, and Octavian (as the junior partner) Africa.
Originally, the conspirators had planned to eliminate not only Caesar but also many of his supporters, including Antony, but Brutus rejected the proposal, limiting the conspiracy to Caesar alone.
#* Marcus Antonius Antyllus, murdered by Octavian in 30 BC.
His reasons were to punish the Parthians for assisting Pompey in the recent civil war, to avenge Crassus' defeat at Carrhae, and especially to match the glory of Alexander the Great for himself.
When Augustus died in AD 14, his political powers passed to his adopted son Tiberius; the Roman Principate had begun.
Antony and Cleopatra's navy was destroyed, and they were forced to escape to Egypt with 60 ships.
Though he was an ardent Caesarian, Lepidus had maintained friendly relations with the Senate and with Sextus Pompey.
Antony, having learned of the plot the night before, went to stop Caesar from attending the meeting.
To do so, they employed a legalized form of mass murder: proscription.
In early 44 BC, Julius Caesar announced his intentions to invade Parthia and restore Roman power in the East.
Upon returning to Rome, the Triumvirate repartitioned rule of Rome's provinces between themselves, with Antony as the clear senior partner.
Sometime between 54 and 30 BC, the union produced a single daughter, Antonia Prima.
This appointment marks the beginning of his military career.
A Parthian army, led by Orodes II's eldest son Pacorus, invaded Syria in early 40 BC.
Fulvia had previously been married to both Publius Clodius Pulcher and Gaius Scribonius Curio, having been a widow since Curio's assassination in 52 BC.
:::::::::::::::::::i. Sauromaces II of Iberia
A member of the plebeian Antonia gens, Antony was born in Rome on January 14, 83 BC.
He may also have been involved in the Lupercal cult as he was referred to as a priest of this order later in life.
After Herod offered him a large financial gift, Antony confirmed the brothers in their positions.
Rome was effectively under the absolute power of these three men.
One of the Tribunes for 47 BC, Publius Cornelius Dolabella, a former general under Pompey, proposed a law which would have canceled all outstanding debts.
Iullus Antonius, 43 BC – 2 BC, had 3 children
Antony was a supporter of Julius Caesar, and served as one of his generals during the conquest of Gaul and the Civil War.
To solidify the alliance between Antony and Lepidus, Antony's daughter Antonia Prima was engaged to Lepidus's son, also named Lepidus.
::::c. Cotys IX, King of Lesser Armenia
Sextus Pompey, son of Caesar's old rival Pompey Magnus, was given command of the Republic's fleet from his base in Sicily while Brutus and Cassius were granted the governorships of Macedonia and Syria respectively.
Despite a temporary alienation later in life, Antony and Caesar developed friendly relations which would continue until Caesar's assassination in 44 BC.
At the Battle of Cyrrhestica, Ventidius inflicted an overwhelming defeat against the Parthians which resulted in the death of Pacorus.
This caused Sextus to lose many valuable allies as the formerly exiled Senators gradually aligned themselves with either Octavian or Antony.
::::a. a son (this child and the only child of the Claudia Antonia listed below are the same person)
During the southern march, Caesar placed Antony as his second in command.
Fearing the persecutions of Lucius Cornelius Sulla only thirty-years earlier, they avoided granting Pompey the dictatorship by instead naming him sole Consul for the year, giving him extraordinary but limited powers.
His death resulted in a feud between the Antonia and the famous orator.
Despite Rome's internal turmoil during the time, the Parthians did not immediately benefit from the power vacuum in the East due to Orodes II's reluctance despite Labienus' urgings to the contrary.
Arriving in Tarsus aboard her magnificent ship, Cleopatra invited Antony to a grand banquet to solidify their alliance.
One such rebel was King Antiochus of Commagene, whom he besieged in Samosata.
Before marching against Brutus and Cassius in the East, the Triumvirs decided to eliminate their enemies in Rome.
However, the eight legions serving under Octavian, composed largely of Caesar's veterans, refused to follow one of Caesar's murderers, allowing Octavian to retain his command.
Within days of Antony's expulsion, on 7 January 49 BC, the Senate reconvened.
Antony fled Rome, fearing for his life, and returned to Caesar's camp on the banks of the Rubicon River, the southern limit of Caesar's lawful command.
Antony then spent the winter of 41 BC in Alexandria with Cleopatra, leaving only two legions to defend the Syrian border against Parthian incursions.
The Parthians faced no opposition and proceeded to the town of Gindarus in Cyrrhestica where Ventidius's army was waiting.
Octavian choose the former.
Antony, in his first months in the East, raised money, reorganized his troops, and secured the alliance of Rome's client kingdoms.
:::I. Julia Livia, 5 AD – 43 AD, had 4 children
::::::::i. Tiberius Julius Cotys II, King of the Bosporan Kingdom, had 1 child
Caesar attempted to get away, but, blinded by blood, he tripped and fell; the men continued stabbing him as he lay defenseless on the lower steps of the portico.
With the support of Caesar, who as Pontifex Maximus was head of the Roman religion, Antony was appointed the College of Augurs, an important priestly office responsible for interpreting the will of the Roman gods by studying the flight of birds.
However, when Octavian returned to the city with his army, the pair was forced to retreat to Perusia in Etruria.
Antony assumed direct control of the East while he installed one of his lieutenants as the ruler of Gaul.
After a forty-day siege, the Roman soldiers stormed the city and, despite Herod's pleas for restraint, acted without mercy, pillaging and killing all in their path, prompting Herod to complain to Antony.
A proclaimed ''philhellene'' ("Friend of all things Greek"), Antony supported Greek culture to win the loyalty of the inhabitants of the Greek East.
Defeated, Antony and Cleopatra fled to Egypt, where they committed suicide.
Their centurions, who had become important figures politically, refused to fight due to their shared service under Caesar, with the legions under their command followed suit.
He then met a Parthian army at the border between Cilicia and Syria, defeating it and killing a large portion of the Parthian soldiers at the Amanus Pass.
Several times Antony was summoned to Rome, but remained in Alexandria with Cleopatra.
::A. Lucius Antonius, 20 BC – 25 AD, had no children
The Romans hoped to use Herod as a bulwark against the Parthians in the coming campaign.
As many as eighteen Roman towns through Italy were affected by the confiscations of 41 BC, with entire populations driven out.
The enormous popularity of Octavian with the legions secured the defection of the provinces of Cyrenaica and Greece to his side.
Caesar's funeral was held on 20 March.
The Senate, as was custom, assigned Antony and Dolabella the provinces of Macedonia and Syria, respectively, to govern in 43 BC after their Consular terms expired.
* Ptolemaic Egypt in Africa
Because of his health, Octavian remained in camp while his lieutenants assumed a position on the left flank opposite Brutus.
Clodius, through the influence of his benefactor Marcus Licinius Crassus, had developed a positive political relationship with Julius Caesar.
He also promoted himself as Hellenistic ruler, which won him the affection of the Greek peoples of the East but also made him the target of Octavian's propaganda in Rome.
:::I. Artaxias III, King of Armenia, 13 BC – 35 AD, died without issue
Three days later, on 10 January, Caesar crossed the Rubicon River, starting a civil war.
In November 43 BC, Octavian, Lepidus, and Antony met near Bononia.
Octavian responded with treason charges: of illegally keeping provinces that should be given to other men by lots, as was Rome's tradition, and of starting wars against foreign nations (Armenia and Parthia) without the consent of the Senate.
Without their fleet, Caesar lacked the necessary transport ships to cross into Greece with his seven legions.
Prince Ptolemy Philadelphus of Egypt, 36 BC – 29 BC, died without issue (presumably)
While Octavian pardoned Lucius for his role in the war and even granted him command in Spain as his chief lieutenant there, Fulvia was forced to flee to Greece with her children.
In Hasmonean Judea, several Jewish delegations complained to Antony of the harsh rule of Phasael and Herod, the sons of Rome's assassinated chief Jewish minister Antipater the Idumaean.
In 27 BC, Octavian was granted the title of ''Augustus,'' marking the final stage in the transformation of the Roman Republic into an empire, with himself as the first Roman emperor.
Antony's violent reaction had caused Rome to fall into a state of anarchy.
The resulting battle was a decisive victory for Caesar.
Antony achieved his first military distinctions after securing important victories at Alexandrium and Machaerus.
:::::::::::::i. Tiberius Julius Sauromates III, King of the Bosporan Kingdom, died 232 AD
However, following Marcus Licinius Crassus's defeat at the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BC, Armenia was forced into an alliance with Parthia due to Roman's weakened position in the East.
::::::::::::::::ii.
By summer 44 BC, Antony was in a difficult position due to his actions regarding his compromise with the Liberatores following Caesar's assassination.
During this time, the alliance between Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus had effectively ended.
Caesar managed to retreat to Thessaly, with Pompey in pursuit.
The south position was anchored to a supposedly impassable marsh, while the north was bordered by impervious hills.
# Marriage to Fulvia, by whom he had two sons:
He was a major figure in the Second Catilinarian Conspiracy and was summarily executed on the orders of the Consul Cicero in 63 BC for his involvement.
In 31 BC, the war started.
The size of his army indicated Antony's intention to conquer Parthia, or at least receive its submission by capturing the Parthian capital of Ecbatana.
First used by the Dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 82 BC, Sulla drew up a list of his political enemies to purge Rome of opposition to his rule.
#* Ptolemy Philadelphus.
However, the Triumvirs did not possess sufficient state-controlled land to allot to the veterans.
During this time Antony married his third wife, Fulvia.
According to some ancient authors, Antony led a carefree life of luxury in Alexandria.
In the summer of 41 BC, Antony, to resassert Roman power in the East, conquered Palmyra on the Roman-Parthian border.
The festival was held in honor of Lupa, the she-wolf who suckled the infant orphans Romulus and Remus, the founders of Rome.
These kingdoms included:
Pompey had deposed Aristobulus and installed Hyrcanus as Rome’s client ruler over Judea.
Lucius and Fulvia took a political and martial gamble in opposing Octavian and Lepidus, however, as the Roman army still depended on the Triumvirs for their salaries.
Away in the East and embarrassed by Fulvia's actions, Antony gave no instructions to his legions.
Rome then installed Artavasdes II as king and continued its influence over Armenia.
Caesar then sailed to Egypt, where he deposed Ptolemy XIII in favor of his sister Cleopatra in 47 BC.
:::::i. Tiberius Julius Mithridates, King of the Bosporan Kingdom, died 68 AD, died without issue
The political atmosphere of Rome at the time of the festival was deeply divided.
(Messalina was the mother of the two youngest children of the Roman Emperor Claudius listed below)
:::::::i. Tiberius Julius Sauromates I, King of the Bosporan Kingdom, had 1 child
The battle gave Caesar a much needed boost in legitimacy, as prior to the battle much of the Roman world outside Italy supported Pompey and the Optimates as the legitimate government of Rome.
:::::::::::::::iii.
Valeria Messalina, 17 AD or 20 AD – 48 AD, had 2 children
At Cleopatra's request, Antony ordered the execution of Arsinoe, who, though marched in Caesar's triumphal parade in 46 BC, had been granted sanctuary at the temple of Artemis in Ephesus.
As for Cleopatra, she was proclaimed Queen of Kings and Queen of Egypt, to rule with Caesarion (Ptolemy XV Caesar, son of Cleopatra by Julius Caesar), King of Kings and King of Egypt.
When Antony refused to relinquish Caesar's vast fortune to him, Octavian borrowed heavily to fulfill the bequests in Caesar's will to the Roman people and to his veterans, as well as to establish his own bodyguard of veterans.
Prince Alexander Helios of Egypt, born 40 BC, died without issue (presumably)
After a year of service in Gaul, Caesar dispatched Antony to Rome to formally begin his political career, receiving election as Quaestor for 52 BC as a member of the Populares faction.
After Caesar's assassination, Cleopatra and Caesarion returned to Egypt, where she named the child as her co-ruler.
Beginning in 41 BC, he traveled across the Aegean Sea to Anatolia, leaving his friend Lucius Marcius Censorius as governor of Macedonia and Achaea.
Surrounded by Cleopatra and her children, Antony ended his alliance with Octavian.
Caesar's political rivals feared these reforms were his attempts at transforming the Republic into an open monarchy.
Caesar would later remark the civil war would have ended that day if Pompey had only attacked him.
::::d. Rubellius Drusus
With the war over, Octavian was left in sole control over Italy.
Thus, Antony tried to secretly outflank the Liberators' position through the marshes in the south.
::A. Domitia Lepida the Elder, c. 19 BC – 59 AD, had 1 child
Claudia Antonia, c. 30 AD – 66 AD, had 1 child
In this position, Antony could protect Caesar from his political enemies by vetoing any actions unfavorable to his patron.
::C. Iulla Antonia ??
He attended religious festivals and ceremonies, including initiation into the Eleusinian Mysteries, a secret cult dedicated to the worship of the goddesses Demeter and Persephone.
To avoid being killed, a number of outlaws fled to either Sextus Pompey in Sicily or to the Liberators in the East.
Antony again remained in Rome while Caesar, in 45 BC, sailed to Spain to defeat the final opposition to his rule.
When Caesar returned in late 45 BC, the civil war was over.
::A. Pythodorida of Pontus, 30 BC or 29 BC – 38 AD, had 3 children
With the defeat of the Liberators, only Sextus Pompey and his fleet remained to challenge the Triumvirate's control over the Republic.
He could either denounce the Liberatores as murderers and alienate the Senate or he could maintain his support for the compromise and risk betraying the legacy of Caesar, strengthening Octavian's position.
This compromise was a great success for Antony, who managed to simultaneously appease Caesar's veterans, reconcile the Senate majority, and appear to the Liberatores as their partner and protector.
While the Triumvirs commanded a larger number of infantry, the Liberators commanded a larger cavalry contingent.
Worked into a fury by the bloody spectacle, the assembly rioted.
Octavian's position improved, as he received Spain, which was taken from Lepidus.
There, Canidius forced the Iberian King Pharnavaz II into an alliance against Zober, king of neighboring Albania, subduing the kingdom and reducing it to a Roman protectorate.
Antony then made a new proposal: Caesar would retain only two of his eight legions and the governorship of Illyrium if he was allowed to stand for the Consulship ''in absentia''.
Additionally, tens of thousands of veterans who had fought for the Republican cause in the war also required land grants.
:::::::::::::i. Tiberius Julius Rhescuporis III,King of the Bosporan Kingdom, died 227 AD
By the end of the year 49 BC, Caesar, already the ruler of Gaul, had captured Italy, Spain, Sicily, and Sardinia out of Optimates control.
Many of the proscribed Senators, rather than face death, fled to Sicily seeking Sextus' protection.
By Antonia, he had a daughter:
Antony was also held responsible for Sextus Pompey's execution without a trial.
Then only 19 years old and stationed with Caesar's army in Macedonia, the youth became a member of Caesar's Julian clan, changing his name to "Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus" (Octavian) in accordance with the conventions of Roman adoption.
When the Senate refused, Octavian marched on Rome with his eight legions and assumed control of the city in August 43 BC.
The parade through the city was a pastiche of Rome's most important military celebration.
In the return, a mock Roman triumph was celebrated in the streets of Alexandria.
This was done against the orders of the Senate but with the approval of Pompey, then Rome’s leading politician, and only after the deposed king provided a 10,000 talent bribe.
Chief among them were Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus.
Archelaus had served as the high priest and ruler of the temple state of Comana in Cappadocia.
With the exception of those responsible for Caesar's assassination, all those proscribed were allowed to return to Rome and promised compensation.
Fearing Octavian's land grants would cause the loyalty of the Caesarian veterans to shift away from Antony, Fulvia traveled constantly with her children to the new veteran settlements in order to remind the veterans of their debt to Antony.
Though he left Alexandria for Tyre in early 40 BC, when he learned of the civil war between his wife and Octavian, he was forced to return to Italy with his army to secure his position in Rome rather than defeat the Pathians.
Meeting her in Athens, Antony rebuked Fulvia for her actions before sailing on to Italy with his army to face Octavian, laying siege to Brundisium.
::B. Princess Drusilla of Mauretania, born 5 AD or 8 BC
#* Iullus Antonius, married Claudia Marcella Major, daughter of Octavia.
Ratifying Octavian's extraordinary command on 1 January 43 BC, the Senate dispatched him along with Consuls Hirtius and Pansa to defeat Antony and his five legions.
Caesar sought to mend relations with the populist leader; he was elected to a third term as Consul for 46 BC, but proposed the Senate should transfer the consulship to Dolabella.
Antony, however, objected to the assignment, preferring to govern Cisalpine Gaul which had been assigned to Decimus Junius Brutus Albinus, one of Caesar's assassins.
When Antony's governor of Gaul died, Octavian took over his legions there, further strengthening his control over the West.
Antonia, born 50 BC, had 1 child
This arrangement ensured his immunity from suit would continue, he had needed the Consulship to protect himself from prosecution by Pompey.
The provinces included Macedonia, Asia, Bithynia, Cilicia, Cyprus, Syria, and Cyrenaica.
However, Antony was soon forced to retreat in mid-October after a failed two-month siege of the provincial capital.
Though King Deiotarus of Galatia supported Brutus and Cassius following Caesar's assassination, Antony allowed him to retain his position.
Though periods of peace developed cultural and commercial exchanges, war was a constant threat.
The Greek historian Plutarch records it was Antony who convinced Gabinius to finally act.
::::c. Gaius Rubellius Blandus
'' (by Mark Antony to Cleopatra and her children) in 34 BC.
During the Greek campaign, Plutarch records Antony was Caesar's top general and second to only him in reputation.
This agreement, known as the ''Treaty of Brundisium'', reinforced the Triumvirate and allowed Antony begin preparing for Caesar's long-awaited campaign against the Parthian Empire.
Fulvia also attempted to delay the land settlements until Antony returned to Rome, so that he could share credit for the settlements.
Supporting the Senatorial faction against Antony, Octavian, in September 44 BC, encouraged the leading Senator Marcus Tullius Cicero to attack Antony in a series of speeches portraying him as a threat to the Republican order.
Upon his arrival in Ephesus in Asia, Antony was worshiped as the god Dionysus born anew.
Antony, as the sole Consul, soon took the initiative and seized the state treasury.
Upon learning the Parthian Empire had invaded Rome's territory in early 40 BC, Antony left Egypt for Syria to confront the invasion.
According to the Greek historian Plutarch, eighteen battles were fought between the retreating Romans and the Parthians during the month-long march back to Armenia, with approximately 20,000 infantry and 4,000 cavalry dying during the retreat alone.
Both consuls were killed, however, leaving Octavian in sole command of their armies, some eight legions.
Marcus Antonius Antyllus, 47 BC – 30 BC, died without issue
#* Antonia Minor (also known Julia Antonia Minor), married Nero Claudius Drusus, the younger son of the Empress Livia Drusilla and brother of the Emperor Tiberius; mother of the Emperor Claudius, grandmother of the Emperor Caligula and Empress Agrippina the Younger, and maternal great-grandmother of the emperor Nero.
While Antony treated the losers mildly, Octavian dealt cruelly with his prisoners and even beheaded Brutus's corpse.
The supporters of Caesar, led by Clodius, and the supporters of Pompey, led by Titus Annius Milo, routinely clashed.
While the battle was initially evenly matched, Antony's leadership routed Brutus's forces.
Furthermore, reward money was given to anyone who gave information leading to the death of a proscribed man, and any person who killed a proscribed man was entitled to keep part of his property, with the remainder going to the state.
The Consuls for the year, Gaius Claudius Marcellus Maior and Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus, were firm Optimates opposed to Caesar.
Though they believed Caesar's death would restore the Republic, Caesar had been immensely popular with the Roman middle and lower classes, who became enraged upon learning a small group of aristocrats had killed their champion.
Lentulus, despite exploiting his political success for financial gain, was constantly in debt due to the extravagance of his lifestyle.
Both consuls, Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Gaius Sosius, and a third of the Senate abandoned Rome to meet Antony and Cleopatra in Greece.
Though an indecisive result, the victory was a tactical win for Pompey.
Tiberius Julius Cotys I, King of the Bosporan Kingdom, had 1 child
Brutus assumed sole command of the Liberator army and preferred a war of attrition over open conflict.
Rhadamsades, King of the Bosporan Kingdom, died 323 AD
Antony's honours were revoked and his statues removed (''damnatio memoriae'').
