Marketing segmentation is considered to be a part of a larger concept in marketing called target marketing.
In addition to the controllable marketing mix factors, there are uncontrollable factors called environmental forces.
* The extent to which customers are currently ignorant of what one might argue they ''should'' want—which is dicey because whether it can be acted upon affordably depends on whether or how soon the customers will learn, or be convinced, otherwise.
'''Relationship marketing''' / '''Relationship management'''
Thus, this signifies a firm exploiting economies of scale until the minimum efficient scale is reached.
Furthermore, the use of a service is inherently subjective, meaning that several persons experiencing a service would each experience it uniquely.
Recently, there has been a large emphasis on data analytics.
Thus, market research is a subset of marketing research.
The six key elements of a marketing scan are the ''demographic forces'', ''socio-cultural forces'', ''economic forces'', ''regulatory forces'', ''competitive forces'', and ''technological forces''.
B2B marketing doesn't always involve wholesale products.
This information is then used by managers to plan marketing activities, gauge the nature of a firm's marketing environment and obtain information from suppliers.
Marketing researchers can use such systems to devise better methods of converting data into information, and for the creation of enhanced data gathering methods.
They collect either primary data or Secondary data.
Data can be mined from various sources such as online forms, mobile phone applications and more recently, social media marketing.
For example, a start-up car manufacturing firm would face little success should it attempt to rival Toyota, Ford, Nissan, Chevrolet, or any other large global car maker.
A given firm may offer numerous products or services to a marketplace, spanning numerous and sometimes wholly unrelated industries.
Generally, there are three ways of doing this: the customer-driven approach, the market change identification approach, and the product innovation approach.
Experiments are typical in causal research.
'''Intangibility''' - It does not possess material form, and thus cannot be touched.
A "swarm-moves" model was introduced by a Florida Institute of Technology researcher, which is appealing to supermarkets because it can "increase sales without the need to give people discounts."
'''Inventory''' (Perishability) – the service cannot last
The last P stands for '''Promotion''' which is the process of reaching the target market and convincing them to buy the product.
Such an orientation may suit scenarios in which a firm holds dead stock, or otherwise sells a product that is in high demand, with little likelihood of changes in consumer tastes that would diminish demand.
With this technology, within a fraction of a second the consumer is identified by the RTB, and then bid on by many bidders from which an ad is delivered by the winner.
Listed below are some prominent marketing strategy models.
In this context, "branding" refers to the main company philosophy and marketing is considered to be an instrument of branding philosophy.
Primary research is often expensive to prepare, collect, and interpret from data to information.
Governments often employ marketing to communicate messages with a social purpose, such as a public health or safety message, to citizens.
Inter-departmental conflicts may occur, should a firm adhere to the marketing orientation.
The other 3P's of service marketing are: process, physical environment, and people.
Evidently, a company needs to weigh up and ascertain how to utilize its finite resources.
In contrast, marketing research relates to all research conducted within marketing.
Information from an organization's marketing department would be used to guide the actions of other departments within the firm.
Market segmentation pertains to the division of a market of consumers into persons with similar needs and wants.
Quality of the product
A lesson from this type of situation is to be smarter about the true test validity of instruments like surveys.
Meso environment – the industry in which a company operates and the industry's market(s).
A production orientation may be deployed when a high demand for a product or service exists, coupled with a good certainty that consumer tastes will not rapidly alter (similar to the sales orientation).
* Basic research – aims to understand relative relationships between variables.
Production may oppose the installation, support, and servicing of new capital stock, which may be needed to manufacture a new product.
• Technological: The marketing strategies often adapt to the pace of development of the consumer demand and exponential technological progression.
The starting point is always the consumer.
* Product Services - Those service elements associated with a physical objects such as on-line shopping or instrument tuning
As an example, a marketing department could ascertain (via marketing research) that consumers desired a new type of product, or a new usage for an existing product.
There are several levels of marketing objectives within an organization.
The four components that characterize holistic marketing are relationship marketing, internal marketing, integrated marketing, and socially responsive marketing.
Some consider there to be a fifth "P": positioning.
Thus, the issue of divest, or a ceasing of production, may be made.
1) Qualitative research methods
Marketing roles are often defined by the size of the company and the number of products.
Staying ahead of the consumer is an important part of a marketer's job.
If the information search is insufficient, the consumer may search for alternative means to satisfy the need/want.
'''Causal relationships''' is when one variable influences the other but not vice versa.
The marketing mix, originally coined by Neil Borden, can be valuable when determining a product or brand's offer, and is often associated with the four Ps.
R&D companies often parallel customer orientation with R&D phases to ensure the desired customer specifications are produced.
It attempts to perfect the segmentation strategy used in traditional marketing.
Amongst others they include: regulatory, economic, social, political environmental, competitive, and technological.
"The first major disruption to this system was search-engine marketing (SEM), which introduced not only a new kind of inventory but also a new paradigm for marketing altogether: Advertisers could use a publisher-specific platform to bid against one another for the right to place contextual ads" (Sinnerich 5).
The variables may have either causal or correlational relationship.
A marketing plan can also pertain to a specific product, as well as to an organization's overall marketing strategy.
Similar characteristics to marketing orientation but with the added proviso that there will be a curtailment of any harmful activities to society, in either product, production, or selling methods.
The holistic marketing concept looks at marketing as a complex activity and acknowledges that everything matters in marketing - and that a broad and integrated perspective is necessary in developing, designing and implementing marketing programs and activities.
History attests to many products that were commercial failures in spite of being technological breakthroughs.
Digital marketing is an umbrella term for the targeted, measurable, and interactive marketing of products or services using digital technologies to reach and convert leads into customers.The key objective is to promote brands, build preference and increase sales through various digital marketing techniques.
In order for marketers to successfully sell their products, they must establish the brands they are selling as familiar, essential, as well as lovable to their consumers, functioning as a way for marketers to create a solid relationship between the consumer and the product.
RTB has begun to transform online marketing and advertising in a similar manner to right-time marketing.
The marketing mix is a business tool used in marketing and by marketers.
The production department would then start to manufacture the product, while the marketing department would focus on the promotion, distribution, pricing, etc.
Information technology typically progresses at a fast rate, leading to marketing managers being cognizant of the latest technological developments.
It is important to understand the "marketing environment" in order to comprehend the consumers concerns, motivations and to adjust the product according to the consumers needs.
A commodity culture is essentially the construction of the consumer's identities through the consumer products being sold.
This way marketing satisfies these needs and wants through the development of exchange processes and the building of long-term relationships.
'''Place''' represents the variables of getting the product to the consumer such as distribution channels, market coverage, and movement organization.
There also exist additional modes of marketing research, which are:
''See'' Positioning (marketing).
Habits, lifestyle, and diet are all considered to be controllable risk factors.
The manifestation of this process is considered by many traditional thinkers to include the following; '''''S'''egmenting'', '''''T'''argeting,'' and '''''P'''ositioning''.
The marketing activity and process of identifying a market problem or opportunity, and developing a solution based on market research, segmentation, and supporting data.
Real-time bidding (RTB) also follows a similar principle.
• Political: The socio-economic conditions are closely related to the state of the governmental institutions.
Computer-based information systems can be employed, aiding in better processing and storage of data.
Early contributions were rooted mainly in social psychology, with a strong attention to attitude research and the analysis of behavioral effects.
Building and keeping good customer relations
'''Involvement''' – customer can tailor the service while using it (e.g.
For instance, the Kellogg's cereal Frosties are marketed to children.
'''Holistic Marketing'''
A firm only possesses a certain amount of resources.
Marketing researchers use statistical methods such as quantitative research, qualitative research, hypothesis tests, Chi-squared tests, linear regression, correlations, frequency distributions, poisson distributions, binomial distributions, etc.
Additionally, a firm's finance departments would be consulted, with respect to securing appropriate funding for the development, production, and promotion of the products.
Information technology can aid in enhancing an MkIS' software and hardware components, and improve a company's marketing decision-making process.
• Regulatory: This refers to laws and legality (governmental policies) that may affect the way marketing can be characterized.
As the company grows larger, roles start to become more specialized.
* Predictive research, meaning research conducted to predict a future occurrence.
However, in recent years, service marketing has widened the domains to be considered, contributing to the 7P's of marketing in total.
Emphasis is placed on the whole relationship between suppliers and customers.
Consequently, ascertaining consumer demand is vital for a firm's future viability and even existence as a going concern.
Following this stage, a post-purchase evaluation is often conducted, comprising an appraisal of the value/utility brought by the purchase of the sneakers.
* Pursuing new markets (thus new value networks) when they are still in a commercially inferior or unattractive state, simply because their potential to grow and intersect with established markets and value networks looks like a likely bet.
Marketers must look at where the threats and opportunities stem from in the world around the consumer to maintain a productive and profitable business.
For example, if one imagines a pair of sneakers, the desire for a pair of sneakers would be followed by an information search on available types/brands.
A formal approach to this customer-focused marketing is known as '''''SIVA''''' (Solution, Information, Value, Access).
It is not only the product itself being sold, rather the connotation attached to that product, and the feeling the consumer gets about the product that is being sold.
Not all products are either pure goods or pure services.
A firm in the market economy survives by producing goods and services that persons are willing and able to buy.
This mode of behavior involves one business marketing a product or service to another business.
A firm focusing on a production orientation specializes in producing as much as possible of a given product or service.
The four Ps determine how marketing satisfies consumer needs.
1980s to present day
Yet, many services are directly connected to products.
Positioning may refer to the position a business has chosen to carry out their marketing and business objectives.
The purpose of marketing is to induce behavioral change in the receptive audience.
* Conclusive research, for the purpose of deriving a conclusion via a research process.
With growing diversity in the tastes of modern consumers, firms are taking note of the benefit of servicing a multiplicity of new markets.
Marketers use the process of  ''marketing environmental scans'', which continually acquires information on events occurring outside the organization to identify trends, opportunities and threats to a business.
The techniques used in marketing include choosing target markets through market analysis and market segmentation, as well as understanding methods of influence on the consumer behavior.
1970s to the present day
Newer forms of marketing also use the Internet and are therefore called ''Internet marketing'' or more generally e-marketing, online marketing, 'digital marketing', search engine marketing, or 'desktop advertising'.
Marketing theory holds that brand attributes is primarily a matter of customer perception rather than product or service features.
An example would be a business buying either wholesale from other businesses or directly from the manufacturer in contracts or agreements.
The external influences are the forces that affect the characteristics of the marketing strategies to which marketeers adapt.
However, this general business strategy would be interpreted and implemented in different contexts throughout the firm.
In the 1990s, the concept of '''four C's''' was introduced as a more customer-driven replacement of four P's.
Macro (national) environment - larger societal forces that affect the microenvironment.
'''Product''' is the first P representing the actual product.
B2C and B2B behavior are not mutually exclusive terms, as similarities and differences exist, with some key differences listed below:
The psychology of marketing is determined through the analysis of customer perception pertaining to brands.
The marketing research process spans a number of stages, including the definition of a problem, development of a research plan, collection and interpretation of data, and disseminating information formally in the form of a report.
Crunchy Nut Cornflakes are marketed to adults.
This visual culture involves today's media environment, marketers, and advertisers constantly trying to find new ways that they can hold the attention of the very often dismissive consumers.
They are considered controllable marketing mix factors, meaning that they can change or be altered as needed.
The American Marketing Association has defined marketing as "the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large."
* In-depth interview – a method of analysis, which proceeds as a confidential and secure conversation between an interviewer and a respondent.
In another example, Sun Microsystems can use market segmentation to classify its clients according to their promptness to adopt new products.
With RTB, consumers are able to directly respond and indirectly create marketing campaigns.
* Service Products - Those pure services or major service components, directly offered to customers, such as a gig
Marketing roles, titles, and responsibilities differ, often significantly, between B2B and B2C companies.
The analysis of buyer behavior through online platforms includes Google Analytics and vendor side software such as Experian.
to interpret their findings, and convert data into information.
Customization Maximization (similar to profit maximization in economics,) is the measurable approach to more efficiently sustaining specific customer needs, in effort to maximize the customization of the product or service offered to the customer, by the measure of data relating to responses, feedback, and elasticity.
Customers who in 1997 said that they would not place any value on internet browsing capability on a mobile phone, or 6% better fuel efficiency in their vehicle, might say something different today, because the value proposition of those opportunities has changed.
If the value/utility is high, then a repeat purchase may be made.
A firm employing a product orientation is chiefly concerned with the quality of its own product.
Each of these factors can have a direct impact on marketing which may have to be re-evaluated and overhauled as a result.
1990s to present day
Moreover, a product may be reaching the end of its life-cycle.
* The extent to which what customers ''say'' they want does not match their purchasing decisions.
According to Aram Sinnerich, in a report titled ''The Revolution Will Be Targeted'', there was a disruption in the online marketing system.
The "'''four P's'''".
For example, the product management role can split so that the product manager would focus on designing the product experience and functionality, while a product marketer would package and price the product.
Market research pertains to research in a given market.
* Focus groups - form of qualitative research in which a group of people are asked about their perceptions, opinions, beliefs, and attitudes.
Other caveats of customer focus are:
Today, smart phones are at the center of new mobile marketing trends, delivering the right message to the right person at the right time.
The task of marketing research is to provide management with relevant, accurate, reliable, valid, and current information.
Psychological marketing deals mainly with intangible aspects of communications, on the role of mental images and representations.
Depending on the governmental impact on bureaucracy, corruption, freedom of speech, and other limitations (or opportunities), the marketing strategies will adapt to the political conditions.
In recent years, mobile devices have gained significant market share, while desktop and laptop devices have seen a decline.
1960s to present day
The lessons drawn from this work include:
Internet marketing is another branch of online marketing, where SEO (search engine optimization) is regarded as an effective method of increasing your website's presence in organic searches for creating potential customers.
The product focus lies on industrial goods or capital goods rather than consumer products or end products.
The mind map to the right details further roles and responsibilities including: corporate marketing, solution marketing, field marketing, and technical marketing.
The Psychology of Marketing represents an interdisciplinary research area, where several contributions converge, from cognitive science, neuroscience, social psychology, and dynamic psychology.
They do not invalidate or contradict the principle of customer focus; rather, they simply add extra dimensions of awareness and caution to it.
As an example, a firm may conduct research in a target market, after selecting a suitable market segment.
2) Quantitative research methods
Building and keeping relationships between organizations
The SIVA Model provides a demand/customer-centric alternative to the well-known 4Ps supply side model (product, price, placement, promotion) of marketing management.
With this in mind, the marketing department would inform the R&D (research and development) department to create a prototype of a product or service based on the consumers' new desires.
In a modified re-buy scenario, the fifth and sixth stages are precluded.
The senior management of a firm would formulate a general business strategy for a firm.
*In a straight re-buy, the fourth, fifth, and sixth stages are omitted.
'Direct marketing' is used by those organisations, such as insurance services and health clubs, that have a defined customer or membership base they wish to develop strong, on-going relationships with via personalized communications – traditionally through 'direct mail' (postal) communications and more recently, via e-mail.
Primary research can also be broken down into quantitative research and qualitative research, which, as the terms suggest, pertain to numerical and non-numerical research methods and techniques, respectively.
Finance may oppose the required capital expenditure, since it could undermine a healthy cash flow for the organization.
'''Secondary data''' – they already exist and can be accessed within an organisation or from external sources.
A marketing firm must ascertain the nature of customers' buying behavior if it is to market its product properly.
The aim is to provide the best possible customer service and build customer loyalty.
* Surveys - a part of longitudinal and cross-sectional studies.
Different forms of marketing activities, such as promotion, advertising and communication to the customer are used.
Thus, when top management are devising the firm's strategic direction or mission, the intended marketing activities are incorporated into this plan.
Accordingly, a plan is required in order to effectively manage such products.
This is the type of marketing that we see all around us all the time and will continue to develop so that it takes over our whole lives.
Western European timeframe
Everything matters in marketing
A firm would also assume that as long as its product was of a high standard, people would buy and consume the product.
RTB, put in simple terms, is the idea that when a person logs onto the Internet, information is gathered about that person and then messages are adapted to conform to that user.
As an example, a firm would employ market research to gauge consumer desires, use R&D (research and development) to develop a product attuned to the revealed information, and then utilize promotion techniques to ensure persons know the product exists.
The basic idea is that people will buy more of products that are seen to be popular, and several feedback mechanisms to get product popularity information to consumers are mentioned, including smart card technology and the use of Radio Frequency Identification Tag technology.
Market segmentation allows for a better allocation of a firm's finite resources.
It targets its audience more precisely, and is sometimes called personalized marketing or one-to-one marketing.
This may involve buying stakes in the stock of smaller firms, acquiring them outright, or incubating small, financially distinct units within one's organization to compete against them.
Conversely, '''Correlational relationships''' is when there is a statistically testable relationship between an event and a condition.
• Competitive: Competition refers to the numbers of similar competitive product brands.
Recent approaches include a comprehensive analysis of several areas, including neuroscience, linguistics, and experimental research.
There are two theories based on four Cs: Lauterborn's four Cs (''consumer'', ''cost'', ''communication'', ''convenience'') and Shimizu's four Cs  (''commodity'', ''cost'', ''communication'', ''channel'') in the '''7Cs Compass Model''' (Co-marketing).
If one buys a train ticket, the use of the train is typically experienced concurrently with the purchase of the ticket.
Micro (internal) environment - forces within the company that affect its ability to serve its customers.
Holistic marketing disengages the political marketing activities of "divide and conquer", or market segmentation.
Various trends in the economic business cycle, including inflation, recessions, deficit, or income level.
