They were jealous of Sellers, because when the gray-heads among them pleased their vanity by detailing in the hearing of the younger craftsmen marvels which they had seen in the long ago on the river, Sellers was always likely to step in at the psychological moment and snuff them out with wonders of his own which made their small marvels look pale and sick.
Twain was opposed to the vivisection practices of his day.
He claimed he had found a manuscript detailing the life of Joan of Arc when he was an adolescent.
Henry was killed on June 21, 1858, when the steamboat he was working on, the ''Pennsylvania'', exploded.
The dozen or so members ranged in age from 10 to 16.
Twain acknowledged he originally sympathized with the more moderate Girondins of the French Revolution and then shifted his sympathies to the more radical Sansculottes, indeed identifying as "a Marat".
There were three versions found in his manuscripts, made between 1897 and 1905: the Hannibal, Eseldorf, and Print Shop versions.
It will be a great satisfaction to me to show off in this way; and perhaps the largest of all the satisfactions will be the knowledge that every scoffer, of my sex, will secretly envy me and wish he dared to follow my lead.
Oxford University awarded Twain an honorary doctorate in letters (D.Litt.)
You closed a most eloquent description, by which you had keyed your audience up to a pitch of the intensest interest, with a piece of atrocious anti-climax which nullified all the really fine effect you had produced."
Twain made a substantial amount of money through his writing, but he lost a great deal through investments, mostly in new inventions and technology, particularly the Paige typesetting machine.
The riverboatman's cry was "mark twain" or, more fully, "by the mark twain", meaning "according to the mark on the line, the depth is two fathoms", that is, "The water is  deep and it is safe to pass."
That is the real end.
In the essay ''Three Statements of the Eighties'' in the 1880s, Twain stated that he believed in an almighty God, but not in any messages, revelations, holy scriptures such as the Bible, Providence, or retribution in the afterlife.
He lost not only the bulk of his book profits, but also a substantial portion of his wife's inheritance.
Upon returning to the United States, Twain was offered honorary membership in Yale University's secret society Scroll and Key, in 1868.
Twain began his career writing light, humorous verse, but evolved into a chronicler of the vanities, hypocrisies and murderous acts of mankind.
He then returned to America in October 1900, having earned enough to pay off his debts.
Sellers never published another paragraph nor ever used his nom de guerre again.
In the second half of July 1896, he sailed back to England, completing his circumnavigation of the world begun fourteen months before.
However, I have told all about this in "Old Times on the Mississippi."
During his tour of Europe and the Middle East, he wrote a popular collection of travel letters, which were later compiled as ''The Innocents Abroad'' (1869).
Officials in Connecticut and New York estimated the value of Twain's estate at $471,000 ($ today).
According to Stuart (2013) "Leading these banning campaigns, generally, were religious organizations or individuals in positions of influence – not so much working librarians, who had been instilled with that American "library spirit" which honored intellectual freedom (within bounds of course).
''Old Times on the Mississippi'', a series of sketches published in the ''Atlantic Monthly'' in 1875, featured Twain's disillusionment with Romanticism.
He said the war with Spain in 1898 was "the worthiest" war ever fought.
After his death, Twain's family suppressed some of his work that was especially irreverent toward conventional religion, notably ''Letters from the Earth'', which was not published until his daughter Clara reversed her position in 1962 in response to Soviet propaganda about the withholding.
In 1851, he began working as a typesetter and contributor of articles and humorous sketches for the ''Hannibal Journal'', a newspaper Orion owned.
They had three daughters: Susy (1872–1896), Clara (1874–1962) and Jean (1880–1909).
Twain describes the episode in his book ''Roughing It''.
In the 1870s and 1880s, Twain and his family summered at Quarry Farm in Elmira, the home of Olivia's sister, Susan Crane.
Cooper thinks they are marvelous creatures for noticing, but he was almost always in error about his Indians.
Twain's legacy lives on today as his namesakes continue to multiply.
It did eventually become his trademark, as illustrated in anecdotes about this eccentricity (such as the time he wore a white summer suit to a Congressional hearing during the winter).
In his later travelogue ''Following the Equator'' (1897), Twain observes that in colonized lands all over the world, "savages" have always been wronged by "whites" in the most merciless ways, such as "robbery, humiliation, and slow, slow murder, through poverty and the white man's whiskey"; his conclusion is that "there are many humorous things in this world; among them the white man's notion that he is less savage than the other savages".
The work recounts Twain's memories and new experiences after a 22-year absence from the Mississippi.
Before 1899, Twain was an ardent imperialist.
Slavery, then legal in Missouri, was a theme Twain would explore in these writings.
In 1909, Twain said:
Clara had wished to study the piano under Theodor Leschetizky in Vienna.
Twain was in great demand as a featured speaker, performing solo humorous talks, similar to what would later become stand-up comedy.
Twain's next major published work, ''Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'', solidified him as a noteworthy American writer.
She came from a "wealthy but liberal family", and through her, he met abolitionists, "socialists, principled atheists and activists for women's rights and social equality", including Harriet Beecher Stowe (his next-door neighbor in Hartford, Connecticut), Frederick Douglass, and the writer and utopian socialist William Dean Howells, who became a long-time friend.
''Pauper'' was Twain's first attempt at historical fiction, and blame for its shortcomings is usually put on Twain for having not been experienced enough in English society, and also on the fact that it was produced after a massive hit.
The book was started in December 1885, then shelved a few months later until the summer of 1887, and eventually finished in the spring of 1889.
Ernest Hemingway once said of ''Huckleberry Finn'':
None but the dead are permitted to tell the truth."
During the Philippine–American War, Twain wrote a short pacifist story titled ''The War Prayer'', which makes the point that humanism and Christianity's preaching of love are incompatible with the conduct of war.
Twain was critical of imperialism in other countries as well.
On a stormy evening I made a talk before a full house, in the village, clothed like a ghost, and looking as conspicuous, all solitary and alone on that platform, as any ghost could have looked; and I found, to my gratification, that it took the house less than ten minutes to forget about the ghost and give its attention to the tidings I had brought.I am nearly seventy-one, and I recognize that my age has given me a good many privileges; valuable privileges; privileges which are not granted to younger persons.
Twain studied the Mississippi, learning its landmarks, how to navigate its currents effectively, and how to "read the river" and its constantly shifting channels, reefs, submerged snags and rocks that would "tear the life out of the strongest vessel that ever floated".
As an adult he engaged in religious discussions and attended services, his theology developing as he wrestled with the deaths of loved ones and his own mortality.
The anti-religious ''The Mysterious Stranger'' was published in 1916.
William M. Laffan of ''The New York Sun'' and the McClure Newspaper Syndicate offered Twain the publication of a series of six European letters.
The actual title is not clearly established.
The book also introduced, in a supporting role, Huckleberry Finn, based on Twain's boyhood friend Tom Blankenship.
During his 17 years in Hartford (1874–1891) and over 20 summers at Quarry Farm, Twain wrote many of his classic novels, among them ''The Adventures of Tom Sawyer'' (1876), ''The Prince and the Pauper'' (1881), ''Life on the Mississippi'' (1883), ''Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'' (1885), and ''A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court'' (1889).
In 1867, a local newspaper funded a trip to the Mediterranean.
He referred humorously to his lack of success at mining, turning to journalism for the Virginia City ''Territorial Enterprise''.
Twain generally avoided publishing his most controversial opinions on religion in his lifetime, and they are known from essays and stories that were published later.
Twain's response to hearing of Ament's methods was published in the ''North American Review'' in February 1901: ''To the Person Sitting in Darkness'', and deals with examples of imperialism in China, South Africa, and with the U.S. occupation of the Philippines.
In addition to providing a source for the "tooth and claw" style of literary criticism, Twain outlines in several letters and essays what he considers to be "quality writing".
''Roughing It'' is a semi-autobiographical account of Twain's journey from Missouri to Nevada, his subsequent life in the American West, and his visit to Hawaii.
Twain's writings and lectures, combined with the help of a new friend, enabled him to recover financially.
He then left for Nevada to work for Orion, who was Secretary of the Nevada Territory.
It was on this trip that he met his future brother-in-law, Charles Langdon.
In 1909, Thomas Edison visited Twain at his home in Redding, Connecticut and filmed him.
(For further information, see Mark Twain in Nevada.)
Twain was guilt-stricken and held himself responsible for the rest of his life.
It is said to have been the only known existing film footage of Twain.
In 1847, when Twain was 11, his father, by then an attorney and judge, died of pneumonia.
Helen Keller benefited from Twain's support, as she pursued her college education and publishing, despite her disabilities and financial limitations.
They related to the stage and condition of the river, and were accurate and valuable;&nbsp;... At the time that the telegraph brought the news of his death, I was on the Pacific coast.
Twain was raised in Hannibal, Missouri, which later provided the setting for ''Tom Sawyer'' and ''Huckleberry Finn''.
Twain accepted an offer from Robert Sparrow Smythe and embarked on a year-long, around-the-world lecture tour in July 1895 to pay off his creditors in full, although he was no longer under any legal obligation to do so.
In it, he also states that "Mark Twain" was the call made when the boat was in safe water&nbsp;– two fathoms ().
Twain's next venture was a work of straight fiction that he called ''Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc'' and dedicated to his wife.
While they were living in Buffalo, their son Langdon died of diphtheria at the age of 19&nbsp;months.
Captain Isaiah Sellers was not of literary turn or capacity, but he used to jot down brief paragraphs of plain practical information about the river, and sign them "MARK TWAIN", and give them to the ''New Orleans Picayune''.
Working under writer and friend Dan DeQuille, here he first used the pen name that would become famous; on February 3, 1863, he signed a humorous travel account, "Letter From Carson&nbsp;– re: Joe Goodman; party at Gov.&nbsp;Johnson's; music", with "Mark Twain".
In a letter to friend and fellow writer William Dean Howells in 1887, he acknowledged that his views changed and developed over his life, referring to one of his favorite works:
However, there is also evidence showing him wearing a white suit before 1904.
Finally, Rogers took absolute charge of Twain's money until all the creditors were paid.
Olivia's death in 1904 and Jean's on December 24, 1909, deepened his gloom.
The pilots thought it was brilliant.
Twain's wife died in 1904 while the couple were staying at the Villa di Quarto in Florence; and, after an appropriate period of time, Twain allowed himself to publish some works that his wife, a ''de facto'' editor and censor throughout his life, had looked down upon.
Many of his neglected and previously uncollected writings on anti-imperialism appeared for the first time in book form in 1992.
Eight days later, Twain wrote to his friend Daniel Carter Beard, to whom he had read the story, "I don't think the prayer will be published in my time.
He loves his country better than he does the countries of other people.
Though she rejected his first marriage proposal, two months later, they were engaged.
Reports of outrageous exploitation and grotesque abuses led to widespread international protest in the early 1900s, arguably the first large-scale human rights movement.
All of the Clemens family are buried in Elmira's Woodlawn Cemetery.
Near the completion of ''Huckleberry Finn'', Twain wrote ''Life on the Mississippi'', which is said to have heavily influenced the former book.
Twain's next two works drew on his experiences on the Mississippi River.
In the ''New York Herald'', October 16, 1900, Twain describes his transformation and political awakening, in the context of the Philippine–American War, to anti-imperialism:
His experiences in the American West inspired ''Roughing It'' (written during 1870–71 and published in 1872) and his experiences in Angels Camp, California, in Calaveras County, provided material for "The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County" (1865).
Leopold's rubber gatherers were tortured, maimed and slaughtered, until the movement forced Brussels to call a halt.
Twain claimed that his famous pen name was not entirely his invention.
Like ''The Prince and the Pauper'', this novel also contains the tale of two boys born on the same day who switch positions in life.
In some later writings in the 1890s, he was less optimistic about the goodness of God, observing that "if our Maker ''is'' all-powerful for good or evil, He is not in His right mind".
Some have called it the first Great American Novel, and the book has become required reading in many schools throughout the United States.
Twain was a Presbyterian.
The young poet Ina Coolbrith may have romanced him.
Twain's views became more radical as he grew older.
It was in these days that Twain became a writer of the Sagebrush School, and was known later as the most notable within this literary genre.
In mid-1900, he was the guest of newspaper proprietor Hugh Gilzean-Reid at Dollis Hill House, located on the north side of London.
They gave him also a Book of Mormon.
I made a brave experiment, the other night, to see how it would feel to shock a crowd with these unseasonable clothes, and also to see how long it might take the crowd to reconcile itself to them and stop looking astonished and outraged.
In 1897, Twain spoke to the Concordia Press Club in Vienna as a special guest, following diplomat Charlemagne Tower, Jr.
Another brother, Pleasant (1828–1829), died at six months.
"No, other Indians would have noticed these things, but Cooper's Indians never notice anything.
Twain went on to Fiji, Australia, New Zealand, Sri Lanka, India, Mauritius, and South Africa.
He wrote, for example, "Faith is believing what you know ain't so", and "If Christ were here now there is one thing he would not be&nbsp;– a Christian".
He maintained that his primary pen name came from his years working on Mississippi riverboats, where two fathoms, a depth indicating safe water for passage of boat, was measured on the sounding line.
All the while, Twain was writing letters meant for publishing back and forth, chronicling his experiences with his burlesque humor.
After this burst of popularity, the ''Sacramento Union'' commissioned Twain to write letters about his travel experiences.
It was eloquent, moving, sincere.
He famously derided James Fenimore Cooper in his article detailing Cooper's "Literary Offenses".
Some accounts have Twain taking seven years off after his first burst of creativity, eventually finishing the book in 1883.
The rest is just cheating.
Additionally, a large portion of his speeches and lectures have been lost or were not written down; thus, the collection of Twain's works is an ongoing process.
Twain was also a staunch supporter of women's rights and an active campaigner for women's suffrage.
While training, Samuel convinced his younger brother Henry to work with him.
From 1901, soon after his return from Europe, until his death in 1910, Twain was vice-president of the American Anti-Imperialist League, which opposed the annexation of the Philippines by the United States and had "tens of thousands of members".
For many years he had occasionally written brief paragraphs concerning the river and the changes which it had undergone under his observation during fifty years, and had signed these paragraphs "Mark Twain" and published them in the St. Louis and New Orleans journals.
Twain's last work was his autobiography, which he dictated and thought would be most entertaining if he went off on whims and tangents in non-chronological order.
Most commercially successful was a self-pasting scrapbook; a dried adhesive on the pages needed only to be moistened before use.
His parents met when his father moved to Missouri and were married in 1823.
He was initiated an Entered Apprentice on May 22, 1861, passed to the degree of Fellow Craft on June 12, and raised to the degree of Master Mason on July 10.
He raised money to build a Presbyterian Church in Nevada in 1864.
His first success as a writer came when his humorous tall tale, "The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County", was published in a New York weekly,  ''The Saturday Press'', on November 18, 1865.
Of these works, ''The Mysterious Stranger'', depicting various visits of Satan to the Earth, is perhaps the best known.
Considering the circumstances of Twain's birth and Halley's Comet, and his strong belief in the paranormal, it is not surprising that these "mystic" connections recur throughout his writing.
Twain was a Freemason.
It would be a long, arduous journey, and he was sick much of the time, mostly from a cold and a carbuncle.
In his autobiography, Twain writes further of Captain Sellers' use of "Mark Twain": I was a cub pilot on the Mississippi River then, and one day I wrote a rude and crude satire which was leveled at Captain Isaiah Sellers, the oldest steamboat pilot on the Mississippi River, and the most respected, esteemed, and revered.
In winter 1900/01, Twain became his country's most prominent opponent of imperialism, raising the issue in his speeches, interviews and writings.
His wit and satire, in prose and in speech, earned praise from critics and peers, and he was a friend to presidents, artists, industrialists, and European royalty.
In my satire I made rude game of his reminiscences.
The only reason it was published there was that his story arrived too late to be included in a book Artemus Ward was compiling featuring sketches of the American West.
This particular work was not published in Twain's lifetime.
In 1907, Twain met Dorothy Quick (then aged 11) on a transatlantic crossing, beginning "a friendship that was to last until the very day of his death".
At other times he wrote or spoke in ways that contradicted a strict deist view, for example, plainly professing a belief in Providence.
The pilot had to "get up a warm personal acquaintanceship with every old snag and one-limbed cottonwood and every obscure wood pile that ornaments the banks of this river for twelve hundred miles; and more than that, must ... actually know where these things are in the dark..." Steamboat pilot Horace E. Bixby took on Twain as a "cub" pilot to teach him the river between New Orleans and St. Louis for $500, payable out of Twain's first wages after graduating.
He had never been held up to ridicule before; he was sensitive, and he never got over the hurt which I had wantonly and stupidly inflicted upon his dignity.
In the wake of these financial setbacks, he filed for protection from his creditors via bankruptcy, and with the help of Henry Huttleston Rogers eventually overcame his financial troubles.
When told that only three men had been so honored, including the Prince of Wales, he replied "Well, it must make the Prince feel mighty fine."
Four hundred manuscript pages of ''Huckleberry Finn'' were written in mid-1876, right after the publication of ''Tom Sawyer''.
Twain's frankest views on religion appeared in his final work ''Autobiography of Mark Twain'', the publication of which started in November 2010, 100 years after his death.
His financial adviser, Henry Huttleston Rogers, quashed that idea and got Twain out of that business altogether, but the book was published nonetheless.
He filed for bankruptcy in 1894.
Those who knew Twain well late in life recount that he dwelt on the subject of the afterlife, his daughter Clara saying: "Sometimes he believed death ended everything, but most of the time he felt sure of a life beyond."
This trip resulted in ''The Innocents Abroad or The New Pilgrims' Progress''.
Additionally, he used the pen name "Thomas Jefferson Snodgrass" for a series of humorous letters.
A subsequent article, "To My Missionary Critics" published in ''The North American Review'' in April 1901, unapologetically continues his attack, but with the focus shifted from Ament to his missionary superiors, the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions.
In February 1870, Twain and Langdon were married in Elmira, New York, where he courted her and managed to overcome her father's initial reluctance.
In 1905, the Brooklyn Public Library banned both ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'' and ''The Adventures of Tom Sawyer'' from the children's department because of their language.
Confusion among the versions led to an extensive publication of a jumbled version, and only recently have the original versions as Twain wrote them become available.
Twain chose to pay all his pre-bankruptcy creditors in full, though he had no legal responsibility to do so.
The first volume of autobiography, over 736&nbsp;pages, was published by the University of California in November 2010, 100&nbsp;years after his death, as Twain wished.
He gave paid talks to many men's clubs, including the Authors' Club, Beefsteak Club, Vagabonds, White Friars, and Monday Evening Club of Hartford.
Twain's funeral was at the "Old Brick" Presbyterian Church in New York.
Titled ''The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today'', it was not a travel piece, as his previous two books had been, and it was his first attempt at writing a novel.
There is also a smaller headstone.
Next after fine colors, I like plain white.
He became an extremely outspoken critic of not only other authors, but also other critics, suggesting that before praising Cooper's work, Thomas Lounsbury, Brander Matthews, and Wilkie Collins "ought to have read some of it".
Fewer than 200 copies were sold.
During this time of dire financial straits, Twain published several literary reviews in newspapers to help make ends meet.
It was a beautifully engineered mechanical marvel that amazed viewers when it worked, but it was prone to breakdowns.
In 1865, his humorous story "The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County" was published, based on a story he heard at Angels Hotel in Angels Camp, California, where he had spent some time as a miner.
Evidence suggests that Twain began wearing white suits on the lecture circuit, after the death of his wife Olivia ("Livy") in 1904.
Also, Twain smoked pipes constantly, and Susan Crane did not wish him to do so in her house.
When he was four, Twain's family moved to Hannibal, Missouri, a port town on the Mississippi River that inspired the fictional town of St.&nbsp;Petersburg in ''The Adventures of Tom Sawyer'' and ''Adventures of Huckleberry Finn''.
''Little Bessie'', a story ridiculing Christianity, was first published in the 1972 collection ''Mark Twain's Fables of Man''.
The book is also notable because it is Twain's only collaboration; it was written with his neighbor, Charles Dudley Warner.
It soon became an unexpected best seller, making Twain one of very few authors publishing new best-selling volumes in all three of the 19th, 20th, and 21st&nbsp;centuries.
A complete bibliography of his works is nearly impossible to compile because of the vast number of pieces written by Twain (often in obscure newspapers) and his use of several different pen names.
Twain's next major publication was ''The Adventures of Tom Sawyer'', which drew on his youth in Hannibal.
Little by little I hope to get together courage enough to wear white clothes all through the winter, in New York.
Other accounts have Twain working on ''Huckleberry Finn'' in tandem with ''The Prince and the Pauper'' and other works in 1880 and other years.
Samuel Clemens himself responded to this suggestion by saying, "Mark Twain was the nom de plume of one Captain Isaiah Sellers, who used to write river news over it for the New Orleans Picayune.
Twain moved to San Francisco in 1864, still as a journalist, and met writers such as Bret Harte and Artemus Ward.
To further aid Coolbrith, George Wharton James visited Twain in New York and arranged for a new portrait session.
The short story brought international attention, and was even translated into classic Greek.
In ''Following the Equator'', Twain expresses "hatred and condemnation of imperialism of all stripes".
This was another piece Twain was convinced would save his publishing company.
Rogers first made Twain file for bankruptcy in April 1894.
"Pilot was the grandest position of all.
He credited Fitch with giving him his "first really profitable lesson" in writing.
His ancestors were of Scots-Irish, English, and Cornish extraction.
In January 1901, he began serving as vice-president of the Anti-Imperialist League of New York.
In 1906, Twain began his autobiography in the ''North American Review''.
Twain's story about his pen name has been questioned by some with the suggestion that "mark twain" refers to a running bar tab that Twain would regularly incur while drinking at John Piper's saloon in Virginia City, Nevada.
In 1874, Susan had a study built apart from the main house so that her brother-in-law would have a quiet place in which to write.
In 1866, Clemens presented his lecture on the Sandwich Islands to a crowd in Washoe City, Nevada.
After an apprenticeship with a printer, Twain worked as a typesetter and contributed articles to the newspaper of his older brother, Orion Clemens.
He was lauded as the "greatest American humorist of his age", and William Faulkner called Twain "the father of American literature".
Twain visited Salt Lake City for two days and met there members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
In 1900 and again in 1908, he stated, "I like ''Joan of Arc'' best of all my books, it is the best".
He joined the newly formed International Typographical Union, the printers union, and educated himself in public libraries in the evenings, finding wider information than at a conventional school.
