Various influential cultural figures have expressed a great interest in de Sade's work, including the French philosopher Michel Foucault, the American film maker John Waters and the Spanish filmmaker Jesús Franco.
His son had all his remaining unpublished manuscripts burned, including the immense multi-volume work ''Les Journées de Florbelle''.
Constance and de Sade would stay together for the rest of his life.
There is father-and-son correspondence, wherein father addresses son as ''marquis''.
His skull was later removed from the grave for phrenological examination.
Pierre Klossowski, in his 1947 book ''Sade Mon Prochain'' ("Sade My Neighbour"), analyzes de Sade's philosophy as a precursor of nihilism, negating Christian values and the materialism of the Enlightenment.
Then he whipped her, made various incisions on her body into which he poured hot wax, and then beat her.
His works include novels, short stories, plays, dialogues, and political tracts; in his lifetime some were published under his own name, while others appeared anonymously and de Sade denied being their author.
Geoffrey Gorer, an English anthropologist and author (1905–1985), wrote one of the earliest books on de Sade entitled ''The Revolutionary Ideas of the Marquis de Sade'' in 1935.
Sade held the work of writers Matthew Lewis and Ann Radcliffe high above other Gothic authors, praising the brilliant imagination of Radcliffe and pointing to Lewis' ''The Monk'' as without question the genre’s best achievement.
Many, however, were lost in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The cruelties depicted in his works gave rise to the concept of sadism.
During Sade's time of freedom, beginning in 1790, he published several of his books anonymously.
Similarly, Camille Paglia argued that de Sade can be best understood as a satirist, responding "point by point" to Rousseau's claims that society inhibits and corrupts mankind's innate goodness: Paglia notes that Sade wrote in the aftermath of the French Revolution, when Rousseauist Jacobins instituted the bloody Reign of Terror and Rousseau's predictions were brutally disproved.
By holding these views, he cut himself off entirely from the revolutionary thinkers of his time to join those of the mid-nineteenth century.
In 1969, American International Films released a German-made production called ''de Sade'', with Keir Dullea in the title role.
A substantial amount were destroyed after de Sade's death at the instigation of his son, Donatien-Claude-Armand.
Pier Paolo Pasolini filmed ''Salò, or the 120 Days of Sodom'' (1975),
In de Sade's youth, his father abandoned the family; his mother joined a convent.
The first ''Manifesto of Surrealism'' (1924) announced that "Sade is surrealist in sadism", and extracts of the original draft of ''Justine'' were published in ''Le Surréalisme au service de la révolution''.
The ''lettre de cachet'' would later prove disastrous for the marquis.
Nikos Nikolaidis' 1979 film ''The Wretches Are Still Singing'' was shot in a surreal way with a predilection for the aesthetics of the Marquis de Sade; de Sade is said to have influenced Romantic and Decadent authors such as Charles Baudelaire, Gustave Flaubert, Algernon Swinburne, and Rachilde; and to have influenced a growing popularity of nihilism in Western thought.
De Sade was celebrated in surrealist periodicals, and feted by figures such as Guillaume Apollinaire, Paul Éluard, and Maurice Heine; Man Ray admired Sade because he and other surrealists viewed him as an ideal of freedom.
Despite this common interest, the two came to dislike each other intensely.
His ex-wife and children had agreed to pay his pension there.
He wrote several political pamphlets, in which he called for the implementation of direct vote.
At this time, la Présidente, de Sade's mother-in-law, obtained a ''lettre de cachet'' (a royal order of arrest and imprisonment, without stated cause or access to the courts) from the King, excluding de Sade from the jurisdiction of the courts.
In 1790, he was released from Charenton after the new National Constituent Assembly abolished the instrument of ''lettre de cachet''.
Similarly, psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan posited in his 1966 essay "Kant avec de Sade" that de Sade's ethics was the complementary completion of the categorical imperative originally formulated by Immanuel Kant.
According to Donald Thomas, who has written a biography on de Sade, Brady and Hindley had read very little of de Sade's actual work; the only book of his they possessed was an anthology of excerpts that included none of his most extreme writings.
De Sade is best known for his erotic works, which combined philosophical discourse with pornography, depicting sexual fantasies with an emphasis on violence, criminality, and blasphemy against the Catholic Church.
In 1776, he returned to Lacoste, again hired several servant girls, most of whom fled.
De Sade nevertheless believed that the genre was at odds with itself, arguing that the supernatural elements within Gothic fiction created an inescapable dilemma for both its author and its readers.
It has been suggested that de Sade's writing influenced the subsequent medical and social acceptance of abortion in Western society.
He theorized that if these problems were successfully avoided within the genre that the resulting work would be universally regarded for its excellence in fiction.
The benign director of the institution, Abbé de Coulmier, allowed and encouraged him to stage several of his plays, with the inmates as actors, to be viewed by the Parisian public.
The words ''sadism'' and ''sadist'' are derived from his name.
This did not change until the mid-twentieth century, when the Comte Xavier de Sade reclaimed the marquis title, long fallen into disuse, on his visiting cards, and took an interest in his ancestor's writings.
The de Sade family were ''noblesse d'épée'', claiming at the time the oldest, Frank-descended nobility, so, assuming a noble title without a King's grant, was customarily ''de rigueur''.
These include Peter Weiss's play ''Marat/Sade'', a fantasia extrapolating from the fact that de Sade directed plays performed by his fellow inmates at the Charenton asylum.
Thus, Gorer argued, "he can with some justice be called the first reasoned socialist."
At that time, the "Divine Marquis" of legend was so unmentionable in his own family that Xavier de Sade only learned of him in the late 1940s when approached by a journalist.
"To enlighten mankind and improve its morals is the only lesson which we offer in this story.
The philosopher of egoist anarchism Max Stirner is also speculated to have been influenced by de Sade's work.
Later that year, his name was added – whether by error or wilful malice – to the list of émigrés of the Bouches-du-Rhône department.
His grandfather, Gaspard François de Sade, was the first to use ''marquis''; occasionally, he was the ''Marquis de Sade'', but is identified in documents as the ''Marquis de Mazan''.
As well as the manuscripts they retain, others are held in universities and libraries.
In 1784, Vincennes was closed, and de Sade was transferred to the Bastille.
Subtitled "Heroic and Tragic Tales", Sade combines romance and horror, employing several Gothic tropes for dramatic purposes.
He told her she could make money by working for him—she understood her work to be that of a housekeeper.
For many years, de Sade's descendants regarded his life and work as a scandal to be suppressed.
There is blood, banditti, corpses and, of course, insatiable lust.
In his 1988 ''Political Theory and Modernity'', William E. Connolly analyzes Sade's ''Philosophy in the Bedroom'' as an argument against earlier political philosophers, notably Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Thomas Hobbes, and their attempts to reconcile nature, reason, and virtue as bases of ordered society.
There have been many and varied references to the Marquis de Sade in popular culture, including fictional works and biographies.
He was a member of the Piques section, notorious for its radical views.
He wrote that the Gothic novel was a perfectly natural, predictable consequence of the revolutionary sentiments in Europe.
The family have also claimed a trademark on the name.
He theorized that the adversity of the period had rightfully caused Gothic writers to "look to hell for help in composing their alluring novels."
The men of the de Sade family alternated between using the ''marquis'' and ''comte'' (count) titles.
At age 15, he was commissioned as a sub-lieutenant on 14 December 1755 after 20 months of training, becoming a soldier.
One of the essays in Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno's ''Dialectic of Enlightenment'' (1947) is titled "Juliette, or Enlightenment and Morality" and interprets the ruthless and calculating behavior of ''Juliette'' as the embodiment of the philosophy of enlightenment.
At his chateau at Arcueil, de Sade ripped her clothes off, threw her on a divan and tied her by the four limbs.
Within his objections to the lack of verisimilitude in the Gothic may have been an attempt to present his own work as the better representation of the whole nature of man.
He had left instructions in his will forbidding that his body be opened for any reason whatsoever, and that it remain untouched for 48 hours in the chamber in which he died, and then placed in a coffin and buried on his property located in Malmaison near Épernon.
In the realm of visual arts, many surrealist artists had interest in the Marquis.
In 1790, he was elected to the National Convention, where he represented the far left.
''Quills'', inspired by de Sade's imprisonment and battles with the censorship in his society, portrays de Sade as a literary freedom fighter who is a martyr to the cause of free expression.
On 2 July 1789, he reportedly shouted out from his cell to the crowd outside, "They are killing the prisoners here!
De Sade was forced to disavow his son's desertion in order to save his neck.
In its portrayal of conventional moralities it is somewhat of a departure from the erotic cruelties and moral ironies that dominate his libertine works.
", and a disturbance began to foment.
One chapter of her book ''Pornography: Men Possessing Women'' (1979) is devoted to an analysis of Sade.
But while he sought this separation he believed the Gothic played a necessary role in society and discussed its roots and its uses.
In his literary criticism de Sade sought to prevent his fiction from being labeled "Gothic" by emphasizing Gothic's supernatural aspects as the fundamental difference from themes in his own work.
He was his parents' only surviving child.
Alternating title usage indicates that titular hierarchy (below ''duc et pair'') was notional; theoretically, the ''marquis'' title was granted to noblemen owning ''several'' countships, but its use by men of dubious lineage caused its disrepute.
Ironically, ''The New Monk'' wound up increasing the level of cruelty, but as a parody of the genre, it illuminates the link between sadism and the Gothic novel.
Despite the strong adverse reaction to de Sade's work and de Sade's own disassociation from the Gothic novel, the similarities between the fiction of sadism and the Gothic novel were much closer than many of its readers or providers even realized.
His work is referenced on film at least as early as
By contrast, Andrea Dworkin saw Sade as the exemplary woman-hating pornographer, supporting her theory that pornography inevitably leads to violence against women.
His wife obtained a divorce soon after.
With ''120 Days'', for example, de Sade wished to present "the most impure tale that has ever been written since the world exists."
He has also been seen as a precursor of Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis in his focus on sexuality as a motive force.
updating de Sade's novel to the brief Salò Republic; Benoît Jacquot's ''Sade'' and Philip Kaufman's ''Quills'' (from the play of the same name by Doug Wright) both hit cinemas in 2000.
He was arrested there and imprisoned in the Château de Vincennes.
In the late 20th century, there was a resurgence of interest in de Sade; leading French intellectuals like Roland Barthes, Jacques Derrida, and Michel Foucault published studies of the philosopher, and interest in de Sade among scholars and artists continued.
He initially ingratiated himself with the new political situation after the revolution, supported the Republic, called himself "Citizen de Sade", and managed to obtain several official positions despite his aristocratic background.
The writer Georges Bataille applied de Sade's methods of writing about sexual transgression to shock and provoke readers.
While at the school, he was tutored by Abbé Jacques-François Amblet, a priest.
In ''Philosophy in the Bedroom'' de Sade proposed the use of induced abortion for social reasons and population control, marking the first time the subject had been discussed in public.
Luis Buñuel's ''L'Âge d'Or'' (1930), the final segment of which provides a coda to de Sade's ''120 Days of Sodom'', with the four debauched noblemen emerging from their mountain retreat.
Simone de Beauvoir (in her essay ''Must we burn Sade?
Since de Sade professed that the ultimate goal of an author should be to deliver an accurate portrayal of man, it is believed that de Sade's attempts to separate himself from the Gothic novel highlights this conviction.
The eponym of the psychological and subcultural term ''sadism'', his name is used variously to evoke sexual violence, licentiousness, and freedom of speech.
That year, the two men were sentenced to death ''in absentia'' for sodomy and the poisoning.
De Sade's life and works have been the subject of numerous fictional plays, films, pornographic or erotic drawings, etchings, and more.
Because of the damage done to his estate in Lacoste, which was sacked in 1789 by an angry mob, he moved to Paris.
De Sade and Latour were caught and imprisoned at the Fortress of Miolans in late 1772, but escaped four months later.
At the Lycée Louis-le-Grand, he was subjected to "severe corporal punishment," including "flagellation," and he "spent the rest of his adult life obsessed with the violent act."
He resumed writing and met fellow prisoner Comte de Mirabeau, who also wrote erotic works.
In 1809, new police orders put de Sade into solitary confinement and deprived him of pens and paper.
However, at least one philosopher has rejected Adorno and Horkheimer’s claim that de Sade's moral skepticism is actually coherent, or that it reflects Enlightenment thought.
These works challenge perceptions of sexuality, religion, law, age, and gender in ways that de Sade would argue are incompatible with the supernatural.
In 1813, the government ordered Coulmier to suspend all theatrical performances.
Sade’s most famous books are often classified not as Gothic but as libertine novels, and include the novels ''Justine, or the Misfortunes of Virtue''; ''Juliette''; ''The 120 Days of Sodom''; and ''Philosophy in the Bedroom''.
'''Donatien Alphonse François, Marquis de Sade''' (2 June 1740 – 2 December 1814) (), was a French aristocrat, revolutionary politician, philosopher, and writer, famous for his libertine sexuality.
He was also accused of blasphemy, a serious offense at that time.
Moreover, it is believed that de Sade praised ''The Monk'' (which displays Ambrosio’s sacrifice of his humanity to his unrelenting sexual appetite) as the best Gothic novel chiefly because its themes were the closest to those within his own work.
De Sade's use of pornographic devices to create provocative works that subvert the prevailing moral values of his time inspired many other artists in a variety of media.
Susie Bright claims that Dworkin's first novel ''Ice and Fire'', which is rife with violence and abuse, can be seen as a modern retelling of Sade's ''Juliette''.
Hindley herself claimed that Brady would send her to obtain books by de Sade, and that after reading them he became sexually aroused and beat her.
While these works focus on the dark side of human nature, the magic and phantasmagoria that dominates the Gothic is noticeably absent and is the primary reason these works are not considered to fit the genre.
For de Sade, his work was best suited for the accomplishment of this goal in part because he was not chained down by the supernatural silliness that dominated late 18th-century fiction.
At this stage, he was becoming publicly critical of Maximilien Robespierre and, on 5 December, he was removed from his posts, accused of "moderatism", and imprisoned for almost a year.
After the controversy surrounding Matthew Lewis' ''The Monk'', Minerva Press released ''The New Monk'' as a supposed indictment of a wholly immoral book.
He thus became a symbol of the artist's struggle with the censor.
The issues of sexual violence, sadomasochism, and pedophilia stunned even those contemporaries of de Sade who were quite familiar with the dark themes of the Gothic novel during its popularity in the late 18th century.
His behavior included an affair with his wife's sister, Anne-Prospère, who had come to live at the castle.
To have a character like Justine, who is stripped without ceremony and bound to a wheel for fondling and thrashing, would be unthinkable in the domestic Gothic fiction written for the bourgeoisie.
After 13 months as a sub-lieutenant, he was commissioned to the rank of cornet in the Brigade de S. André of the Comte de Provence's Carbine Regiment.
Later in life, the Abbé testified at one of de Sade's trials, saying that de Sade had a "passionate temperament which made him eager in the pursuit of pleasure" but had a "good heart."
Later in his childhood, de Sade was sent to the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in Paris, a Jesuit college, for four years.
In 1796, now all but destitute, he had to sell his ruined castle in Lacoste.
Similarly, Susan Sontag defended both Sade and Georges Bataille's ''Histoire de l'oeil'' (''Story of the Eye'') in her essay "The Pornographic Imagination" (1967) on the basis their works were transgressive texts, and argued that neither should be censored.
The modern volume entitled ''Gothic Tales'' collects a variety of other short works of fiction intended to be included in Sade's ''Contes et Fabliaux d'un Troubadour Provencal du XVIII Siecle''.
De Sade's works have to this day been kept alive by artists and intellectuals because they espouse a philosophy of extreme individualism that became reality in the economic liberalism of the following centuries.
Matters were not helped by his son's May 1792 desertion from the military, where he had been serving as a second lieutenant and the ''aide-de-camp'' to an important colonel, the Marquis de Toulengeon.
Many of his works were written in prison.
The Marquis de Sade viewed Gothic fiction as a genre that relied heavily on magic and phantasmagoria.
Beginning in 1763, de Sade lived mainly in or near Paris.
He subsequently discovered a store of de Sade's papers in the family château at Condé-en-Brie, and worked with scholars for decades to enable their publication.
Compared to works like ''Justine'', here Sade is relatively tame, as overt eroticism and torture is subtracted for a more psychological approach.
In literature, de Sade is referenced in several stories by horror and science fiction writer (and author of Psycho) Robert Bloch, while Polish science fiction author Stanisław Lem wrote an essay analyzing the game theory arguments appearing in de Sade's ''Justine''.
Coulmier's novel approaches to psychotherapy attracted much opposition.
Similarly, in the horror film ''Waxwork'', de Sade is among the film's wax villains to come alive.
De Sade was forced to flee to Italy once again.
Suffering is the primary rule, as in these novels one must often decide between sympathizing with the torturer or the victim.
He eventually became Colonel of a Dragoon regiment and fought in the Seven Years' War.
It opens with a domesticated approach:
Later that year, de Sade was tricked into going to Paris to visit his supposedly ill mother, who in fact had recently died.
He was raised with servants who indulged "his every whim," which led to him becoming "known as a rebellious and spoiled child with an ever-growing temper."
He escaped but was soon recaptured.
In 1777, the father of one of those employees went to Lacoste to claim his daughter, and attempted to shoot the Marquis at point-blank range, but the gun misfired.
He argued that an author in this genre was forced to choose between elaborate explanations of the supernatural or no explanations at all and that in either case the reader was unavoidably rendered incredulous.
Sade's sexually explicit works were a medium for the articulation of the corrupt and hypocritical values of the elite in his society, which caused him to become imprisoned.
The poet Algernon Charles Swinburne is also said to have been highly influenced by de Sade.
The surrealists admired him as one of their forerunners, and Guillaume Apollinaire famously called him "the freest spirit that has yet existed".
He was released in 1794, after the overthrow and execution of Robespierre had effectively ended the Reign of Terror.
He was a proponent of extreme freedom, unrestrained by morality, religion, or law.
His youngest son, the Marquis Thibault de Sade, has continued the collaboration.
In 1772, an episode in Marseille involved the non-lethal poisoning of prostitutes with the supposed aphrodisiac Spanish fly and sodomy with Latour, his manservant.
Through the unreleased passions of his libertines, de Sade wished to shake the world at its core.
De Sade later hid at Lacoste, where he rejoined his wife, who became an accomplice in his subsequent endeavors.
He kept a group of young employees at Lacoste, most of whom complained about sexual mistreatment and quickly left his service.
Serial killer Ian Brady, who with Myra Hindley carried out torture and murder of children known as the Moors murders in England during the 1960s, was fascinated by de Sade, and the suggestion was made at their trial and appeals that the tortures of the children (the screams and pleadings of whom they tape-recorded) were influenced by de Sade's ideas and fantasies.
Constance was allowed to live with him at Charenton.
After intervention by his family, he was declared insane in 1803 and transferred once more to the asylum at Charenton.
In the two suitcases found by the police that contained books that belonged to Brady was ''The Life and Ideas of the Marquis de Sade''.
The storming of the Bastille, a major event of the French Revolution, would occur a few days later on 14 July.
Unlike the milder Gothic fiction of Radcliffe, Sade's horror ends in sodomy, rape, or torture.
Often de Sade himself has been depicted in American popular culture less as a revolutionary or even as a libertine and more akin to a sadistic, tyrannical villain.
The family sold the Château de Condé in 1983.
The Marquis de Sade was born in the Hôtel de Condé, Paris, to Jean Baptiste François Joseph, Count de Sade and Marie Eléonore de Maillé de Carman, cousin and Lady-in-waiting to the Princess of Condé on 2 June 1740.
This affair lasted some 4 years, until his death in 1814.
To his despair, he believed that the manuscript was lost during his transfer, but he continued to write.
Many assume that de Sade's criticism of the Gothic novel is a reflection of his frustration with sweeping interpretations of works like ''Justine''.
Sade even contrives a kind of affection between Justine and her tormentors, suggesting shades of masochism in his heroine.
De Sade was incarcerated in various prisons and an insane asylum for about 32 years of his life: 11 years in Paris (10 of which were spent in the Bastille), a month in the Conciergerie, two years in a fortress, a year in Madelonnettes Convent, three years in Bicêtre Hospital, a year in Sainte-Pélagie Prison, and 12 years in the Charenton asylum.
In modern culture his works are simultaneously viewed as masterful analyses of how power and economics work, and as erotica.
In ''The Sadeian Woman: And the Ideology of Pornography'' (1979), Angela Carter provides a feminist reading of Sade, seeing him as a "moral pornographer" who creates spaces for women.
It features the sadistic Mrs. Rod, whose boarding school for young women becomes a torture chamber equipped with its own "flogging-room".
De Sade lived a scandalous libertine existence and repeatedly procured young prostitutes as well as employees of both sexes in his castle in Lacoste.
De Sade's fiction has been tagged under many different titles, including pornography, Gothic, and baroque.
He was educated by an uncle, the Abbé de Sade.
During the French Revolution he was an elected delegate to the National Convention.
He repeated this process seven or eight times, when she finally escaped by climbing out of a second-floor window and running away.
De Sade began a sexual relationship with 14-year-old Madeleine LeClerc, daughter of an employee at Charenton.
It was during this time he wrote ''Voyage d'Italie''.
While claiming he was opposed to the Reign of Terror in 1793, he wrote an admiring eulogy for Jean-Paul Marat.
The first major scandal occurred on Easter Sunday in 1768, in which de Sade procured the sexual services of a woman, Rose Keller, a widow-beggar who approached him for alms.
In January 1767, his father died.
In 1763, on returning from war, he courted a rich magistrate's daughter, but her father rejected his suitorship and, instead, arranged a marriage with his elder daughter, Renée-Pélagie de Montreuil; that marriage produced two sons and a daughter.
He pointed out that de Sade was in complete opposition to contemporary philosophers for both his "complete and continual denial of the right to property" and for viewing the struggle in late 18th century French society as being not between "the Crown, the bourgeoisie, the aristocracy or the clergy, or sectional interests of any of these against one another", but rather all of these "more or less united against the proletariat."
Descriptions in ''Justine'' seem to anticipate Radcliffe's scenery in ''The Mysteries of Udolpho'' and the vaults in ''The Italian'', but, unlike these stories, there is no escape for Sade's virtuous heroine, Justine.
Several prostitutes there complained about mistreatment by him and he was put under surveillance by the police, who made detailed reports of his activities.
In reading it, may the world discover how great is the peril which follows the footsteps of those who will stop at nothing to satisfy their desires."
'', published in ''Les Temps modernes'', December 1951 and January 1952) and other writers have attempted to locate traces of a radical philosophy of freedom in de Sade's writings, preceding modern existentialism by some 150 years.
At age 14, de Sade began attending an elite military academy.
He met Marie-Constance Quesnet, a former actress, and mother of a six-year-old son, who had been abandoned by her husband.
At Court, precedence was by seniority and royal favor, not title.
Two days later, he was transferred to the insane asylum at Charenton near Paris.
Despite his celebration of ''The Monk'', de Sade believed that there was not a single Gothic novel that had been able to overcome these problems.
In 1766, he had a private theatre built in his castle, the Château de Lacoste, in Provence.
For example, in the final episode of the television series ''Friday the 13th: The Series'', Micki, the female protagonist, travels back in time and ends up being imprisoned and tortured by de Sade.
He had been working on his magnum opus ''Les 120 Journées de Sodome'' (''The 120 Days of Sodom'').
However, there is much to suggest that he suffered abuse from his fellow revolutionaries due to his aristocratic background.
An example is "Eugénie de Franval", a tale of incest and retribution.
They fled to Italy, de Sade taking his wife's sister with him.
He successfully appealed his death sentence in 1778, but remained imprisoned under the ''lettre de cachet''.
Yukio Mishima, Barry Yzereef, and Doug Wright also wrote plays about de Sade; Weiss's and Wright's plays have been made into films.
