This promise was known as the "verbum."
In 1563 the Council of Trent, twenty-fourth session, required that a valid marriage must be performed by a priest before two witnesses.
Even within Western culture, "definitions of marriage have careened from one extreme to another and everywhere in between" (as Evan Gerstmann has put it).
While child marriage is observed for both boys and girls, the overwhelming majority of child spouses are girls.
Myanmar (frequently referred to as Burma) is also the only predominantly Buddhist nation to allow for civil polygynous marriages, though such is rarely tolerated by the Burmese population.
Marriage, like other close relationships, exerts considerable influence on health.
The history of marriage is often considered under History of the family or legal history.
Marital status — the simple fact of being married — confers more health benefits to men than women.
In June 2015, the Supreme Court ruled that all states would have to grant marriage status to same-sex couples.
Sometimes this covers an elopement, but sometimes it depends on sexual violence.
All other rights and responsibilities are to be decided between the husband and wife, and may even be included as stipulations in the marriage contract before the marriage actually takes place, so long as they do not go against the minimum requirements of the marriage.
The suffix "-gamy" refers specifically to the number of spouses, as in bi-gamy (two spouses, generally illegal in most nations), and poly-gamy (more than one spouse).
The customs of bride price and dowry, that exist in parts of the world, can lead to buying and selling people into marriage.
In an analysis of marriage among the Nayar, a polyandrous society in India, Gough found that the group lacked a husband role in the conventional sense; that unitary role in the west was divided between a non-resident "social father" of the woman's children, and her lovers who were the actual procreators.
However, in the late 1800s in England and the United States, feminist activists began calling for raised age of consent laws, which was eventually handled in the 1920s, having been raised to 16-18.
He offered a list of ten rights associated with marriage, including sexual monopoly and rights with respect to children, with specific rights differing across cultures.
The matrimonial covenant, by which a man and a woman establish between themselves a partnership of the whole of life, is by its nature ordered toward the good of the spouses and the procreation and education of offspring; this covenant between baptized persons has been raised by Christ the Lord to the dignity of a sacrament.
Men usually married when they were in their 20s and women in their teens.
Some human rights organizations argue that the criminalization of adultery also violates internationally recognized protections for private life, as it represents an arbitrary interference with an individual's privacy, which is not permitted under international law.
However, to date, cross-cultural tests of this hypothesis using worldwide samples have failed to find any significant relationship between these two variables.
Islam has always allowed it, while Hindu strictures vary widely.
It is a relatively new practice that same-sex couples are being granted the same form of legal marital recognition available to mixed-sexed couples.
Hinduism sees marriage as a sacred duty that entails both religious and social obligations.
Twelve years later, in 1564, John filed for divorce.
There was the free marriage known as ''sine manu''.
As a polygynous society, the Israelites did not have any laws that imposed marital fidelity on men.
Another kind of marriage selection is the levirate marriage in which widows are obligated to marry their husband's brother, mostly found in societies where kinship is based on endogamous clan groups.
Marriage is an institution that is historically filled with restrictions.
The legal and social concept of marital rape has developed in most industrialized countries in the mid to late 20th century; in many other parts of the world it is not recognized as a form of abuse, socially or legally.
Different societies demonstrate variable tolerance of extramarital sex.
Section 2, which allows states to not recognize same-sex marriage in other states was still in effect.
to occur, the person simply "consents" to the marriage even if he/she doesn't want it, out of the implied social pressure and duty.
From 1913 until 1948, 30 out of the then 48 states enforced such laws.
In many countries today, each marriage partner has the choice of keeping his or her property separate or combining properties.
A "walking marriage" refers to a type of temporary marriage formed by the Mosuo of China, in which male partners live elsewhere and make nightly visits.
Societies have often placed restrictions on marriage to relatives, though the degree of prohibited relationship varies widely.
In a maternal marriage a male would become a son-in-law who lived in the wife's home.
* The secularism of the Enlightenment emphasized marriage as a ''contract'' "to be formed, maintained, and dissolved as the couple sees fit".
Where religious marriages are recognised by the state, the officiator must also conform with the law of the jurisdiction.
For example, Medieval England saw marriage age as variable depending on economic circumstances, with couples delaying marriage until the early twenties when times were bad and falling to the late teens after the Black Death, when there were labor shortages; by appearances, marriage of adolescents was not the norm in England.
In India, nearly 7,000 women were killed in 2001 over dowries, and activists believe that figures represent a third of the actual number of such murders.
Among ancient Germanic tribes, the bride and groom were roughly the same age and generally older than their Roman counterparts, at least according to Tacitus:
Although people with infectious diseases such as AIDS may now marry, marriage is still illegal for the mentally ill.
In the year 1552 CE, John Somerford and Jane Somerford Brereton were both married at the ages of 3 and 2, respectively.
A '''dowry''' is "a process whereby parental property is distributed to a daughter at her marriage (i.e.
Religious groups have differing views on the legitimacy of polygyny.
Child marriages are often arranged between the families of the future bride and groom, sometimes as soon as the girl is born.
This particularly applies to minimum age, or physical infirmities.
Bridewealth  is the amount of money or property or wealth paid by the groom or his family to the parents of a woman upon the marriage of their daughter to the groom.
Where Aristotle had set the prime of life at 37 years for men and 18 for women, the Visigothic Code of law in the 7th century placed the prime of life at 20 years for both men and women, after which both presumably married.
Offspring resulting from annulled relationships are considered legitimate.
When defined broadly, marriage is considered a cultural universal.
In some countries – notably the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, Norway and Spain – both ceremonies can be held together; the officiant at the religious and civil ceremony also serving as agent of the state to perform the civil ceremony.
In 2012, after a Moroccan 16-year-old girl committed suicide after having been forced by her family to marry her rapist and enduring further abuse by the rapist after they married, there have been protests from activists against this practice which is common in Morocco.
Although handfastings vary for each Wiccan they often involve honoring Wiccan gods.
From the 1690s until the Marriage Act of 1753 as many as 300,000 clandestine marriages were performed at Fleet Prison alone.
In some cases couples living together do not wish to be recognized as married.
It is also known as brideprice although this has fallen in disfavor as it implies the purchase of the bride.
Muslim men may "marry" up to four women, who do not however enjoy the legal status of wives.
Although marital rape is being increasingly criminalized in developing countries too, cultural, religious, and traditional ideologies about "conjugal rights" remain very strong in many parts of the world; and even in many countries that have adequate laws against rape in marriage these laws are rarely enforced.
Similarly, a couple may remain married in religious eyes after a civil divorce.
In the United States, this is called the marriage penalty.
This forced Gough to disregard sexual access as a key element of marriage and to define it in terms of legitimacy of offspring alone: marriage is "a relationship established between a woman and one or more other persons, which provides a child born to the woman under circumstances not prohibited by the rules of relationship, is accorded full birth-status rights common to normal members of his society or social stratum."
This proportion has fallen dramatically, but still more than 10% of all marriages are believed to be between first and second cousins.
In developed countries child marriage is outlawed or restricted.
Laws concerning divorce and the ease with which a divorce can be obtained vary widely around the world.
Marriage creates rights and duties in the Church between the spouses and towards their children: "entering marriage with the intention of never having children is a grave wrong and more than likely grounds for an annulment".
Betrothal (''erusin''), which refers to the time that this binding contract is made, is distinct from marriage itself (''nissu'in''), with the time between these events varying substantially.
In various European and some Latin American countries, any religious ceremony must be held separately from the required civil ceremony.
As polygamy in Africa is increasingly subject to legal limitations, a variant form of ''de facto'' (as opposed to legal or ''de jure'') polygyny is being practised in urban centres.
Some cultures allow the dissolution of marriage through divorce or annulment.
In some countries however, unmarried cohabitation of a couple for a specific period of time does create a presumption of paternity similar to that of formal marriage.
Although a society may be classified as polygynous, not all marriages in it necessarily are; monogamous marriages may in fact predominate.
Serial monogamy creates a new kind of relative, the "ex-".
The ceremony is known as 'Anand Karaj' and represents the holy union of two souls united as one.
Once the process of marriage was secularized into a private contract, the role of churches substantially diminished for Protestants.
In some societies such as the Lovedu of South Africa, or the Nuer of the Sudan, aristocratic women may become female 'husbands.'
In these cases, married couples may not form an independent household, but remain part of an extended family household.
''inter vivos'') rather than at the holder's death (''mortis causa'')… A dowry establishes some variety of conjugal fund, the nature of which may vary widely.
Before then, no specific ritual was prescribed for celebrating a marriage: "Marriage vows did not have to be exchanged in a church, nor was a priest's presence required.
This pattern was found in a broad swath of Eurasian societies from Japan to Ireland.
In northern Ghana, for example, payment of bridewealth signifies a woman's requirement to bear children, and women using birth control face substantial threats of physical abuse and reprisals.
Those who remarry do so on average 3 times.
In the latter case, called community property, when the marriage ends by divorce each owns half.
The New Marriage Law of 1950 radically changed Chinese marriage traditions, enforcing monogamy, equality of men and women, and choice in marriage; arranged marriages were the most common type of marriage in China until then.
Where the strong influence of classical Celtic and Germanic cultures (which were not rigidly patriarchal) helped to offset the Judaeo-Roman patriarchal influence, in Eastern Europe the tradition of early and universal marriage (often in early adolescence) as well as traditional Slavic patrilocal custom led to a greatly inferior status of women at all levels of society.
There has been a trend toward the neolocal residence in western societies.
Divorce is not recognized, but annulments predicated upon previously existing impediments may be granted.
In contemporary English common law, a marriage is a voluntary contract by a man and a woman, in which by agreement they choose to become husband and wife.
However, "duty of marriage" is also interpreted as whatever one does as a married couple, which is more than just sexual activity.
In some cases, bridewealth is a means by which the groom's family's ties to the children of the union are recognized.
Whom they marry may be influenced by socially determined rules of incest, prescriptive marriage rules, parental choice and individual desire.
Although an "Anti-Miscegenation Amendment" to the United States Constitution was proposed in 1871, in 1912–1913, and in 1928, no nationwide law against racially mixed marriages was ever enacted.
Besides the second and subsequent marriages being void, the bigamist is also liable to other penalties, which also vary between jurisdictions.
In Eastern ritual churches, the bishop or priest functions as the actual minister of the Sacred Mystery (Eastern Orthodox deacons may not perform marriages).
A ''civil union'', also referred to as a ''civil partnership'', is a legally recognized form of partnership similar to marriage.
In Western ritual, the ministers of the sacrament are the husband and wife themselves, with a bishop, priest, or deacon merely witnessing the union on behalf of the church, and adding a blessing.
Should the guardian disagree on the marriage, it may not legally take place.
The Covenant Code orders "If he take him another; her food, her clothing, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish(or lessen)".
A couple could exchange consent anywhere, anytime."
The respective maintenance obligations, both during and eventually after a marriage, are regulated in most jurisdictions; alimony is one such method.
After the marriage, all the property (called "fortune") and expected inheritances of the wife belonged to the husband.
For example, In the United States, polygamy is illegal in all 50 states.
Beginning with Denmark in 1989, civil unions under one name or another have been established by law in several countries in order to provide same-sex couples rights, benefits, and responsibilities similar (in some countries, identical) to opposite-sex civil marriage.
Pierre Bourdieu notes, however, that very few marriages ever follow the rule, and that when they do so, it is for "practical kinship" reasons such as the preservation of family property, rather than the "official kinship" ideology.
Child marriages can also occur in the context of marriage by abduction.
Some regulations require one of the parties to reside within the jurisdiction of the register office (formerly parish).
Married Greek women had few rights in ancient Greek society and were expected to take care of the house and children.
Child marriage was common throughout history, even up until the 1900s in the United States, where in 1880 CE, in the state of Delaware, the age of consent for marriage was 7 years old.
Cohabitation may be an option pursued as a form of resistance to traditional institutionalized marriage.
In some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Kuwait, Maldives, Morocco, Oman, Mauritania, United Arab Emirates, Sudan, Yemen, any form of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal.
An issue that is a serious concern regarding marriage and which has been the object of international scrutiny is that of sexual violence within marriage.
This power dynamic conceptualizes men as "the provider operating in the public sphere" and women as "the caregivers operating within the private sphere".
Research on marriage and health is part of the broader study of the benefits of social relationships.
In the United Kingdom 47.6% of births were to unmarried women in 2012; in Ireland the figure was 35.1%.
Such marriages are illegal in most countries due to incest restrictions.
For Protestant denominations, the purposes of marriage include intimate companionship, rearing children and mutual support for both husband and wife to fulfill their life callings.
Allowing same-gender couples to legally marry is considered to be one of the most important of all LGBT rights.
A court order ruled in 2004 that no such incident had occurred and acquitted all accused.
Tracking the occurrence of polygamy is further complicated in jurisdictions where it has been banned, but continues to be practiced (''de facto polygamy'').
These trends coincide with the broader human rights movement.
Mary Wollstonecraft, in the 18th century, described marriage as "legal prostitution".
South Africa under apartheid also banned interracial marriage.
The authority figure could be parents, family, a religious official, or a group consensus.
* Martin Luther saw it as a social "estate of the earthly kingdom...subject to the prince, not the Pope."
The tribunal of the kingdom rejected the husband's claim, validating the wedding, but the husband appealed to the tribunal in Zaragoza, and this institution annulled the marriage.
It is allowed in Islam and Confucianism.
A similar arrangement in Saudi Arabia, called misyar marriage, also involves the husband and wife living separately but meeting regularly.
Marriage is commonly celebrated in the context of a Eucharistic service (a nuptial Mass or Divine Liturgy).
However, Korotayev's tests show that the female contribution to subsistence does correlate significantly with matrilocal residence in general.
For example, widow inheritance provides a widow with another man from her late husband's brothers.
Some critics object to what they see as propaganda in relation to marriage – from the government, religious organizations, the media – which aggressively promote marriage as a solution for all social problems; such propaganda includes, for instance, marriage promotion in schools, where children, especially girls, are bombarded with positive information about marriage, being presented only with the information prepared by authorities.
While most Christian denominations do not currently perform same-sex marriages, some do, such as Metropolitan Community Church, Quaker, United Church of Canada, and United Church of Christ congregations, and some Anglican dioceses, for example.
One of the functions of churches from the Middle Ages was to register marriages, which was not obligatory.
Countries that have relatively recently legalized divorce are Italy (1970), Portugal (1975), Brazil (1977), Spain (1981), Argentina (1987), Paraguay (1991), Colombia (1991), Ireland (1996), Chile (2004) and Malta (2011).
Conversely, institutionalized marriages may not involve cohabitation.
The only difference between the two systems was the timing of the payment.
Today it is condemned by international human rights organizations.
The Nazi ban on interracial marriage and interracial sex was enacted in September 1935 as part of the Nuremberg Laws, the ''Gesetz zum Schutze des deutschen Blutes und der deutschen Ehre'' (The Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour).
Although an increase in the female contribution to subsistence tends to lead to matrilocal residence, it also tends simultaneously to lead to general non-sororal polygyny which effectively destroys matrilocality.
This is the case in Australia.
In ancient Chinese society, people of the same surname are supposed to consult with their family trees prior to marriage to reduce the potential risk of unintentional incest.
The mutual love between man and wife becomes an image of the eternal love with which God loves humankind.
In some areas, child marriages and polygamy may occur in spite of national laws against the practice.
The Talmud interprets this as a requirement for a man to provide food and clothing to, and have sex with, each of his wives.
Christian marriages are based upon the teachings of Jesus Christ and the Apostle Paul.
Several cultures have practiced temporary and conditional marriages.
The related word "matrimony" derives from the Old French word ''matremoine'', which appears around 1300 CE and ultimately derives from Latin ''mātrimōnium'', which combines the two concepts: ''mater'' meaning "mother" and the suffix -''monium'' signifying "action, state, or condition".
Most research on marriage and health has focused on heterosexual couples, and more work is needed to clarify the health impacts of same-sex marriage.
Studies also show that married couples find the highest level of satisfaction in egalitarian relationships and lowest levels of satisfaction in wife dominate relationships.
About 45% of marriages in Britain and, according to a 2009 study, 46% of marriages in the U.S. end in divorce.
Section 3 of the law  which prevented the Federal Government from recognizing same-sex marriage was struck down in United States v. Windsor (2013).
Civil marriage, which does not exist in some countries, is marriage without religious content carried out by a government institution in accordance with the marriage laws of the jurisdiction, and recognised as creating the rights and obligations intrinsic to matrimony.
Numerous philosophers, feminists and other academic figures have commented on this throughout history, condemning the hypocrisy of legal and religious authorities in regard to sexual issues; pointing to the lack of choice of a woman in regard to controlling her own sexuality; and drawing parallels between marriage, an institution promoted as sacred, and prostitution, widely condemned and vilified (though often tolerated as a "necessary evil").
It is to this flexibility that Anthropologist Robin Fox attributes its success as a social support system: "This has often meant – given the imbalance in the sex ratios, the higher male infant mortality, the shorter life span of males, the loss of males in wartime, etc.
Individuals may marry for several reasons, including legal, social, libidinal, emotional, financial, spiritual, and religious purposes.
Bridewealth is a common practice in parts of South-East Asia (Thailand, Cambodia), parts of Central Asia, and in much of sub-Saharan Africa.
From age, to race, to social status, to consanguinity, to gender, restrictions are placed on marriage by society for reasons of benefiting the children, passing on healthy genes, maintaining cultural values, or because of prejudice and fear.
In the Jewish tradition, the rabbis in ancient times insisted on the marriage couple entering into a prenuptial agreement, called a ''ketubah''.
Morning gifts, which might also be arranged by the bride's father rather than the bride, are given to the bride herself; the name derives from the Germanic tribal custom of giving them the morning after the wedding night.
Inheritance was more important than feelings: a woman whose father dies without male heirs could be forced to marry her nearest male relative – even if she had to divorce her husband first.
As of 2000, the average marriage age range was 25–44 years for men and 22–39 years for women.
In the Middle Eastern region, Israel, Turkey and Tunisia are notable exceptions.
In some jurisdictions, such as Brazil, New Zealand, Uruguay, Ecuador, France and the U.S. states of Hawaii and Illinois, civil unions are also open to opposite-sex couples.
Within the society's kinship terminology, such relatives are usually indicated by a specific term which sets them apart as potentially marriageable.
Some countries, such as Israel, refuse to accept a legal challenge of paternity in such a circumstance, in order to avoid the stigmatization of the child (see Mamzer, a concept under Jewish law).
Following the marriage, the couple may consummate the marriage.
The ten countries with the highest rates of child marriage are: Niger (75%), Chad, Central African Republic, Bangladesh, Guinea, Mozambique, Mali, Burkina Faso, South Sudan, and Malawi.
Relations may be by consanguinity or affinity, meaning by blood or by marriage.
It is most common in egalitarian societies marked by high male mortality or male absenteeism.
In some societies the rule is that a partner is selected from an individual's own social group – endogamy, this is often the case in class and caste based societies.
Conversely, such practices may be outlawed and penalized in parts of the world out of concerns for women's rights and because of international law.
The last sati incident allegedly ouccured in Rajasthan in 1987 when 18-year-old Roop Kanwar allegedly committed sati.
As Christianity spread during the Roman period and the Middle Ages, the idea of free choice in selecting marriage partners increased and spread with it.
In England, the place of marriage formerly had to be a church or register office, but this was extended to any public venue with the necessary licence.
Nonetheless, polygyny is a gender issue which offers men asymmetrical benefits.
Same-sex marriage is recognized by various religious denominations.
The Act did not apply to Jewish marriages or those of Quakers, whose marriages continued to be governed by their own customs.
In some societies, the co-wives are relatives, usually sisters, a practice called ''sororal polygyny''; the pre-existing relationship between the co-wives is thought to decrease potential tensions within the marriage.
It is associated with ''partible paternity'', the cultural belief that a child can have more than one father.
"Feminist demands for a wife's control over her own property were not met in parts of Britain until ... laws were passed in the late 19th century."
Only those who indulge in immoral acts should be afraid''."
If this polygyny factor is controlled (e.g., through a multiple regression model), division of labor turns out to be a significant predictor of postmarital residence.
Tensions not only exist ''between'' genders, but also ''within'' genders; senior and junior men compete for wives, and senior and junior wives in the same household may experience radically different life conditions, and internal hierarchy.
These changes have occurred primarily in Western countries.
many Christian denominations regard marriage as a sacrament, as a sacred institution, or as a covenant, but this was not always the case before the 1184 Council of Verona officially recognized marriage as a sacrament.
The Eastern Orthodox Church allows divorce for a limited number of reasons, and in theory (but usually not in practice) requires that a marriage after divorce be celebrated with a penitential overtone.
The Church in turn lashed out at those who got married twice or thrice in a row while their formers spouses were still alive.
* Anglicans regarded marriage as a ''domestic commonwealth'' within England and the church.
An Avunculate marriage is a marriage that occurs between an uncle and his niece or between an aunt and her nephew.
This is advantageous to a married couple with disparate incomes.
A forced marriage is a marriage in which one or both of the parties is married against their will.
Besides other things, the ''ketubah'' provided for an amount to be paid by the husband in the event of a divorce or his estate in the event of his death.
The first laws in modern times recognizing same-sex marriage were enacted during the first decade of the 21st century.
The Hebrew Bible (Christian Old Testament) describes a number of marriages, including those of Isaac (), Jacob() and Samson ().
People have proposed arguments against marriage for reasons that include political, philosophical and religious criticisms; concerns about the divorce rate; individual liberty and gender equality; questioning the necessity of having a personal relationship sanctioned by government or religious authorities; or the promotion of celibacy for religious or philosophical reasons.
If the amount of her inheritance is settled by law rather than agreement, it may be called dower.
In some societies, the very high social and religious importance of marital fidelity, especially female fidelity, has as result the criminalization of adultery, often with harsh penalties such as stoning or flogging; as well as leniency towards punishment of violence related to infidelity (such as honor killings).
If a marriage includes multiple husbands and wives, it can be called group marriage.
Dowry related violence is a problem in several places (see dowry deaths), and, in response to violent incidents regarding the practice, several jurisdictions have enacted laws restricting or banning dowry (see Dowry law in India).
