The basin is supplied with water through an old hydraulic system which conveys water from the mountains located approximately  away from Marrakesh.
''Riads'' (Moroccan mansions) are common in Marrakesh.
Its 130 student dormitory cells cluster around a courtyard richly carved in cedar, marble and stucco.
At the time, the Jewish community consisted of a large portion of the city's bankers, jewelers, metalworkers, tailors and sugar traders.
The city was fortified by Tashfin's son, Ali ibn Yusuf, who in 1122–1123 built the ramparts which remain to this day, completed further mosques and palaces, and developed an underground water system in the city known as the ''rhettara'' to irrigate his new garden.
The city is popular with the French, and many French celebrities have bought property in the city, including fashion moguls Yves St Laurent and Jean-Paul Gaultier.
Bab Agnaou was renovated and its opening reduced in size during the rule of sultan Mohammed ben Abdallah.
Today the square attracts people from a diversity of social and ethnic backgrounds and tourists from all around the world.
Historically this square was used for public decapitations by rulers who sought to maintain their power by frightening the public.
As a result, almost all the city's monuments were destroyed.
The arts and crafts of Marrakesh have had a wide and enduring impact on Moroccan handicrafts to the present day.
In the 21st century, property and real estate development in the city has boomed, with a dramatic increase in new hotels and shopping centres, fuelled by the policies of Mohammed VI of Morocco, who aims to increase the number of tourists annually visiting Morocco to 20 million by 2020.
The palace was carefully restored by the Omar Benjelloun Foundation and converted into a museum in 1997.
The main developments have been in facilities for tourists including hotels and leisure centres such as golf courses and health spas, with investments of 10.9 billion dirham (US$1.28 billion) in 2011.
One of the school's best known teachers was Mohammed al-Ifrani (1670–1745).
According to historian Susan Searight, however, the town's name was first documented in an 11th-century manuscript in the Qarawiyyin library in Fez, where its meaning was given as "country of the sons of Kush".
In 2015, a tramway is proposed.
The El Badi Palace flanks the eastern side of the Kasbah.
The hospital has 194 beds, covering an area of .
The Mamounia Gardens, more than 100 years old and named after Prince Moulay Mamoun, have olive and orange trees as well as a variety of floral displays.
Berber music is influenced by Andalusian classical music and typified by its ''oud'' accompaniment.
The city's gardens feature numerous native plants alongside other species that have been imported over the course of the centuries, including giant bamboos, yuccas, papyrus, palm trees, banana trees, cypress, philodendrons, rose bushes, bougainvilleas, pines and various kinds of cactus plants.
The interior of the octagonally arched dome is decorated with distinctive carvings bordered by a Kufic frieze inscribed with the name of its patron, Sultan Ali ibn Yusuf.
The palace is not open to the public, and is now privately owned by French businessman Dominique du Beldi.
The main road network within and around Marrakesh is well paved.
It is the capital city of the mid-southwestern region of Marrakesh-Safi.
Souk Ableuh contains stalls which specialize in lemons, chilis, capers, pickles, green, red, and black olives, and mint, a common ingredient of Moroccan cuisine and tea.
A ''pastilla'' is a filo-wrapped pie stuffed with minced chicken or pigeon that has been prepared with almonds, cinnamon, spices and sugar.
Paul Sullivan cites the ''souks'' as the principal shopping attraction in the city: "A honeycomb of intricately connected alleyways, this fundamental section of the old city is a micro-medina in itself, comprising a dizzying number of stalls and shops that range from itsy kiosks no bigger than an elf's wardrobe to scruffy store-fronts that morph into glittering Aladdin's Caves once you're inside."
The Moroccan tea culture is practiced in Marrakesh; green tea with mint is served with sugar from a curved teapot spout into small glasses.
Under the Saadian dynasty, Marrakesh regained its former position as a point of contact for caravan routes from the Maghreb, the Mediterranean and sub-Saharan African.
The hotel infrastructure in recent years has experienced rapid growth.
Other hotels include Eden Andalou Hotel, Hotel Marrakech, Sofitel Marrakech, Palm Plaza Hotel & Spa, Royal Mirage Hotel, Piscina del Hotel, and Palmeraie Golf Palace.
The museum holds exhibits of both modern and traditional Moroccan art together with fine examples of historical books, coins and pottery produced by Moroccan Jewish, Berber and Arab peoples.
Jemaa el-Fnaa was renovated along with much of the Marrakech city, whose walls were extended by Abu Yaqub Yusuf and particularly by Yaqub al-Mansur in 1147–1158.
The minaret was designed to prevent a person at the top of the tower from viewing activity within the king's harems.
It is located in Mouassine and is part of the Mouassine complex, which includes a library, hamman, madrasa (school) and the Mouassine Fountain, the largest and most important in the city.
Since the legislative elections in November 2011, the ruling political party in Marrakesh has, for the first time, been the Justice and Development Party or PDJ which also rules at the national level.
Sup de Co Marrakech, also known as the École Supérieure de Commerce de Marrakech, is a private four-year college that was founded in 1987 by Ahmed Bennis.
During the early 20th century, Marrakesh underwent several years of unrest.
The palace was intended primarily for hosting lavish receptions for ambassadors from Spain, England and the Ottoman Empire, showcasing Saadian Morocco as a nation whose power and influence reached as far as the borders of Niger and Mali.
The word ''mur''  is used now in Berber mostly in the feminine form ''tamurt''.
A number of Moroccan football clubs are located here, including Najm de Marrakech, KAC Marrakech, Mouloudia de Marrakech and Chez Ali Club de Marrakech.
A severe strain has been placed upon the healthcare facilities of the city in the last decade as the city population has grown dramatically.
As a result of its cultural reputation, Marrakesh attracted many writers and artists, especially from Andalusia, including the famous philosopher Averroes of Cordoba.
The city regained its preeminence under wealthy Saadian sultans Abu Abdallah al-Qaim and Ahmad al-Mansur, who embellished the city with sumptuous palaces such as the El Badi Palace (1578) and restored many ruined monuments.
In 1985, UNESCO declared the old town area of Marrakesh a UNESCO World Heritage Site, raising international awareness of the cultural heritage of the city.
Located to the north of the foothills of the snow-capped Atlas Mountains, Marrakesh is located  southwest of Tangier,  southwest of the Moroccan capital of Rabat,  south of Casablanca, and  northeast of Agadir.
Glaoui, already known for his amorous adventures and lavish lifestyle, became a symbol of Morocco's colonial order.
El Badi Palace, built by Ahmad al-Mansur in 1578, was a replica of the Alhambra Palace, made with costly and rare materials including marble from Italy, gold dust from Sudan, porphyry from India and jade from China.
Surrounded by lemon, orange, and olive groves, the city's culinary characteristics are rich and heavily spiced but not hot, using various preparations of ''Ras el hanout'' (which means "Head of the shop"), a  blend of dozens of spices which include ash berries, chilli, cinnamon, grains of paradise, monk’s pepper, nutmeg, and turmeric.
Akal-n-iguinawen – land of the black).
The dome of the kiosk is framed by a battlement decorated with arches and seven-pointed stars.
Marrakesh is particularly popular with the French, and numerous French celebrities own property in the city.
The "silvery valley of the Ourika river curving north towards Marrakesh", and the "red heights of Jebel Yagour still capped with snow" to the south are sights in this area.
The Jemaa el-Fnaa is one of the best-known squares in Africa and is the centre of city activity and trade.
Measuring  in size, the gardens feature citrus, apricot, pomegranate, olive and cypress trees.
Conversely, the city itself was in earlier times simply called ''Marocco City'' (or similar) by travelers from abroad.
Festivals, both national and Islamic, are celebrated in Marrakesh and throughout the country, and some of them are observed as national holidays.
The ''Birmingham Post'' comments: "The ''souk'' offers an incredible shopping experience with a myriad of narrow winding streets that lead through a series of smaller markets clustered by trade.
The Madrasa was re-constructed by the Saadian Sultan Abdallah al-Ghalib (1557–1574) in 1564 as the largest and most prestigious madrasa in Morocco.
In 1907, Marrakesh caliph Moulay Abd al-Hafid was proclaimed sultan by the powerful tribes of the High Atlas and by Ulama scholars who denied the legitimacy of his brother, Abd al-Aziz.
Bab Agnaou was built in the 12th century during the Almohad dynasty.
From medieval times until around the beginning of the 20th century, the entire country of Morocco was known as the "Kingdom of Marrakesh", as the kingdom's historic capital city was often Marrakesh.
Mansouri became the second woman in the history of Morocco to obtain a mayoral position, after Asma Chaabi, mayor of Essaouira.
Golf is a popular sport in Marrakech.
The pavilion and a nearby artificial lake are surrounded by orchards and olive groves.
Marrakesh has several universities and schools, including Cadi Ayyad University (also known as the University of Marrakech), and its component, the École nationale des sciences appliquées de Marrakech (ENSA Marrakech), which was created in 2000 by the Ministry of Higher Education and specializes in engineering and scientific research, and the La faculté des sciences et techniques-gueliz which known to be number one in Morocco in its kind of faculties.
Average temperatures range from  in the winter to  in the summer.
Tajines can be prepared with chicken, lamb, beef or fish, adding fruits, olives and preserved lemon, vegetables and spices, including cumin, peppers, saffron, turmeric, and ''ras el hanout''.
Bab el Khémis, situated in the medina's northeastern corner, is one of the city's main gates and features a man-made spring.
The Agdal Gardens, located south of the medina and also built in the 12th century, are royal orchards surrounded by ''pise'' walls.
It is considered the most eminent hotel of the city and has been described as the "grand dame of Marrakesh hotels."
The party, which advocates Islamism and Islamic democracy, won five seats; the National Rally of Independents (RNI) took one seat, while the PAM won three.
The Marrakesh Street Circuit hosts the World Touring Car Championship, Auto GP and FIA Formula Two Championship races.
However, the city receives less rain than is typically found in a Mediterranean climate, resulting in a semi-arid climate classification.
In the 1990s very few foreigners lived in the city, but real estate developments have dramatically increased in the last 15 years; by 2005 over 3,000 foreigners had purchased properties in the city, lured by its culture and the relatively cheap house prices.
After a temporary closure beginning in 1960, the building was refurbished and reopened to the public as a historical site in 1982.
These divisions still roughly exist but with significant overlap.
It is the fourth largest city in the country, after Casablanca, Fes and Tangier.
The building is composed of three rooms; the best known has a roof supported by twelve columns and encloses the tomb of al-Mansur's son.
According to tradition, it is believed that these saints are only sleeping and will awaken one day to resume their good deeds.
Others of note outside the Medina area include Ksar Char Bagh, Amanjena, Villa Maha, Dar Ahlam, Dar Alhind and Dar Tayda.
Rice is cooked with saffron, raisins, spices, and almonds, while couscous may have added vegetables.
It is a larger version of the Alhambra's Court of the Lions.
Her appointment was shrouded in controversy and resulted in her temporarily losing her seat the following month after a court ruled that the election had been fixed.
Another version of tajine includes vegetables and chickpeas seasoned with flower petals.
Improvements to the highways from Marrakesh to Casablanca, Agadir and the local airport have led to a dramatic increase in tourism in the city, which now attracts over two million tourists annually.
Yves Saint Laurent, The Beatles, The Rolling Stones and Jean-Paul Getty all spent significant time in the city; Laurent bought a property here and renovated the Majorelle Gardens.
It was built by Saadian sultan Ahmad al-Mansur after his success against the Portuguese at the Battle of the Three Kings in 1578.
It was also in 1907 that Dr. Mauchamp, a French doctor, was murdered in Marrakesh, suspected of spying for his country.
On 30 March 1912, the French Protectorate in Morocco was established.
France used the event as a pretext for sending its troops from the eastern Moroccan town of Oujda to the major metropolitan center of Casablanca in the west.
Upon the death of Bou-Ahmed in 1900, the palace was raided by Sultan Abd al-Aziz.
Trade and crafts are extremely important to the local tourism-fueled economy.
This ornamentation is framed by three panels marked with an inscription from the Quran in Maghrebi script using foliated Kufic letters, which were also used in Al-Andalus.
The Museum of Islamic Art (''Musée d'Art Islamique'') is a blue-coloured building located in the Marjorelle Gardens.
The Royal Palace, also known as Dar el-Makhzen, is located next to the Badi Palace.
Various European names for Morocco (Marruecos, Marrocos, Maroc, Marokko, etc.)
After the premature death in 1900 of the grand vizier Ba Ahmed, who had been designated regent until the designated sultan Abd al-Aziz became of age, the country was plagued by anarchy, tribal revolts, the plotting of feudal lords, and European intrigues.
The average elevation of the snow-covered High Atlas lies above .
The house itself represents an example of classical Andalusian architecture, with fountains in the central courtyard, traditional seating areas, a hammam and intricate tilework and carvings.
Recently renovated, its small exhibition rooms have displays of Islamic artifacts and decorations including Irke pottery, polychrome plates, jewellery, and antique doors.
Another popular non-alcoholic drink is orange juice.
Bou Ahmed resided here with his four wives, 24 concubines and many children.
As one of the principal tourist cities in Africa, Marrakesh has over 400 hotels.
In 2009, king Mohammed VI inaugurated a regional psychiatric hospital in Marrakesh, built by the Mohammed V Foundation for Solidarity, costing 22 million ''dirhams'' (approximately 2.7 million U.S. dollars).
Set in a  olive grove at La Palmeraie, the hotel has 252 rooms, 16 suites, six restaurants and a  conference room.
The red walls of the city, built by Ali ibn Yusuf in 1122–1123, and various buildings constructed in red sandstone during this period, have given the city the nickname of the "Red City" or "Ochre City".
Under the Almoravids, pious and learned warriors from the desert, numerous mosques and madrasas (Koranic schools) were built, developing the community into a trading center for the Maghreb and sub-Saharan Africa.
It was created in 1558 by the Saadians at the site where the sultan's stables were previously located.
''Thuya'' craft products are made of caramel coloured ''thuya'', a conifer indigenous to Morocco.
Through the squawking chaos of the poultry market, the gory fascination of the open-air butchers' shops and the uncountable number of small and specialist traders, just wandering around the streets can pass an entire day."
Marrakesh is one of the great citadels of the Muslim world.
Despite the economic recession, real estate and hotel development in Marrakesh has grown dramatically in the 21st century.
Historically the souks of Marrakesh were divided into retail areas for particular goods such as leather, carpets, metalwork and pottery.
Glaoui dominated the city and became famous for his collaboration with the general residence authorities, culminating in a plot to dethrone Mohammed Ben Youssef (Mohammed V) and replace him with the Sultan's cousin, Ben Arafa.
The winter snows mantle them with white, and the turquoise sky gives a setting for their grey rocks and gleaming caps that is of unrivaled beauty."
It also has two large cinema complexes, Le Colisée à Gueliz and Cinéma Rif, and a new shopping precinct, Al Mazar.
The separate freight terminal has  of covered space.
The French colonial army encountered strong resistance from Ahmed al-Hiba, a son of Sheikh Ma al-'Aynayn, who arrived from the Sahara accompanied by his nomadic Reguibat tribal warriors.
Souk Haddadine specializes in ironware and lanterns.
Although the palace is now a ruin with little left but the outer walls, the site has become the location of the annual Marrakech Folklore Festival and other events.
Cadi Ayyad University was established in 1978 and operates 13 institutions in the Marrakech Tensift Elhaouz and Abda Doukkala regions of Morocco in four main cities, including Kalaa of Sraghna, Essaouira and Safi in addition to Marrakech.
Avenue Mohammed VI contains what is claimed to be Africa's largest nightclub: Pacha Marrakech, a trendy club that plays house and electro house music.
The old Jewish Quarter (''Mellah'') is situated in the kasbah area of the city's medina, east of Place des Ferblantiers.
This site is also known for its historic swimming pool, where a Sultan is said to have drowned.
The most important of the seven tombs is the shrine of Sidi Bel Abbas.
The mountain range runs along the Atlantic coast, then rises to the east of Agadir and extends northeast into Algeria before disappearing into Tunisia.
After two successive exiles to Corsica and Madagascar, Mohammed Ben Youssef was allowed to return to Morocco in November 1955, bringing an end to the despotic rule of Glaoui over Marrakesh and the surrounding region.
The PAM, largely consisting of friends of King Mohammed VI, came in second place with 9,794 votes.
The blacktopped runway is  long and  wide.
Local boutiques are adept at making western-style clothes using Moroccan materials.
The Almohads, Masmouda tribesmen from the High Atlas mountains who practiced orthodox Islam, took the city in 1147 under leader Abd al-Mu'min.
It was a twin of the Giralda in Seville and the unfinished Hassan Tower in Rabat, all built by the same designer.
Marrakesh has long been an important centre for healthcare in Morocco, and the regional rural and urban populations alike are reliant upon hospitals in the city.
Numerous organizations of the region are based here, including the regional government administrative offices, the Regional Council of Tourism office, and regional public maintenance organizations such as the Governed Autonomous Water Supply and Electricity and Maroc Telecom.
Built in the 12th century, it provides access to roads leading to the mountain towns of Amizmiz and Asni.
Famed designer Yves Saint Laurent bought and restored the property, which features a stele erected in his memory, and the Museum of Islamic Art, which is housed in a dark blue building.
The city then fell into a state of decline, which soon led to the loss of its status as capital to rival city Fes.
The mausoleum comprises the corpses of about sixty members of the Saadi Dynasty that originated in the valley of the Draa River.
Marrakesh, the regional capital, constitutes a prefecture-level administrative unit of Morocco, Marrakech Prefecture, forming part of the region of Marrakech-Safi.
The blast destroyed the nearby Argana Cafe.
The location of Marrakesh on the north side of the Atlas, rather than the south, forbids its from being described as a desert city, but it remains the northern focus of the Saharan lines of communication, and its history, its types of dwellers, and its commerce and arts, are all related to the great south Atlas spaces that reach further into the Sahara desert."
Wood crafts are generally made of cedar, including the ''riad'' doors and palace ceilings.
In February 2001, the Moroccan government signed a loan agreement worth eight million U.S. dollars with The OPEC Fund for International Development to help improve medical services in and around Marrakesh, which led to expansions of the Ibn Tofail and Ibn Nafess hospitals.
The irrigation system was perfected to provide water for new palm groves and parks, including the Menara Garden.
Churchill used to relax within the gardens of the hotel and paint there.
With 130,000 hectares of greenery and over 180,000 palm trees in its Palmeraie, Marrakesh is an oasis of rich plant variety.
The square attracted dwellers from the surrounding desert and mountains to trade here, and stalls were raised in the square from early in its history.
The spire atop the minaret is decorated with gilded copper balls that decrease in size towards the top, a style unique to Morocco.
The city has expanded north from the old centre with suburbs such as Daoudiate, Diour El Massakine, Yamama, Sidi Abbad, Sakar, and Malizia, to the southeast with Sidi Youssef Ben Ali, to the west with Massima, and southwest to Hay Annahda, Berradi and beyond the airport.
T'hami El Glaoui, known as "Lord of the Atlas", became Pasha of Marrakesh, a post he held virtually throughout the 44-year duration of the Protectorate (1912–1956).
The construction ordered by Abdallah al-Ghalib was completed in 1565, as attested by the inscription in the prayer room.
There are 18 ''souks'' in Marrakesh, employing over 40,000 people in pottery, copperware, leather and other crafts.
The road from Marrakesh to Settat, a  stretch, was inaugurated by King Mohammed VI in April 2007, completing the  highway to Tangiers.
The gate was called Bab al Kohl (the word ''kohl'' also meaning "black") or Bab al Qsar (palace gate) in some historical sources.
The Saadian Tombs were built in the 16th century as a mausoleum to bury numerous Saadian rulers and entertainers.
Bou-Ahmed paid special attention to the privacy of the palace in its construction and employed architectural features such as multiple doors which prevented passers-by from seeing into the interior.
Orange wood is used for making ladles known as ''harira'' (lentil soup ladles).
It was originally covered with Marrakshi pink plaster, but in the 1990s experts opted to remove the plaster to expose the original stone work.
The garden, open to the public since 1947, has a large collection of plants from five continents including cacti, palms and bamboo.
It was rebuilt in the 1560s by Saadian Sultan Abdallah al-Ghalib, as the original had fallen into ruin.
Subsequently, with the fluctuating fortunes of the city, Jemaa el-Fnaa saw periods of decline and renewal.
Marrakesh has several universities and schools, including Cadi Ayyad University.
The pavilion was built during the 16th century Saadi dynasty and renovated in 1869 by sultan Abderrahmane of Morocco, who used to stay here in summertime.
The death of Yusuf II in 1224 began a period of instability.
United Nations agencies became active in Marrakesh beginning in the 1970s, and the city's international political presence has subsequently grown.
Circumambulation of the tombs is undertaken by devotees to achieve inner purity.
Rahba Qedima contains stalls selling hand-woven baskets, natural perfumes, knitted hats, scarves, tee shirts, Ramadan tea, ginseng, and alligator and iguana skins.
It has seen rapid development of residential complexes and many luxury hotels.
The number of households in 2014 was 217,245 against 173,603 in 2004.
Crafts employ a significant percentage of the population, who primarily sell their products to tourists.
A hot semi-arid climate (Köppen: BSh) predominates at Marrakesh.
The Mellah, today reconfigured as a mainly residential zone renamed Hay Essalam, currently occupies an area smaller than its historic limits and has an almost entirely Muslim population.
It has been part of the UNESCO World Heritage site since 1985.
It has been described as a "world-famous square", "a metaphorical urban icon, a bridge between the past and the present, the place where (spectacularized) Moroccan tradition encounters modernity."
The city has three golf courses, located just outside the city limits and played almost through the year.
The AeroExpo Marrakech International Exhibition of aeronautical industries and services is held here, as is the Riad Art Expo.
New radiotherapy and medical equipment was provided and  of existing hospital space was rehabilitated.
The Théâtre Royal, built by Tunisian architect Charles Boccara, puts on theatrical performances of comedy, opera, and dance in French and Arabic.
The region has been inhabited by Berber farmers since Neolithic times, but the actual city was founded in 1062 by Abu Bakr ibn Umar, chieftain and cousin of Almoravid king Yusuf ibn Tashfin.
The Secretary General of her Authenticity and Modernity Party (PAM), Mohamed Cheikh Biadillah, stated that "her election reflects the image of a modern Morocco."
After a period of decline, the city was surpassed by Fes, but in the early 16th century, Marrakesh again became the capital of the kingdom.
A greater number of theatrical troupes perform outdoors and entertain tourists on the main square and the streets, especially at night.
Mohammed VI has also announced plans for the construction of a 450 million dirham military hospital in Marrakesh.
Two types of music are traditionally associated with Marrakesh.
Many enterprises in the city are facing colossal debt problems.
When built it was the city's largest mosque but today it is half its original size.
Moroccan women who practice craftsmanship are known as ''Maalems'' (expert craftspeople) and make such fine products as Berber carpets and shawls made of ''sabra'' (cactus silk).
David Prescott Barrows, who describes Marrakesh as Morocco's "strangest city", describes the landscape in the following terms: "The city lies some fifteen or twenty miles from the foot of the Atlas mountains, which here rise to their grandest proportions.
On 15 April 1994, the Marrakesh Agreement was signed here to establish the World Trade Organization, and in March 1997 Marrakesh served as the site of the World Water Council's first World Water Forum, which was attended by over 500 international participants.
Tajines may also be basted with "smen" moroccan ghee that has a flavour similar to blue cheese.
More recently, several Marrakesh female music groups have also risen to popularity.
Until the arrival of the French in 1912, Jews could not own property outside of the Mellah; all growth was consequently contained within the limits of the neighborhood, resulting in narrow streets, small shops and higher residential buildings.
The corner-pieces are embellished with floral decorations.
Carpets and textiles are weaved, sewn or embroidered, sometimes used for upholstering.
The lavish palace, which took around a quarter of a century to build, was funded by compensation from the Portuguese and African gold and sugar cane revenue.
are directly derived from the Berber word ''Murakush''.
The quinches at the corners of the dome are covered with muqarnas.
