Indigenous people were educated in Japanese schools, and studied the Japanese language and Japanese culture.
They had been part of the Spanish East Indies formally since 1528.
However, some have questioned the ability of the Marshall Islands to enforce this zone.
Copra, the meat of the coconut, yields coconut oil (1 liter for every 6 to 10 coconuts).
The independence procedure was formally completed under international law in 1990, when the UN officially ended the Trusteeship status pursuant to Security Council Resolution 683.
* Namdrik Atoll – Mattlan Zackhras (UDP)
The following senators are in the legislative body:
Twenty-four of the atolls and islands are inhabited.
Tensions escallated in the region due to the intensifying of Saudi-led coalition attacks in Yemen.
* Mili Atoll – Wilbur Heine (AKA)
* Ebon Atoll – John M. Silk (UDP)
He stood off a group of islands from which local inhabitants hurled stones at his ship.
They signed a treaty with Kabua, whom the Germans had earlier recognized as "King of the Ralik Islands," on October 15.
Politically, the Marshall Islands is a presidential republic in free association with the United States, with the US providing defense, subsidies, and access to U.S. based agencies such as the FCC and the USPS.
In 2007, the Marshall Islands joined the International Labour Organization, which means its labour laws will comply with international benchmarks.
But the plant closed in 2005 after a failed attempt to convert it to produce tuna steaks, a process that requires half as many employees.
After the plant closed, it was taken over by the government, which had been the guarantor of a $2 million loan to the business.
This is the world's largest shark sanctuary, extending the worldwide ocean area in which sharks are protected from .
On January 10, the Spaniards sighted another island that they named "Placeres", perhaps Ailuk; ten leagues away, they sighted another island that they called "Pajares" (perhaps Jemo).
The German Empire had primarily economic interests in Micronesia.
Before Japan banned foreign traders on the archipelago, the activities of Catholic and Protestant missionaries were allowed.
The islands derive their name from British explorer John Marshall, who visited in 1788.
They conscripted the islanders as laborers and mistreated them.
From 1946 to 1958, the early years of the Cold War, the United States tested 67 nuclear weapons at its Pacific Proving Grounds located in the Marshall Islands, including the largest atmospheric nuclear test ever conducted by the U.S., code named Castle Bravo.
US defense officials have said that they would review U.S. defense obligations to the Government of the Marshall Islands in the wake of recent events and also condemned the shots fired at the bridge as "inappropriate".
On October 13, 1885, the gunboat  under Captain Fritz Rötger brought German emissaries to Jaluit.
* Maloelap Atoll – Michael Konelios (UDP)
The islands are located about halfway between Hawaii and Australia, north of Nauru and Kiribati, east of the Federated States of Micronesia, and south of the U.S. territory of Wake Island, to which it lays claim.
* Bikar (Bikaar) Atoll
The Pentagon reported that the destroyer USS Farragut and a maritime reconnaissance aircraft were dispatched upon receiving a distress call from the ship ''Tigris'' and it was also reported that all 34 crew members were detained.
During the American bombing, the islands' population suffered from lack of food and various injuries.
The official language of the Marshall Islands is Marshallese, but it is common to speak the English language.
* Lae Atoll – Thomas Heine (AKA)
The islands share maritime boundaries with the Federated States of Micronesia to the west, Wake Island to the north, Kiribati to the south-east, and Nauru to the south.
In 1914, Japan joined the Entente during World War I and captured various German Empire colonies, including several in Micronesia.
Coconut trees abound in the Pacific's tropical islands.
Elections are held every four years in universal suffrage (for all citizens above 18), with each of the twenty-four constituencies (see below) electing one or more representatives (senators) to the lower house of RMI's unicameral legislature, the '''Nitijela'''.
The Japanese enlarged administration and appointed local leaders, which weakened the authority of local traditional leaders.
* Kwajalein Atoll – Michael Kabua (AKA), Tony A. deBrum (AKA), Jeban Riklon (AKA)
On 28 April 2015, the Iranian navy seized the Marshall Island-flagged MV ''Maersk Tigris'' near the Strait of Hormuz.
* Namu Atoll – Tony Aiseia (AKA)
Other expeditions by Spanish and English ships followed.
* Arno Atoll – Nidel Lorak (UDP), Jiba B. Kabua (AKA)
In 2013, the northern atolls of the Marshall Islands experienced drought.
In September 2013, the Marshall Islands hosted the 44th Pacific Islands Forum summit.
Britain also raised no objection to a German protectorate over the Marshalls in exchange for German recognition of Britain's rights in the Gilbert and Ellice Islands.
* Likiep Atoll – Speaker Donald F. Capelle (UDP)
In 2013, heavy waves once again breached the city walls of Majuro.
The drought left 6,000 people surviving on less than  of water per day.
The islanders had no immunity to European diseases and many died as a result of contact with the Spanish.
Marshallese land owners receive rent for the base.
Moreover, during the 1930s, one third of all land up to the high water level was declared the property of the Japanese government.
The Spaniards went ashore and traded with the local inhabitants.
The Compact provided for aid and U.S. defense of the islands in exchange for continued U.S. military use of the missile testing range at Kwajalein Atoll.
On March 27, 1933, Japan gave notice of withdrawal from the League of Nations,  but continued to manage the islands, and in the late 1930s began building air bases on several atolls.
The islands were named for Marshall on Western charts, although the natives have historically named their home "jolet jen Anij" (Gifts from God).
In 1852 the San Francisco-based ships ''Glencoe'' and ''Sea Nymph'' were attacked and everyone aboard except for one crew member were killed.
The upper house of Parliament, called the '''Council of Iroij''', is an advisory body comprising twelve tribal chiefs.
In 1824 the crew of the American whaler ''Globe'' mutinied and some of the crew put ashore on Mulgrave Island.
The islands were historically known by the inhabitants as "jolet jen Anij" (Gifts from God).
On January 12, they sighted another island at 10°N that they called "Corrales" (possibly Wotho).
Major religious groups in the Republic of the Marshall Islands include the United Church of Christ (formerly Congregational), with 51.5% of the population; the Assemblies of God, 24.2%; the Roman Catholic Church, 8.4%; and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), 8.3%.
DeBrum demanded new commitment and international leadership to stave off further climate disasters from battering his country and other similarly vulnerable countries.
The country consists of a total of 29 atolls and five isolated islands.
On September 29, 1914, Japanese troops occupied the Enewetak Atoll, and on September 30, 1914, the Jaluit Atoll, the administrative centre of the Marshall Islands.
On January 15, the Spaniards sighted another low island, perhaps Ujelang, at 10°N, where they described the people on "Barbudos".
* Wotje Atoll – Litokwa Tomeing (UPP)
He was very interested in the islands and conducted considerable research on the Marshallese culture and language.
Spain sold the islands to Germany in 1884 through papal mediation.
Rule is shared by the AKA and the UDP.
In 1999, a private company built a tuna loining plant with more than 400 employees, mostly women.
The income tax has two brackets, with rates of 8% and 12%.
Although the Spanish Empire had a residual claim on the Marshalls in 1874, when she began asserting her sovereignty over the Carolines, she made no effort to prevent the German Empire from gaining a foothold there.
The government of the Marshall Islands operates under a mixed parliamentary-presidential system as set forth in its Constitution.
* Ujae Atoll – Caious Lucky (AKA)
The designation was repeated later on British maps.
The northern atolls get  of rainfall annually; the southern atolls about twice that.
After the German–Spanish Treaty of 1899, in which Germany acquired the Carolines, Palau, and the Marianas from Spain, Germany placed all of its Micronesian islands, including the Marshalls, under the governor of German New Guinea.
The President, who is head of state as well as head of government, is elected by the 33 senators of the Nitijela.
In World War II, the United States conquered the islands in the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign.
Small-scale industry is limited to handicrafts, fish processing, and copra.
The Germans erected a sign declaring a "Imperial German Protectorate" at Jaluit.
He published a small work in 1912 about the Catholic mission activities and the people of the Marshall Islands.
Population has outstripped the supply of freshwater, usually from rainfall.
Geographically, the country is part of the larger island group of Micronesia.
Over two-thirds of the population live in the capital, Majuro and Ebeye, the secondary urban center, located in Kwajalein Atoll.
The violence was usually attributed as a response to the ill treatment of the natives in response to petty theft, which was a common practice.
* Jabat Island – Kessai H. Note (UDP)
U.S. attacks started in mid-1943, and caused half the Japanese garrison of 5,100 people in the Mili Atoll to die from hunger by August 1945.
With the 1952 test of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb, code named "Ivy Mike," the island of Elugelab in the Enewetak atoll was destroyed.
The ship had been chartered by Germany's Rickmers Ship Management, which stated that the ship contained no special cargo and no military weapons.
The European powers recognized Spanish sovereignty over the islands in 1874.
It has been speculated that the crisis over the Carolines with Spain, which almost provoked a war, was in fact "a feint to cover the acquisition of the Marshall Islands", which went almost unnoticed at the time, despite the islands being the largest source of copra in Micronesia.
The international community in 1874 recognized the Spanish Empire's claim of sovereignty over the islands as part of the Spanish East Indies.
* Rongelap Atoll – Kenneth A. Kedi (IND)
These emergencies resulted in the United States President declaring an emergency in the islands.
Legislative power lies with the Nitijela.
Marshalls Energy Company (MEC), a government entity, provides the islands with electricity.
In 1862, the population was estimated at about 10,000.
In 1834, Captain DonSette and his crew were killed.
Life on the outer atolls is generally traditional.
These islands, which he named "Los Jardines", may have been Enewetak or Bikini Atoll.
Historical population figures are unknown.
About one-half of the nation's population lives on Majuro, the capital, and Ebeye, a densely populated island.
* Majuro Atoll – Phillip H. Muller (AKA), David Kramer (KEA), Brenson S. Wase (KEA), Anthony Muller (KEA), Jurelang Zedkaia (KEA)
In October 2011, the government declared that an area covering nearly  of ocean shall be reserved as a shark sanctuary.
One year later, the American schooner ''Dolphin'' arrived and picked up two boys, the last survivors of a massacre by the natives due to their brutal treatment of the women.
Operating costs exceeded revenue, and the plant's owners tried to partner with the government to prevent closure.
Following the 2013 emergencies, the Minister of Foreign Affairs Tony deBrum was encouraged by the Obama administration in the United States to turn the crises into an opportunity to promote action against climate change.
Later, Spain sold the islands to the German Empire in 1884, and they became part of German New Guinea in 1885.
Around 1820, Russian explorer Adam Johann von Krusenstern and the French explorer Louis Isidore Duperrey named the islands after John Marshall, and drew maps of the islands.
The '''Marshall Islands''', officially the '''Republic of the Marshall Islands''' (),* English: ''Republic of the Marshall Islands'' * Marshallese: '''' () is an island country located near the equator in the Pacific Ocean, slightly west of the International Date Line.
The majority of the citizens of the Marshall Islands are of Marshallese descent, though there are small numbers of immigrants from the United States, China, Philippines and other Pacific islands.
The Marshall Islands were in an important geographic position, being the easternmost point in Japan's defensive ring at the beginning of World War II.
* Lib Island – Jerakoj Jerry Bejang (AKA)
From 1956 to August 1998, at least $759 million was paid to the Marshallese Islanders in compensation for their exposure to U.S. nuclear weapon testing.
Over time, the Marshall Island people learned to navigate over long ocean distances by canoe using traditional stick charts.
The country uses the United States dollar as its currency.
This resulted in the failure of food crops and the spread of diseases such as diarrhea, pink eye, and influenza.
Micronesians settled the Marshall Islands in the 2nd millennium BC, but there are no historical or oral records of that period.
Also represented are Bukot Nan Jesus (also known as Assembly of God Part Two), 2.2%; Baptist, 1.0%; Seventh-day Adventists, 0.9%; Full Gospel, 0.7%; and the Baha'i Faith, 0.6%.
On September 21, 1529, Álvaro de Saavedra Cerón commanded the Spanish ship ''Florida'', on his second attempt to recross the Pacific from the Maluku Islands.
Persons without any religious affiliation account for a very small percentage of the population.
Catholic missionary Father A. Erdland, from the Missionaries of the Sacred Heart based in Hiltrup, Germany, lived on Jaluit from around 1904 to 1914.
Similarly, in 1845 the schooner ''Naiad'' punished a native for stealing with such violence that the natives attacked the ship.
The threat of drought is commonplace throughout the island chains.
But government officials personally interested in an economic stake in the plant refused to help.
It is estimated that 330&nbsp;kW of solar and 450&nbsp;kW of wind power would be required to make the College of the Marshall Islands energy self-sufficient.
The atolls and islands form two groups: the Ratak (sunrise) and the Ralik (sunset).
Despite the Marshalls' small area and few resources, the absorption of the territory by Japan would to some extent alleviate Japan's problem of an increasing population with a diminishing amount of available land to house it.
The Ministry of Education (Marshall Islands) operates the state schools in the Marshall Islands.
In 2009, a 57&nbsp;kW solar power plant was installed, the largest in the Pacific at the time, including New Zealand.
A large concentration of about 4,300 Marshall Islanders have relocated to Springdale, Arkansas, the largest population concentration of natives outside their island home.
* Aur Atoll – Hilda C. Heine (AKA)
* Wotho Atoll – David Kabua (AKA)
Father H. Linckens, another Missionary of the Sacred Heart visited the Marshall Islands in 1904 and 1911 for several weeks.
On December 17, 1920, the Council of the League of Nations approved the South Pacific Mandate for Japan to take over all former German colonies in the Pacific Ocean located north of the Equator.
In 1986, the Compact of Free Association with the United States entered into force, granting the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) its sovereignty.
It was reported in May 2015 that Tehran would release the ship after it paid a penalty.
On Christmas morning in 2008, the government declared a state of emergency.
The two island chains lie approximately parallel to one another, running northwest to southeast, comprising about  of ocean but only about  of land mass.
The United States Army maintains the Ronald Reagan Ballistic Missile Defense Test Site on Kwajalein Atoll.
This declaration activated support from US government agencies under the Republic's "free association" status with the United States, which provides humanitarian and other vital support.
* Mejit Island – Dennis Momotaro (AKA)
During its years of colonial rule, Japan moved more than 1,000 Japanese to the Marshall Islands although they never outnumbered the indigenous peoples as they did in the Mariana Islands and Palau.
The country's population of 53,158 people (at the 2011 Census) is spread out over 29 coral atolls, comprising 1,156 individual islands and islets.
* Ailuk Atoll – Maynard Alfred (UDP)
Nuclear claims between the U.S. and the Marshall Islands are ongoing, and health effects from these nuclear tests linger.
These islands, which he named "Los Pintados", may have been Ujelang.
With few natural resources, the islands' wealth is based on a service economy, as well as some fishing and agriculture; aid from the United States represents a large percentage of the islands' gross domestic product.
Following capture and occupation by the United States during World War II, the Marshall Islands, along with several other island groups located in Micronesia, passed formally to the United States under United Nations auspices in 1947 as part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 21.
Later that year a whaler's boat crew were killed.
Self-government was achieved in 1979, and full sovereignty in 1986, under a Compact of Free Association with the United States.
DeBrum proposed a Majuro Declaration for Climate Leadership to galvanize concrete action on climate change.
* Utirik Atoll – Hiroshi V. Yamamura (AKA)
In 1857, two missionaries successfully settled on Ebon, living among the natives through at least 1870.
Micronesian colonists gradually settled the Marshall Islands during the 2nd millennium BC, with inter-island navigation made possible using traditional stick charts.
A German trading company, the Jaluit Gesellschaft, administered the islands from 1887 until 1905.
The corporate tax is 3% of revenue.
The Spanish ship ''San Pedro'' and two other vessels in an expedition commanded by Miguel López de Legazpi discovered an island on January 9, 1530, possibly Mejit, at 10°N, which they named "Los Barbudos".
The twenty-four electoral districts into which the country is divided correspond to the inhabited islands and atolls.
In 2005, Aloha Airlines canceled its flight services to the Marshall Islands.
The Compact of Free Association allows them to freely relocate to the United States and obtain work there.
In 2008, 420 solar home systems of 200 Wp each were installed on Ailinglaplap Atoll, sufficient for limited electricity use.
This may impact business conditions in the islands.
Most of the residents are Marshallese, who are of Micronesian origin and migrated from Asia several thousand years ago.
The ship was reported to be under the control of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard according to the Pentagon.
In 2008, extreme waves and high tides caused widespread flooding in the capital city of Majuro and other urban centres,  above sea level.
Although the ancient skills are now in decline, the Marshallese were once able navigators, using the stars and stick-and-shell charts.
* Enewetak Atoll – Jack J. Ading (KEA)
Along with other Pacific Islands, the Marshall Islands were then consolidated into the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands governed by the US.
It renounced all of its Pacific possessions, including the Marshall Islands.
In 1960, the entire population was about 15,000.
"The bombs had a total yield of 108,496 kilotons, over 7,200 times more powerful than the atomic weapons used during World War II."
Each includes 15 to 18 islands and atolls.
Subsequently, seven other chiefs on seven other islands signed a treaty in German and Marshallese and a final copy witnessed by Rötger on November 1 was sent to the German Foreign Office.
The Marshall Islands also lays claim to Wake Island.
Project 4.1 was a medical study conducted by the United States of those residents of the Bikini Atoll exposed to radioactive fallout.
Marshall Islands has been a United Nations member state since 1991.
On October 1, he found another group of islands where he went ashore for eight days, exchanged gifts with the local inhabitants and took on water.
The executive branch consists of the President and the Presidential Cabinet, which consists of ten ministers appointed by the President with the approval of the Nitijela.
Captain John Charles Marshall and Thomas Gilbert visited the islands in 1788.
The islands have few natural resources, and their imports far exceed exports.
After the war, on June 28, 1919, Germany signed (under protest) the Treaty of Versailles.
Japan also tried to change the social organization in the islands from matrilineality to the Japanese patriarchal system, but with no success.
The uninhabited atolls are:
There are currently four political parties in the Marshall Islands: Aelon̄ Kein Ad (AKA), United People's Party (UPP), Kien Eo Am (KEA) and United Democratic Party (UDP).
The average altitude above sea level for the entire country is .
After that, ships including the ''San Jeronimo'', ''Los Reyes'' and ''Todos los Santos'' also visited the islands in different years.
He published a 376-page monograph on the islands in 1914.
On September 15, 2007, Witon Barry (of the Tobolar Copra processing plant in the Marshall Islands capital of Majuro) said power authorities, private companies, and entrepreneurs had been experimenting with coconut oil as alternative to diesel fuel for vehicles, power generators, and ships.
This policy was the government strategy not only in the Marshall Islands, but on all the other mandated territories in Micronesia.
Four of the five Marshallese presidents who have been elected since the Constitution was adopted in 1979 have been traditional paramount chiefs.
There are two tertiary institutions operating in the Marshall Islands, the College of the Marshall Islands and the University of the South Pacific.
A minority of Marshallese have some recent Asian ancestry, mainly Japanese.
This excludes many who have relocated elsewhere, primarily to the United States.
Islands in the archipelago were first explored by Europeans in the 1520s, with Spanish explorer Alonso de Salazar sighting an atoll in August 1526.
While Wake has been administered by the United States since 1899, the Marshallese government refers to it by the name ''Enen-kio''.
* Ailinglaplap Atoll – Christopher Loeak (AKA), Ruben R. Zackhras (UDP)
In World War I the Empire of Japan occupied the Marshall Islands, which in 1919 the League of Nations combined with other former German territories to form the South Pacific Mandate.
