Besides silicon and oxygen, the most abundant elements in the Martian crust are iron, magnesium, aluminum, calcium, and potassium.
The southern polar cap has a diameter of  and a thickness of .
Asteroid capture is a long-favored theory, but their origin remains uncertain.
The axial tilt of Mars is 25.19 degrees relative to its orbital plane, which is similar to the axial tilt of Earth.
Landforms visible on Mars strongly suggest that liquid water has existed on the planet's surface.
Mars is scarred by a number of impact craters: a total of 43,000 craters with a diameter of  or greater have been found.
Mars has the largest dust storms in the Solar System.
The depiction of Mars in fiction has been stimulated by its dramatic red color and by nineteenth century scientific speculations that its surface conditions might support not just life but intelligent life.
* '''Amazonian period''' (named after Amazonis Planitia): 2.9–3.3 billion years ago to present.
Mars is a terrestrial planet that consists of minerals containing silicon and oxygen, metals, and other elements that typically make up rock.
This proposal has been met with skepticism, and an exclusively inorganic origin for the shapes has been proposed.
Its apparent magnitude reaches −2.91, which is surpassed only by Jupiter, Venus, the Moon, and the Sun.
The highest atmospheric density on Mars is equal to that found  above Earth's surface.
ISRO launched MOM on November 5, 2013, with the aim of analyzing the Martian atmosphere and topography.
In a 1901 interview Tesla said:
Research in 2008 has presented evidence regarding a theory proposed in 1980 postulating that, four billion years ago, the northern hemisphere of Mars was struck by an object one-tenth to two-thirds the size of Earth's Moon.
As Mars approaches opposition, it begins a period of retrograde motion, which means it will appear to move backwards in a looping motion with respect to the background stars.
I wired these facts to Europe and sent out neostyle copies through this country.
It can look like butterscotch, and other common surface colors include golden, brown, tan, and greenish, depending on the minerals present.
Tests conducted by the Phoenix Mars lander have shown that the soil has a alkaline pH and it contains magnesium, sodium, potassium and chloride.
Elsewhere, particularly on the oldest areas of the Martian surface, finer-scale, dendritic networks of valleys are spread across significant proportions of the landscape.
The existence of Mars as a wandering object in the night sky was recorded by the ancient Egyptian astronomers and by 1534 BCE they were familiar with the retrograde motion of the planet.
The summer temperatures in the south can be up to  warmer than the equivalent summer temperatures in the north.
By the 19th century, the resolution of telescopes reached a level sufficient for surface features to be identified.
Today, features on Mars are named from a variety of sources.
Much of the surface is deeply covered by finely grained iron(III) oxide dust.
The duration of this retrograde motion lasts for about 72 days, and Mars reaches its peak luminosity in the middle of this motion.
The Phoenix lander directly sampled water ice in shallow Martian soil on July 31, 2008.
Even more notable are the perihelic oppositions of Mars, which occur every 15 or 17 years and are distinguished because Mars is close to perihelion, making it even closer to Earth.
Literature from ancient China confirms that Mars was known by Chinese astronomers by no later than the fourth century BCE.
It may take on a pink hue due to iron oxide particles suspended in it.
Martian surface temperatures vary from lows of about  at the winter polar caps to highs of up to  in equatorial summer.
Mars lost its magnetosphere 4 billion years ago, possibly because of numerous asteroid strikes, so the solar wind interacts directly with the Martian ionosphere, lowering the atmospheric density by stripping away atoms from the outer layer.
Subsurface water flow and groundwater sapping may play important subsidiary roles in some networks, but precipitation was probably the root cause of the incision in almost all cases.
Mars's average distance from the Sun is roughly , and its orbital period is 687 (Earth) days.
Small quantities of methane and formaldehyde detected by Mars orbiters are both claimed to be possible evidence for life, as these chemical compounds would quickly break down in the Martian atmosphere.
It is either the tallest or second-tallest mountain in the Solar System, depending on how it is measured, with various sources giving figures ranging from about  high.
Cave entrances measure from  wide and they are estimated to be at least  deep.
The Viking probes of the mid-1970s carried experiments designed to detect microorganisms in Martian soil at their respective landing sites and had positive results, including a temporary increase of CO2 production on exposure to water and nutrients.
The volume of water ice in the south polar ice cap, if melted, would be sufficient to cover the entire planetary surface to a depth of .
They invented arithmetic methods for making minor corrections to the predicted positions of the planets.
Its presence despite this short lifetime indicates that an active source of the gas must be present.
Compared to Earth, the atmosphere of Mars is quite rarefied.
Other geological features, such as deltas and alluvial fans preserved in craters, are further evidence for warmer, wetter conditions at an interval or intervals in earlier Mars history.
Named after the Roman god of war, it is often referred to as the "Red Planet" because the iron oxide prevalent on its surface gives it a reddish appearance.
Optical ground-based telescopes are typically limited to resolving features about  across when Earth and Mars are closest because of Earth's atmosphere.
Images from the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS) aboard NASA's Mars Odyssey orbiter have revealed seven possible cave entrances on the flanks of the volcano Arsia Mons.
Detailed scenarios for the metabolism and chemical cycles for a functional ecosystem have been published.
Mars is a terrestrial planet with a thin atmosphere, having surface features reminiscent both of the impact craters of the Moon and the valleys, deserts, and polar ice caps of Earth.
This leads to geyser-like eruptions of CO2 gas mixed with dark basaltic sand or dust.
On September 28, 2015, NASA announced the presence of briny flowing salt water on the Martian surface.
This paleomagnetism of magnetically susceptible minerals has properties that are similar to the alternating bands found on the ocean floors of Earth.
Streaks are common across Mars and new ones appear frequently on steep slopes of craters, troughs, and valleys.
Because the orbit of Phobos is below synchronous altitude, the tidal forces from the planet Mars are gradually lowering its orbit.
Despite the 30-hour orbit of Deimos, 2.7 days elapse between its rise and set for an equatorial observer, as it slowly falls behind the rotation of Mars.
Pseudo-scientific speculations about the Face on Mars and other enigmatic landmarks spotted by space probes have meant that ancient civilizations continue to be a popular theme in science fiction, especially in film.
In the East Asian cultures, Mars is traditionally referred to as the "fire star" (), based on the Five elements.
The core is surrounded by a silicate mantle that formed many of the tectonic and volcanic features on the planet, but it appears to be dormant.
The resulting mean surface pressure is only 0.6% of that of Earth (101.3 kPa).
The surface of Mars is primarily composed of tholeiitic basalt, although parts are more silica-rich than typical basalt and may be similar to andesitic rocks on Earth or silica glass.
* '''Noachian period''' (named after Noachis Terra): Formation of the oldest extant surfaces of Mars, 4.5 billion years ago to 3.5 billion years ago.
When farthest away from Earth, it is more than seven times farther away than when it is closest.
Craters smaller than 60&nbsp;km are named for towns and villages of the world with populations of less than 100,000.
In the fourth century BCE, Aristotle noted that Mars disappeared behind the Moon during an occultation, indicating the planet was farther away.
Clouds of water-ice were photographed by the ''Opportunity'' rover in 2004.
It is known that in the past, Mars has had a much more circular orbit.
Experiments performed by the lander showed that the Martian soil has a basic pH of 7.7, and contains 0.6% of the salt perchlorate.
Accretion early in the history of Mars is plausible, but would not account for a composition resembling asteroids rather than Mars itself, if that is confirmed.
The ''Phoenix'' lander directly sampled water ice in shallow Martian soil on July 31, 2008.
The scale height of the atmosphere is about , which is higher than Earth's, , because the surface gravity of Mars is only about 38% of Earth's, an effect offset by both the lower temperature and 50% higher average molecular weight of the atmosphere of Mars.
Albedo features are named for classical mythology.
* '''Hesperian period''' (named after Hesperia Planum): 3.5 billion years ago to 2.9–3.3 billion years ago.
Mars is less dense than Earth, having about 15% of Earth's volume and 11% of Earth's mass, resulting in about 38% of Earth's surface gravity.
The length of Valles Marineris is equivalent to the length of Europe and extends across one-fifth the circumference of Mars.
Ptolemy's model and his collective work on astronomy was presented in the multi-volume collection ''Almagest'', which became the authoritative treatise on Western astronomy for the next fourteen centuries.
In late December 2014, NASA's MAVEN spacecraft detected evidence of widespread auroras in Mars's northern hemisphere and descended to approximately 20–30 degrees North latitude of Mars's equator.
A number of authors have suggested that their formation process involves liquid water, probably from melting ice, although others have argued for formation mechanisms involving carbon dioxide frost or the movement of dry dust.
The surface of Mars as seen from Earth is divided into two kinds of areas, with differing albedo.
Phobos rises in the west, sets in the east, and rises again in just 11 hours.
This record approach was only slightly closer than other recent close approaches.
The lack of a magnetosphere and the extremely thin atmosphere of Mars are a challenge: the planet has little heat transfer across its surface, poor insulation against bombardment of the solar wind and insufficient atmospheric pressure to retain water in a liquid form (water instead sublimes to a gaseous state).
Mars made its closest approach to Earth and maximum apparent brightness in nearly 60,000 years, , magnitude −2.88, on August 27, 2003 at 9:51:13 UT.
In March 2015, scientists stated that such an ocean might have been the size of Earth's Arctic Ocean.
The commonly accepted theories include that they are dark underlying layers of soil revealed after avalanches of bright dust or dust devils.
The gas rushing underneath a slab to the site of a geyser carves a spiderweb-like pattern of radial channels under the ice, the process being the inverted equivalent of an erosion network formed by water draining through a single plughole.
The ''canali'' were independently found by other astronomers, like Henri Joseph Perrotin and Louis Thollon in Nice, using one of the largest telescopes of that time.
The average thickness of the planet's crust is about , with a maximum thickness of .
The next aphelion came in February 2012 and the next perihelion came in January 2013.
Zero altitude was defined by the height at which there is  of atmospheric pressure.
These seasonal actions transport large amounts of dust and water vapor, giving rise to Earth-like frost and large cirrus clouds.
The ''Curiosity'' rover, which landed on Mars in August 2012, is able to make measurements that distinguish between different isotopologues of methane, but even if the mission is to determine that microscopic Martian life is the source of the methane, the life forms likely reside far below the surface, outside of the rover's reach.
It was given as from a well-known geographical point on Mars.
Noachian age surfaces are scarred by many large impact craters.
Methane has been detected in the Martian atmosphere with a concentration of about 30&nbsp;ppb; it occurs in extended plumes, and the profiles imply that the methane was released from discrete regions.
Mars is named after the Roman god of war.
The streaks can start in a tiny area which then spread out for hundreds of metres.
The observatory was used for the exploration of Mars during the last good opportunity in 1894 and the following less favorable oppositions.
These are thought to record erosion which occurred during the catastrophic release of water from subsurface aquifers, though some of these structures have been hypothesized to result from the action of glaciers or lava.
The only occultation of Mars by Venus observed was that of October 13, 1590, seen by Michael Maestlin at Heidelberg.
Regions of low albedo show concentrations of plagioclase feldspar, with northern low albedo regions displaying higher than normal concentrations of sheet silicates and high-silicon glass.
Methane could be produced by a non-biological process called ''serpentinization'' involving water, carbon dioxide, and the mineral olivine, which is known to be common on Mars.
Volcanic activity, cometary impacts, and the presence of methanogenic microbial life forms are among possible sources.
Craters larger than 60&nbsp;km are named for deceased scientists and writers and others who have contributed to the study of Mars.
Mars is near perihelion when it is summer in the southern hemisphere and winter in the north, and near aphelion when it is winter in the southern hemisphere and summer in the north.
By comparison, the Grand Canyon on Earth is only  long and nearly  deep.
This includes ''2001 Mars Odyssey'', ''Mars Express'', ''Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter'' (MRO), MAVEN, Mars Orbiter Mission, ''Opportunity'', and ''Curiosity''.
Earth's crust, averaging , is only one third as thick as Mars', in ratio to the sizes of the two planets.
Olympus Mons formed during this period, along with lava flows elsewhere on Mars.
But both have circular orbits, near the equator, which is unusual for captured objects and the required capture dynamics are complex.
Mars is host to seven functioning spacecraft: five in orbit—''2001 Mars Odyssey'', ''Mars Express'', ''Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter'', MAVEN and Mars Orbiter Mission—and two on the surface—Mars Exploration Rover ''Opportunity'' and the Mars Science Laboratory ''Curiosity''.
The youngest of these channels are thought to have formed as recently as only a few million years ago.
Recent evidence has suggested that any water on the Martian surface may have been too salty and acidic to support regular terrestrial life.
Ptolemy, a Greek living in Alexandria, attempted to address the problem of the orbital motion of Mars.
Many other observations and proclamations by notable personalities added to what has been termed "Mars Fever".
They began by establishing that most of Mars's surface features were permanent and by more precisely determining the planet's rotation period.
Mars is approximately half the diameter of Earth, and its surface area is only slightly less than the total area of Earth's dry land.
The mission is the first successful Asian interplanetary mission.
Huge linear swathes of scoured ground, known as outflow channels, cut across the surface in around 25 places.
There is evidence of an enormous impact basin in the northern hemisphere of Mars, spanning , or roughly four times larger than the Moon's South Pole – Aitken basin, the largest impact basin yet discovered.
The history of observations of Mars is marked by the oppositions of Mars, when the planet is closest to Earth and hence is most easily visible, which occur every couple of years.
When the telescope became available, the diurnal parallax of Mars was again measured in an effort to determine the Sun-Earth distance.
More recent evidence for liquid water comes from the finding of the mineral gypsum on the surface by NASA's Mars rover Opportunity in December 2011.
Because light does not reach the floor of most of the caves, it is possible that they extend much deeper than these lower estimates and widen below the surface.
The telescope never reached the resolution required to give proof to any speculations.
This permanent dry ice cover at the south pole is peppered by flat floored, shallow, roughly circular pits, which repeat imaging shows are expanding by meters per year; this suggests that the permanent CO2 cover over the south pole water ice is degrading over time.
As Mars approaches opposition it begins a period of retrograde motion, which makes it appear to move backwards in a looping motion relative to the background stars.
The soil nutrients may be able to support life, but life would still have to be shielded from the intense ultraviolet light.
The Hesperian period is marked by the formation of extensive lava plains.
Other scientists caution that this new study has not been confirmed, and point out that Martian climate models have not yet shown that the planet was warm enough in the past to support bodies of liquid water.
They tend to occur when Mars is closest to the Sun, and have been shown to increase the global temperature.
During perihelion, Mars dips inside this region, but Mars's thin (low-pressure) atmosphere prevents liquid water from existing over large regions for extended periods.
Especially noticeable, even at low magnification, are the polar ice caps.
This forms only in the presence of acidic water, which demonstrates that water once existed on Mars.
The shield volcano Olympus Mons (''Mount Olympus'') is an extinct volcano in the vast upland region Tharsis, which contains several other large volcanoes.
It was some time afterward when the thought flashed upon my mind that the disturbances I had observed might be due to an intelligent control.
'''Mars''' is the fourth planet from the Sun and the second-smallest planet in the Solar System, after Mercury.
The ''Phoenix'' lander returned data showing Martian soil to be slightly alkaline and containing elements such as magnesium, sodium, potassium and chlorine.
These observations provided confirmation of earlier hypotheses based on timing of formation and rate of growth that these dark streaks resulted from water flowing in the very shallow subsurface.
Presently, information is being relayed from seven active probes on or in-orbit around Mars, including five orbiters and two rovers.
The next Mars opposition occurs on July 27, 2018 at a distance of about 58&nbsp;million&nbsp;km.
The seasonal changes (consisting of the diminishing of the polar caps and the dark areas formed during Martian summer) in combination with the canals lead to speculation about life on Mars, and it was a long-held belief that Mars contained vast seas and vegetation.
Even in the 1960s articles were published on Martian biology, putting aside explanations other than life for the seasonal changes on Mars.
Planetary astronomer Carl Sagan wrote:
In 2004, ''Opportunity'' detected the mineral jarosite.
The two polar ice caps appear to be made largely of water.
There are transits of Mercury and transits of Venus, and the moons Phobos and Deimos are of sufficiently small angular diameter that their partial "eclipses" of the Sun are best considered transits (see Transit of Deimos from Mars).
The Mars Orbiter Mission used a Hohmann transfer orbit to escape Earth's gravitational influence and catapult into a nine-month-long voyage to Mars.
Early in December 1900, we received from Lowell Observatory in Arizona a telegram that a shaft of light had been seen to project from Mars (the Lowell observatory makes a specialty of Mars) lasting seventy minutes.
The average time between the successive oppositions of Mars, its synodic period, is 780 days but the number of days between the dates of successive oppositions can range from 764 to 812.
A transit of Earth as seen from Mars will occur on November 10, 2084.
These nutrients are found in gardens on Earth, and they are necessary for growth of plants.
Observations by the ''Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter'' have revealed possible flowing water during the warmest months on Mars.
Mariner 9 and Viking allowed better maps of Mars to be made using the data from these missions, and another major leap forward was the Mars Global Surveyor mission, launched in 1996 and operated until late 2006, that allowed complete, extremely detailed maps of the Martian topography, magnetic field and surface minerals to be obtained.
Results from the ''Curiosity'' rover had previously found a high ratio of deuterium in Gale Crater, though not significantly high enough to suggest the presence of an ocean.
A 2014 analysis of the Phoenix WCL showed that the Ca(ClO4)2 in the Phoenix soil has not interacted with liquid water of any form, perhaps for as long as 600 Myr.
In practice, today this surface is defined directly from satellite gravity measurements.
In 2012, it was proposed that Valles Marineris is not just a graben, but a plate boundary where  of transverse motion has occurred, making Mars a planet with possibly a two-tectonic plate arrangement.
If validated, this would make the northern hemisphere of Mars the site of an impact crater  in size, or roughly the area of Europe, Asia, and Australia combined, surpassing the South Pole–Aitken basin as the largest impact crater in the Solar System.
His term, which means "channels" or "grooves", was popularly mistranslated in English as "canals".
These can vary from a storm over a small area, to gigantic storms that cover the entire planet.
Along crater and canyon walls, there are thousands of features that appear similar to terrestrial gullies.
It is larger and more advanced than the Mars Exploration Rovers, with a movement rate up to  per hour.
Further evidence that liquid water once existed on the surface of Mars comes from the detection of specific minerals such as hematite and goethite, both of which sometimes form in the presence of water.
Elements with comparatively low boiling points, such as chlorine, phosphorus, and sulphur, are much more common on Mars than Earth; these elements were probably removed from areas closer to the Sun by the young star's energetic solar wind.
This pressure corresponds to the triple point of water, and it is about 0.6% of the sea level surface pressure on Earth (0.006 atm).
The largest confirmed of these is the Hellas impact basin, a light albedo feature clearly visible from Earth.
In the present day epoch, the orientation of the north pole of Mars is close to the star Deneb.
On February 10, 2013, the ''Curiosity'' rover obtained the first deep rock samples ever taken from another planetary body, using its on-board drill.
In recent decades, the high-resolution mapping of the surface of Mars, culminating in Mars Global Surveyor, revealed no artifacts of habitation by "intelligent" life, but pseudoscientific speculation about intelligent life on Mars continues from commentators such as Richard C. Hoagland.
One theory, published in 1999 and re-examined in October 2005 (with the help of the ''Mars Global Surveyor''), is that these bands demonstrate plate tectonics on Mars four billion years ago, before the planetary dynamo ceased to function and the planet's magnetic field faded away.
Tesla's theories gained support from Lord Kelvin who, while visiting the United States in 1902, was reported to have said that he thought Tesla had picked up Martian signals being sent to the United States.
Influential works included Ray Bradbury's ''The Martian Chronicles'', in which human explorers accidentally destroy a Martian civilization, Edgar Rice Burroughs' ''Barsoom'' series, C. S. Lewis' novel ''Out of the Silent Planet'' (1938), and a number of Robert A. Heinlein stories before the mid-sixties.
The streaks flow downhill in Martian summer, when the temperature is above –23 degrees Celsius, and freeze at lower temperatures.
On September 28, 2015, NASA announced that they had found conclusive evidence of hydrated brine flows on recurring slope lineae, based on spectrometer readings of the darkened areas of slopes.
Mars passed an aphelion in March 2010 and its perihelion in March 2011.
There are ongoing investigations assessing the past habitability potential of Mars, as well as the possibility of extant life.
In that year, Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli used a  telescope in Milan to help produce the first detailed map of Mars.
Radar data from ''Mars Express'' and the ''Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter'' show large quantities of water ice both at the poles (July 2005) and at middle latitudes (November 2008).
This finding was derived from the ratio of water and deuterium in the modern Martian atmosphere compared to the ratio found on Earth.
The last time it came so close is estimated to have been on September 12, 57 617 BC, the next time being in 2287.
The streaks are dark at first and get lighter with age.
Martian craters can have a morphology that suggests the ground became wet after the meteor impacted.
Several plans for a human mission to Mars have been proposed throughout the 20th century and into the 21st century, but no active plan has an arrival date sooner than 2025.
Researchers think that much of the low northern plains of the planet were covered with an ocean hundreds of meters deep, though this remains controversial.
The study leader Francis McCubbin, a planetary scientist at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque looking at hydroxals in crystalline minerals from Mars, states that the amount of water in the upper mantle of Mars is equal to or greater than that of Earth at 50–300 parts per million of water, which is enough to cover the entire planet to a depth of .
By the period of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, the Babylonian astronomers were making regular records of the positions of the planets and systematic observations of their behavior.
Due to the smaller mass of Mars, the probability of an object colliding with the planet is about half that of Earth.
Magnetic fields in the solar wind drape over Mars, into the atmosphere, and the charged particles follow the solar wind magnetic field lines into the atmosphere, causing auroras to occur outside the magnetic umbrellas.
One of the larger examples, Ma'adim Vallis is  long and much bigger than the Grand Canyon with a width of  and a depth of  in places.
He published several books on Mars and life on the planet, which had a great influence on the public.
The first person to draw a map of Mars that displayed any terrain features was the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens.
The current understanding of planetary habitability—the ability of a world to develop environmental conditions favorable to the emergence of life—favors planets that have liquid water on their surface.
Mars's cycle of eccentricity is 96,000 Earth years compared to Earth's cycle of 100,000 years.
For Mars, they knew that the planet made 37 synodic periods, or 42 circuits of the zodiac, every 79 years.
From the surface of Mars, the motions of Phobos and Deimos appear different from that of the Moon.
Amazonian regions have few meteorite impact craters, but are otherwise quite varied.
Mars is more likely to be struck by short-period comets, ''i.e.
The smooth Borealis basin in the northern hemisphere covers 40% of the planet and may be a giant impact feature.
Large albedo features retain many of the older names, but are often updated to reflect new knowledge of the nature of the features.
The first measurements with the Tunable Laser Spectrometer (TLS) indicated that there is less than 5 ppb of methane at the landing site at the point of the measurement.
