His father was a Methodist and had a real estate business in Edmonton.
McLuhan's 1942 Cambridge University doctoral dissertation surveys the history of the verbal arts (grammar, logic, and rhetoric—collectively known as the trivium) from the time of Cicero down to the time of Thomas Nashe.
The term is sometimes described as having negative connotations in ''The Gutenberg Galaxy'', but McLuhan himself was interested in exploring effects, not making value judgments:
He was awarded a Ph.D. in December 1943.
''Newsweek'' magazine did a cover story on him; articles appeared in ''Life Magazine'', ''Harper's'', ''Fortune'', ''Esquire'', and others.
Cool media, on the other hand, are usually, but not always, those that provide little involvement with substantial stimulus.
* Enhancement (figure): What the medium amplifies or intensifies.
McLuhan's ''The Gutenberg Galaxy'' won Canada's highest literary award, the Governor-General's Award for Non-Fiction, in 1962.
Despite his death in 1980, someone claiming to be McLuhan was posting on a ''Wired'' mailing list in 1996.
The two diamonds on the right of a tetrad are the ''Obsolescence'' and ''Reversal'' qualities, both ''Ground'' qualities.
A movie is thus said by McLuhan to be "hot", intensifying one single sense "high definition", demanding a viewer's attention, and a comic book to be "cool" and "low definition", requiring much more conscious participation by the reader to extract value.
", published in ''New York Magazine'' and Wolfe's own ''The Pump House Gang''.
However, McLuhan's hot and cool exist on a continuum: they are more correctly measured on a scale than as dichotomous terms.
See Bibliography of Marshall McLuhan for a more comprehensive list of works by and about McLuhan.
The dominant technologies of one age become the games and pastimes of a later age.
The University of Toronto's School of Graduate Studies tried to close his research centre shortly thereafter, but was deterred by substantial protests, most notably by Woody Allen.
During this time McLuhan supervised the doctoral thesis of modernist writer Sheila Watson, on the subject of Wyndham Lewis.
He entered Trinity Hall, Cambridge in the autumn of 1934, where he studied under I.
"Comprehensive awareness" results when the two sides of the brain are in true balance.
Extreme development of print process and individualism.
Hot media usually, but not always, provide complete involvement without considerable stimulus.
Some media, like the movies, were "hot"—that is, they enhance one single sense, in this case vision, in such a manner that a person does not need to exert much effort in filling in the details of a movie image.
All technologies have embedded within them their own assumptions about time and space.
"But", someone says, "we didn't know it would happen."
During his lifetime and afterward, McLuhan heavily influenced cultural critics, thinkers, and media theorists such as Neil Postman, Jean Baudrillard, Timothy Leary, Terence McKenna, William Irwin Thompson, Paul Levinson, Douglas Rushkoff, Jaron Lanier, Hugh Kenner, and John David Ebert, as well as political leaders such as Pierre Elliott Trudeau  and Jerry Brown.
This followed naturally from his earlier work as both dialectic and rhetoric in the classical trivium aimed at persuasion.
Wedding of sight and sound.
The laws of the tetrad exist simultaneously, not successively or chronologically, and allow the questioner to explore the "grammar and syntax" of the "language" of media.
There are no boundaries to sound.
McLuhan argued that we must study media in their historical context, particularly in relation to the technologies that preceded them.
In September 1979, he suffered a stroke, which affected his ability to speak.
He published his first major work during this period: ''The Mechanical Bride'' (1951).
If there can be no universal moral sentence passed on technology, McLuhan believes that "there can only be disaster arising from unawareness of the causalities and effects inherent in our technologies".
(Williams 1990, 126/7)
We hear from all directions at once.
The tetrad is a means of examining the effects on society of any technology (i.e., any medium) by dividing its effects into four categories and displaying them simultaneously.
At the end of March 1937, McLuhan completed what was a slow, but total conversion process, when he was formally received into the Roman Catholic Church.
Both centralizing and decentralizing at once create cities in crisis.
* Obsolescence (ground): What the medium drives out of prominence.
The Western way of thinking about technology is too much related to the left hemisphere of our brain, which has a rational and linear focus.
McLuhan was devout throughout his life, but his religion remained a private matter.
The resonant interval is the invisible borderline between Visual and Acoustic Space.
At this point his focus shifted dramatically, turning inward to study the influence of communication media independent of their content.
:"Drop this jiggery-pokery and talk straight turkey.
While studying the trivium at Cambridge he took the first steps toward his eventual conversion to Roman Catholicism in 1937, founded on his reading of G. K. Chesterton.
Quoting with approval an observation on the nature of the printed word from ''Prints and Visual Communication'' by William Ivins, McLuhan remarks:
The analyses bear on aesthetic considerations as well as on the implications behind the imagery and text.
*''Thunder 8: Movies.''
An audio recording version of McLuhan's famous work was made by Columbia Records.
He was educated at the University of Manitoba and Cambridge University and  began his teaching career as a Professor of English at several universities in the U.S. and Canada, before moving to the University of Toronto where he would remain for the rest of his life.
Allen's Oscar-winning motion picture ''Annie Hall'' (1977) had McLuhan in a cameo as himself: a pompous academic arguing with Allen in a cinema queue is silenced by McLuhan suddenly appearing and saying, "You know nothing of my work."
In 1969, ''Playboy'' magazine published a lengthy interview with him.
The message which the medium conveys can only be understood if the medium and the environment in which the medium is used—and which, simultaneously, it effectively creates—are analysed together.
From 2008 through 2015 Professor Dominique Scheffel-Dunand of York University served Director of the Program.
Paul Levinson's 1999 book ''Digital McLuhan'' explores the ways that McLuhan's work can be better understood through the lens of the digital revolution.
* Retrieval (figure): What the medium recovers which was previously lost.
Robots-androids will have much greater flexibility than humans have had until now, in both mind and body.
Enclosure of private parts.
In his 1989 posthumous book, ''The Global Village'', McLuhan, collaborating with Bruce R. Powers, provided a strong conceptual framework for understanding the cultural implications of the technological advances associated with the rise of a worldwide electronic network.
A light bulb does not have content in the way that a newspaper has articles or a television has programs, yet it is a medium that has a social effect; that is, a light bulb enables people to create spaces during nighttime that would otherwise be enveloped by darkness.
In order to glean the most understanding out of each, the reader must break the portmanteau into separate words (and many of these are themselves portmanteaus of words taken from multiple languages other than English) and speak them aloud for the spoken effect of each word.
McLuhan describes the term "cool media" as emerging from jazz and popular music and, in this context, is used to mean "detached."
McLuhan writes about robotism in the context of Japanese Zen Buddhism and how it can offer us new ways of thinking about technology.
When all the cultures of the world are simultaneously present, the work of the artist in the elucidation of form takes on new scope and new urgency.
It is comparable to what happens when a new note is added to a melody.
McLuhan is known for coining the expressions "the medium is the message" and the ''global village'', and for predicting the World Wide Web almost thirty years before it was invented.
Then he started going, 'Tune in, turn on, and drop out.'"
He never fully recovered from the stroke and died in his sleep on December 31, 1980.
This is like the television camera that the Apollo 8 astronauts focused on the Earth after they had orbited the moon.
With the arrival of the internet, however, interest in his work and perspective has renewed.
* Reversal (ground): What the medium does when pushed to its limits.
Tom Wolfe suggests that a major under-acknowledged influence on McLuhan's work is the Catholic philosopher Teilhard de Chardin whose ideas anticipated those of McLuhan, especially the evolution of the human mind into the "noosphere".
McLuhan claims that the ten thunders in ''Wake'' represent different stages in the history of man:
The chairman of the selection committee was McLuhan's colleague at the University of Toronto and oftentime intellectual sparring partner, Northrop Frye.
The technology and social effects of typography incline us to abstain from noting interplay and, as it were, "formal" causality, both in our inner and external lives.
Both of his parents were born in Canada.
Instead of tending towards a vast Alexandrian library the world has become a computer, an electronic brain, exactly as in an infantile piece of science fiction."
It will be a useful prelude to the rewrite of ''Understanding Media'' the 1960 NAEB report that I'm doing now."
After consulting a minister, his father accepted the decision to convert.
It is a problem, but not a moral problem; and it would be nice to clear away some of the moral fogs that surround our technologies.
I wish somebody else had written it.
Another theme of the Wake ''Finnegans Wake'' that helps in the understanding of the paradoxical shift from cliché to archetype is 'past time are pastimes.'
... Terror is the normal state of any oral society, for in it everything affects everything all the time.
The "languages of the heart", or what McLuhan would otherwise define as oral culture, were thus made archetype by means of the printing press, and turned into cliché.
According to McLuhan, the invention of movable type greatly accelerated, intensified, and ultimately enabled cultural and cognitive changes that had already been taking place since the invention and implementation of the alphabet, by which McLuhan means phonemic orthography.
For this reason, he obtained permission to complete and submit his dissertation from the United States, without having to return to Cambridge for an oral defence.
While at Fordham, McLuhan was diagnosed with a benign brain tumor; it was treated successfully.
While in St. Louis, he also met his future wife.
After a year of service he contracted influenza and remained in Canada, away from the front.
In 1935 he wrote to his mother: "Had I not encountered Chesterton, I would have remained agnostic for many years at least".
Philip Marchand reports that, as a direct consequence of these meetings, McLuhan was offered the use of an office in the headquarters of both ''Time'' and ''Newsweek'', any time he needed it.
From herding to harnessing animals.
Robotism-androidism emerges from the further development of the right hemisphere of the brain, creativity and a new relationship to spacetime (most humans are still living in 17th century classical Newtonian physics spacetime).
*What does the medium flip into when pushed to extremes?
The tetrad is something like threads in a complexly interwoven flowing superspace, a four-fold pattern of transformation.
And this flexibility of androids (what McLuhan calls robotism) has a strong affinity with Japanese culture and life.
Each "thunder" below is a 100-character portmanteau of other words to create a statement he likens to an effect that each technology has on the society into which it is introduced.
Perhaps more significant, however, was Tom Wolfe's presence at the festival, which he would later write about in his article, "What If He Is Right?
And when the sense ratios alter in any culture then what had appeared lucid before may suddenly become opaque, and what had been vague or opaque will become translucent.
"The technique of invention was the discovery of the nineteenth century", brought on by the adoption of fixed points of view and perspective by typography, while "the technique of the suspended judgment is the discovery of the twentieth century", brought on by the bard abilities of radio, movies and television.
Leary said McLuhan "was very much interested in ideas and marketing, and he started singing something like, 'Psychedelics hit the spot / Five hundred micrograms, that’s a lot,' to the tune of a Pepsi commercial.
The left brain is the locus of analysis, classification, and rationality.
Various audio recording techniques and statements are used to illustrate the relationship between spoken, literary speech and the characteristics of electronic audio media.
A third term of ''The Global Village'' that McLuhan and Powers develop at length is The Tetrad.
In 1970, McLuhan was made a Companion of the Order of Canada.
The lyric is:  "Marshall McLuhan, casual viewin' head buried in the sand."
He received the required bachelor's degree from Cambridge in 1936  and entered their graduate program.
(1912–2003), who would go on to write his Ph.D. dissertation on a topic McLuhan had called to his attention, and who also would later become a well-known authority on communication and technology.
In our long striving to recover for the Western world a unity of sensibility and of thought and feeling we have no more been prepared to accept the tribal consequences of such unity than we were ready for the fragmentation of the human psyche by print culture.
... Print is the extreme phase of alphabet culture that detribalizes or decollectivizes man in the first instance.
Cartoons about him appeared in ''The New Yorker''.
For instance, McLuhan contrasts the considerable alarm and revulsion that the growing quantity of books aroused in the latter seventeenth century with the modern concern for the "end of the book".
Patterns of nature submitted to greed and power.
Centralism via wheel, transport, cities: civil life.
When faced with a totally new situation we tend always to attach ourselves to the objects, to the flavor of the most recent past.
The main concept of McLuhan's argument (later elaborated upon in ''The Medium is the Massage'') is that new technologies (like alphabets, printing presses, and even speech itself) exert a gravitational effect on cognition, which in turn affects social organization: print technology changes our perceptual habits ("visual homogenizing of experience"), which in turn affects social interactions ("fosters a mentality that gradually resists all but a... specialist outlook").
Key to McLuhan's argument is the idea that technology has no ''per se'' moral bent—it is a tool that profoundly shapes an individual's and, by extension, a society's self-conception and realization:
Moving to Toronto in 1946, McLuhan joined the faculty of St. Michael's College, a Catholic college of the University of Toronto.
*What does the medium make obsolete?
''Radio reduces the importance of print and the visual.''
In this new age, humankind will move from individualism and fragmentation to a collective identity, with a "tribal base."
His mother, however, felt that his conversion would hurt his career and was inconsolable.
In the years after his death, he continued to be a controversial figure in academic circles.
If men decided to modify this visual technology by an electric technology, individualism would also be modified.
The moral valence of technology's effects on cognition is, for McLuhan, a matter of perspective.
So, unless aware of this dynamic, we shall at once move into a phase of panic terrors, exactly befitting a small world of tribal drums, total interdependence, and superimposed co-existence.
The last thunder is a turbulent, muddy wake, and murk of non-visual, tactile man.
A. Richards and F. R. Leavis, and was influenced by New Criticism.
McLuhan also started the journal ''Explorations'' with anthropologist Edmund "Ted" Carpenter.
The present environment, itself made up of the effects of previous technologies, gives rise to new technologies, which, in their turn, further affect society and individuals.
McLuhan believed that in order to grasp fully the effect of a new technology, one must examine figure (medium) and ground (context) together, since neither is completely intelligible without the other.
McLuhan biographer Philip Marchand called the recording "the 1967 equivalent of a McLuhan video."
Ong wrote a highly favorable review of this new book in ''America''.
"Any hot medium allows of less participation than a cool one, as a lecture makes for less participation than a seminar, and a book for less than a dialogue."
While some critics have taken issue with McLuhan’s writing style and mode of argument, McLuhan himself urged readers to think of his work as "probes" or "mosaics" offering a toolkit approach to thinking about the media.
*''Thunder 10: Television.''
Yet in Japanese life the contradictions, as they seem to us, are as deeply based in their view of life as our uniformities are in ours.” The ability to live in the present and instantly readjust.
And as our senses have gone outside us, Big Brother goes inside.
Joyce's ''Wake'' is claimed to be a gigantic cryptogram which reveals a cyclic pattern for the whole history of man through its '''Ten Thunders'''.
It would be good for morality.
*''Thunder 3: Specialism.''
All previous environments (book, newspaper, radio, etc.)
Is it not obvious that there are always enough moral problems without also taking a moral stand on technological grounds?
In the early 1950s, McLuhan began the Communication and Culture seminars, funded by the Ford Foundation, at the University of Toronto.
Finally, McLuhan described key points of change in how man has viewed the world and how these views were changed by the adoption of new media.
The information this individual provided convinced one writer for ''Wired'' that "if the poster was not McLuhan himself, it was a bot programmed with an eerie command of McLuhan's life and inimitable perspective."
There he taught courses on William Shakespeare, and tutored and befriended Walter J. Ong, S.J.
McLuhan references de Chardin early on in ''The Mechanical Bride'' (p. 32): "This externalization of our senses creates what de Chardin calls the 'noosphere' or a technological brain for the world.
McLuhan relates the cliché-to-archetype process to the Theater of the Absurd:
*''Thunder 9: Car and Plane.''
In ''The Mechanical Bride'', McLuhan turned his attention to analysing and commenting on numerous examples of persuasion in contemporary popular culture.
In a letter to Walter Ong dated May 31, 1953, McLuhan reported that he had received a two-year grant of $43,000 from the Ford Foundation to carry out a communication project at the University of Toronto involving faculty from different disciplines, which led to the creation of the journal.
McLuhan's coinage for this new social organization is the ''global village''.
During this "festival", McLuhan met with advertising executives, members of the mayor's office, and editors from the San Francisco Chronicle and Ramparts magazine.
McLuhan himself said of the book, "I'm not concerned to get any kudos out of ''The Gutenberg Galaxy''.
Instead of tending towards a vast Alexandrian library the world has become a computer, an electronic brain, exactly as an infantile piece of science fiction.
The key development that led to the Renaissance was not the rediscovery of ancient texts but a shift in emphasis from the formal study of logic to rhetoric and language.
They require more active participation on the part of the user, including the perception of abstract patterning and simultaneous comprehension of all parts.
Reading, writing, and hierarchical ordering are associated with the left brain, as are the linear concept of time and phonetic literacy.
This is a major work of McLuhan's because it contains the most extensive elaboration of his concept of Acoustic Space, and it provides a critique of standard 20th century communication models like the Shannon–Weaver model.
McLuhan states that "a light bulb creates an environment by its mere presence."
In the seventeenth century world the languages of the heart were pushed down into the unconscious by the dominant print cliché.
If the medium - whether print or television – is the cause, of all other causes, all that men ordinarily see as history is at once reduced to effects.
Together, they spent 1939–40 in Cambridge, where he completed his master's degree (awarded in January 1940) and began to work on his doctoral dissertation on Thomas Nashe and the verbal arts.
Modern life is characterized by the reemergence of grammar as its most salient feature—a trend McLuhan felt was exemplified by the New Criticism of Richards and Leavis.
The work of McLuhan was a particular culmination of an aesthetic theory which became, negatively, a social theory ...
Much enamoured with McLuhan's work, Feigen and Gossage arranged for McLuhan to meet with editors of several major New York magazines in May 1965 at the Lombardy Hotel in New York.
The two diamonds on the left of a tetrad are the ''Enhancement'' and ''Retrieval'' qualities of the medium, both ''Figure'' qualities.
It seems to me a book that somebody should have written a century ago.
McLuhan pointed to the light bulb as a clear demonstration of this concept.
''Acoustic radio flips into audio-visual TV.''
We look at the present through a rear-view mirror.
Together with Harold Innis, Eric A. Havelock, and Northrop Frye, McLuhan and Carpenter have been characterized as the Toronto School of communication theory.
After Herbert's discharge from the army in 1915, the McLuhan family moved to Winnipeg, Manitoba, where Marshall grew up and went to school, attending Kelvin Technical School before enrolling in the University of Manitoba in 1928.
Each essay begins with a newspaper or magazine article or an advertisement, followed by McLuhan's analysis thereof.
This is a partial list of works cited in this article.
His brother, Maurice, was born two years later.
From 1937 to 1944 he taught English at Saint Louis University (with an interruption from 1939 to 1940, when he returned to Cambridge).
McLuhan's insight was that a medium affects the society in which it plays a role not by the content delivered over the medium, but by the characteristics of the medium itself.
His mother was a Baptist schoolteacher who later became an actress.
This was one of McLuhan's most frequent statements to and about those who would disagree with him.
Furthermore, McLuhan coined and certainly popularized the usage of the term "surfing" to refer to rapid, irregular and multidirectional movement through a heterogeneous body of documents or knowledge, e.g., statements like "Heidegger surf-boards along on the electronic wave as triumphantly as Descartes rode the mechanical wave."
Andy Warhol was paraphrasing McLuhan with his now famous 15 minutes of fame quote.
McLuhan frequently quoted Walter Ong's ''Ramus, Method, and the Decay of Dialogue'' (1958), which evidently had prompted McLuhan to write ''The Gutenberg Galaxy''.
McLuhan designed the tetrad as a pedagogical tool, phrasing his laws as questions with which to consider any medium:
"—'Old man' speaking
Hot media favour analytical precision, quantitative analysis and sequential ordering, as they are usually sequential, linear and logical.
The right-brain hemisphere thinking is the capability of being in many places at the same time.
The right brain is the locus of the spatial, tactile, and musical.
'''Herbert Marshall McLuhan''',  (July 21, 1911&nbsp;– December 31, 1980) was a Canadian professor, philosopher, and public intellectual.
However, Ong later tempered his praise, by describing McLuhan's ''The Gutenberg Galaxy'' as "a racy survey, indifferent to some scholarly detail, but uniquely valuable in suggesting the sweep and depth of the cultural and psychological changes entailed in the passage from illiteracy to print and beyond."
In any case, McLuhan soon became a fixture of media discourse.
Upon reflection years afterward, he credited the faculty there with influencing the direction of his later work because of their emphasis on the ''training of perception'' and such concepts as Richards's notion of ''feedforward''.
He returned to Toronto, where, for the rest of his life, he taught at the University of Toronto and lived in Wychwood Park, a bucolic enclave on a hill overlooking the downtown where Anatol Rapoport was his neighbour.
According to McLuhan, the advent of print technology contributed to and made possible most of the salient trends in the Modern period in the Western world: individualism, democracy, Protestantism, capitalism and nationalism.
From 1983 until 2008, the McLuhan Program was under the direction of Dr. Derrick de Kerckhove who was McLuhan's student and translator.
His work is viewed as one of the cornerstones of the study of media theory, as well as having practical applications in the advertising and television industries.
McLuhan departs from his mentor Harold Innis in suggesting that a medium "overheats", or reverses into an opposing form, when taken to its extreme.
McLuhan wrote in 1964: "I am pleased to think of my own book ''The Gutenberg Galaxy'' as a footnote to the observations of Innis on the subject of the psychic and social consequences, first of writing then of printing."
In 1940, the McLuhans returned to Saint Louis University, where he continued teaching and they started a family.
