As a major port, it is believed that Marseille was one of the first places in France to encounter the epidemic, and some 15,000 people died in a city that had a population of 25,000 during its period of economic prosperity in the previous century.
Marseille's main cultural attraction was, since its creation at the end of the 18th century and until the late 1970s, the Opéra.
Currently the Opéra de Marseille stages six or seven operas each year.
Marseille hosts a Gay Pride event in early July.
Marseille has three golf courses.
During the Roman era, the city was controlled by a directory of 15 selected "first" among 600 senators.
The number of congress days hosted on its territory increased from 109,000 in 1996 to almost 300,000 in 2011.
Following their marriage, they moved to the hill just to the north of the Lacydon; and from this settlement grew Massalia.
Marseille rebelled in 1248, under the leadership of two local nobles, Barral of Baux and Boniface of Castellane, while Charles was embarked on the Seventh Crusade.
According to the legend, Protis, while exploring for a new trading outpost or ''emporion'' for Phocaea, discovered the Mediterranean cove of the Lacydon, fed by a freshwater stream and protected by two rocky promontories.
At the beginning of July, there is the International Documentary Festival.
Protis was invited inland to a banquet held by the chief of the local Ligurian tribe for suitors seeking the hand of his daughter Gyptis in marriage.
At the last municipal election in 2008, Marseille was divided between the northern boroughs dominated by the left and the more affluent southern part dominated by the right, with the centre and eastern parts of the city as battlegrounds, allowing for a narrow re-election of the UMP administration.
Marseille has also been important in the arts.
As in many other French cities, a bike-sharing service nicknamed "Le vélo", free for trips of less than half an hour, was introduced by the city council in 2007.
The Métro system operates on a turnstile system, with tickets purchased at the nearby adjacent automated booths.
The connection between Massalia and the Phoceans is mentioned in Thucydides's ''Peloponnesian War''; he notes that the Phocaean project was opposed by the Carthaginians, whose fleet was defeated.
Marseille served as the European Capital of Culture for 2013 along with Košice.
Three bus rapid transit lines are under construction to better connect the Métro to farther places (Castellane -> Luminy ; Capitaine Gèze – La Cabucelle -> Vallon des Tuves ; La Rose -> Château Gombert – Saint Jérome).
Humans have inhabited Marseille and its environs for almost 30,000 years: palaeolithic cave paintings in the underwater Cosquer Cave near the calanque of Morgiou date back to between 27,000 and 19,000 BC; and recent excavations near the railway station have unearthed neolithic brick habitations from around 6000 BC.
The city also serves as France's leading centre of oil refining.
'''The cantons of Marseille :'''
Despite reinforcement by L. Domitius Ahenobarbus, Massalia's fleet was defeated and the city fell by September.
Marseille has a large number of theatres, including la Criée, le Gymnase and the Théâtre Toursky.
Marseille rose up once more, in 1262, under Boniface of Castellane and Hugues des Baux, cousin of Barral des Baux (who remained loyal and helped contain the unrest).
It hosted the European Football Championship in 2016, and will be the European Capital of Sport in 2017.
A second wave of colonists arrived in about 540, when Phocaea was destroyed by the Persians.
Marseille has a large ferry terminal, the ''Gare Maritime'', with services to
Similar to the liberation of other major French cities, (Such as Paris and Strasbourg.)
Points accrued count towards the World Match Racing Tour and a place in the final event, with the overall winner taking the title ISAF World Match Racing Tour Champion.
Trade prospered, and Marseille gave him no further trouble.
An extensive network of motorways connects Marseille to the north and west (A7), Aix-en-Provence in the north (A51), Toulon (A50) and the French Riviera (A8) to the east.
The Old Port was replaced as the main port for trade by the Port de la Joliette during the Second Empire and now contains restaurants, offices, bars and hotels and functions mostly as a private marina.
Jean-Claude Gaudin of the right-wing UMP was elected mayor in 1995.
He was succeeded by Robert Vigouroux of the RDSE.
He helped raise the status of the town to a city and allowed certain privileges to be granted to it.
The most commonly used tarot deck takes its name from the city; it has been called the ''Tarot de Marseille'' since the 1930s—a name coined for commercial use by the French cardmaker and cartomancer Paul Marteau, owner of B–P Grimaud.
Other significant communities include Maghrebis, Turks, Comorians, Chinese, and Vietnamese.
Snowfalls are infrequent, over 50% of years do not experience a single snowfall.
There is a new long distance bus station adjacent to new modern extension to the Gare Saint-Charles with destinations mostly to other Bouches-du-Rhône towns, including buses to Aix-en-Provence, Cassis, La Ciotat and Aubagne.
July and August are the hottest months, averaging temperatures of around  during the day and  at night in the Marignane airport ( from Marseille) but in the city near the sea the average temperature is  in July.
Before being ''de Marseille'', it was used to play the local variant of tarocchi before it became used in cartomancy at the end of the 18th century, following the trend set by Antoine Court de Gébelin.
Simon Kitson has shown how this corruption extended into local administrations like the Police.
As a result of this visit, the fortress of Château d'If was constructed; this did little to prevent Marseille being placed under siege by the army of the Holy Roman Empire a few years later.
An annual footrace is held between the city and neighbouring Cassis: the Marseille-Cassis Classique Internationale.
The drachmas minted in Massalia were found in all parts of Ligurian-Celtic Gaul.
Late Antiquity continued until the 7th century in Marseille, with Phocean and Roman infrastructures still in use (forums, baths).
In 1348, the city suffered terribly from the bubonic plague, which continued to strike intermittently until 1361.
Charles returned in 1250 and forced Marseille to surrender in 1252.
Currently, over one third of the population of Marseille can trace their roots back to Italy.
It was governed as an aristocratic republic, with an assembly formed by the 600 wealthiest citizens.
In 1999, in several arrondissements, about 40% of the young people under 18 were of Maghrebi origin (at least one immigrant parent).
Massalia, whose name was probably adapted from an existing language related to Ligurian, was the first Greek settlement in France.
According to Provençal tradition, Mary Magdalen evangelised Marseille with her brother Lazarus.
Massalia became one of the major trading ports of the ancient world.
Maritime opportunities also increased with the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869.
Marseille is connected with the Rhône via a canal and thus has access to the extensive waterway network of France.
The statesman Titus Annius Milo, then living in exile in Marseille, joked that no one could miss Rome as long as they could eat the delicious red mullet of Marseille.
Domitius Ahenobarbus defeated the Gauls at Vindalium in 121&nbsp;BC—in exchange for yielding a strip of land through its territory which was used to construct the ''Via Domitia'', a road to Spain.
Other music venues in Marseille are L'Embobineuze and GRIM.
The city's laws among other things forbade the drinking of wine by women and allowed, by a vote of the senators, assistance to a person to commit suicide.
During the Punic Wars, Hannibal crossed the Alps north of the city.
The port is among the 20th firsts in Europe for container traffic with 1,062,408 TEU and new infrastructures have already raised the capacity to 2M TEU.
, the Marseille metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $60.3 billion, or $36,127 per capita (purchasing power parity).
By the end of the 18th century about half the population originated from elsewhere in Provence mostly and also from southern France.
The most famous citizen of Massalia was the mathematician, astronomer and navigator Pytheas.
Bands like IAM originated from Marseille and initiated the rap phenomenon in France.
Some 45,000 jobs are linked to the port activities and it represents 4 billion euros added value to the regional economy.
The rise of the French Empire and the conquests of France from 1830 onward (notably Algeria) stimulated the maritime trade and raised the prosperity of the city.
Stade Velodrome hosted a number of games during the 1998 FIFA World Cup, 2007 Rugby World Cup, and UEFA Euro 2016.
On 21 June, there are dozens of free concerts in the city as part of the Fête de la Musique.
Marseille even knew a golden age in the 6th century, when it became a major commercial center in the Mediterranean Sea.
Marseille is a major French centre for trade and industry, with excellent transportation infrastructure (roads, sea port and airport).
Notably, René also founded the Corporation of Fisherman.
The Netflix series ''Marseille'' is set in the city in the 2010s.
Marseille municipality acts to develop Marseille as a regional nexus for entertainment in the south of France with high concentration of museums, cinemas, theatres, clubs, bars, restaurants, fashion shops, hotels, and art galleries.
As a consequence, the two forts of Saint-Jean and Saint-Nicholas were erected above the harbour and a large fleet and arsenal were established in the harbour itself.
A free ferry service operates between the two opposite quays of the Old Port.
In October, the Fiesta des Suds offers many concerts of world music.
Towards the end of the 16th century, Marseille suffered yet another outbreak of the plague; the hospital of the Hôtel-Dieu was founded soon afterwards.
On 22 January 1943, over 4,000 Jews were seized in Marseille as part of "Action Tiger".
Throughout most seasons of the year it can be windy while the sea remains smooth enough to allow sailing.
Gaudin was re-elected in 2001 and 2008.
Though he hoped to establish a sea trading route for tin from Cornwall, his trip was not a commercial success, and it was not repeated.
From the 1950s onward, the city served as an entrance port for over a million immigrants to France.
Further east still are the Sainte-Baume (a  mountain ridge rising from a forest of deciduous trees), the city of Toulon and the French Riviera.
The local German garrison was defeated by mainly French forces, with limited American support.
Even after the town fell into the hands of the Visigoths in the 5th century, the city became an important Christian intellectual center with people such as John Cassian, Salvian and Sidonius Apollinaris.
The city thrived by acting as a link between inland Gaul, hungry for Roman goods and wine (which Massalia was steadily exporting by 500 BC), and Rome's insatiable need for new products and slaves.
In the interwar period, Marseille was known for its extensive organised crime networks.
After his death, his daughter Beatrice of Provence married Louis IX of France's brother Charles in 1246, making him Count.
King René, who wished to equip the entrance of the port with a solid defense, decided to build on the ruins of the old Maubert tower and to establish a series of ramparts guarding the harbour.
From 1950 to the mid-1990s, Marseille was a socialist and communist stronghold.
The city thus maintained its independence a little longer, although the Romans organized their province of Transalpine Gaul around it and constructed a colony at Narbo Martius (Narbonne) in 118&nbsp;BC which subsequently competed economically with Massalia.
It has been the birthplace and home of many French writers and poets, including , , Pierre Bertas, Edmond Rostand and André Roussin.
In 1962, there was a large influx from the newly independent Algeria, including around 150,000 returned Algerian settlers (''pieds-noirs'').
The local rugby teams are Marseille XIII and Marseille Vitrolles Rugby.
Marseille is now France's largest city on the Mediterranean coast and the largest port for commerce, freight and cruise ships.
The urban operation Euroméditerranée has developed a large offer of offices and thus Marseille hosts one of the main business district in France.
The city is also served with 11 other regional trains stations in the east and the north of the city.
Between 330 and 320 BC, he organized an expedition by ship into the Atlantic and as far north as England, and to visit Iceland, Shetland, and Norway, where he was the first scientist to describe drift ice and the midnight sun.
Marseille is famous for its important pétanque activity, it is even renown as the ''pétanque capitale''.
The Old Port was destroyed in January 1943 by the Germans.
The Marseille region is home to thousands of companies, 90% of which are small and medium enterprises with less than 500 employees.
During the first half of the 20th century, Marseille celebrated its "port of the empire" status through the colonial exhibitions of 1906 and 1922; the monumental staircase of the railway station, glorifying French colonial conquests, dates from then.
Marseille's economic activities and prosperity ended suddenly with the Charles Martel attacks in 739, when his armies punished the city for rejecting the governor he had established a few years earlier.
Marseille is listed as a major centre of art and history.
Corsica, Sardinia, Algeria and Tunisia.
The construction of the new city defenses took place between 1447 and 1453.
Running is also popular in many of Marseille's parks such as Le Pharo and Le Jardin Pierre Puget.
Gare Saint-Charles is also one of the main terminal stations for the TGV in the south of France making Marseille reachable in three hours from Paris (a distance of over 750&nbsp;km) and just over one and a half hours from Lyon.
A century later more troubles were in store: King Louis XIV himself had to descend upon Marseille, at the head of his army, in order to quash a local uprising against the governor.
Most of the archaeological remnants of the original Greek settlement were replaced by later Roman additions.
An extensive bus network serves the city and suburbs of Marseille, with 104 lines and 633 buses.
Located near the Old Port and the Canebière, at the very heart of the city, its architectural style was comparable to the classical trend found in other opera houses built at the same time in Lyon and Bordeaux.
Because of its pre-eminence as a Mediterranean port, Marseille has always been one of the main gateways into France.
These cultural events generated more than 11 million visits.
Marseille is the home of three main technopoles: Château-Gombert (technological innovations), Luminy (biotechnology) and La Belle de Mai (17,000 sq.m.
The city regained much of its wealth and trading power when it was revived in the 10th century by the Counts of Provence.
It consists of two lines: Line 1 (blue) between Castellane and La Rose opened in 1977 and Line 2 (red) between Sainte-Marguerite-Dromel and Bougainville opened between 1984 and 1987.
From 2011 ferry shuttle services operate between the Old Port and Pointe Rouge; in spring 2013 it will also run to l'Estaque.
The city was European Capital of Culture, together with Košice, Slovakia, in 2013.
Two large forts flank the entrance to the Old Port—Fort Saint-Nicolas on the south side and Fort Saint-Jean on the north.
The main nationalities are Romanians and Poles.
They take place in three main sites, ''Le Palais du Pharo'', ''Le Palais des Congrès et des Expositions (Parc Chanot)'' and the ''World Trade Center''.
In 2012 Marseille hosted the World Water Forum.
Marseille initially resisted his assertion of control, but acknowledged his suzerainty in 1243.
Further out in the Bay of Marseille is the Frioul archipelago which comprises four islands, one of which, If, is the location of Château d'If, made famous by the Dumas novel ''The Count of Monte Cristo''.
'''Largest groups of foreign residents'''
Marseille is connected by the Marseille Métro train system operated by the ''Régie des transports de Marseille'' (RTM).
Marseille is the second largest city in France after Paris and the centre of the third largest metropolitan area in France after Paris and Lyon.
In addition, the night train (Intercités de Nuit from Luxembourg and Strasbourg stops here on its way to Nice, whereas the night train from Paris to Nice serves the Gare de Blancarde.
Marseille was united with Provence in 1481 and then incorporated into France the following year, but soon acquired a reputation for rebelling against the central government.
The city was not affected by the decline of the Roman Empire before the 8th century, as Marseille knew a stable situation, probably thanks to its efficient defensive walls inherited from the Phoceans.
There is also an extensive arts centre in La Friche, a former match factory behind the St-Charles station.
The city boasts a wide variety of sports facilities and teams.
The Massiliots found it cheaper and simpler to trade with Northern Europe over land routes.
To the west of Marseille is the former artists' colony of l'Estaque; further west are the Côte Bleue, the Gulf of Lion and the Camargue region in the Rhône delta.
Charles continued his father-in-law's administrative changes, which reignited discontent.
Music from all over the world in introduced.
The Counts of Provence allowed Marseille, governed by a consul, great autonomy until the rule of Raymond Berengar IV of Provence.
The European Capital of Culture was also the occasion to unveil more than 600 million euros in new cultural infrastructure in Marseille and it environs, including the iconic MuCEM designed by Rudy Ricciotti.
Charles quelled the revolt in 1263.
The airport is the fifth busiest French airport, and known the 4th most important European traffic growth in 2012.
Robb gives greater weight to the Gyptis story, though he notes that the tradition was to offer water, not wine, to signal the choice of a marriage partner.
The city has many museums and galleries and there are many ancient buildings and churches of historical interest.
Among the most famous ones are CMA CGM, container-shipping giant; Compagnie maritime d'expertises (Comex), world leader in sub-sea engineering and hydraulic systems; Eurocopter Group, an EADS company; Azur Promotel, an active real estate development company; ''La Provence'', the local daily newspaper; RTM, Marseille's public transport company; and Société Nationale Maritime Corse Méditerranée (SNCM), a major operator in passenger, vehicle and freight transportation in the Western Mediterranean.
Marseille has been the host of 8 (2010) Match Race France events which are part of the World Match Racing Tour.
Unemployment in the economy fell from 20% in 1995 to 14% in 2004.
In 1934, Alexander I of Yugoslavia arrived at the port to meet with the French foreign minister Louis Barthou.
The second largest group in Marseille in terms of single nationalities were from the Comoros, amounting to some 45,000 people.
Trading in Marseille also flourished as the Guild began to establish a position of power within the merchants of the city.
The city is home to several campuses of Aix-Marseille University and part of one of the largest metropolitan conurbations in France, the Metropolis of Aix-Marseille-Provence.
Marseille is officially the sunniest major city in France with over 2,900 hours of sunshine while the average sunshine in France is around 1,950 hours and is also the driest major city with only  of precipitation annually, especially thanks to the Mistral which is a cold, dry wind originating in the Rhône Valley that occurs mostly in winter and spring and which generally brings clear skies and sunny weather to the region.
The main French research bodies including the CNRS, INSERM and INRA are all well represented in Marseille.
Marseille is ranked 86th in the world for business tourism and events, advancing from the 150th spot one year before.
However, Marseille unemployment rate remains higher than the national average.
Since 1803, starting on the last Sunday of November, there has been a Santon Fair in Marseille; it is currently held in the Cours d'Estienne d'Orves, a large square off the Vieux-Port.
Petroleum is shipped northward to the Paris basin by pipeline.
Marseille has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen Csa) with mild, humid winters and warm to hot, mostly dry summers.
Marseille is also France's second largest research centre with 3,000 research scientists within Aix Marseille University.
During the Second World War, Marseille was bombed by German and Italian forces in 1940.
Marseille also has the second-largest Corsican and Armenian populations of France.
The centre of Marseille has several pedestrianised zones, most notably rue St Ferréol, Cours Julien near the Music Conservatory, the Cours Honoré-d'Estienne-d'Orves off the Old Port and the area around the Hôtel de Ville.
Several urban projects have been developed to make Marseille attractive.
It maintained nominal autonomy but lost its trading empire and was largely brought under Roman dominion.
The identical supplied boats (J Boats J-80 racing yachts) are raced two at a time in an on the water dogfight which tests the sailors and skippers to the limits of their physical abilities.
In 1919, a fire almost completely destroyed the house, leaving only the stone colonnade and peristyle from the original façade.
The small port of l'Estaque on the far end of the Bay of Marseille became a favourite haunt for artists, including Auguste Renoir, Paul Cézanne (who frequently visited from his home in Aix), Georges Braque and Raoul Dufy.
of offices dedicated to multimedia activities).
Marseille-Provence 2013 (MP2013) featured more than 900 cultural events held throughout Marseille and the surrounding communities.
The city was also considered as a possible venue for 2007 America's Cup.
The club's home, the Stade Vélodrome, which can seat around 67,000 people, also functions for other local sports, as well as the national rugby team.
In some parts of Marseille, youth unemployment is reported to be as high as 40%.
Thus new parks, museums, public spaces and real estate projects aim to improve the city cadre de vie (Parc du 26e Centenaire, Old Port of Marseille, numerous places in Euromediterrannee) to attract firms and people.
The main commercial centre of the city intersects with the Canebière at rue St Ferréol and the Centre Bourse (the main shopping mall).
In a slightly different way, ragga music is represented by Massilia Sound System.
The city has dozens of gyms and several public swimming pools.
Jean Pardo, engineer, conceived the plans and Jehan Robert, mason of Tarascon, carried out the work.
Marseille is also well known in France for its hip hop music.
They were held in detention camps before being deported to Poland occupied by Nazi Germany to be murdered.
Both lines of the Métro intersect at Gare Saint-Charles and Castellane.
The city's fortunes declined still further when it was sacked and pillaged by the Aragonese in 1423.
In 123&nbsp;BC, Massalia was faced by an invasion of the Allobroges and Arverni under Bituitus; it entered into an alliance with Rome, receiving protection—Roman legions under Q. Fabius Maximus and Gn.
This period in Marseille's history is reflected in many of its monuments, such as the Napoleonic obelisk at Mazargues and the royal triumphal arch on the Place Jules Guesde.
The socialist Gaston Defferre was consecutively re-elected six times as Mayor of Marseille from 1953 until his death in 1986.
It was established within modern Marseille around 600&nbsp;BC by colonists coming from Phocaea (now Foça, in modern Turkey) on the Aegean coast of Asia Minor.
Since 1972, the Ballet national de Marseille has performed at the opera house; its director from its foundation to 1998 was Roland Petit.
Fishing remains important in Marseille and the food economy of Marseille is fed by the local catch; a daily fish market is still held on the Quai des Belges of the Old Port.
There are also direct TGV lines to Lille, Brussels, Nantes, Genève and Strasbourg as well as Eurostar services to London.
As a part of Operation Dragoon,General Joseph de Goislard de Monsabert lead roughly 130,000 French troops to liberate the city.
Many immigrants have stayed and given the city a French-African quarter with a large market.
The hottest temperature was  on 26 July 1983 during a great heat wave, the lowest temperature was  on 13 February 1929 during a strong cold wave, but  or   temperatures are uncommon.
The economy of Marseille and its region is still linked to its commercial port, the first French port and the fifth European port by cargo tonnage, which lies north of the Old Port and eastern in Fos-sur-Mer.
However, in the early 2000s, the growth in container traffic was being stifled by the constant strikes and social upheaval.
Marseille is also divided in 25 cantons, each of them returning a member of the General Council of the Bouches-du-Rhône département.
The most popular team is the city's football club, Olympique de Marseille, which was the finalist of the UEFA Champions League in 1991, before winning the competition in 1993.
Marseille is also a place for other water sports such as windsurfing and powerboating.
Previously this deck was called ''Tarot italien'' (Italian Tarot) and even earlier it was simply called Tarot.
During Julius Caesar's war against Pompey and most of the Senate, Massalia allied itself with the exiled government; closing its gates to Caesar on his way to Spain in April of 49&nbsp;BC, the city was besieged.
