Thematically too, the concerns carried on from ''Mean Streets'' and ''Taxi Driver'': insecure males, violence, guilt, and redemption.
Scorsese, who was strongly drawn to the characters and the story of Wharton's text, wanted his film to be as rich an emotional experience as the book was to him rather than the traditional academic adaptations of literary works.
Remarkably, his backward-looking tribute to the golden age of musicals and noirish romantic melodramas turned out to be one of his most freewheeling and personal films."
The film was the director's third collaboration with Robert De Niro, co-starring with Liza Minnelli.
Scorsese directed the series premiere for ''Boardwalk Empire'', an HBO drama series, starring Steve Buscemi and Michael Pitt, and based upon Nelson Johnson's book ''Boardwalk Empire: The Birth, High Times and Corruption of Atlantic City''.
Championed by influential film critic Pauline Kael, ''Mean Streets'' was a breakthrough for Scorsese, De Niro, and Keitel.
While being presented with the award, Scorsese poked fun at his previous track record of nominations, asking "Could you double-check the envelope?"
''Gangs of New York'' earned Scorsese his first Golden Globe for Best Director.
''Raging Bull'' (1980)
Schoonmaker, Richardson, Powell, and Ferretti have all won Academy Awards in their respective categories on collaborations with Scorsese.
Scorsese has often said he thinks De Niro's best work under his direction was Rupert Pupkin in ''The King of Comedy''.
The following year Scorsese completed production of ''The Blues'', an expansive seven-part documentary tracing the history of blues music from its African roots to the Mississippi Delta and beyond.
''Cape Fear'' received a mixed critical reception and was lambasted in many quarters for its scenes depicting misogynistic violence.
Another foray into the mainstream, the film was a stylized thriller taking its cues heavily from Alfred Hitchcock and Charles Laughton's ''The Night of the Hunter'' (1955).
''Cape Fear'' (1991)
The production was highly troubled, with many rumors referring to the director's conflict with Miramax boss Harvey Weinstein.
It still bore many of Scorsese's trademarks, however.
''New York, New York'' (1977)
On February 12, 2012, at the 65th British Academy Film Awards, Scorsese was the recipient of the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award., May 7, 2013.
He has also cited filmmakers including Satyajit Ray, Ingmar Bergman, Michelangelo Antonioni, and Federico Fellini as a major influence on his career.
Some of his films include references/allusions to Westerns, particularly ''Rio Bravo'', ''The Great Train Robbery'', ''Shane'', ''The Searchers'', and ''The Oklahoma Kid''.
The themes central to the film were consistent with the director's established concerns: New York, violence as culturally endemic, and subcultural divisions down ethnic lines.
Scorsese received his award from Mary Margaret Valenti, Valenti's widow.
On July 25, 2014, Mick Jagger tweeted from the set, confirming that the filming had started.
Scorsese's film ''The Aviator'' (2004) is a lavish, large-scale biopic of eccentric aviation pioneer and film mogul Howard Hughes and reunited Scorsese with actor Leonardo DiCaprio.
In 1967, Scorsese made his first feature-length film, the black and white ''I Call First'', which was later retitled ''Who's That Knocking at My Door'' with his fellow students actor Harvey Keitel and editor Thelma Schoonmaker, both of whom were to become long-term collaborators.
Scorsese often uses long tracking shots, as seen in ''Taxi Driver'', ''Goodfellas'', ''Casino'', ''Gangs of New York'', and ''Hugo''.
In 1997, the Institute ranked ''Raging Bull'' as the 24th greatest film of all time on their AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list.
The film is best remembered today for the title theme song, which was popularized by Frank Sinatra.
The film was slated to shoot under the Paramount Pictures banner, but shortly before principal photography was to commence, Paramount pulled the plug on the project, citing pressure from religious groups.
It is a satire on the world of media and celebrity, whose central character is a troubled loner who ironically becomes famous through a criminal act (kidnapping).
If ''The Age of Innocence'' alienated and confused some fans, then ''Kundun'' (1997) went several steps further, offering an account of the early life of Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, the People's Liberation Army's entering of Tibet, and the Dalai Lama's subsequent exile to India.
With domestic box office receipts surpassing , ''The Departed'' was Scorsese's highest-grossing film (not accounting for inflation) until 2010s ''Shutter Island''.
In January 2005 ''The Aviator'' became the most-nominated film of the 77th Academy Awards nominations, nominated in 11 categories including Best Picture.
A DVD version of the film was released that same month.
With ''After Hours'' (1985) Scorsese made an aesthetic shift back to a pared-down, almost "underground" film-making style.
The series ended after one season.
94 on the AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list.
Elaine and Saul Bass, the latter being Hitchcock's frequent title designer, designed the opening credits for ''Goodfellas'', ''The Age of Innocence'', ''Casino'' and ''Cape Fear''.
In March 2015, it was announced that Scorsese will direct a Mike Tyson biopic.
He provides the opening voice-over narration in ''Mean Streets'' and ''The Color of Money''; plays the off-screen dressing room attendant in the final scene of ''Raging Bull''; provides the voice of the unseen ambulance dispatcher in ''Bringing Out the Dead''.
He recounted its influence in a documentary on Italian neorealism, and commented on how ''Bicycle Thieves'' alongside ''Paisà'', ''Rome, Open City'' inspired him and how this influenced his view or portrayal of his Sicilian roots.
The Mike Tyson film that Terence Winter (''The Wolf of Wall Street'', ''Boardwalk Empire'') is penning will cover the full breadth of his career, reportedly using the aging technology deployed in David Fincher's ''The Curious Case of Benjamin Button''.
92 on the AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list (10th Anniversary Edition) and they put ''Goodfellas'' at No.
On June 17, 2008, the American Film Institute placed two of Scorsese's films on the AFI's 10 Top 10 list: ''Raging Bull'' at #1 for the Sports genre and ''Goodfellas'' at #2 for the Gangster genre.
This film was intended to be the first of Scorsese's semiautobiographical J. R. Trilogy, which also would have included a later film, ''Mean Streets''.
Scorsese has mentioned on several occasions that he was greatly inspired in his early days at New York University by his Armenian American film professor Haig P. Manoogian.
Usually has a quick cameo in his films (''Who's That Knocking at My Door'', ''Boxcar Bertha'', ''Mean Streets'', ''Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore'', ''Taxi Driver'', ''The King of Comedy'', ''After Hours'', ''The Last Temptation of Christ'' (albeit hidden under a hood), ''The Age of Innocence'', ''Gangs of New York'', ''Hugo'').
In October 2014, it was announced that Scorsese will produce a yet-to-be-named documentary about the Grateful Dead directed by Amir Bar-Lev.
Scorsese sometimes highlights characters in a scene with an iris, an homage to 1920s silent film cinema (as scenes at the time sometimes used this transition).
in English in 1964.
Terence Winter, who previously wrote for ''The Sopranos'', created the series.
The ''King of Comedy'' failed at the box office, but has become increasingly well regarded by critics in the years since its release.
This was his first collaboration with the Academy Award–winning actor Daniel Day-Lewis, with whom he would work again in ''Gangs of New York''.
2 on their list of the top 10 gangster films (after ''The Godfather'').
Part of the New Hollywood wave of filmmaking, he is widely regarded as one of the most significant and influential filmmakers in cinema history.
Scorsese has cited Sabu and Victor Mature as his favorite actors during his youth and has spoken of the influence of the 1947 Powell and Pressburger film ''Black Narcissus'', whose innovative techniques later impacted his filmmaking.
Scorsese has been married to Helen Schermerhorn Morris since 1999.
The film was first presented on television in both the United States (as part of the PBS ''American Masters'' series) and the United Kingdom (as part of the BBC Two ''Arena'' series) on September 26–27, 2005.
Joe Pesci earned the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in ''Goodfellas''.
Also known for using freeze frame, such as the opening credits of ''The King of Comedy'' (1983), and throughout ''Goodfellas'' (1990).
It tells the story of a New York stockbroker, played by DiCaprio, who engages in a large securities fraud case involving corruption on Wall Street, stock manipulation, namely the practice of "pump and dump" and the corporate banking world.
The film does not cover Dylan's entire career; it focuses on his beginnings, his rise to fame in the 1960s, his then-controversial transformation from an acoustic guitar–based musician and performer to an electric guitar–influenced sound and his "retirement" from touring in 1966 following an infamous motorcycle accident.
''Shine a Light'' is a concert film of rock and roll band The Rolling Stones' performances at New York City's Beacon Theater on October 29 and November 1, 2006, intercut with brief news and interview footage from throughout the band's career.
Although adhering to Scorsese's established style, ''The Color of Money'' was the director's first official foray into mainstream film-making.
Most controversy centered on the final passages of the film, which depicted Christ marrying and raising a family with Mary Magdalene in a Satan-induced hallucination while on the cross.
Scorsese also produced several documentaries, such as ''The Soul of a Man'' (directed by Wim Wenders) and ''Lightning in a Bottle'' (directed by Antoine Fuqua).
He voluntarily asked to be an executive producer of ''The Third Side of the River'' (directed by Scorsese's protege Celina Murga).
It was Brian De Palma who introduced Scorsese to Robert De Niro.
For his crew, Scorsese frequently worked with editor Thelma Schoonmaker, cinematographers Michael Ballhaus, Robert Richardson, and Michael Chapman, screenwriters Paul Schrader, Mardik Martin, and John Logan, costume designer Sandy Powell, production designer Dante Ferretti, music producer Robbie Robertson, and composers Howard Shore and Elmer Bernstein.
''Boxcar Bertha'' (1972)
De Niro won, as did Thelma Schoonmaker for editing, but Best Director went to Robert Redford for ''Ordinary People''.
The screenplay was written by Terence Winter and starred Leonardo DiCaprio as Belfort, along with Jonah Hill and Matthew McConaughey, among others.
This led to a more significant role in Bertrand Tavernier's jazz film ''Round Midnight''.
In December 2007, actors Mark Ruffalo, Max von Sydow, Ben Kingsley, and Michelle Williams joined the cast, marking the first time these four actors have worked with Scorsese.
Scorsese directed the pilot for ''Vinyl'' written by Terence Winter and George Mastras, with Mick Jagger producing and Mastras as showrunner.
The film is scheduled to be released on December 23, 2016.
The series stars Bobby Cannavale as Richie Finestra, founder and president of a top-tier record label, set in 1970s New York City's drug-and sex-fueled music business as punk and disco were breaking out, all told through the eyes of Finestra trying to resurrect his label and find the next new sound.
Already controversial upon its release, ''Taxi Driver'' hit the headlines again five years later, when John Hinckley, Jr. made an assassination attempt on then-president Ronald Reagan.
''Taxi Driver'' won the Palme d'Or at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival, also receiving four Oscar nominations, including Best Picture.
In 1997, Scorsese received the AFI Life Achievement Award.
The critical success of ''Taxi Driver'' encouraged Scorsese to move ahead with his first big-budget project: the highly stylized musical ''New York, New York''.
's Jack Valenti Institute, which provides support to Italian film students in the U.S., in memory of former foundation board member and past president of the Motion Picture Association of America (M.P.A.A.)
Other frequent collaborators include Victor Argo (6), Harry Northup (6), Harvey Keitel (5), Murray Moston (5), J. C. MacKenzie (3), Joe Pesci (3), Frank Vincent (3) and Verna Bloom (3).
''The Aviator'' was nominated for six Golden Globe awards, including Best Motion Picture—Drama, Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Actor—Motion Picture Drama for Leonardo DiCaprio.
''Variety'' reported in January 2016 that Scorsese is also producing a biopic based on the life of classical pianist Byron Janis, with Peter Glanz writing a screenplay based on Janis' own book, ''Chopin and Beyond: My Extraordinary Life in Music and the Paranormal''.
This tribute to Scorsese's home town and the classic Hollywood musical was a box-office failure.
''Hugo'' also won two BAFTA awards, among other numerous awards and nominations.
Slow motion flashbulbs and accented camera/flash/shutter sounds are often used, as is song "Gimme Shelter" by The Rolling Stones; heard in several of Scorsese's films: ''Goodfellas'', ''Casino'', and ''The Departed''.
Daniel Day-Lewis, who had become very reclusive to the Hollywood scene, Alec Baldwin, Ben Kingsley, Jude Law, Emily Mortimer, John C. Reilly, Frank Sivero, and Ray Winstone have also appeared in multiple Scorsese films.
In the four-hour documentary, Scorsese lists the four aspects of the director he believes are the most important as (1) the director as storyteller; (2) the director as an illusionist: D.W. Griffith or F. W. Murnau, who created new editing techniques among other innovations that made the appearance of sound and color possible later on; (3) the director as a smuggler—filmmakers such as Douglas Sirk, Samuel Fuller, and Vincente Minnelli, who used to hide subversive messages in their films; and (4) the director as iconoclast.
The disappointing reception that ''New York, New York'' received drove Scorsese into depression.
Scorsese returned to the crime genre with the Boston-set thriller ''The Departed'', based on the Hong Kong police drama ''Infernal Affairs'' (which is co-directed by Andrew Lau and Alan Mak) .
In 1990, he founded The Film Foundation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to film preservation, and in 2007 he founded the World Cinema Foundation.
Indeed, many of the tropes and tricks of the earlier film resurfaced more or less intact, most obviously the casting of both Robert De Niro and Joe Pesci, Pesci once again playing an unbridled psychopath.
Despite denials of artistic compromise, ''Gangs of New York'' revealed itself to be the director's most conventional film: standard film tropes that the director had traditionally avoided, such as characters existing purely for exposition purposes and explanatory flashbacks, here surfaced in abundance.
He is a recipient of the AFI Life Achievement Award for his contributions to the cinema, and has won an Academy Award, a Palme d'Or, Cannes Film Festival Best Director Award, Silver Lion, Grammy Award, Emmys, Golden Globes, BAFTAs, and DGA Awards.
Despite its weak reception, the film is positively regarded by some critics.
His family moved to the Little Italy section of Manhattan before he started school.
It received generally positive reviews, although not the universal critical acclaim of some of his other films.
Scorsese also developed an admiration for neorealist cinema at this time.
Scorsese made a brief cameo appearance in the film ''Anna Pavlova'' (also known as ''A Woman for All Time''), originally intended to be directed by one of his heroes, Michael Powell.
As a teenager in the Bronx, Scorsese frequently rented Powell and Pressburger's ''The Tales of Hoffmann'' (1951) from a store that had one copy of the reel.
After the film was released Roger Ebert, a friend and supporter of Scorsese, named ''Goodfellas'' "the best mob movie ever" and is ranked No.
In 2011, Scorsese received an honorary doctorate from the National Film School in Lodz.
Scorsese was one of only two people who regularly rented that reel.
In February 2003, ''Gangs of New York'' received 10 Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Actor for Daniel Day-Lewis; however, it did not win in any category.
Scorsese and the film won numerous awards, including five BAFTA Awards, a Silver Lion and more.
Scorsese attended New York University's Tisch School of the Arts (B.A., English, 1964; M.F.A., film, 1966) making the short films ''What's a Nice Girl Like You Doing in a Place Like This?''
Seven film-makers including Wim Wenders, Clint Eastwood, Mike Figgis, and Scorsese himself each contributed a 90-minute film (Scorsese's entry was titled "Feel Like Going Home").
German director Wim Wenders numbered it among his 15 favorite films.
Included are the three films (''Taxi Driver'', ''Raging Bull'', and ''Goodfellas'') that made AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies list.
The original score composed by regular Scorsese collaborator Elmer Bernstein was rejected at a late stage for a score by Howard Shore and mainstream rock artists U2 and Peter Gabriel.
Scorsese became friends with the influential "movie brats" of the 1970s: Brian De Palma, Francis Ford Coppola, George Lucas and Steven Spielberg.
''Mean Streets'' (1973)
He subsequently blamed his act on his obsession with Jodie Foster's ''Taxi Driver'' character (in the film, De Niro's character, Travis Bickle, makes an assassination attempt on a senator).
1 on Roger's movie list for 1990, along with Gene Siskel and Peter Travers, the film is widely considered one of the director's greatest achievements.
(It is also worth noting that the film's incident-filled nocturnal setting is reminiscent of ''After Hours''.)
; Other works in 1980s
A period of wild partying followed, damaging the director's already fragile health.
During the filming Scorsese played a background part as a gambler at one of the tables.
''Taxi Driver'' also marked the start of a series of collaborations between Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader, whose influences included the diary of would-be assassin Arthur Bremer and ''Pickpocket'', a film by the French director Robert Bresson.
On April 29, 2016, it was announced that Scorsese was in early talks to direct ''The General'', a film based on the life on George Washington.
It won three, including Best Motion Picture—Drama and Best Actor—Motion Picture Drama.
For their tenth anniversary edition of the list, ''Raging Bull'' was moved to #4, ''Taxi Driver'' was moved to #52, and ''Goodfellas'' was moved to #92.
Also, ''The Wolf of Wall Street'' was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor for Leonardo DiCaprio, Best Supporting Actor for Jonah Hill, Best Director for Martin Scorsese, and Best Adapted Screenplay for Terence Winter but did not win in any category.
Scorsese lost again, this time to director Clint Eastwood for ''Million Dollar Baby'' (which also won Best Picture).
Along with directors Woody Allen and Francis Ford Coppola, in 1989 Scorsese provided one of three segments in the portmanteau film ''New York Stories'', called "Life Lessons".
It is written by Jay Cocks, based upon the novel of the same name and stars Andrew Garfield, Liam Neeson and Adam Driver.
"Through intimate conversations, I hope to provide greater insight into this transcendent figure."
Traditional dramatic devices were substituted for a trance-like meditation achieved through an elaborate tableau of colorful visual images.
The film garnered two Oscar nominations.
Another Scorsese-directed documentary, titled ''American Boy'', also appeared in 1978, focusing on Steven Prince, the cocky gun salesman who appeared in ''Taxi Driver''.
In the 2000s, Scorsese produced several films for upcoming directors, such as ''You Can Count on Me'' (directed by Kenneth Lonergan),  ''Rain'' (directed by Katherine Lindberg), ''Lymelife'' (directed by Derick Martini) and ''The Young Victoria'' (directed by Jean-Marc Vallée).
''Raging Bull'', filmed in high contrast black and white, is where Scorsese's style reached its zenith: ''Taxi Driver'' and ''New York, New York'' had used elements of expressionism to replicate psychological points of view, but here the style was taken to new extremes, employing extensive slow-motion, complex tracking shots, and extravagant distortion of perspective (for example, the size of boxing rings would change from fight to fight).
Originally filmed for a release in the winter of 2001 (to qualify for Academy Award nominations), Scorsese delayed the final production of the film until after the beginning of 2002; the studio consequently delayed the film for nearly a year until its release in the Oscar season of late 2002.
In 1998, the American Film Institute placed three Scorsese films on their list of the greatest movies in America: ''Raging Bull'' at #24, ''Taxi Driver'' at #47, and ''Goodfellas'' at #94.
It was highly lauded by critics upon original release, but was a box office bomb, making an overall loss.
They just wanted to watch the money."
''Who's That Knocking at My Door'' (1967), ''Mean Streets'' (1973), ''Taxi Driver'' (1976), ''Raging Bull'' (1980), ''Goodfellas'' (1990), and ''The Wolf of Wall Street'' (2013).
Its world premiere was at the opening of the 58th Berlinale Film Festival on February 7, 2008.
The film has been met with critical acclaim and earned Scorsese his third Golden Globe Award for Best Director.
He then married producer Barbara De Fina in 1985; their marriage ended in divorce as well, in 1991.
His blonde leading ladies are usually seen through the eyes of the protagonist as angelic and ethereal; they wear white in their first scene and are photographed in slow motion (Cybill Shepherd in ''Taxi Driver''; Cathy Moriarty's white bikini in ''Raging Bull''; Sharon Stone's white minidress in ''Casino'').
::Although the film deals with New York aristocracy and a period of New York history that has been neglected, and although it deals with code and ritual, and with love that's not unrequited but unconsummated—which pretty much covers all the themes I usually deal with—when I read the book, I didn't say, "Oh good, all those themes are here."
On September 18, 2011, at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards, Scorsese won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for his work on the series premiere of ''Boardwalk Empire''.
The film starred Robert De Niro as the troubled and psychotic Travis Bickle.
''The Wolf of Wall Street'' (2013)
The film stars Asa Butterfield, Chloë Grace Moretz, Ben Kingsley, Sacha Baron Cohen, Ray Winstone, Emily Mortimer, Christopher Lee and Jude Law.
During the ceremony, Scorsese helped launch N.I.A.F.
Even prior to its release the film caused a massive furor, worldwide protests against its blasphemy effectively turning a low budget independent movie into a media sensation.
In 2001, the American Film Institute placed two Scorsese films on their list of the most "heart-pounding movies" in American cinema: ''Taxi Driver'' at #22 and ''Raging Bull'' at #51.
''The Departed'' also received the Academy Award for the Best Motion Picture of 2006, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Film Editing by longtime Scorsese editor Thelma Schoonmaker, her third win for a Scorsese film.
; Other works in 1970s
''The Aviator'' (2004)
It received eight Oscar nominations, including Best Picture, Best Actor for Robert De Niro, and Scorsese's first for Best Director.
''Shutter Island'' (2010)
The film continued Scorsese's collaboration streak with Leonardo DiCaprio, and was his first collaboration with Matt Damon, Jack Nicholson, Mark Wahlberg, and Martin Sheen.
In 1972, Scorsese made the Depression-era exploiter ''Boxcar Bertha'' for B-movie producer Roger Corman, who also helped directors such as Francis Ford Coppola, James Cameron, and John Sayles launch their careers.
1991 brought ''Cape Fear'', a remake of a cult 1962 movie of the same name and the director's seventh collaboration with De Niro.
His friend Jay Cocks gave him the Wharton novel in 1980, suggesting that this should be the romantic piece Scorsese should film as Cocks felt it best represented his sensibility.
Although ''The Age of Innocence'' was ultimately different from these films in terms of narrative, story, and thematic concern, the presence of a lost society, of lost values as well as detailed re-creations of social customs and rituals continues the tradition of these films.
Scorsese also worked as an executive producer on Andrew Lau-directed crime drama film  ''Revenge of the Green Dragons'' (Andrew Lau's earlier film ''Infernal Affairs'' inspired ''The Departed'').
''Taxi Driver'' (1976)
''Hugo'' is Scorsese's first 3D film and was released in the United States on November 23, 2011.
In large part this was due to its huge stylistic similarities to his earlier ''Goodfellas'', and its excessive violence that garnered it a reputation as possibly the most violent American gangster film ever made.
In addition to directing the pilot (for which he won the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing), Scorsese also served as an executive producer on the series.
The film co-starred Jodie Foster in a highly controversial role as an underage prostitute, and Harvey Keitel as her pimp, Matthew, called "Sport".
From this work onwards, Scorsese's films are always labeled as "A Martin Scorsese Picture" on promotional material.
In August 2007, Scorsese was named the second-greatest director of all time in a poll by ''Total Film'' magazine, in front of Steven Spielberg and behind Alfred Hitchcock.
Surviving members Bob Weir, Mickey Hart, Bill Kreutzmann and Phil Lesh have agreed to new interviews for the film.
''Bringing Out the Dead'' (1999)
Also, often contributes his voice to a film without appearing on screen (e.g.
The film received highly positive reviews.
The fact that it was a violent gangster film made it more palatable to fans of the director who perhaps were baffled by the apparent departure of the earlier film.
The divorce was acrimonious and served as the basis of Cameron's first feature, the dark comedy ''God's Will'', which also starred their daughter, Domenica.
Scorsese still found time for a four-hour documentary in 1995, titled ''A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies'', offering a thorough trek through American cinema.
Writerdirector Schrader often returns to Bresson's work in films such as ''American Gigolo'', ''Light Sleeper'', and Scorsese's later ''Bringing Out the Dead''.
The film is widely viewed as a masterpiece and was voted the greatest film of the 1980s by Britain's ''Sight & Sound'' magazine.
At the awards ceremony he said, "I feel like I'm a part of this school and that I attended it," paying tribute to the films of Wajda, Munk, Has, Polanski and Skolimowski.
He has been noted for his liberal usage of profanity and violence.
It came back into the public eye, especially in countries such as the UK and France, but still is largely neglected in North America.
The expressionism of his previous work, here gave way to moments of almost total surrealism.
1 American sports film on their list of the top 10 sports films.
The film also marked the first collaboration between Scorsese and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, who since then has become a fixture in later Scorsese films.
The film finally won actor Paul Newman an Oscar and gave Scorsese the clout to finally secure backing for a project that had been a longtime goal for him: ''The Last Temptation of Christ''.
(In the 1988 version, these roles were played respectively by Willem Dafoe and David Bowie.)
Their daughter also had a small role in ''Cape Fear'' using the name Domenica Scorsese and has continued to act, write, direct, and produce.
Scorsese was raised in a devoutly Catholic environment.
Scorsese was married to actress Isabella Rossellini from 1979 to their divorce in 1983.
They have a daughter, Francesca, who appeared in ''The Departed'' and ''The Aviator''.
After his mid-1980s flirtation with commercial Hollywood, Scorsese made a major return to personal film-making with the Paul Schraderscripted ''The Last Temptation of Christ'' in 1988.
The film was also nominated for 11 Academy Awards, winning five of them and becoming tied with Michel Hazanavicius's film ''The Artist'' for the most Academy Awards won by a single film in 2011.
It screened as a work in progress at the Berlin International Film Festival in February 2014 and premiered in June 2014 at the Sheffield Doc/Fest.
It was presented to him by his longtime friends and colleagues Francis Ford Coppola, George Lucas, and Steven Spielberg.
Like previous Scorsese–Schrader collaborations, its final scenes of spiritual redemption explicitly recalled the films of Robert Bresson.
By now the signature Scorsese style was in place: macho posturing, bloody violence, Catholic guilt and redemption, gritty New York locale (though the majority of ''Mean Streets'' was actually shot in Los Angeles), rapid-fire editing and a soundtrack with contemporary music.
Although well regarded, the film remains an anomaly in the director's early career as it focuses on a central female character.
With eight Best Director nominations, he is the most nominated living director, and is tied with Billy Wilder for the second most nominations overall.
The film was initially scheduled for release on September 21, 2007, but Paramount Classics postponed its general release until April 2008.
