After banishing the Zwickau prophets, he now faced a battle against not only the established Church but also the radical reformers who threatened the new order by fomenting social unrest and violence.
From 1510 to 1520, Luther lectured on the Psalms, the books of Hebrews, Romans, and Galatians.
In 1545 and 1546 Luther preached three times in the Market Church in Halle, staying with his friend Justus Jonas during Christmas.
From December 1539, Luther became implicated in the bigamy of Philip I, Landgrave of Hesse, who wanted to marry one of his wife's ladies-in-waiting.
One friend blamed the decision on Luther's sadness over the deaths of two friends.
He enclosed in his letter a copy of his "Disputation of Martin Luther on the Power and Efficacy of Indulgences", which came to be known as the ''Ninety-five Theses''.
Published at a time of rising demand for German-language publications, Luther's version quickly became a popular and influential Bible translation.
Luther's writings circulated widely, reaching France, England, and Italy as early as 1519.
Saint Anna, I will become a monk!"
His hymns influenced the development of singing in Protestant churches.
Therefore, in any case, away with them!"
Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz and Magdeburg did not reply to Luther's letter containing the ''Ninety-five Theses''.
As Luther later noted, "the pope had a finger in the pie as well, because one half was to go to the building of St Peter's Church in Rome".
However, Philip was unable to keep the marriage secret, and he threatened to make Luther's advice public.
The elector authorised a visitation of the church, a power formerly exercised by bishops.
Others had translated the Bible into German, but Luther tailored his translation to his own doctrine.
In 1501, at the age of 19, he entered the University of Erfurt, which he later described as a beerhouse and whorehouse.
"Suddenly, and while I was occupied with far different thoughts," he wrote to Wenceslaus Link, "the Lord has plunged me into marriage."
In the summer of 1521, Luther widened his target from individual pieties like indulgences and pilgrimages to doctrines at the heart of Church practices.
Luther's boldest assertion in the debate was that Matthew 16:18 does not confer on popes the exclusive right to interpret scripture, and that therefore neither popes nor church councils were infallible.
Salvation originates with the Father and draws the believer to the Father.
Second, the violent actions of rebelling, robbing, and plundering placed the peasants "outside the law of God and Empire", so they deserved "death in body and soul, if only as highwaymen and murderers."
In his Smalcald Articles, he described the saints as currently residing "in their graves and in heaven."
After secretly visiting Wittenberg in early December 1521, Luther wrote ''A Sincere Admonition by Martin Luther to All Christians to Guard Against Insurrection and Rebellion''.
When the town council asked Luther to return, he decided it was his duty to act.
His essay ''On Confession, Whether the Pope has the Power to Require It'' rejected compulsory confession and encouraged private confession and absolution, since "every Christian is a confessor."
Luther's rediscovery of "Christ and His salvation" was the first of two points that became the foundation for the Reformation.
"Don't be too proud," Luther retorted, "German necks don't break that easily.
Martin Luther married Katharina von Bora, one of 12 nuns he had helped escape from the Nimbschen Cistercian convent in April 1523, when he arranged for them to be smuggled out in herring barrels.
They escorted Luther to the security of the Wartburg Castle at Eisenach.
So too was the Little Horn of Daniel 7, coming up among the divisions of Rome, explicitly applied.
Despite his victory in Wittenberg, Luther was unable to stifle radicalism further afield.
The Swiss cities, however, did not sign these agreements.
Preachers such as Zwickau prophet Nicholas Storch and Thomas Müntzer found support amongst poorer towns-people and peasants between 1521 and 1525.
Unless I am convinced by the testimony of the Scriptures or by clear reason (for I do not trust either in the pope or in councils alone, since it is well known that they have often erred and contradicted themselves), I am bound by the Scriptures I have quoted and my conscience is captive to the Word of God.
Using the German vernacular, they expressed the Apostles' Creed in simpler, more personal, Trinitarian language.
This was a general assembly of the estates of the Holy Roman Empire that took place in Worms, a town on the Rhine.
The ceremonial walk to the church and the wedding banquet were left out, and were made up two weeks later on 27 June.
He made clear, however, that the spiritual war against an alien faith was separate, to be waged through prayer and repentance.
On 17 December 1941, seven Protestant regional church confederations issued a statement agreeing with the policy of forcing Jews to wear the yellow badge, "since after his bitter experience Luther had already suggested preventive measures against the Jews and their expulsion from German territory."
To avoid confusing or upsetting the people, Luther avoided extreme change.
Luther states that everything that is used to work sorrow over sin is called the law, even if it is Christ's life, Christ's death for sin, or God's goodness experienced in creation.
After 8&nbsp;a.m., he experienced chest pains.
However, though seemingly contradictorily, he also wrote in the latter work that human reason "strives not against faith, when enlightened, but rather furthers and advances it", bringing claims he was a fideist into dispute.
The benefits of good works could be obtained by donating money to the church.
Luther made his pronouncements from Wartburg in the context of rapid developments at Wittenberg, of which he was kept fully informed.
His position was entirely religious and in no respect racial."
The ''Instruction'' is a problematic document for those seeking a consistent evolution in Luther's thought and practice.
Francis Blackburne in 1765 argued that John Jortin misread this and other passages from Luther, while Gottfried Fritschel pointed out in 1867 that it actually refers to the soul of a man "in this life" (''homo enim in hac vita'') tired from his daily labour (''defatigus diurno labore'') who at night enters his bedchamber (''sub noctem intrat in cubiculum suum'') and whose sleep is interrupted by dreams.
There had been revolts by the peasantry on a smaller scale since the 15th century.
Josel asked the city of Strasbourg to forbid the sale of Luther's anti-Jewish works: they refused initially, but did so when a Lutheran pastor in Hochfelden used a sermon to urge his parishioners to murder Jews.
There is no known condemnation of Luther by Protestants themselves.
Luther himself seemed saddened by the move.
File:Schlosskirche (Wittenberg).jpg|''Schlosskirche'' in Wittenberg, the site where Luther posted his Ninety Five Theses, is simultaneously his gravesite.
He considered the Jews blasphemers and liars because they rejected the divinity of Jesus.
The hymn functioned both as a liturgical setting of the Lord's Prayer and as a means of examining candidates on specific catechism questions.
Faith, for Luther, was a gift from God; the experience of being justified by faith was "as though I had been born again."
"God's anger with them is so intense," Luther concluded, "that gentle mercy will only tend to make them worse, while sharp mercy will reform them but little.
In 1523, Luther advised kindness toward the Jews in ''That Jesus Christ was Born a Jew'' and also aimed to convert them to Christianity.
File:Luther death-hand mask.jpg|Cast of Luther's face and hands at his death, in the Market Church in Halle.
These theses asserted that the law is no longer to be taught to Christians but belonged only to city hall.
When he was criticised for inserting the word "alone" after "faith" in Romans 3:28, he replied in part: "The text itself and the meaning of St. Paul urgently require and demand it.
Fine Christians they are!
The controversy that ensued involved all four Mansfeld counts: Albrecht, Philip, John George, and Gerhard.
If he were forced to choose, he would take his stand with the masses, and this was the direction in which he moved."
He also responded to these assertions in other writings, such as his 1539 open letter to C. Güttel ''Against the Antinomians'', and his book ''On the Councils and the Church'' from the same year.
Early in 1537, Johannes Agricola (1494–1566)&nbsp;– serving at the time as pastor in Luther's birthplace, Eisleben&nbsp;– preached a sermon in which he claimed that God's gospel, not God's moral law (the Ten Commandments), revealed God's wrath to Christians.
Luther's 1538 hymnic version of the Lord's Prayer, "Vater unser im Himmelreich", corresponds exactly to Luther's explanation of the prayer in the ''Small Catechism'', with one stanza for each of the seven prayer petitions, plus opening and closing stanzas.
He alone is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world (John 1:29), and God has laid on Him the iniquity of us all (Isaiah 53:6).
He worked closely with the new elector, John the Steadfast, to whom he turned for secular leadership and funds on behalf of a church largely shorn of its assets and income after the break with Rome.
...  For reason is the greatest enemy that faith has; it never comes to the aid of spiritual things."
He came to view his cry for help as a vow he could never break.
The affair caused lasting damage to Luther's reputation.
In 1529, he wrote the ''Large Catechism'', a manual for pastors and teachers, as well as a synopsis, the ''Small Catechism'', to be memorised by the people themselves.
Josel of Rosheim, the Jewish spokesman who tried to help the Jews of Saxony in 1537, later blamed their plight on "that priest whose name was Martin Luther—may his body and soul be bound up in hell!—who wrote and issued many heretical books in which he said that whoever would help the Jews was doomed to perdition."
There is not a Lutheran on the landscape that has read “The Bondage of the Will,” to their great shame and disgrace".
Luther's teaching of the Ten Commandments, therefore, has clear eschatological overtones, which, characteristically for Luther, do not encourage world-flight but direct the Christian to service to the neighbor in the common, daily vocations of this perishing world.
Nevertheless, Professor Richard (Dick) Geary, former Professor of Modern History at the University of Nottingham, England, and the author of ''Hitler and Nazism'' (Routledge 1993), published an article in the magazine ''History Today'' examining electoral trends in Weimar Germany between 1928 and 1933.
That is, Luther depicted the Trinity not as a doctrine to be learned, but as persons to be known.
From that moment, he devoted himself to Luther's defeat.
Three of his best-known works were published in 1520: ''To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation'', ''On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church'', and ''On the Freedom of a Christian''.
"That is why faith alone makes someone just and fulfills the law," he wrote.
In ''On the Abrogation of the Private Mass'', he condemned as idolatry the idea that the mass is a sacrifice, asserting instead that it is a gift, to be received with thanksgiving by the whole congregation.
The theologians were not prepared to make a general ruling, and they reluctantly advised the landgrave that if he was determined, he should marry secretly and keep quiet about the matter.
For Luther, also Christ's life, when understood as an example, is nothing more than an illustration of the Ten Commandments, which a Christian should follow in his or her vocations on a daily basis.
Luther based his position on predestination on St. Paul's epistle to the .
On 13 June 1525, the couple was engaged with Johannes Bugenhagen, Justus Jonas, Johannes Apel, Philipp Melanchthon and Lucas Cranach the Elder and his wife as witnesses.
Various sites in and outside of Germany (supposedly) visited by Martin Luther throughout his lifetime commemorate it with local memorials.
Switzerland celebrates the holiday on the first Sunday after 31 October.
Luther told him to "tell a good, strong lie" and deny the marriage completely, which Philip did during the subsequent public controversy.
More than writing his theses, Luther's confrontation with the church cast him as an enemy of the pope.
At the time of the Marburg Colloquy, Suleiman the Magnificent was besieging Vienna with a vast Ottoman army.
They did not demand, as do our insane peasants in their raging, that the goods of others—of Pilate and Herod—should be common, but only their own goods.
Luther's 1524 creedal hymn "" ("We All Believe in One True God") is a three-stanza confession of faith prefiguring Luther's 1529 three-part explanation of the Apostles' Creed in the ''Small Catechism.''
He also provided simplified versions of the baptism and marriage services.
The years of struggle with Rome, the antagonisms with and among his fellow reformers, and the scandal which ensued from the bigamy of the Philip of Hesse incident, in which Luther had played a leading role, all may have contributed.
Luther taught that salvation and, subsequently, eternal life are not earned by good deeds but are received only as the free gift of God's grace through the believer's faith in Jesus Christ as redeemer from sin.
Citing Deuteronomy 13, wherein Moses commands the killing of idolaters and the burning of their cities and property as an offering to God, Luther called for a "''scharfe Barmherzigkeit''" ("sharp mercy") against the Jews "to see whether we might save at least a few from the glowing flames."
Reason could not lead men to God, he felt, and he thereafter developed a love-hate relationship with Aristotle over the latter's emphasis on reason.
Therefore let everyone who can, smite, slay, and stab, secretly or openly, remembering that nothing can be more poisonous, hurtful, or devilish than a rebel ... For baptism does not make men free in body and property, but in soul; and the gospel does not make goods common, except in the case of those who, of their own free will, do what the apostles and disciples did in Acts 4 :32–37.
This cannot be otherwise acquired or grasped by any work, law or merit.
In December 1544, he began to feel the effects of angina.
He strongly disputed the claim that freedom from God's punishment for sin could be purchased with money, proposing an academic discussion of the practice and efficacy of indulgences in his ''Ninety-five Theses'' of 1517.
It is also celebrated elsewhere around the world.
Saxony-Anhalt has two towns lawfully named after Luther, Lutherstadt Eisleben and Lutherstadt Wittenberg.
Luther described this period of his life as one of deep spiritual despair.
Luther had been suffering from ill health for years, including Ménière's disease, vertigo, fainting, tinnitus, and a cataract in one eye.
Slovenia celebrates it due to the profound contribution of the Reformation to its culture.
"Regarding the plan to collect my writings in volumes," he wrote, "I am quite cool and not at all eager about it because, roused by a Saturnian hunger, I would rather see them all devoured.
All humans are sinners by nature, he explained, and God's grace (which cannot be earned) alone can make them just.
The catechism is one of Luther's most personal works.
"Merciful God, what misery I have seen," Luther wrote, "the common people knowing nothing at all of Christian doctrine ... and unfortunately many pastors are well-nigh unskilled and incapable of teaching."
Though Luther saw the Muslim faith as a tool of the devil, he was indifferent to its practice: "Let the Turk believe and live as he will, just as one lets the papacy and other false Christians live."
File:Luthers Sterbehaus Eisleben.jpg|The house where Luther died—perceived to be the one until 2004.
According to Bainton: "Luther's dilemma was that he wanted both a confessional church based on personal faith and experience and a territorial church including all in a given locality.
In the view of Luther's biographer Martin Brecht, "giving confessional advice for Philip of Hesse was one of the worst mistakes Luther made, and, next to the landgrave himself, who was directly responsible for it, history chiefly holds Luther accountable".
I cannot and will not recant anything, since it is neither safe nor right to go against conscience.
Luther connected high art and folk music, also all classes, clergy and laity, men, women and children.
Human beings could learn about God only through divine revelation, he believed, and Scripture therefore became increasingly important to him.
We are beggars: this is true.
However, Mullett suggests that given his nature, "we are free to believe that Luther would tend to select the more dramatic form of words."
His translation of the Bible into the vernacular (instead of Latin) made it more accessible to the laity, an event that had a tremendous impact on both the church and German culture.
According to Michael, just about every anti-Jewish book printed in the Third Reich contained references to and quotations from Luther.
He received a bachelor's degree in Biblical studies on 9 March 1508, and another bachelor's degree in the ''Sentences'' by Peter Lombard in 1509.
He transformed ''A solus ortus cardine'' to "" ("We should now praise Christ") and ''Veni Creator Spiritus'' to "" ("Come, Holy Spirit, Lord God").
The enforcement of the ban on the ''Ninety-five Theses'' fell to the secular authorities.
An apoplectic stroke deprived him of his speech, and he died shortly afterwards at 2:45&nbsp;a.m. on 18 February 1546, aged 62, in Eisleben, the city of his birth.
Luther and his wife moved into a former monastery, "The Black Cloister," a wedding present from the new elector John the Steadfast (1525–32).
Branches of Protestantism that emerged afterwards vary in their remembrance and veneration of Luther, ranging from a complete lack of a single mention to a commemoration almost comparable to the way Lutherans commemorate and remember his persona.
It became known as the German Te Deum.
The theologian Johann Eck, however, was determined to expose Luther's doctrine in a public forum.
He wrote two hymns on the Ten Commandments, "Dies sind die heilgen Zehn Gebot" and "Mensch, willst du leben seliglich".
A piece of paper was later found on which Luther had written his last statement.
Luther is honoured on 18 February with a commemoration in the Lutheran Calendar of Saints and in the Episcopal (United States) Calendar of Saints.
The hearings degenerated into a shouting match.
Yet if Tetzel overstated the matter in regard to indulgences for the ''dead'', his teaching on indulgences for the ''living'' was in line with Catholic dogma of the time.
His refusal to renounce all of his writings at the demand of Pope Leo X in 1520 and the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V at the Diet of Worms in 1521 resulted in his excommunication by the Pope and condemnation as an outlaw by the Emperor.
These included a renewed attack on Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz, whom he shamed into halting the sale of indulgences in his episcopates, and a "Refutation of the Argument of Latomus," in which he expounded the principle of justification to Jacobus Latomus, an orthodox theologian from Louvain.
His poor physical health made him short-tempered and even harsher in his writings and comments.
This is Hesse, not Switzerland."
At the end of this speech, Luther raised his arm "in the traditional salute of a knight winning a bout."
He had several brothers and sisters, and is known to have been close to one of them, Jacob.
He often accompanied the sung hymns with a lute, later recreated as the waldzither that became a national instrument of Germany in the 20th century.
On the other hand, Luther also points out that the Ten Commandments&nbsp;– when considered not as God's condemning judgment but as an expression of his eternal will, that is, of the natural law&nbsp;– also positively teach how the Christian ought to live.
:"Nevertheless, the sleep of this life and that of the future life differ; for '''in this life''', man, fatigued by his daily labour, at nightfall goes to his couch, as in peace, to sleep there, and enjoys rest; nor does he know anything of evil, whether of fire or of murder."
Austria allows Protestant children not to go to school that day, and Protestant workers have a right to leave work in order to participate in a church service.
The Latin ''Theses'' were printed in several location in Germany in 1517.
He spent the rest of his career in this position at the University of Wittenberg.
And so often they do."
Condemned by virtually every Lutheran denomination, these statements and their influence on antisemitism have contributed to his controversial status.
Reformation Day commemorates the publication of the Ninety Five Theses in 1517 by Martin Luther; it has been historically important in the following European entities.
He sent Martin to Latin schools in Mansfeld, then Magdeburg in 1497, where he attended a school operated by a lay group called the Brethren of the Common Life, and Eisenach in 1498.
In 1526, he argued in ''Whether Soldiers can be in a State of Grace'' that national defence is reason for a just war.
On 19 October 1512, he was awarded his Doctor of Theology and, on 21 October 1512, was received into the senate of the theological faculty of the University of Wittenberg, having succeeded Staupitz as chair of theology.
When the fathers of the council of Constance condemned this proposition of John Huss—''The church of Jesus Christ is only the community of the elect'', they condemned an error; for the church, like a good mother, embraces within her arms all who bear the name of Christian, all who are called to enjoy the celestial beatitude.'"
It was conducted from 28 January to 25 May 1521, with Emperor Charles V presiding.
Hans Hillerbrand writes that Luther had no intention of confronting the church, but saw his disputation as a scholarly objection to church practices, and the tone of the writing is accordingly "searching, rather than doctrinaire."
His companions, Justus Jonas and Michael Coelius, shouted loudly, "Reverend father, are you ready to die trusting in your Lord Jesus Christ and to confess the doctrine which you have taught in his name?"
Because it expressed essential Reformation doctrine, this expanded version of "Aus tiefer Not" was designated as a regular component of several regional Lutheran liturgies and was widely used at funerals, including Luther's own.
His theology challenged the authority and office of the Pope by teaching that the Bible is the only source of divinely revealed knowledge from God and opposed sacerdotalism by considering all baptized Christians to be a holy priesthood.
Luther's thought is revolutionary to the extent that it is a theology of the cross, the negation of every affirmation: as long as the cross is at the center, the system building tendency of reason is held in check, and system building does not degenerate into System.
Luther incorporated questions and answers in the catechism so that the basics of Christian faith would not just be learned by rote, "the way monkeys do it", but understood.
In Robert Michael's view, Luther's words "We are at fault in not slaying them" amounted to a sanction for murder.
The most important for Luther was the doctrine of justification&nbsp;– God's act of declaring a sinner righteous&nbsp;– by faith alone through God's grace.
As a consequence, Luther was excommunicated by Pope Leo X on 3 January 1521, in the bull ''Decet Romanum Pontificem''.
On his table Luther wrote the words "''Hoc est corpus meum''" ("This is my body") in chalk, to continually indicate his firm stance.
In January 1519, at Altenburg in Saxony, the papal ''nuncio'' Karl von Miltitz adopted a more conciliatory approach.
He wrote to the Elector: "During my absence, Satan has entered my sheepfold, and committed ravages which I cannot repair by writing, but only by my personal presence and living word."
Luther said, "we want to practice Christian love toward them and pray that they convert," but also that they are "our public enemies&nbsp;... and if they could kill us all, they would gladly do so.
He intended his vigorous, direct language to make the Bible accessible to everyday Germans, "for we are removing impediments and difficulties so that other people may read it without hindrance."
In January 1518 friends of Luther translated the ''Ninety-five Theses'' from Latin into German.
Some scholars see Luther's influence as limited, and the Nazis' use of his work as opportunistic.
In contrast to images of frail Catholic saints, Luther was presented as a stout man with a "double chin, strong mouth, piercing deep-set eyes, fleshy face, and squat neck."
By 1529, in ''On War against the Turk'', he was actively urging Emperor Charles V and the German people to fight a secular war against the Turks.
He had long condemned vows of celibacy on Biblical grounds, but his decision to marry surprised many, not least Melanchthon, who called it reckless.
His words, through divine mercy, are bringing back every day misguided people into the way of the truth."
Luther's influence persisted after his death.
Revolts broke out in Franconia, Swabia, and Thuringia in 1524, even drawing support from disaffected nobles, many of whom were in debt.
The Father creates, the Son redeems, and the Spirit sanctifies, a divine unity with separate personalities.
For I acknowledge none of them to be really a book of mine, except perhaps the ''Bondage of the Will'' and the Catechism."
Despite the disagreements on the Eucharist, the Marburg Colloquy paved the way for the signing in 1530 of the Augsburg Confession, and for the formation of the Schmalkaldic League the following year by leading Protestant nobles such as John of Saxony, Philip of Hesse, and George, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach.
The three schools focused on the so-called "trivium": grammar, rhetoric, and logic.
File:Luthertombstoneunderaltar.jpg|Luther's tombstone beneath the pulpit in the Castle Church in Wittenberg.
For example, the ''Instructions for the Visitors of Parish Pastors in Electoral Saxony'' (1528), drafted by Melanchthon with Luther's approval, stressed the role of repentance in the forgiveness of sins, despite Luther's position that faith alone ensures justification.
Luther's final journey, to Mansfeld, was taken because of his concern for his siblings' families continuing in their father Hans Luther's copper mining trade.
Their livelihood was threatened by Count Albrecht of Mansfeld bringing the industry under his own control.
Luther sympathised with some of the peasants' grievances, as he showed in his response to the Twelve Articles in May 1525, but he reminded the aggrieved to obey the temporal authorities.
Martin Luther is honored in various ways by Christian traditions coming out directly from the Protestant Reformation, i.e.
Those who attended a farewell supper walked him to the door of the Black Cloister.
Over the next five days, private conferences were held to determine Luther's fate.
Lutheranism, the Reformed tradition, and Anglicanism.
Luther objected to a saying attributed to Johann Tetzel that "As soon as the coin in the coffer rings, the soul from purgatory (also attested as 'into heaven') springs."
File:Luthergrab-WB.jpg|Close-up of the grave with inscription in Latin.
In contrast to the views of John Calvin and Philipp Melanchthon, throughout his life Luther maintained that it was not false doctrine to believe that a Christian's soul sleeps after it is separated from the body in death; and, accordingly, he disputed traditional interpretations of some Bible passages, such as the parable of the rich man and Lazarus.
The Lutheran theologian Franz Pieper observed that Luther's teaching about the state of the Christian's soul after death differed from the later Lutheran theologians such as Johann Gerhard.
This meant he was to visit and oversee each of eleven monasteries in his province.
The city of Nuremberg presented a first edition of ''On the Jews and their Lies'' to Julius Streicher, editor of the Nazi newspaper ''Der Stürmer'', on his birthday in 1937; the newspaper described it as the most radically anti-Semitic tract ever published.
As a result, on 4 March 1540, Philip married a second wife, Margarethe von der Saale, with Melanchthon and Bucer among the witnesses.
Luther and his colleagues introduced the new order of worship during their visitation of the Electorate of Saxony, which began in 1527.
The first and chief article is this: Jesus Christ, our God and Lord, died for our sins and was raised again for our justification (Romans 3:24–25).
