Hermann became a historian and would later serve as the executor of Heidegger's will.
In pursuit of the retrieval of this question, Heidegger spent considerable time reflecting on ancient Greek thought, in particular on Plato, Parmenides, Heraclitus, and Anaximander, as well as on the tragic playwright Sophocles.
In 1941, under pressure from publisher Max Niemeyer, Heidegger agreed to remove the dedication to Husserl from ''Being and Time'' (restored in post-war editions).
Heidegger remained a member of both the academic faculty and of the Nazi Party until the end of the war.
His influence is clear on Jean Beaufret, François Fédier, Dominique Janicaud, Jean-Luc Marion, Jean-François Courtine, etc.
More recently, Heidegger's thought has considerably influenced the work of the French philosopher Bernard Stiegler.
Heidegger does not unequivocally condemn technology: while he acknowledges that modern technology contains grave dangers, Heidegger nevertheless also argues that it may constitute a chance for human beings to enter a new epoch in their relation to being.
Derrida, Lacoue-Labarthe, and Jean-François Lyotard, among others, all engaged in debate and disagreement about the relation between Heidegger's philosophy and his Nazi politics.
Ludwig Wittgenstein made a remark recorded by Friedrich Waismann: "To be sure, I can imagine what Heidegger means by being and anxiety" which has been construed by some commentators as sympathetic to Heidegger's philosophical approach.
This clandestine textual appropriation of non-Western spirituality, the extent of which has gone undiscovered for so long, seems quite unparalleled, with far-reaching implications for our future interpretation of Heidegger’s work."
Sartre's key proposition about the priority of ''existentia'' over ''essentia''  that is, Sartre's statement that "existence precedes essence" does, however, justify using the name "existentialism" as an appropriate title for a philosophy of this sort.
He considered Heidegger to be the worst example of such philosophy, which Ayer believed to be entirely useless.
Arendt initially suggested that Heidegger's behavior precipitated Husserl's death.
Those who idolize "facts" never notice that their idols only shine in a borrowed light.
Heidegger later claimed that his relationship with Husserl had already become strained after Husserl publicly "settled accounts" with Heidegger and Max Scheler in the early 1930s.
In Husserl's account the structure of protentions is accorded neither the finitude nor the primacy that Heidegger claims are central to the original future of ecstatic-horizonal temporality.
Heidegger claimed to have revived the question of being, the question having been largely forgotten by the metaphysical tradition extending from Plato to Descartes, a forgetfulness extending to the Age of Enlightenment and then to modern science and technology.
He served as a soldier during the final year of World War I, working behind a desk and never leaving Germany.
The ''Der Spiegel'' interviewers did not bring up Heidegger's 1949 quotation comparing the industrialization of agriculture to the extermination camps.
''The Principle of Reason'', trans.
(''What Is Called Thinking?''
The termination of the retired professor Husserl's academic privileges thus did not involve any specific action on Heidegger's part.
In the majority of "research results," the Greeks appear as pure National Socialists.
Initially striving for a synthesis between Hegelian Marxism and Heidegger's phenomenology, Marcuse later rejected Heidegger's thought for its "false concreteness" and "revolutionary conservativism."
Derrida attempted to displace the understanding of Heidegger's work that had been prevalent in France from the period of the ban against Heidegger teaching in German universities, which amounted to an almost wholesale rejection of the influence of Jean-Paul Sartre and existentialist terms.
The essence of modern technology is the conversion of the whole universe of beings into an undifferentiated "standing reserve" (''Bestand'') of energy available for any use to which humans choose to put it.
Heidegger died on 26 May 1976, and was buried in the Meßkirch cemetery, beside his parents and brother.
I am not sure how to judge it, and have read no commentator who even begins to make sense of it".
In a 1950 lecture he formulated the famous saying ''Language speaks'', later published in the 1959 essays collection ''Unterwegs zur Sprache'', and collected in the 1971 English book ''Poetry, Language, Thought''.
Bertrand Russell commented, expressing the sentiments of many mid-20th-century analytic philosophers, that:
He enjoyed outdoor pursuits, being especially proficient at skiing.
Heidegger married Elfride Petri on 21 March 1917, in a Catholic ceremony officiated by his friend Engelbert Krebs, and a week later in a Protestant ceremony in the presence of her parents.
These positive and negative analytic evaluations have been collected in Michael Murray (ed.
The exact nature of the conversation is not known, but what is known is that it included talk of Heidegger's relationship to the Catholic Church and subsequent Christian burial at which the priest officiated.
Heidegger's behavior towards Husserl has evoked controversy.
He resigned the rectorate in April 1934, but remained a member of the Nazi Party until 1945 even though (as Julian Young asserts) the Nazis eventually prevented him from publishing.
Heidegger spent much time at his vacation home at Todtnauberg, on the edge of the Black Forest.
''Identity and Difference'', trans.
When Husserl retired as Professor of Philosophy in 1928, Heidegger accepted Freiburg's election to be his successor, in spite of a counter-offer by Marburg.
Heidegger's thought influenced some architectural theorists in a direct manner, or through an impact via his reflections on 'dwelling', the 'origin of the work of art', 'the essence of technology', and the unfolding of a broad interest in phenomenology within the contemporary circles of architectural theory.
He envisaged this abyss to be the greatest event in the West's history because it would enable Humanity to comprehend Being more profoundly and primordially than the Pre-Socratics.
''Identität und Differenz'', Gesamtausgabe Volume 11
Heidegger's former lover Arendt spoke on his behalf at this hearing, while Jaspers spoke against him.
An important witness to Heidegger's continued allegiance to National Socialism during the post-rectorship period is his former student Karl Löwith, who met Heidegger in 1936 while Heidegger was visiting Rome.
There was discussion of a meeting in 1972, but this failed to take place.
And this would in turn raise the question of whether this failure is due to a flaw in Heidegger's account of temporality, that is, of whether Heidegger was correct to oppose vulgar and authentic time.
For example, in 2011 Mark Wrathall argued that Heidegger pursued and refined the central notion of unconcealment throughout his life as a philosopher.
Thus Husserl's understanding that all consciousness is "intentional" (in the sense that it is always intended ''toward'' something, and is always "about" something) is transformed in Heidegger's philosophy, becoming the thought that all experience is grounded in "care".
Martin Heidegger had a long and highly problematic romantic relationship with Hannah Arendt and a steamy affair (over many decades) with Elisabeth Blochmann, both students of his.
Heidegger's intuition about the question of Being is thus a historical argument, which in his later work becomes his concern with the "history of Being", that is, the history of the forgetting of Being, which according to Heidegger requires that philosophy retrace its footsteps through a productive destruction of the history of philosophy.
The analytic tradition values clarity of expression.
Heidegger argues that describing experience properly entails finding the being for whom such a description might matter.
The rectorate was an attempt to see something in the movement that had come to power, beyond all its failings and crudeness, that was much more far-reaching and that could perhaps one day bring a concentration on the Germans' Western historical essence.
In his inaugural address as rector on 27 May he expressed his support of a German revolution, and in an article and a speech to the students from the same year he also supported Adolf Hitler.
He defined the order of publication and dictated that the principle of editing should be "ways not works."
Heidegger remained at Freiburg im Breisgau for the rest of his life, declining a number of later offers, including one from Humboldt University of Berlin.
He completed his doctoral thesis on psychologism in 1914, influenced by Neo-Thomism and Neo-Kantianism, and in 1916 finished his ''venia legendi'' with a thesis on Duns Scotus directed by Heinrich Rickert and influenced by Edmund Husserl's phenomenology.
Heidegger's largest issue with Sartre's existential humanism is that, while it does make a humanistic 'move' in privileging existence over essence, "the reversal of a metaphysical statement remains a metaphysical statement."
For Heidegger, Hölderlin expressed the intuitive necessity of metaphysical concepts as a guide for ethical paradigms, devoid of reflection.
This overenthusiasm on the part of academics seems not even to notice that with such "results" it does National Socialism and its historical uniqueness no service at all, not that it needs this anyhow.
However, others feel that this is to overstate the difference.
Heidegger was elected rector of the University of Freiburg on April 21, 1933, and assumed the position the following day.
The ''Gesamtausgabe'' was begun during Heidegger's lifetime.
-- one cannot even read Derrida or Levinas without taking into account their critiques of Heidegger that run deep at the basis of their thinking.
In particular, Jürgen Habermas admonishes the influence of Heidegger on recent French philosophy in his polemic against "postmodernism" in ''The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity'' (1985).
In reading Aristotle, Heidegger increasingly contested the traditional Latin translation and scholastic interpretation of his thought.
He asserts: "The investigation concludes that Heidegger’s work was significantly influenced by East Asian sources.
The need for ''Dasein'' to assume these possibilities, that is, the need to be responsible for one's own existence, is the basis of Heidegger's notions of authenticity and resoluteness—that is, of those specific possibilities for ''Dasein'' which depend on escaping the "vulgar" temporality of calculation and of public life.
Emmanuel Levinas attended his lecture courses during his stay in Freiburg in 1928.
Some National Socialist education officials viewed him as a rival, while others saw his efforts as comical.
In that text, intended for a French audience, Heidegger explained this misreading in the following terms:
Although he later worked less on Aristotle, Heidegger recommended postponing reading Nietzsche, and to "first study Aristotle for ten to fifteen years."
''Off the Beaten Track''.
"Letter on 'Humanism'" is often seen as a direct response to Sartre's 1945 lecture "Existentialism is a Humanism."
Heidegger himself had contact with a number of leading Japanese intellectuals, including members of the Kyoto School, notably Hajime Tanabe and Kuki Shūzō.
Contrary to the criticisms Heidegger advances in his lectures, intentionality (and, by implication, the meaning of 'to be') in the final analysis is not construed by Husserl as sheer presence (be it the presence of a fact or object, act or event).
Whereas Heidegger argued that the question of human existence is central to the pursuit of the question of being, Husserl criticized this as reducing phenomenology to "philosophical anthropology" and offering an abstract and incorrect portrait of the human being.
"Die Frage nach der Technik", in Gesamtausgabe Volume 7
The lectures on Nietzsche focused on fragments posthumously published under the title ''The Will to Power'', rather than on Nietzsche's published works.
In his interview Heidegger defended as double-speak his 1935 lecture describing the "inner truth and greatness of this movement."
In the first division of the work, Heidegger attempted to turn away from "ontic" questions about beings to ontological questions about Being, and recover the most fundamental philosophical question: the question of Being, of what it means for something to be.
Heidegger's thought is original in being an authentic retrieval of the past, a repetition of the possibilities handed down by the tradition.
In his postwar thinking, Heidegger distanced himself from Nazism, but his critical comments about Nazism seem "scandalous" to some since they tend to equate the Nazi war atrocities with other inhumane practices related to rationalisation and industrialisation, including the treatment of animals by factory farming.
He helped Blochmann emigrate from Germany before the start of World War II and resumed contact with both of them after the war.
This is termed "ready to hand", and Heidegger considers it an authentic mode, saying that the given ("past") has presence in an oversimplified way when reduced to possible future usefulness to us.
Arendt was Jewish, and Blochmann had one Jewish parent, making them subject to severe persecution by the Nazi authorities.
According to the ''IEP'', he is "widely acknowledged to be one of the most original and important philosophers of the 20th century."
The British logical positivist A. J. Ayer was strongly critical of Heidegger's philosophy.
Reinhard May records Chang Chung-Yuan saying that "Heidegger is the only Western Philosopher who not only intellectually understands but has intuitively grasped Taoist thought."
According to Husserl, ''Being and Time'' claimed to deal with ontology but only did so in the first few pages of the book.
One crucial source of this insight was Heidegger's reading of Franz Brentano's treatise on Aristotle's manifold uses of the word "being", a work which provoked Heidegger to ask what kind of unity underlies this multiplicity of uses.
In 1927, Heidegger published his main work ''Sein und Zeit'' (''Being and Time'').
However, recent work by philosopher and critical theorist Nikolas Kompridis tries to show that Heidegger's insights into world disclosure are badly misunderstood and mishandled by Habermas, and are of vital importance for critical theory, offering an important way of renewing that tradition.
Levinas also condemned Heidegger's involvement with National Socialism, stating: "One can forgive many Germans, but there are some Germans it is difficult to forgive.
It investigates the question of Being by asking about the being for whom Being is a question.
He affirmed that Nazi informants who observed his lectures would understand that by "movement" he meant National Socialism.
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy states that Heidegger's writing is "notoriously difficult", possibly because his thinking was "original" and clearly on obscure and innovative topics.
and other Heideggerian texts were read by Jean-Paul Sartre and other existentialists, as well as by thinkers such as Alexandre Kojève, Georges Bataille and Emmanuel Levinas.
Yet for all its "dangerous closeness" to what Heidegger understands by temporality, Husserl's account of internal time-consciousness does differ fundamentally.
In 1923, Heidegger was elected to an extraordinary Professorship in Philosophy at the University of Marburg.
One cannot help suspecting that language is here running riot.
This dating of the influence is much too late."
Heidegger delivered his inaugural address, the ''Rektoratsrede'', on "Die Selbstbehauptung der Deutschen Universität" ("The Self-assertion of the German University") on 27 May.
(For more on this see ''Penser à Strasbourg,'' Jacques Derrida, et al., which includes reproductions of both letters and an account by Braun, "À mi-chemin entre Heidegger et Derrida").
Roger Scruton stated that:  "His major work ''Being and Time'' is formidably difficult—unless it is utter nonsense, in which case it is laughably easy.
''Discourse On Thinking''
His tenure as rector was fraught with difficulties from the outset.
That Heidegger did not write this second part of ''Being and Time'', and that the existential analytic was left behind in the course of Heidegger's subsequent writings on the history of being, might be interpreted as a failure to conjugate his account of ''individual'' experience with his account of the vicissitudes of the ''collective'' human adventure that he understands the Western philosophical tradition to be.
Heidegger adopted similar views, e.g.
When in 1987 Víctor Farías published his book ''Heidegger et le nazisme'', this debate was taken up by many others, some of whom were inclined to disparage so-called "deconstructionists" for their association with Heidegger's philosophy.
Adolf Hitler was sworn in as Chancellor of Germany on January 30, 1933.
It will in no way be denied that at the time I believed in such possibilities and for that reason renounced the actual vocation of thinking in favor of being effective in an official capacity.
Two recurring themes of Heidegger's later writings are poetry and technology.
For Heidegger thinking is thinking ''about'' things originally discovered in our everyday practical engagements.
Also  ''Beiträge zur Philosophie (Vom Ereignis)'' (''Contributions to Philosophy (From Enowning)''), composed in the years 1936–38 but not published until 1989, on the centennial of Heidegger's birth.
However, it subsequently transpired that this qualification had not been made during the original lecture, although Heidegger claimed that it had been.
The existential analytic of ''Being and Time'' was thus always only a first step in Heidegger's philosophy, to be followed by the "dismantling" (''Destruktion'') of the history of philosophy, that is, a transformation of its language and meaning, that would have made of the existential analytic only a kind of "limit case" (in the sense in which special relativity is a limit case of general relativity).
Pragmatist Rorty claimed that Heidegger's approach to philosophy in the first half of his career has much in common with that of the latter-day Ludwig Wittgenstein.
Aristotle's ethical, logical, and metaphysical works were crucial to the development of his thought in the crucial period of the 1920s.
During the 1930s, critics of Heidegger's espousal of a Nazi-style rhetoric of martial manliness noted the unheroic nature of his service in WWI.
by Richard Rojcewicz and Daniela Vallega-Neu (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2012)
Heidegger's concepts of anxiety (''Angst'') and mortality draw on Kierkegaard and are indebted to the way in which the latter lays out the importance of our subjective relation to truth, our existence in the face of death, the temporality of existence, and the importance of passionate affirmation of one's individual being-in-the-world.
Philosophical historian Hans Sluga wrote:
For instance, when a hammer is efficiently used to knock in nails, we cease to be aware of it.
He developed a number of contacts in France, where his work continued to be taught, and a number of French students visited him at Todtnauberg (see, for example, Jean-François Lyotard's brief account in ''Heidegger and "the Jews"'', which discusses a Franco-German conference held in Freiburg in 1947, one step toward bringing together French and German students).
For Ayer, this sort of philosophy was a poisonous strain in modern thought.
Heidegger's reputation within English-language philosophy has slightly improved in philosophical terms in some part through the efforts of Hubert Dreyfus, Richard Rorty, and a recent generation of analytically oriented phenomenology scholars.
The following week the national Reich law of 28 April 1933, replaced Reichskommissar Wagner's decree.
However, not all analytic philosophers have been as hostile.
Critics such as Levinas, Karl Löwith, and Theodor Adorno claim that Heidegger's support for National Socialism revealed flaws inherent in his thought.
Heidegger thought the presence of things for us is not their being, but merely them interpreted as equipment according to a particular system of meaning and purpose.
He emphasized the importance of Authenticity in human existence, involving a truthful relationship to our thrownness into a world which we are  "always already" concerned with, and to our Being-towards-death, the Finitude of the time and being we are given, and the closing down of our various possibilities for being through time.
Stiegler understands the existential analytic of ''Being and Time'' as an account of psychic individuation, and his later "history of being" as an account of collective individuation.
Second, he admitted that he saw an "awakening" (''Aufbruch'') which might help to find a "new national and social approach," but said that he changed his mind about this in 1934, largely prompted by the violence of the Night of the Long Knives.
Initially members of the Frankfurt School were positively disposed to Heidegger, becoming more critical at the beginning of the 1930s.
Despite this, some commentators have insisted that an agrarian nostalgia permeates his later work.
He wanted to position himself as the philosopher of the Party, but the highly abstract nature of his work and the opposition of Alfred Rosenberg, who himself aspired to act in that position, limited Heidegger's role.
His students at Freiburg included Arendt, Günther Anders, Hans Jonas, Karl Löwith, Charles Malik, Herbert Marcuse and Ernst Nolte.
Some writers on Heidegger's work see possibilities within it for dialogue with traditions of thought outside of Western philosophy, particularly East Asian thinking.
Heidegger approached the question through an inquiry into the being that has an understanding of Being, and asks the question about it, namely, Human being, which he called Dasein ("being-there").
Many of Heidegger's works from the 1930s onwards include meditations on lines from Hölderlin's poetry, and several of the lecture courses are devoted to the reading of a single poem (see, for example, ''Hölderlin's Hymn "The Ister"'').
This is also the case for the lecture courses devoted to the poetry of Friedrich Hölderlin, which became an increasingly central focus of Heidegger's work and thought.
A reviewer of Wrathall's book stated: "An ontology of unconcealment ... means a description and analysis of the broad contexts in which entities show up as meaningful to us, as well as the conditions under which such contexts, or worlds, emerge and fade."
Heidegger focuses less on the way in which the structures of being are revealed in everyday behavior, and more on the way in which behaviour itself depends on a prior "openness to being."
Heidegger was one of the most influential philosophers of the 20th century, and his ideas have penetrated into many areas, but in France there is a very long and particular history of reading and interpreting his work which in itself resulted in deepening the impact of his thought in Continental Philosophy.
Deconstruction came to Heidegger's attention in 1967 by way of Lucien Braun's recommendation of Jacques Derrida's work (Hans-Georg Gadamer was present at an initial discussion and indicated to Heidegger that Derrida's work came to his attention by way of an assistant).
In the second division, Heidegger argues that human being is even more fundamentally structured by its Temporality, or its concern with, and relationship to time, existing as a structurally open "possibility-for-being."
It is difficult to forgive Heidegger."
Having nothing further to contribute to an ontology independent of human existence, Heidegger changed the topic to ''Dasein''.
He extended the concept of subject to the dimension of history and concrete existence, which he found prefigured in such Christian thinkers as Saint Paul, Augustine of Hippo, Luther, and Kierkegaard.
In 1967 Heidegger met with the Jewish poet Paul Celan, a concentration camp survivor.
Levinas was deeply influenced by Heidegger, and yet became one of his fiercest critics, contrasting the infinity of the good beyond being with the immanence and totality of ontology.
Aside from merely disputing readings of his own work, however, in "Letter on 'Humanism,'" Heidegger asserts that "Every humanism is either grounded in a metaphysics or is itself made to be the ground of one."
For Heidegger, unlike for Husserl, philosophical terminology could not be divorced from the history of the use of that terminology, and thus genuine philosophy could not avoid confronting questions of language and meaning.
May sees great influence of Taoism and Japanese scholars in Heidegger's work, although this influence is not acknowledged by the author.
The second intuition animating Heidegger's philosophy derives from the influence of Edmund Husserl, a philosopher largely uninterested in questions of philosophical history.
In late 1946, as France engaged in ''épuration légale'' in its Occupation zone, the French military authorities determined that Heidegger should be blocked from teaching or participating in any university activities because of his association with the Nazi Party.
Heidegger's silence about the stark similarities between his account of temporality and Husserl's investigation of internal time-consciousness contributes to a ''misrepresentation'' of Husserl's account of intentionality.
Heidegger became Rector of the University of Freiburg on 22 April 1933.
Eine Auseinandersetzung der Diltheyschen Richtung mit Heidegger und Husserl'', Leipzig 1930 (3rd ed.
that time was the horizon of Being: ' ...time temporalizes itself only as long as there are human beings.'
A few months before his death, he met with Bernhard Welte, a Catholic priest, Freiburg university professor and earlier correspondent.
The essence of being human is the maintenance of this openness.
Heidegger contrasts this openness to the "will to power" of the modern human subject, which is one way of forgetting this originary openness.
Despite perceived differences between Eastern and Western philosophy, some of Heidegger's later work, particularly "A Dialogue on Language between a Japanese and an Inquirer", does show an interest in initiating such a dialogue.
Heidegger's ''Black Notebooks'', written between 1931 and 1941 and first published in 2014, contain several anti-semitic statements and have led to a re-evaluation of Heidegger's relation to Nazism.
Rather, he meant it as he expressed it in the parenthetical clarification later added to ''Introduction to Metaphysics'' (1953), namely, "the confrontation of planetary technology and modern humanity."
He finally offered his resignation on 23 April 1934, and it was accepted on 27 April.
Because Heidegger's discussion of ontology (the study of being) is rooted in an analysis of the mode of existence of individual human beings (''Da-sein'', or there-being), his work has often been associated with existentialism.
Heidegger's later works, beginning by 1930 and largely established by the early 1940s, seem to many commentators (e.g.
''Being and Time'' influenced many thinkers, including such existentialist thinkers as Jean-Paul Sartre (although Heidegger distanced himself from existentialism—see below).
Though as rector he prevented students from displaying an anti-Semitic poster at the entrance to the university and from holding a book burning, he kept in close contact with the Nazi student leaders and clearly signaled to them his sympathy with their activism.
Heidegger's defenders, notably Arendt, see his support for Nazism as arguably a personal " 'error' " (a word which Arendt placed in quotation marks when referring to Heidegger's Nazi-era politics).
''Hölderlins Hymne »Der Ister«'' (1942, published 1984), Gesamtausgabe Volume 53
Heidegger grants to Hölderlin a singular place within the history of being and the history of Germany, as a herald whose thought is yet to be "heard" in Germany or the West.
But the basic tenet of "existentialism" has nothing at all in common with the statement from ''Being and Time'' that "the 'essence' of Dasein lies in its existence"—apart from the fact that in ''Being and Time'' no statement about the relation of ''essentia'' and ''existentia'' can yet be expressed, since there it is still a question of preparing something precursory.
(It was published five days after his death, on 31 May 1976.)
Gilbert Ryle wrote a critical yet positive review of ''Being and Time''.
"The Question Concerning Technology", in Heidegger, Martin, ''Basic Writings'': Second Edition, Revised and Expanded, ed.
In Derrida's view, deconstruction is a tradition inherited via Heidegger (the French term "déconstruction" is a term coined to translate Heidegger's use of the words "Destruktion"—literally "destruction"—and "Abbau"—more literally "de-building").
Studying theology at the University of Freiburg while supported by the church on the understanding that he would defend their doctrine, Heidegger broke with Catholicism and switched his field of study to philosophy.
Nevertheless, it was Heidegger's rationalization and later work on Hölderlin's poems as well as on Parmenides ("For to be aware and to be are the same," DK B 3) and his consistent understanding of Nietzsche's thought that formed the foundation of postmodern existentialism.
According to Derrida, Sartre's interpretation of Dasein and other key Heideggerian concerns is overly psychologistic, anthropocentric, and misses the historicality central to ''Dasein'' in ''Being and Time''.
Derrida and others not only continued to defend the importance of reading Heidegger, but attacked Farías on the grounds of poor scholarship and for what they saw as the sensationalism of his approach.
Heidegger's collected works are published by Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger's later works include ''Vom Wesen der Wahrheit'' ("On the Essence of Truth", 1930), ''Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes'' ("The Origin of the Work of Art", 1935), ''Einführung in die Metaphysik'' ("Introduction to Metaphysics", 1935),  ''Bauen Wohnen Denken'' ("Building Dwelling Thinking", 1951), and ''Die Frage nach der Technik'' ("The Question Concerning Technology", 1954) and ''Was heisst Denken?''
This collection includes "Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes" (1935–1936)
In the two years following, he worked first as an unsalaried Privatdozent.
Heidegger knew that he was not Hermann's biological father but raised him as his son.
''Der Satz vom Grund'', Gesamtausgabe Volume 10
However, Heidegger asserted that his dedicated students would know this statement was no eulogy for the NSDAP.
Heidegger was short and sinewy, with dark piercing eyes.
Following on from Aristotle, he began to develop in his lectures the main theme of his philosophy: the question of the sense of being.
Heidegger opens his magnum opus, ''Being and Time'', with a citation from Plato's ''Sophist'' indicating that Western philosophy has neglected Being because it was considered obvious, rather than as worthy of question.
Heideggerians regarded Søren Kierkegaard as, by far, the greatest philosophical contributor to Heidegger's own existentialist concepts.
''Holzwege'', Gesamtausgabe Volume 5.
In the course of his existential analytic, Heidegger argues that ''Dasein'', who finds itself thrown into the world (''Geworfenheit'') amidst things and with others, is thrown into its possibilities, including the possibility and inevitability of one's own mortality.
Heidegger is a controversial figure, largely for his affiliation with Nazism, as Rector of the University of Freiburg for 11 months prior to his resignation in April 1934, for which he neither apologized nor publicly expressed regret, although in private he called it "the biggest stupidity of his life" (''die größte Dummheit seines Lebens'').
It has also been claimed that a number of elements within Heidegger's thought bear a close parallel to Eastern philosophical ideas, particularly Zen Buddhism and Taoism.
On 23 September 1966, Heidegger was interviewed by Rudolf Augstein and Georg Wolff for ''Der Spiegel'' magazine, in which he agreed to discuss his political past provided that the interview be published posthumously.
