The Bureau also sent anonymous letters to King threatening to reveal information if he did not cease his civil rights work.
Sometimes these confrontations turned violent.
But the campaign was a success: Connor lost his job, the "Jim Crow" signs came down, and public places became more open to blacks.
The Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., was dedicated in 2011.
King suffered from depression throughout much of his life.
The United States Congress was spending more and more on the military and less and less on anti-poverty programs at the same time.
That is the problem of racism, the problem of poverty and the problem of war.
The summer before his last year at Morehouse, in 1947, the 18-year-old King chose to enter the ministry.
Displeased with the pace of President Kennedy's addressing the issue of segregation, King and the Gandhi Society produced a document in 1962 calling on the President to follow in the footsteps of Abraham Lincoln and use an Executive Order to deliver a blow for Civil Rights as a kind of Second Emancipation Proclamation - Kennedy did not execute the order.
The committee also found that the dissertation still "makes an intelligent contribution to scholarship."
Throughout his participation in the civil rights movement, King was criticized by many groups.
Footage of police brutality against the protesters was broadcast extensively and aroused national public outrage.
Organizers intended to denounce the federal government for its failure to safeguard the civil rights and physical safety of civil rights workers and blacks.
In 1963, Raveling, then 26, was standing near the podium, and immediately after the oration, impulsively asked King if he could have his copy of the speech.
King lost his friend because the child's father no longer wanted the boys to play together.
King, there is only one thing left for you to do.
In his third year at Morehouse, King became romantically involved with the daughter of an immigrant German woman who worked as a cook in the cafeteria.
His death was followed by riots in many U.S. cities.
Three days into his sentence, Police Chief Laurie Pritchett discreetly arranged for King's fine to be paid and ordered his release.
He felt that Congress had shown "hostility to the poor" by spending "military funds with alacrity and generosity".
King led the SCLC until his death.
In a radio address made during his final evening in India, King reflected, "Since being in India, I am more convinced than ever before that the method of nonviolent resistance is the most potent weapon available to oppressed people in their struggle for justice and human dignity".
He summed up this aspect by saying, "A nation that continues year after year to spend more money on military defense than on programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death".
Footage of the police response was broadcast on national television news and dominated the nation's attention, shocking many white Americans and consolidating black Americans behind the movement.
King was also advised by the white activists Harris Wofford and Glenn Smiley.
At the age of 12, shortly after his maternal grandmother died, King blamed himself and jumped out of a second-story window, but survived.
King once reproved another student for keeping beer in his room, saying they had shared responsibility as African Americans to bear "the burdens of the Negro race."
President Kennedy was concerned the turnout would be less than 100,000.
King argues that the crisis of racism is too urgent, and the current system too entrenched: "We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed."
King sang with his church choir at the 1939 Atlanta premiere of the movie ''Gone with the Wind.''
Throughout his career King was frequently protected by other civil rights activists who carried arms, such as Colonel Stone Johnson, Robert Hayling, and the Deacons for Defense and Justice.
Witnesses near King at the moment of his death said that the shot came from another location.
1961), and Bernice King (b.
"We had witnessed persons being kicked off lunch counter stools&nbsp;... ejected from churches&nbsp;... and thrown into jail&nbsp;...
He stated, "It should benefit the disadvantaged of ''all'' races".
''Newsweek'' called this strategy a Children's Crusade.
The following day he was swept up in a mass arrest of peaceful demonstrators, and he declined bail until the city made concessions.
King's wife Coretta appeared to have accepted his affairs with equanimity, saying once that "all that other business just doesn't have a place in the very high level relationship we enjoyed."
However, the campaign's early volunteers did not succeed in shutting down the city, or in drawing media attention to the police's actions.
The SCLC petitioned for an injunction in federal court against the State of Alabama; this was denied and the judge issued an order blocking the march until after a hearing.
King also stated in "Beyond Vietnam" that "true compassion is more than flinging a coin to a beggar&nbsp;... it comes to see that an edifice which produces beggars needs restructuring".
It was just that he had a particularly difficult time with that temptation".
Having concluded that King was dangerous due to communist infiltration, the FBI shifted to attempting to discredit King through revelations regarding his private life.
At the age of 15, King passed the exam and entered Morehouse.
King's father fully supported his decision to continue his education.
During the course of this movement, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed.
King was second in Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century.
Judge John Lewis Smith Jr., in 1977 ordered all known copies of the recorded audiotapes and written transcripts resulting from the FBI's electronic surveillance of King between 1963 and 1968 to be held in the National Archives and sealed from public access until 2027.
He received attention for singing "I Want to Be More and More Like Jesus."
The trip to India affected King, deepening his understanding of nonviolent resistance and his commitment to America's struggle for civil rights.
Hundreds of the marchers were arrested and jailed.
Due to this, Morehouse was eager to fill its classrooms.
King was a middle child, between an older sister, Willie Christine King, and a younger brother, Alfred Daniel Williams King.
This injunction temporarily halted civil rights activity until King defied it by speaking at Brown Chapel on January 2, 1965.
King also sometimes used the concept of "agape" (brotherly Christian love).
A precocious student, he skipped both the ninth and the twelfth grades of high school.
They became the parents of four children: Yolanda King (b.
Another influence for King's nonviolent method was Henry David Thoreau's essay ''On Civil Disobedience'', which King read in his student days.
According to biographer Taylor Branch, King's autopsy revealed that though only 39 years old, he "had the heart of a 60 year old", which Branch attributed to the stress of 13 years in the Civil Rights Movement.
The day following King's assassination, school teacher Jane Elliott conducted her first "Blue Eyes/Brown Eyes" exercise with her class of elementary school students in Riceville, Iowa.
Black people in Birmingham, organizing with the SCLC, occupied public spaces with marches and sit-ins, openly violating laws that they considered unjust.
The FBI distributed reports regarding such affairs to the executive branch, friendly reporters, potential coalition partners and funding sources of the SCLC, and King's family.
The campaign culminated in a march on Washington, D.C., demanding economic aid to the poorest communities of the United States.
King quoted Tolstoy's ''War and Peace'' in 1959.
In a 1952 letter to Coretta Scott, he said "I imagine you already know that I am much more socialistic in my economic theory than capitalistic&nbsp;..." In one speech, he stated that "something is wrong with capitalism" and claimed, "There must be a better distribution of wealth, and maybe America must move toward a democratic socialism."
Even after renouncing his personal use of guns, King had a complex relationship with the phenomenon of self-defense in the movement.
Marches, especially the one through Marquette Park on August 5, 1966, were met by thrown bottles and screaming throngs.
In it, King stated that equal rights for African Americans could not be far away, "because the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice".
King also opposed the Vietnam War because it took money and resources that could have been spent on social welfare at home.
Journalistic accounts and televised footage of the daily deprivation and indignities suffered by southern blacks, and of segregationist violence and harassment of civil rights workers and marchers, produced a wave of sympathetic public opinion that convinced the majority of Americans that the Civil Rights Movement was the most important issue in American politics in the early 1960s.
In 2002, ''The New York Times'' reported that a church minister, Rev.
There is but one way out for you.
At the time, it was the largest gathering of protesters in Washington, D.C.'s history.
With assistance from Harris Wofford, the American Friends Service Committee, and other supporters, he was able to fund the journey in April 1959.
A review by the NSA itself concluded that Minaret was "disreputable if not outright illegal."
In an April 4, 1967, appearance at the New York City Riverside Church—exactly one year before his death—King delivered a speech titled "Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence".
King became a civil rights activist early in his career.
King stated that black Americans, as well as other disadvantaged Americans, should be compensated for historical wrongs.
The march finally went ahead fully on March 25, 1965.
On October 14, 1964, King received the Nobel Peace Prize for combating racial inequality through nonviolent resistance.
Most of these rights were successfully enacted into the law of the United States with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
On September 20, 1958, while signing copies of his book ''Stride Toward Freedom'' in Blumstein's department store in Harlem, King narrowly escaped death when Izola Curry, a mentally ill black woman who believed he was conspiring against her with communists, stabbed him in the chest with a letter opener.
The original, typewritten copy of the speech, including King's handwritten notes on it, was discovered in 1984 to be in the hands of George Raveling, the first African-American basketball coach of the University of Iowa.
King's friend and colleague, James Bevel, also disputed the argument that Ray acted alone, stating, "There is no way a ten-cent white boy could develop a plan to kill a million-dollar black man."
King said that he did not seek a full restitution of wages lost to slavery, which he believed impossible, but proposed a government compensatory program of $50&nbsp;billion over ten years to all disadvantaged groups.
The unexpected ending of this second march aroused the surprise and anger of many within the local movement.
In 1957, King, Ralph Abernathy, Fred Shuttlesworth, Joseph Lowery, and other civil rights activists founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC).
On January 17, 2000, for the first time, Martin Luther King Jr. Day was officially observed in all fifty U.S. states.
More than a quarter of a million people of diverse ethnicities attended the event, sprawling from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial onto the National Mall and around the reflecting pool.
King refused to give in to the FBI's threats.
In 2000, the U.S. Department of Justice completed the investigation into Jowers' claims but did not find evidence to support allegations about conspiracy.
He also connected the war with economic injustice, arguing that the country needed serious moral change:
On January 13, 1968, the day after President Johnson's State of the Union Address, King called for a large march on Washington against "one of history's most cruel and senseless wars".
He posited that "the money spent would be more than amply justified by the benefits that would accrue to the nation through a spectacular decline in school dropouts, family breakups, crime rates, illegitimacy, swollen relief rolls, rioting and other social evils".
Rioting seemed very possible.
King was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the Congressional Gold Medal.
King also expresses his frustration with white moderates and clergymen too timid to oppose an unjust system:
He presented this idea as an application of the common law regarding settlement of unpaid labor, but clarified that he felt that the money should not be spent exclusively on blacks.
"I Have a Dream" came to be regarded as one of the finest speeches in the history of American oratory.
J. Edgar Hoover feared Communists were trying to infiltrate the Civil Rights movement, but when no such evidence emerged, the bureau used the incidental details caught on tape over the next five years in attempts to force King out of the preeminent leadership position.
In an interview conducted for ''Playboy'' in 1965, he said that granting black Americans only equality could not realistically close the economic gap between them and whites.
King had read Marx while at Morehouse, but while he rejected "traditional capitalism", he also rejected communism because of its "materialistic interpretation of history" that denied religion, its "ethical relativism", and its "political totalitarianism".
Martin Luther King Jr. was the conscience of his generation.
In another sermon, he stated:
King condemned America's "alliance with the landed gentry of Latin America", and said that the U.S. should support "the shirtless and barefoot people" in the Third World rather than suppressing their attempts at revolution.
After Albany, King sought to choose engagements for the SCLC in which he could control the circumstances, rather than entering into pre-existing situations.
His mother was an accomplished organist and choir leader, and she took him to various churches to sing.
In November 1967 he made a 24-hour trip to the United Kingdom to receive an honorary degree from Newcastle University, being the first African American to be so honoured by Newcastle.
King interpreted this package as an attempt to drive him to suicide, although William Sullivan, head of the Domestic Intelligence Division at the time, argued that it may have only been intended to "convince Dr. King to resign from the SCLC".
King became the youngest assistant manager of a newspaper delivery station for the ''Atlanta Journal'' in 1942, when he was 13.
King said his father regularly whipped him until he was fifteen; a neighbor reported hearing the elder King telling his son "he would make something of him even if he had to beat him to death."
In turn, both Gandhi and Martin Luther King had read Tolstoy, and King, Gandhi and Tolstoy had been strongly influenced by Jesus' Sermon on the Mount.
King researchers David Garrow and Gerald Posner disagreed with William F. Pepper's claims that the government killed King.
FBI surveillance of King, some of it since made public, attempted to demonstrate that he also engaged in numerous extramarital affairs.
King long opposed American involvement in the Vietnam War, but at first avoided the topic in public speeches in order to avoid the interference with civil rights goals that criticism of President Johnson's policies might have created.
King was joined in attending Crozer by Walter McCall, a former classmate at Morehouse.
When King was a child, he befriended a white boy whose father owned a business near his family's home.
King supported the ideals of democratic socialism, although he was reluctant to speak directly of this support due to the anti-communist sentiment being projected throughout the United States at the time, and the association of socialism with communism.
According to King, "that agreement was dishonored and violated by the city" after he left town.
King's reputation improved immensely.
The FBI, under written directive from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, began tapping King's telephone in the fall of 1963.
He gazed upon the great wall of segregation and saw that the power of love could bring it down.
He guarded his language in public to avoid being linked to communism by his enemies, but in private he sometimes spoke of his support for democratic socialism.
1955), Martin Luther King III (b.
Therefore, he enlisted the aid of additional church leaders and the UAW union to help mobilize demonstrators for the cause.
King's widow Coretta said publicly that she believed her husband would have supported gay rights.
Those suspecting a conspiracy in the assassination point to the two successive ballistics tests which proved that a rifle similar to Ray's Remington Gamemaster had been the murder weapon.
With the march going forward, the Kennedys decided it was important to work to ensure its success.
The same year that Martin Luther King was assassinated, she established the King Center in Atlanta, Georgia, dedicated to preserving his legacy and the work of championing nonviolent conflict resolution and tolerance worldwide.
King and the SCLC were criticized for putting children in harm's way.
They said that it came from behind thick shrubbery near the boarding house—which had been cut away in the days following the assassination—and not from the boarding house window.
There were often dramatic stand-offs with segregationist authorities.
In 1963, he was named ''Time'' Person of the Year, and in 2000, he was voted sixth in an online "Person of the Century" poll by the same magazine.
He stated, "It wasn't a racist thing; he thought Martin Luther King was connected with communism, and he wanted to get him out of the way."
On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat.
On February 6, 1964, King delivered the inaugural speech of a lecture series initiated at the New School called "The American Race Crisis".
degree in sociology, and enrolled in Crozer Theological Seminary in Chester, Pennsylvania, from which he graduated with a B.Div.
Abernathy later wrote that the movement received a worse reception in Chicago than in the South.
King and the SCLC put into practice many of the principles of the Christian Left and applied the tactics of nonviolent protest with great success by strategically choosing the method of protest and the places in which protests were carried out.
Growing up in Atlanta, King attended Booker T. Washington High School.
Other civil rights leaders involved in the SCLC with King included: James Bevel, Allen Johnson, Curtis W. Harris, Walter E. Fauntroy, C. T. Vivian, Andrew Young, The Freedom Singers, Charles Evers, Cleveland Robinson, Randolph Blackwell, Annie Bell Robinson Devine, Charles Kenzie Steele, Alfred Daniel Williams King, Benjamin Hooks, Aaron Henry and Bayard Rustin.
King was arrested and jailed early in the campaign—his 13th arrest out of 29.
Hundreds of streets in the U.S. have been renamed in his honor, and a county in Washington State was also renamed for him.
However, the organizers were firm that the march would proceed.
Divisions within the black community and the canny, low-key response by local government defeated efforts.
He went so far as to hold up his example when receiving the Nobel Peace Prize in 1964, hailing the "successful precedent" of using nonviolence "in a magnificent way by Mohandas K. Gandhi to challenge the might of the British Empire&nbsp;...
In his 1967 Massey Lecture, King stated:
''Life'' magazine called the speech "demagogic slander that sounded like a script for Radio Hanoi", and ''The Washington Post'' declared that King had "diminished his usefulness to his cause, his country, his people".
King saw his father's proud and fearless protests against segregation, such as King Sr. refusing to listen to a traffic policeman after being referred to as "boy," or stalking out of a store with his son when being told by a shoe clerk that they would have to "move to the rear" of the store to be served.
It was later acknowledged by the King Center that Billy Graham was the one who bailed King out of jail during this time.
On being awarded the Planned Parenthood Federation of America's Margaret Sanger Award on 5th May, 1966, King said:
King's opposition cost him significant support among white allies, including President Johnson, Billy Graham, union leaders and powerful publishers.
King liked singing and music.
The SCLC's 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom was the first time King addressed a national audience.
William F. Pepper represented the King family in the trial.
The Bureau received authorization to proceed with wiretapping from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in the fall of 1963 and informed President John F. Kennedy, both of whom unsuccessfully tried to persuade King to dissociate himself from Stanley Levison, a New York lawyer who had been involved with Communist Party USA.
However, the 1950s and '60s Civil Rights Movement arose from activism within the black community dating back to before World War I.
One such letter sent to King just before he received the Nobel Peace Prize read, in part:
You know what it is.
One of the group's inspirations was the crusades of evangelist Billy Graham, who befriended King after he attended a Graham crusade in New York City in 1957.
Rustin resigned from the march, stating that the goals of the campaign were too broad, that its demands were unrealizable, and that he thought that these campaigns would accelerate the backlash and repression on the poor and the black.
He struggled only with the weapons of truth, soul force, non-injury and courage."
King initially refused, but complied after his teacher told him that he would be breaking the law if he did not submit.
There are three urgent and indeed great problems that we face not only in the United States of America but all over the world today.
During King's junior year in high school, Morehouse College, a respected historically black college, announced it would accept any high school juniors who could pass its entrance exam.
Despite his growing public opposition towards the Vietnam War, King was also not fond of the hippie culture which developed from the anti-war movement.
His vision was for change that was more revolutionary than mere reform: he cited systematic flaws of "racism, poverty, militarism and materialism", and argued that "reconstruction of society itself is the real issue to be faced".
Inspired by King's vision, it undertakes a range of activities across the UK as it seeks to "build cultures of peace."
In 2003, Pepper published a book about the long investigation and trial, as well as his representation of James Earl Ray in his bid for a trial, laying out the evidence and criticizing other accounts.
A tape recording of several of King's extramarital liaisons, excerpted from FBI wiretaps, accompanied the letter.
The campaign officially began in Memphis, on May 2, at the hotel where King was murdered.
Wilson provided no evidence to back up his claims.
It was the clearest demonstration up to that time of the dramatic potential of King's nonviolence strategy.
and "The Dimensions of a Complete Life".
In some cases, bystanders attacked the police, who responded with force.
King's wife, Coretta Scott King, followed in her husband's footsteps and was active in matters of social justice and civil rights until her death in 2006.
King's "inner urge" had begun developing, and he made peace with the Baptist Church, as he believed he would be a "rational" minister with sermons that were "a respectful force for ideas, even social protest."
In the United Kingdom, The Northumbria and Newcastle Universities Martin Luther King Peace Committee exists to honour King's legacy, as represented by his final visit to the UK to receive an honorary degree from Newcastle University in 1967.
The Peace Committee operates out of the chaplaincies of the city's two universities, Northumbria and Newcastle, both of which remain centres for the study of Martin Luther King and the US Civil Rights Movement.
In 1965, he helped to organize the Selma to Montgomery marches, and the following year he and SCLC took the movement north to Chicago to work on segregated housing.
Gandhi seemed to have influenced him with certain moral principles, though Gandhi himself had been influenced by ''The Kingdom of God Is Within You'', a nonviolent classic written by Christian anarchist Leo Tolstoy.
complaining of what he described as a double standard that applauded his nonviolence at home, but deplored it when applied "toward little brown Vietnamese children".
During the protests, the Birmingham Police Department, led by Eugene "Bull" Connor, used high-pressure water jets and police dogs against protesters, including children.
The African-American students of Crozer for the most part conducted their social activity on Edwards Street.
Observed for the first time on January 20, 1986, it is called Martin Luther King Jr. Day.
Jerry Ray said that he had assisted his brother on one such robbery.
His nonviolent thought was also based in the injunction to ''turn the other cheek'' in the Sermon on the Mount, and Jesus' teaching of putting the sword back into its place (Matthew 26:52).
King and his wife were also awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 2004.
King quoted a United States official who said that, from Vietnam to Latin America, the country was "on the wrong side of a world revolution".
However, he later concluded that the Bible has "many profound truths which one cannot escape" and decided to enter the seminary.
The chapter draws from an address by Wofford, with Rustin and Stanley Levison also providing guidance and ghostwriting.
A sister of Jowers admitted that he had fabricated the story so he could make $300,000 from selling the story, and she in turn corroborated his story in order to get some money to pay her income tax.
King returned in July 1962, and was sentenced to forty-five days in jail or a $178 fine.
King also criticized American opposition to North Vietnam's land reforms.
It was during this time he chose to be called Martin Luther King in honor of the German reformer Martin Luther.
In his speech "I've Been to the Mountaintop", he stated that he just wanted to do God's will.
King's role in the bus boycott transformed him into a national figure and the best-known spokesman of the civil rights movement.
He made our nation stronger because he made it better.
In these remarks, King referred to a conversation he had recently had with Jawaharlal Nehru in which he compared the sad condition of many African Americans to that of India's untouchables.
Ironically, the pacifist SCLC accepted them.
