In listing witnesses who saw where Jesus was buried by Joseph of Arimathea,  and Matthew 27:61 both name only two people: Mary Magdalene and "the other Mary," who in Mark is "the mother of James."
Not only John Chrysostom in the East (''Matthew, Homily 88''), but also Ambrose (''De virginitate'' 3,14; 4,15) in the West, when speaking of Mary Magdalene after the resurrection of Jesus Christ, far from calling her a harlot, suggest she was a virgin.
In the Gospels, Mary Magdalene is referred to simply as "Mary" only in  and .
There is also a short reference to a person named "Martha" among the disciples, possibly the same person who is named as the sister of Mary of Bethany.
The Saviour answered and said to them, "Why do I not love you like her?"
Luke does not name any witnesses, but mentions "women who had followed him from Galilee" standing at a distance.
Talmudic passages speak of a Miriam "hamegadela se’ar nasha", "Miriam, the plaiter of women’s hair" (Hagigah 4b; cf.
The occurrence of these two different accounts is one of the factors contributing to the theory that Mark 16:9–20 is a later addition to the Gospel.
In addition, there were Mary, the mother of James and Mary Salome.
The eggs represent new life, and Christ bursting forth from the tomb.
In 1822, the grotto was consecrated afresh.
The name had become very popular during Jesus' time due to its connections to the ruling Hasmonean and Herodian dynasties.
Mary is defended by Levi:
Among the women who are specifically named in the canonical gospels, Mary Magdalene's name is one of the most frequently found, appearing 12 times, always, except for , in connection with the death and resurrection of Jesus.
She was also present two days later, immediately following the sabbath, when, according to all four canonical Gospels,    she was, either alone or as a member of a group of women, the first to testify to the resurrection of Jesus.
Do you think that I thought this up myself in my heart or that I am lying concerning the Savior?"
These legends are covered in the section below on the Roman Catholic tradition.
and  specifically name her as the first person to see Jesus after his resurrection.
The Gospel of Luke says seven demons had gone out of her, and the longer ending of Mark says Jesus had cast seven demons out of her.
The canonical gospels are dated from the second half of the 1st century.
For this reason he loved her more than us".
As part of this new attention to the cult of the Magdalene, in 1600, her relics were placed in a sarcophagus commissioned by Pope Clement VIII, the head being placed in a separate reliquary.
* Mary of Bethany, the sister of Martha and Lazarus  and  .
Gnostic writings use Mary, Mary Magdalene, or Magdalene.
and  say Jesus cleansed her of "seven demons".
In 1998, Ramon K. Jusino proposed an unprecedented argument that the "Beloved Disciple" of the Gospel of John is Mary Magdalene.
Simon Peter said to them: Let Mary go forth from among us, for women are not worthy of the life.
The Benedictine Order always celebrated Mary of Bethany together with Martha and Lazarus of Bethany on 29 July, while Mary Magdalene was celebrated on 22 July.
And she began to speak to them these words: "I", she said, "I saw the Lord in a vision and I said to Him, Lord I saw you today in a vision".
Almost all of Mary's vision is within the lost pages.
According to the memoirs of Juliet Thompson, `Abdu'l-Bahá also compared Mary to Juliet, one of his most devoted followers, claiming that she even physically resembled her and that Mary Magdalene was Juliet Thompson's "correspondence in heaven".
As the swooning Virgin Mary became more common, generally occupying the attention of John, the unrestrained gestures of Magdalene increasingly represented the main display of the grief of the spectators.
When she met him, she held a plain egg in her hand and exclaimed, "Christ is risen!"
In , the author names three women in sequence: "Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of Zebedee's children".
Ki Longfellow's novel ''The Secret Magdalene'' (2005) draws on the Gnostic gospels and other sources to portray Mary as a brilliant and dynamic woman who studies at the fabled library at Alexandria, and shares her knowledge with Jesus.
The rationale for this change versus the previous worship book of the ELCA is not explained, nor is it clear that an authoritative council of the ELCA approved this change in any organized fashion, other than by adopting the new worshipbook.
Ehrman (a scholar of the Greek New Testament and Early Christianity) says that the question people ask him most often is whether Mary Magdalene and Jesus of Nazareth married each other.
In which place she had no comfort of running water, ne solace of trees, ne of herbs.
Mary Magdalene came to Marseille and converted the whole of Provence.
There are several people named Mary in the Gospels.
The head of the saint now lies there and has been the centre of many pilgrimages.
says "...Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go to anoint Jesus’ body."
Modern Protestants honor her as a disciple and friend of Jesus.
Kripal writes that "the historical sources are simply too contradictory and simultaneously too silent" to make absolute declarations regarding Jesus' sexuality.
Indeed he claimed that she surpassed all the men of her time, and that "crowns studded with the brilliant jewels of guidance" were upon her head.
In Gnostic writings Mary Magdalene is seen as one of the most important of Jesus' disciples, whom he loved more than the others.
They have never celebrated her as a penitent.
The Eastern Orthodox Church maintains that Mary Magdalene, distinguished from Mary of Bethany and the "sinful woman" who anoints Jesus in Luke, had been a virtuous woman all her life, even before her conversion.
The Gospel of Philip describes Mary's relation to Jesus by Coptic variants of the Greek κοινωνός (''koinōnos'').
The statement in Mark is part of the "longer ending" of that Gospel, not found in the earliest manuscripts, and which may have been a second-century addition to the original text, possibly based on the Gospel of Luke.
The identity of Mary Magdalene is believed to have been merged with the identity of the unnamed sinner who anoints Jesus' feet in .
In the Gospel of Mark, the author lists a group of women three times, and each time Mary Magdalene’s name appears first.
According to another legend, on the way they were shipwrecked on the island of Malta, where Dingli, Rabat, Madliena (Maltese for Magdalene), and Valletta all have chapels or other dedications.
says the group who reported to the disciples the finding of the empty tomb consisted of "Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the others with them".
Christ loved Mary more than all the disciples, and used to kiss her often.
Uniquely among the followers of Jesus, she is specified by name (though not consistently by any one gospel) as a witness to three key events: Jesus' crucifixion, his burial, and the discovery that his tomb was empty.
In the Gospel of Luke, the author enumerates the women who reported the tomb visit: "It was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the other women with them."
Of the 64 questions, 39 are presented by a woman who is referred to as Mary or Mary Magdalene.
The seven devils removed from her by Jesus "morphed into the seven capital sins, and Mary Magdalene began to be condemned not only for lust but for pride and covetousness as well."
There are many references to Mary Magdalene in the sacred writings of the Bahá'í Faith, where she enjoys an exalted status as a heroine of faith and the "archetypal woman of all cycles".
In Mark, Matthew, and John, Mary Magdalene is first witness to the resurrection.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America honors Mary Magdalene on July 22 as an Apostle, albeit as a Lesser Festival.
The aspect of the repentant sinner became almost equally significant as the disciple in her ''persona'' as depicted in Western art and religious literature, fitting well with the great importance of penitence in medieval theology.
Several Gnostic writings, usually dated to 2nd and 3rd centuries, paint a drastically different picture of Mary Magdalene from that of the canonical Gospels.
The common identification of Mary Magdalene with other New Testament figures was rejected in the 1969 revision of the General Roman Calendar, with the comment regarding her liturgical celebration on 22 July: "No change has been made in the title of today's memorial, but it concerns only Saint Mary Magdalene, to whom Christ appeared after his resurrection.
Use of the actual term "apostle to the apostles" or "apostle of the apostles" is first attested much later than the time of Hippolytus.
These apocryphal sources are dated from the end of the 1st to the early 4th century, all written well after St. Mary's death.
"Mary, thou blessed one, whom I will perfect in all mysteries of those of the height, discourse in openness, thou, whose heart is raised to the kingdom of heaven more than all thy brethren".
In 1521 his views were formally condemned by the theology faculty of the Sorbonne, and debate died down, overtaken by the larger issues raised by Martin Luther.
`Abdu'l-Bahá considered her to be the supreme example of how women are completely equal with men in the sight of God and can at times even exceed men in holiness and greatness.
Ideas that go beyond the gospel presentation of Mary Magdalene as a prominent representative of the women who followed Jesus have been put forward over the centuries.
, Matthew 27:56 and  mention Mary Magdalene as a witness to crucifixion, along with various other women.
The latter of the two describes the sentiment towards female members of the early Gnostics:
In medieval depictions Mary's long hair entirely covers her body and preserves her modesty (supplemented in some German versions such as one by Tilman Riemenschneider by thick body hair), but from the 16th century some depictions, like those by Titian, show part of her naked body, the amount of nudity tending to increase in successive periods.
Depictions of the ''Penitent Magdalen'' became enormously popular in preaching and art (see above).
The identity of "Mary" appearing as the main character in this Gospel is sometimes disputed, but she is generally believed to be Mary Magdalene.
That work uses cognates of ''koinōnos'' and Coptic equivalents to refer to the literal pairing of men and women in marriage and sexual intercourse, but also metaphorically, referring to a spiritual partnership, and the reunification of the Gnostic Christian with the divine realm.
St. Mary Magdalene's relics were first venerated at the Abbey of la Madaleine, Vézelay in Burgundy from about 1050.
Gnostic writings describe tensions and jealousy between Mary Magdalene and other disciples, especially Peter.
It is claimed that the equivalent of the phrase ''apostolorum apostola'' appeared already in the 9th century.
She mentions in particular Hugh of Cluny (1024–1109), Peter Abelard (1079–1142), and Bernard of Clairvaux (1090–1153) among those who gave Mary Magdalene the title of ''apostolorum apostola'' (apostle of the apostles).
Most of the later legends speak of a Mary who after the Ascension of Jesus lived as a hermit in a cave for thirty years, communicating with angels.
The work also says that the Lord loved her more than all the disciples, and used to kiss her often (63.34–36).
Mary is mentioned briefly in saying 21.
Mary of Bethany is referred to simply as "Mary" both in  and the Gospel of John.
In addition, the Gregorian figure of the composite Magdalen developed an elaborate literary and artistic tradition in the Middle Ages.
* The Virgin Mary, mother of Christ
Mary was a very common name in New Testament times, held by a number of women in the canonical Gospels.
However, there is substantial scholarly concern about the fragment's authenticity, with a number of scholars regarding it as a modern forgery.
According to Eastern traditions, she retired to Ephesus with the Theotokos (Mary, the Mother of God) and there she died.
Jesus responds, "They are like children who have settled in a field which is not theirs.
''Pistis Sophia'' presents a long dialog with Jesus in the form of his answers to questions from his disciples.
If genuine, it appears to date to around the 6th to 9th centuries AD, and would suggest that some Egyptian Christians of that period believed that Jesus was married.
However the work is actually no earlier than the 12th Century
While she may have been among the women mentioned in , she is not mentioned in the epistles of Paul the Apostle or the other epistles.
Surely the Savior knew her very well.
says that she was actually "called Magdalene".
In his apostolic letter ''Mulieris Dignitatem'' ("On the dignity and vocation of women", parts 67–69) dated 15 August 1988, Pope John Paul II dealt with the Easter events in relation to the women being present at the tomb after the Resurrection, in a section entitled 'First Witnesses of the Resurrection':
When the Gospel of Thomas was written, people commonly assumed that men were superior to women.
Long hair was only worn loose in public by either prostitutes or (by the end of the Middle Ages) noblewomen; working and middle-class women were normally expected to keep their hair covered or at least bound up, with exceptions for festive occasions, in particular brides on their wedding day.
According to Darrell Bock, it first appears in the 10th century, but Katherine Ludwig Jansen says she found no reference to it earlier than the 12th, by which time it was already commonplace.
Within the four Gospels she is named at least 12 times, more than most of the apostles.
The competition between the Cluniac Benedictines of Vézelay and the Dominicans of Saint-Maxime occasioned a rash of miraculous literature supporting the one or the other site.
The shrine was found intact, with an explanatory inscription stating why the relics had been hidden.
A document, possibly written by Ermengaud of Béziers, undated and anonymous and attached to his ''Treatise against Heretics'', makes a similar statement.
According to Carla Ricci, "The place she Mary Magdalene occupied in the list cannot be considered fortuitous", because over and over Mary Magdalene's name is placed at the head of specifically named women, indicating her importance among the followers of Jesus.
She is said to have witnessed Jesus' crucifixion and resurrection.
During the Counter Reformation and Baroque periods (late 16th and 17th centuries), the cult of Mary Magdalene saw a great, new popularity as the Catholic Church publicized her as an attractive, persuasive model of repentance and reform, in keeping with the goals of the reform Council of Trent (1545–63).
The early notion of Mary Magdalene as a sinner and adulteress was reflected in Western medieval Christian art, where she was the most commonly depicted female figure after the Virgin Mary.
And the companion of the saviour was Mary Magdalene.
This view finds expression both in her written ''life'' (βίος or vita) and in the liturgical service in her honor that is included in the Menaion and performed on her annual feast-day.
A kneeling Magdalene by Giotto in the Scrovegni Chapel (c. 1305) was especially influential.
In Provence, Mary is said to have spent her last years alone in the wilderness, fasting and engaging in acts of penitential self-discipline, behavior that was rewarded with experiences of ecstatic union with the divine.
The Gnostic texts commonly refer to Mary Magdalene as Mary.
In 1449 King René d'Anjou gave to Angers Cathedral the amphora from Cana in which Jesus changed water to wine, acquiring it from the nuns of Marseilles, who told him that Mary Magdalene had brought it with her from Judea, relating to the legend where she was the jilted bride at the wedding after which John the Evangelist received his calling from Jesus.
From the 12th century Abbot Hugh of Semur (died 1109), Peter Abelard (died 1142), and Geoffrey of Vendome (died 1132) all referred to Mary Magdalene as the sinner who merited the title ''apostolorum apostola'' (Apostle to the Apostles), with the title becoming commonplace during the 12th and 13th centuries.
Her relics were transferred to Constantinople in 886 and are preserved there.
Mary Magdalene is considered to be a saint by the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Anglican, and Lutheran churches—with a feast day of July 22.
The monk and historian Domenico Cavalca (c. 1270–1342), citing Jerome, suggested that Mary Magdalene was betrothed to St John the Evangelist: "I like to think that the Magdalene was the spouse of John, not affirming it...
On December 9, 1279, an excavation ordered by Charles II, King of Naples at Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume, Provence, led to the discovery of another purported burial of Mary Magdalene.
Anglican Christians refer to her as a saint and may follow her example of repentance; While some interpret the Thirty-Nine Articles as forbidding them to call upon her for intercession, other Anglicans, citing the Episcopal burial service, say they can ask the saint to pray for them.
`Abdu'l-Bahá, the son of the founder of the religion, said that she was "the channel of confirmation" to Jesus' disciples, a "heroine" who "re-established the faith of the apostles" and was "a light of nearness in his kingdom".
Saint-Maximin-la-Sainte-Baume gradually displaced Vézelay in popularity and acceptance.
Esther A. de Boer likewise presents the idea as "one possibility among others", not as a definitive solution to the problem of the identity of the anonymous disciple.
As Gothic painted crucifixions became crowded compositions the Magdalene became a prominent figure, with a halo and identifiable by her long unbound blonde hair, and usually a bright red dress.
The Eastern Orthodox churches also commemorate her on the Sunday of the Myrrhbearers, the Orthodox equivalent of one of the Western Three Marys traditions.
It is reflected in Martin Scorsese's film adaptation of Nikos Kazantzakis's novel ''The Last Temptation of Christ'', in José Saramago's ''The Gospel According to Jesus Christ'', Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical ''Jesus Christ Superstar'', Mel Gibson's ''The Passion of the Christ'', Jean-Claude La Marre's ''Color of the Cross'' and Hal Hartley's ''The Book of Life''.
It was because of this association of St. Mary Magdalene having been a prostitute that she became the patroness of "wayward women", and Magdalene asylums became established to help save women from prostitution.
In particular, Mary is often shown naked in the legendary scene of her "Elevation", where she is sustained in the desert by angels who raise her up and feed her heavenly manna, as recounted in the ''Golden Legend'' (quoted below).
Following this, Mary of Bethany disappears from the narrative, while Mary Magdalene, already described not as receiving Jesus on his visits to Bethany in Judea, but as travelling about in Galilee with Jesus and the Twelve and with many other women, two of whom are named, emerges at Jesus' crucifixion, finding later his tomb empty and being the first to see him after the Resurrection.
Luke's story, though only four verses long, has been a complex source of inspiration, interpretation, and debate for centuries.
Her story became conflated in the West with that of Saint Mary of Egypt, a 4th-century prostitute turned hermit, whose clothes wore out and fell off in the desert.
In contrast, her name was also used for the Magdalen Asylums, institutions for "fallen women".
In  Mary anoints Jesus with expensive perfume and wipes his feet with her hair, at which Jesus says that it was intended that "she should save this perfume for the day of my burial".
In Hebrew מגדל ''Migdal'' means "tower", "fortress"; in Aramaic, "Magdala" means "tower" or "elevated, great, magnificent".
When the owners of the field come, they will say, 'Let us have back our field.'
At different times in history, Mary Magdalene has been confused or misidentified with almost every woman in the four Gospels, except the mother of Jesus.
The other women of the New Testament in these same depictions ordinarily have dark hair beneath a scarf, following contemporary standards of propriety by hiding their hair beneath headdresses or kerchiefs.
Jesus said: Behold, I shall lead her, that I may make her male, in order that she also may become a living spirit like you males.
It is believed that after the Crucifixion, Mary Magdalene and the Virgin Mary put a basket full of eggs at the foot of the cross.
File:Mary Magdalene Penitent by Pedro de Mena, circa 1664, Museo Nacional de Escultura.jpg|Penitent Mary Magdalene by Pedro de Mena, ca.
It is usually dated to about the same period as that of the Gospel of Philip.
They were sometimes thought to be the couple at the Wedding at Cana, though the Gospel accounts say nothing of the ceremony being abandoned.
There was a flurry of books and pamphlets, most opposing Lefèvre d'Étaples, but others supporting him.
St. Mary Magdalene was the patron of Magdalen College, Oxford, and Magdalene College, Cambridge (both colleges pronounce her name as "maudlin").
The Emperor laughed, and said that Christ rising from the dead was as likely as the egg in her hand turning red while she held it.
The relics and free-standing images were scattered and destroyed at the Revolution.
As Mary of Bethany, she is shown as present at the Resurrection of Lazarus, her brother, and in the scene with Jesus and her sister Martha, which began to be depicted often in the 17th century, as in ''Christ in the House of Martha and Mary'' by Velázquez.
There is a tradition that Mary Magdalene led so chaste a life that the devil thought she might be the one who was to bear Christ into the world, and for that reason he sent the seven demons to trouble her.
The "composite Magdalene" was never accepted by the Eastern Orthodox churches, who saw only Mary the disciple, and believed that after the Resurrection she lived as a companion to the Virgin Mary, and not even in the West was it universally accepted.
The first actual appearance by Jesus that Luke mentions is later that day, when Cleopas and an unnamed disciple walked with a fellow traveler who they later realized was Jesus.
I am glad and blythe that St Jerome should say so".
The two are similar in many respects, with Mary Magdalene often being viewed as a Christian antecedent of the latter, while Tahirih in her own right could be described as the spiritual return of the Magdalene; especially given their common, shared attributes of "knowledge, steadfastness, courage, virtue and will power", in addition to their importance within the religious movements of Christianity and the Bahá'í Faith as female leaders.
When Mary had said these things, she fell silent, since it was up to this point that the Savior had spoken to her.
Jesus says of Mary:
In the ''Golden Legend'' the "right sharp desert" where Mary retires to repent is located near Aix-en-Provence in the South of France.
And that was because our Redeemer did do show it openly, that he had ordained for her refection celestial, and no bodily meats.
In  the resurrection is announced to the women at the tomb by "two men in clothes that gleamed like lightning" who suddenly appeared next to them.
Mary is then confronted by Andrew and Peter, who do not take for granted what she says, because she is a woman:
In the Gospel of John, Mary Magdalene is also referred to simply as "Mary" at least twice.
For every woman who makes herself male shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
It has two short references to a "Mary", generally regarded as Mary Magdalene.
Between the time of Pope Gregory I (590–604 AD), until Jacobus de Voragine's Golden Legend and Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples (Concerning Mary Magdalene) in 1519 AD, various versions of the Legend of Mary Magdalene circulated in the south of France and Germany.
In subsequent religious legend, Mary's story became conflated with that of St Mary of Egypt, another repentant prostitute who then lived as a hermit.
Jusino based his argument largely on the Nag Hammadi Gnostic books, rejecting the view of Raymond E. Brown that these books were later developments, and maintaining instead that the extant Gospel of John is the result of modification of an earlier text that presented Mary Magdalene as the Beloved Disciple.
The same chapter says she did not delay in exercising the office of apostolate with which he had been honoured (''apostolatus officio quo honorata fuerat fungi non distulit'').
Because of Mary Magdalene's position as an apostle, though not one of those who became official witnesses to the resurrection, the Catholic Church honoured her by reciting the Creed on her feast day, the only woman to be so honoured apart from Mary, the mother of Jesus.
Among Eastern Orthodox Christians this sharing is accompanied by the proclamation "Christ is risen!"
Nevertheless, the reputation still lingers.
Madliena in Gozo also had a chapel dedicated to St. Mary Magdalene, but this was demolished.
On 10 June 2016, the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments issued a decree which elevated Mary's liturgical commemoration from an obligatory memorial to a feast day, like that of most of the Apostles (Peter and Paul are commemorated with a solemnity).
And every day at every hour canonical she was lifted up in the air of angels, and heard the glorious song of the heavenly companies with her bodily ears.
Even if covered, she often wears only a drape pulled around her, or an undergarment.
Did he prefer her to us?"
Neither Mary Magdalene nor any of the other women are mentioned by name in Paul's catalog of appearances at , which he begins with "he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve".
According to Robert Kiely, "No figure in the Christian Pantheon except Jesus, the Virgin Mary, and John the Baptist has inspired, provoked, or confounded the imagination of painters more than the Magdalene".
says she was accompanied by Salome and Mary the mother of James, while Matthew 28:1 omits Salome.
With that, Mary’s image was, according to Susan Haskins, author of ''Mary Magdalene: Myth and Metaphor,'' “finally settled...for nearly fourteen hundred years,” although in fact the most important late medieval popular accounts of her life describe her as a rich woman whose life of sexual freedom is purely for pleasure.
Mary Magdalene, the anointing sinner of Luke, and Mary of Bethany, who in  also anoints Jesus' feet, were long regarded as the same person.
Elsewhere it said of the Roman liturgy of 22 July that "it will make mention neither of Mary of Bethany nor of the sinful woman of Luke 7:36–50, but only of Mary Magdalene, the first person to whom Christ appeared after his resurrection".
Mary Magdalene is usually shown with long flowing hair, which she wears down over her shoulders, and may use either to cover her nakedness in the desert, or to dry Jesus's feet after washing them.
She may be shown either as very extravagantly and fashionably dressed, unlike other female figures wearing contemporary styles of clothes, or alternatively as completely naked but covered by very long blond or reddish-blonde hair.
Following this, Jesus continues his explanation with a parable about the owner of a house and a thief, ending with the common rhetoric, "Whoever has ears to hear let him hear".
During the Middle Ages, Mary Magdalene was regarded in Western Christianity as a repentant prostitute or promiscuous woman, accusations not found in any of the four canonical gospels.
Bart Ehrman concludes that historical evidence tells us nothing at all about Jesus' sexuality—"certainly nothing to indicate that Jesus and Mary had a sexual relationship of any kind".
It is not about the sister of Saint Martha, nor about the sinful woman whose sins the Lord forgave ()."
The elaborately detailed (and conflicting) legends that brought Mary to Western Europe after Jesus's life on earth were very widely accepted in the Western church, though not at all by Eastern Orthodoxy, which had her retiring with the Virgin Mary, and dying in Ephesus.
According to Luke "the apostles", and according to the longer ending of Mark "those who had been with him", did not believe Mary's report of what she saw.
Mary and Martha are among the most familiar sets of sisters in the Bible.
Jesus seems to know her family well, and is described as visiting them several times.
In the Gospel of John, on the other hand, Mary Magdalene is placed after Mary of Clopas.
First discovered in 1896, the Gospel of Mary exalts Mary Magdalene over the male disciples of Jesus.
The Dominican friar Jacobus de Voragine (c. 1230–1298) in his ''Golden Legend'' dismisses talk of John and Mary being betrothed and that John had left his bride at the altar to follow Jesus.
Apart from the Crucifixion, Mary was often shown in scenes of the Passion of Jesus, when mentioned in the Gospels, such as the Crucifixion, Christ Carrying the Cross and Noli me Tangere, but usually omitted in other scenes showing the Twelve Apostles, such as the Last Supper.
Richard J. Hooper does not make the Jusino thesis his own, but says: "Perhaps we should not altogether reject the possibility that some Johannine Christians considered Mary Magdalene to be 'the disciple whom Jesus loved'."
Mary Magdalene thus became a symbol of repentance from the vanities of the world.
Bahá'ís have noted parallels between Mary Magdalene and the Babí heroine-poet Tahirih.
The "Gospel of Jesus' Wife", a Coptic papyrus fragment unveiled in 2012, presents Jesus as speaking of his wife: "My wife ... she will be able to be my disciple."
describes the witnesses as "the women who had come with Jesus from Galilee."
In the words of William Caxton's English translation of the ''Golden Legend'':
