Democrats replaced the Constitution of 1864 with the Constitution of 1867.
Maryland has a large food-production sector.
St. Mary's became the first capital of Maryland, and remained so for 60 years until 1695.
In 1902 the state regulated conditions in mines; outlawed child laborers under the age of 12; mandated compulsory school attendance; and enacted the nation's first workers' compensation law.
Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 129,730 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 13,017 people.
The Eastern Shore was settled by Protestants, chiefly Methodist and the southern counties were initially settled by English Catholics.
They are believed to be descended from horses who escaped from shipwrecks.
It also became the seventh state admitted to the U.S. after ratifying the new Constitution.
However, given the incidence of malaria and typhoid, life expectancy in Maryland was about 10 years less than in New England.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Maryland households are currently the wealthiest in the country, with a 2013 median household income of $72,483 which puts it ahead of New Jersey and Connecticut, which are second and third respectively.
There is also a large automated chicken-farming sector in the state's southeastern part; Salisbury is home to Perdue Farms.
Former Governor Robert Ehrlich was the first Republican to be elected to that office (in 2002) in four decades, and after one term lost his seat to Baltimore Mayor Martin O'Malley, a Democrat.
In 2008, for instance, McCain won 17 counties to Obama's six; Obama also carried Baltimore City.
Maryland's regions experienced economic changes following WWII.
Baltimore was a major war production center during World War II.
Mobs burned down all the original Catholic churches of southern Maryland.
He was Vice President from 1969 to 1973, when he resigned in the aftermath of revelations that he had taken bribes while he was Governor of Maryland.
Southern Maryland is still somewhat rural, but suburbanization from Washington, D.C. has encroached significantly since the 1960s; important local population centers include  Lexington Park, Prince Frederick, and Waldorf.
Maryland blacks were part of a biracial Republican coalition elected to state government in 1896–1904 and comprised 20% of the electorate.
The Baltimore Colts represented the NFL in Baltimore from 1953 to 1983 before moving to Indianapolis.
It is the 42nd largest and 9th smallest state and is closest in size to the state of Hawaii (), the next smallest state.
Large ethnic minorities include Eastern Europeans such as Croatians, Russians and Ukrainians.
Both eastern and western Maryland are, however, dotted with cities of regional importance, such as Ocean City, Princess Anne, and Salisbury on the Eastern Shore and Cumberland, Frostburg, and Hancock in Western Maryland.
All real property in Maryland is subject to the property tax.
The dispute remained unresolved for nearly a century, carried on by the descendants of William Penn and Lord Baltimore&nbsp;— the Calvert family, which controlled Maryland, and the Penn family, which controlled Pennsylvania.
Maryland's capital city, Annapolis, is one exception to this pattern, since it lies along the banks of the Severn River, close to where it empties into the Chesapeake Bay.
The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (B&O) was the first chartered railroad in the United States.
There are also several auxiliary Interstate highways in Maryland.
Although a tactical draw, the battle was considered a strategic Union victory and a turning point of the war.
The College Board's 9th Annual AP Report to the Nation also ranked Maryland first.
The first public university in the state is the University of Maryland, Baltimore, which was founded in 1807 and contains the University of Maryland's only public academic health, human services, and one of two law centers (the other being the University of Baltimore School of Law).
Freight rail transport is handled principally by two Class I railroads, as well as several smaller regional and local carriers.
The 2006 election brought no significant change in this pattern of Democratic dominance.
The purebred Chesapeake Bay Retriever dog was bred specifically for water sports, hunting and search and rescue in the Chesapeake area.
In the early years, the line between indentured servants and African slaves or laborers was fluid, and white and black laborers commonly lived and worked together, and formed unions.
Most of the business of government is conducted in Annapolis, the state capital.
Also, the state's poverty rate of 7.8 percent is the lowest in the country.
Among the immigrants of the 19th and 20th century from eastern and southern Europe were many Catholics.
435 species of birds have been reported from Maryland.
The largest undergraduate institution in Maryland is the University of Maryland, College Park which was founded as the Maryland Agricultural College in 1856 and became a public land grant college in 1864.
In 1642 a number of Puritans left Virginia for Maryland and founded Providence (now called Annapolis).
Included among these are the crape myrtle, Italian cypress, live oak in the warmer parts of the state, and even hardy palm trees in the warmer central and eastern parts of the state.
Maryland's reptile and amphibian population includes the diamondback terrapin turtle, which was adopted as the mascot of University of Maryland, College Park.
Blacks resisted such efforts, with suffrage groups conducting voter education.
The intermediate appellate court is known as the Court of Special Appeals and the state supreme court is the Court of Appeals.
The budget for education was $5.5 billion in 2009, representing about 40 percent of the state's general fund.
Both of Maryland's U.S.
During the colonial era, families of free people of color were formed most often by unions of white women and African men.
Nearly every part of Maryland receives  per month of rain.
Maryland has an area of  and is comparable in overall area with Belgium ().
The list includes Babe Ruth, Cal Ripken Jr, Johnny Unitas, Brooks Robinson, Frank Robinson, Ray Lewis, Michael Phelps, Jimmie Foxx, Jim Parker, and Wes Unseld.
Half the population lived in cities.
In addition, the southern counties of the western shoreline of Chesapeake Bay are warm enough to support a tobacco cash crop zone, which has existed since early Colonial times but declined greatly after a state government buyout in the 1990s.
The appearance of the judges of the Maryland Court of Appeals is unique; Maryland is the only state whose judges wear red robes.
Maryland's border with Delaware was based on a Transpeninsular Line and the Twelve-Mile Circle around New Castle.
Concurrently the Interstate Highway System was built throughout the state, most notably I-95 and the Capital Beltway, altering travel patterns.
Whites did impose racial segregation in public facilities and Jim Crow laws, which effectively lasted until passage of federal civil rights legislation in the mid-1960s.
Maryland's economy benefits from the state's close proximity to the federal government in Washington, D.C. with an emphasis on technical and administrative tasks for the defense/aerospace industry and bio-research laboratories, as well as staffing of satellite government headquarters in the suburban or exurban Baltimore/Washington area.
The next largest state, its neighbor West Virginia, is almost twice the size of Maryland ().
The port also receives several different brands of imported motor vehicles and is the number two auto port in the U.S.
In 1996 Maryland was Clinton's sixth best, in 2000 Maryland ranked fourth for Gore and in 2004 John Kerry showed his fifth-best performance in Maryland.
Following the end of Reconstruction in 1877, Democrats devised means of disfranchising blacks, initially by physical intimidation and voter fraud, later by constitutional amendments and laws.
Maryland is bounded on its north by Pennsylvania, on its west by West Virginia, on its east by Delaware and the Atlantic Ocean, and on its south, across the Potomac River, by West Virginia and Virginia.
The MTA also serves the city and its suburbs with its local bus service (the 9th largest system in the nation).
Generally, rural Western Maryland between the West Virginian Panhandle and Pennsylvania has an Appalachian culture; the Southern and Eastern Shore regions of Maryland embody a Southern culture,
According to The Williams Institute's analysis of the 2010 U.S. Census, 12,538 same-sex couples are living in Maryland, representing 5.8 same-sex couples per 1,000 households.
Buildings in the state are not well-designed for earthquakes and can suffer damage easily.
Unlike many other states, significant autonomy is granted to many of Maryland's counties.
The top income tax bracket of 9.45 percent is the fifth highest combined state and local income tax rates in the country, behind New York City's 11.35 percent, California's 10.3 percent, Rhode Island's 9.9 percent, and Vermont's 9.5 percent.
Historically, there used to be small gold-mining operations in Maryland, some near Washington, but these no longer exist.
In late 1973 a court found Agnew guilty of violating tax laws.
Among its occasional nicknames are ''Old Line State'', the ''Free State'', and the ''Chesapeake Bay State''.
Other professional sports franchises in the state include five affiliated minor league baseball teams, one independent league baseball team, the Baltimore Blast indoor soccer team, two indoor football teams,three low-level outdoor soccer teams, and the Chesapeake Bayhawks of Major League Lacrosse.
Many of their ethnic Italian, Polish, Czech, and Greek descendants still live in the area.
In 2008 the state led the entire country in the percentage of students passing Advanced Placement examinations.
The MTA's Commuter Bus system provides express coach service on longer routes connecting Washington D.C. and Baltimore to parts of Central and Southern MD as well as the Eastern Shore.
Power in Maryland is divided among three branches of government: executive, legislative, and judicial.
In fact, 1.7 percent are Korean, while as a whole, almost 6.0 percent are Asian.
Voter Registration by Party (February 2016)
In 2014 Larry Hogan, a Republican, was elected Governor of Maryland.
Close to the small town of Hancock, in western Maryland, about two-thirds of the way across the state, there are  between its borders.
Two of Maryland's counties, Howard and Montgomery, are the second and eleventh wealthiest counties in the nation respectively.
The Basilica of the National Shrine of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary in Baltimore was the first Roman Catholic cathedral built in the United States, and the Archbishop of Baltimore is, albeit without formal primacy, the United States' quasi-primate, and often a cardinal.
There are numerous man-made lakes, the largest of these being the Deep Creek Lake, a reservoir in Garrett County in westernmost Maryland.
State elections are dominated by Baltimore and the populous suburban counties bordering Washington, D.C.: Montgomery and Prince George's.
More recent European immigrants of the late 19th and early 20th century settled first in Baltimore, attracted to its industrial jobs.
So prominent is the Chesapeake in Maryland's geography and economic life that there has been periodic agitation to change the state's official nickname to the '''''Bay State''''', a nickname that has been used by Massachusetts for decades.
Other Hispanic groups with significant populations in the state include Mexicans and Puerto Ricans.
The majority of Maryland's population is concentrated in the cities and suburbs surrounding Washington, D.C., as well as in and around Maryland's most populous city, Baltimore.
Blacks comprised 20% of the electorate and immigrants comprised 15%, and the legislature had difficulty devising requirements against blacks that did not also disadvantage immigrants.
The independent Maryland Transportation Authority, headquartered in Baltimore, maintains and operates the state's eight toll facilities.
Maryland also has a state highway system that contains routes numbered from 2 through 999, however most of the higher-numbered routes are either unsigned or are relatively short.
Wealthy Catholic planters built chapels on their land to practice their religion in relative secrecy.
The remainder of the state, particularly Western Maryland and the Eastern Shore, is more supportive of Republicans.
After Democratic Senator Paul Sarbanes announced that he was retiring, Democratic Congressman Benjamin Cardin defeated Republican Lieutenant Governor Michael S. Steele, with 55 percent of the vote, against Steele's 44 percent.
In 1878 the Chesapeake Bay Retriever was the first individual retriever breed recognized by the American Kennel Club.
Per capita personal income in 2006 was $43,500, fifth in the nation.
The Bay also has overwintering waterfowl in its wildlife refuges.
Numerous Indian Americans live across the state, especially in central Maryland.
Other private institutions include Mount St. Mary's University, McDaniel College (formerly known as Western Maryland College), Hood College, Stevenson University (formerly known as Villa Julie College), Loyola University Maryland, and Goucher College, among others.
During the latter Ice Ages, the glaciers did not reach as far south as Maryland, and therefore they did not carve out the deep natural lakes that exist in states farther north.
Property tax rates vary widely.
Major state highways include Routes 2 (Governor Ritchie Highway/Solomons Island Road/Southern Maryland Blvd.
Both I-270 and the Capital Beltway were extremely congested; however, the Intercounty Connector (ICC; MD&nbsp;200) alleviated some of the congestion over time.
The Maryland Transit Administration (often abbreviated as "MTA Maryland"), a state agency part of the Maryland Department of Transportation also provides transit services within the state.
Jews are numerous throughout Montgomery County and in Pikesville and Owings Mills northwest of Baltimore.
Maryland also has an  portion of I-81 that travels through the state near Hagerstown.
These rates can increase, decrease or remain the same from year to year.
In recent years, Maryland has been among the most reliable states for Democratic nominees.
This population however, still remains culturally very active and yearly festivals are held.
The largest and most significant battle in the state was the Battle of Antietam on September 17, 1862, near Sharpsburg.
The Maryland Department of Transportation, headquartered in the Hanover area of unincorporated Anne Arundel County, oversees most transportation in the state through its various administration-level agencies.
I-83 has  in Maryland and connects Baltimore to southern central Pennsylvania (Harrisburg and York, Pennsylvania).
More than 1,231 firefighters worked to bring the blaze under control.
The lack of a glacial history also accounts for Maryland's soil, which is sandier and muddier than the rocky soils farther to the north and northeast.
St. John's College in Annapolis, Maryland and Washington College in Chestertown, Maryland, both private institutions, are the two oldest colleges in the state, and are among the oldest in the country.
Institutions and government agencies with an interest in research and development located in Maryland include the Johns Hopkins University, the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, more than one campus of the University System of Maryland, Goddard Space Flight Center, the United States Census Bureau, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Celera Genomics company, the J. Craig Venter Institute (JCVI), and MedImmune&nbsp;– recently purchased by AstraZeneca.
Wilbur Wright trained military aviators at this location.
Earthquakes in Maryland are infrequent and small due to the state's distance from seismic/earthquake zones.
The two years from 1644–1646 that Claiborne and his Puritan associates held sway were known as "The Plundering Time".
In 2012, ''The Baltimore Sun'' published a list of Maryland's top ten athletes in the state's history.
Of the 115,000 men from Maryland who joined the military during the Civil War, 85,000, or 77%, joined the Union army, while the remainder joined the Confederate Army.
On February 2, 1781, Maryland became the 13th state to approve the ratification of the Articles of Confederation which brought into being the United States as a united, sovereign and national state.
The city of Baltimore and Maryland's 23 counties levy local "piggyback" income taxes at rates between 1.25 and 3.2 percent of Maryland taxable income.
Penn successfully argued that the Maryland charter entitled Lord Baltimore only to unsettled lands, and Dutch settlement in Delaware predated his charter.
Although the port handles a wide variety of products, the most typical imports are raw materials and bulk commodities, such as iron ore, petroleum, sugar, and fertilizers, often distributed to the relatively close manufacturing centers of the inland Midwest via good overland transportation.
The royal charter granted Maryland the land north of the Potomac River up to the 40th parallel.
In western Maryland, the higher elevations of Allegany and Garrett counties—including the cities of Cumberland, Frostburg, and Oakland—display more characteristics of the humid continental zone, due in part to elevation.
A large component of this is commercial fishing, centered in the Chesapeake Bay, but also including activity off the short Atlantic seacoast.
Senators and seven of its eight Representatives in Congress are Democrats, and Democrats hold a supermajority in the state Senate.
Most of the state's waterways are part of the Chesapeake Bay watershed, with the exceptions of a tiny portion of extreme western Garrett County (drained by the Youghiogheny River as part of the watershed of the Mississippi River), the eastern half of Worcester County (which drains into Maryland's Atlantic coastal bays), and a small portion of the state's northeast corner (which drains into the Delaware River watershed).
This land was ceded to the United States Federal Government in 1790 to form the District of Columbia.
), 4 (Pennsylvania Avenue/Southern Maryland Blvd./Patuxent Beach Road/St.
The Congressional Country Club has hosted three golf tournaments for the U.S. Open and a PGA Championship.
Maryland's state sales tax is 6 percent.
Maryland enjoys considerable historical repute for the talented sports players of its past, including Cal Ripken Jr. and Babe Ruth.
Altogether, white collar technical and administrative workers comprise 25 percent of Maryland's labor force, attributable in part to nearby Maryland being a part of the Washington Metro Area where the federal government office employment is relatively high.
Maryland's urban and rural communities had different experiences during the Great Depression.
During World War II the Glenn Martin Company (now part of Lockheed Martin) airplane factory employed some 40,000 people.
The state is named after the English queen Henrietta Maria of France.
Ocean City on the Atlantic Coast has been a popular beach destination in summer, particularly since the Chesapeake Bay Bridge was built in 1952 connecting the Eastern Shore to the more populated Maryland cities.
Maryland ranks 40th in total energy consumption nationwide, and it managed less toxic waste per capita than all but six states in 2005.
Much of the Baltimore–Washington corridor lies just south of the Piedmont in the Coastal Plain, though it straddles the border between the two regions.
Two state-funded institutions, Morgan State University and St. Mary's College of Maryland, as well as two federally funded institutions, the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences and the United States Naval Academy, are not affiliated with the University System of Maryland.
George Calvert was the first Lord of Baltimore and the first English proprietor of the then-Maryland colonial grant.
In April 2007 Maryland joined the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)—a regional initiative formed by all of the Northeastern states, Washington D.C., and three Canadian provinces to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Mixed-race children born to white mothers were considered free by the principle of ''partus sequitur ventrem'', by which children took the social status of their mothers, a principle of slave law that was adopted throughout the colonies, following Virginia in 1662.
Baltimore's Light Rail and Metro Subway systems serve its densely populated inner-city and the surrounding suburbs.
Lord Baltimore's first settlers arrived in the new colony in March 1634.
Forty-three percent of the state's population resides in these three jurisdictions, each of which contain large, traditionally Democratic voting bloc(s): African Americans in Baltimore and Prince George's, federal employees in Prince George's and Montgomery, and postgraduates in Montgomery.
About 4.0 percent are undocumented (illegal) immigrants.
Among them are two beltways encircling the major cities of the region: I-695, the McKeldin (Baltimore) Beltway, which encircles Baltimore; and a portion of I-495, the Capital Beltway, which encircles Washington, D.C. I-270, which connects the Frederick area with Northern Virginia and the District of Columbia through major suburbs to the northwest of Washington, is a major commuter route and is as wide as fourteen lanes at points.
The highest point in Maryland, with an elevation of , is Hoye Crest on Backbone Mountain, in the southwest corner of Garrett County, near the border with West Virginia, and near the headwaters of the North Branch of the Potomac River.
There are no natural lakes, though there are numerous natural ponds.
Maryland's largest airport is Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport, more commonly referred to as BWI.
In 1952 the eastern and western halves of Maryland were linked for the first time by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge, which replaced a nearby ferry service.
The Progressive Era of the late 19th and early 20th centuries brought political reforms.
Maryland ranked No.
In addition, a number of educational and medical research institutions are located in the state.
This geographical curiosity makes Maryland the narrowest state, bordered by the Mason–Dixon line to the north, and the northwards-arching Potomac River to the south.
However, Maryland has been using Genuine Progress Indicator, an indicator of well-being, to guide the state's development, rather than relying only on growth indicators like GDP.
Smaller but much older Irish populations can be found in Southern Maryland, with some roots dating as far back as the early Maryland colony.
The ponies and their sale were popularized by the children's book, ''Misty of Chincoteague.''
Agriculture is oriented to dairy farming (especially in foothill and piedmont areas) for nearby large city milksheads plus specialty perishable horticulture crops, such as cucumbers, watermelons, sweet corn, tomatoes, muskmelons, squash, and peas (Source:USDA Crop Profiles).
Spanish is the second-most-spoken language in Maryland, after English.
The border dispute with Pennsylvania led to Cresap's War in the 1730s.
This lasted until after the American Revolutionary War.
Major rail yards are located in Baltimore and Cumberland, with an intermodal terminal (rail, truck and marine) in Baltimore.
The only other airports with commercial service are at Hagerstown and Salisbury.
The armed phase of the conflict ended in May 1738 with the intervention of King George II, who compelled the negotiation of a cease-fire.
Hostilities erupted in 1730 and escalated through the first half of the decade, culminating in the deployment of military forces by Maryland in 1736 and by Pennsylvania in 1737.
The brownstone quarries in the east, which gave Baltimore and Washington much of their characteristic architecture in the mid-19th century, were once a predominant natural resource.
Nearby supplies of natural resources along with railroads fostered its growth into a major manufacturing center.
I-97, fully contained within Anne Arundel County and the second shortest () one- or two-digit Interstate highway which connects the Baltimore area to the Annapolis area.
The Maryland General Assembly is composed of the Maryland House of Delegates and the Maryland Senate.
Heavy manufacturing declined in Baltimore.
Existing facilities, including Fort McHenry, were greatly expanded.
In 1644 William Claiborne, a Puritan, seized Kent Island while his associate, the pro-Parliament Puritan Richard Ingle, took over St. Mary's.
The once mighty primary metals sub-sector, which at one time included what was then the largest steel factory in the world at Sparrows Point, still exists, but is pressed with foreign competition, bankruptcies, and mergers.
Georgetown University, the first Catholic University, was founded in 1789 in what was then part of Maryland.
Baltimore grew significantly during the Industrial Revolution, due in large part to its seaport and good railroad connections, attracting European immigrant labor.
Two National Football League teams play in Maryland, the Baltimore Ravens in Baltimore City and the Washington Redskins in Landover.
The legislature may not increase the governor's proposed budget expenditures.
Maryland is also home to one of the three races in horse racing's annual Triple Crown, the Preakness Stakes, which is run every spring at Pimlico Race Course in Baltimore.
The WMATA's Metrorail rapid transit and Metrobus local bus systems (the 2nd and 6th busiest in the nation of their respective modes) provide service in Montgomery and Prince George's counties and connect them to Washington D.C., with the express Metrobus ''Route B30'' serving BWI Airport.
No restrictions or limitations on property taxes are imposed by the state, meaning cities and counties can set tax rates at the level they deem necessary to fund governmental services.
Generally, properties that are owned and used by religious, charitable, or educational organizations or property owned by the federal, state or local governments are exempt.
Western and northern Maryland have large German-American populations.
In a series of laws passed between 1892 and 1908, reformers worked for standard state-issued ballots (rather than those distributed and marked by the parties); obtained closed voting booths to prevent party workers from "assisting" voters; initiated primary elections to keep party bosses from selecting candidates; and had candidates listed without party symbols, which discouraged the illiterate from participating.
, Maryland has supported the Democratic nominee in each of the last six presidential elections, by an average margin of 15.4 percent.
The Democratic Party remained in control of eight county governments including Baltimore City.
They purchased the site from the paramount chief of the region, who was eager to establish trade.
The highest educational official in the state is the State Superintendent of Schools, who is appointed by the State Board of Education to a four-year term of office.
The Democratic Party rapidly regained power in the state from Republicans.
Every year during the last week of July, feral horses are captured and waded across a shallow bay for sale at Chincoteague, Virginia.
Maryland's state flower, the black-eyed susan, grows in abundance in wild flower groups throughout the state.
I-70 enters from Pennsylvania north of Hancock and continues east for  to Baltimore, connecting Hagerstown and Frederick along the way.
Many of the library systems have established formalized partnerships with other educational institutions in their counties and regions.
Annual rainfall ranges from  with more in higher elevations.
They captured Jesuit priests, imprisoned them, then sent them back to England.
