They married in late 1816, after the suicide of Percy Shelley's first wife, Harriet.
In the 1820s and 1830s, Mary Shelley frequently wrote short stories for gift books or annuals, including sixteen for ''The Keepsake'', which was aimed at middle-class women and bound in silk, with gilt-edged pages.
Mary Shelley insisted she would have known if Claire had been pregnant, but it is unclear how much she really knew.
Mary Shelley's works often argue that cooperation and sympathy, particularly as practised by women in the family, were the ways to reform civil society.
In 1984, Mary Poovey influentially identified the retreat of Mary Shelley’s reformist politics into the "separate sphere" of the domestic.
Mary Shelley was distracted and unhappy in the cramped and remote Villa Magni, which she came to regard as a dungeon.
In 1814, Mary began a romance with one of her father's political followers, she then married Percy Bysshe Shelley.
On the morning of 10 October, Fanny Imlay was found dead in a room at a Swansea inn, along with a suicide note and a laudanum bottle.
Mary found a way to tell the story of Percy's life, nonetheless: she included extensive biographical notes about the poems.
She records details of each writer's life and character, quotes their writing in the original as well as in translation, and ends with a critical assessment of their achievement.
In 1822, her husband drowned when his sailing boat sank during a storm near Viareggio.
In the mid-1840s, Mary Shelley found herself the target of three separate blackmailers.
However, Shelley critiques those Enlightenment ideals that Godwin promotes in his works.
Victor Frankenstein's "thoughtless rejection of family", for example, is seen as evidence of Shelley's constant concern for the domestic.
Lady Shelley, Percy Florence's wife, responded in part by presenting a severely edited collection of letters she had inherited, published privately as ''Shelley and Mary'' in 1882.
Claire Clairmont gave birth to a baby girl on 13 January, at first called Alba, later Allegra.
The result was the ''History of a Six Weeks' Tour'', published in November 1817.
Although Mary Shelley wrote twenty-one short stories for the annuals between 1823 and 1839, she always saw herself, above all, as a novelist.
Most of Godwin’s friends disliked his new wife, describing her as quick-tempered and quarrelsome; but Godwin was devoted to her, and the marriage was a success.
Byron joined them on 25 May, with his young physician, John William Polidori, and rented the Villa Diodati, close to Lake Geneva at the village of Cologny; Percy Shelley rented a smaller building called Maison Chapuis on the waterfront nearby.
Sir Timothy raised Mary's allowance from £100 a year to £250 but remained as difficult as ever.
The couple moved with Claire into lodgings at Somers Town, and later, Nelson Square.
When Mary was four, her father married a neighbour, with whom, as her stepmother, Mary came to have a troubled relationship.
She refused, saying that after being married to one genius, she could only marry another.
He said he would suppress it in return for £250, but Mary Shelley refused.
Mary Shelley's last full-length book, written in the form of letters and published in 1844, was ''Rambles in Germany and Italy in 1840, 1842 and 1843'', which recorded her travels with her son Percy Florence and his university friends.
On 1 February 1851, at Chester Square, she died at the age of fifty-three from what her physician suspected was a brain tumour.
But thou art fled, gone down a dreary road
Her father was the political philosopher William Godwin, and her mother was the philosopher and feminist Mary Wollstonecraft.
Their friendship had altered, however, following her refusal to cooperate with his proposed biography of Percy Shelley; and he later reacted angrily to her omission of the atheistic section of ''Queen Mab'' from Percy Shelley's poems.
Mellor largely agreed, arguing that "Mary Shelley grounded her alternative political ideology on the metaphor of the peaceful, loving, bourgeois family.
In the summer of 1838 Edward Moxon, the publisher of Tennyson and the son-in-law of Charles Lamb, proposed publishing a collected works of Percy Shelley.
Shelley was "profoundly committed to an ethic of cooperation, mutual dependence, and self-sacrifice".
For example, she removed the atheistic passages from ''Queen Mab'' for the first edition.
In ''Rambles'', Shelley follows the tradition of Mary Wollstonecraft's ''Letters Written in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark'' and her own ''A History of a Six Weeks' Tour'' in mapping her personal and political landscape through the discourse of sensibility and sympathy.
Harriet’s family obstructed Percy Shelley's efforts—fully supported by Mary Godwin—to assume custody of his two children by Harriet.
As literary scholar Kari Lokke writes, ''The Last Man'', more so than ''Frankenstein'', "in its refusal to place humanity at the center of the universe, its questioning of our privileged position in relation to nature&nbsp;...&nbsp;constitutes a profound and prophetic challenge to Western humanism."
He had agreed to raise her so long as Claire had nothing more to do with her.
"Perhaps a corpse would be re-animated", Mary noted, "galvanism had given token of such things".
Either before or during the journey, she had become pregnant.
Mary Shelley lived a literary life.
"I am to justify his ways," she had declared in 1824; "I am to make him beloved to all posterity."
She and Jane Williams rushed desperately to Livorno and then to Pisa in the fading hope that their husbands were still alive.
Percy Shelley's radicalism, particularly his economic views, which he had imbibed from William Godwin's ''Political Justice'' (1793), had alienated him from his wealthy aristocratic family: they wanted him to follow traditional models of the landed aristocracy, and he wanted to donate large amounts of the family's money to schemes intended to help the disadvantaged.
Mary Shelley herself confided that she modelled the central characters of ''The Last Man'' on her Italian circle.
In 1826, Percy Florence became the legal heir of the Shelley estate after the death of his half-brother Charles Shelley, his father's son by Harriet Shelley.
From 1839, she suffered from headaches and bouts of paralysis in parts of her body, which sometimes prevented her from reading and writing.
Between observations on scenery, culture, and "the people, especially in a political point of view", she uses the travelogue form to explore her roles as a widow and mother and to reflect on revolutionary nationalism in Italy.
Throughout this period, she also championed Percy Shelley's poetry, promoting its publication and quoting it in her writing.
After her death, however, she was chiefly remembered as the wife of Percy Bysshe Shelley and as the author of ''Frankenstein''.
James Rieger concluded Percy's "assistance at every point in the book's manufacture was so extensive that one hardly knows whether to regard him as editor or minor collaborator", while Anne K. Mellor later argued Percy only "made many technical corrections and several times clarified the narrative and thematic continuity of the text."
But Godwin was often deeply in debt; feeling that he could not raise the children by himself, he cast about for a second wife.
However, in the last decade or so this view has been challenged.
In 1828, she met and flirted with the French writer Prosper Mérimée, but her one surviving letter to him appears to be a deflection of his declaration of love.
Trelawny, Byron, and Hunt cremated Percy Shelley’s corpse on the beach at Viareggio.
As Mary Favret writes, "the disembodied Percy identifies the spirit of poetry itself".
These losses left her in a deep depression that isolated her from Percy Shelley, who wrote in his notebook:
The situation awaiting Mary Godwin in England was fraught with complications, some of which she had not foreseen.
And left me in this dreary world alone?
It was after midnight before they retired, and unable to sleep, she became possessed by her imagination as she beheld the ''grim terrors'' of her "waking dream", her ghost story:
Reviewers and readers assumed that Percy Shelley was the author, since the book was published with his preface and dedicated to his political hero William Godwin.
With a revival in Percy Shelley's finances after the death of his grandfather, Sir Bysshe Shelley, the couple holidayed in Torquay and then rented a two-storey cottage at Bishopsgate, on the edge of Windsor Great Park.
She saw Percy Shelley as an embodiment of her parents' liberal and reformist ideas of the 1790s, particularly Godwin's view that marriage was a repressive monopoly, which he had argued in his 1793 edition of ''Political Justice'' but since retracted.
The following year, Mary Shelley edited a volume of her husband's essays, letters, translations, and fragments, and throughout the 1830s, she introduced his poetry to a wider audience by publishing assorted works in the annual ''The Keepsake''.
In a letter of 17 November 1822, she announced: "I shall write his life—& thus occupy myself in the only manner from which I can derive consolation."
Mary Shelley rejected this idea instantly.
Mary's earliest years were happy ones, judging from the letters of William Godwin's housekeeper and nurse, Louisa Jones.
Thy form is here indeed—a lovely one—
For example, Bennett claims that Mary Shelley's works reveal a consistent commitment to Romantic idealism and political reform and Jane Blumberg's study of Shelley's early novels argues that her career cannot be easily divided into radical and conservative halves.
For the first time, she and her son were financially independent, though the estate proved less valuable than they had hoped.
Scholars have speculated that she may have been sent away for her health, to remove her from the seamy side of business, or to introduce her to radical politics.
"It was acting in a novel, being an incarnate romance," Mary Shelley recalled in 1826.
Her habit of intensive reading and study, revealed in her journals and letters and reflected in her works, is now better appreciated.
Her desire of knowledge is great, and her perseverance in everything she undertakes almost invincible."
I was asked each morning, and each morning I was forced to reply with a mortifying negative."
Mary Shelley's work in this genre has been described as that of a "hack writer" and "wordy and pedestrian".
In 1830, she sold the copyright for a new edition of ''Frankenstein'' for £60 to Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley for their new Standard Novels series.
Mary Shelley enjoyed the stimulating society of William Godwin's circle, but poverty prevented her from socialising as she wished.
It is as the wife of Percy Bysshe Shelley that she excites our interest."
By 1809, Godwin's business was close to failure, and he was "near to despair".
Percy Shelley enthusiastically encouraged Mary Shelley's writing: "My husband was, from the first, very anxious that I should prove myself worthy of my parentage, and enrol myself on the page of fame.
Mary Shelley's first concern during these years was the welfare of Percy Florence.
She was partly consoled by the visits of Hogg, whom she disliked at first but soon considered a close friend.
Evading Sir Timothy's ban on a biography, Mary Shelley often included in these editions her own annotations and reflections on her husband's life and work.
These formed part of Lardner's ''Cabinet Cyclopaedia'', one of the best of many such series produced in the 1820s and 1830s in response to growing middle-class demand for self-education.
Mary lived with her son and daughter-in-law at Field Place, Sussex, the Shelleys' ancestral home, and at Chester Square, London, and accompanied them on travels abroad.
Soon after Percy Shelley's death, Mary Shelley determined to write his biography.
The birth of her fourth child, Percy Florence, on 12 November 1819, finally lifted her spirits, though she nursed the memory of her lost children till the end of her life.
Shelley was particularly interested in "the fragility of individual identity" and often depicted "the way a person's role in the world can be cataclysmically altered either by an internal emotional upheaval, or by some supernatural occurrence that mirrors an internal schism".
Mary Shelley was aware of Payne's plan, but how seriously she took it is unclear.
For Shelley, biographical writing was supposed to, in her words, "form as it were a school in which to study the philosophy of history", and to teach "lessons".
The Shelleys then embarked on a roving existence, never settling in any one place for long.
At Bishopsgate, Percy wrote his poem ''Alastor''; and on 24 January 1816, Mary gave birth to a second child, William, named after her father, and soon nicknamed "Willmouse".
Shelley emphasises domesticity, romance, family, sympathy, and compassion in the lives of her subjects.
Scholars now consider Mary Shelley to be a major Romantic figure, significant for her literary achievement and her political voice as a woman and a liberal.
While Percy composed a series of major poems, Mary wrote the autobiographical novel ''Matilda'', the historical novel ''Valperga'', and the plays ''Proserpine''  and ''Midas''.
The story has been fictionalised several times and formed the basis for a number of films.
Sir Timothy Shelley had at first agreed to support his grandson, Percy Florence, only if he were handed over to an appointed guardian.
The couple devoted their time to writing, reading, learning, sightseeing, and socialising.
Biographers have offered various interpretations of these events: that Percy Shelley decided to adopt a local child; that the baby was his by Elise, Claire, or an unknown woman; or that she was Elise's by Byron.
During the period 1827–40, Mary Shelley was busy as an editor and writer.
She celebrates the "feminine affections and compassion" associated with the family and suggests that civil society will fail without them.
Lord Raymond, who leaves England to fight for the Greeks and dies in Constantinople, is based on Lord Byron; and the utopian Adrian, Earl of Windsor, who leads his followers in search of a natural paradise and dies when his boat sinks in a storm, is a fictional portrait of Percy Bysshe Shelley.
According to Wolfson, Donald Reiman, a modern editor of Percy Bysshe Shelley's works, still refers to Mary Shelley's editions, while acknowledging that her editing style belongs "to an age of editing when the aim was not to establish accurate texts and scholarly apparatus but to present a full record of a writer's career for the general reader".
For thine own sake I cannot follow thee
At Marlow, they entertained their new friends Marianne and Leigh Hunt, worked hard at their writing, and often discussed politics.
The coast offered Percy Shelley and Edward Williams the chance to enjoy their "perfect plaything for the summer", a new sailing boat.
The novel is engaged with political and ideological issues, particularly the education and social role of women.
On 6 March, she wrote to Hogg:
The loss of her child induced acute depression in Mary Godwin, who was haunted by visions of the baby; but she conceived again and had recovered by the summer.
Scholars have shown increasing interest in her literary output, particularly in her novels, which include the historical novels ''Valperga'' (1823) and ''Perkin Warbeck'' (1830), the apocalyptic novel ''The Last Man'' (1826), and her final two novels, ''Lodore'' (1835) and ''Falkner'' (1837).
All was not well between the couple that summer, however, and Percy spent more time with Jane Williams than with his depressed and debilitated wife.
At Lucerne, lack of money forced the three to turn back.
In 1828, she fell ill with smallpox while visiting them in Paris.
In March of that year, the Chancery Court ruled Percy Shelley morally unfit to assume custody of his children and later placed them with a clergyman's family.
Until the republication of these essays in 2002, their significance within her body of work was not appreciated.
Unfortunately, all of Mary's juvenilia were lost when she ran off with Percy in 1814, and none of her surviving manuscripts can be definitively dated before that year.
Mary wrote ''Valperga'' to help alleviate her father's financial difficulties, as Percy refused to assist him further.
Mary glossed Percy's political radicalism as a form of sentimentalism, arguing that his republicanism arose from sympathy for those who were suffering.
She wrote that the preface to the first edition was Percy's work "as far as I can recollect."
The letters the couple wrote on the second journey confront the "great and extraordinary events" of the final defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo after his "Hundred Days" return in 1815.
To Mary's dismay, her father disapproved, and tried to thwart the relationship and salvage the "spotless fame" of his daughter.
Many of Shelley's stories are set in places or times far removed from early 19th-century Britain, such as Greece and the reign of Henry IV of France.
Her father described her at age 15 as "singularly bold, somewhat imperious, and active of mind.
Mary Shelley busied herself with editing her husband's poems, among other literary endeavours, but concern for her son restricted her options.
This vision allowed women to participate in the public sphere but it inherited the inequalities inherent in the bourgeois family.
Poovey suggests that ''Frankenstein''s multiple narratives enable Shelley to split her artistic persona: she can "express and efface herself at the same time".
She thereby implicitly endorsed a conservative vision of gradual evolutionary reform."
Sir Timothy threatened to stop the allowance if any biography of the poet were published.
Victor Frankenstein's failure as a "parent" in the novel has been read as an expression of the anxieties which accompany pregnancy, giving birth, and particularly maternity.
Shelley scholar Anne K. Mellor suggests that, from a feminist viewpoint, it is a story "about what happens when a man tries to have a baby without a woman&nbsp;...&nbsp;''Frankenstein'' is profoundly concerned with natural as opposed to unnatural modes of production and reproduction".
Rather than focusing on the twists and turns of the plot, however, the novel foregrounds the mental and moral struggles of the protagonist, Victor Frankenstein, and Shelley imbues the text with her own brand of politicised Romanticism, one that criticised the individualism and egotism of traditional Romanticism.
In December 1801, he married Mary Jane Clairmont, a well-educated woman with two young children of her own—Charles and Claire.
Ten days after the storm, three bodies washed up on the coast near Viareggio, midway between Livorno and Lerici.
After Wollstonecraft's death less than a month after her daughter Mary was born, Mary was raised by Godwin, who was able to provide his daughter with a rich, if informal, education, encouraging her to adhere to his own liberal political theories.
On their return to England in September, Mary and Percy moved—with Claire Clairmont, who took lodgings nearby—to Bath, where they hoped to keep Claire’s pregnancy secret.
For Shelley, building sympathetic connections between people is the way to build civil society and to increase knowledge: "knowledge, to enlighten and free the mind from clinging deadening prejudices—a wider circle of sympathy with our fellow-creatures;—these are the uses of travel".
Ellen Moers was one of the first to claim that Shelley's loss of a baby was a crucial influence on the writing of ''Frankenstein''.
Collections of Mary Shelley's papers are housed in ''Lord Abinger's Shelley Collection'' on deposit at the Bodleian Library, the New York Public Library (particularly The Carl H. Pforzheimer Collection of Shelley and His Circle), the Huntington Library, the British Library, and in the John Murray Collection.
That leads to Sorrow's most obscure abode.
The threat of a debtor's prison, combined with their ill health and fears of losing custody of their children, contributed to the couple's decision to leave England for Italy on 12 March 1818, taking Claire Clairmont and Alba with them.
Godwin was saved from debtor's prison by philosophical devotees such as Francis Place, who lent him further money.
She also met the American actor John Howard Payne and the American writer Washington Irving, who intrigued her.
My dearest Mary, wherefore hast thou gone,
Mary and Percy began meeting each other secretly at Mary Wollstonecraft's grave in St Pancras Churchyard, and they fell in love—she was nearly 17, he nearly 22.
Do thou return for mine.
In May 1816, Mary Godwin, Percy Shelley, and their son travelled to Geneva with Claire Clairmont.
Upon their return to England, Mary was pregnant with Percy's child.
She became particularly fond of the Greek revolutionary Prince Alexander Mavrocordato and of Jane and Edward Williams.
They also explore the sublimity of Lake Geneva and Mont Blanc as well as the revolutionary legacy of the philosopher and novelist Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
While earlier Godwinian novels had shown how rational individuals could slowly improve society, ''The Last Man'' and ''Frankenstein'' demonstrate the individual's lack of control over history.
From ''Frankenstein'''s first theatrical adaptation in 1823 to the cinematic adaptations of the 20th century, including the first cinematic version in 1910 and now-famous versions such as James Whale's 1931 ''Frankenstein'', Mel Brooks' 1974 ''Young Frankenstein'', and Kenneth Branagh's 1994 ''Mary Shelley's Frankenstein'', many audiences first encounter the work of Mary Shelley through adaptation.
She also records her "pilgrimage" to scenes associated with Percy Shelley.
In their interpretation, Shelley reaffirms this masculine tradition, including the misogyny inherent in it, but at the same time "conceals fantasies of equality that occasionally erupt in monstrous images of rage".
In 1816, the couple famously spent a summer with Lord Byron, John William Polidori, and Claire Clairmont near Geneva, Switzerland, where Mary conceived the idea for her novel ''Frankenstein''.
In practice, however, she loved only Percy Shelley and seems to have ventured no further than flirting with Hogg.
Their Italian years were a time of intense intellectual and creative activity for both Shelleys.
She was often physically ill, however, and prone to depressions.
In the summer of 1824, Mary Shelley moved to Kentish Town in north London to be near Jane Williams.
Critics have until recently cited ''Lodore'' and ''Falkner'' as evidence of increasing conservatism in Mary Shelley's later works.
She was forced, however, into several compromises, and, as Blumberg notes, "modern critics have found fault with the edition and claim variously that she miscopied, misinterpreted, purposely obscured, and attempted to turn the poet into something he was not".
The events in Naples, a city Mary Shelley later called a paradise inhabited by devils, remain shrouded in mystery.
The party arrived at Geneva on 14 May 1816, where Mary called herself "Mrs Shelley".
On 16 June, she miscarried, losing so much blood that she nearly died.
Payne fell in love with her and in 1826 asked her to marry him.
Some modern critics, such as Patricia Clemit and Jane Blumberg, have taken the same view, resisting autobiographical readings of Mary Shelley's works.
She argues that the novel is a "birth myth" in which Shelley comes to terms with her guilt for causing her mother's death as well as for failing as a parent.
Recent scholarship has yielded a more comprehensive view of Mary Shelley’s achievements.
She was still helping to support her father, and they looked out for publishers for each other.
They planned to spend the summer with the poet Lord Byron, whose recent affair with Claire had left her pregnant.
She later described that summer in Switzerland as the moment "when I first stepped out from childhood into life".
Until the 1970s, Mary Shelley was known mainly for her efforts to publish her husband's works and for her novel ''Frankenstein'', which remains widely read and has inspired many theatrical and film adaptations.
Mary Shelley's omissions provoked criticism, often stinging, from members of Percy Shelley's former circle, and reviewers accused her of, among other things, indiscriminate inclusions.
Most of the short poems Shelley wrote at San Terenzo were addressed to Jane rather than to Mary.
Mary Godwin read these memoirs and her mother's books, and was brought up to cherish her mother's memory.
Portraying herself as Percy's "practical muse", she also noted how she had suggested revisions as he wrote.
She also edited and promoted the works of her husband, the Romantic poet and philosopher Percy Bysshe Shelley.
Oblique references in her journals, from the early 1830s until the early 1840s, suggest that Mary Shelley had feelings for the radical politician Aubrey Beauclerk, who may have disappointed her by twice marrying others.
The novel's resolution proposes that when female values triumph over violent and destructive masculinity, men will be freed to express the "compassion, sympathy, and generosity" of their better natures.
"It proved a wet, ungenial summer", Mary Shelley remembered in 1831, "and incessant rain often confined us for days to the house".
Mary Godwin may have first met the radical poet-philosopher Percy Bysshe Shelley in the interval between her two stays in Scotland.
In her own lifetime, Mary Shelley was taken seriously as a writer, though reviewers often missed her writings' political edge.
Through her, Shelley offers a feminine alternative to the masculine power politics that destroy the male characters.
Shelley's works reveal her as less optimistic than Godwin and Wollstonecraft; she lacks faith in Godwin's theory that humanity could eventually be perfected.
Unable to think of a story, young Mary Godwin became anxious: "''Have you thought of a story?''
To avoid boarding fees, she moved to Harrow on the Hill herself so that Percy could attend as a day scholar.
Mary, who later wrote of "my excessive and romantic attachment to my father", was confused.
In the view of literary scholar Greg Kucich, they reveal Mary Shelley's "prodigious research across several centuries and in multiple languages", her gift for biographical narrative, and her interest in the "emerging forms of feminist historiography".
Since Mary Shelley shared his belief in the non-exclusivity of marriage, she formed emotional ties of her own among the men and women of their circle.
Mary Shelley was born as Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin in Somers Town, London, in 1797.
To Baxter, he wrote, "I am anxious that she should be brought up&nbsp;...&nbsp;like a philosopher, even like a cynic."
Shelley uses the historical novel to comment on gender relations; for example, ''Valperga'' is a feminist version of Scott's masculinist genre.
They travelled down the Rhine and by land to the Dutch port of Marsluys, arriving at Gravesend, Kent, on 13 September 1814.
On the first anniversary of Mary Shelley's death, the Shelleys opened her box-desk.
A year after Wollstonecraft's death, Godwin published his ''Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman'' (1798), which he intended as a sincere and compassionate tribute.
She wrote the novels ''The Fortunes of Perkin Warbeck'' (1830), ''Lodore'' (1835), and ''Falkner'' (1837).
Mary Shelley's last years were blighted by illness.
According to Jane Shelley, Mary Shelley had asked to be buried with her mother and father; but Percy and Jane, judging the graveyard at St Pancras to be "dreadful", chose to bury her instead at St Peter's Church, Bournemouth, near their new home at Boscombe.
Shortly afterwards, Mary Shelley bought some letters written by herself and Percy Bysshe Shelley from a man calling himself G. Byron and posing as the illegitimate son of the late Lord Byron.
Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar argue in their seminal book ''The Madwoman in the Attic'' (1979) that in ''Frankenstein'' in particular, Shelley responded to the masculine literary tradition represented by John Milton's ''Paradise Lost''.
