Plymouth is the largest municipality in the state by land area.
File:Quincycenter.jpg|8.
His younger brother Edward M. Kennedy held that seat until his death from a brain tumor in 2009.
The Government of Massachusetts is divided into three branches: Executive, Legislative, and Judicial.
File:New Bedford, Massachusetts-view from harbor.jpeg|6.
File:Panorama of Lynn, Massachusetts, from High Rock Tower.jpg|9.
'''√ 62%''' ''1,803,801''
The rebellion was one of the major factors in the decision to draft a stronger national constitution to replace the Articles of Confederation.
WGBH-TV in Boston is a major public television station and produces national programs such as ''Nova'', ''Frontline'', and ''American Experience''.
The governor of Massachusetts heads the executive branch; duties of the governor include signing or vetoing legislation, filling judicial and agency appointments, granting pardons, preparing an annual budget, and commanding the Massachusetts National Guard.
The first English settlers in Massachusetts, the Pilgrims, arrived via the ''Mayflower'' at Plymouth in 1620, and developed friendly relations with the native Wampanoag people.
Often controversial, with numerous claims of graft and mismanagement, and with its initial price tag of $2.5 billion increasing to a final tally of over $15 billion, the Big Dig has nonetheless changed the face of Downtown Boston.
Later, Adams was active in early American foreign affairs and succeeded Washington as the second United States President.
Bostonian John Adams, known as the "Atlas of Independence", was an important figure in both the struggle for independence as well as the formation of the new United States.
Originally dependent on agriculture, fishing and trade, Massachusetts was transformed into a manufacturing center during the Industrial Revolution.
Massachusetts has a long political history; earlier political structures included the Mayflower Compact of 1620, the separate Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth colonies, and the combined colonial Province of Massachusetts.
Commonly known as "the Big Dig", it was, at the time, the biggest federal highway project ever approved.
According to a 2013 study by Phoenix Marketing International, Massachusetts had the sixth-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 6.73 percent.
The most destructive earthquake yet known in New England occurred in 1755, causing considerable damage across Massachusetts.
Massachusetts is the sixth most popular tourist destination for foreign travelers.
By the 1920s, competition from the South and Midwest, followed by the Great Depression, led to the collapse of the three main industries in Massachusetts: textiles, shoemaking, and precision mechanics.
Boston-Logan International Airport is the busiest airport in New England, serving 33.4 million total passengers in 2015, and witnessing rapid growth in international air traffic since 2010.
Small offshore islands and beaches are home to roseate terns and are important breeding areas for the locally threatened piping plover.
File:North Main Street, Brockton MA.jpg|7.
It also operates longer distance commuter rail services throughout the larger Greater Boston area, including service to Worcester, Lowell, and Plymouth.
His son John Quincy Adams, also from Massachusetts, would go on to become the sixth United States President.
Other popular tourist destinations include Salem, Plymouth, and the Berkshires.
Abilities of the Council include confirming gubernatorial appointments and certifying elections.
Religious intolerance continued.
Other orchestras in Massachusetts include the Cape Cod Symphony Orchestra in Barnstable and the Springfield Symphony Orchestra.
'''√ 60%''' ''1,616,487''
The other market surrounds the Springfield area.
This decline would continue into the later half of the century; between 1950 and 1979, the number of Massachusetts residents involved in textile manufacturing declined from 264,000 to 63,000.
In Eastern Massachusetts, following World War II, the economy was transformed from one based on heavy industry into a service-based economy.
Massachusetts was originally inhabited by tribes of the Algonquian language family such as the Wampanoag, Narragansett, Nipmuc, Pocomtuc, Mahican, and Massachusett.
Before the American Civil War, Massachusetts was a center for the abolitionist, temperance, and transcendentalist movements.
Other performing arts and theater organizations in Massachusetts include the Boston Ballet, the Boston Lyric Opera, and the Lenox-based Shakespeare & Company.
In total, 21.07% (1,287,419) of Massachusetts' population age 5 and older spoke a mother language other than English.
Currently, the US senators are Democrats Elizabeth Warren and Ed Markey.
Modern Massachusetts is a global leader in biotechnology, engineering, higher education, finance, and maritime trade.
Unlike the Plymouth colony, the bay colony was founded under a royal charter in 1629.
Two heritage railways are also in operation: the Cape Cod Central Railroad and the Berkshire Scenic Railway.
Vermont became a state in 1791, but did not fully ban slavery until 1858 with the Vermont Personal Liberty Law.
Major non-interstate highways in Massachusetts include U.S.
Political designations
A significant Jewish population immigrated to the Boston and Springfield areas between 1880 and 1920.
The nation's first Marine Hospital was erected by federal order in Boston in 1799.
Horace Mann made the state's school system a national model.
The voters of these now defunct counties elect only Sheriffs and Registers of Deeds, who are part of the state government.
'''√ 61%''' ''1,906,319''
The House consists of 160 members while the Senate has 40 members.
The public University of Massachusetts (nicknamed ''UMass'') features five campuses in the state, with its flagship campus in Amherst that enrolls over 25,000 students.
Along the western border of Western Massachusetts lies the highest elevated part of the state, the Berkshire Mountains range.
Massachusetts has approximately 42 public-use airfields, and over 200 private landing spots.
Exurban Boston and coastal areas grew the most rapidly, while Berkshire County in far Western Massachusetts and Barnstable County on Cape Cod were the only counties to lose population as of the 2010 Census.
Interstate&nbsp;90 (I-90, also known as the Massachusetts Turnpike), is the longest interstate in Massachusetts.
An unusual provision allows filers to voluntarily pay at the pre-referendum 5.85% income tax rate, which is done by between one and two thousand taxpayers per year.
Boston University, Northeastern University, College of the Holy Cross, UMass Lowell, and UMass Amherst also participate in Division I athletics.
Both the Boston Symphony Orchestra and Boston Pops Orchestra are based in Massachusetts.
In addition, the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation maintains a number of parks, trails, and beaches throughout Massachusetts.
Boston College fields teams in the nationally televised Atlantic Coast Conference, while Harvard University competes in the famed Ivy League.
Roman Catholics make up 34% and now predominate because of massive immigration from primarily Catholic countries and regions – chiefly Ireland, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Quebec, and Latin America.
Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, both located in Cambridge, consistently rank among the world's best universities.
With the exodus of several manufacturing companies, the area's industrial economy began to decline during the early 20th century.
From 1786 to 1787, an armed uprising, known as Shays' Rebellion led by Revolutionary War veteran Daniel Shays wrought havoc throughout Massachusetts, and ultimately attempted to seize the U.S. Federal Armory at Springfield.
Tanglewood, in western Massachusetts, is a music venue that is home to both the Tanglewood Music Festival and Tanglewood Jazz Festival, as well as the summer host for the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
In addition to classical and folk music, Massachusetts has produced musicians and bands spanning a number of contemporary genres, such as the classic rock band Aerosmith, the proto-punk band The Modern Lovers, the new wave band The Cars, and the alternative rock band Pixies.
A number of contemporary national political issues have been influenced by events in Massachusetts, such as the decision in 2003 by the state Supreme Judicial Court allowing same-sex marriage and a 2006 bill which mandated health insurance for all Bay Staters.
Logan International Airport has service to numerous cities throughout the United States, as well as international service to Canada, Mexico, the Caribbean, Europe, and Asia.
Massachusetts has the most doctors per 100,000 residents, the second-lowest infant mortality rate, and the lowest percentage of uninsured residents (for both children as well as the total population).
''The Boston Globe'', ''Boston Herald'', ''Springfield Republican'', and the ''Worcester Telegram & Gazette'' are Massachusetts's largest daily newspapers.
Many areas of Massachusetts showed relatively stable population trends between 2000 and 2010.
Massachusetts is located along the Atlantic Flyway, a major route for migratory waterfowl along the eastern coast.
This established Massachusetts' southern border in the west, though surveying problems resulted in disputed territory until 1803–04.
Kripalu Center in Stockbridge, the Shaolin Meditation Temple in Springfield, and the Insight Meditation Center in Barre are examples of non-Abrahamic religious centers in Massachusetts.
Depending on how it is calculated, state and local tax burden in Massachusetts has been estimated among U.S. states and Washington D.C. as 21st highest (11.44% or $6,163 per year for a household with nationwide median income) or 25th highest overall with below-average corporate taxes (39th highest), above-average personal income taxes, (13th highest), above-average sales tax (18th) highest, and below-average property taxes (46th highest).
The Boston Breakers are the Women's Professional Soccer in Massachusetts.
The state of Massachusetts is a center for medical education and research including Harvard's Brigham and Women's Hospital, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute as well as the New England Baptist Hospital, Tufts Medical Center, and Boston Medical Center which is the primary teaching hospital for Boston University.
Harvard University in Cambridge is the oldest institution of higher learning in the United States, with the largest financial endowment of any university, and whose Law School has spawned a contemporaneous majority of United States Supreme Court Justices.
In the 2004 election, the state gave Massachusetts senator John Kerry 61.9% of the vote, his best showing in any state.
Other cities with a population over 100,000 include Worcester, Springfield, Lowell, and Cambridge.
In 1774, the Intolerable Acts targeted Massachusetts with punishments for the Boston Tea Party and further decreased local autonomy, increasing local dissent.
While cultivation of crops like squash and corn supplemented their diets, these tribes were generally dependent on hunting, gathering and fishing for most of their food supply.
There are a number of major AM and FM stations which serve Massachusetts, along with many more regional and community-based stations.
In 1692, the town of Salem and surrounding areas experienced one of America's most infamous cases of mass hysteria, the Salem witch trials.
The large coastal plain of the Atlantic Ocean in the eastern section of the state contains Greater Boston, along with most of the state's population, as well as the distinctive Cape Cod peninsula.
Massachusetts was founded and settled by the Puritans in 1620 and most people in Massachusetts today remain Christians.
In 1641, Massachusetts expanded inland significantly, acquiring the Connecticut River Valley settlement of Springfield, which had recently disputed with, and defected from its original administrators, the Connecticut Colony.
Currently, forests cover around 62% of Massachusetts.
In terms of age, 79.2% were over 18 years old and 14.8% were over 65 years old.
Massachusetts is also the home of the Cape Cod Baseball League.
As of the summer of 2013 the Cape Cod Regional Transit Authority in collaboration with the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority and the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) is operating the CapeFLYER providing passenger rail service between Boston and Cape Cod.
In addition, there are many community dailies and weeklies.
Massachusetts is home to five major league professional sports teams: seventeen-time NBA Champions Boston Celtics, eight-time World Series winners Boston Red Sox, six-time Stanley Cup winners Boston Bruins, and four-time Super Bowl winners New England Patriots.
Massachusetts was a center of the movement for independence from Great Britain; colonists in Massachusetts had long uneasy relations with the British monarchy, including open rebellion under the Dominion of New England in the 1680s.
The Pennsylvania Gradual Abolition Act of 1780 made Pennsylvania the first state to abolish slavery by statute.
Massachusetts is the 7th smallest state in the United States.
According to ''Businessweek'', commonwealth residents have an average life expectancy of 78.4 years, the fifth longest in the country.
There are two major television media markets located in Massachusetts.
The headquarters of the Unitarian Universalist Association, long located on Beacon Hill, is now located in South Boston.
Particular agricultural products of note include green house products making up more than one third of the states agricultural output, cranberries, sweet corn and apples are also large sectors of production.
Voters in Massachusetts also approved a ballot measure in 2012 that legalized the medical use of marijuana.
Both Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, also in Cambridge, have been ranked among the most highly regarded academic institutions in the world.
Additionally, Massachusetts provided Reagan with his smallest margins of victory in both the 1980 and 1984 elections.
Logan, Hanscom Field in Bedford, and Worcester Regional Airport are operated by Massport, an independent state transportation agency.
32% of the population identifies as having no religion.
There is no inheritance tax and limited Massachusetts estate tax related to federal estate tax collection.
In the late 19th century, the sports of basketball and volleyball were invented in the western Massachusetts cities of Springfield and Holyoke, respectively.
A significant population of long-tailed ducks winter off Nantucket.
Massachusetts is also an important center for the performing arts.
CNBC's list of "Top States for Business for 2014" has recognized Massachusetts as the 25th best state in the nation for business.
Famous painters from Massachusetts include Winslow Homer and Norman Rockwell; many of the latter's works are on display at the Norman Rockwell Museum in Stockbridge.
David McCullough points out that an equally important feature was its placing for the first time the courts as a co-equal branch separate from the executive.
In 2012, Massachusetts consumed 1374.4 trillion BTU, making it the fifth lowest state in terms of consumption of energy per capita, and 63% of that energy came from natural gas.
Villages consisted of lodges called wigwams as well as long houses, and tribes were led by male or female elders known as sachems.
There are currently 219 endangered species in Massachusetts.
In more rural areas in the western part of Massachusetts, larger mammals such as moose and black bears have returned, largely due to reforestation following the regional decline in agriculture.
Plimoth Plantation and Old Sturbridge Village are two open-air or "living" museums in Massachusetts, recreating life as it was in the 17th and early 19th centuries, respectively.
40% of foreign immigrants were from Central or South America, according to a 2005 Census Bureau study, with many of the remainder from Asia.
Federal court cases are heard in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts, and appeals are heard by the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.
There are currently a total of 143 hospitals in the state.
'''√ 62%''' ''1,571,763''
Amtrak operates inter-city rail, including the high-speed Acela service to cities such as Providence, New Haven, New York City, and Washington, DC from South Station.
As of the 2014 election, the Democratic Party holds a significant majority over the Republican party.
Boston is the state capital and largest city in Massachusetts.
The route travels  generally west to east, entering Massachusetts at the New York state line in the town of West Stockbridge, and passes just north of Springfield, just south of Worcester and through Framingham before terminating near Logan International Airport in Boston.
Anti-Parliamentary activity by men such as Samuel Adams and John Hancock, followed by reprisals by the British government, were a primary reason for the unity of the Thirteen Colonies and the outbreak of the American Revolution in 1775.
In the 1970s, the Commonwealth ranked as a relatively high-tax state, gaining the pejorative nickname '''Taxachusetts'''.
Throughout the mid 20th century, Massachusetts has gradually shifted from a Republican-leaning state to one largely dominated by Democrats; the 1952 victory of John F. Kennedy over incumbent Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr. is seen as a watershed moment in this transformation.
Pockets of Republican strength are in the central areas along the I-495 crescent, Hampden County, and communities on the south and north shores, but the state as a whole has not given its Electoral College votes to a Republican in a presidential election since Ronald Reagan carried it in 1984.
Although Republicans held the governor's office continuously from 1991 to 2007 and from 2015 onwards, they have been among the most moderate Republican leaders in the nation.
It is the most irreligious region of the country, along with the Western United States.
George H. W. Bush, 41st President of the United States (1989–1993) was born in Milton, Massachusetts in 1924.
Routes 1, 3, 6, and 20, and state routes 2, 3, 9, 24, and 128.
The Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA), also known as "The T", operates public transportation in the form of subway, bus, and ferry systems in the Metro Boston area.
File:Boston skyline from Cambridge March 2016 panorama 2.jpg|1.
Massachusetts routinely votes for the Democratic Party, with the core concentrations in the Boston metro area, the Cape and Islands, and Western Massachusetts outside Hampden County.
The per capita personal income in 2012 was $53,221, making it the third highest state in the nation.
The project included making the Central Artery a tunnel under downtown Boston, in addition to the re-routing of several other major highways.
In the late 18th century, Boston became known as the "Cradle of Liberty" for the agitation there that led to the American Revolution.
Members of both bodies are elected to two-year terms.
News and World Report''s best Liberal Arts Colleges: Williams College (#1), Amherst College (#2), and Wellesley College (#4).
Massachusetts is home to a large number of museums and historical sites.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, who was born in Boston but spent much of his later life in Concord, largely created the philosophy with his 1836 work ''Nature'', and continued to be a key figure in the movement for the remainder of his life.
The United States Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that the Massachusetts gross state product in 2013 was US$446 billion.
Geographically, the center of population of Massachusetts is located in the town of Natick.
In U.S. presidential elections since 2012, Massachusetts has been allotted 11 votes in the electoral college, out of a total of 538.
I-495 forms a wide loop around the outer edge of Greater Boston.
As of 2010, 78.93% (4,823,127) of Massachusetts residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 7.50% (458,256) spoke Spanish, 2.97% (181,437) Portuguese, 1.59% (96,690) Chinese (which includes Cantonese and Mandarin), 1.11% (67,788) French, 0.89% (54,456) French Creole, 0.72% (43,798) Italian, 0.62% (37,865) Russian, and Vietnamese was spoken as a main language by 0.58% (35,283) of the population over the age of five.
The Woods Hole, Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket Steamship Authority regulates freight and passenger ferry service to the islands of Massachusetts including Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket.
Today, Christians make up 57% of the state's population, with Protestants making up 21% of them.
The airport served 33.5 million passengers in 2015, up from 31.6 million in 2014, and is used by around 40 airlines with a total of 103 gates.
In 2014 and 2015, Massachusetts was ranked as the most energy efficient state the United States while Boston is the most efficient city, but it had the third highest electricity prices of any state.
'''√ 62%''' ''1,904,098''
The state imposes a 6.25% sales tax on retail sales of tangible personal property—except for groceries, clothing (up to $175.00), and periodicals.
The corporate income tax rate is 8.8%, and the short-term capital gains tax rate is 12%.
Boston is the largest city, at the inmost point of Massachusetts Bay, and the mouth of the Charles River.
Despite its small size, Massachusetts features numerous topographically distinctive regions.
Eleven communities which call themselves "towns" are, by law, cities since they have traded the town meeting form of government for a mayor-council or manager-council form.
During the 20th century, Massachusetts' economy shifted from manufacturing to services.
Abolitionists John Brown and Sojourner Truth lived in Springfield and Northampton, respectively, while Frederick Douglass lived in Boston.
In 1786, Shays' Rebellion, a populist revolt led by disaffected Revolutionary War veterans, influenced the United States Constitutional Convention.
Jews currently make up 3% of the population.
In 1636, Williams founded the colony of Rhode Island and Hutchinson joined him there several years later.
Massachusetts registered voters as of February, 2016
The American Hockey League (AHL), the NHL's development league, is headquartered in Springfield.
In 1691, the colonies of Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth were united (along with present-day Maine, which had previously been divided between Massachusetts and New York) into the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
Massachusetts also charges a use tax when goods are bought from other states and the vendor does not remit Massachusetts sales tax; taxpayers report and pay this on their income tax forms or dedicated forms, though there are "safe harbor" amounts that can be paid without tallying up actual purchases (except for purchases over $1000).
Other major interstates include I-91, which travels generally north and south along the Connecticut River; I-93, which travels north and south through central Boston, then passes through Methuen before entering New Hampshire; and I-95, which connects Providence, Rhode Island with Greater Boston, forming a partial loop concurrent with Route&nbsp;128 around the more urbanized areas before continuing north along the coast into New Hampshire.
File:Lowell skyline.jpg|3.
The Kennedy family was prominent in Massachusetts politics in the 20th century.
The Massachusetts Bay banished dissenters such as Anne Hutchinson and Roger Williams due to religious and political disagreements.
Like most states, Massachusetts's electoral votes are granted in a winner-take-all system.
Buddhists, Pagans, Hindus, Seventh-day Adventists, Muslims, and Mormons also can be found.
A number of major museums and important historical sites are also located there, and events and festivals throughout the year celebrate the state's history and heritage.
Most Bay State residents live within the Boston Metropolitan Area, also known as Greater Boston, which includes Boston and its proximate surroundings but also extending to Greater Lowell and to Worcester.
Film events in the state include the Boston Film Festival, the Boston International Film Festival, and a number of smaller film festivals in various cities throughout Massachusetts.
The descendants of the Puritans belong to many different churches; in the direct line of inheritance are the various Congregational churches, United Church of Christ and the congregations of Unitarian Universalist Association.
Massachusetts is the fastest growing state in New England and the 25th fastest growing state in the United States.
The works of such abolitionists contributed to Massachusetts' actions during the Civil War.
The Massachusetts Constitution was ratified in 1780 while the Revolutionary War was in progress, four years after the Articles of Confederation was drafted, and eight years before the present United States Constitution was ratified on June 21, 1788.
It is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the east, the states of Connecticut and Rhode Island to the south, New Hampshire and Vermont to the north, and New York to the west.
In 1777, General Henry Knox founded the Springfield Armory, which during the Industrial Revolution catalyzed numerous important technological advances, including interchangeable parts.
37.2% of the population is overweight and 21.7% is obese, and Massachusetts ranks sixth highest in the percentage of residents who are considered neither obese nor overweight (41.1%).
Freshwater fish species in Massachusetts include bass, carp, catfish, and trout, while saltwater species such as Atlantic cod, haddock, and American lobster populate offshore waters.
The Boston Marathon is also a popular event in the state drawing more than 30,000 runners and tens of thousands of spectators annually.
Although much of Massachusetts had been cleared for agriculture, leaving only traces of old growth forest in isolated pockets, secondary growth has regenerated in many rural areas as farms have been abandoned.
Most of the county governments were abolished by the state of Massachusetts beginning in 1997 including Middlesex County, the largest county in the state by population.
According to 2015 rankings by ''US News & World Report'', Massachusetts General Hospital  the hospital ranked in the top three in two specialties.
Historically themed museums and sites such as the Springfield Armory National Historic Site in Springfield, Boston's Freedom Trail and nearby Minute Man National Historical Park, both of which preserve a number of sites important during the American Revolution, the Lowell National Historical Park, which focuses on some of the earliest mills and canals of the industrial revolution in the US, the Black Heritage Trail in Boston, which includes important African-American and abolitionist sites in Boston, and the New Bedford Whaling National Historical Park all showcase various periods of Massachusetts's history.
Many prominent American political dynasties have hailed from the state, including the Adams and Kennedy families.
According to 2010 data from The Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) the largest single denominations are the Roman Catholic Church with 2,940,199 adherents; the United Church of Christ with 86,639 adherents; and the Episcopal Church with 81,999 adherents.
Other famous authors and poets born or strongly associated with Massachusetts include Nathaniel Hawthorne, John Updike, Emily Dickinson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, E.E.
The Supreme Judicial Court is made up of a chief justice and six associate justices.
In 1974, Elaine Noble became the first openly lesbian or gay candidate elected to a state legislature in US history.
The Constitution of the Vermont Republic, adopted in 1777, represented the first partial ban on slavery.
Drafted by John Adams, the Massachusetts Constitution is currently the oldest functioning written constitution in continuous effect in the world.
Government contracts, private investment, and research facilities led to a new and improved industrial climate, with reduced unemployment and increased per capita income.
Other counties have been reorganized, and a few still retain county councils.
Plymouth was the site of the first colony in New England, founded in 1620 by the Pilgrims, passengers of the ''Mayflower''.
