Although inertial mass, passive gravitational mass and active gravitational mass are conceptually distinct, no experiment has ever unambiguously demonstrated any difference between them.
Measuring gravitational mass in terms of traditional mass units is simple in principle, but extremely difficult in practice.
In November 1684, Isaac Newton sent a document to Edmund Halley, now lost but presumed to have been titled ''De motu corporum in gyrum'' (Latin for "On the motion of bodies in an orbit").
* the mass of a very small particle may be identified by its inverse Compton wavelength ().
The force known as "weight" is proportional to mass and acceleration in all situations where the mass is accelerated away from free fall.
In a constant gravitational field, the weight of an object is proportional to its mass, and it is unproblematic to use the same unit for both concepts.
This is because weight is a force, while mass is the property that (along with gravity) determines the strength of this force.
Suppose we have an object with inertial and gravitational masses ''m'' and ''M'', respectively.
We might say that the larger mass exerts a greater "resistance" to changing its state of motion in response to the force.
By definition, 1&nbsp;u is exactly one twelfth of the mass of a carbon-12 atom, and by extension a carbon-12 atom has a mass of exactly 12&nbsp;u.
However, at very high speeds, special relativity postulates that energy is an additional source of mass.
For example, when a body is at rest in a gravitational field (rather than in free fall), it must be accelerated by a force from a scale or the surface of a planetary body such as the Earth or the Moon.
A later experiment was described in Galileo's ''Two New Sciences'' published in 1638.
The Royal Society published Newton’s entire collection at their own expense in May 1686–7.
Well known examples include the condensation of the Higgs boson in particle physics, and ferromagnetism in condensed matter physics.
In correspondence with Isaac Newton from 1679 and 1680, Hooke conjectures that gravitational forces might decrease according to the double of the distance between the two bodies.
It is commonly stated that Galileo obtained his results by dropping objects from the Leaning Tower of Pisa, but this is most likely apocryphal; actually, he performed his experiments with balls rolling down nearly frictionless inclined planes to slow the motion and increase the timing accuracy.
The two sides of a balance scale are close enough that the objects experience similar gravitational fields.
It also determines the strength of its mutual gravitational attraction to other bodies.
Mass is not the same as weight, even though we often calculate an object's mass by measuring its weight with a spring scale, rather than comparing it directly with known masses.
In order to formulate the equations of physics such that mass values do not change between observers, it is convenient to use rest mass.
The universality of free-fall only applies to systems in which gravity is the only acting force.
Rest mass is the Newtonian mass as measured by an observer moving along with the object.
According to Newton's second law of motion, if a body of fixed mass ''m'' is subjected to a single force ''F'', its acceleration ''a'' is given by ''F''/''m''.
Galileo was not the first to investigate Earth's gravitational field, nor was he the first to accurately describe its fundamental characteristics.
This process is known as tachyon condensation.
Isaac Newton kept quiet about his discoveries until 1684, at which time he told a friend, Edmond Halley, that he had solved the problem of gravitational orbits, but had misplaced the solution in his office.
If a first body of mass ''m''A is placed at a distance ''r'' (center of mass to center of mass) from a second body of mass ''m''B, each body is subject to an attractive force , where  is the "universal gravitational constant".
When ''v'' is larger than ''c'', the denominator in the equation for the energy is "imaginary", as the value under the radical is negative.
Albert Einstein developed his general theory of relativity starting from the assumption that this correspondence between inertial and (passive) gravitational mass is not accidental: that no experiment will ever detect a difference between them (the weak version of the equivalence principle).
Instead, the imaginary mass creates an instability in the configuration:- any configuration in which one or more field excitations are tachyonic will spontaneously decay, and the resulting configuration contains no physical tachyons.
The invariant mass of systems is the same for observers in all inertial frames, while the relativistic mass depends on the observer's frame of reference.
* ''Mass–energy'' measures the total amount of energy contained within a body, using .
Hence, if they have similar masses then their weights will also be similar.
Hence, it should be theoretically possible to determine the exact number of carob seeds that would be required to produce a gravitational field similar to that of the Earth or Sun.
To date, no other accurate method for measuring gravitational mass has been discovered.
In the case of fermions, the Higgs mechanism results in the replacement of the term ''m''ψ in the Lagrangian with .
Newton further reasons that if an object were "projected in an horizontal direction from the top of a high mountain" with sufficient velocity, "it would reach at last quite beyond the circumference of the Earth, and return to the mountain from which it was projected."
In 1609, Johannes Kepler published his three laws of planetary motion, explaining how the planets orbit the Sun.
It is primarily used in astronomy to compare large masses such as stars or galaxies (≈).
This definition has been championed by Ernst Mach and has since been developed into the notion of operationalism by Percy W. Bridgman.
That it does is merely an empirical fact.
Therefore, if one were to gather an immense number of carob seeds and form them into an enormous sphere, then the gravitational field of the sphere would be proportional to the number of carob seeds in the sphere.
For instance, a person's weight may be stated as 75&nbsp;kg.
where  is the Lorentz factor:
''Inertial mass'' is the mass of an object measured by its resistance to acceleration.
This shifts the explanandum of the value for the mass of each elementary particle to the value of the unknown couplings ''G''ψ.
Although some theorists have speculated that some of these phenomena could be independent of each other, current experiments have found no difference in results, whatever way is used to measure mass:
If, on the other hand, the object's weight was equivalent to 144 carob seeds then the object was said to weigh one Roman ounce (uncia).
Therefore, information still does not propagate faster than light,  and solutions grow exponentially, but not superluminally (there is no violation of causality).
The ball was allowed to roll a known distance down the ramp, and the time taken for the ball to move the known distance was measured.
All other forces, especially friction and air resistance, must be absent or at least negligible.
On 25 August 1609, Galileo Galilei demonstrated his first telescope to a group of Venetian merchants, and in early January 1610, Galileo observed four dim objects near Jupiter, which he mistook for stars.
This number is small but not negligible: about 3.7 nanograms.
An object on the Moon would weigh less than it does on Earth because of the lower gravity, but it would still have the same mass.
However, this notion of applying "identical" forces to different objects brings us back to the fact that we have not really defined what a force is.
It appeared in Newton's 1728 book ''A Treatise of the System of the World''.
No matter how strong the gravitational field, objects in free fall are weightless, though they still have mass.
If the only force acting on the object comes from a gravitational field ''g'', combining Newton's second law and the gravitational law yields the acceleration
* the electronvolt (eV) is a unit of energy, but because of the mass–energy equivalence it can easily be converted to a unit of mass, and is often used like one.
A biography by Galileo's pupil Vincenzo Viviani stated that Galileo had dropped balls of the same material, but different masses, from the Leaning Tower of Pisa to demonstrate that their time of descent was independent of their mass.
It is unclear if these were just hypothetical experiments used to illustrate a concept, or if they were real experiments performed by Galileo, but the results obtained from these experiments were both realistic and compelling.
* the slug (sl) is an Imperial unit of mass (about 14.6&nbsp;kg).
So long as the system is closed with respect to mass and energy, both kinds of mass are conserved in any given frame of reference.
In physics, '''mass''' is a property of a physical body.
In bound systems, the binding energy must often be subtracted from the mass of the unbound system, because binding energy commonly leaves the system at the time it is bound.
Because the relativistic mass is proportional to the energy, it has gradually fallen into disuse among physicists.
In a Lorentz invariant theory, the same formulas that apply to ordinary slower-than-light particles (sometimes called "bradyons" in discussions of tachyons) must also apply to tachyons.
A body's mass also determines the degree to which it generates or is affected by a gravitational field.
Through such mechanisms, objects in elevators, vehicles, centrifuges, and the like, may experience weight forces many times those caused by resistance to the effects of gravity on objects, resulting from planetary surfaces.
After being encouraged by Halley, Newton decided to develop his ideas about gravity and publish all of his findings.
In everyday usage, mass and "weight" are often used interchangeably.
This definition, however, might be changed by the proposed redefinition of SI base units, which will leave the Dalton very close to one, but no longer exactly equal to it.
The groove was lined with "parchment, also smooth and polished as possible".
(where '''p''' is the relativistic momentum of the bradyon and '''m''' is its rest mass) should still apply, along with the formula for the total energy of a particle:
Both rest and relativistic mass can be expressed as an energy by applying the well-known relationship ''E''&nbsp;= ''mc''2, yielding rest energy and "relativistic energy" (total system energy) respectively:
The mass of an object determines its acceleration in the presence of an applied force.
* the tonne (t) (or "metric ton") is equal to 1000&nbsp;kg.
Restated in mathematical terms, on the surface of the Earth, the weight ''W'' of an object is related to its mass ''m'' by , where  is the acceleration due to Earth's gravitational field, (expressed as the acceleration experienced by a free-falling object).
Under no circumstances do any excitations ever propagate faster than light in such theories – the presence or absence of a tachyonic mass has no effect whatsoever on the maximum velocity of signals (there is no violation of causality).
For example, if one takes exactly one kilogram of ice, and applies heat, the mass of the resulting melt-water will be more than a kilogram: it will include the mass from the thermal energy (latent heat) used to melt the ice; this follows from the conservation of energy.
This equation shows that the total energy of a particle (bradyon or tachyon) contains a contribution from its rest mass (the "rest mass–energy") and a contribution from its motion, the kinetic energy.
where '''a'''1 and '''a'''2 are the accelerations of ''m''1 and ''m''2, respectively.
However, after a few days of observation, Galileo realized that these "stars" were in fact orbiting Jupiter.
This phenomenon is referred to as the "universality of free-fall".
Consequently, historical weight standards were often defined in terms of amounts.
This force keeps the object from going into free fall.
This allows the scale, by comparing weights, to also compare masses.
fields with imaginary mass have come to play an important role in modern physics and are discussed in popular books on physics.
In the case of a tachyon the real part of the mass is zero, and hence no concept of a particle can be attributed to it.
The above statement may be reformulated in the following way: if ''g'' is the magnitude at a given location in a gravitational field, then the gravitational force on an object with gravitational mass ''M'' is
Newton's second law states that
However, in the resulting theory, gravitation is not a force and thus not subject to Newton's third law, so "the equality of inertial and ''active'' gravitational mass ... remains as puzzling as ever".
:"a large vessel of water placed in an elevated position; to the bottom of this vessel was soldered a pipe of small diameter giving a thin jet of water, which we collected in a small glass during the time of each descent, whether for the whole length of the channel or for a part of its length; the water thus collected was weighed, after each descent, on a very accurate balance; the differences and ratios of these weights gave us the differences and ratios of the times, and this with such accuracy that although the operation was repeated many, many times, there was no appreciable discrepancy in the results."
In this context, the mass has units of eV/''c''2 (where ''c'' is the speed of light).
On the surface of the Earth, for example, an object with a mass of 50&nbsp;kilograms weighs 491 newtons, which means that 491 newtons is being applied to keep the object from going into free fall.
and the body's kinetic energy ''K'' to its velocity:
For example, the binding energy of atomic nuclei is often lost in the form of gamma rays when the nuclei are formed, leaving nuclides which have less mass than the free particles (nucleons) of which they are composed.
This is sometimes referred to as gravitational mass.
the rest mass '''m''' must be imaginary, as a pure imaginary number divided by another pure imaginary number is a real number.
The time was measured using a water clock described as follows:
At the core of the problem is the non-linearity of the Einstein field equations, making it impossible to write the gravitational field energy as part of the stress–energy tensor in a way that is invariant for all observers.
The only convincing resolution to this question is that all bodies must fall at the same rate.
In simple spring scales, for example, the force ''F'' is proportional to the displacement of the spring beneath the weighing pan, as per Hooke's law, and the scales are calibrated to take ''g'' into account, allowing the mass ''M'' to be read off.
The equivalence of inertial and gravitational masses is sometimes referred to as the "Galilean equivalence principle" or the "weak equivalence principle".
Thus, the theory postulates that the force acting on a massive object caused by a gravitational field is a result of the object's tendency to move in a straight line (in other words its inertia) and should therefore be a function of its inertial mass and the strength of the gravitational field.
Thus, any stationary body having mass has an equivalent amount of energy, and all forms of energy resist acceleration by a force and have gravitational attraction.
For example, if a hammer and a feather are dropped from the same height through the air on Earth, the feather will take much longer to reach the ground; the feather is not really in ''free''-fall because the force of air resistance upwards against the feather is comparable to the downward force of gravity.
In general relativity, the equivalence principle is any of several related concepts dealing with the equivalence of gravitational and inertial mass.
This equation illustrates how mass relates to the inertia of a body.
accelerated) frame of reference.
Einstein's equivalence principle states that within sufficiently small regions of space-time, it is impossible to distinguish between a uniform acceleration and a uniform gravitational field.
* the pound (lb) is a unit of both mass and force, used mainly in the United States (about 0.45&nbsp;kg or 4.5&nbsp;N).
He further stated that gravitational attraction increases by how much nearer the body wrought upon is to their own center.
There is disagreement over whether the concept remains useful pedagogically.
Typically, the mass of objects is measured in relation to that of the kilogram, which is defined as the mass of the ''international prototype kilogram'' (IPK), a platinum alloy cylinder stored in an environmentally-monitored safe secured in a vault at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures in France.
In Newtonian physics, mass can be generalized as the amount of matter in an object.
The electronvolt and its multiples, such as the MeV (megaelectronvolt), are commonly used in particle physics.
where '''g''' is the apparent acceleration of a body as it passes through a region of space where gravitational fields exist, ''μ'' is the gravitational mass (standard gravitational parameter) of the body causing gravitational fields, and '''R''' is the radial coordinate (the distance between the centers of the two bodies).
Mass is not conserved in this process because the system is not closed during the binding process.
The Romans, for example, used the carob seed (carat or siliqua) as a measurement standard.
Newton's third law then states that
The tentatively confirmed discovery of a massive Higgs boson is regarded as a strong confirmation of this theory.
Isaac Newton had bridged the gap between Kepler’s gravitational mass and Galileo’s gravitational acceleration, resulting in the discovery of the following relationship which governed both of these:
It is a measure of an object's resistance to acceleration (a change in its state of motion) when a force is applied.
At the core of this assertion is Albert Einstein's idea that the gravitational force as experienced locally while standing on a massive body (such as the Earth) is the same as the ''pseudo-force'' experienced by an observer in a non-inertial (i.e.
In the Standard Model of particle physics as developed in the 1960s, there is the proposal that this term arises from the coupling of the field  ψ to an additional field Φ, the so-called Higgs field.
The first was received by the Royal Society on 28 April 1685–6; the second on 2 March 1686–7; and the third on 6 April 1686–7.
It is given by the latent heat of melting ice (334 kJ/kg) divided by the speed of light squared (''c''2 = 9&times;1016 m2/s2).
Cavendish found that the Earth's density was 5.448 ± 0.033 times that of water.
According to Newton's theory all objects produce gravitational fields and it is theoretically possible to collect an immense number of small objects and form them into an enormous gravitating sphere.
Another problem for easy definition is that much of the rest mass of ordinary matter derives from the invariant mass contributed to matter by particles and kinetic energies which have no rest mass themselves (only 1% of the rest mass of matter is accounted for by the rest mass of its fermionic quarks and electrons).
Given two objects A and B, of masses ''M''A and ''M''B, separated by a displacement '''R'''AB, Newton's law of gravitation states that each object exerts a gravitational force on the other, of magnitude
As of January 2013, there are several proposals for redefining the kilogram yet again, including a proposal for defining it in terms of the Planck constant.
It is even more dramatic when done in an environment that naturally has a vacuum, as David Scott did on the surface of the Moon during Apollo 15.
Tachyon condensation drives a physical system that has reached a local limit and might naively be expected to produce physical tachyons, to an alternate stable state where no physical tachyons exist.
The wooden ramp was "12 cubits long, half a cubit wide and three finger-breadths thick" with a straight, smooth, polished groove.
Galileo found that for an object in free fall, the distance that the object has fallen is always proportional to the square of the elapsed time:
If both parts are of the same magnitude, this is interpreted as a resonance appearing in a scattering process rather than a particle, as it is considered not to exist long enough to be measured independently of the scattering process.
The standard International System of Units (SI) unit of mass is the kilogram (kg).
An unstable particle is a state which is only approximately constant over time; If it exists long enough to be measured, it can be formally described as having a complex mass, with the real part of the mass greater than its imaginary part.
However, Galileo's reliance on scientific experimentation to establish physical principles would have a profound effect on future generations of scientists.
The total mass of the observable universe is estimated at between 1052&nbsp;kg and 1053&nbsp;kg, corresponding to the rest mass of between 1079 and 1080 protons.
Increasingly precise experiments have been performed, such as those performed by Loránd Eötvös, using the torsion balance pendulum, in 1889. , no deviation from universality, and thus from Galilean equivalence, has ever been found, at least to the precision 10−12.
But there is indirect evidence for the reality of the Electroweak symmetry breaking as described by the Higgs mechanism, and the non-existence of Higgs bosons would indicate a "Higgsless" description of this mechanism.
Hooke urged Newton, who was a pioneer in the development of calculus, to work through the mathematical details of Keplerian orbits to determine if Hooke's hypothesis was correct.
While the ''field'' may have imaginary mass, any physical particles do not; the "imaginary mass" shows that the system becomes unstable, and sheds the instability by undergoing a type of phase transition called tachyon condensation (closely related to second order phase transitions) that results in symmetry breaking in current models of particle physics.
However, in quantum field theory, a particle (a "one-particle state") is roughly defined as a state which is constant over time; i.e., an eigenvalue of the Hamiltonian.
However, from a practical standpoint, the gravitational fields of small objects are extremely weak and difficult to measure.
But because of slight differences in the strength of the Earth's gravitational field at different places, the distinction becomes important for measurements with a precision better than a few percent, and for places far from the surface of the Earth, such as in space or on other planets.
Kepler discovered that the square of the orbital period of each planet is directly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit, or equivalently, that the ratio of these two values is constant for all planets in the Solar System.
From a fundamental physics perspective, mass is the number describing under which the representation of the little group of the Poincaré group a particle transforms.
This is a special case of the general rule, where unstable massive particles are formally described as having a complex mass, with the real part being their mass in the usual sense, and the imaginary part being the decay rate in natural units.
In support of this conclusion, Galileo had advanced the following theoretical argument: He asked if two bodies of different masses and different rates of fall are tied by a string, does the combined system fall faster because it is now more massive, or does the lighter body in its slower fall hold back the heavier body?
Then we can measure the mass of any other object in the universe by colliding it with the reference object and measuring the accelerations.
This can easily be done in a high school laboratory by dropping the objects in transparent tubes that have the air removed with a vacuum pump.
In classical mechanics, Newton's third law implies that active and passive gravitational mass must always be identical (or at least proportional), but the classical theory offers no compelling reason why the gravitational mass has to equal the inertial mass.
* ''Passive gravitational mass'' measures the gravitational force exerted on an object in a known gravitational field.
By finding the exact relationship between a body's gravitational mass and its gravitational field, Newton provided a second method for measuring gravitational mass.
The most important consequence of this equivalence principle applies to freely falling objects.
The kilogram is 1000&nbsp;grams (g), first defined in 1795 as one cubic decimeter of water at the melting point of ice.
An additional difficulty was pointed out by Henri Poincaré, which is that the measurement of instantaneous acceleration is impossible: unlike the measurement of time or distance, there is no way to measure acceleration with a single measurement; one must make multiple measurements (of position, time, etc.)
Outside the SI system, other units of mass include:
The simple classical mechanics definition of mass is slightly different than the definition in the theory of special relativity, but the essential meaning is the same.
For a given observer, this can be achieved by the stress–energy–momentum pseudotensor.
Additionally, mass relates a body's momentum '''p''' to its linear velocity '''v''':
Macroscopically, mass is associated with matter, although matter is not, ultimately, as clearly defined a concept as mass.
"For a stone projected is by the pressure of its own weight forced out of the rectilinear path, which by the projection alone it should have pursued, and made to describe a curve line in the air; and through that crooked way is at last brought down to the ground.
In fact, by unit conversion it is a simple matter of abstraction to realize that any traditional mass unit can theoretically be used to measure gravitational mass.
An early use of this relationship is a balance scale, which balances the force of one object's weight against the force of another object's weight.
However, Newton explains that when a stone is thrown horizontally (meaning sideways or perpendicular to Earth's gravity) it follows a curved path.
If an object's weight was equivalent to  1728 carob seeds, then the object was said to weigh one Roman pound.
The primary difficulty with Mach's definition of mass is that it fails to take into account the potential energy (or binding energy) needed to bring two masses sufficiently close to one another to perform the measurement of mass.
And into this groove was placed "a hard, smooth and very round bronze ball".
In classical mechanics, according to Newton's second law, we say that a body has a mass ''m'' if, at any instant of time, it obeys the equation of motion
In the theory of relativity a related concept is the mass–energy content of a system.
In addition, "matter" is a loosely defined term in science, and thus cannot be precisely measured.
The atomic mass unit is convenient for expressing the masses of atoms and molecules.
* the mass of a very large star or black hole may be identified with its Schwarzschild radius ().
where ''G'' is the universal gravitational constant.
However, Galileo’s free fall motions and Kepler’s planetary motions remained distinct during Galileo’s lifetime.
This is the basis by which masses are determined by weighing.
In contrast to earlier theories (e.g.
However, it turns out that it is impossible to find an objective general definition for the concept of invariant mass in general relativity.
Repeated experiments since the 17th century have demonstrated that inertial and gravitational mass are identical; since 1915, this observation has been entailed ''a priori'' in the equivalence principle of general relativity.
By contrast, on the surface of the Moon, the same object still has a mass of 50&nbsp;kilograms but weighs only 81.5&nbsp;newtons, because only 81.5 newtons is required to keep this object from going into a free fall on the moon.
The conservation of mass holds even as some types of particles are converted to others.
The ramp was inclined at various angles to slow the acceleration enough so that the elapsed time could be measured.
Because the total energy must be real, the numerator must ''also'' be imaginary:  i.e.
These four objects (later named the Galilean moons in honor of their discoverer) were the first celestial bodies observed to orbit something other than the Earth or Sun.
In scientific contexts where pound (force) and pound (mass) need to be distinguished, SI units are usually used instead.
Galileo had shown that objects in free fall under the influence of the Earth’s gravitational field have a constant acceleration, and Galileo’s contemporary, Johannes Kepler, had shown that the planets follow elliptical paths under the influence of the Sun’s gravitational mass.
Newton's cannonball was a thought experiment used to bridge the gap between Galileo's gravitational acceleration and Kepler's elliptical orbits.
Newton's own investigations verified that Hooke was correct, but due to personal differences between the two men, Newton chose not to reveal this to Hooke.
The two are related by the following equation:
Thus, for example, if the reference weight ''m''2 is taken to be the mass of the neutron in free space, and the relative accelerations for the proton and neutron in deuterium are computed, then the above formula over-estimates the mass ''m''1 (by 0.239%) for the proton in deuterium.
This says that the ratio of gravitational to inertial mass of any object is equal to some constant ''K'' if and only if all objects fall at the same rate in a given gravitational field.
Then in 1889, the kilogram was redefined as the mass of the international prototype kilogram, and as such is independent of the meter, or the properties of water.
More precise experimental efforts are still being carried out.
Sometime prior to 1638, Galileo turned his attention to the phenomenon of objects in free fall, attempting to characterize these motions.
