The earlier Dutch colony of New Netherlands disputed many of these claims, arguing that they held rights to lands beyond Rhode Island up to the western side of Cape Cod and the Plymouth Bay Colony.
Claims were disputed in this area for many years, particularly between Connecticut and Rhode Island.
Sexual activity between men was called sodomy, and was also punishable by death.
The company elected Matthew Cradock as its first governor, and immediately began organizing provisions and recruiting settlers.
These areas provided the bulk of the migration, although colonists also came from other regions of England.
Due to the Puritan perception of marriage as a civil union, divorce did sometimes occur and could be pursued by both genders.
In 1643, Massachusetts Bay joined Plymouth Colony, Connecticut Colony, and New Haven Colony in the New England Confederation, a loose coalition organized primarily to coordinate military and administrative matters among the Puritan colonies.
These grants were typically about , and were located sufficiently near other towns to facilitate defense and social support.
The charter provided for an additional council of 13 persons to have overarching responsibility for the combined enterprise.
Interiors became more elaborate in later years, with plaster walls, wainscoting, and potentially expensive turned woodwork in the most expensive homes.
The consequence of the ensuing debate was that the general court voted in 1644 that the council of assistants would sit and deliberate separately from the general court (they had sat together until then), the concurrence of both bodies being required for the passage of legislation.
The company to whom the grant was sold was styled "The New England Company for a Plantation in Massachusetts Bay".
Juries were authorized to decide questions of both fact and law, although the court was able to decide in the event that a jury failed to reach a decision.
Francis Higginson, one of the first ministers of the settlement.
This independence helped the settlers to maintain their Puritan religious practices with very little oversight by the king, Archbishop Laud, and the Anglican Church.
Massachusetts authorities were sympathetic to the Parliamentary cause, and had generally positive relationships with the governments of the English Commonwealth and The Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell.
For example, mill operators were required to weigh grain before and after milling, to ensure that the customer received back what he delivered (minus the miller's percentage).
Charles granted the new charter on 4 March 1628/9, superseding the land grant and establishing a legal basis for the new English colony at Massachusetts.
Towns were obligated to provide education for their children, which was usually satisfied by hiring a teacher of some sort.
The land-use patterns of the natives included plots cleared for agricultural purposes, and woodland territories for the hunting of game.
A shortage of hard currency in the colony prompted it to establish a mint in 1652.
Massachusetts authorities conspired to have Andros arrested in April 1689 after the 1688 Glorious Revolution in England, and they reestablished government under the forms of the vacated charter.
Massachusetts lost all of these territories in the 1660s, when Connecticut and Rhode Island received their royal charters.
Colonists arriving after the first wave found that the early towns did not have room for them.
In the early years, the colony was highly dependent on the import of staples from England and was supported by the investments of a number of wealthy immigrants.
It was also normal for older widowed parents to live with one of their children.
The "first Colony" ranged from the 34th to 41st degree latitude north; the "second Colony" ranged from the 38th to 45th degree latitude.
These houses were the precursors to what is now called the saltbox style of architecture.
The colony's economy depended on the success of its trade, in part because its land was not as suitable for agriculture as that of other colonies such as Virginia, where large plantations could be established.
Many ministers reacted to the repressive religious policies of England, making the trip with their flocks.
She was hanged in 1638 for murdering her daughter, as the common law of Massachusetts made no distinction at the time between insanity (or mental illness) and criminal behavior.
John Cotton, Roger Williams, Thomas Hooker, and others became leaders of Puritan congregations.
The colony and later the province and state retained control of Maine until it was granted statehood in 1820.
The deputies learned of the provisions that the general court should make all laws, and that all freemen should be members of the general court.
The pattern of migration often centered around specific Nonconformist clergy who sought to leave England under threat from Archbishop Laud, who encouraged their flock to accompany them.
Goods were transported to local markets over roads that were sometimes little more than widened Indian trails.
The next year, Naumkeag was renamed Salem and fortified by another 300 settlers, led by Rev.
Few titled nobility emigrated, even though some supported the emigration politically and financially and also acquired land holdings in Massachusetts and other colonies.
Questions of governance and representation arose again in 1634, when several deputies demanded to see the charter, which the assistants had kept hidden from public view.
Bridges were fairly uncommon, since they were expensive to maintain, and fines were imposed on their owners for the loss of life or goods if they failed.
In 1623, the Plymouth Council for New England (successor to the Plymouth Company) established a small fishing village at Cape Ann under the supervision of the Dorchester Company, with Thomas Gardner as its overseer.
It was most active in the 1670s during King Philip's War.
Most children received some form of schooling, something which the colony's founders believed to be important for forming a proper relationship with God.
The transformation was complete: a trading company had become a (somewhat) representative democracy.
Dyer was one of the four executed Quakers known as the Boston martyrs.
Plymouth's colonists faced great hardships and earned few profits for their investors, who sold their interests to the settlers in 1627.
These included smoking tobacco, abusing one's mother-in-law, profane dancing, pulling hair, sleeping during church services, riding behind two men (a woman named Lydia was convicted of this), playing cards, and engaging in any number of activities on the Sabbath.
This book in some ways resembles a promotional tract intended to encourage further migration.
Attempts to ban these items failed, and the colony resorted to laws restricting their display to those who could demonstrate £200 in assets.
Neither of these corporations was given a name by this charter, but the territories were named as the "first Colony" (fourth paragraph of charter) and "second Colony" (fifth paragraph of charter), over which they were respectively authorized to settle and to govern.
This number was significantly larger as late as 1616; in later years, contemporary chroniclers interviewed Indians who described a major pestilence that killed between one and two thirds of the population.
A group of emigrants had bought all the Massachusetts Bay Company's stock and brought the Charter to America in 1630; neither the English king nor Parliament nor an English company exerted any influence in Massachusetts Bay Colony.
The charter omitted a significant clause: the location for the annual stockholders' meeting.
The colony's economy began to diversify in the 1640s, as the fur trading, lumber, and fishing industries found markets in Europe and the West Indies, and the colony's shipbuilding industry developed.
These laws formed the nucleus of colonial legislation until independence, and contained some provisions that were fairly advanced for the time.
Its first meeting in America was held in October 1630, but it was attended by only eight freemen.
Towns were required to maintain their roads, on penalty of fines, and the colony required special town commissions to lay out roads in a more sensible manner in 1639.
Most of today's Massachusetts boundaries with its neighbors were fixed in the 18th century.
They also enacted a law specifying that only those men who "are members of some of the churches" in the colony were eligible to become freemen and gain the vote.
English ships continued to come to the New England area for fishing and trade with the Indians.
For the next ten years, there was a steady exodus of Puritans from England, with about 10,000 people emigrating to Massachusetts and the neighbouring colonies, a phenomenon now called the Great Migration.
Land divisions between the tribes were well understood.
Massachusetts administered Block Island and the area around present-day Stonington, Connecticut as part of these spoils of war, and was one of several claimants to land in what was known as Narragansett Country (roughly Washington County, Rhode Island).
The total Indian population in 1620 has been estimated to be 7,000 with the population of New England at 15–18,000.
There were other short-lived colonial settlements in 1623 and 1624 at present-day Weymouth, Massachusetts; the Wessagusset Colony of Thomas Weston and an effort by Robert Gorges to establish an overarching colonial structure both failed.
The Massachusetts Bay Colony became the first English chartered colony whose board of governors did not reside in England.
By this means, the colony expanded into the interior, spawning settlements in adjacent territories as well.
The population of Massachusetts remained largely English in character until the 1840s.
Men who lost their wives often remarried fairly quickly, especially if they had children needing care.
A legal case in 1642 brought about the separation of the council of assistants into an upper house of the general court.
Older widows would also sometimes marry for financial security.
The London Company proceeded to establish Jamestown.
Slavery existed but was not widespread within the colony.
Outside a town center, land would be allocated for farming, some of which might be held communally.
The case involved a widow's lost pig and had been overturned by the general court; but the assistants had sat in judicial decision on the case and voted as a body to veto the general court's act.
(Nixes Mate was one such site where pirate William Fly's body was displayed, now little more than a granite outcrop.)
Rape, however, required more than one witness, and was therefore rarely prosecuted.
By the end of the war, most of the Indian population of southern New England made peace treaties with the colonists.
This new charter additionally extended voting rights to non-Puritans, an outcome that Mather had tried to avoid.
The investors appointed to govern over any settlements in the "first Colony" were from London; the investors appointed to govern over any settlements in the "second Colony" were from the "Town of Plimouth in the County of Devon."
Lesser offenses were heard in county courts or by commissioners appointed for hearing minor disputes.
Religious divisions and the need for additional land prompted a number of migrations that resulted in the establishment of the Connecticut Colony (by Hooker) and the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations (by Williams and Anne Hutchinson).
Development in Maine was restricted to coastal areas, and large inland areas remained under native control until after King Philip's War, particularly the uplands in what is now Worcester County.
The territory nominally administered by the colony included much of present-day central New England, including portions of the U.S. states of Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Connecticut.
Many of the early colonists who migrated from England came with some or all of their family.
King William III issued a charter in 1691, despite efforts by Massachusetts agents to revive the old colonial charter.
On several occasions, it passed laws regulating wages and prices of economically important goods and services, but most of these initiatives did not last very long.
Timber began to take on an increasingly important role in the economy, especially for naval purposes, after conflicts between England and the Dutch depleted England's supplies of ship masts.
Adultery and rape were more serious crimes, and both were punishable by death.
The population was strongly Puritan, and its governance was dominated by a small group of leaders who were strongly influenced by Puritan religious leaders.
The Massachusetts colony was dominated by its rivers and coastline.
The current boundary between Massachusetts and New Hampshire was not fixed until the 18th century.
The Puritan dislike of ostentation led the colony to also regulate expenditures on what it perceived as luxury items.
From 1686, the colony's territory was administratively unified by James II of England with the other New England colonies in the Dominion of New England.
The meeting house would be the center of the town's political and religious life.
Wealthier individuals would extend their house by adding a leanto on the back, which allowed a larger kitchen (possibly with a brick or stone chimney including an oven), additional rooms, and a sleeping loft.
Within the marriage, the husband was typically responsible for supplying the family's financial needs, although it was not uncommon for women to work in the fields and to perform some sort of home labor (for example, spinning thread or weaving cloth) to supplement the family income.
Political differences with England after the English Restoration led to the revocation of the colonial charter in 1684.
The Body of Liberties enacted in 1641 included rules governing the treatment and handling of slaves.
This company was originally organized through the efforts of Puritan minister John White (1575–1648) of Dorchester, in the English county of Dorset.
The Pennacooks occupied the Merrimack River valley to the north, and the Nipmuc, Pocumtuc, and Mahican occupied the western lands of present-day Massachusetts, although some of those tribes were under tribute to the Mohawks, who were expanding aggressively from present-day upstate New York.
It is known in Massachusetts as the "Old Colony Line", and is still visible as the boundary between Norfolk County to the north and Bristol and Plymouth Counties to the south.
The company sent approximately 100 new settlers with provisions to join Conant in 1628, led by Governor's Assistant John Endecott, one of the grantees.
Bradstreet reported in 1680 that the colony had 100 to 120 slaves, but historian Hugh Thomas documents evidence suggesting that there may have been a somewhat larger number.
Plans began in 1606 for the first permanent British settlements on the east coast of North America.
The colonial charter specified that the boundaries were to be from three miles (4.8&nbsp;km) north of the Merrimack River to three miles south of the Charles River and westward to the "South Sea" (i.e., the Pacific Ocean).
As early as 1632, ships built in the colony began trading with other colonies, England, and foreign ports in Europe.
Judicial appeals were to be decided by a joint session, since otherwise the assistants would be in the position to veto attempts to overturn their own decisions.
Colonial support for the Commonwealth presented problems upon the restoration to the throne of Charles II in 1660.
They formed the first council of assistants, and voted (contrary to the terms of the charter) that the governor and deputy should be elected by them, from their number.
In 1660, one of the most notable instances was English Quaker Mary Dyer who was hanged in Boston for repeatedly defying a law banning Quakers from the colony.
The Cape Ann settlement was not profitable, and the financial backers of the Dorchester Company terminated their support by the end of 1625.
Sir William Phips arrived in 1692 bearing the charter and formally took charge of the new province.
This was followed by the Cambridge Agreement later that year, in which a group of investors agreed to emigrate and work to buy out others who would not emigrate.
This was modified in the next session of the general court, in which the governor and deputy were to be elected by the general court.
The trades of shoe-making and coopering (barrel-making) were authorized to form guilds, making it possible to set price, quality, and expertise levels for their work.
The Lords of Trade had decided for a variety of reasons to consolidate the New England colonies; they issued ''quo warranto'' writs in 1681 for the charters of several North American colonies, including Massachusetts.
A flotilla of ships sailed from England beginning in April 1630, sometimes known as the Winthrop Fleet.
It was expected that individuals would marry fairly young and begin producing offspring.
Larger communities supported craftsmen skilled in providing many of the necessities of 17th century life.
The 1629 charter of Charles I asserted that the second Colony ranged from 40th to 48th degrees north latitude, which reduces the overlap.)
In the early years, the fleet principally carried fish to destinations from the West Indies to Europe.
Construction improved in later years, and houses began to be sheathed in clapboard, with thatch or plank roofs and wooden chimneys.
The mother was usually not present because she was still recovering from the birth, and the child's name was usually chosen by the father.
Sexual activity was expected to be confined to marriage.
Evidence was sometimes based on hearsay and superstition; for example, the "ordeal of touch" was used in 1646 (in which someone accused of murder is forced to touch the dead body; if blood appears, the accused is deemed guilty) to convict and execute a woman accused of murdering her newborn child.
Bodies of individuals hanged for piracy were sometimes gibbeted (publicly displayed) on harbor islands visible to seagoing vessels.
The structure of the colonial government changed over the lifetime of the charter.
As a consequence, the colonial leadership exhibited intolerance to other religious views, including Anglican, Quaker, and Baptist theologies.
Massachusetts in particular was reluctant to agree that the king had any sort of authority to control its governance.
They brought with them apprentices and servants, the latter of whom were sometimes in indentured servitude.
The preponderance of the immigrants were well-to-do gentry and skilled craftsmen.
This was found not to be the case and, in 1652, Governor Endecott sent a survey party to locate the northernmost point on the Merrimack.
Towns often had a village green, used for outdoor celebrations and activities such as military exercises of the town's trainband or militia.
The colonial leadership was the most active in New England in the persecution of Quakers.
(Note that the "first Colony" and the "second Colony" overlapped.
The quality of these instructors varied, from minimally educated local people to Harvard-educated ministers.
Midwife Margaret Jones was convicted of being a witch and hanged in 1648 after the condition of patients allegedly worsened in her care.
The northern boundary was originally thought to be roughly parallel to the latitude of the mouth of the Merrimack River, since the river was assumed to flow primarily west.
Consequently, most river crossings were made by ferry.
The Massachusetts writ was never served for technical reasons, and the charter was not formally vacated until the chancery court issued a ''scire facias'' writ formally annulling the charter on June 18, 1684.
By 1660, the colony's merchant fleet was estimated at 200 ships and, by the end of the century, its shipyards were estimated to turn out several hundred ships annually.
On April 10, 1606, King James I of England (James VI of Scotland) granted a charter forming two joint stock companies.
This line, south of the present boundary, was protested by Connecticut, but stood until the 1690s, when Connecticut performed its own survey.
The lower courts were also responsible for issuing licenses and for matters such as probate.
Following the English Restoration in 1660, matters of colonial administration drew the king's attention.
Notable exceptions were a bridge across the Mystic River constructed in 1638, and another over the Saugus River, whose upkeep costs were subsidized by the colony.
In the following years, most of the immigrants came for economic reasons; they were merchants, seamen, and skilled craftsmen.
Their settlement was abandoned at present-day Gloucester, but a few settlers remained in the area, including Roger Conant, establishing a settlement a little further south, near the village of the Naumkeag tribe.
For example, the colonial government repeatedly refused requests by Charles and his agents to allow the Church of England to become established, and it resisted adherence to the Navigation Acts, laws that constrained colonial trade.
Life could be quite difficult in the early years of the colony.
An additional 116 settlers were admitted to the general court as freemen in 1631, but most of the governing power, as well as the judicial power, remained with the council of assistants.
The 1634 election resulted in the election of Dudley as governor, and the general court proceeded to reserve for itself a large number of powers, including those of taxation, distribution of land, and the admission of freemen.
Among these provisions were the ideas of equal protection and double jeopardy that were later enshrined in the United States Constitution.
The colony's claims were large, but the practicalities of the time meant that they never actually controlled any land further west than the Connecticut River valley.
Church services might be held for several hours on Wednesday and all day Sunday.
The Massachusetts Bay Colony was founded by the owners of the Massachusetts Bay Company, which included investors in the failed Dorchester Company which had established a short-lived settlement on Cape Ann in 1623.
The colony's council of assistants sat as the final court of appeal, and as the principal court for criminal issues of "life, limb, or banishment" and civil issues where the damages exceeded £100.
The colony was economically successful, engaging in trade with England and the West Indies.
The Mason heirs pursued their claims in England, and the result was the formation of the Province of New Hampshire in 1679.
The group leaders would also be responsible for acquiring native title to the lands that they selected.
Sentences for offenses included fines and corporal punishments such as whipping and sitting in the stocks, with the punishments of banishment from the colony and death by hanging being reserved for the most serious offenses.
Farmers with large plots of land might build a house near their properties on the outskirts of the town.
Certain businesses were quick to thrive, notably shipbuilding, fisheries, and the fur and lumber trades.
Following the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, the colony also saw in an influx of French Protestant Huguenots.
Many of the colonists came from the county of Lincolnshire and East Anglia, northeast of London, and a large group also came from Devon, Somerset, and Dorset in the southwest of England.
The charter remained in force for 55 years; Charles II revoked it in 1684 as a result of colonial insubordination with trade, tariff, and navigation laws.
Most of the people who arrived during the first 12 years emigrated from two regions of England.
The Massachusetts Bay Colony began in 1628 and was the company's second attempt at colonization.
The political and economic dominance of New England by the modern state of Massachusetts was made possible in part by the early dominance in these spheres by the Massachusetts Bay colonists.
The years from 1689 to 1692 were also difficult ones, since the colony was at the forefront of King William's War, and its frontier communities were ravaged by attacks organized in New France and conducted by French and Indian raiding parties.
After a protest over the imposition of taxes by a meeting of the council of assistants, the general court ordered each town to send two representatives, known as deputies, to meet with the court to discuss matters of taxation.
This extension of the colonial claim conflicted with several proprietary grants owned by the heirs of John Mason and Sir Ferdinando Gorges.
The result was that the government began with a corporate organization that included a governor and deputy governor, a general court of its shareholders (known as "freemen"), and a council of assistants similar to a board of directors.
Charles dissolved Parliament in 1629, whereupon the company's directors met to consider the possibility of moving the company's seat of governance to the colony.
If an adult died without issue, his (or her) name could be carried on when the siblings of the deceased named children in his memory.
Edward Winslow and William Bradford, two of its leaders, were likely authors of a work published in England in 1622 called ''Mourt's Relation''.
The colonial charter was designed for the management of a corporation, and the needs of the colonial government did not always fit well into this model.
It was chiefly negotiated by Increase Mather in his role as the colony's ambassador-extraordinary, unifying Massachusetts Bay with Plymouth Colony, Martha's Vineyard, Nantucket, and territories that roughly encompass present-day Maine, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia to form the Province of Massachusetts Bay.
The growth of a generation of people who were born in the colony and the rise of a merchant class began to slowly change the political and cultural landscape of the colony, even though its governance continued to be dominated by relatively conservative Puritans.
The dominion was governed by Sir Edmund Andros without any local representation beyond hand-picked councillors, and was extremely unpopular in New England.
The advent of the English Civil War in the early 1640s brought a halt to major migration, and a significant number of men returned to England to fight in the war.
(The Merrimack's principal tributary goes significantly further north as the Pemigewasset River.)
It was common for a merchant to ship dried fish to Portugal or Spain, pick up wine and oil for transport to England, and then carry finished goods from England or elsewhere back to the colony.
The most significant exception was the eastern boundary with Rhode Island, which required extensive litigation, including Supreme Court rulings, before it was finally resolved in the 19th century.
The parties reached a compromise, and agreed that the general court would be made up of two deputies elected by each town.
Merchants also represented a significant proportion of the migrants, often the children of the gentry, and they played an important role in establishing the economy of the colony.
The Massachusetts frontier was particularly hard hit, with several communities being abandoned in the Connecticut and Swift River valleys.
Minister John Wheelwright was banished in the wake of the Antinomian Controversy (like Anne Hutchinson), and he moved north to found Exeter, New Hampshire.
In December 1620, a group of Pilgrims established Plymouth Colony just to the south of Massachusetts Bay, seeking to preserve their cultural identity and attain religious independence.
The survey party carved lettering into a rock there (now called Endicott Rock), and its latitude was taken to be the colony's northern boundary.
John White continued to seek funding for a colony.
When extended eastward, this line was found to meet the Atlantic near Casco Bay in present-day Maine.
The proceedings were arranged so that the time had expired for the colonial authorities to defend the charter, before they even learned of the event.
Many colonists lived in fairly crude structures, including dugouts, wigwams, and dirt-floor huts made using wattle and daub construction.
The colony was successful, with about 20,000 people migrating to New England in the 1630s.
One of the first people to be executed in the colony was Dorothy Talbye, who was apparently delusional.
This restriction on the franchise was not liberalized until after the English Restoration.
Annual town meetings would be held at the meeting house, generally in May, to elect the town's representatives to the general court and to transact other community business.
One characteristic unique to the New England colonies (as distinguished from some of the other English colonies) was that most of the immigrants were emigrating for religious and political reasons, rather than economic ones.
