Some of these persist as myths even today.
Male masturbation became an even more important image in ancient Egypt.
Though research is still as yet scant, those suffering from cardiovascular disorders (particularly those recovering from myocardial infarction, or heart attacks) should resume physical activity (including sexual intercourse and masturbation) gradually and with the frequency and rigor which their physical status will allow.
;Mutual masturbation foreplay: The manual stimulation of each other's genitals where the session eventually leads to sexual intercourse.
Reading or viewing pornography, sexual fantasies, or other erotic stimuli may lead to a desire for sexual release such as by masturbation.
Other cultures have rites of passage into manhood that culminate in the first ejaculation of a male, usually by the hands of a tribal elder.
Men who averaged five or more ejaculations weekly in their 20s had significantly lower risk.
In 2013, a man found masturbating openly on a beach in Sweden was cleared of charges of sexual assault, the court finding that his activities had not been directed towards any specific person.
This technique may include the use of a simulacrum, or artificial vagina.
After dire warnings that those who so indulged would suffer impotence, gonorrhea, epilepsy and a wasting of the faculties (included were letters and testimonials supposedly from young men ill and dying from the effects of compulsive masturbation), the pamphlet then goes on to recommend as an effective remedy a "Strengthening Tincture" at 10 shillings a bottle and a "Prolific Powder" at 12 shillings a bag, available from a local shop.
Women can sexually stimulate themselves by crossing their legs tightly and clenching the muscles in their legs, creating pressure on the genitals.
The €14,000 campaign includes leaflets, flyers, a "fanzine", and workshops for the young in which they receive instruction on masturbation techniques along with advice on contraception and self-respect.
Terms such as ''playing with yourself'', ''pleasuring oneself'' and slang such as ''wanking'', ''jerking off'', and ''frigging'' are common.
Robert Baden-Powell, the founder of The Scout Association, incorporated a passage in the 1914 edition of ''Scouting for Boys'' warning against the dangers of masturbation.
A variation on this is to place the fingers and thumb on the penis as if playing a flute, and then shuttle them back and forth.
A clay figurine of the 4th millennium BC from a temple site on the island of Malta depicts a woman masturbating.
As the prostate is touch-sensitive, some directly stimulate it using a well-lubricated finger or dildo inserted through the anus into the rectum.
To avoid friction, irritation and soreness from this resulting friction, some may prefer to use a personal lubricant, masturbation cream or saliva.
The series came under public attack from senior television figures, and was pulled amid claims of declining editorial standards and controversy over the channel's public service broadcasting credentials.
Thoughts, fantasies, and memories of previous instances of arousal and orgasm can produce sexual excitation.
There are many other variations on male masturbation techniques.
This was done in response to data and experience from the other EU member states to reduce teen pregnancy and STIs (STDs), and to promote healthy habits.
Most semen used for sperm donation, and all semen donated through a sperm bank by sperm donors, is produced in this way.
Its authors have said that for too long, experts have concentrated on the need for "safe sex" and committed relationships while ignoring the principal reason that many people have sex.
However, its constituent films may yet be shown by the channel at a later date.
In a bath or shower a female may direct tap water at her clitoris and vulva.
Medical attitudes toward masturbation began to change at the beginning of the 20th century when H. Havelock Ellis, in his seminal 1897 work ''Studies in the Psychology of Sex'', questioned Tissot's premises, cheerfully named famous men of the era who masturbated and then set out to disprove (with the work of more recent physicians) each of the claimed diseases of which masturbation was purportedly the cause.
Semen is valued and masturbation is seen as a waste of semen and is therefore frowned upon even though frequent ejaculation is encouraged.
''Am Abend'' (1910), one of the earliest pornographic films that have been collected at the Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction, starts with a female masturbation scene.
Masturbate-a-thons are often charity events that are "intended to encourage people to explore safer sex, talk about masturbation and lift the taboos that still surround the subject."
The nipples are erogenous zones, and vigorous stimulation of them during masturbation usually causes the penis to become erect more quickly than it would otherwise.
Female masturbation can also provide protection against cervical infections by increasing the acidity of the cervical mucus and by moving debris out of the cervix.
Many  believe this was the result of her long history of promoting controversial viewpoints and not due solely to her public mention of masturbation.
At the same time, the supposed medical condition of hysteria—from the Greek ''hystera'' or uterus—was being treated by what would now be described as medically administered or medically prescribed masturbation for women.
There has been an increase in discussion and portrayal of masturbation in art, popular music, television, films, and literature.
For circumcised males, on whom the glans is mostly or completely uncovered, this technique creates more direct contact between the hand and the glans.
Sometimes one or more fingers may be inserted into the vagina to stroke its frontal wall where the G-spot may be located.
Today, religions vary in their views of masturbation; some view it as a spiritually detrimental practice, some see it as not spiritually detrimental, and others take a situational view.
In the US, laws vary from state to state.
This type of stimulation is typically all that is required to achieve orgasm and ejaculation.
It could be caused by a low-grade urinary tract or yeast infection, or the child may be overstimulated and in need of soothing, or indeed understimulated and bored.
Many "remedies" were devised, including eating a bland, meatless diet.
This passage stated that the individual should run away from the temptation by performing physical activity which was supposed to tire the individual so that masturbation could not be performed.
If more than one male has intercourse with a female, the sperm with the highest motility will compete more effectively.
Some have argued that Billy Joel's song "The Stranger" is about masturbation.
He went on, however, to acknowledge that "it is not so easy to produce a rational demonstration of the inadmissibility of that unnatural use", but ultimately concluded that its immorality lay in the fact that "a man gives up his personality … when he uses himself merely as a means for the gratification of an animal drive".
Restrictions on pornography, used to accompany masturbation, are common in American correctional facilities.
Lying face down on a comfortable surface such as a mattress or pillow, the penis can be rubbed against it.
This can, however, redirect semen into the bladder (referred to as retrograde ejaculation).
Instead, the subject is described using a series of euphemisms.
In many jurisdictions, masturbation by one person of another is considered digital penetration which may be illegal in some cases, such as when the other person is a minor.
A bed or couch is usually provided for the man, and pornographic films or other material may be made available.
In males, masturbation flushes out old sperm with low motility from the male's genital tract.
While ''masturbation'' is the formal word for this practice, many other expressions are in common use.
That is, a difference in mortality appeared between any two subjects when one subject ejaculated at around two times per week more than the other.
The outer foreskin glides smoothly over the inner foreskin.
Individuals of some species have been known to create tools for masturbation purposes.
The medical literature of the times describes procedures for electric shock treatment, infibulation, restraining devices like chastity belts and straitjackets, cauterization or – as a last resort – wholesale surgical excision of the genitals.
The 1983 recording "She Bop" by Cyndi Lauper, was one of the first fifteen songs ever required to carry Parental Advisory sticker for sexual content.
A study has reported a significantly higher rate of masturbation in gay men and women who were in a relationship.
For males who have not been circumcised, stimulation of the penis typically comes from the "pumping" of the foreskin, whereby the foreskin is held and slid up and down over the glans, which, depending on foreskin length, is completely or partially covered and then uncovered in a rapid motion.
In these cases, any energetic manipulation of the penis can be problematic.
;Non-contact group: More than two people masturbating in the presence of each other in a group but not touching each other.
The facility at a sperm bank  used for this purpose is known as a masturbatorium (US) or men's production room (UK).
The Masturbating Bear however made his ''Tonight Show'' debut during the final days of Conan O'Brien's tenure as host of the ''Tonight Show''.
Diogenes, speaking in jest, credited the god Hermes with its invention: he allegedly took pity on his son Pan, who was pining for Echo but unable to seduce her, and taught him the trick of masturbation in order to relieve his suffering.
In November 2013, Matthew Burdette, after being filmed masturbating, committed suicide.
The most common masturbation technique among males is to hold the penis with a loose fist and then to move the hand up and down the shaft.
Mutual masturbation (mutual manual stimulation of the genitals between partners) can be a substitute for sexual penetration.
;Contact mutual masturbation: One person touching another person to masturbate.
This approach was promoted by Dr. John Harvey Kellogg (inventor of corn flakes) and Rev.
The strength of these correlations increased with increasing frequency of ejaculation.
What about sex or masturbation twice a week?"
Studies have found that masturbation is frequent in humans of both sexes and all ages, although there is variation.
In later decades, the more drastic of these measures were increasingly replaced with psychological techniques, such as warnings that masturbation led to blindness, hairy hands or stunted growth.
In the 1920s, Havelock Ellis reported that turn-of-the-century seamstresses using treadle-operated sewing machines could achieve orgasm by sitting near the edge of their chairs.
They may repeat this cycle multiple times.
73% of men and 37% of women reported masturbating in the four weeks before their interview, while 53% of men and 18% of women reported masturbating in the previous seven days.
The study also indicated that increased ejaculation through masturbation rather than intercourse would be more helpful as intercourse is associated with diseases (STDs) that may increase the risk of cancer instead.
In the UK in 2009, a leaflet was issued by the National Health Service in Sheffield carrying the slogan, "an orgasm a day keeps the doctor away".
A study published in 1997 found an inverse association between death from coronary heart disease and frequency of orgasm even given the risk that myocardial ischaemia and myocardial infarction can be triggered by sexual activity.
Some men also enjoy anal stimulation, with fingers or otherwise, without any prostate stimulation.
In the nineteenth century it was a disease; in the twentieth, it's a cure."
(''Wank'' is a Briticism for ''masturbate''.)
Connecticut Department of Corrections officials say that these restrictions are intended to avoid a hostile work environment for correctional officers.
In 2009, the Sheffield NHS Health Trust issued a pamphlet called "Pleasure" which discussed the health benefits of masturbation.
It was found that, between individuals aged 16 to 44, 95% of men and 71% of women masturbated at some point in their lives.
Female masturbation involves the stroking or rubbing of a woman's vulva, especially her clitoris, with an index or middle fingers, or both.
Pan in his turn taught the habit to young shepherds.
It drew on familiar themes of sin and vice, this time in particular against the "heinous sin" of "self-pollution".
In 1760, he published ''L'Onanisme'', his own comprehensive medical treatise on the purported ill-effects of masturbation.
The other person may do the same during or after.
Mutual masturbation allows couples to enjoy each other and obtain sexual release as often as they need but without the inconveniences and risks associated with sex.
By watching a partner masturbate, one finds out the methods they use to please him- or herself, allowing each partner to learn exactly how the other enjoys being touched.
Popular belief asserts that individuals of either sex who are not in sexually active relationships tend to masturbate more frequently than those who are; however, much of the time this is not true as masturbation alone or with a partner is often a feature of a relationship.
Most early people seem to have connected human sexuality with abundance in nature.
The ejaculate is saved in a wad of animal skin and worn later to help conceive children.
It was clear by then that Conan O'Brien was being removed from the show and he spent his last shows pushing the envelope with skits that typically would not be appropriate for the ''Tonight Show'', one of which was the Masturbating Bear.
Solo masturbation is a sexual activity that is free of risk of sexually transmitted infections.
Most early people seem to have connected human sexuality with abundance in nature.
Similar results have been found in a 2007 British national probability survey.
A woman went into a German hospital with two pencils in her bladder, having pierced her urethra after inserting them during masturbation.
Italian gynecologists Giorgio Giorgi and Marco Siccardi observed via ultrasound a female fetus possibly masturbating and having what appeared to be an orgasm.
The prostate gland is one of the organs that contributes fluid to semen.
Palliative care practitioners should routinely ask their patients if anything interferes in their ability to masturbate and then work with the patient to correct the problem if it is identified."
If, for example, she has had intercourse with more than one male, such an orgasm can increase the likelihood of a pregnancy by one of them.
Another NBC show, ''Late Night with Conan O'Brien'', had a character known as the Masturbating Bear, a costume of a bear with a diaper covering its genitals.
Solo performances in gay pornography have been described in 1985 as "either or both active (tense, upright) and/or passive (supine, exposed, languid, available)", whereas female solo performances are said to be "exclusively passive (supine, spread, seated, squatted, orifices offered, etc.)".
"Baby girls sometimes move their bodies rhythmically, almost violently, appearing to experience orgasm."
Some critics of this theory held that his research was biased and that the Gallup Poll method was redundant for defining "natural behavior".
With two or more participants, the risk of sexually transmitted infections, while not eliminated, is much less than with most forms of penetrative sex.
Often, masturbation in the sight of others is prosecuted under a general law such as public indecency, though some laws make specific mention of masturbation.
''Self-abuse'' and ''self-pollution'' were common in early modern times and are still found in modern dictionaries.
A small percentage of men suffer from postorgasmic illness syndrome (POIS), which can cause severe muscle pain throughout the body and other symptoms immediately following ejaculation, whether due to masturbation or partnered sex.
Some techniques which may work for one individual can be difficult or uncomfortable for another.
Masturbation involves touching, pressing, rubbing or massaging a person's genital area, either with the fingers or against an object such as a pillow; inserting fingers or an object into the vagina or anus (see anal masturbation); and stimulating the penis or vulva with an electric vibrator, which may also be inserted into the vagina or anus.
Standing up, a chair, the corner of an item of furniture, or even a washing machine can be used to stimulate the clitoris through the labia and clothing.
This leaflet has been circulated to parents, teachers and youth workers and is meant to update sex education by telling older school students about the benefits of enjoyable sex.
Masturbation involving both a man and a woman (see ''mutual masturbation'') can result in pregnancy only if semen contacts the vulva.
The study author suggests "It can be done from time-to-time to alleviate the congestion and the patient can adjust the number of intercourses or masturbations depending on the severity of the symptoms."
Men and women can fall prey to this problem.
May is considered "Masturbation Month" by sex-positive organizations and activists, including Betty Dodson, Joani Blank, Susan Block, and Carol Queen.
Both sex and masturbation lower blood pressure.
There are depictions of male masturbation in prehistoric rock paintings around the world.
Masturbation aids such as a vibrator, dildo or Ben Wa balls can also be used to stimulate the vagina and clitoris.
This technique may also be used by some circumcised men who have sufficient excess skin remaining from their circumcision.
From the earliest records, ancient Sumer had a relaxed attitude toward sex, and masturbation was a popular technique for enhancing potency, either alone or with a partner.
A 2008 study concluded that frequent ejaculation between the ages of 20 and 40 may be correlated with higher risk of developing prostate cancer.
Some people get sexual pleasure by inserting objects, such as urethral sounds, into the urethra (the tube through which urine and, in men, semen, flows), a practice known as urethral play or "sounding".
One common term used for it was ''anaphlan,'' which roughly translates as "up-fire".
In the book ''Human Sexuality: Diversity in Contemporary America'', by Strong, Devault and Sayad, the authors point out, "A baby boy may laugh in his crib while playing with his erect penis".
Various medical and psychological benefits have been attributed to a healthy attitude toward sexual activity in general and to masturbation in particular.
If such play becomes all-consuming, it may be necessary to look for an underlying cause of this, such as the child being tense and in need of comfort, or that others may be overreacting and thus reinforcing the habit.
In March 2007 the UK broadcaster Channel 4 was to air a season of television programmes about masturbation, called Wank Week.
Routine neonatal circumcision was widely adopted in the United States and the UK at least partly because of its believed preventive effect against masturbation (see also History of male circumcision).
The ancient Greeks had a more relaxed attitude toward masturbation than the Egyptians did, regarding the act as a normal and healthy substitute for other forms of sexual pleasure.
As late as the seventeenth century in Europe the practice was commonly employed by nannies to put their young male charges to sleep.
Thomas Szasz states the shift in scientific consensus as "Masturbation: the primary sexual activity of mankind.
In the ''Seinfeld'' episode "The Contest", the show's main characters enter into a contest to see who can go the longest without masturbating.
In 2010, the Supreme Court of Alabama upheld a state law criminalizing the distribution of sex-toys.
This is consistent with a 2003 Australia article on the benefits against prostate cancer.
Both sexes sometimes apply lubricating substances to intensify sensation.
Some professionals consider masturbation to function as a cardiovascular workout.
It may be used as foreplay, or as an alternative to sexual penetration.
A 2008 study at Tabriz Medical University found ejaculation reduces swollen nasal blood vessels, freeing the airway for normal breathing.
For a list of terms, see the entry for ''masturbate'' in Wiktionary.
Some doctors speculate that the frequency of POIS "in the population may be greater than has been reported in the academic literature", and that many POIS sufferers are undiagnosed.
In the West, masturbation in private or with a partner is generally considered a normal and healthy part of sexual enjoyment.
In 2003, an Australian research team led by Graham Giles of The Cancer Council Australia found that males masturbating frequently had a lower probability to develop prostate cancer.
Alfred Kinsey's 1950s studies on US population have shown that 92% of men and 62% of women have masturbated during their lifespan.
Stimulating the prostate from outside, via pressure on the perineum, can be pleasurable as well.
This view persisted well into the Victorian era, where such medical censure of masturbation was in line with the widespread social conservatism and opposition to open sexual behavior common at the time.
Coon and Mitterer stated: "Approximately 70 percent of married women and men masturbate at least occasionally."
No causal relationship is known between masturbation and any form of mental or physical disorder.
Egyptian Pharaohs, in response to this, were at one time required to masturbate ceremonially into the Nile.
Intercourse, by itself, is often inconvenient or impractical at times to provide sufficient sexual release for many people.
Some may keep their hand stationary while pumping into it with pelvic thrusts in order to simulate the motions of sexual intercourse.
After much debate on whether or not he would be able to be used on Conan O'Brien's new TBS show, ''Conan'', the Masturbating Bear made an appearance on the very first episode.
Prior to leaving ''Late Night'' to become host of ''The Tonight Show'', Conan O'Brien originally retired the character due to concerns about its appropriateness in an earlier time slot.
Solo pornography recognized with AVN Awards include the ''All Alone'' series and ''All Natural: Glamour Solos''.
Personal lubricant is sometimes used during masturbation, especially when penetration is involved, but this is not universal and many women find their natural lubrication sufficient.
Austrian psychoanalyst Wilhelm Reich in his 1922 essay ''Concerning Specific Forms of Masturbation'' tried to identify healthy and unhealthy forms of masturbation.
On the other hand, frequent ejaculation in one's 50s was found to be correlated with a lower such risk in this same study.
Masturbation among adolescents contributes to them developing a sense of mastery over sexual impulses, and it has a role in the physical and emotional development of prepubescents and pubescents.
Some men place both hands directly on their penis during masturbation, while others may use their free hand to fondle their testicles, nipples, or other parts of their body.
He tried to relate the way people masturbated to their degree of inclination towards the opposite sex and to their psycho-sexual pathologies.
The Merck Manual gives the following statistics: 97% of men and 80% of women have masturbated.
Officials from the neighbouring region of Andalucia have expressed an interest in copying the programme.
The text book ''Palliative care nursing: quality care to the end of life'' states, "Terminally ill people are likely no different from the general population regarding their masturbation habits.
The Spanish region of Extremadura launched a programme in 2009 to encourage "sexual self-exploration and the discovery of self-pleasure" in people aged from 14 to 17.
Citing case studies of young male masturbators amongst his patients in Lausanne, Switzerland as basis for his reasoning, Tissot argued that semen was an "essential oil" and "stimulus" that, when lost from the body in great amounts, would cause "a perceptible reduction of strength, of memory and even of reason; blurred vision, all the nervous disorders, all types of gout and rheumatism, weakening of the organs of generation, blood in the urine, disturbance of the appetite, headaches and a great number of other disorders."
Masturbatory behavior has been documented in a very wide range of species.
Semen is ingested for strength and is considered in the same line as mothers' milk.
In the UK, masturbating in public is illegal under Section 28 of the Town Police Clauses Act 1847.
Lying face down one may use the hands, one may straddle a pillow, the corner or edge of the bed, a partner's leg or some scrunched-up clothing and "hump" the vulva and clitoris against it.
The first use of the word "onanism" to consistently and specifically refer to masturbation appears to be ''Onania'', an anonymous book first distributed in London in 1716.
"Master of my domain" became a part of the American lexicon from this episode.
The next ejaculate then contains more fresh sperm, which have higher chances of achieving conception during intercourse.
A somewhat controversial ejaculation control technique is to put pressure on the perineum, about halfway between the scrotum and the anus, just before ejaculating.
as rectal foreign bodies).
Masturbation has been depicted in art since prehistoric times and is mentioned and discussed in very early writings.
Sylvester Graham (inventor of Graham crackers).
There were recommendations to have boys' pants constructed so that the genitals could not be touched through the pockets, for schoolchildren to be seated at special desks to prevent their crossing their legs in class and for girls to be forbidden from riding horses and bicycles because the sensations these activities produce were considered too similar to masturbation.
Other researchers argue allowing masturbation could help prisoners restrict their sexual urges to their imaginations rather than engaging in prison rape or other non-masturbatory sexual activity that could pose sexually transmitted disease or other health risks.
Participants may speak openly with onlookers while masturbating to share techniques and describe the pleasure and benefits.
It may also involve touching, rubbing, or pinching the nipples or other erogenous zones while masturbating.
The glans itself may widen and lengthen as the stimulation continues, becoming slightly darker in colour, while the gliding action of the foreskin reduces friction.
The initiative, whose slogan is, "Pleasure is in your own hands" has angered local right-wing politicians and challenged traditional Roman Catholic views.
The stimulation may involve hands, fingers, everyday objects, sex toys such as vibrators, or combinations of these.
The mechanism is through stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system and is long lasting.
Masturbation is considered normal when performed by children, even in early infancy.
The authority with which the work was subsequently treated – Tissot's arguments were even acknowledged and echoed by luminaries such as Kant and Voltaire – arguably shifted the view of masturbation in Western medicine over the next two centuries into that of a debilitating illness.
Common positions include lying on back or face down, sitting, squatting, kneeling or standing.
The penalty may be up to 14 days in prison, depending on a range of circumstantial factors.
In the US, masturbation was a diagnosable psychological condition until DSM II (1968).
A clay figurine of the 4th millennium BC from a temple site on the island of Malta, depicts a woman masturbating.
At a sperm bank or fertility clinic, a special room or cabin may be set aside so that semen may be produced by male masturbation for use in fertility treatments such as artificial insemination.
Assuming a broad range average of between 3 and 5 ejaculations per week for healthy males, this would mean 5 to 7 ejaculations per week.
In the city of Charlotte, North Carolina, masturbating in public is a class 3 misdemeanour.
A few extremely flexible males can reach and stimulate their penis with their tongue or lips, and so perform autofellatio.
