In 1900 Dartmouth College introduced the Master of Commercial Science (MCS), first awarded in 1902.
In Scotland all the statutes of the Universities which enforced conditions on the grant of degrees were a dead letter."
In 1879 a statute to actually establish the faculty of Natural Sciences at Oxford was promulgated, but in 1880 a proposal to rename the degree as a Master of Science was rejected along with a proposal to grant Masters of Natural Sciences a Master of Arts degree, in order to make them full members of the University.
In 1903, the London Daily News criticised the practice of Oxford and Cambridge, calling their MAs "the most stupendous of academic frauds" and "bogus degrees".
The French master's degree is the combination of two individual years : the master 1 (M1) and master 2 (M2), following the Bologna Process.
Those who received their mr., ir.
The government offers the Taiwan Scholarship ranging from NT$20,000–30,000 per month for two years.
Irish master's degrees are 1 – 2 years (60 - 120 ECTS credits) for taught degrees and 2 years (not credit rated) for research degrees.
* The undergraduate arts degree of the ancient universities of Scotland
two semesters, 8 months), while research degrees often take either a full calendar year or two academic years.
in Michigan the "in course" MA was introduced in 1848 and was last awarded in 1882, while the "on examination" MA was introduced in 1859.
* '''Research''' master's degrees are primarily research based, although may contain taught elements, particularly on research methods.
Since these graduates do not have a separate bachelor's degree (which is in fact – in retrospect – incorporated into the program), the master's degree is their first academic degree.
The same two degrees, again omitting the master's, were awarded at Edinburgh, despite the MA being the standard undergraduate degree for Arts in Scotland.
* In the United Kingdom, first degrees in medicine, dentistry and veterinary science are considered equivalent to master's degrees despite, for historical reasons, often having the titles of bachelor's degrees.
The Master of Science (MSc) degree was finally introduced in Britain in 1878 at Durham, followed by the new Victoria University in 1881.
* The Oxbridge MA, awarded without additional work
), Master of Education (M.Ed.
* In Slovenia and Croatia, during the pre-Bologna process education, all Academic degrees were awarded after a minimum of four years of university studies and a successful defence of a written thesis are considered equivalent to the master's degree.
are the traditional formal form of master's degree, where the student already holds an undergraduate (bachelor's) degree on entry.
Programs are entirely in English and tuition is less than would be paid in North America, with as little as US$5000 for an M.B.A. As an incentive to increase the number of foreign students, the government of Taiwan and universities have made extra efforts to provide a range of quality scholarships available.
Initially, the Bachelor of Arts (BA) was awarded for the study of the trivium and the Master of Arts (MA) for the study of the quadrivium.
titles, depending on the field of study.
Over the first half of the century the automatic master's degrees for honours graduates vanished as honours degrees became the standard undergraduate qualification in the UK.
The idea quickly crossed the Atlantic, with Manchester establishing a Faculty of Commerce, awarding Bachelor and Master of Commerce degrees, in 1903.
Specialization (''lato sensu'') and M.B.A. degrees can be also offered as distance education courses, while the master's degree (''stricto-sensu'') requires physical attendance.
master's degree) programme is typically 90–120 ECTS credits, with a minimum requirement of at least 60 ECTS credits at second-cycle level.
A dissertation may or may not be required, depending on the program.
In Finland and Sweden, the title of kand.
It was specified that the title "Master" should only be used for qualifications that met the learning outcomes and credit definitions, although it was noted that "A small number of universities in Scotland have a long tradition of labelling certain first degrees as 'MA'.
The nineteenth century saw a great expansion in the variety of master's degrees offered.
When London introduced its Faulty of Sciences in 1858, the University was granted a new charter giving it the power "to confer the several Degrees of Bachelor, Master, and Doctor, in Arts, Laws, Science, Medicine, Music", but the degrees it awarded in science were the Bachelor of Science and the Doctor of Science.
Those who had already started the program could, upon completing it, bear the appropriate title (MSc, LL.M.
), Master of Arts (M.A.)
At the start of the twentieth century there were therefore four different sorts of master's degree in the UK: the Scottish MA, granted as a first degree; the Master of Arts (Oxbridge and Dublin), granted to all BA graduates a certain period after their first degree without further study; master's degrees that could be gained ether by further study or by gaining an honours degree (which, at the time in the UK involved further study beyond the ordinary degree, as it still does in Scotland and some Commonwealth countries); and master's degrees that could only be obtained by further study (including all London master's degrees).
These are university-specific scholarships ranging from tuition waivers, up to NT$20,000 per month.
titles are similar to a master's degree, and the shortcut MA or M.Sc.
only after obtaining a permission to bear such titles from the Dienst Uitvoering Onderwijs.
Similar abbreviations, inspired by Latin, apply to a large number of fields, e.g.
''stricto sensu'' post-graduation) or specialization (a.k.a.
It corresponds to the European (Bologna Process) 2nd Cycle or the North American master's.
Oxford and Cambridge retained their MAs, but renamed many of their postgraduate bachelor's degrees in the higher faculties as master's degrees, e.g.
and upon completion of, for instance, an engineering master's degree, a person becomes cand.polyt.
The UK Quality Assurance Agency defines three categories of Master's degrees:
This development was noted by the Dearing Report into UK Higher Education in 1997, which called for the establishment of a national framework of qualifications and identified five different routes to master's degrees:
* 4 years master's programmes: these are mostly Master of Science (M.S.)
a total of four years in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and five years in Scotland).
Master of Engineering (M.Eng.
Despite their titles these are still master's degree and may not be referred to as doctoral degrees, nor may graduates use the title "doctor".
), ''meester'' (mr.) and ''doctorandus'' (drs.)
This gradually became formalised as the ''licentia docendi'' (licence to teach).
M.B.A.), and often substitute a project for the thesis.
* In Greece, the ''metaptychiako'' which literally translates as ''post-degree'' (...programme or title), lasts normally from one to, more often, two years, and can be studied after a, at least, four-years undergraduate ''ptychio'', which means ''degree''.
Originally, masters and doctors were not distinguished, but by the 15th century it had become customary in the English universities to refer to the teachers in the lower faculties (arts and grammar) as masters and those in the higher faculties as doctors.
It is a joint-degree program, which is part of a team effort with four universities.
It addressed many of the Dearing Report's concerns, specifying that shorter courses at H-level (honours), e.g.
The United States Department of Education classifies master's degree as '''research''' or '''professional'''.
At the University of Michigan this was introduced in two forms in 1858: "in course", first awarded in 1859, and "on examination", first awarded in 1862.
This scheme would appear to have then been quietly dropped, with Oxford going on to award BAs and MAs in science.
In the UK, students will normally need to have a 2:1 for a taught master's course, and possibly higher for a research master's.
* Conversion degrees, sometimes below the standard of undergraduate degrees in the same subject
and all law and medicine related courses are studied after completion of successful bachelor towards doctoral degree.
The name of the degree normally includes the subject name.
They aim to prepare students fit research careers.
teacher) in one university should be admitted to the same rank in other universities.
The master's degree dates back to the origin of European universities, with a Papal bull of 1233 decreeing that anyone admitted to the mastership in the University of Toulouse should be allowed to teach freely in any other university.
The most foreign student-friendly programs in Taipei, Taiwan are at:
degree are also entitled to use M.Sc.
The courses offered for master and PhD normally are research-based.
In the UK, postgraduate master's degrees may be either "research" or "taught", with taught degrees being further subdivided into "specialist or advanced study" or "professional or practice" (see above).
* '''Integrated master's degrees''' (MChem, MEng, MMath, MPharm, MPhys, MPsych, MSci,  etc.)
Reports of Agency reviews of such provision will relate to undergraduate benchmarks and will make it clear that the title reflects Scottish custom and practice, and that any positive judgement on standards should not be taken as implying that the outcomes of the programme were at postgraduate level."
The QAA released the first "framework for higher education qualifications in England, Wales and Northern Ireland" in January 2001.
It was not until 1837 that separate examinations were reintroduced for the MA in England, at the newly established Durham University (even though, as in the ancient English universities, this was to confer full membership), to be followed in 1840 by the similarly new University of London, which was only empowered by its charter to grant degrees by examination.
(US$18,000–24,000 for a two-year program)
or MA), but alternatively still use the old-style title (ir., mr. or drs.
Research master's degrees in the US, e.g.
Extended master's degrees typically take three to four years and contain significant practice-related learning that must be developed in collaboration with relevant professional, statutory or regulatory bodies.
In the 1960s, new Scottish universities (with the exception of Dundee, which inherited the undergraduate MA from St Andrews) reintroduced the BA as their undergraduate degree in Arts, restoring the MA to its position as a postgraduate qualification.
In Brazil, the degree often serves as additional qualification for those seeking to differentiate themselves in the job market, or for those who want to pursue a Ph.D.
This form is also sometimes used with other integrated master's degrees, and occasionally for postgraduate master's degrees (e.g.
title requires a master's degree.
* In Switzerland, the old Licence or Diplom (4 to 5 years in duration) is considered equivalent to the master's degree.
Differently, the "specialization" degree (also referred as "pós-graduação ''lato-sensu''"), also comprehends a 1–2 years studies, but do not require a new thesis to be purposed and defended, being usually attended by professionals looking for a complimentary formation on a different knowledge area than their original graduation.
* Four year (five in Scotland) undergraduate degrees such as the MEng
In Ireland, master's degrees may be either '''Taught''' or '''Research'''.
* In Italy the master's degree is equivalent to the two-year ''Laurea magistrale'', which can be earned after a ''Laurea'' (a three-year undergraduate degree, equivalent to a bachelor's degree).
* 2 years master's programmes: these are mostly Master of Arts (M.A.)
Depending on the goal of the student (a doctorate or a professional career) the master 2 can also be called a "Master Recherche" (research master) and a "Master Professionnel" (professional master), each with different requirements.
The first "framework for qualifications of Higher Education Institutes in Scotland", also published in January 2001, used the same qualifications descriptors, adding in credit values that specified that a stand-alone master should be 180 credits and a "Masters (following an integrated programme from undergraduate to Masters level study)" should be 600 credits with a minimum of 120 at M-level.
* Specialist postgraduate programmes, such as the MA and MSc
There are a range of pathways to the degree, with entry based on evidence of a capacity to undertake higher degree studies in the proposed field.
In the US, The Gregg Reference Manual recommends placing periods in degrees (e.g.
Admission to a master's degrees normally requires successful completion of study at bachelor's degree level either (for postgraduate degrees) as a stand-alone degree or (for integrated degrees) as part of an integrated scheme of study.
This led to questions as to the status of the integrated master's degrees and one-year master's degrees in the UK.
* Master of Agriculture (M.Sc.
Under the Bologna Process, countries in the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) are moving to a three cycle (bachelor's - master's - doctorate) system of degrees.
the Cambridge LLB became the LLM in 1982, and the Oxford BLitt, BPhil (except in philosophy) and BSc became the MLitt, MPhil and MSc.
are offered in all major subjects.
* Master of Science in Information Technology (M.Sc.I.T.
In 1832 Lord Brougham, the Lord Chancellor and an alumnus of the University of Edinburgh, told the House of Lords that "In England the Universities conferred degrees after a considerable period of residence, after much labour performed, and if they were not in all respects so rigorous as the statutes of the Universities required, nevertheless it could not be said, that Masters of Arts were created at Oxford and Cambridge as they were in Scotland, without any residence, or without some kind of examination.
are UK degrees that combine an undergraduate bachelor's degree course with an extra year at master's level (i.e.
University courses are therefore single and last five to six years, after which the master's degree is awarded (in this case referred to as ''Laurea magistrale a ciclo unico'').
Two thirds of EHEA countries have standardised on 120 ECTS credits for their second-cycle (master's) degrees, but 90 ECTS credits is the main form in Cyprus, Ireland and Scotland and 60-75 credits in Montenegro, Serbia and Spain.
In the United States, the first master's degrees (''Magister Artium'', or Master of Arts) were awarded at Harvard University soon after its foundation.
At the start of the century, the only master's degree was the MA, and this was normally awarded without any further study or examination.The Master in Surgery degree was introduced by the University of Glasgow in 1815.
In addition, students will normally have to write a personal statement and, in the arts and humanities, will often have to submit a portfolio of work.
Care should be taken not to confuse the Master ''by'' Research (MbyRes, MRes or ResM), which is a research degree in a specific subject, with the Master ''of'' Research (MRes), which is a taught degree concentrating on research methods.
title after the application of the Bologna process have the option of signing as '''A.
Probably the most important master's degree introduced in the 19th century was the Master of Science (MS in the US, MSc in the UK).
* Master of Management (M.M.
* Master of Laws (LL.M.
The candidatus degree is abbreviated cand.
* In Denmark there are two forms of master's degree.
The form "Master in ..." is also sometimes used, particularly where a faculty title is used for an integrated master's in addition to its use in a traditional postgraduate master's, e.g.
The combined length of the first and second cycle varies from "3 + 1" years (240
The  Framework for Higher Education Qualification (FHEQ) in England Wales and Northern Ireland level 7 qualifications and the Framework for Qualification of Higher Education Institutes in Scotland (FQHEIS) level 11 qualifications (postgraduate and integrated master's degrees, with the exception of MAs from the ancient universities of Scotland and Oxbridge MAs) have been certified as meeting this requirement.
* National ChengChi University – I.M.B.A.
The "in course" MS was last awarded in 1876.
The UK ''integrated master's degree'' is combined with a bachelor's degree for a four (England, Wales and Northern Ireland) or five (Scotland) academic year total period - one academic year longer than a normal bachelor's degree.
Professional master's degrees may be structured like research master's (e.g.
B.S., Ph.D.), however The Chicago Manual of Style recommends writing degrees without periods (e.g.
The educational programmes allow students to be mobile within the system, for example one semester may be taken in a confederate school without paying additional membership or tuition fees.
All Doctoral and Ph.D. or third cycle degree are based on research and experience oriented and result based.
Graduates of the program, within the Baltic Sea area are also given the chance to continue onwards with their studies within the postgraduate system if they have studied the social sciences or humanities field.
Usually focused on academic research, the master's degree (on any specific knowledge area) requires the development of a thesis, presented (and defended) to a board of Ph.D. after the period of research.
conversion courses, should be styled Graduate Diploma or Graduate Certificate rather than as master's degrees, but confirmed that the extended undergraduate degrees were master's degrees, saying that "Some Masters degrees in science and engineering are awarded after extended undergraduate programmes that last, typically, a year longer than Honours degree programmes".
The most professional and internationalised program in Nepal are:
By 1861 this had been adopted throughout Scotland as well as by Cambridge and Durham in England and the University of Dublin in Ireland.
Taught degrees (of both forms) typically take a full calendar year (i.e.
Stand-alone master's programs in the US are normally two years in length.
These typically have a duration of 300 – 360 ECTS credits (five to six years), with the integrated master's degrees in England, Wales and Northern Ireland being the shortest at 240 ECTS credits (four years).
* '''Postgraduate/graduate master's degrees''' (MA/M.A./A.M., MSc/M.S., MBA/M.B.A., MSt, LLM/LL.M., etc.)
Masters degrees are commonly titled using the form 'Master of ...', where either a faculty (typically Arts or Science) or a field (Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Business Administration, etc.)
or cand.oecon), law (cand.jur), humanities (cand.mag) etc.
However, the Framework for Higher Education Qualifications in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and the Framework for Qualifications of Higher Education Institutes in Scotland have both been aligned with the overarching framework for the EHEA with these being accepted as master's-level qualifications.
This led to the establishment of the Quality Assurance Agency, which was charged with drawing up the framework.
Examples of the reversed usage include Harvard University, the University of Chicago and MIT, leading to the abbreviations A.M. and S.M.
degrees; which normally consist of a mixture of research and taught material.
* In France, the master's degree (''diplôme de master'') takes two years and is worth 120 ECTS credits.
Master's in Accounting).
The definition of ECTS credits is that "60 ECTS credits are allocated to the learning outcomes and associated workload of a full-time academic year or its equivalent", thus European master's degrees should last for between one calendar year and two academic years, with at least one academic year of study at master's level.
A few titles are more general, for example Master of Philosophy (MPhil), used (in the same manner as Doctor of Philosophy) to indicate degrees with a large research component, Master of Studies (MSt)/Master of Advanced Study (MASt)/Master of Advanced Studies (M.A.S.
The second form is the Master Degree (no possessive) within the adult further education system, which is worth 60 ECTS credits and is taught part-time.
* Master of Education (M.Ed);
A regular post-graduation course has to comply with a minimum of 360 class-hours, while a M.B.A. degree has to comply with a minimum of 400 class-hours.
As in the United Kingdom, M.Phil.
In 1983, the Engineering Council issued a "'Statement on enhanced and extended undergraduate engineering degree courses", proposing the establishment of a 4-year first degree (Master of Engineering).
In addition, a great part of Brazilian universities offers a M.B.A. (Master of Business Administration) degree.
As the process continued, descriptors were introduced for all three levels in 2004, and ECTS credit guidelines were developed.
In Scotland the pre-Reformation universities (St Andrews, Glasgow and Aberdeen) developed so that the Scottish MA became their first degree, while in Oxford, Cambridge and Trinity College, Dublin, the MA was awarded to BA graduates of a certain standing without further examination from the late seventeenth century, its main purpose being to confer full membership of the university.
At the Victoria University both the MA and MSc followed the lead of Durham's MA in requiring a further examination for those with an ordinary bachelor's degree but not for those with an honours degree.
Graduate schools in the US may require students to take one or more standardised tests, such as the GRE, GMAT or LSAT.
Courses normally last one year in the UK and two years in the US.
the UK integrated master's degree), particularly in STEM subjects and subjects allied to medicine.
The two most common titles of master's degrees are the Master of Arts (MA/M.A./A.M) and Master of Science (MSc/M.S./S.M.)
This is because a single program that led to these degree was in effect before 2002, which comprised the same course load as the bachelor and master programs put together.
Master's degree (''stricto sensu'') does not requires minimum class-hours, but it's practically impossible to finish it before 1.5 year due the workload and research required; an average time for the degree is 2.5 years.
The Australian Qualifications Framework classifies master's degrees as '''research''', '''coursework''' or '''extended'''.
The Oxbridge MA is not an academic qualification; it is granted without further examination to those who have gained a BA from Oxford or Cambridge Universities in England, and the MA of Trinity College Dublin in Ireland is granted to its graduates in a similar manner.
Ensuing correspondence pointed out that "A Scotch M.A., at the most, is only the equivalent of an English B.A."
To obtain a national diploma for the master 2 requires a minimum of one year of study after the master 1.A French "diplôme d'Ingénieur" is also the equivalent of a master's degree, provided the diploma is recognised by the Commission des titres d'ingénieur, as are qualifications recognised at Level I of the ''répertoire national des certifications professionnelles'' (national register of professional certificates).
* Master of Business Studies ( M.B.S.
There is the University of Tartu in Estonia, the University of Turku in Finland, Vytautas Magnus University in Lithuania and the University of Latvia.
82% of respondents conferred only a master's degree for the course, while 9% conferred a bachelor's degree at the end of the bachelor's-level stage and a master's degree at the end of the course and a further 9% conferred both bachelor's and master's degrees at the end of the course.
* Master of Computer Applications (M.C.A.
In particular fields, namely law, pharmacy and medicine, this distinction is not made.
: sociology (cand.scient.soc), economics (cand.merc., cand.polit.
* Master of Arts (M.A.
In 1862, a Royal Commission suggested that Durham should award master's degrees in theology and science (interestingly with the suggested abbreviations MT and MS, contrary to later British practice of using MTh or MTheol and MSc for these degrees), but its recommendations were not enacted.
In the Overarching Framework of Qualifications for the European Higher Education Area defined as part of the Bologna process, a "second cycle" (i.e.
These degrees are research-based and offered through universities.
Subsequently after passing the qualifications provided, people may procure teaching qualifications and continue their scholastic research around doctoral studies, or carry on studying within their career in the private or public sector.
or Master of Philosophy is a research degree awarded for the completion of a thesis, and is a shorter version of the Ph.D.
At the same time, new universities were being established around the then British Empire along the lines of London, including examinations for the MA: the University of Sydney in Australia and the Queen's University of Ireland in 1850, and the Universities of Bombay (now the University of Mumbai), Madras and Calcutta in India in 1857.
These have also been certified as compatible with the FQ-EHEA.
In Taiwan, bachelor's degrees are about four years (with honors) and there is an entrance examination required for people who want to study in master and Ph.D. degrees.
A master's degree normally requires previous study at the bachelor's level, either as a separate degree or as part of an integrated course.
A graduate may choose a master course completely different from his/her previous one.
The original meaning of the master's degree was thus that someone who had been admitted to the rank (degree) of master (i.e.
From late medieval times until the nineteenth century, the pattern of degrees was therefore to have a bachelor's and master's degree in the lower (undergraduate) faculties and to have bachelor's and doctorates in the higher (postgraduate) faculties.
The Bologna declaration in 1999 started the Bologna Process, leading to the creation of the European Higher Education Area (EHEA).
This specified learning outcomes for M-level (master's) degrees and advised that the title "Master" should only be used for qualifications that met those learning outcomes in full.
The forms "Master of Science" and "Master in Science" are indistinguishable in Latin, thus MSci is "Master of Natural Sciences" at the University of Cambridge.
In Nepal, after bachelor's degree about to at least three or four years with full-time study in college and university with an entrance test for those people who want to study further can study in master and further Ph.D. and Doctorate degree.
and called for common standards for degrees, while defenders of the ancient universities said that "the Cambridge M.A.
Examples are the MPhil (always a research degree, often linked to a doctoral programme), MLitt (usually, but not always a research degree) and Master's by Research.
At the master's degree ("mestrado", in Portuguese, also referred as "pós-graduação ''stricto sensu''") there are 2–3 years of full-time graduate-level studies.
In countries where the bachelor's degree with honours is the standard undergraduate degree, this is often the normal entry qualification.
''', depending on the field in which the degree was obtained, since the ir., mr. and drs.
Coursework master's degrees typically also last one to two years, and consist mainly of structured learning with some independent research and project work or practice-related learning.
may officially be used in order to render such title as an international title.
In the UK, stops (periods) are not used in degree abbreviations.
* Master of Science (M.Sc.
may be rendered, if obtained in the Netherlands from a university, after the application of the Bologna process, as: MSc instead of ir., LL.M.
In Australia, some extended master's degrees use the title "doctor": Juris doctor and Doctors of Medical Practice, Physiotherapy, Dentistry, Optometry and Veterinary Practice.
Taught master's degrees are normally one to two year courses, rated at 60 - 120 ECTS credits, while research master's degrees are normally two year courses, either rated at 120 ECTS credits or not credit rated.
* Master of Engineering (M.Eng.
Integrated master's degrees and postgraduate master's degrees oriented towards professional practice are often more specifically named for their field of study ("tagged degrees"), including, for example, the Master of Business Administration, Master of Divinity, Master of Engineering and Master of Physics.
three semesters, 12 months), although some may be completed within an academic year (i.e.
