Four cirques led to the shape of the mountain.
The four main ridges separating the four faces are the main climbing routes.
Meanwhile the Italian Alpine Club was founded and its leaders, Felice Giordano and Quintino Sella, established plans to conquer the Matterhorn before any non-Italian could succeed.
In the last and highest section, the Theodul Pass must be crossed before returning to Zermatt.
It served as decoration in many Swiss military hospices during the war in addition to be found in countless middle class living rooms.
The Matterhorn acquired its characteristic pyramidal shape in much more recent times as it was caused by natural erosion over the past million years.
The Matterhorn's faces are steep, and only small patches of snow and ice cling to them; regular avalanches send the snow down to accumulate on the glaciers at the base of each face, the largest of which are the Tiefmattengletscher to the west, part of the Zmutt Glacier, and the Matterhorn Glacier to the north.
In addition, the steep faces of the mountain and its isolated location make it prone to banner clouds formation, with the air flowing around the mountain producing condensation of the air on the lee side and also creating vortices.
By the late 1980s, it was estimated that over 500 people have died whilst attempting its summit since the 1865 ascent, with an average of about 12 deaths each year.
In 2015 will be celebrated the 150th anniversary of the first ascent.
The Matterhorn is an isolated mountain.
The first winter ascent of the Hörnli ridge was by Vittorio Sella with guides J.
Decomposing ''Matterhorn'' as two words again yields ''Matter'' and ''Horn''; the second word means "horn, peak", whereas the first is our ''Matte'' in the genitive case, meaning possession : literally, ''Matterhorn'' means "Zermatt's peak".
Ueli Steck set the record time in climbing the north face (Schmid route) of Matterhorn in 2009 with a time of 1 hour 56 minutes.
The slightly lower ''Italian summit'' at  lies to the west.
The four steep faces, rising above the surrounding glaciers, face the four compass points and are split by the ''Hörnli'', ''Furggen'', ''Leone'' and ''Zmutt'' ridges.
Felice Giordano hired Carrel as a guide.
After hearing Sunday mass at the chapel of Breuil, the party started.
The '''Matterhorn''' (, ; , ; , ), is a mountain of the Alps, straddling the main watershed and border between Switzerland and Italy.
Very soon afterwards Carrel and Bich were finally on the top.
On August 21, 2013, the Spanish mountain runner Kilian Jornet broke Brunod's record as it took him 1 hour, 56 min to the top, and 2 hours, 52 minutes from Breuil-Cervinia to the top and back.
The pass was used as a crossover and trade route for the Romans and the Romanised Celts between 100 BC and 400 AD.
The ''Lion'' ridge (''Cresta del Leone''), lying between the south and west faces and aligned towards the Dent d'Hérens is the Italian normal route and goes across Pic Tyndall; Collomb comments, "A superb rock ridge, the shortest on the mountain, now draped with many fixed ropes, but a far superior climb compared with the Hörnli."
Sometimes referred to as the ''Mountain of Mountains'' (), the Matterhorn has become an iconic emblem of the Swiss Alps and of the Alps in general.
In 1868 the Italian engineer Felice Giordano measured a height of  by means of a mercury barometer, which he had taken to the summit.
The Zmutt ridge was first climbed by Albert F. Mummery, Alexander Burgener, J. Petrus and A. Gentinetta on September 3, 1879.
To its west lies the Zmutt ridge (''Zmuttgrat''), between the north and west faces and aligned towards the Wandfluehorn; this is, according to Collomb, "the classic route up the mountain, its longest ridge, also the most disjointed."
Tourists began to visit Switzerland in the summer to see the Alps and often hired locals as guides.
This section of the Pennine Alps, including the Matterhorn, the Zinalrothorn, the Dent Blanche, the Dent d'Hérens, the Breithorn, the Strahlhorn, the Rimpfischhorn and the Alphubel, concentrates most of western Europe's highest mountains and forms a crown of peaks around Zermatt.
Because they had kept their plans secret, their ascent was a complete surprise.
(It should be remembered that in this part of the Alps, meadows can hardly be found below the tree line, so the village serves as a gateway towards these meadows slightly higher up, hence the name "towards the meadows".)
In Sebastian Münster's ''Cosmography'', published in 1543, the name of ''Matter'' is given to the Theodul Pass, and this seems to be the origin of the present German name of the mountain.
The Matterhorn has a pyramidal shape with four faces nearly facing the four compass points.
Both resorts of Zermatt and Cervinia function as ski resort all year round and are connected by skilifts over the Theodul Pass.
In July John Tyndall with Johann Joseph Bennen and another guide overcame most of the difficulties of the ridge that seemed so formidable from below and successfully reached the main shoulder; but at a point not very far below the summit they were stopped by a deep cleft that defied their utmost efforts.
He gave, however, expression to his enthusiasm on the summit.
The mountain overlooks the Swiss town of Zermatt in the canton of Valais to the north-east and the Italian town of Breuil-Cervinia in the Aosta Valley to the south.
Meanwhile Gottlieb Samuel Studer, the geographer, together with Melchior Ulrich, was describing and mapping the topographical features of the Zermatt peaks.
On August 20, 1992 Italian alpinist Hans Kammerlander and Swiss alpine guide Diego Wellig climbed the Matterhorn four times in just 23 hours and 26 minutes.
With the beginning of alpine skiing in the early 20th century, tourists began traveling to Switzerland in winter also.
During the following weeks, Whymper spent his time climbing other mountains in the area with his guides, before going back to Breuil on July 7.
Croz descended first, then Hadow, Hudson and Douglas, the elder Taugwalder, Whymper, with the younger Taugwalder coming last.
His mind intuitively grasped the causes which gave the peak its present precipitous form: the Matterhorn was not like a perfected crystal; the centuries had laboured to destroy a great part of an ancient and much larger mountain.
This combination of mountain climbing, skiing and tourism, was used in the western United States, creating Sun Valley, Vail, Jackson Hole, and mountain towns around world.
Forbes ascended the Theodul Pass in 1842, climbed the Breithorn, and came down to Breuil; as he descended from the savage scenery of the Matterhorn, the Italian landscapes of the Valtournanche seemed to him like paradise.
The first ascent of the Matterhorn was finally made in 1865 from Zermatt by a party led by Edward Whymper but ended disastrously when four of its members fell to their deaths on the descent.
In 1999 the summit height was precisely determined to be at  above sea level.
The north face is amongst the six most difficult faces of the Alps, as well as ‘The Trilogy’, the three hardest of the six, along with the north faces of the Eiger and the Grandes Jorasses (TD+ Difficulty rating).
The bodies of Croz, Hadow and Hudson were found on the Matterhorn Glacier, but the body of Douglas was never found.
When it freezes again, it fractures pieces of rock because of its dilatation (freeze-thaw), forming a cirque.
The Matterhorn is part of the Swiss Federal Inventory of Natural Monuments since 1983.
The mountain on its lofty pedestal in the very heart of the Alps was, perhaps, too far removed from the ideal he had formed of the mountains; but he returned, studied and dreamt for long at its feet, and at length he pronounced it "the most noble cliff in Europe."
The Austroalpine nappes are part of the Apulian plate, a small continent which broke up from Africa before the Alpine orogeny.
They remained there for 26 hours in their tent before giving up.
In July 1862, Jean-Antoine, together with César Carrel, accompanied as porters (sic) John Tyndall, Anton Walters and J.J. Bennen to Matterhorn's ''Shoulder'' at , which was subsequently named Pic Tyndall in honor of the client.
After reaching Zinal from Zermatt by the Augstbord and Meiden passes, the trekker crosses the Col de Sorebois and the Col de Torrent before arriving at Arolla.
In July 1860, three brothers from Liverpool attempted the mountain, Alfred, Charles and Sandbach Parker, but they turned back at about .
They frequently looked, but in vain, for traces of their fallen companions.
While the Matterhorn is the culminating point of the Valtournenche on the south, it is only one of the many 4000 metres summits of the Mattertal valley on the north.
Bonatti's direct route was not repeated solo until 29 years later, in winter 1994 by Catherine Destivelle.
On his first journey de Saussure had come from Ayas to the Col des Cimes Blanches, from where the Matterhorn first comes into view; descending to Breuil, he ascended to the Theodul Pass.
Naturally the wish of Carrel prevailed, for he was the leader and had not lost the habit of command, notwithstanding his recent defeat.
Christian Moritz Engelhardt, who was so filled with admiration for Zermatt and its neighbourhood that he returned there at least ten times (from 1835 to 1855), described these places in two valuable volumes, drew panoramas and maps, and collected the most minute notes on the mineralogy and botany of the region.
Each year a large number of mountaineers try to climb the Matterhorn from the Hörnli Hut via the northeast Hörnli ridge, the most popular route to the summit.
Giordano would have joined them, but Carrel refused absolutely to take him with them; he said he would not have the strength to guide a traveller, and could neither answer for the result nor for any one's life.
Whymper's first attempt was in August 1861, from the village of Breuil on the south side.
(Apart from the local police service which uses a Volkswagen car, only electric vehicles are used locally).
Most of the base of the mountain lies in the Tsaté nappe, a remnant of the Piedmont-Liguria oceanic crust (ophiolites) and its sedimentary rocks.
The topographic prominence of the Matterhorn is  as the ridge connecting it with a higher summit (in this case the Weisshorn, which is the culminating point of the range west of the Mattertal valley) sinks to a height of  at the Col Durand, a saddle between the Pointe de Zinal and the Mont Durand.
However there is no connection with the village of Breuil-Cervinia on the Italian side.
Its height is exceeded by four major summits: the Weisshorn (4,505 m), the Dom (4,545 m), the Lyskamm (4,527 m) and the second highest in the Alps, Monte Rosa (4,634 m).
The Matterhorn was studied by Horace-Bénédict de Saussure in the late eighteenth century, who was followed by other renowned naturalists and artists such as John Ruskin in the nineteenth century.
When he arrived exhausted on the top of the pass, he gazed "on the beautiful pyramid of the Cervin, more wonderful than aught else in sight, rising from its bed of ice to a height of 5,000 feet, a spectacle of indescribable grandeur."
1880 (Siegfried Map)
The current shape of the mountain is the result of cirque erosion due to multiple glaciers diverging from the peak, such as the Matterhorn Glacier at the base of the north face, forming a ''horn''.
Since then, the Matterhorn has become a reference that still inspires graphic artists today and has been used extensively for all sort of publicity and advertising.
On July 16, two days after the first ascent and the catastrophe, Jean-Antoine Carrel set out to crown Whymper's victory by proving that the Italian side was not unconquerable.
Hörnli Hut (or Schönbiel Hut)
Julius Elliott made the second ascent via the Hörnli ridge in 1868, and later that year the party of John Tyndall, J. J. and J. P. Maquignaz was the first to traverse the summit by way of the Hörnli and Italian ridges.
In his work on Modern Painters he makes continual use of the mountains as an example of beauty and an incentive to morality.
In the decisive year 1865, Whymper returned with new plans, deciding to attack the Matterhorn via its south face instead of the Italian ridge.
Just as he did two years before, Whymper asked Carrel to be his guide, but Carrel declined; Whymper was also unsuccessful in hiring other local guides from Breuil.
M. Piacenza with guides J. J. Carrel and J. Gaspard on September 9, 1911, climbed most of the ridge but bypassed the overhangs near the top to the south.
Areas served by cable car are the Unterrothorn and the Klein Matterhorn (''Little Matterhorn'') (3,883 m, highest transportation system in Europe).
The Gornergrat railway was constructed, and has been working since 1899, but there has been no more talk of the other.
The Matterhorn Museum (Zermatt) relates the general history of the region from alpinism to tourism.
Walter Bonatti climbed the "North Face Direct" solo on February 18–22, 1965.
Precisely at this moment, Carrel and party were approximatively 400 metres below, still dealing with the most difficult parts of the Italian ridge.
The first ascent of the Matterhorn changed mountain culture.
Edward Whymper joined the efforts in August 1861, but in his first 7 attempts with a variety of companions could only reach a maximum height of .
Its first solo ascent was made in five hours by Dieter Marchart on July 22, 1959.
In 1862 Whymper made further attempts, still from the south side, on the Lion ridge (or Italian ridge), where the route seemed easier than the Hörnli ridge (the normal route today).
It is an artificial mountain, a picture corresponding rather with the exaggerated effect it produces on the astonished mind of the artist, than with the real form of the mountain.
Because of its recognizable shape, many other similar mountains around the world were named or nicknamed the 'Matterhorn' of their respective countries or mountain ranges.
Whymper returned to Breuil in 1863, persuading Carrel to join forces with him and try the mountain once more via the Italian ridge.
They hired another two local guides, a father and son, both named Peter Taugwalder.
Because its height is above the snowline, its flanks are covered by ice, resulting from the accumulation and compaction of snow.
The latter declared the Matterhorn a natural wonder worthy of protection and refused the concession to the engineer.
There is a record of a party of Englishmen who in the summer of 1800 crossed the Great St. Bernard Pass, a few months after the passage of Bonaparte; they came to Aosta and thence to Valtournanche, slept at the chalets of Breuil, and traversed the Theodul Pass, which they called ''Monte Rosa''.
Here opinions were divided; Gorret suggested ascending by the ridge and scaling the last tower straight up.
On August 22, 1871, while wearing a white print dress, Lucy Walker became the first woman to reach the summit of the Matterhorn, followed a few weeks later by her rival Meta Brevoort.
Whymper and his guide camped one more night on the ''Col du Lion'' (=Col Tournanche)  and were forced to turn around only an hour above this pass the day after.
Up to 3,400 metres the mountain is composed of successive layers of ophiolites and sedimentary rocks.
The first ascent of the south face was made by Enzo Benedetti with guides Louis Carrel and Maurice Bich on October 15, 1931, and the first complete ascent of the east face was made by Enzo Benedetti and G. Mazzotti with guides Louis and Lucien Carrel, Maurice Bich and Antoine Gaspard on September 18–19, 1932.
It has been described as a striking example of marriage of tourism, patriotism and popular art.
Smaller glaciers lie at the base of the south face (the Ghiacciaio Inferiore del Cervino) and the east face (unnamed).
The last of the Matterhorn's four ridges to be ascended was the Furggen ridge.
The north face, before it was climbed in 1931, was one of the last great big wall problems in the Alps.
They arrived later in Zermatt in the Monte Rosa Hotel, where they met two other British climbers — the Reverend Charles Hudson and his young and inexperienced companion, Douglas Robert Hadow — who had hired the French guide Michel Croz to try to make the first ascent.
This was Whymper's seventh attempt.
Considered by some as one of the most beautiful treks in the Alps, it follows many ancient trails that have linked the Swiss and Italian valleys for centuries.
This was done using Global Positioning System technology as part of the TOWER Project (Top of the World Elevations Remeasurement) and to an accuracy of less than one centimetre, which also allows future changes to be tracked.
It will finally provide a link between the Swiss and Italian side of the Matterhorn.
100 million years ago the extension of the Tethys Ocean stopped and the Apulian plate broke from Gondwana and moved toward the European continent.
The Matterhorn has two distinct summits, situated at either end of a  exposed rocky crest which forms the Swiss/Italian border.
The Matterhorn was one of the last of the main Alpine mountains to be ascended, not because of its technical difficulty, but because of the fear it inspired in early mountaineers.
A completely renewed Hörnli Hut will open the same year in the beginning of July.
Another affiche depicting the Matterhorn was created by Cardinaux for the chocolate brand Toblerone in the 1920s.
When seeing his rival on the summit, Carrel and party gave up on their attempt and went back to Breuil.
However, de Saussure was not moved to climb the mountain, and had no hope of measuring its altitude by taking a barometer to its summit.
The Swiss explorer and geologist Horace-Bénédict de Saussure, inspired by the view of the Matterhorn, anticipated the modern theories of geology:
Among the poets of the Matterhorn during these years (1834 to 1840) were Elie de Beaumont, a famous French geologist; Pierre Jean Édouard Desor, a naturalist of Neuchâtel, who went up there with a party of friends, two of whom were Louis Agassiz and Bernhard Studer.
He encountered Lord Francis Douglas, a Scottish mountaineer, who also wanted to climb the Matterhorn.
The Matterhorn does not form a perfect square pyramid, as the north and south faces are wider than the west and east faces.
They made the passage of the ''enjambée'', and traversed the west face to reach the Zmutt ridge.
Other men of high attainments followed, but in the years 1850 scientists and artists were about to be succeeded by real climbers and the passes and peaks around Zermatt were explored little by little.
A cable car running from Testa Grigia to Klein Matterhorn is currently planned for 2014.
At last they reached the base of the final tower.
The Taugwalders and Whymper were left alive when the rope linking Douglas to the elder Taugwalder broke.
Good conditions are necessary to circumnavigate the peak.
, a large stone building at the base of the main ridge, and spend the night.
The west face, which is the highest of the four, was completely climbed only in 1962.
The Gornergrat railway, reaching a record altitude of 3,100 metres, was inaugurated in 1898.
"Stronger minds," remarked Edward Whymper, "felt the influence of the wonderful form, and men who ordinarily spoke or wrote like rational beings, when they came under its power seemed to quit their senses, and ranted and rhapsodised, losing for a time all common forms of speech."
But the Alpine Museum of Zermatt sent a protest letter with 90,000 signatures to the Italian government.
There is a record of climbing Matterhorn from the village Breuil-Cervinia, of 2 h 10 min by  in 1995., and from Breuil-Cervinia to Matterhorn and back, of 3:14:44 by Bruno Brunod in 1995.
The greater number came from the Valais up the Visp valley to Zermatt.
After Bonatti's climb, the best alpinists were still preoccupied with one last great problem: the "Zmutt Nose", an overhang lying on the right-hand side of the north face.
That climb and disaster, later portrayed in several films, marked the end of the golden age of alpinism.
"We were about to enter unknown country," wrote Gorret, "for no man had gone beyond this point."
The route they followed was: Zmutt ridge–summit–Hörnli ridge (descent)–Furggen ridge–summit–Lion ridge (descent)–Lion ridge–summit–Hörnli ridge (descent)–Hörnli ridge–summit–Hörnli Hut (descent).
On Münster's topographical chart this group is marked under the names of ''Augstalberg'' ("Aosta mountain") and ''Mons Silvius''.
During these days he climbed the Klein Matterhorn (3,883 metres), which he named the ''Cime Brune du Breithorn''.
The first winter ascent of the north face was made by Hilti von Allmen and Paul Etter on February 3–4, 1962.
Then much mist about the summit.
Ruskin was the Matterhorn's poet par excellence.
When Whymper discovered Giordano and Carrel's plan, he left Breuil and crossed the Theodul Pass to Zermatt to hire local guides.
It is not exactly known at what period the new name of Servin, or Cervin, replaced the old, from which it seems to be derived.
To succeed on the north face, good climbing and ice-climbing technique and route-finding ability were required.
The usual pattern of ascent is to take the Schwarzsee cable car up from Zermatt, hike up to the Hörnli Hut elev.
Rodolphe Töpffer, who first accompanied and guided youth to the Alps for purposes of education and amusement, began his journeys in 1832, but it is only in 1840 that he mentions the Matterhorn.
Jean-Baptiste Bich and Jean-Augustin Meynet completed the party.
These words, pronounced by a man noted among all his contemporaries for his thorough knowledge of mountains, show what men's feelings then were towards the Matterhorn, and how at a time when the idea of Alpine exploration was gaining ground in their minds, the Matterhorn stood by itself as a mountain apart, of whose conquest it was vain even to dream.
He started from Bivacco Bossi and climbed the Furggen ridge up the Furggen overhangs.
On Zermatt there was a note: "A place which may, perhaps, interest the tourist is the valley of Praborgne (Zermatt); it is bounded by huge glaciers which come right down into the valley; the village of Praborgne is fairly high, and stands at a great height above the glaciers; its climate is almost as warm as that of Italy, and plants belonging to hot countries are to be found there at considerable altitudes, above the ice."
In 1890 the Federal Government was asked simultaneously by the same contractor for a concession for the Zermatt-Gornergrat railway, and for a Zermatt-Matterhorn one.
He was accompanied by Amé Gorret, a priest who had shared with him the first attempt on the mountain back in 1857.
The mountain appeared in it under the three names of ''Silvius'', ''Matterhorn'', and ''Mont Cervin'', and was briefly described as one of the most splendid and wonderful obelisks in the Alps.
An hypothesis of Josias Simler (''De Alpibus Commentarius'', 1574) on the etymology of the name of Mons Silvius was readopted by T. G. Farinetti: "Silvius was probably a Roman leader who sojourned with his legions in the land of the Salassi and the Seduni, and perhaps crossed the Theodul Pass between these two places.
Rail and cable-car facilities have been built to make some of the summits in the area more accessible.
He feared the arrival of Whymper, now a rival, and wrote to Quintino Sella:
In July 1981 the Swiss Michel Piola and Pierre-Alain Steiner surmounted the Zmutt Nose by following a direct route, the Piola-Steiner.
By modern standards, the climb is fairly difficult (AD Difficulty rating), but not hard for skilled mountaineers according to French climbing grades.
Finally the south side is separated from the east side by the Furggen ridge (''Furggengrat''), which is aligned towards the Klein Matterhorn.
He descended along the Hornli ridge, crossed at the bottom of the North face, climbed up the Zmutt ridge and down the Italian route to Duca degli Abruzzi Oriondé Refuge, at 2802 m.
Yet his scientific interest was kindled by "the proud peak which rises to so vast an altitude, like a triangular obelisk, that seems to be carved by a chisel."
Those who made their way up through the Valtournanche to the foot of the mountain were few in number.
After building a cairn, Whymper and party stayed an hour on the summit.
Lifted a bit about 3.30, and we saw our flag on the western summit of the Matterhorn."
The construction of the railway linking the village of Zermatt from the town of Visp started in 1888.
Although it was not more than two yards wide, and the slope was one of 75 percent, we gave it all kinds of pleasant names : the corridor, the gallery, the railroad, &c., &c." They imagined all difficulties were at an end; but a rock couloir, which they had hitherto not observed, lay between them and the final bit of ridge, where progress would be perfectly easy.
Although the elder Taugwalder was accused of cutting the rope to save himself and his son, the official inquest found no proof of this.
Still, several climbers die each year due to a number of factors including the scale of the climb and its inherent dangers, inexperience, falling rocks, and overcrowded routes.
In 1841 James David Forbes, professor of natural philosophy at the University of Edinburgh, came to see the Matterhorn.
The Matterhorn is mentioned in a guide-book to Switzerland by Johann Gottfried Ebel, which was published in Zürich towards the end of the eighteenth century, and translated in English in 1818.
On his second journey, in 1792, he came to the Valtournanche, studying and describing it; he ascended to the Theodul Pass, where he spent three days, analysing the structure of the Matterhorn, whose height he was the first to measure, and collecting stones, plants and insects.
The project essentially consisted of a line which went up to the Hörnli, and continued thence in a rectilinear tunnel about two kilometres long, built under the ridge, and issuing near the summit on the Zmutt side.
They continued their descent, including an hour in the dark, until 9.30 p.m. when a resting place was found.
The next day, climbers rise at 3:30 am so as to reach the summit and descend before the regular afternoon clouds and storms come in.
The deeply glaciated region between the Matterhorn and Monte Rosa (named ''Dent Blanche-Matterhorn-Monte Rosa'') is listed in the Federal Inventory of Landscapes and Natural Monuments since 1983.
In the preface to the first volume of the ''Alpine Journal'', which appeared in 1863, the editor Hereford Brooke George wrote that: "While even if all other objects of interest in Switzerland should be exhausted, the Matterhorn remains (who shall say for how long?)
There are fixed ropes on parts of the route to help.
On this attempt, however, a storm soon developed and they were stuck halfway to the summit.
Unexpectedly it was first climbed by the brothers Franz and Toni Schmid on July 31–August 1, 1931.
Time pressed: it was necessary to reduce the numbers of the party; Gorret sacrificed himself, and Meynet stopped with him.
About this time there came a man who studied the Matterhorn in its structure and form, and who sketched it and described it in all its parts with the curiosity of the artist and the insight of the scientist.
He calculated its height as .
The north face overlooks the Ober Gabelhorn (7&nbsp;km away) across the Zmutt Glacier and valley (above Zermatt), the east face overlooks the Gorner Glacier system between the Gornergrat and Monte Rosa (respectively 10 and 17&nbsp;km away) across the Theodul Pass, the west face overlooks the upper basin of the Zmutt Glacier between the Dent Blanche and the Dent d'Hérens (respectively 7 and 4&nbsp;km away) and the south face fronts the resort town of Breuil-Cervinia and overlooks a good portion of the Valtournenche.
When they were together Whymper asked to see the broken rope and saw that it had been employed by mistake as it was the weakest and oldest of the three ropes they had brought.
The town of Zermatt remains almost completely free of internal combustion vehicles and can be reached by train only.
The Dufour map, which was afterwards followed by the Italian surveyors, gave  as the height of the Swiss summit.
During the warmer period of summer, part of the ice melts and seeps into the bedrock.
Just three days later, on July 17, 1865, Jean-Antoine Carrel and Jean-Baptiste Bich reached the summit from the Italian side.
The orogeny itself began after the end of the oceanic subduction when the European continental crust collided with the Apulian continent, resulting in the formation of nappes.
The least difficult technical climb and the usual climbing route, the Hörnli ridge (''Hörnligrat''), lies between the east and north faces and is aligned towards the Oberrothorn above Zermatt.
On June 21, Whymper began his ascent with Swiss guides, but halfway up they experienced severe rockfall; although nobody was injured, they decided to give up the ascent.
Meanwhile Giordano at Breuil was writing in his diary as follows: "Splendid weather; at 9.30 saw Carrel and his men on the Shoulder, after that saw nothing more of them.
Then they began their descent of the Hörnli ridge.
+ Height measurements by year
The west face, the highest at 1,400 metres, has the fewest ascent routes and lies in a more remote area than the other faces.
