Hawaiians associated elements of their natural environment with particular deities.
In Hawaiian, ''Mauna Kea'' means "white mountain", a reference to its summit, which can be frequently covered in snow.
There are many other species and ecosystems on the island, and on Mauna Kea, that remain threatened by human development and invasive species.
Donald Thomas, director of the University of Hawaii's Center for the Study of Active Volcanoes believes one reason to continue study of the aquifers is due to use and ‘occupancy’ of the higher elevation areas, stating: ''"Nearly all of these activities depend on the availability of potable water that, in most cases, must be trucked to the Saddle from Waimea or Hilo — an inefficient and expensive process that consumes a substantial quantity of our scarce liquid fuels.”''
The reserve is a region of sparsely vegetated cinder deposits and lava rock, including areas of aeolian desert and Lake Waiau.
The Mauna Kea Ice Age Reserve on the southern summit flank of Mauna Kea was established in 1981.
Mauna Kea can be ecologically divided into three sections: an alpine climate at its summit, a ''Sophora chrysophylla''–''Myoporum sandwicense'' (or māmane–naio) forest on its flanks, and an ''Acacia koa''–''Metrosideros polymorpha'' (or koa–ōhia) forest, now mostly cleared by the former sugar industry, at its base.
In 1998,  were transferred from the observatory lease to supplement the Mauna Kea Ice Age Reserve.
Settlers to the island burned and cut down much of the native forest for the construction of sugarcane plantations and houses.
This is a highly unusual food source for a species in the genus ''Nysius'', which consists of predominantly seed-eating insects.
These ''ahupuaa'' generally took the form of long strips of land oriented from the mountain summits to the coast.
In Hawaiian mythology, the summit of Mauna Kea was seen as the "region of the gods", a place where benevolent spirits reside.
There are three episodes of glaciation that have been recorded from the last 180,000 years: the ''Pōhakuloa'' (180–130&nbsp;ka), ''Wāihu'' (80–60&nbsp;ka) and ''Mākanaka'' (40–13&nbsp;ka) series.
Mauna Kea's great elevation and the steepness of its flanks provide a better view and a shorter hike than the adjacent Mauna Loa.
Contact with Europe and America had major consequences for island residents.
An active control program is in place, though it is not conducted with sufficient rigor to allow significant recovery of the māmane-naio ecosystem.
At one stage reduced to a population of just 50 plants, Mauna Kea silversword was thought to be restricted to the alpine zone, but in fact has been driven there by pressure from livestock, and can grow at lower elevations as well.
'''Mauna Kea''' ( or , ), is a dormant volcano on the island of Hawaii.
An intense three-way competition for NASA funds to construct a large telescope began between Kuiper, Harvard University, and the University of Hawaii (UH), which only had experience in solar astronomy.
Plant species found at this elevation include ''Styphelia tameiameiae'', ''Taraxacum officinale'', ''Tetramolopium humile'', ''Agrostis sandwicensis'', ''Anthoxanthum odoratum'', ''Trisetum glomeratum'', ''Poa annua'', ''Sonchus oleraceus'', and ''Coprosma ernodiodes''.
A small body of permafrost, less than  across, was found at the summit of Mauna Kea prior to 1974, and may still be present.
These ecosystems can be roughly divided into three sections by elevation: alpine–subalpine, montane, and basal forest.
For this reason, a ''kapu'' (ancient Hawaiian law) restricted visitor rights to high-ranking aliʻi.
Mauna Kea entered its quieter post-shield stage 250,000 to 200,000&nbsp;years ago, and is currently dormant.
A lack of soil also retards root growth, makes it difficult to absorb nutrients from the ground, and gives the area a very low water retention capacity.
Individuals likely took trips up Mauna Kea's slopes to visit family-maintained shrines near its summit, and traditions related to ascending the mountain exist to this day.
Brakes often overheat on the way down and there is no fuel available on Mauna Kea.
The prevailing, though not completely settled, view is that the hotspot has been largely stationary within the planet's mantle for much, if not all of the Cenozoic Era.
The Pohakuloa Training Area on the plateau is the largest military training ground in Hawaii.
Their construction on a "sacred landscape" continues to be a topic of debate.
On lower slopes, vast tracts of koa–ōhia forest were converted to farmland.
Higher up, feral animals that escaped from ranches found refuge in, and damaged extensively, Mauna Kea's native māmane–naio forest.
There are three accounts of foreigners visiting Hawaii before the arrival of James Cook, in 1778.
With the collapse of the sugar industry in the 1990s, much of this land lies fallow but portions are used for cattle grazing, small-scale farming and the cultivation of eucalyptus for wood pulp.
However, the earliest Western depictions of the isle, including Mauna Kea, were created by explorers in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
The Mauna Kea Observatories are used for scientific research across the electromagnetic spectrum from visible light to radio, and comprise the largest such facility in the world.
While the land was partitioned no money was allocated for the building of the fence.
* On August 26, 1823, Joseph F. Goodrich, an American missionary, made the first recorded ascent in a single day; however, a small arrangement of stones he observed suggested he was not the first human on the summit.
However, while Hawaiian volcanism is well-understood and extensively studied, there remains no definite explanation of the mechanism that causes the hotspot effect.
In addition, explosive eruptions have built cinder cones near the summit.
Its presence is attributed to a freshwater head within Mauna Kea's basal lens.
Bird species native to the acacia koa–ōhia forest include the Hawaiian crow (''Corvus hawaiiensis''), the akepa (''Loxops coccineus''), Hawaii creeper (''Oreomystis mana''), ʻakiapōlāʻau (''Hemignathus munroi''), and Hawaiian hawk (''Buteo solitarius''), all of which are endangered, threatened, or near threatened; the Hawaiian crow in particular is extinct in the wild, but there are plans to reintroduce the species into the Hakalau reserve.
The volcano continues to slip and flatten under its own weight at a rate of less than  per year.
The Saddle Road, named for its crossing of the saddle-shaped plateau between Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa, was completed in 1943, and eased travel to Mauna Kea considerably.
Mauna Kea is over  in volume, so massive that it and its neighbor, Mauna Loa, depress the ocean crust beneath it by .
Lake Waiau provided drinking water for the workers.
Vast swathes of the forest were burned and cleared for sugarcane plantations.
The summit of Mauna Kea has an alpine climate
Volcanic glass and gabbro were collected for blades and fishing gear, and māmane wood was preferred for the handles.
The remoteness resulted in evolutionary lines distinct from those elsewhere and isolated these endemic species from external biotic influence, and also makes them especially vulnerable to extinction and the effects of invasive species.
One notable species is Mauna Kea silversword (''Argyroxiphium sandwicense'' var.
At peak quarry activity after AD&nbsp;1400, there were separate facilities for rough and fine cutting; shelters with food, water, and wood to sustain the workers; and workshops creating the finished product.
The hunting industry fought back, and the back-and-forth between the ranchers and hunters eventually gave way to a rise in public environmental concern.
When Europeans arrived in the late 18th century, settlers introduced cattle, sheep and game animals, many of which became feral and began to damage the mountain's ecology.
With its high altitude, dry environment, and stable airflow, Mauna Kea's summit is one of the best sites in the world for astronomical observation.
The very dark skies resulting from Mauna Kea's distance from city lights are preserved by legislation that minimizes light pollution from the surrounding area; the darkness level allows the observation of faint astronomical objects.
Today, multiple hiking trails exist, including the Mauna Kea Trail, and by 2007 over 100,000 tourists and 32,000 vehicles were going each year to the Visitor Information Station (VIS) adjacent to the Onizuka Center for International Astronomy.
These factors historically made Mauna Kea an excellent spot for stargazing.
The lake is very small and shallow, with a surface area of  and a depth of .
Mauna Kea is about a million years old, and has thus passed the most active shield stage of life hundreds of thousands of years ago.
Flightless birds that had previously known no predators became a staple food source.
A former summit caldera may have been filled and buried by later summit eruption deposits.
Native Hawaiians were devastated by introduced diseases; port cities including Hilo, Kealakekua, and Kailua grew with the establishment of trade; and the adze quarries on Mauna Kea were abandoned after the introduction of metal tools.
The lower koa–ōhia forest gave the natives wood for canoes and ornate bird feathers for decoration.
UH rebuilt its small astronomy department into a new Institute for Astronomy, and in 1968 the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources gave it a 65-year lease for all land within a  radius of its telescope, essentially that above .
Most prominently, Mauna Kea is built upon older flows from Kohala to the northwest, and intersects the base of Mauna Loa to the south.
At an altitude of , it lies within the Puu Waiau cinder cone and is the only alpine lake in Hawaii.
Macrae was the first person to record the Mauna Kea silversword (''Argyroxiphium sandwicense''), saying: "The last mile was destitute of vegetation except one plant of the Sygenisia tribe, in growth much like a Yucca, with sharp pointed silver coloured leaves and green upright spike of three or four feet producing pendulous branches with brown flowers, truly superb, and almost worth the journey of coming here to see it on purpose."
A plan was proposed to fence 25% of the forests for protection, and manage the remaining 75% for game hunting.
By 2009, the total number of identified sites had risen to 223, and archaeological research on the volcano's upper flanks is ongoing.
Of these five volcanoes, Mauna Kea is the fourth oldest and fourth most active.
These cones are the most recent eruptive centers of Mauna Kea.
This plan was further revised to address concern expressed in the Hawaiian community that a lack of respect was being shown toward the cultural values of the mountain.
Hilo Ridge, a prominent underwater rift zone structure east of Mauna Kea, was once believed to be a part of the volcano; however, it is now understood to be a rift zone of Kohala that has been affected by younger Mauna Kea flows.
Non-native plants are the other serious threat; there are over 4,600 introduced species on the island, whereas the number of native species is estimated at just 1,000.
The summits of the five volcanoes of Hawaii are revered as sacred mountains; and Mauna Kea's summit, the highest, is the most sacred.
The prevailing lowland forest ecosystem was transformed from forest to grassland; some of this change was caused by the use of fire, but the prevailing cause of forest ecosystem collapse and avian extinction on Hawaii appears to have been the introduction of the Polynesian (or Pacific) rat.
Lava flows from Mauna Kea overlapped in complex layers with those of its neighbors during its growth.
Since the creation of an access road in 1964, thirteen telescopes funded by eleven countries have been constructed at the summit.
Ancient Hawaiians living on the slopes of Mauna Kea relied on its extensive forests for food, and quarried the dense volcano-glacial basalts on its flanks for tool production.
The telescopes on Mauna Kea's summit would be the first to detect the minute amounts of deformation resulting from the volcano's swelling, acting like expensive tiltmeters.
Mauna Kea last erupted 6,000 to 4,000 years ago and is now considered dormant.
They are covered by the oldest exposed rock strata on Mauna Kea, the post-shield alkali basalts of the ''Hāmākua Volcanics'', which erupted between 250,000 and 70–65,000 years ago.
An area of heavy snowfall, it is inhospitable to vegetation, and is known as the Hawaiian tropical high shrublands.
However, very few natives actually reached the summit, because of the strict ''kapu'' placed on it.
Ecosystems on the mountain form concentric rings along its slopes due to changes in temperature and precipitation with elevation.
Bird species hunted included the uau (''Pterodroma sandwichensis''), nēnē (''Branta sandvicensis''), and palila (''Loxioides bailleui'').
One of the results of this grazing was the increased prevalence of herbaceous and woody plants, both endemic and introduced, that were resistant to browsing.
The once vast forest had almost disappeared by 1880, and by 1900 logging interests had shifted to Kona and the island of Maui.
Mauna Kea stands  above sea level, just  higher than its neighbor Mauna Loa, and is the highest point in the state of Hawaii.
Similar deposits probably existed on Mauna Loa, but have been covered by later lava flows.
The feral animals were almost eradicated, and numbered a few hundred in the 1950s.
They also stay under heated surfaces most of the time.
Construction was halted on April 7, 2015 after protests expanded over the state.
The court ruled in favor of conservationists and upheld the precedence of federal laws before state control of wildlife.
Drilling by the University of Hawaii at that time encountered an artesian groundwater aquifer at 300 meters below sea level and 100 meters of hole depth within a compacted layer of soil and lava where the flows of both Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea meet (Humuula saddle region).
Land was divided into regions designed for both the immediate needs of the populace and the long-term welfare of the environment.
* On August 6, 1889, E.D.
The summit atmosphere is exceptionally stable, lacking turbulence for some of the world's best astronomical seeing.
The original eruptive fissures (rift zones) in the flanks of Mauna Kea were buried by its post-shield volcanism.
This decision was followed by a second court order in 1981.
These changes in lava composition accompanied the slow reduction of the supply of magma to the summit, which led to weaker eruptions that then gave way to isolated episodes associated with volcanic dormancy.
Today the Mauna Kea Science Reserve has 13 observation facilities, each funded by as many as 11 countries.
Ungulate hunting is allowed year-round.
Mauna Kea is the only Hawaiian volcano with distinct evidence of glaciation.
Measured from its base on the ocean floor, it rises over , significantly greater than the elevation of Mount Everest above sea level.
This led the Department of Land and Natural Resources to prepare an initial management plan, drafted in 1977 and supplemented in 1980.
Governor Ige announced substantial changes to the management of Mauna Kea in the future but stated the project can move forward.
On a second climb in July, he was found dead in a pit intended to catch wild cattle.
There are nine telescopes working in the visible and infrared spectrum, three in the submillimeter spectrum, and one in the radio spectrum, with mirrors or dishes ranging from .
The palila was formerly found on the slopes of Mauna Kea, Mauna Loa, and Hualālai, but is now confined to the slopes of Mauna Kea—only 10% of its former range—and has been declared critically endangered.
Principal sources of nutrition for Hawaiians living on the slopes of the volcano came from the māmane–naio forest of its upper slopes, which provided them with vegetation and bird life.
The reserve has been the site of an extensive replanting campaign since 1989.
The first Ancient Hawaiians to arrive on Hawaii island lived along the shores, where food and water were plentiful.
By 1970, two  telescopes had been constructed by the US Air Force and Lowell Observatory.
A public hunting program is used to control the numbers of introduced animals including pigs, sheep, goats, turkey, pheasants, and quail.
The most recent volcanic flows are hawaiites and mugearites: they are the post-shield ''Laupāhoehoe Volcanics'', erupted between 65,000 and 4,000 years ago.
Native Hawaiian non-profit groups such as Kahea, concerned with cultural heritage and the environment also oppose development for cultural and religious reasons.
On its completion in 1970, the UH  was the seventh largest optical/infrared telescope in the world.
Approximately 27&nbsp;percent of the Science Reserve had been surveyed by 2000, identifying 76&nbsp;shrines, 4&nbsp;adze manufacturing workshops, 3&nbsp;other markers, 1&nbsp;positively identified burial site, and 4&nbsp;possible burial sites.
At their maximum extent, the glaciers extended from the summit down to between  of elevation.
The Mauna Kea Access Road is paved up to the Center at .
The Hakalau Forest National Wildlife Refuge is a major koa forest reserve on Mauna Kea's windward slope.
In 1809 John Palmer Parker arrived and befriended Kamehameha&nbsp;I, who put him in charge of cattle management on the island.
Mauna Kea's summit was encompassed in the ahupuaa of Kaohe, with part of its eastern slope reaching into the nearby Humuula.
In October 2014, the groundbreaking ceremony for the telescope was interrupted by protesters causing the project to temporarily halt.
It was established in 1985, covering  of ecosystem remnant.
The lack of shrines or other artifacts on the many cinder cones dotting the volcano may be because they were reserved for burial.
Poliahu, deity of snow, also resides there.
Parts of the reserve show the effect of agriculture on the native ecosystem, as much of the land in the upper part of the reserve is abandoned farmland.
The summit of Mauna Kea lies above the tree line, and consists of mostly lava rock and alpine tundra.
However, an influx of local hunters led to the feral species being valued as game animals, and in 1959 the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources, the governing body in charge of conservation and land use management, changed its policy to a sustained-control program designed to facilitate the sport.
Much of the mountain is under water; when measured from its oceanic base, Mauna Kea is over  tall, making it the world's tallest mountain from base to summit, surpassing Mount Everest.
The closely related ''Nysius aa'' lives on Mauna Loa.
A free Star Gazing Program is held at the VIS every night from 6-10 pm.
The most recent cones were built between 9000 and 4500 years ago, atop the glacial deposits, although one study indicates that the last eruption may have been around 3600 years ago.
Use of the quarry declined between this period and contact with Americans and Europeans.
Mouflon (''Ovis aries orientalis'') was introduced from 1962–1964, and a plan to release axis deer (''Axis axis'') in 1964 was prevented only by protests from the ranching industry, who said that they would damage crops and spread disease.
* In 1881, Queen Emma traveled to the peak to bathe in the waters of Lake Waiau during competition for the role of ruling chief of the Kingdom of Hawaii.
Despite its dormancy, Mauna Kea is expected to erupt again, although there would be sufficient warning to evacuate.
Ancient Hawaiians brought foreign plants and animals, and their arrival was associated with increased rates of erosion.
In comparison, the Hubble Space Telescope has a  mirror, similar in size to the UH88, now the second smallest telescope on the mountain.
In the early 19th century, the earliest notable ''recorded'' ascents of Mauna Kea included the following:
In the early 1960s, the Hawaii Island Chamber of Commerce encouraged astronomical development of Mauna Kea, as economic stimulus; this coincided with University of Arizona astronomer Gerard Kuiper's search for sites to use newly improved detectors of infrared light.
Here, either sulfur-bearing steam altered the volcanic ash to low-permeability clays, or explosive interactions between rising magma and groundwater or surface water (phreatic eruptions) formed exceptionally fine ash that also would reduce the permeability of the lake bed.
Site testing by Kuiper's assistant Alika Herring in 1964 confirmed the summit's outstanding suitability.
''sandwicense''), a highly endangered endemic plant species that thrives in Mauna Kea's high elevation cinder deserts.
Despite many references to burial around Mauna Kea in Hawaiian oral history, few sites have been confirmed.
The mountain's plentiful forest provided plants and animals for food and raw materials for shelter.
Growth is restricted here by extremely cold temperatures, a short growing season, low rainfall, and snow during winter months.
Its present summit is dominated by lava domes and cinder cones up to  in diameter and hundreds of meters tall.
He recorded four ecosystems as he travelled from base to summit, and also visited Lake Waiau.
* On June 17, 1825, an expedition from HMS ''Blonde'', led by botanist James Macrae, reached the summit of Mauna Kea.
Archaeological evidence suggests that these regions were used for hunting, collecting stone material, and possibly for spiritual reasons or for astronomical or navigational observations.
These travelers used stone cabins constructed by the Civilian Conservation Corps in the 1930s as base camps, and it is from these facilities that the modern mid-level Onizuka Center for International Astronomy telescope support complex is derived.
Their conservation status is unclear, but the species is no longer a candidate for the Endangered Species List; studies on the welfare of the species began in 1980.
Today, multiple trails to the summit exist, in various states of use.
In Hawaiian mythology, the peaks of the island of Hawaii are sacred.
Among the concerns of the protest groups are the land appraisals and Native Hawaiians consultation.
The first Mauna Kea summit road was built in 1964, making the peak itself accessible to larger numbers of people.
In 2012 two more bore holes were drilled on Mauna Kea and water discovered at much higher elevations than previously believed but shallower than expected.
Baldwin left Hilo and followed cattle trails to the summit.
Contact with Americans and Europeans in the early 19th century brought more settlers to the island, and had a lasting negative ecological effect.
Like all Hawaiian volcanoes, Mauna Kea has been created as the Pacific tectonic plate has moved over the Hawaiian hotspot in the Earth's underlying mantle.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries trails were formed, often by the movement of game herds, that could be traveled on horseback.
This early era was followed by peace and cultural expansion between the 12th and late 18th century.
The high elevation with its risk of altitude sickness, weather concerns, steep road grade, and overall inaccessibility make the volcano dangerous and summit trips difficult.
The shield-stage lavas that built the enormous main mass of the mountain are tholeiitic basalts, like those of Mauna Loa, created through the mixing of primary magma and subducted oceanic crust.
Having violated the Endangered Species Act, Hawaii state was required to remove all feral animals from the mountainside.
A small part of the māmane–naio forest is encompassed by the Mauna Kea State Recreation Area.
Standing  above sea level, its peak is the highest point in the state of Hawaii.
Late volcanism has also given it a much rougher appearance than its neighboring volcanoes; contributing factors include the construction of cinder cones, the decentralization of its rift zones, the glaciation on its peak, and the weathering effects of the prevailing trade winds.
The multi-telescope "outrigger", proposed in 2006 was eventually canceled.
Wēkiu bugs feed on dead insect carcasses that drift up Mauna Kea on the wind and settle on snow banks.
Māmane seeds and naio fruit are the chief foods of the birds in this zone, especially the palila (''Loxioides bailleui'').
The Hawaii island volcanoes are the most recent evidence of this process that, over 70 million years, has created the -long Hawaiian Ridge–Emperor seamount chain.
It has been suggested that the shrines, which are arranged around the volcano's summit along what may be an ancient snow line, are markers for the transition to the sacred part of Mauna Kea.
However, local organisations started to raise concerns about the environmental impact of the observatory.
In January 1982, the UH Board of Regents approved a plan to support the continued development of scientific facilities at the site.
Around AD&nbsp;1100, natives established adze quarries high up on Mauna Kea to extract the uniquely dense basalt (generated by the quick cooling of lava flows meeting glacial ice during subglacial eruptions) to make tools.
There are 15&nbsp;threatened and endangered plants, 3&nbsp;endangered birds, and 1&nbsp;endangered bat species in the area.
In the midst of this wrangling the Endangered Species Act was passed; the National Audubon Society and Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund filed a lawsuit against the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources, claiming that they were violating federal law, in the landmark case ''Palila v. Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources'' (1978).
A popular site is ''Kīpuka Pu'u Huluhulu'', a kīpuka on Mauna Kea's flank that formed when lava flows isolated the forest on a hill.
A public hunting program removed many of the feral animals, at least temporarily.
In pre-contact times, natives traveling up Mauna Kea were probably guided more by landscape than by existing trails, as no evidence of the latter has been found.
On April 2, 2015, 300 protestors were gathered near the visitor's center when 12 people were arrested with 11 more arrested at the summit.
The Mauna Kea State Recreation Area functions as a base camp for the sport.
Its destruction was driven by an influx of European and American settlers in the early 19th century, as extensive logging during the 1830s provided lumber for new homes.
Hawaii's geographical isolation strongly influences its ecology.
Small gullies etch the summit, formed by rain- and snow-fed streams that flow only during winter melt and rain showers.
Based on prior eruptions, such an event could occur anywhere on the volcano's upper flanks and would likely produce extended lava flows, mostly of a'a, of  in length.
There are over 3,000 registered hunters on Hawaii island, and hunting, for both recreation and sustenance, is a common activity on Mauna Kea.
Mauna Kea is home to Lake Waiau, the highest lake in the Pacific Basin.
With the development of astronomical facilities on Mauna Kea commencing, conservationists demanded protection of Mauna Kea's ecosystem.
A planned new telescope, the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT), has attracted controversy and protests.
In recent years, concern over the vulnerability of the native species has led to court cases that have forced the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources to eradicate all feral species on the mountain.
Much of its mass lies east of its present summit.
Remote islands like Hawaii have a large number of species that are found nowhere else (see Endemism in the Hawaiian Islands).
Subglacial eruptions built cinder cones during the Mākanaka glaciation, most of which were heavily gouged by glacial action.
Until the construction of roads in the mid-20th century, only the hardy visited Mauna Kea's upper slopes; hunters tracked game animals, and hikers traveled up the mountain.
