A short single-day eruption in 1877 was unusual in that it took place underwater, in Kealakekua Bay and within a mile of the shoreline; curious onlookers approaching the area in boats reported unusually turbulent water and occasional floating blocks of hardened lava.
The 1950 eruption was not the most voluminous eruption on the volcano (the long-lived 1872-1877 event produced more than twice as much material) but it was easily one of the fastest-acting, producing the same amount of lava as the 1859 eruption in a tenth of the time.
Grass had to be painstakingly brought from the lowest elevations for insulation to get accurate measurements.
Since then, the volcano has remained active, with a history of effusive and explosive eruptions, including 33 eruptions since the first well-documented eruption in 1843.
It took another week to bring all the equipment to the summit, including a pendulum designed for measuring slight variations in gravity.
Mauna Loa is the largest subaerial and second largest overall volcano in the world (behind Tamu Massif), covering a land area of  and spans a maximum width of .
Their tent was pitched within  of the crater's edge, secured by lava blocks.
A longer but summit-bound event in 1940 was comparatively less interesting.
It is speculated that extensive phreatomagmatic activity occurred during this time, contributing extensively to ash deposits on the summit.
After another full day's hike they established "Flag Station" on December 22, and by this time were on the Ainapō Trail.
Between 11,000 and 8,000&nbsp;years ago, activity was more intense than it is today.
Between about 7,000 and 6,000&nbsp;years ago Mauna Loa was largely inactive.
Established on Kīlauea in 1912, the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO), presently a branch of the United States Geological Survey, is the primary organization associated with the monitoring, observance, and study of Hawaiian volcanoes.
Trade winds blow from east to west across the Hawaiian islands, and the presence of Mauna Loa strongly affects the local climate.
Isidor Löwenstern successfully climbed Mauna Loa in February 1839, only the third successful climb in 60&nbsp;years.
This shallow magma chamber is significantly higher-placed than Mauna Loa's rift zones, suggesting magma intrusion into the deeper and occasional dike injections into the shallower parts of the rift zone drive rift activity; a similar mechanism has been proposed for neighboring Kīlauea.
He was surprised to find heavy snow and morning temperatures of , and was unable to compare the heights of Mauna Loa and Kea but correctly supposed the latter to be taller based on its larger snow cap.
The historic Ainapō Trail fell into disuse, and was reopened in the 1990s.
At 1 million to 700,000 years of age, Mauna Loa is the second youngest of the five volcanoes on the island, making it the third youngest volcano in the Hawaiian – Emperor seamount chain, a chain of shield volcanoes and seamounts extending from Hawaii to the Kuril–Kamchatka Trench in Russia.
There is also a less definite northward rift zone that extends towards the Humuula Saddle marking the intersection of Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea.
The rainfall supports extensive forestation.
Mauna Loa has been monitored intensively by the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory since 1912.
The oldest volcano on the island, Kohala, is more than a million years old, and Kīlauea, the youngest, is believed to be between 300,000 and 600,000 years of age.
The Observatory also maintains two gas detectors at Mokuʻāweoweo, Mauna Loa's summit caldera, as well as a publicly accessible  live webcam and occasional screenings by interferometric synthetic aperture radar imaging.
Thus the first entirely confirmed historically witnessed eruption was a January 1843 event, since which Mauna Loa has erupted anew 32 times.
Occurring during an enforced nighttime blackout on the island, the eruption's luminosity forced the government to issue a gag order on the local press, hoping to prevent news of its occurrence spreading for fear that the Japanese would use it to launch a bombing run on the island.
Although the journey was arduous and required several days and many porters, ancient Hawaiians likely made the journey during eruptions to leave offerings and prayers to honor Pele, much as they did at Halemaumau, neighboring Kilauea's more active and more easily accessible caldera.
Another of Cook's men, Lieutenant James King, estimated the peak to be at least  high based on its snow line.
When they reached Kīlauea after two days, their guide Puhano headed off to the established Ainapō Trail.
poly 25 186 49 180 73 150 54 108 36 100 24 104 5 123 3 137 22 164 Hualalai
The NOAA Mauna Loa Observatory (MLO) is located close by.
Their age roughly corresponding with the glaciation of Mauna Loa during the last ice age, raising the distinct possibility that it is the product of phreatomagmatic interaction between the long-gone glaciers and Mauna Loa's eruptive activities.
After soliciting help from Lorrin A. Thurston, in 1915 he was able to persuade the US Army to construct a "simple route to the summit" for public and scientific use, a project completed in December of that year; the Observatory has maintained a presence on the volcano ever since.
The first is a  rift trending southwest from the caldera to the sea and a further  underwater, with a prominent 40° directional change along its length; this rift zone is historically active across most of its length.
Because of the potential hazards it poses to population centers, Mauna Loa is part of the Decade Volcanoes program, which encourages studies of the world's most dangerous volcanoes.
Because Kīlauea lacks a topographical prominence and appears as a bulge on the southeastern flank of Mauna Loa, it was historically interpreted by both native Hawaiians and early geologists to be an active satellite of Mauna Loa.
From its location well above local human-generated influences, the MLO monitors the global atmosphere, including the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide.
Unlike Mauna Kea, on which extensive evidence of glaciation remains even today, Mauna Loa was at the time and has remained active, having grown an additional  in height since then and covering any glacial deposits beneath new flows; strata of that age doesn't occur until at least  down from the volcano's summit, too low for glacial growth.
The first Ancient Hawaiians to arrive on Hawaii island lived along the shores where food and water were plentiful.
The Yuan-Tseh Lee Array for Microwave Background Anisotropy (AMiBA) sits at an elevation of .
Douglas collected biological samples on the way both up and down, and after a difficult and distressing descent began collating his samples; he planned to return to England, but instead several months later his body was mysteriously discovered crushed in a pit besides a dead wild boar.
They form a terrace against which younger flows have since banked, heavily eroded and incised against its slope in terms of direction; this is believed to be the result of a period of erosion because of a change in the direction of lava flow caused by the volcano's prehistoric slump.
A June 1832 eruption was witnessed by a missionary on Maui, but the  between the two islands and lack of apparent geological evidence have cast this testimony in doubt.
King Kamehameha III assigned American medical missionary Dr. Gerrit P. Judd to the expedition as a translator.
These models predict a  wide magma chamber located at a depth of about ,  below sea level, near the southeastern margin of Mokuāweoweo.
File:Hawaii Volcanoes Hazard Map.svg|thumb|right|275px|Clickable imagemap of the United States Geological Survey hazard mapping for Hawaii island; the lowest numbers correspond with the highest hazard levels.
Mauna Loa is tall enough to have experienced glaciation during the last ice age, 25,000 to 15,000 years ago.
Possible eruptions occurred around 1730 and 1750 and sometime during 1780 and 1803.
Nonetheless, their proximity has led to a historical trend in which high activity at one volcano roughly coincides with low activity at the other.
Mauna Loa continued its activity, and of the eruptions that occurred in 1887, 1892, 1896, 1899, 1903 (twice), 1907, 1914, 1916, 1919, and 1926, three (in 1887, 1919, and 1926) were partially subaerial.
However, the role the bombing played in ending the eruption has since been heavily disputed by volcanologists.
However, the high winds made so much noise that the ticks could often not be heard, and varied the temperature to make measurements inaccurate.
Observations of the atmosphere are undertaken at the Mauna Loa Observatory, and of the Sun at the Mauna Loa Solar Observatory, both located near the mountain's summit.
Although Wilkes thought he was almost to the summit, the guides knew they were less than halfway up.
The oldest exposed flows on Mauna Loa are thought to be the Ninole Hills on its southern flank, subaerial basalt rock dating back approximately 100 to 200 thousand years.
The west side of Mauna Loa, meanwhile, is unimpeded in movement, and indeed is believed to have undergone a massive slump collapse between 100,000 and 200,000 years ago, the residue from which, consisting of a scattering of debris up to several kilometers wide and up to  distant, is still visible today.
Using an optical method, he estimated Mauna Kea was only  higher (modern measurements are ).
Mauna Loa has been designated a Decade Volcano, one of the sixteen volcanoes identified by the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth's Interior (IAVCEI) as being worthy of particular study in light of their history of large, destructive eruptions and proximity to populated areas.
On his second visit John Ledyard, a corporal of the Royal Marines aboard the HMS ''Resolution'', proposed and receiving approval for an expedition to summit Mauna Loa to learn "about that part of the island, particularly the peak, the tip of which is generally covered with snow, and had excited great curiosity."
At about  elevation they established a camp called "Sunday Station" at the edge of the forest.
Some of these missionaries left for Hawaii island, and spent ten weeks traveling around it, preaching at local villages and climbing Kilauea, from which one of its members, William Ellis, observed Mauna Loa with the aid of a telescope and ascertained it and Kea to be "perhaps 15,000 to 16,000 feet above the level of the sea"; they did not, however, attempt to climb the volcano itself.
Lava eruptions from Mauna Loa are silica-poor and very fluid, and they tend to be non-explosive.
However, while the Hawaiian mantle plume is well-understood and extensively studied, the nature of hotspots themselves remain fairly enigmatic.
In February of that year Menzies, two ships' mates, and a small group of native Hawaiian attendants attempted a direct course for the summit from Kealakekua Bay, making it  inland by their reckoning (an overestimation) before they were turned away by the thickness of the forest.
Using a compass, Ledyard and small group of ships' mates and native attendants attempted to make a direct course for the summit.
After an entire day replenishing stocks, they continued up to a second camp they called "Recruiting Station" at about  elevation.
By this time, the naval officers and Hawaiians could not agree on terms to continue hiring porters, so sailors and marines were ordered from the ships.
In 1916 Mokuāweoweo was included in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, and a new trail was built directly from park headquarters at Kīlauea, an even more direct route than the one taken by Wilkes.
In September 1840 they arrived in Honolulu, where repairs to the ships took longer than expected.
That night (December 23), the snow on the canvas roof caused it to collapse.
The largest subaerial volcano in both mass and volume, Mauna Loa has historically been considered the largest volcano on Earth.
Mauna Loa's 1942 eruption occurred only four months after the attack on Pearl Harbor and United States entry into World War II, and created a unique problem for the wartime United States.
Simplified geophysical models of Mauna Loa's magma chamber have been constructed, using interferometric synthetic aperture radar measures of ground deformation due to the slow buildup of lava under the volcano's surface.
Mauna Loa also lacks its neighbor's summit permafrost region, although sporadic ice persists in places.
Mokuāweoweo's caldera floor lies between  beneath its rim and it is only the latest of several calderas that have formed and reformed over the volcano's life.
Wilkes sailed to Hilo on the island of Hawaii and decided to climb Mauna Loa first, since it looked easier than Mauna Kea.
However, analysis of the chemical composition of lavas from the two volcanoes show that they have separate magma chambers, and are thus distinct.
On Monday, January 11, Wilkes hiked around the summit crater.
The prevailing view states that the hotspot has been largely stationary within the planet's mantle for much, if not all of the Cenozoic Era.
The Wilkes expedition's camp site's ruins are the only known physical evidence in the Pacific of the U. S. Exploring Expedition.
Menzies decided to make a second attempt (above the objections of the accompanying island chief), but again his progress was arrested by unassailable thickets.
Deep fault lines are a common feature on Hawaiian volcanoes, allowing large portions of their flanks to gradually slide downwards and forming structures like the Hilina Slump and the ancient Ninole Hills; large earthquakes could trigger rapid flank collapses along these lines, creating massive landslides and possibly triggering equally large tsunamis.
Although Mauna Loa's activity has been overshadowed in recent years by that of its neighbor Kīlauea, it remains active.
However the flow got no closer, as two natural levees further up its pathway consequently broke and diverted active flows.
However, on the second day of traveling the route became steeper, rougher, and blocked by "impenetrable thickets," and the group was forced to abandon their attempt and return to Kealakekua Bay, reckoning they had "penetrated 24 miles and we suppose were within 11 miles of the peak"; in reality, Mokuʻāweoweo lies only  east of the bay, a severe overestimation on Ledyard's part.
The next morning they were unable to start a fire using friction due to the thin air at that altitude, and sent for matches.
poly 56 65 99 64 116 38 188 66 224 103 221 134 194 140 139 143 93 123 60 92 53 79 Mauna Kea
Studies have shown that a cycle occurs in which volcanic activity at the summit is dominant for several hundred years, after which activity shifts to the rift zones for several more centuries, and then back to the summit again.
The cause of this cessation in activity is not known, and no known similar hiatus has been found at other Hawaiian volcanoes except for those currently in the post-shield stage.
The western (leeward) side has a much drier climate.
There is very little movement there today, a consequence of the volcano's geometry.
poly 247 157 236 157 203 198 172 202 149 230 128 277 173 250 193 248 249 226 287 186 259 173 Kilauea
poly 54 64 99 63 113 40 78 23 74 12 46 5 37 21 41 44 Kohala
Following further activity in 1871, Mauna Loa experienced nearly continuous activity from August 1872 through 1877, a long-lasting and voluminous eruption lasting approximately 1,200 days and never moving beyond its summit.
Following the pattern of Hawaiian volcano formation, Mauna Loa would have started as a submarine volcano, gradually building itself up through underwater eruptions of alkali basalt before emerging from the sea through a series of surtseyan eruptions about 400,000 years ago.
However it rumbled to life again in 1984, manifesting first at Mauna Loa's summit and then producing a narrow, channelized 'a'a flow that advanced downslope to within  of Hilo, close enough to illuminate the city at nighttime.
The oldest-known dated rocks are not older than 200,000&nbsp;years.
Mauna Loa is a typical shield volcano in form, taking the shape of a long, broad dome extending down to the ocean floor whose slopes are about 12° at their steepest, a consequence of its extremely fluid lava.
Thomas A. Jaggar, the observatory's founder, attempted a summit expedition to the volcano to observe its 1914 eruption, but was rebuffed by the arduous trek required (see Ascents).
Mauna Loa is one of five subaerial volcanoes that make up the island of Hawaii, created by the Hawaii hotspot.
They could not find a way down its steep sides so chose a smooth place on the rim for the camp site, at coordinates .
It is an active shield volcano with relatively gentle slopes, with a volume estimated at approximately , although its peak is about  lower than that of its neighbor, Mauna Kea.
The Mauna Loa Solar Observatory (MLSO), located at  on the northern slope of the mountain, has long been prominent in observations of the Sun.
After an event in 1933, Mauna Loa's 1935 eruption caused a public crisis when its flows started to head towards Hilo.
Since there was no water at Sunday Station, porters had to be sent back ten miles (16&nbsp;km) to a lava tube on Ainapō Trail which had a known supply.
Mauna Loa's July 1975 eruption was forewarned by more than a year of seismic unrest, with the HVO issuing warnings to the general public from late 1974; the 1984 eruption was similarly preceded by as much as three years of unusually high seismic activity, with volcanologists predicting an eruption within two years in 1983.
James Cook's third voyage was the first to make landfall on Hawaii island, in 1778, and following adventures along the North American west coast Cook returned to the island in 1779.
Seismic stations have been maintained on Hawaii since the Observatory's inception, but these were concentrated primarily on Kīlauea, with coverage on Mauna Loa improving only slowly through the 20th century.
The United States Geological Survey maintains a hazard zone mapping of the island done on a one to nine scale, with the most dangerous areas corresponding the smallest numbers.
The camp site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on July 24, 1974 as site 74000295, and is state historic site 10-52-5507.
After another day's climb, nine men reached the rim of Mokuāweoweo.
Mauna Loa has not erupted since, and as of January 2013 has remained quiet for nearly 29 years, its longest period of quiet in recorded history.
No recent eruptions of the volcano have caused fatalities, but eruptions in 1926 and 1950 destroyed villages, and the city of Hilo is partly built on lava flows from the late 19th century.
On December 31, 1840 the pre-fabricated pendulum house was assembled.
Much of the remainder of the volcano is hazard level three, about 15 to 20 percent of which has been covered by flows within the last 750 years.
The volcano's magma comes from the Hawaii hotspot, which has been responsible for the creation of the Hawaiian island chain over tens of millions of years.
The United States Exploring Expedition led by Lieutenant Charles Wilkes was tasked with a vast survey of the Pacific Ocean starting in 1838.
The Pāhala ashes themselves were produced over a long period of time circa 13 to 30 thousand years ago, although heavy vitrification and interactions with post and pre- creation flows has hindered exact dating.
Regardless, Kīlauea's lack of a geographic outline and strong volcanic link to Mauna Loa led to it being considered an offshoot of Mauna Loa by the Ancient Hawaiians, meaning much of the mythos now associated with Kīlauea was originally directed at Mauna Loa proper as well.
cut into a rock at the site.
Based on this classification Mauna Loa's continuously active summit caldera and rift zones have been given a level one designation.
Additionally, two smaller pit craters lie southwest of the caldera, named Lua Hou (New Pit) and Lua Hohonu (Deep Pit).
Hawaii Volcanoes National Park covers the summit and the southeastern flank of the volcano, and also incorporates Kīlauea, a separate volcano.
The 1984 eruption nearly reached the city, but stopped short after the flow was redirected upstream.
Strainmeters, by contrast, are relatively rare.
Lavas from Mauna Kea intersect with Mauna Loa's basal flows as a consequence of Kea's older age, and Mauna Kea's original rift zones were buried beneath post-shield volcanic rocks of Mauna Loa; additionally, Mauna Kea shares Mauna Loa's gravity well, depressing the ocean crust beneath it by .
Wilkes did not want to head back downhill so he blazed his own way through dense forest directed by a compass.
Following a 1949 event the next major eruption at Mauna Loa occurred in 1950.
This is not always the case; the 1984 eruption of Mauna Loa started during an eruption at Kīlauea, but had no discernible effect on the Kīlauea eruption, and the ongoing inflation of Mauna Loa's summit, indicative of a future eruption, began the same day as new lava flows at Kīlauea's Puu Ōō crater.
This time the botanist consulted King Kamehameha I for advice and learned that he could take canoes to the south and follow the Ainapō Trail, not knowing of its existence beforehand.
The next successful ascent was made on January 29, 1834, 40&nbsp;years later, by the Scottish botanist David Douglas, who also reached the summit caldera using the Ainapō Trail.
When Kīlauea lay dormant between 1934 and 1952, Mauna Loa became active, and when the latter remained quiet from 1952 to 1974, the reverse was true.
The Hawaiians were offended by the waste of sacred trees which did not help morale.
At low elevations, the eastern (windward) side of the volcano receives heavy rain; the city of Hilo is the wettest in the United States.
One of these trails, the Ainapo Trail, ascended from the village of Kapāpala over  in about  and ended at Mokuāweoweo at Mauna Loa's summit.
Mauna Loa is slumping eastward along its southwestern rift zone, leveraging its mass into Kīlauea and driving the latter eastward at a rate of about  per year; the interaction between the two volcanoes in this manner has generated a number of large earthquakes in the past, and has resulted in a significant area of debris off of Kīlauea's seaward flank known as the Hilina Slump.
Axes and chisels cut away the rock surface for the pendulum's base.
This trail, arriving at the summit from the east via Red Hill, became the preferred route due to its easier access and gentler slope.
Wilkes decided to spend the winter in Hawaii and take the opportunity to explore its volcanoes while waiting for better weather to continue the expedition.
Mauna Loa has probably been erupting for at least 700,000&nbsp;years, and may have emerged above sea level about 400,000&nbsp;years ago.
The shield-stage lavas that built the enormous main mass of the mountain are tholeiitic basalts, like those of Mauna Kea, created through the mixing of primary magma and subducted oceanic crust.
Menzies made a third attempt to summit Mauna Loa in February 1794.
It took another three days to adjust the clock to the point where the experiments could begin.
Very low temperatures mean that precipitation often occurs in the form of snow, and the summit of Mauna Loa is described as a ''periglacial'' region, where freezing and thawing play a significant role in shaping the landscape.
Christmas Day was spent building rock walls around the camp to give some protection from the high winds and blowing snow.
An earlier eruption in 1926 overran the village of Hoōpūloa Makai, and Hilo, partly built on lavas from the 1880-81 eruption, is at risk from future eruptions.
Two guides joined them at Sunday Station: Keaweehu, "the bird-catcher" and another whose Hawaiian name is not recorded, called "ragsdale".
The northeastern rift zone takes the form of a succession of cinder cones, the most prominent of which the  high Puu Ulaula, or Red Hill.
On January 13, 1841, he had "Pendulum Peak, January 1841 U.S. Ex, Ex."
Mauna Loa has complex interactions with its neighbors, Hualālai to the west, Mauna Kea to the north, and particularly Kīlauea to the east.
It was created between 1,000 and 1,500 years ago by a large eruption from Mauna Loa's northeast rift zone, which emptied out a shallow magma chamber beneath the summit and collapsed it into its present form.
The next attempt to summit Mauna Loa was an expedition led by Archibald Menzies, a botanist and naturalist on the 1793 Vancouver Expedition.
The network consisted of short trailheads servicing local areas along the main roads and more extensive networks within and around agricultural centers.
A snowstorm was in progress and several suffered from altitude sickness.
A potentially greater hazard at Mauna Loa is a sudden, massive collapse of the volcano's flanks, like the one that struck the volcano's west flank between 100,000 and 200,000 years ago and formed the present-day Kealakekua Bay.
Ancient Hawaiians constructed an extensive trail system on Hawaii island, today known as the Ala Kahakai National Historic Trail.
There are also a series of normal faults on Mauna Loa's northern and western slopes, between its two major rift zones, that are believed to be the result of combined circumferential tension from the two rift zones and from added pressure due to the westward growth of neighboring Kīlauea.
For all the effort he did not obtain any significant results, attributing gravity discrepancies to "the tides".
Dr. Judd traveled between the summit and the Recruiting Station to tend the many who suffered from altitude sickness or had worn out their shoes on the rough rock.
At the Flag Station Wilkes and his eight remaining men built a circular wall of lava rocks and covered the shelter with a canvas tent.
Below is the table for the slope observatory, which is at  in the alpine zone.
Combining the volcano's extensive submarine flanks ( to the sea floor) and  subaerial height, Mauna Loa rises  from base to summit, greater than the  elevation of Mount Everest from sea level to its summit.
The highest recorded temperature was  and the lowest was  on February&nbsp;18, 2003 and February&nbsp;20, 1962, respectively.
At higher elevations, the amount of precipitation decreases, and skies are very often clear.
The bombing, conducted on December 27, was declared a success by Thomas A. Jaggar, director of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, and lava stopped flowing by January 2, 1936.
At daylight some of the group went down the trail to retrieve firewood and the gear abandoned on the trail the day before.
Mauna Loa's most recent eruption occurred from March&nbsp;24 to April&nbsp;15, 1984.
This cyclical behavior is unique to Mauna Loa among the Hawaiian volcanoes.
After the 1950 event Mauna Loa entered an extended period of dormancy, interrupted only by a small single-day summit event in 1975.
The second, northeastern rift zone extends towards Hilo and is historically active across only the first  of its length, with a nearly straight and, in its latter sections, poorly defined trend.
In addition, much of the mountain is invisible even underwater: its mass depresses the crust beneath it by another , in the shape of an inverse mountain, meaning the total height of Mauna Loa from the start of its eruptive history is about .
An eruption in 1868 occurred alongside the enormous 1868 Hawaii earthquake, a magnitude eight event that claimed 77 lives and remains the largest earthquake ever to hit the island.
Eruptions on Mauna Loa are almost always preceded and accompanied by prolonged episodes of seismic activity, the monitoring of which was the primary and often only warning mechanism in the past and which remains viable today.
'''Mauna Loa''' ( or ; Hawaiian: ; ) is one of five volcanoes that form the Island of Hawaii in the U.S. state of Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean.
These rift zones are deeply set structures, driven by dike intrusions along a decollement fault that is believed to reach down all the way to the volcano's base,  deep.
The 1843 event was followed by eruptions in 1849, 1851, 1852, and 1855, with the 1855 flows being particularly extensive.
The prevailing lowland forest ecosystem was transformed from forest to grassland; some of this change was caused by the use of fire, but the main reason appears to have been the introduction of the Polynesian Rat (''Rattus exulans'').
However, as flows from the eruption rapidly spread down the volcano's flank and threatened the Olaa flume, Mountain View's primary water source, the United States Air Force decided to drop its own bombs on the island in the hopes of redirecting the flows away from the flume; sixteen bombs weighing between  each were dropped on the island, but produced little effect.
Measurements are adjusted to account for local outgassing of CO2 from the volcano.
Most of these stories agree that the Hawaiian volcano deity, Pele, resides in Halemaumau Crater on Kilauea; however a few place her home at Mauna Loa's summit caldera Mokuʻāweoweo, and the mythos in general associates her with all volcanic activity on the island.
A summit shelter was built with some of the stones from Wilkes' camp site and mortar in 1934.
Ancient Hawaiians have been present on Hawaii island for about 1,500 years, but they preserved almost no records on volcanic activity on the island beyond a few fragmentary accounts dating to the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
Further eruptions occurred in 1879 and then twice in 1880, the latter of which extended into 1881 and came within the present boundaries of the island's largest city, Hilo; however at the time the settlement was a shore-side village located further down the volcano's slope, and so was unaffected.
However, two sections of the volcano, the first in the Naalehu area and the second on the southeastern flank of Mauna Loa's rift zone, are protected from eruptive activity by local topography, and have thus been designated hazard level 6, comparable with a similarly isolated segment on Kīlauea.
The location of Mauna Loa has made it an important location for atmospheric monitoring by the Global Atmosphere Watch and other scientific observations.
Ancient Hawaiian religious practice holds that the five volcanic peaks of the island are sacred, and regards Mauna Loa, the largest of them all, with great admiration; but what mythology survives today consists mainly of oral accounts from the 18th century first compiled in the 19th.
1859 marked the largest of the three historical flows that have been centered on Mauna Loa's northwestern flank, producing a long lava flow that reached the ocean on Hawaii island's west coast, north of Kiholo Bay.
Earlier models based on Mauna Loa's two most recent eruptions made a similar prediction, placing the chamber at  deep in roughly the same geographic position.
The tents were dismantled and Hawaiians carried the gear down over the next three days, while Wilkes enjoyed a lomilomi Hawaiian massage.
He continued his measurements at lower elevations and left the island on March 5.
Mauna Loa's summit hosts three overlapping pit craters arranged northeast-southwest, the first and last roughly  in diameter and the second an oblong  feature; together these three craters make up the  summit caldera Mokuāweoweo, so named for the Hawaiian ʻāweoweo fish (''Priacanthus meeki''), purportedly due to the resemblance of its eruptive fires to the coloration of the fish.
Undersea surveys have revealed numerous landslides along the Hawaiian chain and evidence of two such giant tsunami events: 200,000&nbsp;years ago, Molokai experienced a  tsunami, and 100,000&nbsp;years ago a megatsunami  high struck Lānai.
On a second visit by the expedition to the island in January of the next year Menzies was placed in charge of exploring the island interior, and after traversing the flanks of Hualālai he and his party arrived at the high plateau separating the two volcanoes.
Activity centered on its summit are usually followed by flank eruptions up to a few months distant, and although Mauna Loa is historically less active than that of its neighbor Kilauea, it tends to produce greater volumes of lava over shorter periods of time.
The positioning of the trails were practical, connecting living areas to farms and ports and regions to resources, with a few upland sections reserved for gathering and most lines marked well enough to remain identifiable long after regular use has ended.
By the time Douglas reached the summit the environment had put him under extreme duress, but he nonetheless stayed overnight to make measurements of the summit caldera's proportions and record barometric data on its height, both now known to be widely inaccurate.
A more recent example of the risks associated with slumps occurred in 1975, when the Hilina Slump suddenly lurched forward several meters, triggering a 7.2 Mw earthquake and a  tsunami that killed two campers at Halape.
Originating from the volcano's southwestern rift zone, the eruption remains the largest rift event in the volcano's modern history, lasting 23 days, emitting 376 million cubic meters of lava, and reaching  out to the ocean within 3 hours.
It is sometimes reported that the missionary Joseph Goodrich reached the summit around this time, but he never claimed this himself, though he did summit Mauna Kea and describe Mokuāweoweo with the aid of another telescope.
Mauna Loa's summit is also the focal point for its two prominent rift zones, marked on the surface by well-preserved, relatively recent lava flows (easily seen in satellite imagery) and linearly arranged fracture lines intersected by cinder and splatter cones.
