Issues often encountered by foreign tourists include scams, overcharging and dual pricing.
In 1994, the police detained the editor-in-chief and a journalist of a weekly magazine for having “unlawfully published secret news”.
Some went to England to become pilots and ground staff in the Royal Air Force.
Mauritius is a member of the World Trade Organization, the Commonwealth of Nations, La Francophonie, the African Union, the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), the Indian Ocean Commission, COMESA and formed the Indian Ocean Rim Association.
Accordingly, the Tribunal found that, in declaring the ‘MPA’, the United Kingdom had acted unlawfully and in disregard of Mauritius’ rights.
Subsequently, a commission was appointed to look into the complaints made by the Indian immigrants, and in 1872 two lawyers, appointed by the British Crown, were sent from England to make an inquiry.
The island was under the administration of the French East India Company which maintained its presence until 1767.
All military, police, and security functions in Mauritius are carried out by 10,000 active-duty personnel under the command of the Commissioner of Police.
The Dutch established a small colony on the island in 1638, from which they exploited ebony trees and introduced sugar cane, domestic animals and deer.
Another Portuguese sailor, Dom Pedro Mascarenhas, gave the name ''Mascarenes'' to the Archipelago.
Local and renewable energy sources are biomass, hydro, solar and wind energy.
Emmanuel Anquetil rallied the urban workers while Pandit Sahadeo concentrated on the rural working class.
In recent years, information and communication technology, seafood, hospitality and property development, healthcare, renewable energy, and education and training have emerged as important sectors, attracting substantial investment from both local and foreign investors.
'''Mauritius''' (; ), officially the '''Republic of Mauritius''' (), is an island nation in the Indian Ocean about  off the southeast coast of the African continent.
English and French are generally accepted as the official languages of Mauritius and as the languages of government administration, courts, and business.
As a result, the sugar industry began to lose its hold on the economy.
The power struggle between Bérenger and Jugnauth came to a head in March 1983.
In the same year, 1911, the first public cinema shows took place in Curepipe and, in the same town, a stone building was erected to house the Royal College.
The island is widely known as the only known home of the dodo, which, along with several other avian species, was made extinct by human activities relatively shortly after the island's settlement.
The 8,000-member National Police Force is responsible for domestic law enforcement.
Mauritius also claims sovereignty over Tromelin Island from France.
In 1982 an MMM government led by prime minister Anerood Jugnauth and Paul Bérenger as Minister of Finance was elected.
Back in India, he sent over a young lawyer Manilal Doctor to improve the plight of the Indo-Mauritians.
It enjoys a tropical climate with clear warm sea waters, attractive beaches, tropical fauna and flora complemented by a multi-ethnic and cultural population.
The Assembly elects a Speaker, a Deputy Speaker and a Deputy Chairman of Committees as some of its first task.
Gaëtan Duval became the vice-prime minister.
It is situated some 430&nbsp;km to the north-east of Mauritius and is mostly used as a fishing base.
The report's ranking of 183 countries is based on measures of economic openness, regulatory efficiency, rule of law, and competitiveness.
The UK argued that the dispute is one about sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago.
It was from here that Dutch navigator Abel Tasman set out to discover the western part of Australia.
This party, led by Guy Rozemont, bettered its position in 1953, and, on the strength of the election results, demanded universal suffrage.
The Tertiary Education sector includes universities and other technical institutions in Mauritius.
The president Cassam Uteem and cardinal Jean Margéot toured the country and, after four days of turmoil, calm was restored.
Both units are composed of police officers on lengthy rotations to those services.
Mauritius is also commonly known as ''Maurice'' () and ''Île Maurice'' in French, ''Moris'' in Mauritian Creole.
The Tribunal went on to hold that the United Kingdom had not respected Mauritius binding legal rights over the Chagos Archipelago.
The people of Mauritius are multiethnic, multi-religious, multicultural and multilingual.
It also depends on the United Kingdom as a trading partner.
General elections were postponed and public meetings were prohibited.
There was also a boom in the tourism industry, and new hotels sprang up throughout the island.
Navin Ramgoolam was again elected in May 2010.
On 3 December 1810 the French surrendered the island during the Napoleonic Wars.
A United Nations tribunal ruled that Britain had acted illegally when it created a marine protected area around the Chagos without the consent of Mauritius, thereby depriving this country of its fishing rights.
Voting took place for the first time on the basis of universal adult suffrage on 9 March 1959.
Police officers eventually fired on the crowd, and killed three labourers including a boy of ten and a pregnant woman, Anjaly Coopen.
The Tribunal also observed that the failure of the United Kingdom to balance its own rights and interests with those of Mauritius is to be contrasted with the approach adopted by the United Kingdom with respect to the United States.
It is understood that with no predators to attack them, they lost their need and ability to fly.
The last one was killed in 1681.
The political landscape stayed rather confused.
Mauritius has the highest population density in Africa.
The Commission was tasked to investigate the dispossession of land, and “determine appropriate measures to be extended to descendants of slaves and indentured laborers.” It was “unique in that it dealt with socio-economic class abuses" and explored the possibility of reparations.
Mauritius has repeatedly asserted that the separation of its territories is a violation of United Nations' resolutions banning the dismemberment of colonial territories before independence and claims that the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, forms an integral part of the territory of Mauritius under both Mauritian law and international law.
He managed to escape from prison and plotted a rebellion that would free all the slaves on the island.
Occasional tropical cyclones generally occurs between January to March and tend to disrupt the weather for only about three days, bringing a lot of rain.
Assassination attempts were made twice against Paul Bérenger.
The UK excised the archipelago from Mauritian territory prior to Mauritian independence in 1965.
The MMM made an alliance (known as Remake) with the MSM but broke off with the latter to become the ally of Labour Party.
Chagossians have since engaged in activism to return to the archipelago, claiming that the forced expulsion and dispossession were illegal.
Its land area is 1,864.8&nbsp;km2.
Due to its volcanic origin, age, isolation, and its unique terrain, Mauritius is home to a diversity of flora and fauna not usually found in such a small area.
The Tribunal firmly rejected that argument, holding that those undertakings became a binding international agreement upon the independence of Mauritius, and have bound the UK ever since.
It is claimed that Dodos were descendants of a type of pigeon which settled in Mauritius over four million years ago, but this is disputed.
Mauritius became an important base on the trade routes from Europe to the East before the opening of the Suez Canal and was involved in the long power struggle between the French and the British.
The landslide victory of 60–0 was a repeat of the 1982 score, but this time it was on the side of the Labour–MMM alliance.
The coalition government of the Labour Party and the PMSD (Parti Mauricien Social Democrate) reacted by curtailing civil liberties and curbing the freedom of the press.
According to the 2011 Democracy Index compiled by the Economist Intelligence Unit that measures the state of democracy in 167 countries, Mauritius ranks 24th worldwide and is the only African country with "full democracy".
The Dutch colony was abandoned in 1710, and, five years later, the island became a French colony and was named Isle de France.
But the war affected Mauritius much less than the wars of the eighteenth century.
* the ‘MPA’ is legally invalid.
In 1832, Adrien d'Épinay launched the first Mauritian newspaper (''Le Cernéen'') which was not controlled by the government.
The movement rapidly collapsed because none of the candidates who wanted Mauritius to be given back to France was elected in the 1921 elections.
Mrs. Santi Bai Hanoomanjee
At the outbreak of World War II in 1939, many Mauritians volunteered to serve under the British flag in Africa and the Near East, fighting against the German and Italian armies.
The abolition of slavery had important impacts on Mauritius' society, economy and population.
The next general election took place on 20 December 1976.
In 1911 there were riots in Port Louis due to a false rumour that Dr. Eugène Laurent had been murdered by the oligarchs in Curepipe.
Weighing up to 50 pounds, the dodo was a welcome source of fresh meat for the sailors.
Through the Newspapers and Periodicals Amendment Act, the government tried to make every newspaper provide a bank guarantee of half a million rupees.
Additionally, the British brought 8,740 Indian soldiers to the island.
The result of the Tribunal’s decision is that, it is now open to the Parties to enter into the negotiations that the Tribunal would have expected prior to the proclamation of the MPA, with a view to achieving a mutually satisfactory arrangement for protecting the marine environment, to the extent necessary under a “sovereignty umbrella”.
Deputy Prime Minister
The Portuguese did not stay long as they were not interested in these islands.
The Westminster system was thus maintained and Aneerood Jugnauth became the PM for the sixth time.
The Labour Party won 28 seats out of 62 but the Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, managed to remain in office, with a two-seat majority, after striking an alliance with the PMSD of Gaetan Duval.
The parties differ on the characterization of the dispute.
Mauritius has no exploitable natural resources and therefore depends on imported petroleum products to meet most of its energy requirements.
Nomination day took place on 24 November 2014 and, for the first time, electoral candidates had the option of not proclaiming their ethnic group.
An important figure of the 19th century was Rémy Ollier, a journalist of mixed origin.
In 1507 Portuguese sailors visited the uninhabited island.
Industrialisation began to spread to villages as well, and  attracted young workers from all ethnic communities.
He stayed on the island for two weeks, and urged the Indo-Mauritian community to take an interest in education and to play a more active role in politics.
Under British rule, the island became the Empire's main sugar-producing colony.
Slavery was abolished in 1835, and the planters ultimately received two million pounds sterling in compensation for the loss of their slaves who had been imported from Africa and Madagascar during the French occupation.
The island of Mauritius is divided into 20 constituencies that return three members each, while Rodrigues is a single constituency that returns two members.
Another airport is the Sir Gaëtan Duval Airport in Rodrigues.
Mauritius is a multiethnic society, drawn from Indian, African, European (mostly French) and Chinese origin.
The Gross Domestic Product (PPP) was estimated at $22.025 billion in 2014, and  GDP (PPP) per capita was over $16,820, one of the highest in Africa.
The islands of Mauritius and Rodrigues ( southwest) form part of the Mascarene Islands, along with nearby Réunion, a French overseas department.
Situated near the Tropic of Capricorn, Mauritius has a tropical climate.
Mauritius received the World Leading Island Destination award for the third time and World's Best Beach at the World Travel Awards in January 2012.
Aapravasi Ghat, in the bay at Port Louis and now a UNESCO site, was the first British colony to serve as a major reception centre for slaves and indentured servants for British plantation labour.
He also made Port Louis become a municipality so that the citizens could administer the town through their own elected representatives.
The 1963 election was won by the Labour Party and its allies.
The arrival of man saw the introduction of invasive alien species and the rapid destruction of habitat and the loss of much of the endemic flora and fauna.
The island quickly became a stopover for ships engaged in the spice trade.
The harbour of Port Louis handles international trade as well as a cruise terminal.
This allowed the evolution of a number of flightless birds and large reptile species.
Mauritius has an ''upper middle income economy'', according to the World Bank in 2011.
Mauritius had a life expectancy of 75.17 in 2014.
Mauritius has a multi-party system.
Together with Saint Brandon, Réunion, and Rodrigues, the island is part of the Mascarene Islands.
These tourism assets are its main strength, especially since they are backed up by well-designed and run hotels, and reliable and operational services and infrastructures.
Along with the other Mascarene Islands, Mauritius is known for its varied flora and fauna, with many species endemic to the island.
Mauritius will henceforth detain 80% of the shares while the rest would go to the Chinese promoters.
In the 2005 election, Navin Ramgoolam, leader of the Labour Party, was brought to power after making an alliance with the Parti Mauricien Xavier-Luc Duval (PMXD) and other minor parties.
On 20 May, thousands of students tried to enter Port-Louis over the Grand River North West bridge and  clashed with the police.
The sovereignty of Mauritius was explicitly recognised by two of the arbitrators and denied by none of the other three.
Saint Brandon is an archipelago comprising a number of sand-banks, shoals and islets.
The Tribunal’s Award also determined that the United Kingdom’s undertaking to return the Chagos Archipelago to Mauritius gives Mauritius an interest in significant decisions that bear upon the possible future uses of the Archipelago.
On the contrary, the 1914–18 war was a period of great prosperity because of a boom in sugar prices.
The environment in Mauritius is typically tropical in the coastal regions with forests in the mountainous areas.
It ruled that the United Kingdom has breached its obligations under Articles 2(3), 56(2), and 194(4) of UNCLOS.
The Constitution of Mauritius states that for purposes of separation of powers, the judiciary is independent.
In 1969, the opposition party Mauritian Militant Movement (MMM) led by Paul Bérenger was founded.
In 1903, motorcars were introduced in Mauritius, and in 1910 the first taxis, operated by Joseph Merven, came into service.
Mauritius states that its case is that the MPA is unlawful under the Convention.
During the same year, faster links were established with Rodrigues thanks to the wireless.
In 2002, Rodrigues became an autonomous entity within the republic and was thus able to elect its own representatives to administer the island.
Tourism continues to be the main source for foreign exchange, and the number of visitors to the island  reached 1.1 million in 2015.
Despite this booming in the Tourist industry, Tourism Minister, Xavier-Luc Duval, has placed a two-year moratorium on the construction of new hotels.
French and English are favoured in educational and professional settings while Asian languages are used mainly in music, religious and cultural activities.
Official statistics on ethnicity are not available, as such questions were removed from the population census in 1972.
This led to an intense campaign to halt the population explosion, and the decade registered a sharp decline in population growth.
* UK Prime Minister Harold Wilson’s threat to Premier Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam in 1965 that he could return home without independence if he did not consent to the excision of the Chagos Archipelago amounted to duress; Mauritian Ministers were coerced into agreeing to the detachment of the Chagos Archipelago, and that this detachment violated the international law of self-determination,
In 1507 Portuguese sailors came to the uninhabited island and established a visiting base.
The prevailing trade winds keep the east side of the island cooler and also tend to bring more rain there.
Under British rule, the island's name reverted to ''Mauritius'' .
The 1920s saw the rise of a "retrocessionism" movement which favoured the retrocession of Mauritius to France.
Raoul Rivet, the editor of ''Le Mauricien'' newspaper, campaigned for a revision of the constitution that would give the emerging middle class a greater role in the running of the country.
Under his governorship, numerous buildings were erected, a number of which are still standing today.
The resulting report delved into the cause of poverty and qualified  many tenacious beliefs as perceptions.
The O-Level and A-Level examinations are carried out by the University of Cambridge through University of Cambridge International Examinations.
School students must learn English and French; they also have the option to study Asian languages and Creole.
The political party or alliance which has the second largest majority forms the Official Opposition and its leader is normally nominated by the President of the Republic as the Leader of the Opposition.
Due to its strategic position, Mauritius was known as the "star and key" of the Indian Ocean.
Chagos was administratively part of Mauritius from the 18th century when the French first settled the islands.
Several attempts were subsequently made  but the settlements never developed enough to produce dividends, leading to the Dutch to abandon Mauritius in 1710.
The Labour Party did away with the MSM, and then with the PMSD, whose leader had acted as Finance minister.
In 2003, the prime ministership was transferred to Paul Bérenger of the MMM, and Aneerood Jugnauth went to Le Réduit to serve as president.
Parliament remained closed for the most part of 2014.
In 1912, a wider telephone network came into service and it was used by the government, business firms, and a few private households.
The dodo is prominently featured as a (heraldic) supporter of the national coat of arms of Mauritius.
Published 25 November 2011, the report outlined over 300 recommendations detailing ways to bring those affected by slavery and indentured labour out of poverty.
Paul Raymond Bérenger
From 1767 to 1810, except for a brief period during the French Revolution when the inhabitants set up a government virtually independent of France, the island was controlled by officials appointed by the French Government.
Furthermore, it will help to uphold the island’s ‘paradise’ image by keeping in check overbuilding along the coast.
Mauritius is some 2,000&nbsp;km (1,242 miles) off the southeast coast of Africa, between latitudes 19°58.8' and 20°31.7' south and longitudes 57°18.0' and 57°46.5' east.
He named the island "Ilha do Cirne".
The economy is based on tourism, textiles, sugar, and financial services.
These islands have emerged from the abysses as a result of gigantic underwater volcanic eruptions that happened thousands of kilometres to the east of the continental block made up of Africa and Madagascar.
Mauritius has one of the largest Exclusive Economic Zones in the world, and in 2012 the government announced its intention to develop the marine economy.
According to the 2011 census, there was a decrease in the use of Bhojpuri at home, it was spoken by 5% of the population compared to 12% in 2000.
Later in 1971, the MMM, backed by unions, called a series of strikes in the port which caused a state of emergency in the country.
The major musical genre of Mauritius is Sega music, other musical genres are its fusion genre, Seggae and Bhojpuri songs.
The UK gradually depopulated the archipelago's indigenous population and leased its biggest island, Diego Garcia, to the United States.
There can also be a marked difference in temperature and rainfall from one side of the island to the other.
France, which already controlled neighbouring Île Bourbon (now Réunion), took control of Mauritius in 1715 and renamed it Isle de France.
At the beginning of the 20th century, in November 1901, Mahatma Gandhi visited Mauritius, on his way to India (from South Africa).
At the Lancaster Conference of 1965, it became clear that Britain wanted to relieve itself of the colony of Mauritius.
Although there is no marked rainy season, most of the rainfall occurs in summer months.
The first Dutch settlement lasted twenty years.
The country's political heritage and dependence on Western markets have led to close ties with the European Union and its member states, particularly France.
This measure is expected to keep the right balance between demand and supply.
In 1965, three years before the independence of Mauritius, the United Kingdom split the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius and the islands of Aldabra, Farquhar and Desroches from the Seychelles to form the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT).
There are currently no railways in Mauritius, former privately owned industrial railways having been abandoned.
The most recent National Assembly Election was held on 10 December 2014 in all the 20 mainland constituencies, and in the constituency covering the island of Rodrigues.
Furthermore, a stone fortress, Fort Adelaide, was built on a hill (now known as the Citadel hill) in the centre of Port Louis to quell any uprising.
Ratsitatane, nephew of King Radama of Madagascar, was brought to Mauritius as a political prisoner.
The total land area of the country is 2,040&nbsp;km2, about 80% the size of Luxembourg, the 180th largest nation in the world by size.
Spices are also a big part of Mauritian cuisine.
World War I broke out in August 1914.
Jacques-Henri Bernardin de Saint-Pierre lived on the island from 1768 to 1771, then went back to France, where he  wrote ''Paul et Virginie'', a love story, which made the Isle de France famous wherever the French language was spoken.
The 1910s were a period of great political agitation.
Within 100 years of the arrival of humans on Mauritius, the once abundant dodo became a rare bird.
The raids continued until 1810, when a Royal Navy expedition led by Commodore Josias Rowley, R.N., an Anglo-Irish aristocrat, was sent to capture the island.
Fresh negotiations began with Jin Fei in view of reviving the project started in 2006.
Riots flared up after the popular singer Kaya, arrested for smoking marijuana at a public concert, was found dead in his prison cell.
Mauritius has built its success on a free market economy, according to the 2013 Index of Economic Freedom Mauritius is ranked as having the 8th most free economy in the world, and the highest score in investment freedom.
The Republic of Mauritius is constituted of the main island of Mauritius and several outlying islands.
The students were unsatisfied with an education system that did not meet their aspirations and gave limited prospects for future employment.
Arabs became the first humans to set foot on Mauritius, followed by Portuguese around 1505.
The country includes the island of Mauritius, Rodrigues  east, and the outer islands (Agaléga, St. Brandon and two disputed territories).
In Parliament, the official language is English; however, any member of the National Assembly can also address the chair in French.
He mixed with many of the labourers, and in 1871 helped them to write a petition which was sent to Governor Gordon.
The crime rate reduced from 4.3 per 1,000 population in 2009 to 3.6 per 1,000 population in 2010.
Throughout the decade, the prime minister, Aneerood Jugnauth, ruled the country with the help of the PMSD and the Labour Party.
Mauritius is divided into nine districts which consist of different cities, towns and villages.
It is 65&nbsp;km long and 45&nbsp;km wide.
The sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago is disputed between Mauritius and the United Kingdom (UK).
The education structure consists of three years of pre-primary school, six years of primary schooling leading to the Certificate of Primary Education, followed by five years of secondary education leading to the School Certificate and a further two years of higher secondary ending with the Higher School Certificate.
