In March 1999, the government signed an agreement with a joint World Bank-International Monetary Fund mission on a $54&nbsp;million enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF).
* The difficulty of enforcing any laws in the country's vast desert
About 20% of Mauritanians live on less than US$1.25 per day.
The opposition participated in municipal elections in January–February 1994, and in subsequent Senate elections – most recently in April 2004 – and gained representation at the local level, as well as three seats in the Senate.
His regime was plagued by attempted coups and intrigue within the military establishment.
Over the next 500 years, Arabs overcame fierce resistance from the local population (Berber and non-Berber alike) to dominate Mauritania.
With the gradual desiccation of the Sahara, they headed south.
He deepened these ties during the late 1990s and early 2000s as part of Mauritania's drive to attract support from Western states and Western-aligned Arab states.
Mauritania grew increasingly isolated internationally, and tensions with Western countries grew dramatically after it took a pro-Iraqi position during the 1991 Gulf War.
The Mauritanian Government expelled tens of thousands of black Mauritanians.
By April 1992, as civilian rule returned, 16 major political parties had been recognized; 12 major political parties were active in 2004.
Approximately three quarters of Mauritania is desert or semi-desert.
It found few supporters (among them Morocco, Libya and Iran), while Algeria, the United States, France and other European countries criticized the coup, and continued to refer to Abdallahi as the legitimate president of Mauritania.
Though cautiously watched by the international community, the coup came to be generally accepted, with the military ''junta'' organizing elections within a promised two-year timeline.
French rule brought legal prohibitions against slavery and an end to inter-clan warfare.
The army surrounded key government facilities, including the state television building, after the president fired senior officers, one of them the head of the presidential guards.
Taking advantage of Taya's attendance at the funeral of Saudi King Fahd, the military, including members of the presidential guard, seized control of key points in the capital Nouakchott.
The previous capital of the country, Saint-Louis was located in Senegal, so when the country gained independence in 1960, Nouakchott, at the time little more than a fortified village (''"ksar"''),  was chosen as the site of the new capital of Mauritania.
He was ousted in a bloodless coup on 10 July 1978.
Amnesty has accused the Mauritanian legal system, both before and after the 2008 coup, of functioning with complete disregard for legal procedure, fair trial, or humane imprisonment.
The United States continued to criticize the coup, but did not actively oppose the elections.
Many of Abdallahi's former supporters criticized this as a political ploy and refused to recognize the results.
Some Mauritanian exiles believe that the number was as high as 5,000 on the basis of alleged involvement in an attempt to overthrow the government.
The President, Prime Minister Yahya Ould Ahmed Waghef, and Mohamed Ould R'zeizim, Minister of Internal Affairs, were arrested.
Adrar was finally defeated militarily in 1912, and incorporated into the territory of Mauritania, which had been drawn up and planned in 1904.
Mauritania recorded a population of 3,537,368 in its 2013 national census.
A referendum is still supposed to be held sometime in the future, under UN auspices, to determine whether or not the indigenous Sahrawis wish to be independent, as the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, or to be part of Morocco.
They considered that position as a legacy of the Taya regime's attempts to curry favor with the West.
In December 1984, Haidallah was deposed by Colonel Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya, who, while retaining tight military control, relaxed the political climate.
A practical effect was government seizure of traditional communal grazing lands.
Oil was discovered in Mauritania in 2001 in the offshore Chinguetti field.
* Poverty that limits opportunities for slaves to support themselves if freed
Calling themselves the Military Council for Justice and Democracy, the officers released the following statement:
By late summer, Abdel Aziz appeared to have secured his position and to have gained widespread international and internal support.
The slaves were mostly black.
It was rewarded with diplomatic normalization and aid projects.
Vall, once regarded as a firm ally of the now-ousted president, had aided Taya in the coup that had originally brought him to power, and had later served as his security chief.
According to the US State Department ''2010 Human Rights Report'', abuses in Mauritania include:
Kediet ej Jill, near the city of Zouîrât, has an elevation of  and is the highest peak.
In a referendum on 26 June 2006, Mauritanians overwhelmingly (97%) approved a new constitution which limited the duration of a president's stay in office.
In 1964 President Moktar Ould Daddah, originally installed by the French, formalized Mauritania as a one-party state with a new constitution, setting up an authoritarian presidential regime.
Incumbent President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya won reelection with 67.02% of the popular vote, according to the official figures, with Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidalla finishing second.
It is comparable in size to Egypt.
In 1901, Xavier Coppolani took charge of the imperial mission.
Since the coup, Abdel Aziz insisted on holding new presidential elections to replace Abdallahi, but was forced to reschedule them due to internal and international opposition.
While most of Western Sahara has been occupied by Morocco, the UN still considers the Western Sahara a territory that needs to express its wishes with respect to statehood.
According to some estimates, up to 600,000 Mauritanians, or 20% of the population, are still enslaved.
The Arabized dominant elites reacted to changing circumstances, and to Arab nationalist calls from abroad, by increasing pressure to Arabize many aspects of Mauritanian life, such as law and language.
Daddah's own Parti du Peuple Mauritanien (PPM) became the ruling organization in a one-party system.
The country's first deepwater port opened near Nouakchott in 1986.
Life expectancy at birth was 61.14 years (2011 estimate).
The energetic Colonel Mohamed Khouna Ould Haidallah soon emerged as its strongman.
Ordinance 83.127, enacted 5 June 1983, started the process of nationalization of all land not clearly the property of a documented owner, thus abolishing the traditional system of land tenure.
The obesity rate among Mauritanian women is high, perhaps in part due to the local standards of beauty, in which obese women are considered beautiful while thin women are sometimes regarded as "sickly".
:"The national armed forces and security forces have unanimously decided to put a definitive end to the oppressive activities of the defunct authority, which our people have suffered from during the past years."
On 9 April 1989, Mauritanian guards killed two Senegalese.
Hassaniya, a Berber-influenced Arabic dialect that derives its name from the Beni Hassan, became the dominant language among the largely nomadic population.
President Taya won elections in 1992 and 1997.
The coup was also backed by Abdallahi's rival in the 2007 election, Ahmed Ould Daddah.
Low-caste groups within the sub-Saharan African ethnic groups of the south are also sometimes enslaved.
Approximately 90% of Mauritania's land is within the Sahara and consequently the population is concentrated in the south, where precipitation is slightly higher.
On 3 August 2005, a military coup led by Colonel Ely Ould Mohamed Vall ended Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya's twenty-one years of rule.
It lies mostly between latitudes 14° and 26°N, and longitudes 5° and 17°W (small areas are east of 5° and west of 17°).
In February 2011, the waves of the Arab Spring spread to Mauritania, where thousands of people took to the streets of the capital.
In 1076, Moorish Islamic warrior monks (Almoravid or Al Murabitun) attacked and conquered the large area of the ancient Ghana Empire.
All people are free in Mauritania and this phenomenon no longer exists.
In the early 21st century, there were 11 physicians per 100,000 people.
This was the first time since Mauritania gained independence in 1960 that it elected a president in a multi-candidate election.
Sixteen other officers were listed as members of the Council.
Mauritania suffers from several human rights issues, including slavery, where an estimated roughly 4% (155,600 people) of the country's population are being enslaved against their will, especially enemies of the government.
Mauritania is unlikely to meet ESAF's annual GDP growth objectives of 4%–5%.
Its position on the Western Sahara conflict is, since the 1980s, one of strict neutrality.
Infant mortality is 60.42 deaths/1,000 live births (2011 estimate).
The government initiated a military investigation but never released the results.
Due to economic weakness, Mauritania has been a negligible player in the territorial dispute, with its official position being that it wishes for an expedient solution that is mutually agreeable to all parties.
In the apparently successful and bloodless coup, Abdallahi's daughter, Amal Mint Cheikh Abdallahi, said: "The security agents of the BASEP (Presidential Security Battalion) came to our home and took away my father."
Mauritania has been described as a "desperately poor desert nation, which straddles the Arab and African worlds and is Africa's newest, if small-scale, oil producer."
The country is nearly 100% Muslim, most of whom are Sunnis.
The scarps also separate a series of sandstone plateaus, the highest of which is the Adrar Plateau, reaching an elevation of .
Per capita expenditure on health was 43 US$ (PPP) in 2004.
In 1981 slavery was legally abolished, making Mauritania the last country in the world to do so.
Modern Standard Arabic is the official language.
This ethnic discord was evident during inter-communal violence that broke out in April 1989 (the "1989 Events" and "Mauritania–Senegal Border War"), but has since subsided.
The ''Parti Républicain Démocratique et Social'' (PRDS), formerly led by President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya, dominated Mauritanian politics after the country's first multi-party elections in April 1992, following the approval by referendum of the current constitution in July 1991.
The President justified this on the grounds that Mauritania was not ready for western-style multi-party democracy.
In an interview, the Mauritanian Minister of rural development, Brahim Ould M'Bareck Ould Med El Moctar, responded to accusations of human rights abuse by stating:
But relations with Morocco, the other party to the conflict, and its European ally France deteriorated.
Mauritania has not rescinded its recognition of Polisario's Western Saharan exile government, and remains on good terms with Algeria.
Mauritania has the University of Nouakchott and other institutions of higher education, but the majority of highly educated Mauritanians have studied outside the country.
Many sedentary peoples, whose ancestors had been expelled centuries earlier, began to trickle back into Mauritania.
Ould Taya moderated Mauritania's previous pro-Algerian stance, and re-established ties with Morocco during the late 1980s.
Mauritania became an independent nation in November, 1960.
The report continues: "Government efforts were not sufficient to enforce the antislavery law.
Mauritanian blacks allegedly face discrimination in employment in the civil service, the administration of justice before regular and religious courts, access to loans and credits from banks and state-owned enterprise, and opportunities for education and vocational training.
Despite marginal complaints, the elections were almost unanimously accepted by Western, Arab and African countries, which lifted sanctions and resumed relations with Mauritania.
After several military losses to the Polisario –&nbsp;heavily armed and supported by Algeria, the local hegemon and rival to Morocco&nbsp;– Mauritania withdrew in 1979.
Abdallahi's resignation allowed the election of Abdel Aziz as civilian president, on 18 July, by a 52% majority.
In recent years, drought and economic mismanagement have resulted in a buildup of foreign debt.
(See also Foreign relations of Mauritania.)
In 2012, it was estimated that 10% to 20% of the population of Mauritania (between 340,000 and 680,000 people) live in slavery.
A majority of the population still depends on agriculture and livestock for a livelihood, even though most of the nomads and many subsistence farmers were forced into the cities by recurrent droughts in the 1970s and 1980s.
Various models for maintaining the country's cultural diversity have been suggested, but none were successfully implemented.
Public expenditure on education was at 10.1% of 2000–2007 government expenditure.
Armed groups such as the now-exiled FLAM have carried out low-level rebellions in the southern part of Mauritania because of these continuing discriminatory practices.
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Nouakchott, founded in 1965, serves the 4,500 Catholics in Mauritania.
Through a combination of strategic alliances with Zawiya tribes, and military pressure on the Hassane warrior nomads, he managed to extend French rule over the Mauritanian emirates.
There is little evidence to support such claims, but a 2000 DNA study of Yemeni people suggested there might be some ancient connection between the peoples.
The war culminated in an international airlift agreed to by Senegal and Mauritania under international pressure to prevent further violence.
They were among 3,000 to 5,000 blacks — predominantly soldiers and civil servants — arrested between October 1990 and mid-January 1991.
They argued that the election had been falsified due to junta control, and complained that the international community had let down the opposition.
Mauritania expelled some 70,000 sub-Saharan African Mauritanians in the late 1980s.
Although potentially significant for the Mauritanian economy, its overall influence is difficult to predict.
The coup proceeded without loss of life.
Obstacles to ending slavery in Mauritania include:
Following the incident, several riots erupted in Bakel, Dakar and other towns in Senegal, directed against the mainly Arabized Mauritanians who dominated the local retail business.
Many of the Berber tribes claimed Yemeni (and sometimes other Arab) origins.
I must tell you that in Mauritania, freedom is total: freedom of thought, equality – of all men and women of Mauritania... in all cases, especially with this government, this is in the past.
Mauritania's presidential spokesman, Abdoulaye Mamadouba, said the President, Prime Minister, and Interior Minister had been arrested by renegade Senior Mauritanian army officers and were being held under house arrest at the presidential palace in the capital.
Potential nationalization was based on the concept of "dead land", i.e., property which has not been developed or on which obvious development cannot be seen.
The great Sahel droughts of the early 1970s caused massive devastation in Mauritania, exacerbating problems of poverty and conflict.
The Military Council later issued another statement naming Colonel Vall as president and director of the national police force, the ''Sûreté Nationale''.
Privatization remains one of the key issues.
These ethnic groups have been seen to contest the political, economic, and social dominance of Moors.
Ould Taya also started co-operating with the United States in anti-terrorism activities, a policy which was criticized by some human rights organizations.
On 6 August 2008, the head of the presidential guards took over the president's palace in Nouakchott, a day after 48 lawmakers from the ruling party resigned in protest of President Abdallahi's policies.
From November 1990 to February 1991, between 500 and 600 Fula and Soninke political prisoners were executed or tortured to death by Mauritanian government forces.
The elections were won in a second round of voting by Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, with Ahmed Ould Daddah a close second.
Trarza, Brakna and Tagant quickly submitted to treaties with the colonial power (1903–04), but the northern emirate of Adrar held out longer, aided by the anti-colonial rebellion (or jihad) of shaykh Maa al-Aynayn.
For nearly a decade the parliament was dominated by the PRDS.
In October 1987, the government allegedly uncovered a tentative coup d'état by a group of black army officers, backed, according to the authorities, by Senegal.
Heightened ethnic tensions were the catalyst for the Mauritania–Senegal Border War, which started as a result of a conflict in Diawara between Moorish Mauritanian herders and Senegalese farmers over grazing rights.
Since independence, critics have said that Mauritania's society has been characterised by discrimination against black populations, mainly Fula and Soninké.
Under this one-party constitution, Daddah was reelected in uncontested elections in 1976 and 1978.
This social discrimination is applied chiefly against the "black Moors" (Haratin) in the northern part of the country, where tribal elites among "white Moors" (''Beydan'', Hassaniya-speaking Arabs and Arabized Berbers) hold sway.
During the colonial period, 90% of the population remained nomadic.
But (slavery) is something that is totally finished.
However, Abdel Aziz's regime was isolated internationally, and became subject to diplomatic sanctions and the cancellation of some aid projects.
A group of current and former Army officers launched a violent and unsuccessful coup attempt on 8 June 2003.
The rioting, added to already existing tensions, led to a campaign within the country of terror against black Mauritanians, who are often seen as 'Senegalese' by Beidanes, regardless of their nationality.
* Belief that slavery is part of the natural order of this society.
He had brought the country to near-collapse through a disastrous war to annex the southern part of Western Sahara, framed as an attempt to create a "Greater Mauritania".
The minority Sufi brotherhood, the Tijaniyah, has had great influence not only in the country, but in Senegal and Morocco as well.
The exact number of expulsions is not known but the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) estimates that, as of June 1991, 52,995 Mauritanian refugees were living in Senegal and at least 13,000 in Mali.
Following the 2008 coup, the military government of Mauritania faced severe international sanctions and internal unrest.
Although nominally abolished in 1981, it was not illegal to own slaves until 2007.
Its claims were taken over by Morocco.
This changed the former balance of power, and new conflicts arose between the southern populations and Moors.
In order to guarantee immunity for those responsible and to block any attempts at accountability for past abuses, the Parliament declared an amnesty in June 1993 covering all crimes committed by the armed forces, security forces as well as civilians, between April 1989 and April 1992.
The Bafours were primarily agriculturalist, and among the first Saharan people to abandon their historically nomadic lifestyle.
Slavery persists in Mauritania.
The country derives its name from the ancient Berber Kingdom of Mauretania, which existed from the 3rd century BC to the 7th century, in the far north of modern-day Morocco.
There are probably former relationships – slavery relationships and familial relationships from old days and of the older generations, maybe, or descendants who wish to continue to be in relationships with descendants of their old masters, for familial reasons, or out of affinity, and maybe also for economic interests.
Filming for several documentaries and films has taken place in Mauritania, including ''Fort Saganne'' (1984), ''The Fifth Element'' (1997), ''The Books Under the Sand'' (1997), ''Life without Death'' (1997), ''Winged Migration'' (2001), ''Heremakono'' (2002), and  ''Timbuktu'' (2014).
This occurred as the French militarily suppressed the most intransigent Hassane tribes of the Arabized north.
Modern-day slavery is still a common practice in Mauritania.
International and internal pressure eventually forced the release of Abdallahi, who was instead placed under house arrest in his home village.
Mauritania was part of French West Africa from 1920.
Spring-fed oases lie at the foot of some of the scarps.
Mauritania's population is composed of several ethnic groups: the Arabs and Arabized Berbers or ''Beidane''; the ''Haratins'', descendants of freed sub-Saharan black slaves who have grown up in this society; the Soninke; the Serer (generally farmers and stock-breeders); and the Hal-pulaar or Fulas, who include settled farmers called Toucouleur and nomadic stock-breeders.
The capital and largest city is Nouakchott, located on the Atlantic coast, which is home to around one-third of the country's 3.5 million people.
The concentric Guelb er Richat (also known as the Richat Structure) is a prominent feature of the north-central region.
Six candidates, including Mauritania's first female and first Haratine (descended from former slaves) candidates, represented a wide variety of political goals and backgrounds.
Ethnic tensions and the sensitive issue of slavery –&nbsp;past and, in some areas, present&nbsp;– are still powerful themes in the country's political debate.
And I believe that I can tell you that no one profits from this commerce.
Political parties, illegal during the military period, were legalized again in 1991.
Mauritania is generally flat, with vast arid plains broken by occasional ridges and cliff-like outcroppings.
The dunes generally increase in size and mobility toward the north.
...mistreatment of detainees and prisoners; security force impunity; lengthy pretrial detention; harsh prison conditions; arbitrary arrests; limits on freedom of the press and assembly; corruption; discrimination against women; female genital mutilation (FGM); child marriage; political marginalization of southern-based ethnic groups; racial and ethnic discrimination; slavery and slavery-related practices; and child labor.
Amnesty International accused it of practicing coordinated torture against criminal and political detainees.
The Char Bouba war (1644–74) was the unsuccessful final effort of the peoples to repel the Yemeni Maqil Arab invaders.
At , 90% of which is desert, Mauritania is the world's 29th-largest country (after Bolivia).
On 28 October 1999, Mauritania joined Egypt, Palestine, and Jordan as the only members of the Arab League to officially recognize Israel.
The coup was co-ordinated by General Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, former chief of staff of the Mauritanian Army and head of the presidential guard, who had recently been fired.
Mauritania's first fully democratic presidential elections took place on 11 March 2007.
Isolated peaks, often rich in minerals, rise above the plateaus; the smaller peaks are called guelbs and the larger ones kedias.
Most of these so-called 'Senegalese' had no ties to Senegal, and many still reside in refugee camps in Mali and Senegal.
Public expenditure was 2% of the GDP in 2004 and private 0.9% of the GDP in 2004.
It became increasingly contested due to his harsh and uncompromising measures against opponents; many dissidents were jailed, and some executed.
After gaining independence, larger numbers of indigenous Sub-Saharan African peoples (Haalpulaar, Soninke, and Wolof) entered Mauritania, moving into the area north of the Senegal River.
The government of Mauritania denies that slavery continues in the country.
The invaders were led by the Beni Hassan tribe.
There may be additional oil reserves inland in the Taoudeni basin, although the harsh environment will make extraction expensive.
Most opposition parties boycotted the first legislative election in 1992.
In the late 1980s, Ould Taya had established close co-operation with Iraq, and pursued a strongly Arab Nationalist line.
The leaders of the attempted coup were never caught.
In November 2014, Mauritania was invited as a non-member guest nation to the G20 summit in Brisbane.
With the current rises in metal prices, gold and copper mining companies are opening mines in the interior.
The leader of the ''junta'', Col. Vall, promised to abide by the referendum and relinquish power peacefully.
This period was marked by extensive ethnic violence and human rights abuses.
To the west, between the ocean and the plateaus, are alternating areas of clayey plains (regs) and sand dunes (ergs), some of which shift from place to place, gradually moved by high winds.
The economic objectives have been set for 1999–2002.
The government was overthrown on 6 August 2008, in a military coup d'état led by then-General Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz.
Educated in French language and customs, many of these recent arrivals became clerks, soldiers, and administrators in the new state.
The government offered compensation to families of victims, which a few accepted in lieu of settlement.
Despite this amnesty, some Mauritanians have denounced the involvement of the government in the arrests and killings.
Fifty-one officers were arrested and subjected to interrogation and torture.
The organization has said that the Mauritanian government has practiced institutionalized and continuous use of torture throughout its post-independence history, under all its leaders.
Some figures, such as Senate chairman Messaoud Ould Boulkheir, continued to refuse the new order and call for Abdel Aziz's resignation.
Other peoples also migrated south past the Sahara to West Africa.
As a result of extended, severe drought, the desert has been expanding since the mid-1960s.
