My father, much better educated in this art than most amateurs are, knew how to develop my taste and to stimulate my enthusiasm at an early age."
As the guest of the Vaughan Williamses, he visited London, where he played for the Société des Concerts Français, gaining favourable reviews and enhancing his growing international reputation.
The first of Ravel's two operas, the one-act comedy ''L'heure espagnole'' was premiered in 1911.
His later teacher Gabriel Fauré understood this, but it was not generally acceptable to the conservative faculty of the Conservatoire of the 1890s.
Ravel's four chamber works composed after the First World War are the Sonata for Violin and Cello (1920–22), the "Berceuse sur le nom de Gabriel Fauré" for violin and piano (1922), the chamber original of ''Tzigane'' for violin and piano (1924) and finally the Violin Sonata (1923–27).
Transfers of the rolls have been released on compact disc.
The reviews were excellent: the ''Mercure de France'' called the score "absolutely ravishing, a masterwork in miniature".
He collaborated with Stravinsky on a performing version of Mussorgsky's unfinished opera ''Khovanshchina'', and his own works were the ''Trois poèmes de Mallarmé'' for soprano and chamber ensemble, and two short piano pieces, ''À la manière de Borodine'' and ''À la manière de Chabrier''.
Ravel's interpretations of some of his piano works were captured on piano roll between 1914 and 1928, although some rolls supposedly played by him may have been made under his supervision by Robert Casadesus, a better pianist.
The best known composer who studied with Ravel was probably Ralph Vaughan Williams, who was his pupil for three months in 1907–08.
Their admirers began to form factions, with adherents of one composer denigrating the other.
The themes are altogether impersonal".
It is an ethereal piece in the vein of the ''Pavane pour une infante défunte''.
Vaughan Williams recalled that Ravel helped him escape from "the heavy contrapuntal Teutonic manner... ''Complexe mais pas compliqué'' was his motto."
Ravel thought that Debussy was indeed an impressionist but that he himself was not.
Ravel commented that he preferred jazz to grand opera, and its influence is heard in his later music.
His other vocal music from that period shows Debussy's influence, in what Kelly describes as "a static, recitative-like vocal style", prominent piano parts and rhythmic flexibility.
The work had been completed in 1907, but the manager of the Opéra-Comique, Albert Carré, repeatedly deferred its presentation.
Ravel predicted that the premiere of the ''Rite'' would be seen as an event of historic importance equal to that of ''Pelléas et Mélisande''.
The earliest is the String Quartet (1902–03), dedicated to Fauré, and showing the influence of Debussy's quartet of ten years earlier.
Ravel was offered the Legion of Honour in 1920, and though he declined the decoration he was viewed by the new generation of composers typified by Satie's protégés Les Six as an establishment figure.
In 1937 Ravel began to suffer pain from his condition, and was examined by Clovis Vincent, a well-known Paris neurosurgeon.
His themes are frequently modal instead of using the familiar major or minor scales.
Ravel's earliest major work for piano, ''Jeux d'eau'' (1901), is frequently cited as evidence that he evolved his style independently of Debussy, whose major works for piano all came later.
He composed few works in the war years.
A 1932 recording of the G major Piano Concerto was advertised as "Conducted by the composer", although he had in fact supervised the sessions while a more proficient conductor took the baton.
Too much temperament, and the music loses its classical shape; too little, and it sounds pale."
The two middle works are respectively an affectionate tribute to Ravel's teacher, and a virtuoso display piece for the violinist Jelly d'Arányi.
The performable body of works numbers about sixty; slightly more than half are instrumental.
Ravel completed three songs for baritone and orchestra intended for the film; they were published as ''Don Quichotte à Dulcinée''.
The suite celebrates the tradition of François Couperin, the 18th-century French composer; each movement is dedicated to a friend of Ravel's who died in the war.
Vaughan Williams's recollections throw some light on Ravel's private life, about which the latter's reserved and secretive personality has led to much speculation.
His output, never large, became smaller.
It divided musical opinion.
Though that total is small in comparison with the output of his major contemporaries, it is nevertheless inflated by Ravel's frequent practice of writing works for piano and later rewriting them as independent pieces for orchestra.
''The Times'' praised "the enchantment of the work&nbsp;... the effect of mirage, by which something quite real seems to float on nothing."
Orchestral versions of the last by Mikhail Tushmalov, Sir Henry Wood and Leo Funtek predated Ravel's 1922 version, and many more have been made since, but Ravel's remains the best known.
Vaughan Williams, Rosenthal and Marguerite Long have all recorded that Ravel frequented brothels.
After his death in 1960 the estate passed through several hands.
Nonetheless, after the death of Debussy in 1918, he was generally seen, in France and abroad, as the leading French composer of the era.
It was to be a large-scale, full-length work for the Paris Opéra, but Ravel's final illness prevented him from writing it.
Ravel was unmoved by his new international celebrity.
It is more uncompromisingly modern in its musical style than ''L'heure espagnole'', and the jazz elements and bitonality of much of the work upset many Parisian opera-goers.
Ravel, together with several other former pupils of Fauré, set up a new, modernist organisation, the Société Musicale Indépendente, with Fauré as its president.
Ravel's regard for his predecessors is heard in several of his piano works; ''Menuet sur le nom de Haydn'' (1909), ''À la manière de Borodine'' (1912), ''À la manière de Chabrier'' (1913) and ''Le tombeau de Couperin'' all incorporate elements of the named composers interpreted in a characteristically Ravellian manner.
Dubois unavailingly forbade Conservatoire students to attend, and the conductor's friend and former teacher Camille Saint-Saëns was prominent among those who detested the piece.
Dance forms appealed to Ravel, most famously the bolero and pavane, but also the minuet, forlane, rigaudon, waltz, czardas, habanera and passacaglia.
The two composers ceased to be on friendly terms in the middle of the 1900s, for musical and possibly personal reasons.
His fee was a guaranteed minimum of $10,000 and a constant supply of Gauloises cigarettes.
His mother, Marie, ''née'' Delouart, was Basque but had grown up in Madrid.
The music rapidly entered the concert repertoire; it was played at the Queen's Hall, London, within weeks of the Paris premiere, and was repeated at the Proms later in the same year.
Orenstein and Zank both comment that, although Ravel's post-war output was small, averaging only one composition a year, it included some of his finest works.
Aged fourteen, he took part in a concert at the Salle Érard along with other pupils of Decombes, including Reynaldo Hahn and Alfred Cortot.
There were frequent disagreements between the collaborators, and the premiere was under-rehearsed because of the late completion of the work.
From the start of his career, Ravel appeared calmly indifferent to blame or praise.
''L'affaire Ravel'' became a national scandal, leading to the early retirement of Dubois and his replacement by Fauré, appointed by the government to carry out a radical reorganisation of the Conservatoire.
The Société presented concerts of recent works by American composers including Aaron Copland, Virgil Thomson and George Antheil and by Vaughan Williams and his English colleagues Arnold Bax and Cyril Scott.
Ravel's music includes pieces for piano, chamber music, two piano concerti, ballet music, opera, and song cycles.
It was originally a solo piano work, commissioned by the Princesse de Polignac.
Those who knew him well believed that this was no pose but wholly genuine.
Orenstein, commenting that this tour marked the zenith of Ravel's international reputation, lists its non-musical highlights as a visit to Poe's house in New York, and excursions to Niagara Falls and the Grand Canyon.
Foreign influences include Mozart, Schubert, Liszt and Chopin.
The piece was only modestly successful at its first production, and it was not until the 1920s that it became popular.
Ravel's songs often draw on vernacular styles, using elements of many folk traditions in such works as ''Cinq mélodies populaires grecques'', ''Deux mélodies hébraïques'' and ''Chants populaires''.
There is no record that Ravel received any formal general schooling in his early years; his biographer Roger Nichols suggests that the boy may have been chiefly educated by his father.
Ravel did not like the work (his opinion caused a cooling in Stravinsky's friendship with him) but he was in sympathy with the fashion for "dépouillement" – the "stripping away" of pre-war extravagance to reveal the essentials.
Ravel composed little during 1913.
Ravel also worked at unusual speed on the Piano Trio (1914) to complete it before joining the French army.
Such speculation recurred in a 2000 life of Ravel by Benjamin Ivry; subsequent studies have concluded that Ravel's sexuality and personal life remain a mystery.
They survive only in fragmentary form.
Finding city life fatiguing, Ravel moved to the country.
This was his largest-scale orchestral work, and took him immense trouble and several years to complete.
Long attributed this to his self-consciousness about his diminutive stature, and consequent lack of confidence with women.
''La cloche engloutie'' after Hauptmann's ''The Sunken Bell'' occupied him intermittently from 1906 to 1912, Ravel destroyed the sketches for both these works, except for a ''"Symphonie horlogère"'' which he incorporated into the opening of ''L'heure espagnole''.
Fokine had a reputation for his modern approach to dance, with individual numbers replaced by continuous music.
By other accounts, none of them first hand, Ravel was in love with Misia Edwards, or wanted to marry the violinist Hélène Jourdan-Morhange.
Orenstein comments that Debussy was more spontaneous and casual in his composing while Ravel was more attentive to form and craftsmanship.
Ravel began work with Diaghilev's choreographer, Michel Fokine, and designer, Léon Bakst.
When writing for solo piano Ravel rarely aimed at the intimate chamber effect characteristic of Debussy, but sought a Lisztian virtuosity.
Other influences on him in this period were jazz and atonality.
Wittgenstein was initially disappointed by the piece, but after long study he became fascinated by it and ranked it as a great work.
He appeared with most of the leading orchestras in Canada and the US and visited twenty-five cities.
Both these teachers, particularly Fauré, regarded him highly and were key influences on his development as a composer.
This appealed to Ravel, and after discussing the action in great detail with Fokine, Ravel began composing the music.
At the beginning of the 1930s Ravel was working on two piano concertos.
Some of Ravel's duties put him in mortal danger, driving munitions at night under heavy German bombardment.
Henson notes that Ravel preserved most or all his auditory imagery and could still hear music in his head.
When he was seven Ravel started piano lessons with Henry Ghys, a friend of Emmanuel Chabrier; five years later, in 1887, he began studying harmony, counterpoint and composition with Charles-René, a pupil of Léo Delibes.
Experts have ruled out the possibility of a tumour, and have variously suggested frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer's disease and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.
The Piano Concerto in G major was completed a year later.
As a result, there are few leading notes in his output.
It involves subtle musicianship, a feeling for pianistic colour and the sort of lightly worn virtuosity that masks the advanced technical challenges he makes in ''Alborada del gracioso''... and the two outer movements of ''Gaspard de la nuit''.
Edwards was married to Ravel's friend Misia; the couple took Ravel on a seven-week Rhine cruise on their yacht in June and July 1905, the first time he had travelled abroad.
Ravel's brother Edouard accepted this advice; as Henson comments, the patient was in no state to express a considered view.
Some find the characters artificial and the piece lacking in humanity.
He dressed like a dandy and was meticulous about his appearance and demeanour.
The first run of the opera consisted of fourteen performances: Ravel attended all of them.
He considered himself in many ways a classicist, often using traditional structures and forms, such as the ternary, to present his new melodic and rhythmic content and innovative harmonies.
Vincent advised surgical treatment.
The critic Henry Prunières wrote, "From the opening measures, we are plunged into a world in which Ravel has but rarely introduced us."
Like his own teacher, Fauré, he was concerned that his pupils should find their own individual voices and not be excessively influenced by established masters.
In 1913, together with Debussy, Ravel was among the musicians present at the dress rehearsal of ''The Rite of Spring''.
He considered his small stature and light weight ideal for an aviator, but was rejected because of his age and a minor heart complaint.
Ravel declined to join, telling the committee of the league in 1916, "It would be dangerous for French composers to ignore systematically the productions of their foreign colleagues, and thus form themselves into a sort of national coterie: our musical art, which is so rich at the present time, would soon degenerate, becoming isolated in banal formulas."
From this point he concentrated on composition.
He wrote no symphonies or religious works.
Manuel Rosenthal was one, and records that Ravel was a very demanding teacher when he thought his pupil had talent.
Ravel was once again accused of artificiality and lack of human emotion, but Nichols finds "profoundly serious feeling at the heart of this vivid and entertaining work".
During his lifetime it was above all as a master of orchestration that Ravel was famous.
In the same year he conducted the first performance of the ''Shéhérazade'' overture, which had a mixed reception, with boos mingling with applause from the audience, and unflattering reviews from the critics.
He wrote several short pieces paying tribute to composers he admired – Borodin, Chabrier, Fauré and Haydn, interpreting their characteristics in a Ravellian style.
In 1902 and 1903 he won nothing: according to the musicologist Paul Landormy, the judges suspected Ravel of making fun of them by submitting cantatas so academic as to seem like parodies.
In the post-war era there was a reaction against the large-scale music of composers such as Gustav Mahler and Richard Strauss.
Ravel commented to Arthur Honegger, one of Les Six,  "I've written only one masterpiece – ''Boléro''.
In 1913 there was a gramophone recording of ''Jeux d'eau'' played by Mark Hambourg, and by the early 1920s there were discs featuring the ''Pavane pour une infante défunte'' and ''Ondine'', and movements from the String Quartet, ''Le tombeau de Couperin'' and ''Ma mère l'Oye''.
On 30 December 1937 Ravel was buried next to his parents in a granite tomb at the cemetery at Levallois-Perret, a suburb of northwest Paris.
''Olympia'' was to be based on Hoffmann's ''The Sandman''; he made sketches for it in 1898–99, but did not progress far.
Ravel was expelled in 1895, having won no more prizes.
He minutely studied the ability of each orchestral instrument to determine its potential, putting its individual colour and timbre to maximum use.
Even when setting lyrics clearly narrated by a man, he often favoured a female voice, and he seems to have preferred his best-known cycle, ''Shéhérazade'', to be sung by a woman, although a tenor voice is a permitted alternative in the score.
During the war, the Ligue Nationale pour la Defense de la Musique Française was formed by Saint-Saëns, Dubois, d'Indy and others, campaigning for a ban on the performance of contemporary German music.
During the first years of the new century Ravel made five attempts to win France's most prestigious prize for young composers, the Prix de Rome, past winners of which included Berlioz, Gounod, Bizet, Massenet and Debussy.
Arnold Schönberg's abandonment of conventional tonality also had echoes in some of Ravel's music such as the ''Chansons madécasses'' (1926), which Ravel doubted he could have written without the example of ''Pierrot Lunaire''.
He was eliminated in the first round, which even critics unsympathetic to his music, including Lalo, denounced as unjustifiable.
Émile Decombes took over as Ravel's piano teacher in 1889; in the same year Ravel gave his earliest public performance.
Like the Debussy it differs from the more monumental quartets of the established French school of Franck and his followers, with more succinct melodies, fluently interchanged, in flexible tempos and varieties of instrumental colour.
Ravel wrote that Debussy's "genius was obviously one of great individuality, creating its own laws, constantly in evolution, expressing itself freely, yet always faithful to French tradition.
Most of Ravel's piano music is extremely difficult to play, and presents pianists with a balance of technical and artistic challenges.
It's the portrait of a ballet".
The injury was not thought serious at the time, but in a study for the ''British Medical Journal'' in 1988 the neurologist R. A. Henson concludes that it may have exacerbated an existing cerebral condition.
The pieces that began as piano compositions and were then given orchestral dress were ''Pavane pour une infante défunte'' (orchestrated 1910), ''Une barque sur l'océan'' (1906, from the 1905 piano suite ''Miroirs''), the Habanera section of ''Rapsodie espagnole'' (1907–08), ''Ma mère l'Oye'' (1908–10, orchestrated 1911), ''Valses nobles et sentimentales'' (1911, orchestrated 1912), ''Alborada del gracioso'' (from ''Miroirs'', orchestrated 1918) and ''Le tombeau de Couperin'' (1914–17, orchestrated 1919).
He was commissioned to provide a score for Ida Rubinstein's ballet company, and having been unable to secure the rights to orchestrate Albéniz's ''Iberia'' he decided on "an experiment in a very special and limited direction&nbsp;... a piece lasting seventeen minutes and consisting wholly of orchestral tissue without music."
In the cycles ''Shéhérazade'' and ''Chansons madécasses'' Ravel gives vent to his taste for the exotic, even the sensual, in both the vocal line and the accompaniment.
Ravel won the first prize in the Conservatoire's piano competition in 1891, but otherwise he did not stand out as a student.
Chords of the ninth and eleventh and unresolved appoggiaturas, such as those in the ''Valses nobles et sentimentales'', are characteristic of Ravel's harmonic language.
The first, to the orchestrated and expanded version of ''Ma mère l'Oye'', opened at the Théâtre des Arts in January.
Commentators have noted some Debussian touches in some parts of these works.
For all Ravel's orchestral mastery, only four of his works were conceived as concert works for symphony orchestra: ''Rapsodie espagnole'', ''La valse'' and the two concertos.
The critic Alexis Roland-Manuel wrote, "In reality he is, with Stravinsky, the one man in the world who best knows the weight of a trombone-note, the harmonics of a 'cello or a ''pp'' tam-tam in the relationships of one orchestral group to another."
His writing for the brass ranges from softly muted to triple-forte outbursts at climactic points.
The second opera, also in one act, is ''L'enfant et les sortilèges'' (1926), a "fantaisie lyrique" to a libretto by Colette.
The critics Edward Sackville-West and Desmond Shawe-Taylor comment that in the slow movement, "one of the most beautiful tunes Ravel ever invented", the composer "can truly be said to join hands with Mozart".
Ravel was touched by this spontaneous gesture and observed, "You know, this doesn't happen to me in Paris."
The Introduction and Allegro for harp, flute, clarinet, and string quartet (1905) was composed very quickly by Ravel's standards.
Around 1900 Ravel and a number of innovative young artists, poets, critics, and musicians joined together in an informal group; they came to be known as Les Apaches ("The Hooligans"), a name coined by Viñes to represent their status as "artistic outcasts".
The household was not rich, but the family was comfortable, and the two boys had happy childhoods.
He regarded their reaction against his works as natural, and preferable to their copying his style.
It was rejected by Diaghilev, who said, "It's a masterpiece, but it's not a ballet.
The effort to complete the ballet took its toll on Ravel's health; neurasthenia obliged him to rest for several months after the premiere.
Ravel, together with his close friend and confidante Misia Edwards and the opera star Lucienne Bréval, contributed to a modest regular income for the deserted Lilly Debussy, a fact that Nichols suggests may have rankled with her husband.
As Ravel's course progressed, Fauré reported "a distinct gain in maturity... engaging wealth of imagination".
The lighter tone of the G major Piano Concerto follows the models of Mozart and Saint-Saëns, alongside use of jazz-like themes.
The Violin and Cello Sonata is a departure from the rich textures and harmonies of the pre-war Piano Trio: the composer said that it marked a turning point in his career, with thinness of texture pushed to the extreme and harmonic charm renounced in favour of pure melody.
In 1902 André Messager conducted the premiere of Debussy's opera'' Pelléas et Mélisande'' at the Opéra-Comique.
at the premiere he remarked, "That old lady got the message!"
After several unsuccessful attempts to enlist, Ravel finally joined the Thirteenth Artillery Regiment as a lorry driver in March 1915, when he was forty.
Ravel said, "It's probably better for us, after all, to be on frigid terms for illogical reasons."
Apart from a one-movement sonata for violin and piano dating from 1899, unpublished in the composer's lifetime, Ravel wrote seven chamber works.
He liked to experiment with musical form, as in his best-known work, ''Boléro'' (1928), in which repetition takes the place of development.
''Daphnis et Chloé'' opened at the same theatre in June.
Many of his works from the 1920s are noticeably sparer in texture than earlier pieces.
The score presents an impression of simplicity, disguising intricate links between themes, with, in Murray's phrase, "extraordinary and bewitching sounds from the orchestra pit throughout".
Orenstein comments that, short in stature, light in frame, and bony in features, Ravel had the "appearance of a well-dressed jockey", whose large head seemed suitably matched to his formidable intellect.
National and regional consciousness was important to him, and although a planned concerto on Basque themes never materialised, his works include allusions to Hebraic, Greek, Hungarian and gypsy themes.
Marcel Marnat's catalogue of Ravel's complete works lists eighty-five works, including many incomplete or abandoned.
Ravel continued that the work was "one long, very gradual crescendo.
Another critic, Pierre Lalo, thought that Ravel showed talent, but was too indebted to Debussy and should instead emulate Beethoven.
At an all-Ravel programme conducted by Serge Koussevitzky in New York the entire audience stood up and applauded as the composer took his seat.
In the 1920s and 1930s Ravel was internationally regarded as France's greatest living composer.
Stravinsky later said that Ravel was the only person who immediately understood the music.
Through the Société Musicale Indépendente, he was able to encourage them and composers from other countries.
Ravel said that the violin and piano are "essentially incompatible" instruments, and that his Sonata reveals their incompatibility.
After the operation there seemed to be an improvement in his condition, but it was short-lived, and he soon lapsed into a coma.
His earliest works to survive in full are from these student days: ''Sérénade grotesque'', for piano, and "Ballade de la Reine morte d'aimer", a ''mélodie'' setting a poem by Rolande de Marès (both 1893).
The league responded by banning Ravel's music from its concerts.
The Société Nationale de Musique, founded in 1871 to promote the music of rising French composers, had been dominated since the mid-1880s by a conservative faction led by Vincent d'Indy.
For Debussy, the musician and the man, I have had profound admiration, but by nature I am different from Debussy...
After two months of planning Ravel made a four-month tour of North America in 1928, playing and conducting.
He wrote some substantial works while studying with Fauré, including the overture ''Shéhérazade'' and a violin sonata, but he won no prizes, and therefore was expelled again in 1900.
He had worked on it intermittently for some years, planning a concert piece, "a sort of apotheosis of the Viennese waltz, mingled with, in my mind, the impression of a fantastic, fatal whirling".
Ravel was never so assiduous a student of the piano as his colleagues such as Viñes and Cortot were.
His father, Pierre-Joseph Ravel, was an educated and successful engineer, inventor and manufacturer, born in Versoix near the Franco-Swiss border.
The manuscript orchestral score is in Ravel's hand, but Lucien Garban and Manuel Rosenthal helped in transcription.
In 1912 Ravel had three ballets premiered.
It is among the works set in or illustrating Spain that Ravel wrote throughout his career.
A ballet danced to the orchestral version of ''Le tombeau de Couperin'' was given at the Théâtre des Champs-Elysées in November 1920, and the premiere of ''La valse'' followed in December.
His last chamber work, the Violin Sonata (sometimes called the Second after the posthumous publication of his student sonata), is a frequently dissonant work.
The Piano Trio was almost complete when the conflict began, and the most substantial of his wartime works is ''Le tombeau de Couperin'', composed between 1914 and 1917.
In the orchestral versions, the instrumentation generally clarifies the harmonic language of the score and brings sharpness to classical dance rhythms.
Sackville-West and Shawe-Taylor consider the post-war sonatas "rather laboured and unsatisfactory", and neither work has matched the popularity of Ravel's pre-war chamber works.
Although Ravel wrote for mixed choirs and male solo voices, he is chiefly associated, in his songs, with the soprano and mezzo-soprano voices.
His other major works from the 1920s include the orchestral arrangement of Mussorgsky's piano suite ''Pictures at an Exhibition'' (1922), the opera ''L'enfant et les sortilèges'' to a libretto by Colette (1926), ''Tzigane'' (1924) and the Violin Sonata (1927).
Satie's constant experiments in musical form were an inspiration to Ravel, who counted them "of inestimable value".
A substantial proportion of Ravel's output was vocal.
The unrealised three were ''Olympia'', ''La cloche engloutie'' and ''Jeanne d'Arc''.
Ravel was born in the Basque town of Ciboure, France, near Biarritz,  from the Spanish border.
All the other orchestral works were written either for the stage, as in ''Daphnis et Chloé'', or as a reworking of piano pieces, ''Alborada del gracioso'' and ''Une barque sur l'ocean'', (''Miroirs''), ''Valses nobles et sentimentales,'' '' Ma mère l'Oye'', ''Tzigane'' (originally for violin and piano) and ''Le tombeau de Couperin.''
Nichols comments that Ravel had the satisfaction of seeing the ballet staged twice by other managements before Diaghilev died.
Ravel's mother died in January 1917, and he fell into a "horrible despair", compounding the distress he felt at the suffering endured by the people of his country during the war.
At the same time his peace of mind was undermined by his mother's failing health.
