Some of these are still in competitive use, although with the benefit of new barrels.
Having shrugged off cautionary warnings from his officers, Lawton walked up and down the line, rallying his men.
The German Army adopted the best features of the Lebel for the Gewehr 88, also known as the "Model 1888 commission rifle", along with a modified Mauser action and a Mannlicher-style box magazine.
The 1893 Mauser was also used by the Spanish Army in the Philippines against the Philippine Revolutionary Army and U.S. forces.
Several proprietary big game rounds were specifically for hunting large and dangerous game.
Many such guns continued to use the smaller 0.318 diameter bullet until this practice was outlawed by Hermann Göring in the early 1940s in his role as chief huntsman of the Third Reich.
A number of carbine versions known as Karabiner 98s were introduced and used in World War I.
It gained a deadly reputation particularly from the legendary Battle of San Juan Hill (1898), where only 750 Spanish regulars significantly delayed the advance of 8,500 U.S. troops armed with a mix of outclassed .30-40 Krag–Jørgensen bolt-action rifles and older single-shot, breech-loading Trapdoor Springfield rifles, inflicting 1,400 U.S. casualties.
The Mauser name has historically also been licensed by other companies on intermittent occasions.
The commission preferred to create their own design.
Care must be taken to thoroughly and promptly clean and neutralize these salts after firing corrosive ammunition, lest the weapon suffer metal and mechanical damage.
Commonly known today as the "8&nbsp;mm Mauser I", it was used for later Mauser rifle models.
Additionally, the widespread availability and comparative low cost of surplus military ammunition has served to continue their use by shooting enthusiasts.
A delay in the purchase forced them to buy real estate overlooking the Neckar River Valley, where the upper works was built that same year.
In 1995 the company became a subsidiary of Rheinmetall called ''Mauser-Werke Oberndorf Waffensysteme GmbH'', before being acquired by ''Lüke & Ortmeier Group'' in 2000.
Initial production of the weapons was in Germany by Waffenfabrik Mauser, with the remainder being manufactured under license by Sweden's state-operated Bofors Carl Gustaf factory.
In 1898 the German Army purchased a Mauser design, the Model 98, which incorporated improvements introduced in earlier models.
Many parts were interchangeable, with the exception of the bayonets of the 89 and 90/91; the barrel shroud made the bayonet ring too wide.
All versions used detachable shoulder stock holsters.
File:M61411306.jpg|The top of the receiver on an 8.15x46r ''Wehrmannsgewehr''
After the war in Europe, the factory was briefly put back in order to produce weapons for the now under-equipped and exhausted French military.
Production began at the Oberndorf factory for the infantry version, which fired a black powder 11×60mm round from a long  barrel.
Mauser incorporated a third "safety" lug on the bolt body to protect the shooter in the event that one or more of the forward locking lugs failed.
During the 1899 Battle of Paye, U.S. Army major-general, Henry Ware Lawton, known for leading the expedition that captured Geronimo, was in the midst of the fighting.
While many standard model rifles were indeed exported, it was meant primarily for use by the revived German military.
The Gewehr 88 was not actually a Mauser designed and engineered rifle.
A considerable number of surplus Karabiner 98ks were available after World War II, and some were used by Schultz & Larsen in Denmark as the basis for target rifles.
The K98k was first adopted by the ''Wehrmacht'' in 1935 as their standard issue rifle, with many older versions being converted and shortened.
Swedish iron ore contains the proper percentages of trace elements to make good alloy steel.
The Belgians and Czechs produced and widely exported their "Mausers" in various calibers throughout the 1920s and 1930s, before their production facilities were absorbed by Nazi Germany to make parts or whole rifles for the German Army.
Thus, though lacking the industrial base necessary for mass-producing steel and iron, the Swedish steel industry developed a niche market for specialty high-strength steel alloys containing nickel, copper, and vanadium.
Noticeable changes from previous Mauser rifle models included better ruptured case gas venting, better receiver metallurgy, and a larger  diameter receiver ring compared to previous Mauser "small ring" bolt action designs that had  diameter receiver rings for additional strength and safety.
The adaptations usually consisted of shortening the foregrip and barrel, rechambering to accommodate popular British rounds, and minor alterations to the action.
It was introduced in 1910; an updated model chambered for .32 ACP (7.65&nbsp;mm) came out in 1914.
Several variations of this model participated in rifle trials for the U.S. Army of that year; the Norwegian Krag–Jørgensen rifle was ultimately chosen.
Ludwig Löwe & Company was fifty per cent owner of Fabrique Nationale d'Armes de Guerre, a company formed in 1889 to manufacture Mauser rifles for the Belgian government.
A safety feature offered by the Model 1895 was a low shoulder at the rear of the receiver, just behind the base of the bolt handle, which would contain the bolt in the unlikely event that the front locking lugs sheared off due to excessive pressure.
Serbia designed an improved version of the Model 71 in 10.15mm, made in Germany and called the Mauser-Milovanović M1878/80.
Paul Mauser returned to Oberndorf in December 1869, and Wilhelm arrived in April 1870.
As a result, the Swedes chambered their new service weapons, the m/94 carbine and m/96 rifle, in this round.
This extended the effective range of Spanish defensive fire.
Several redesigns, including the adoption of the ''spitzer'' bullet of 153 grains weight (later 198 grains weight), led to a change in the rifling groove depth from .10mm to .15mm to solve problems brought about by the greater velocity and the 8×57mm IS or 8×57mm JS 8.2mm or 0.323-inch bullet.
The M93 introduced a short staggered-column box magazine as standard, holding five smokeless 7×57mm Mauser rounds flush with the bottom of the rifle, which could be reloaded quickly by pushing a strip of rounds from the top of the open bolt.
In the 1990s Mauser was bought by Rheinmetall Berlin AG; the sale was completed in 1996.
Mauser Jagdwaffen continues making bolt-action rifles as a subsidiary of SIG Sauer.
The bullet diameter was increased from  to .
By 23 May 1874, the Mauser partnership had three factories in Oberndorf.
This was not a Mauser designed and engineered cartridge.
Deutsche Waffen und Munitionsfabriken A.G. (DWM) was formed on 7 November 1896, as a merger of Ludwig Löwe & Company A.G., Deutsche Metallpatronenfabrik A.G., Rheinisch-Westfälischen Powder Company, and Rottweil-Hamburg Powder Company.
The rifle was patented in Austria by Samuel Norris on 24 December 1867.
The Model M was introduced in 1914.
By 1903, U.S. authorities had adopted the M1903 Springfield, which copied the 1898 Mauser's bolt and magazine systems, along with a higher-velocity .30 caliber cartridge, the .30-03 (later the more potent .30-06 Springfield).
The partnership became a stock company with the name of Waffenfabrik Mauser on 1 April 1884.
In 2004 Mauser-Werke Oberndorf Waffensysteme GmbH was incorporated into Rheinmetall Waffe Munition GmbH, along with several other companies.
The strong following enjoyed by surplus military Mausers is partly a testament to their reliability and quality of manufacture.
Particular care is often taken to determine the actual caliber of such guns before firing them.
File:Mauser Standard Modell Commercial 8mm Service Rifle 805.jpg|An 8×57mm JS Mauser standard model rifle
After an order for 100,000 rifle sights was received from the Bavarian Rifle Factory at  Amberg, the Mauser brothers began negotiations to purchase the Württemberg Royal Armoury.
However, the Imperial German Flying Corps adopted the rifle for its aircraft crews in 1915, and more generally in 1916.
Its design echoed that of the German Gewehr 71/84 service rifle: a bolt-action weapon with a tubular magazine beneath the barrel.
The ''R'' included in this style of designations indicates a cartridge with a rim, which functions better in some types of rifles, especially drillings and other types of combination guns.
Both would be updated in the early 20th century and saw limited use in World War I.
The 1925 Special range rifle was a commercial product introduced in 1925 and sold in the United States.
These carbines were originally only distributed to cavalry troops, but later in the war to the special storm troop units as well.
The rifle was shown to the Austrian War Ministry by Samuel Norris of E. Remington & Sons.
When Mauser was contracted to fabricate the initial production runs of Swedish Mausers in Germany due to production delays, Sweden required the use of Swedish steel in the manufacturing process.
Their rifles were chambered for the 7.65×53mm Argentine cartridge and were identical to the Spanish model, except for a unique cartridge feed interruptor or magazine cut-off, which when engaged permits the feeding and extraction of single cartridges only while keeping the cartridges in the magazine in reserve, which permitted the feeding of single cartridges while keeping the magazine fully loaded.
The design was developed from the Karabiner 98b, one of the carbines developed from the Model 1898.
The Mauser rifle was accepted by the Prussian government on 2 December 1871, and was accepted for service until 14  February 1872, after a requested design change to the safety lock.
It was nominally intended for export and civilian sales.
The use of smokeless powder gave the Spanish a major advantage over the single-shot, black powder Springfield that was issued to many U.S. troops.
'''Mauser''' is a German arms manufacturer of a line of bolt-action rifles and semi-automatic pistols since the 1870s.
The rifle initially used a firing needle; a later version used a firing pin and a rear-ignition cartridge.
This improved cartridge copied the pointed tip design instead of the previous rounded nose profile.
Today, large and small bore Mauser-derived rifles are made all over the world for the civilian market and are popular with hunters.
It rapidly evolved into the Karabiner 98 Kurz, which was adopted by Nazi Germany as the standard infantry rifle in 1935 and saw service until the end of World War II.
Mauser continued to make hunting and sporting rifles.
The air service turned to the Swiss-produced Mondragón rifle, which was tested by the army and though less accurate than Mauser's design, the rifle was approximately three times cheaper.
Mausers were readily adapted as hunting rifles; in Africa, safari rifles were often made from Mausers.
It still had only two locking lugs.
This was in response to the French adoption of a pointed and boat-tail bullet, which offered better ballistic performance.
Only later .323 caliber versions of Gewehr 98 or converted Gewehr 88 and Gewehr 98 rifles could safely fire the larger 8×57mm JS rounds.
In 1940 the Mauser Company was invited to take part in a competition to re-equip the German Army with a semi-automatic rifle, the Gewehr 41.
18 in Oberndorf am Neckar.
FN could not keep up with orders, so they outsourced production to the Birmingham Small Arms Company in England.
The mechanism was quite delicate, working reliably only when completely clean, which made the rifle unsuitable for infantry use.
The war caused a spike in demand for the company's rifles.
Slightly modified versions were widely sold to other countries, firing bullets that would today be considered very large, typically 9.5mm to 11.5mm.
The 1893 Mauser was used by the Spanish Army in Cuba against U.S. and Cuban insurrectionist forces.
This bullet, with a sharp point (and later in the 1930s a boat tail), brought the cartridge to its eventual potency.
The two rifles became known as the 89 Belgian (with a barrel shroud) and the 91 Argentine (with a 71 layout) Mausers, identical in their function and feed system.
Surplus military Mausers, many in mint condition, have also entered the civilian market, to be purchased by collectors and gun owners.
The M93's stripper clip system allowed the Spaniards to reload far more quickly than could be done with the Krag, whose magazine had to be loaded one round at a time.
However, the rifle had another flaw; it was expensive to make.
The Mauser design, the G41(M), failed as it, along with its G41(W) counterpart, suffered from gas system fouling problems.
On 3 November 1893, the United Kingdoms of Sweden and Norway adopted the 6.5×55 mm cartridge.
In the end they ordered their own simpler variation of the 91 Argentine Mauser known as the 90 Turkish.
The system proved impressive at the 1884 Bavarian Arms Trials.
After the Mauser brothers finished work on the Model 71/84 in 1880, the design team set out to create a small caliber repeater that used smokeless powder.
Due to the possibility for overpressure from the undersize barrel, the spitzer round cannot safely be used in unmodified guns, particularly with Model 88 rifles.
Most of these were used by the ''Wehrmacht'' and the ''Kriegsmarine''.
That being said, vintage surplus ammunition usually requires specialized cleaning regimens to prevent aggressive and rapid metal oxidation caused by corrosive salts (moisture attracting) contained in their priming compounds.
South African Mausers were highly effective against the British during the Second Boer War; these proved deadly at long ranges, prompting the British to design their own Mauser-inspired high-velocity cartridge and rifle.
Mauser A.G. was formed on 23 April 1897.
Paul Mauser died on 29 May 1914, before the start of World War I that August.
Pointed rounds give bullets a better ballistic coefficient, improving the effective range of the cartridge by decreasing aerodynamic drag.
The rifle action was manufactured relatively unchanged from 1896 to 1944, and the m/94 Carbine, m/96 Rifle, m/38 Short Rifle, and m/41 Sharpshooter models are known by collectors as "Swedish Mausers".
During World War II, the Mauser factory in Oberndorf was strategically bombed by the Allies, resulting in the deaths of 26 workers and the destruction of the company's power plant.
* Model 96 / model 96 S – a straight pull action rifle
In response, Mauser started small-scale production of the design in an effort to interest foreign nations, but failed to convince any of the European major powers.
The company also produced a .22 caliber training rifle during this time frame.
The Model B (B for Büchse) and Model K were sport rifles offered in many configurations.
Following the collapse of the German Empire after World War I, many countries that were using Mauser models chose to develop, assemble, or modify their own G98-action rifle designs.
A non-rotating Mauser claw extractor was introduced in the Model 92.
Production ran from 1940 until the end of World War II, and in the 1960s and early 1970s.
As the restrictions on production were increasingly ignored by the Germans in the 1930s, a new Mauser, the Mauser standard model, was developed from the rifle-length Karabiner 98b.
In 1884 an 8-shot tubular magazine was added by Mauser to the Model 71/84.
The Mauser 1918 T-Gewehr was the world's first anti-tank rifle—the first rifle designed for the sole purpose of destroying armored targets.
Smokeless powder allowed smaller diameter bullets to be propelled at higher velocities, with accuracy to , making most other military rifles obsolete.
The partners went to Liège in 1867, but when the French government showed no interest in a Chassepot conversion, the partnership was dissolved.
The Mauser's 7mm cartridge gave some  higher velocity and a resultant flatter trajectory over the .30 Army cartridge used in the U.S. Krag–Jørgensen rifle.
The process of developing a semi-automatic rifle cost Paul Mauser an eye when a prototype suffered an out-of-battery detonation.
The Mauser name was divided between the traditional civilian rifle company and a division of Rheinmetall.
The Karabiner 88 was the carbine version.
The Mauser brothers received an order for 3,000 rifle sights, but actual production of the rifle was given to government arsenals and large firms.
The Mauser M1916, or Mauser ''selbstlade-karabiner'' (self-loading carbine), was a semi-automatic rifle that used a delayed blowback mechanism and fed from 25-round detachable magazine.
In 1999 the civilian manufacture of hunting, defense, and sporting rifles were split off from Rheinmetall.
98/22 Often made from G98 parts, rebuilt in the BRNO factory in Czechoslovakia.
Over a million C96s were produced between 1896 and the late 1930s.
These often have slightly lower power to match the weaker actions present in some of these rifles.
The Swedish Ordnance Office continued to specify the same Swedish steel alloy in Swedish-made Mausers until the last new-production m/38 barrelled actions were completed in 1944.
They are still sought after by military service rifle shooters and hunters.
A division of the original company, ''Mauser Jagdwaffen GmbH'', was split off and, in 2000, sold to Luke & Ortmeier Group.
Another son, Franz Mauser, travelled to America in 1853 with his sister and worked at E. Remington & Sons.
Rheinmetall Berlin AG was renamed Rheinmetall AG in the same year.
The Model C, made from 1903 to 1930, was a cheap rifle made to accommodate a range of cartridges for hunting.
An improved version of the rifle used a coil spring wrapped around the firing pin and a safety and a cocking piece attached to the rear of the firing pin.
These rare Mauser carbines and rifles—especially the Model 1895—can be easily identified by the letters "OVS" (Oranje-Vrijstaat Dutch for "Orange Free State") either marked on the weapons' receiver ring and the stock directly below, or otherwise carved into the right side of the buttstock.
The Mauser Africa Model, introduced around 1904 or 1905, was used mainly by settlers in Africa.
These rifles were often rechambered in larger rounds up to and including .50 caliber (12.7&nbsp;mm).
It is known as the "7mm Mauser".
The new 7×57mm round, which used a  full metal jacket bullet developing  from a  barrel, became the standard infantry arm for the Spanish armed forces, as well as for the military of several Latin-American nations.
Ludwig Olson wrote that an example had at one time been on display at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.
The armies of Brazil and Sweden were issued the Model 94.
Two designs were submitted, and the Mauser version, the G 41(M), failed miserably in testing.
It was a compact double-action blowback design in .32 ACP.
Mauser was formally re-established in the 1950s.
The weapon was originally chambered for the M/88 iteration of the 7.92×57mm Mauser and officially entered German service as the Gew.
The post-war models were also available in .380 ACP.
Many were also converted into FR7 rifles at the end of the 1950s by re-barreling them to accept the 7.62×51mm CETME and 7.62×51mm NATO rounds  for military training and Guardia Civil use.
* Mauser SR 93 sniper rifle
The bolt head did not rotate, a feature chosen by Paul Mauser to "protect the heads of paper cartridges from friction and possible damage while locking the bolt, and to provide a non-rotary seat for the extractor when metallic cartridges were used."
The original bullet had a round nose and was relatively heavy by modern standards but was typical of early smokeless powder small bore military designs.
It was canceled after a short production run.
The most prolific of them were the Czechoslovak M1922 CZ 98 and M1924 CZ vz.24 and the Belgian Fabrique Nationale M1924 and M1930, all in 8×57mm.
By the late 1930s, most all of these original rifles still in Turkish hands were re-barreled and converted to fire the far more common and powerful 8mm Mauser.
The plant was dismantled by the occupying forces for the purpose of war reparations, most factory buildings (approximately 60% in total) were demolished and the records destroyed on orders of the local French Army commander.
The caliber and number produced are not known.
The m/38 short rifle was produced by Husqvarna; additional m/38s were converted from Model 96 rifles.
The Mauser Model 1871 was the Mauser brothers' first rifle.
Aerial combat provided the clean environment the rifle required and its semi-automatic capability was an advancement over bolt-action rifles.
In the late 19th century and early 20th century, companies that made alterations were generally Commonwealth-based.
The Mauser 8×57mm JS or JSR (8.2mm or 0.323-inch) cartridge cannot safely be fired out of a rifle designed for 8×57mm I (8.1mm or 0.318-inch).
What distinguished the original 1893 and subsequent 1903 Ottoman Mauser was its tangent rear sight calibrated from 200 to 2,000 meters, which was represented not by Arabic numerals like virtually all other rifles, but instead by Eastern Arabic numerals; these numerals would also be used on future Persian Mauser rifles and carbines.
The Belgians' talks with Mauser prompted the Ottoman Empire to consider the design.
This rifle was shown to the Prussian government, and after some design changes to the safety, was accepted for service as the Infantry Rifle Model 71 on 14 February 1872.
The Lee–Enfield continued to see service until it was replaced by a semi-automatic weapon after World War II.
These became the 1936 Olympic team rifles for the Germans.
As with other early Mausers, most such arms were made by the Ludwig Loewe company, who in 1896 joined with other manufactures to form Deutsche Waffen und Munitionsfabriken.
The Gewehr 41 rifles, commonly known as the "G41(W)" or "G41(M)", were semi-automatic rifles used by Nazi Germany during World War II.
The Karabiner 98k "Mauser" (often abbreviated "K98k" or "Kar98k"), adopted in the mid- 1930s, became the most common infantry rifle in service in the German Army during World War II.
In this system, gases from the bullet were trapped near the muzzle in a ring-shaped cone, which in turn pulled on a long piston rod that opened the breech and re-loaded the gun.
Because of setbacks brought on by Wilhelm Mauser's death, they failed to have the design completed by 1882, and the German Rifle Test Commission (''Gewehr-Prüfungskommission'') was formed.
It was used by the ''Kriegsmarine'' and was also sold commercially.
In 1994, it became a subsidiary of Rheinmetall, a manufacturer of autocannons such as the Mauser BK-27 and other munitions until 2004, when it was merged into Rheinmetall Waffe Munition GmbH.
Since the late 19th and early 20th centuries, military Mauser designs were also exported and licensed to a number of countries, as well as being a popular civilian firearm.
After World War II, DWM was renamed Industrie-Werke Karlsruhe A.G. (IWK).
It was a shortened version of the M1893 rifle with a straight stock chambered in 7mm Mauser which was a common round in use by the Spanish military.
Both firearms were a success, but decision-makers were not convinced that the stripper feed was superior to the en-bloc system employed by Mannlicher.
In 1905 the 7.92×57mm Mauser ''S Patrone'' "spitzer" (pointed) round was introduced.
Some of these were even shorter than the later K.98k.
Between 1867 and 1869, the Mauser brothers and Samuel Norris developed a single-shot bolt-action rifle.
The Mauser HSc was a self-loading handgun introduced in the 1940s.
The resulting design did not see real success before it was switched to a simpler gas-operated system in the Gewehr 43.
The Gewehr 88 was built for the new 8×57mm I with a 0.318-inch bullet.
A house in Oberndorf was also rented to fulfill the Bavarian order.
In 1886 the French Army introduced the Lebel Model 1886 rifle, which used a smokeless powder cartridge.
Edmund Heckler, Theodor Koch, and Alex Seidel, former Mauser engineers, saved what they could and founded Heckler & Koch, which has since become Germany's main small-arms manufacturer.
Mauser continued to make sporting and hunting rifles in the late 20th century.
* M1943 Spanish short (not to be confused with the M93 Spanish Mauser) in 7.92×57mm manufactured in the Spanish arsenals.
A qualified gunsmith can verify the correct chambering by slugging the barrel.
A U.S. Army board of investigation was commissioned as a direct result of this battle.
A series of very successful hunting rifles were developed in the first decades of the 20th century.
The first Western-made handguns introduced into South Asia were made by the Mauser company, and the term has entered the lexicon in India and the surrounding regions, to mean any heavy pistol.
The main features were the ability to use stripper clips to feed the magazine (a revolution in rate of fire), and its rimless cartridge (7.65 Argentine), advanced for the time.
Their father, Franz Andreas Mauser, was a gunsmith at the Württemberg Royal Armory.
These were made primarily as single shots; some only had a wood block in the magazine space.
This in turn made reloading relatively slow.
The sights were produced at the Xaver Jauch house starting 1 May 1872.
Peter Paul was conscripted in 1859 as an artilleryman at the Ludwigsburg arsenal, where he worked as a gunsmith.
