*For homogeneous materials,  and  are constant throughout the material, while for inhomogeneous materials they depend on location within the material (and perhaps time).
The equations have two major variants.
3D Euclidean space + time
For the most accurate predictions in all situations, Maxwell's equations have been superseded by quantum electrodynamics.
Any space–time (with topological restrictions)
Exceptions include nonclassical light, photon-photon scattering, quantum optics, and many other phenomena related to photons or virtual photons.
The potentials play a central role in quantum mechanics, however, and act quantum mechanically with observable consequences even when the fields vanish (Aharonov–Bohm effect).
for an electromagnetic wave in vacuum , ).
For the magnetizing field , however, the linear approximation can break down in common materials like iron leading to phenomena like hysteresis.
and macroscopic (''free'' charge and current; practical to use on materials) variants of Maxwell's equations, see below.
3D Euclidean space + time
Gauss's law for magnetism in differential equations form follows likewise from the integral form by rewriting the  magnetic flux
Numerical methods for differential equations can be used to approximately solve Maxwell's equations when an exact solution is impossible.
Versions of Maxwell's equations based on the electric and magnetic potentials are preferred for explicitly solving the equations as a boundary value problem, analytical mechanics, or for use in  quantum mechanics.
*In the vector formulation on Euclidean space + time,  is the electrical potential,  is the vector potential and  is the d'Alembert operator.
SI units are used throughout.
Any space–time (with topological restrictions)
Maxwell's equations describe how electric and magnetic fields are generated by charges, currents and changes of each other.
*In the tensor calculus formulation, the electromagnetic tensor  is an antisymmetric covariant rank 2 tensor; the four-potential, , is a covariant vector; the current, , is a vector; the square brackets, , denote antisymmetrization of indices;  is the derivative with respect to the coordinate, .
Any space–time (with topological restrictions)
In the field line description, electric field lines begin only at positive electric charges and end only at negative electric charges.
In order to apply 'Maxwell's macroscopic equations', it is necessary to specify the relations between displacement field  and the electric field , as well as the magnetizing field  and the magnetic field .
The magnetic field induced around a closed loop is proportional to the electric current plus displacement current (rate of change of electric field) it encloses.
Using the modified Ampere law in integral form and the writing the time derivative of the flux as the surface integral of the partial time derivative of  we conclude that
The cost of this factorization is that additional fields, the displacement field  and the magnetizing field , are defined and need to be determined.
The '''Maxwell-Faraday's equation''' version of Faraday's law describes how a time varying magnetic field creates ("induces") an electric field.
The resulting formulation can lead to more accurate algorithms that take all four laws into account.
+ Equations in Gaussian units convention
Potentials (Lorenz&nbsp;gauge)
Another solution is , , while yet other solutions have electromagnetic waves filling spacetime.
where  is the permittivity of free space and  the permeability of free space.
One important consequence of the equations is that fluctuating electric and magnetic fields can propagate at the speed of light, and this electromagnetic radiation manifests itself in manifold ways from radio waves to light and X- or &gamma;-rays.
The equivalence of the differential and integral formulations are a consequence of  the Gauss divergence theorem and the Kelvin–Stokes theorem.
where the last equality uses the  Gauss divergence theorem.
A version of this law was included in the original equations by Maxwell but, by convention, is no longer.
Jefimenko's equations are not so helpful in situations when the charges and currents are themselves affected by the fields they create.
Gaussian units are a popular system of units, that are part of the centimetre–gram–second system of units (cgs).
In general spacetimes, the coordinate system  is arbitrary, the covariant derivative , the Ricci tensor,  and raising and lowering of indices are defined by the Lorentzian metric,  and the d'Alembert operator is defined as .
Therefore, these equations allow self-sustaining "electromagnetic waves" to travel through empty space (see electromagnetic wave equation).
for the magnetic field
The speed calculated for electromagnetic waves, which could be predicted from experiments on charges and currents, exactly matches the speed of light; indeed, light ''is'' one form of electromagnetic radiation (as are X-rays, radio waves, and others).
(Vector area is also denoted by  rather than , but this conflicts with the magnetic potential, a separate vector field).
Moreover, various phenomena occur in the world even though Maxwell's equations predict them to be impossible, such as "nonclassical light" and quantum entanglement of electromagnetic fields (see quantum optics).
Using the integral version of Gauss's equation we can rewrite this to
'''Gauss's law''' describes the relationship between a static electric field and the electric charges that cause it: The static electric field points away from positive charges and towards negative charges.
More generally, for linear materials the constitutive relations are
Maxwell's equations ''seem'' overdetermined, in that they involve six unknowns (the three components of  and ) but eight equations (one for each of the two Gauss's laws, three vector components each for Faraday's and Ampere's laws).
When using cgs units it is conventional to use a slightly different definition of electric field .
By introducing dummy variables characterizing these violations, the four equations become not overdetermined after all.
Since there is no bound charge, the total and the free charge and current are equal.
For non-uniform , a charge is also produced in the bulk.
This is related to a certain limited kind of redundancy in Maxwell's equations: It can be proven that any system satisfying Faraday's law and Ampere's law ''automatically'' also satisfies the two Gauss's laws, as long as the system's initial condition does.
Historically, a quaternionic formulation was used.
Maxwell–Faraday equation (Faraday's law of induction)
A separate law of nature, the Lorentz force law, describes how the electric and magnetic field act on charged particles and currents.
It assumes specific initial conditions to obtain the so-called "retarded solution", where the only fields present are the ones created by the charges.
'Counting' the number of field lines passing through a closed surface, therefore, yields the total charge (including bound charge due to polarization of material) enclosed by that surface divided by dielectricity of free space (the vacuum permittivity).
The very complicated and granular bound charges and bound currents, therefore, can be represented on the macroscopic scale in terms of  and  which average these charges and currents on a sufficiently large scale so as not to see the granularity of individual atoms, but also sufficiently small that they vary with location in the material.
'''Maxwell's equations''' are a set of partial differential equations that, together with the Lorentz force law, form the foundation of classical electrodynamics, classical optics, and electric circuits.
Finally, any phenomenon involving individual photons, such as the photoelectric effect, Planck's law, the Duane–Hunt law, single-photon light detectors, etc., would be difficult or impossible to explain if Maxwell's equations were exactly true, as Maxwell's equations do not involve photons.
When an electric field is applied to a dielectric material its molecules respond by forming microscopic electric dipoles – their atomic nuclei move a tiny distance in the direction of the field, while their electrons move a tiny distance in the opposite direction.
On the other hand, the differential equations are purely ''local'' and are a more natural starting point for calculating the fields in more complicated (less symmetric) situations, for example using finite element analysis.
Gauss's law for magnetism
The "microscopic" set of Maxwell's equations uses total charge and total current, including the complicated charges and currents in materials at the atomic scale.
This is Ampere's modified law in differential equations form up to a trivial rearrangement.
In addition, the formulation using potentials was originally introduced as a convenient way to solve the equations but with all the observable physics contained in the fields.
In fact, the solutions of these equations encompass all the diverse phenomena in the entire field of classical electromagnetism.
the electric flux is
Instead, the magnetic field due to materials is generated by a configuration called a dipole.
The "circulation of the fields" (i.e their curls) can be determined from the line integrals of the fields around the closed curve .
The equations are named after the physicist and mathematician James Clerk Maxwell, who published an early form of the equations between 1861 and 1862, and first proposed that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon.
Examples include extremely strong fields (see Euler–Heisenberg Lagrangian) and extremely short distances (see vacuum polarization).
A sinusoidal plane wave is one special solution of these equations.
This means that, as formulated, the differential form field equations are conformally invariant, but the Lorenz gauge condition breaks conformal invariance.
More technically, it relates the electric flux through any hypothetical closed "Gaussian surface" to the enclosed electric charge.
This produces a ''macroscopic'' ''bound charge'' in the material even though all of the charges involved are bound to individual molecules.
This perpetual cycle allows these waves, now known as electromagnetic radiation, to move through space at velocity, .
(The currents and charges are not unknowns, being freely specifiable subject to charge conservation.)
The ''microscopic'' variant of Maxwell's equation is the version given above.
and use the defining relations above to eliminate , and , the "macroscopic" Maxwell's equations reproduce the "microscopic" equations.
Since the mid-20th century, it has been understood that Maxwell's equations are not exact but are a classical field theory approximation to the more accurate and fundamental theory of quantum electrodynamics.
The most common form is based on conventions used when quantities measured using SI units, but other commonly used  conventions are used with other units including Gaussian units based on the cgs system, Lorentz–Heaviside units (used mainly in particle physics), and Planck units (used in theoretical physics).
Equivalently, we have to specify the dependence of the polarisation  (hence the bound charge) and the magnetisation  (hence the bound current) on the applied electric and magnetic field.
The d'Alembert operator on Minkowski space is  as in the vector formulation.
See the main article on constitutive relations for a fuller description.
If they did exist, both Gauss's law for magnetism and Faraday's law would need to be modified, and the resulting four equations would be fully symmetric under the interchange of electric and magnetic fields.
their divergence) can be determined from the surface integrals of the fields through the closed surface .
These units are sometimes preferred over SI units in the context of special relativity, since when using them, the components of the electromagnetic tensor, the Lorentz covariant object describing the electromagnetic field, have the same unit without constant factors.
The bound charge is most conveniently described in terms of the polarization  of the material, its dipole moment per unit volume.
Following is a summary of some of the numerous other ways to write the microscopic Maxwell's equations, showing they can be formulated using different points of view and mathematical formalisms that describe the same physics.
where  is the permittivity and  the permeability of the material.
The integral formulation relates fields within a region of space to fields on the boundary and can often be used to simplify and directly calculate fields from symmetric distributions of charges and currents.
Differential equations
Even the linear case can have various complications, however.
In applications one also has to describe how the free currents and charge density behave in terms of  and  possibly coupled to other physical quantities like pressure, and the mass, number density, and velocity of charge-carrying particles.
Somewhat similarly, in all materials the constituent atoms exhibit magnetic moments that are intrinsically linked to the angular momentum of the components of the atoms, most notably their electrons.
Often, the charges and currents are themselves dependent on the electric and magnetic fields via the Lorentz force equation and the constitutive relations.
Maxwell's addition to Ampère's law is particularly important: it makes the set of equations mathematically consistent for non static fields, without changing the laws of Ampere and Gauss for static fields.
The operator  is the d'Alembert–Laplace–Beltrami operator on 1-forms on an arbitrary Lorentzian space–time.
A thorough discussion is far beyond the scope of the article, but some general notes follow.
'''Gauss's law for magnetism''' states that there are no "magnetic charges" (also called magnetic monopoles), analogous to electric charges.
"Maxwell's macroscopic equations", also known as '''Maxwell's equations in matter''', are more similar to those that Maxwell introduced himself.
The connection to angular momentum suggests the picture of an assembly of microscopic current loops.
Differential equations (Gaussian convention)
Any space–time (with topological restrictions)
The "sources of the fields" (i.e.
The macroscopic variant of Maxwell's equation is equally general, however, with the difference being one of bookkeeping.
Ampère's circuital law (with Maxwell's addition)
This explanation was first introduced by Julius Adams Stratton in 1941.
The changing magnetic field creates a changing electric field through Faraday's law.
For materials without polarisation and magnetisation, the constitutive relations are (by definition)
The voltage induced in a closed circuit is proportional to the rate of change of the magnetic flux it encloses.
In terms of field lines, this equation states that magnetic field lines neither begin nor end but make loops or extend to infinity and back.
Magnetic dipoles are best represented as loops of current but resemble positive and negative 'magnetic charges', inseparably bound together, having no net 'magnetic charge'.
The "microscopic" form is sometimes called the "general" form of Maxwell's equations.
Conventions differ with the unit systems, because various definitions and dimensions are changed by absorbing dimensionful factors like the speed of light .
These areas of physics are the basis for all electric, optical and radio technologies like power generation, electric motors, wireless communication, cameras, televisions, computers etc.
Potentials (Lorenz gauge)
Jefimenko's equations (or the closely related Liénard–Wiechert potentials) are the explicit solution to Maxwell's equations for the electric and magnetic fields created by any given distribution of charges and currents.
3D Euclidean space + time
Correspondingly, the total current density  splits into free  and bound  components, and similarly the total charge density  splits into free  and bound  parts.
The equations specifying this response are called constitutive relations.
In particular, in an isolated system the total charge is conserved.
The precise formulation of Maxwell's equations depends on the precise definition of the quantities involved.
Like any differential equation, boundary conditions and initial conditions are necessary for a unique solution.
This aspect of electromagnetic induction is the operating principle behind many electric generators: for example, a rotating bar magnet creates a changing magnetic field, which in turn generates an electric field in a nearby wire.
By the isomorphism with the second de Rham cohomology this condition means that every closed 2 form is exact.
In fact, historically, Einstein developed special and general relativity to accommodate the absolute speed of light that drops out of the Maxwell equations with the principle that only relative movement has physical consequences.
The other two describe how the fields "circulate" around their respective sources; the magnetic field "circulates" around electric currents and time varying electric fields in Ampère's law with Maxwell's addition, while the electric field "circulates" around time varying magnetic fields in Faraday's law.
The "macroscopic" set of Maxwell's equations defines two new auxiliary fields that describe the large-scale behaviour of matter without having to consider atomic scale details, but their use requires experimentally determining parameters that describe the electromagnetic response of materials phenomenologically.
due to crystal structure) they are tensors.
Maxwell's equations explain how these waves can physically propagate through space.
as  an arbitrary small ball with arbitrary centre, this implies that the integrand must be zero, which is the differential equations formulation of Gauss equation up to a trivial rearrangement.
Potentials (any gauge)
Note that in the special case of -forms such as ''F'', the Hodge star  only depends on the metric up to a local scale  .
In general  and  depend on both  and , on location and time, and possibly other physical quantities.
E.g., the original equations given by Maxwell (see History of Maxwell's equations) included Ohms law in the form
Two of them describe how the fields vary in space due to sources, if any; electric fields emanating from electric charges in Gauss's law, and magnetic fields as closed field lines ''not due to magnetic monopoles'' in Gauss's law for magnetism.
The magnetic field induced around a closed loop is proportional to the electric current plus displacement current (rate of change of electric field) it encloses.
Other formalisms include the geometric algebra formulation and a matrix representation of Maxwell's equations.
Gauss's law for magnetism
Potentials (any gauge)
Since  can be chosen arbitrary, e.g.
The electric flux leaving a volume is proportional to the charge inside.
The line integrals and curls are analogous to quantities in classical fluid dynamics: the circulation of a fluid is the line integral of the fluid's flow velocity field around a closed loop, and the vorticity of the fluid is the curl of the velocity field.
For the displacement field  the linear approximation is usually excellent because for all but the most extreme electric fields or temperatures obtainable in the laboratory (high power pulsed lasers) the interatomic electric fields of materials of the order of 1011 V/m are much higher than the external field.
For real-world materials, the constitutive relations are rarely simple, except approximately, and usually determined by experiment.
These ''bound currents'' can be described using the magnetization .
Unlike the "microscopic" equations, the "macroscopic" equations separate out the bound charge  and bound current  to obtain equations that depend only on the free charges  and currents .
This dynamically induced electric field has closed field lines just as the magnetic field, if not superposed by a static (charge induced) electric field.
Using these different conventions, the Maxwell equations become:
Outside the material, an assembly of such microscopic current loops is not different from a macroscopic current circulating around the material's surface, despite the fact that no individual charge is traveling a large distance.
Potentials (Lorenz gauge)
Integral equations (SI convention)
The "microscopic" variant is sometimes called "Maxwell's equations in a vacuum".
Ampère's law (with Maxwell's extension)
where we used the Kelvin-Stokes theorem.
Potentials (any gauge)
Even more generally, in the case of non-linear materials (see for example nonlinear optics),  and  are not necessarily proportional to , similarly  or  is not necessarily proportional to  .
Indeed, magnetic charge has never been observed (despite extensive searches) and may not exist.
In Minkowski space coordinates are chosen with respect to an inertial frame; , so that the metric tensor used to raise and lower indices is .
The space-time formulations (i.e.
Since  can be chosen arbitrary, e.g.
This makes constants come out differently.
on space-time rather than space and time separately),  are commonly used in high energy and gravitational physics because they are manifestly compatible with special and general relativity.
For more details, see Computational electromagnetics.
However, as a consequence, it predicts that a changing magnetic field induces an electric field and vice versa.
In many situations, though, deviations from Maxwell's equations are immeasurably small.
It expresses the electric  field and the magnetic  field in terms of the ''total charge'' and ''total current'' present, including the charges and currents at the atomic level.
Homogeneous equations
While Maxwell's equations (along with the rest of classical electromagnetism) are extraordinarily successful at explaining and predicting a variety of phenomena, they are not exact, but approximations.
For example, if every molecule responds the same, similar to that shown in the figure, these tiny movements of charge combine to produce a layer of positive bound charge on one side of the material and a layer of negative charge on the other side.
Maxwell's equations are partial differential equations that relate the electric and magnetic fields to each other and to the electric charges and currents.
An alternative viewpoint on the microscopic equations is that they are the macroscopic equations ''together'' with the  statement that vacuum behaves like a perfect linear "material" without additional polarisation and magnetisation.
Phenomenological constituent equations relate the additional fields to the electric field  and the magnetic -field, often through a simple linear relation.
This factorization can be made by splitting the total electric charge and current as follows:
As such, ''Maxwell's macroscopic equations'' ignore many details on a fine scale that can be unimportant to understanding matters on a gross scale by calculating fields that are averaged over some suitable volume.
Likewise, the Faraday law in differential equations form follows from rewriting the integral form using the Kelvin-Stokes theorem.
:where  denotes the  vector element of surface area, , normal to surface, .
Although it is possible to simply ignore the two Gauss's laws in a numerical algorithm (apart from the initial conditions), the imperfect precision of the calculations can lead to ever-increasing violations of those laws.
Potentials (any gauge)
This refers to the fact that the material medium is not built into the structure of the equation; it does not mean that space is empty of charge or current.
In some cases, Maxwell's equations are solved through infinite space, and boundary conditions are given as asymptotic limits at infinity.
Maxwell–Faraday equation (Faraday's law of induction)
There are no magnetic monopoles; the total magnetic flux through a closed surface is zero.
They are also known as the "Maxwell-Lorentz equations".
Popular variations on the Maxwell equations as a classical theory of electromagnetic fields are relatively scarce because the standard equations have stood the test of time remarkably well.
For a detailed description of the differences between the microscopic (''total'' charge and current including material contributes or in air/vacuum)
These methods usually require a computer, and include the finite element method and finite-difference time-domain method.
as an arbitrary small, arbitrary oriented, and arbitrary  centred disk, we conclude that the integrand must be zero.
Maxwell understood the connection between electromagnetic waves and light in 1861, thereby unifying the theories of electromagnetism and optics.
This implies that the modified electric and magnetic field have the same units (in the SI convention this is not the case making dimensional analysis of the equations different: e.g.
The microscopic equations have universal applicability but may be infeasible to calculate with.
Inhomogeneous equations
In other cases, Maxwell's equations are solved in just a finite region of space, with appropriate boundary conditions on that region: For example, the boundary could be an artificial absorbing boundary representing the rest of the universe, or periodic boundary conditions, or (as with a waveguide or cavity resonator) the boundary conditions may describe the walls that isolate a small region from the outside world.
In other words, any magnetic field line that enters a given volume must somewhere exit that volume.
In addition,  and  are mutually perpendicular to each other and the direction of wave propagation, and are in phase with each other.
Equivalent technical statements are that the sum total magnetic flux through any Gaussian surface is zero, or that the magnetic field is a solenoidal vector field.
The direct space–time formulations make manifest that the Maxwell equations are relativistically invariant (in fact studying the hidden symmetry of the vector calculus formulation was a major source of inspiration for relativity theory).
*For isotropic materials,  and  are scalars, while for anisotropic materials (e.g.
