Its use was particularly widespread during the Classic period of Maya civilization (c. 250–900).
Maya, rather, has become a strategy of self-representation for the Maya movements and its followers.
However, it is probable that the word passed into European languages from a Cariban language or Taino.
Poqomam is spoken by around 49,000 people in several small pockets in Guatemala.
The Mayan language family has no demonstrated genetic relationship to other language families.
In 1996, Guatemala formally recognized 21 Mayan languages by name, and Mexico recognizes eight more within their territory.
"long.slender.object"
In traditionally diphthongized contexts, Mayan languages will realize the V-V sequence by inserting a hiatus-breaking glottal stop or glide insertion between the vowels.
These were used in all subsequent Franciscan writing, and are occasionally seen even today.
In Mamean they are reflected as  and  and in Quichean as  and .
However, owing to a historical division between the two ethnic groups, the Achi Maya do not regard themselves as K'iche'.
There are no cases or genders in Mayan languages.
Other regional varieties and dialects are also presumed to have been used, but have not yet been identified with certainty.
the one by Campbell, Achi is counted as a form of K'iche'.
Poqomchi' is spoken by 90,000 people in Purulhá, Baja Verapaz, and in the following municipalities of Alta Verapaz: Santa Cruz Verapaz, San Cristóbal Verapaz, Tactic, Tamahú and Tucurú.
Both variants are attested in hieroglyphic inscriptions at the Maya sites of the time, and both are commonly referred to as "Classic Maya language".
'''''unts'it wop''''' (one-stick jahuacte) "one stick from a jahuacte tree"
Languages covered by these early grammars include Kaqchikel, Classical Quiché, Tzeltal, Tzotzil and Yucatec.
Most of them live in Guatemala where depending on estimates 40%-60% of the population speaks a Mayan language.
Relational nouns are possessed by the constituent that is the reference point of the relation, and the relational noun names the relation.
Other voice-related constructions occurring in Mayan languages are the following: mediopassive, incorporational (incorporating a direct object into the verb), instrumental (promoting the instrument to object position) and referential (a kind of applicative promoting an indirect argument such as a benefactive or recipient to the object position).
Mayan languages are the descendants of a proto-language called Proto-Mayan or, in K'iche' Maya, ''Nab'ee Maya' Tzij'' ("the old Maya Language").
The first widely accepted alphabet was created for Yucatec Maya by the authors and contributors of the ''Diccionario Maya Cordemex'', a project directed by Alfredo Barrera Vásquez and first published in 1980.
In the eastern branch (Chujean-Q'anjobalan and Ch'olan) they are reflected as  and .
Q'umarkaj, near the present-day city of Santa Cruz del Quiché, was its economic and ceremonial center.
Awakatek is the language of 20,000 inhabitants of central Aguacatán, another municipality of Huehuetenango.
Tense systems in Mayan languages are generally simple.
In colonial times Mayan languages came to be written in a script derived from the Latin alphabet; orthographies were developed mostly by missionary grammarians.
Not all modern Mayan languages have standardized orthographies, but the Mayan languages of Guatemala use a standardized, Latin-based phonemic spelling system developed by the Academia de Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala (ALMG).
Formerly these were based largely on the Spanish alphabet and varied between authors, and it is only recently that standardized alphabets have been established.
Mayan has also been included in various Hokan and Penutian hypotheses.
Chicomuceltec was a language related to Wastek and spoken in Chiapas that became extinct some time before 1982.
The system is of a type best classified as logosyllabic, in which symbols (glyphs or ''graphemes'') can be used as either logograms or syllables.
Although a single prestige language was by far the most frequently recorded on extant hieroglyphic texts, evidence for at least five different varieties of Mayan have been discovered within the hieroglyphic corpus—an Eastern Ch'olan variety found in texts written in the southern Maya area and the highlands, a Western Ch'olan variety diffused from the Usumacinta region from the mid-7th century on, a Yukatekan variety found in the texts from the Yucatán Peninsula, a Tzeltalan variety found in the Western Lowlands (i.e.
Mayan languages often contrast alienable and inalienable possession by varying the way the noun is (or is not) marked as possessed.
Speakers of the western branch moved south into the areas now inhabited by Mamean and Quichean people.
The Yucatec convention of ''dz'' for  is retained in Maya family names such as Dzib.
Subsequently, the Guatemalan Academy of Mayan Languages (known by its Spanish acronym ALMG), founded in 1986, adapted these standards to 22 Mayan languages (primarily in Guatemala).
'''''untek wop''''' (one-tree Jahuacte) "one jahuacte tree"
The surviving corpus of over 10,000 known individual Maya inscriptions on buildings, monuments, pottery and bark-paper codices, combined with the rich postcolonial literature in Mayan languages written in the Latin script, provides a basis for the modern understanding of pre-Columbian history unparalleled in the Americas.
It is likely that other kinds of literature were written in perishable media such as codices made of bark, only four of which have survived the ravages of time and the campaign of destruction by Spanish missionaries.
The morphology of Mayan languages is simpler than that of other Mesoamerican languages, yet its morphology is still considered agglutinating and polysynthetic.
Most Mayans identify first and foremost with a particular ethnic group, e.g.
Today Yucatecan, Tzotzil and Tojolab'al have a basic fixed VOS word order.
A number of references identify the undeciphered Olmec script as its most likely precursor.
In these three Q'anjob'al sentences,the positionals are ''telan'' ("something large or cylindrical lying down as if having fallen"), ''woqan'' ("person sitting on a chairlike object"), and ''xoyan'' ("curled up like a rope or snake").
The linguist Joseph Greenberg included Mayan in his highly controversial Amerind hypothesis, which is rejected by most historical linguists as unsupported by available evidence.
The meaning denoted by a noun may be altered significantly by changing the accompanying classifier.
In Mexico the Mayan speaking population was estimated at 2,5 million people in 2010, whereas the Belizean speaker population figures around 30,000.
It is generally agreed that the Maya writing system was adapted from one or more of these earlier systems.
Achi is spoken by 85,000 people in Cubulco and Rabinal, two ''municipios'' of Baja Verapaz.
Within the Quichean sub-branch K'iche' (Quiché), the Mayan language with the largest number of speakers, is spoken by around 1,000,000 K'iche' Maya in the Guatemalan highlands, around the towns of Chichicastenango and Quetzaltenango and in the Cuchumatán mountains, as well as by urban emigrants in Guatemala City.
Only the stem of 𝕡 is doubled, but that is not supported by Unicode.
Earlier-established civilizations to the west and north of the Maya homelands that also had scripts recorded in surviving inscriptions include the Zapotec, Olmec, and the Zoque-speaking peoples of the southern Veracruz and western Chiapas area—but their scripts are as yet largely undeciphered.
Modern Mayan languages descend from the Proto-Mayan language, thought to have been spoken at least 5,000 years ago; it has been partially reconstructed using the comparative method.
+Semantic differences in numeral classifiers (from Chontal)
The script is largely phonemic, but abandoned the distinction between the apostrophe for ejective consonants and the glottal stop, so that ejective  and the non-ejective sequence  (previously ''t' ''and ''t7'') are both written ''t'.''
Jakaltek, for example, contrasts only past and non-past, while Mam has only future and non-future.
Fabri writes: "The term Maya is problematic because Maya peoples do not constitute a homogenous identity.
Mood does not normally form a separate system in Mayan, but is instead intertwined with the tense/aspect system.
Mesoamerica has been proven to be an area of substantial linguistic diffusion.
During the pre-Columbian era of Mesoamerican history, some Mayan languages were written in the logo-syllabic Maya script.
Terrence Kaufman and John Justeson have reconstructed more than 3000 lexical items for the proto-Mayan language.
The historical and prophetical accounts in the several variations known collectively as the books of Chilam Balam are primary sources of early Yucatec Maya traditions.
Yet the Maya area was more resistant to outside influence than others, and perhaps for this reason, many Maya communities still retain a high proportion of monolingual speakers.
Mayan language specialists such as Campbell believe this suggests a period of intense contact between Maya and the Lencan and Xinca people, possibly during the Classic period (250–900).
However, since the establishment of the Cordemex  and the Guatemalan Academy of Mayan Languages (1986), native language literacy has begun to spread and a number of indigenous writers have started a new tradition of writing in Mayan languages.
The '''Mayan languages''' form a language family spoken in Mesoamerica and northern Central America.
Ch'olan languages are believed to be the most conservative in vocabulary and phonology, and are closely related to the language of the Classic-era inscriptions found in the Central Lowlands.
An alternative proposed classification groups the Huastecan branch as springing from the Ch'olan-Tzeltalan node, rather than as an outlying branch springing directly from the proto-Mayan node.
The Proto-Mayan language is believed to have been spoken in the Cuchumatanes highlands of central Guatemala in an area corresponding roughly to where Q'anjobalan is spoken today.
It has also been surmised that some inscriptions found in the Chiapas highlands region may be in a Tzeltalan language whose modern descendants are Tzeltal and Tzotzil.
Tzeltal has tens of thousands of monolingual speakers.
The Maya area is now dominated by the Spanish language.
Inscriptions in an early Yucatecan language (the ancestor of the main surviving Yucatec language) have also been recognised or proposed, mainly in the Yucatán Peninsula region and from a later period.
An archaic language variety known as Classic Maya predominates in these texts, particularly in the Classic-era inscriptions of the southern and central lowland areas.
Some of these came with indigenous-language translations of the Catholic catechism.
Possessed nouns are marked for person of possessor.
In the case of the Xincan and Lencan languages, on the other hand, Mayan languages are more often the source than the receiver of loanwords.
This type of formation is a main diagnostic trait of the Mesoamerican Linguistic Area and recurs throughout Mesoamerica.
It is currently spoken by approximately 800,000 people, the vast majority of whom are to be found on the Yucatán Peninsula.
Yucatec stands out from other western languages in that its palatalized plosives are sometimes changed into  and sometimes .
Similarities with some languages of Mesoamerica are understood to be due to diffusion of linguistic traits from neighboring languages into Mayan and not to common ancestry.
The split between Proto-Yucatecan (in the north, that is, the Yucatán Peninsula) and Proto-Ch'olan (in the south, that is, the Chiapas highlands and Petén Basin) had already occurred by the Classic period, when most extant Maya inscriptions were written.
The English word "hurricane", which is a borrowing from the Spanish word ''huracán'' is considered to be related to the name of Maya storm deity Jun Raqan.
Ch'olti', a sister language of Ch'orti', is also extinct.
The ''Título de Totonicapán'' and the 17th century theatrical work the ''Rabinal Achí'' are other notable early works in K'iche', the latter in the Achí dialect.
The classification of Mayan languages is based on changes shared between groups of languages.
Colonial-era literature in Mayan languages include the famous ''Popol Vuh'', a mythico-historical narrative written in 17th century Classical Quiché but believed to be based on an earlier work written in the 1550s, now lost.
Tektitek (or Teko) is spoken by over 6,000 people in the municipality of Tectitán, and 1,000 refugees in Mexico.
This pride in unity has led to an insistence on the distinctions of different Mayan languages, some of which are so closely related that they could easily be referred to as dialects of a single language.
Thus in the Classical Quiché of the ''Popol Vuh'' we read ''u-wach ulew'' "on the earth" (literally "its face the earth").
Ixil (possibly three different languages) is spoken by 70,000 in the "Ixil Triangle" region of the department of El Quiché.
As in other Mesoamerican languages, there is widespread metaphorical use of roots denoting body parts, particularly to form locatives and relational nouns such as Tzeltal/Tzotzil ''ti' na'' "door" (lit.
Other members of the K'ichean branch are Sakapultek, spoken by about 15,000 people mostly in El Quiché department, and Sipakapense, which is spoken by 8,000 people in Sipacapa, San Marcos.
Nouns may furthermore adopt a special form marking them as possessed.
Orthographies for the languages of Mexico are currently being developed by the Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas (INALI).
Another related language, now endangered, is Ch'orti', which is spoken by 30,000 in Guatemala.
The closest relatives of the Ch'olan languages are the languages of the Tzeltalan branch, Tzotzil and Tzeltal, both spoken in Chiapas by large and stable or growing populations (265,000 for Tzotzil and 215,000 for Tzeltal).
Thus there are now small Q'anjob'al, Jakaltek, and Awakatek populations in various locations in Mexico, the United States (such as Tuscarawas County, Ohio and Los Angeles, California), and, through postwar resettlement, other parts of Guatemala.
Jakaltek (also known as Popti') is spoken by almost 100,000 in several municipalities of Huehuetenango.
The palatalized plosives  and  are not found in any of the modern families.
Stephen Houston, John Robertson and David Stuart have suggested that the specific variety of Ch'olan found in the majority of Southern Lowland glyphic texts was a language they dub "Classic Ch'olti'an", the ancestor language of the modern Ch'orti' and Ch’olti’ languages.
+Reflexes of Proto-Mayan  and
One element of the revised orthographies that is not widely accepted, especially outside the Guatemalan context, is the conversion of proper nouns (such as names of archaeological sites, modern settlements, and cultures).
This is the most likely origin for cigar and thus cigarette.
The Proto-Mayan velar nasal  is reflected as  in the eastern branches (Quichean–Mamean),  in Q'anjobalan, Ch'olan and Yucatecan, h in Huastecan, and only conserved as  in Chuj and Jakaltek.
The prefix ''we-'' marks the first person singular possessor in both, but the absence of the ''-e'' possessive suffix in the first form marks inalienable possession.
Some scholars think these form a separate Western branch (as in the diagram below).
Bishop Diego de Landa Calderón of the Catholic Archdiocese of Yucatán prohibited the use of the written language, effectively ending the Mesoamerican tradition of literacy in the native script.
Another member of this branch is Akatek, with over 50,000 speakers in San Miguel Acatán and San Rafael La Independencia.
They also possess grammatical and typological features that set them apart from other languages of Mesoamerica, such as the use of ergativity in the grammatical treatment of verbs and their subjects and objects, specific inflectional categories on verbs, and a special word class of "positionals" which is typical of all Mayan languages.
According to the Ethnologue the number of speakers of Tektitek is growing.
Instead they are reflected differently in different branches, allowing a reconstruction of these phonemes as palatalized plosives.
Q'anjob'al is spoken by 77,700 in Guatemala's Huehuetenango department, with small populations elsewhere.
Yucatec Maya (known simply as "Maya" to its speakers) is the most commonly spoken Mayan language in Mexico.
Modern K'iche' has two antipassives: one which ascribes focus to the object and another that emphasizes the verbal action.
Vowel quality is typically classified as having monophthongal vowels.
In the Archaic period (before 2000 BCE), a number of loanwords from Mixe–Zoquean languages seem to have entered the proto-Mayan language.
The reason why only few linguistic varieties are found in the glyphic texts is probably that these served as prestige dialects throughout the Maya region; hieroglyphic texts would have been composed in the language of the elite.
Mayan languages form part of the Mesoamerican language area, an area of linguistic convergence developed throughout millennia of interaction between the peoples of Mesoamerica.
However, Mora-Marín has argued that traits shared by Classic Lowland Maya and the Ch'olti'an languages are retentions rather than innovations, and that the diversification of Ch'olan in fact post-dates the classic period.
A ligature ꜩ for ''tz'' is used alongside &#xA72D; and &#xA72B;.
They may have served as prestige languages, coexisting with other dialects in some areas.
The pre-Columbian Maya civilization developed and used an intricate and fully functional writing system, which is the only Mesoamerican script that can be said to be almost fully deciphered.
The only surviving book of early lyric poetry, the Songs of Dzitbalche by Ah Bam, comes from this same period.
Examples include linking Mayan with the Uru–Chipaya languages,  Mapuche, the Lencan languages, Purépecha and Huave.
A wide range of proposals have tried to link the Mayan family to other language families or isolates, but none is generally supported by linguists.
In Guatemala, matters such as developing standardized orthographies for the Mayan languages are governed by the Academia de Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala (ALMG; Guatemalan Academy of Mayan Languages), which was founded by Maya organisations in 1986.
The earliest texts to have been preserved are largely monumental inscriptions documenting rulership, succession, and ascension, conquest and calendrical and astronomical events.
In the course of the deciphering of the Maya hieroglyphic script, scholars have come to understand that it was a fully functioning writing system in which it was possible to express unambiguously any sentence of the spoken language.
All Mayan languages display the basic diagnostic traits of this linguistic area.
Mayan languages have between 250 and 500 distinct positional roots:
Mayan languages tend to have a rich set of grammatical voices.
Thus, the ''Cordemex'' continues to use the term "Yucatán" (rather than "Yukatan") in its preface, despite the fact that its orthography does not utilize a "c", and most scholarly archaeological texts continue to print the original spellings for archaeological sites and cultures that have been canonized in the literature over the centuries.
Statives can be adjectives, positionals or numerals.
Language has been fundamental in defining the boundaries of that kinship.
Its closest relative, the Chontal Maya language, is spoken by 55,000 in the state of Tabasco.
In 2015, Campbell noted that recent, yet unpublished, evidence uncovered by David Mora-Marin strengthened the case for a relationship between Mayan and Mixe-Zoquean languages, although he did not yet consider it conclusive.
It remains common in Yucatán and in the adjacent states of Quintana Roo and Campeche.
The morphology of Mayan nouns is fairly simple: they inflect for number (plural or singular), and, when possessed, for person and number of their possessor.
Statives are a class of predicative words expressing a quality or state, whose syntactic properties fall in between those of verbs and adjectives in Indo-European languages.
Tojolab'al is spoken in eastern Chiapas by 36,000 people.
Since the colonial period, practically all Maya writing has used a Latin alphabet.
In some classifications, e.g.
as "Yucatec" or "K'iche'"; but they also recognize a shared Maya kinship.
While Mayan peoples continued to produce a rich oral literature in the postcolonial period (after 1821) which has been collected by linguists and ethnologists gathering oral literature, very little written literature was produced in this period.
Tz'utujil has about 90,000 speakers in the vicinity of Lake Atitlán.
Another approach, in Yucatec, was to add a bar to the letter, or to double the stem.
Some K'ichean-branch languages have exhibited developed diphthongs from historical long vowels, by breaking /e:/ and /o:/.
+Reflexes of Proto-Mayan  in daughter languages
Class is usually assigned according to whether the object is animate or inanimate or according to an object's general shape.
Following the 1996 peace accords, it has been gaining a growing recognition as the regulatory authority on Mayan languages both among Mayan scholars and the Maya peoples.
"Sic" is Mayan for "tobacco" and "sicar" means "to smoke tobacco leaves".
The broader meaning of "Maya" now current, while defined by linguistic relationships, is also used to refer to ethnic or cultural traits.
The language of the classical lowland inscriotions then would have been proto-Ch'olan.
Proto-Yucatecan and Proto-Ch'olan speakers subsequently split off from the main group and moved north into the Yucatán Peninsula.
According to an alternative theory by Robertson and Houston, Huastecan stayed in the Guatemalan highlands with speakers of Ch'olan-Tzeltalan, separating from that branch at a much later date than proposed by Kaufman.
The earliest proposal was that of  which identified the Chiapas-Guatemalan highlands as the likely "cradle" of Mayan languages was published by the German antiquarian and scholar Karl Sapper.
They propose that it originated in western and south-central Petén Basin, and that it was used in the inscriptions and perhaps also spoken by elites and priests.
For example, all use relational nouns instead of prepositions to indicate spatial relationships.
Three of the four extant Maya codices are based on Yucatec.
It is the most divergent of modern Mayan languages.
Other major Maya languages, primarily in the Mexican state of Chiapas, such as Tzotzil, Tzeltal, Ch'ol, and Tojolab'al, are not generally included in this reformation, and are sometimes written with the conventions standardized by the Chiapan "State Center for Indigenous Language, Art, and Literature" (CELALI), which for instance writes "ts" rather than "tz" (thus Tseltal and Tsotsil).
Chuj is spoken by 40,000 people in Huehuetenango, and by 9,500 people, primarily refugees, over the border in Mexico, in the municipality of La Trinitaria, Chiapas, and the villages of Tziscau and Cuauhtémoc.
Writing in 1997 Lyle Campbell, an expert in Mayan languages and historical linguistics, argued that the most promising proposal is the "Macro-Mayan" hypothesis, which posits links between Mayan, the Mixe–Zoque languages and the Totonacan languages, but more research is needed to support or disprove this hypothesis.
Shortly after the Spanish conquest, the Mayan languages began to be written with Latin letters.
"mouth of house"), or Kaqchikel ''chi ru-pam'' "inside" (lit.
Some Mayan languages, such as Kaqchikel, do not use numeral classifiers.
In some Mayan languages such as Chontal, classifiers take the form of affixes attached to the numeral; in others such as Tzeltal, they are free forms.
Use and knowledge of the Maya script continued until the 16th century Spanish conquest at least.
When speakers of proto-Tzeltalan later separated from the Ch'olan group and moved south into the Chiapas highlands, they came into contact with speakers of Mixe–Zoque languages.
The famous Maya mythological document, ''Popol Vuh'', is written in an antiquated K'iche' often called Classical K'iche' (or Quiché).
In Mexico, names of archaeological sites and other items of historical record retain the colonial spellings, rather than the revised orthography.
Because indigenous languages were excluded from the education systems of Mexico and Guatemala after independence, Mayan peoples remained largely illiterate in their native languages, learning to read and write in Spanish, if at all.
It was previously also spoken in extreme west of Honduras and El Salvador, but the Salvadorian variant is now extinct and the Honduran one is considered moribund.
This pattern is also recurrent throughout Mesoamerica and is another diagnostic trait of the Mesoamerican Linguistic Area.
Later he described the use of hieroglyphic writing in the religious practices of Yucatecan Maya in his ''Relación de las cosas de Yucatán''.
Proto-Mayan had at least one passive construction as well as an antipassive rule for downplaying the importance of the agent in relation to the patient.
For nominal possessors, the possessed noun is inflected as possessed by a third-person possessor, and followed by the possessor noun, e.g.
Mamean, Q'anjob'al, Jakaltek and one dialect of Chuj have a fixed VSO one.
+Reflexes of Proto-Mayan
1550, Francisco de la Parra invented distinctive letters for ejectives in the Mayan languages of Guatemala, the ''tresillo'' and ''cuatrillo'' (and derivatives).
Toniná, Pomona), and possibly a highland Maya language belonging to K'ichean major within texts painted on Nebaj ceramics.
The script has a complete syllabary (although not all possible syllables have yet been identified), and a Maya scribe would have been able to write anything phonetically, syllable by syllable, using these symbols.
The Poqom languages are closely related to Core Quichean, with which they constitute a Poqom-K'ichean sub-branch on the Quichean–Mamean node.
When counting it is, in many Mayan languages, necessary to use numeral classifiers which specify the class of items being counted; the numeral cannot appear without an accompanying classifier.
This language is most closely related to the Ch'olan branch of the language family, modern descendants of which include Ch'ol, Ch'orti' and Chontal.
The Academia de Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala (ALMG) finds twenty-one distinct Mayan languages."
One point still at issue is the position of Ch'olan and Q'anjobalan–Chujean.
Kaqchikel ''ru-kej ri achin'' "the man's horse" (literally "his horse the man").
Jakaltek has both numeral classifiers and noun classifiers, and the noun classifiers can also be used as pronouns.
To express location and other relations between entities, use is made of a special class of "relational nouns".
This assumption provides a plausible explanation for the geographical distance between the Ch'orti' zone and the areas where Ch'ol and Chontal are spoken.
Another Mayan loanword is "cigar".
Wastek (also spelled Huastec and Huaxtec) is spoken in the Mexican states of Veracruz and San Luis Potosí by around 110,000 people.
According to the prevailing classification scheme by Lyle Campbell and Terrence Kaufman, the first division occurred around 2200 BCE, when Huastecan split away from Mayan proper after its speakers moved northwest along the Gulf Coast of Mexico.
But, given that the term "dialect" has been used by some with racialist overtones in the past, as scholars made a spurious distinction between Amerindian "dialects" and European "languages", the preferred usage in Mesoamerica in recent years has been to designate the linguistic varieties spoken by different ethnic group as separate languages.
Other linguists do not support the positing of an especially close relationship between Ch'olan and Q'anjobalan–Chujean; consequently they classify these as two distinct branches emanating directly from the proto-language.
For example, languages of the western group (such as Huastecan, Yucatecan and Ch'olan) all changed the Proto-Mayan phoneme  into , some languages of the eastern branch retained  (K'ichean), and others changed it into  or, word-finally,  (Mamean).
