In Great Britain, Klaus Fuchs confessed to committing espionage on behalf of the Soviet Union while working on the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos National Laboratory during the War.
* William L. Shirer, journalist, author
Joseph McCarthy himself headed the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations in 1953 and 1954, and during that time used it for a number of his Communist-hunting investigations.
* Philip Loeb, actor
Although the Igor Gouzenko and Elizabeth Bentley affairs had raised the issue of Soviet espionage as far back as 1945, events in 1949 and 1950 sharply increased the sense of threat from Communism in the United States.
Its decline may also be charted through a series of court decisions.
This statement announced the firing of the Hollywood Ten and stated: "We will not knowingly employ a Communist or a member of any party or group which advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States..." This marked the beginning of the Hollywood blacklist.
Six other Republican Senators—Wayne Morse, Irving M. Ives, Charles W. Tobey, Edward John Thye, George Aiken, and Robert C. Hendrickson—joined Smith in condemning the tactics of McCarthyism.
The SISS was headed by Democrat Pat McCarran and gained a reputation for careful and extensive investigations.
Lattimore was charged with perjuring himself before the SISS in 1952.
Harry Slochower was a professor at Brooklyn College who had been fired by New York City for invoking the Fifth Amendment when McCarthy's committee questioned him about his past membership in the Communist Party.
Those who sought to justify McCarthyism did so largely through their characterization of Communism, and American Communists in particular.
Portions of the massive security apparatus established during the McCarthy era still exist.
It was at these testimonies that what became known as "the $64,000 question" was asked: "Are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist Party of the United States?"
In the mid- and late 1950s, the attitudes and institutions of McCarthyism slowly weakened.
* Lion Feuchtwanger, novelist and playwright
Many of the hearings and trials of McCarthyism featured testimony by former Communist Party members such as Elizabeth Bentley, Louis Budenz, and Whittaker Chambers, speaking as expert witnesses.
Loyalty oaths are still required by the California Constitution for all officials and employees of the government of California (which is highly problematic for Quakers and Jehovah's Witnesses whose beliefs preclude them from pledging absolute loyalty to the state), and at the federal level, a few portions of the McCarran Internal Security Act are still in effect.
In the Senate, the primary committee for investigating Communists was the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee (SISS), formed in 1950 and charged with ensuring the enforcement of laws relating to "espionage, sabotage, and the protection of the internal security of the United States."
Among the first film industry witnesses subpoenaed by the Committee were ten who decided not to cooperate.
This era also witnessed the establishment of widely spread FBI surveillance intended to identify homosexual government employees.
From the opposite pole, conservative writer Ann Coulter devotes much of her book ''Treason'' to drawing parallels between past opposition to McCarthy and McCarthyism and the policies and beliefs of modern-day liberals, arguing that the former hindered the anti-Communist cause and the latter hinder the War on Terrorism.
McCarthy first examined allegations of Communist influence in the Voice of America, and then turned to the overseas library program of the State Department.
Such viewpoints led to major collisions between McCarthyite radicals and supporters of public health programs, most notably in the case of the Alaska Mental Health Bill controversy of 1956.
On October 20, 1953, Murrow's show ''See It Now'' aired an episode about the dismissal of Milo Radulovich, a former reserve Air Force lieutenant who was accused of associating with Communists.
The 1952 Arthur Miller play ''The Crucible'' used the Salem witch trials as a metaphor for McCarthyism, suggesting that the process of McCarthyism-style persecution can occur at any time or place.
''The New York Post'' called the act "a monstrosity", "a wretched repudiation of democratic principles," while ''The Nation'' accused Democratic liberals of a "neurotic, election-year anxiety to escape the charge of being 'soft on Communism' even at the expense of sacrificing constitutional rights."
On December 2, 1954, the United States Senate voted 65 to 22 to condemn Joseph McCarthy for "conduct that tends to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute".
* Charles W. Thayer, diplomat
* Howard Da Silva, actor
Card catalogs of these libraries were searched for works by authors McCarthy deemed inappropriate.
Joseph McCarthy's involvement with the ongoing cultural phenomenon that would bear his name began with a speech he made on Lincoln Day, February 9, 1950, to the Republican Women's Club of Wheeling, West Virginia.
Yielding to the pressure, the State Department ordered its overseas librarians to remove from their shelves "material by any controversial persons, Communists, fellow travelers, etc."
Host of an afternoon comedy radio show, Faulk was a leftist active in his union, the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists.
* Bartley Crum, attorney
In addition, it was often claimed that the Party did not allow any member to resign, so a person who had been a member for a short time decades previously could be considered as suspect as a current member.
The records of loyalty review hearings and investigations were supposed to be confidential, but Hoover routinely gave evidence from them to congressional committees such as HUAC.
For example, in his overridden veto of the McCarran Internal Security Act of 1950, President Truman wrote, "In a free country, we punish men for the crimes they commit, but never for the opinions they have."
Eleven leaders of the Communist Party were convicted under the Smith Act in 1949 in the Foley Square trial.
The 1976 film ''The Front'' dealt with the McCarthy-era Hollywood blacklist, as did the 2015 film ''Trumbo''.
Some of the more notable people who were blacklisted or suffered some other persecution during McCarthyism are listed here:
* Lee Grant, actress
The hunt for "sexual perverts", who were presumed to be subversive by nature, resulted in thousands being harassed and denied employment.
It required the registration of Communist organizations with the U.S. Attorney General and established the Subversive Activities Control Board to investigate possible Communist-action and Communist-front organizations so they could be required to register.
* Arthur Miller, playwright and essayist
When President Dwight Eisenhower took office in 1953, he strengthened and extended Truman's loyalty review program, while decreasing the avenues of appeal available to dismissed employees.
* Marsha Hunt, actress
One focus of popular McCarthyism concerned the provision of public health services, particularly vaccination, mental health care services and fluoridation, all of which were deemed by some to be communist plots to poison or brainwash the American people.
Ten defendants were given sentences of five years and the eleventh was sentenced to three years.
While this usually protected them from a contempt of Congress citation, it was considered grounds for dismissal by many government and private industry employers.
In an exchange that reflected the increasingly negative public opinion of McCarthy, Welch rebuked the senator: "Have you no sense of decency, sir?
And when those forced revelations concern matters that are unorthodox, unpopular, or even hateful to the general public, the reaction in the life of the witness may be disastrous."
Much of the undoing of McCarthyism came at the hands of the Supreme Court.
In many cases simply being subpoenaed by HUAC or one of the other committees was sufficient cause to be fired.
As with other loyalty-security reviews of McCarthyism, the identities of any accusers and even the nature of any accusations were typically kept secret from the accused.
Titled "A Report on Senator Joseph R. McCarthy", it used footage of McCarthy speeches to portray him as dishonest, reckless and abusive toward witnesses and prominent Americans.
Teachers are under constant surveillance; their pasts are combed for signs of disloyalty; their utterances are watched for clues to dangerous thoughts."
* Irwin Shaw, writer
During the McCarthy era, thousands of Americans were accused of being communists or communist sympathizers and became the subject of aggressive investigations and questioning before government or private-industry panels, committees and agencies.
For a fee, these teams would investigate employees and question them about their politics and affiliations.
* Carl Foreman, writer of ''High Noon''
At its longest, it comprised 154 organizations, 110 of them identified as Communist.
In Justice Black's opinion, he wrote of the original "Smith Act" trials: "The testimony of witnesses is comparatively insignificant.
Originally coined to criticize the anti-communist pursuits of Republican U.S.
Truman, a Democrat, was probably reacting in part to the Republican sweep in the 1946 Congressional election and felt a need to counter growing criticism from conservatives and anti-communists.
It was successfully applied only twice: in 1954 it was used to prevent Communist Party members from appearing on the New Jersey state ballot, and in 1960 it was cited to deny the CPUSA recognition as an employer under New York State's unemployment compensation system.
In its 1958 decision in ''Kent v. Dulles'', the Supreme Court halted the State Department from using the authority of its own regulations to refuse or revoke passports based on an applicant's communist beliefs or associations.
* Langston Hughes, writer, poet, playwright
* Gene Weltfish, anthropologist fired from Columbia University
I will also throw in a set of free dishes and a case of soap.”
In 1956, the Supreme Court heard the case of ''Slochower v. Board of Education''.
It called for dismissal if there were "reasonable grounds&nbsp;... for belief that the person involved is disloyal to the Government of the United States."
Hoover's influence extended beyond federal government employees and beyond the loyalty-security programs.
In 1960, Dalton Trumbo, one of the best known members of the Hollywood Ten, was publicly credited with writing the films ''Exodus'' and ''Spartacus''.
As had been done numerous times before, the collection of scholars and diplomats associated with Lattimore (the so-called China Hands) were accused of "losing China," and while some evidence of pro-communist attitudes was found, there was nothing to support McCarran's accusation that Lattimore was "a conscious and articulate instrument of the Soviet conspiracy".
The office of this organization was burgled by the FBI at least fourteen times between 1947 and 1951.
In 1953, Robert K. Murray, a young professor of history at Pennsylvania State University who had served as an intelligence officer in World War II, was revising his dissertation on the Red Scare of 1919–20 for publication until Little, Brown and Company decided that "under the circumstances ... it wasn't wise for them to bring this book out."
In one exchange, McCarthy reminded the attorney for the Army, Joseph Welch, that he had an employee in his law firm who had belonged to an organization that had been accused of Communist sympathies.
William F. Buckley, Jr., the founder of the influential conservative political magazine ''National Review'', wrote a defense of McCarthy, ''McCarthy and his Enemies'', in which he asserted that "McCarthyism ... is a movement around which men of good will and stern morality can close ranks."
He was scrutinized by AWARE, Inc., one of the private firms that examined individuals for signs of communist "disloyalty".
In 1956, Hoover was becoming increasingly frustrated by Supreme Court decisions that limited the Justice Department's ability to prosecute Communists.
* Dorothy Parker, writer, humorist
The play focused on the fact that once accused, a person had little chance of exoneration, given the irrational and circular reasoning of both the courts and the public.
In the future, witnesses (in the entertainment industries and otherwise) who were determined not to cooperate with the Committee would claim their Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination.
It also means "the practice of making unfair allegations or using unfair investigative techniques, especially in order to restrict dissent or political criticism."
On June 1, 1950, Senator Margaret Chase Smith, a Maine Republican, delivered a speech to the Senate she called a "Declaration of Conscience".
Many have termed this aspect of McCarthyism the "Lavender scare".
* Jack Gilford, actor
), suspected homosexuality was also a common cause for being targeted by McCarthyism.
* Dimitri Mitropoulos, conductor, pianist, composer
* Aaron Copland, composer
A broad "coalition of the aggrieved" found McCarthyism attractive, or at least politically useful.
* Martin Ritt, actor and director
Block later wrote that there was "nothing particularly ingenious about the term, which is simply used to represent a national affliction that can hardly be described in any other way.
On one occasion he warned that many local anti-Communist movements constituted a "general attack not only on schools and colleges and libraries, on teachers and textbooks, but on all people who think and write ... in short, on the freedom of the mind".
The defense attorneys were cited for contempt of court and given prison sentences.
* Gypsy Rose Lee, actress and stripper
This tactic failed, and the ten were sentenced to prison for contempt of Congress.
FBI director J. Edgar Hoover designed President Truman's loyalty-security program, and its background investigations of employees were carried out by FBI agents.
Jointly drafted by Republican John Marshall Butler and Democrat Hubert Humphrey, the law was an extension of the Internal Security Act of 1950, and sought to outlaw the Communist Party by declaring that the party, as well as "Communist-Infiltrated Organizations" were "not entitled to any of the rights, privileges, and immunities attendant upon legal bodies".
Thanks in part to its success in organizing labor unions and its early opposition to fascism, the Communist Party of the United States (CPUSA) increased its membership through the 1930s, reaching a peak of about 75,000 members in 1940–41.
* Paul Sweezy, economist and founder-editor of ''Monthly Review''
At times, the anti-internationalist aspect of McCarthyist literature took on an anti-Jewish tone.
COINTELPRO actions included planting forged documents to create the suspicion that a key person was an FBI informer, spreading rumors through anonymous letters, leaking information to the press, calling for IRS audits, and the like.
* Dolores del Río, actress
The political divisions McCarthyism created in the United States continue to make themselves manifest, and the politics and history of anti-Communism in the United States are still contentious.
However, in the context of the highly politicised Cold War environment, homosexuality became framed as a dangerous, contagious social disease that posed a potential threat to state security.
* Dirk Jan Struik, mathematician, historian of maths
Paradoxically, accusations of alleged homosexual behaviour marked the end of McCarthy’s political career.
* Ring Lardner Jr., screenwriter, Hollywood Ten
In January 1950, Alger Hiss, a high-level State Department official, was convicted of perjury.
Miller later wrote: "The more I read into the Salem panic, the more it touched off corresponding images of common experiences in the fifties."
The FBI engaged in a number of illegal practices in its pursuit of information on Communists, including burglaries, opening mail and illegal wiretaps.
Companies that were concerned about the sensitivity of their business, or who, like the entertainment industry, felt particularly vulnerable to public opinion made use of these private services.
* Pete Seeger, folk singer, songwriter
Efforts to protect the United States from the perceived threat of Communist subversion were particularly enabled by several federal laws.
* J. Robert Oppenheimer, physicist, scientific director of the Manhattan Project
The show was strongly critical of the Air Force's methods, which included presenting evidence in a sealed envelope that Radulovich and his attorney were not allowed to open.
* Howard Fast, writer
''Any serious assessment of McCarthyism must consider fore and center the criminal role played by the Stalinist Communist Party, which, by associating socialism with terrible crimes against the working class, helped create the political climate in which red-baiting could flourish.''
In ''The Age of Anxiety: McCarthyism to Terrorism'', author Haynes Johnson compares the "abuses suffered by aliens thrown into high security U.S. prisons in the wake of 9/11" to the excesses of the McCarthy era.
* Albert Maltz, screenwriter, Hollywood Ten
Many were convicted on the basis of testimony that was later admitted to be false.
Even before the Faulk verdict, many in Hollywood had decided it was time to break the blacklist.
* Leonard Bernstein, conductor, pianist, composer
This law allowed the government to deport immigrants or naturalized citizens engaged in subversive activities and also to bar suspected subversives from entering the country.
Successfully challenged Landrum–Griffin Act provision
* John Garfield, actor
* Dalton Trumbo screenwriter, Hollywood Ten
In his dissenting opinion, Justice William O. Douglas wrote: "The present law proceeds on a principle repugnant to our society—guilt by association.... What happens under this law is typical of what happens in a police state.
Changing public sentiments heavily contributed to the decline of McCarthyism.
Most of these punishments came about through trial verdicts later overturned, laws that were later declared unconstitutional, dismissals for reasons later declared illegal or actionable, or extra-legal procedures that would come into general disrepute.
However, the McCarran Act had no real effect beyond legal harassment.
Others, while acknowledging that there were inexcusable excesses during McCarthyism, argue that some contemporary historians of McCarthyism underplay the depth of Soviet espionage in America or the undemocratic nature of the CPUSA, the latter concern being shared by some Trotskyites who felt that they, and anti-Stalin socialists in general, were persecuted by the CPUSA.
The first recorded use of the term ''McCarthyism'' was in a political cartoon by ''Washington Post'' editorial cartoonist Herbert Block (aka Herblock), published on March 29, 1950.
A key figure in the end of the blacklisting of McCarthyism was John Henry Faulk.
It is also known that the Communist Party USA was substantially funded and its policies controlled by the Soviet Union, and there are accusations that CPUSA members were often recruited as spies.
* Arthur Laurents, playwright
'''McCarthyism''' is the practice of making accusations of subversion or treason without proper regard for evidence.
There were also more subtle forces encouraging the rise of McCarthyism.
In 1952, the Immigration and Nationality, or McCarran-Walter, Act was passed.
"No responsible employer would be likely to take a chance in giving him a job."
The Soviet Union tested an atomic bomb in 1949, earlier than many analysts had expected.
In April 1954, Senator McCarthy was also under attack in the Army–McCarthy hearings.
Formed in 1938 and known as the Dies Committee for Rep. Martin Dies, who chaired it until 1944, HUAC investigated a variety of "activities," including those of German-American Nazis during World War II.
The number imprisoned is in the hundreds, and some ten or twelve thousand lost their jobs.
It had long been a practice of more conservative politicians to refer to progressive reforms such as child labor laws and women's suffrage as "Communist" or "Red plots."
These organized tens of thousands of housewives into study groups, letter-writing networks, and patriotic clubs that coordinated efforts to identify and eradicate what they saw as subversion.
This tendency increased in the 1930s in reaction to the New Deal policies of President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
At this time he formalized a covert "dirty tricks" program under the name COINTELPRO.
McCarthyism was supported by a variety of groups, including the American Legion and various other anti-communist organizations.
This view is supported by recent documentation from the archives of the KGB as well as post-war decodes of wartime Soviet radio traffic from the Venona Project,  showing that Moscow provided financial support to the CPUSA and had significant influence on CPUSA policies.
The Alien Registration Act or Smith Act of 1940 made it a criminal offense for anyone to "knowingly or willfully advocate, abet, advise or teach the ... desirability or propriety of overthrowing the Government of the United States or of any State by force or violence, or for anyone to organize any association which teaches, advises or encourages such an overthrow, or for anyone to become a member of or to affiliate with any such association".
* Elizabeth Hawes, clothing designer, author, equal rights activist
The House Committee on Un-American Activities - commonly referred to as the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) - was the most prominent and active government committee involved in anti-Communist investigations.
* Burgess Meredith, actor
* Klaus Mann, writer
* Orson Welles, actor, author, film director
Due to numerous hearings, delays and appeals, the act was never enforced, even with regard to the Communist Party of the United States itself, and the major provisions of the act were found to be unconstitutional in 1965 and 1967.
* Dashiell Hammett, author
and Jonah Goldberg.
A significant step for HUAC was its investigation of the charges of espionage brought against Alger Hiss in 1948.
In the film industry, more than 300 actors, authors and directors were denied work in the U.S. through the unofficial Hollywood blacklist.
Oppenheimer had received a top-secret clearance in 1947, but was denied clearance in the harsher climate of 1954.
* Hanns Eisler, composer
Passages of the CPUSA's constitution that specifically rejected revolutionary violence were dismissed as deliberate deception.
In the government's prosecutions of Communist Party members under the Smith Act (see above), the prosecution case was based not on specific actions or statements by the defendants, but on the premise that a commitment to violent overthrow of the government was inherent in the doctrines of Marxism–Leninism.
The term has its origins in the period in the United States known as the '''Second Red Scare''', lasting roughly from 1950 to 1956 and characterized by heightened political repression against supposed communists, as well as a campaign spreading fear of their influence on American institutions and of espionage by Soviet agents.
The cartoon depicted four leading Republicans trying to push an elephant (the traditional symbol of the Republican Party) to stand on a teetering stack of ten tar buckets, the topmost of which was labeled "McCarthyism".
* Edward Dmytryk, director, Hollywood Ten
* Edward G. Robinson, actor
By 1957, 140 leaders and members of the Communist Party had been charged under the law, of whom 93 were convicted.
Insofar as the various blacklists of McCarthyism were actual physical lists, they were created and maintained by these private organizations.
(See flier at right: 'Rabbi Spitz in the American Hebrew, March 1, 1946: "American Jews must come to grips with our contemporary anti-Semites; we must fill our insane asylums with anti-Semitic lunatics."')
In 1952, the Supreme Court upheld a lower court decision in ''Adler v. Board of Education of New York'', thus approving a law that allowed state loyalty review boards to fire teachers deemed "subversive".
* Garson Kanin, writer and director
Thus many faced a choice between "crawling through the mud to be an informer," as actor Larry Parks put it, or becoming known as a "Fifth Amendment Communist"—an epithet often used by Senator McCarthy.
Some feel that there was a genuinely dangerous subversive element in the United States, and that this danger justified extreme measures.
He learned that investigators were questioning his colleagues and relatives.
In 2016, Julian Assange, founder of the whistle-blowing website Wikileaks, accused Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate, of "whipping up a neo-McCarthyist hysteria about Russia."
This investigation ultimately resulted in Hiss's trial and conviction for perjury, and convinced many of the usefulness of congressional committees for uncovering Communist subversion.
Justice Warren wrote in the decision: "The mere summoning of a witness and compelling him to testify, against his will, about his beliefs, expressions or associations is a measure of governmental interference.
This was a major assignment that led to the number of agents in the Bureau being increased from 3,559 in 1946 to 7,029 in 1952.
Similarly, David D. Cole has written that the Patriot Act "in effect resurrects the philosophy of McCarthyism, simply substituting 'terrorist' for 'communist.'"
* Benjamin Keen, historian
* Allen Ginsberg, Beat poet
Elmer Davis, one of the most highly respected news reporters and commentators of the 1940s and 1950s, often spoke out against what he saw as the excesses of McCarthyism.
Many people accused in these "blind memoranda" were fired without any further process.
* Lionel Stander, actor
In 1940, the American Civil Liberties Union ejected founding member Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, saying that her membership in the Communist Party was enough to disqualify her as a civil libertarian.
In January 1954, a Gallup poll found that 50% of the American public supported McCarthy, while 29% had an unfavorable opinion of the senator.
* Danny Kaye, comedian, singer
Due to Hoover's insistence upon keeping the identity of his informers secret, most subjects of loyalty-security reviews were not allowed to cross-examine or know the identities of those who accused them.
Historian Ellen Schrecker, herself criticised for pro-Stalinist leanings, has written, "''in this country,'' McCarthyism did more damage to the constitution than the American Communist Party ever did."
In addition, as Richard Rovere points out, many ordinary Americans became convinced that there must be "no smoke without fire" and lent their support to McCarthyism.
The legal requirements for Fifth Amendment protection were such that a person could not testify about his own association with the Communist Party and then refuse to "name names" of colleagues with Communist affiliations.
With the end of World War II, the Cold War began almost immediately, as the Soviet Union installed Communist puppet régimes across Central and Eastern Europe, while the United States backed anti-communist forces in Greece and China.
* Archie Brown, Abraham Lincoln Brigade, WW II vet, union leader, imprisoned.
Refused to testify to HUAC.
* Lillian Hellman, playwright
