In Western Australia under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981 4.0g of MDMA is the amount required determining a court of trial, 2.0g is considered a presumption with intent to sell or supply and 28.0g is considered trafficking under Australian law.
Merck records indicate its researchers returned to the compound sporadically.
Albert van Schoor performed simple toxicological tests with the drug in 1952, most likely while researching new stimulants or circulatory medications.
This individual later provided these instructions to a client in the Midwest.
The experience elicited by MDMA depends on setting.
Likewise, the plasma half-life of (''R'')-MDMA was significantly longer than that of the (''S'')-enantiomer (5.8&nbsp;±&nbsp;2.2&nbsp;hours vs 3.6&nbsp;±&nbsp;0.9&nbsp;hours).
The committee made this recommendation on the basis of the pharmacological similarity of MDMA to previously scheduled drugs, reports of illicit trafficking in Canada, drug seizures in the United States, and lack of well-defined therapeutic use.
Believing MDMA allowed users to strip away habits and perceive the world clearly, Shulgin called the drug "window".
Some users enjoy the feeling of mass communion from the inhibition-reducing effects of the drug, while others use it as party fuel because of the drug's stimulatory effects.
A small number of therapists continue to use MDMA in therapy despite its illegal status.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime stated in its 2014 World Drug Report that US ecstasy retail prices range from US$1 to $70 per pill, or from $15,000 to $32,000 per kilogram.
MDMA (called methylsafrylamin, safrylmethylamin or N-Methyl-a-Methylhomopiperonylamin in Merck laboratory reports) was an intermediate compound in the synthesis of methylhydrastinine.
Limited exceptions are sometimes made for research.
When he tried the drug in 1977, Zeff was impressed with the effects of MDMA and came out of his semi-retirement to promote its use in therapy.
A new research area named Drug Intelligence aims to automatically monitor distribution networks based on image processing and machine learning techniques, in which an Ecstasy pill picture is analyzed to detect correlations among different production batches.
In Canada, MDMA is listed as a Schedule 1 as it is an analogue of amphetamine.
In 1985, MDMA use became associated with Acid House on the Spanish island of Ibiza.
On 24 December 1912, Merck filed two patent applications that described the synthesis and some chemical properties of MDMA and its subsequent conversion to methylhydrastinine.
Oberlin concluded that the effects of MDMA were not limited to the sympathetic nervous system.
Despite this, less than a month later Lawn reviewed the evidence and reclassified MDMA as Schedule I again, claiming that the expert testimony of several psychiatrists claiming over 200 cases where MDMA had been used in a therapeutic context with positive results could be dismissed because they weren't published in medical journals.
MDMA was also found to have effects on blood sugar levels comparable to high doses of ephedrine.
The market for MDMA in the United States is relatively small compared to methamphetamine, cocaine, and heroin.
Köllisch developed a preparation of a hydrastinine analogue, methylhydrastinine, at the request of fellow lab members, Walther Beckh and Otto Wolfes.
The majority of tablets contain 70–85&nbsp;mg of MDMA.
According to one participant in an ethnographic study, the Texas Group produced more MDMA in eighteen months than all other distribution networks combined across their entire histories.
Permits for research uses on humans must be approved by a recognized ethics committee on human research.
Following the self-trials of a colleague at the University of San Francisco, Shulgin synthesized MDMA and tried it himself in September and October 1976.
In an early media report on MDMA published in 1982, a Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) spokesman stated the agency would ban the drug if enough evidence for abuse could be found.
Results of different studies show its effects of powerful empathy with others.
Desired effects of MDMA include increased empathy, euphoria, and heightened sensations.
Contrary to ongoing treatment with approved psychiatric medications, MDMA is taken only a few times.
The role therapist was minimized in favor of patient self-discovery accompanied by MDMA induced feelings of empathy.
The contributions of these metabolites to the psychoactive and toxic effects of MDMA are an area of active research.
Deaths have been reported due to increased body temperature and dehydration.
In 1981, Clegg had coined "Ecstasy" as a slang term for MDMA to increase its marketability.
The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee explained its ruling by noting that "an individual federal district court judge simply cannot marshal resources akin to those available to the Commission for tackling the manifold issues involved with determining a proper drug equivalency."
Since the mid-1990s, MDMA has become the most widely used amphetamine-type drug by college students and teenagers.
In 1953 and 1954, the United States Army commissioned a study of toxicity and behavioral effects in animals injected with mescaline and several analogues, including MDMA.
MDMA activity at VMAT2 moves neurotransmitters out from synaptic vesicles and into the cytosol; MDMA activity at TAAR1 moves neurotransmitters out of the cytosol and into the synaptic cleft.
Metabolites of MDMA that have been identified in humans include 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxymethamphetamine (HMMA), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyamphetamine (HMA), 3,4-dihydroxyamphetamine (DHA) (also called alpha-methyldopamine (α-Me-DA)), 3,4-methylenedioxyphenylacetone (MDP2P), and 3,4-Methylenedioxy-N-hydroxyamphetamine (MDOH).
By May 1985, MDMA use was widespread in California, Texas, southern Florida, and the northeastern United States.
It is also sometimes snorted or smoked.
It was used to improve psychotherapy beginning in the 1970s and became popular as a street drug in the 1980s.
Sensational media attention was given to the proposed criminalization and the reaction of MDMA proponents, effectively advertising the drug.
Hoping MDMA could avoid criminalization like LSD and mescaline, psychotherapists and experimenters attempted to limit the spread of MDMA and information about it while conducting informal research.
Between the 1970s and the mid-1980s, this network of MDMA users consumed an estimated 500,000 doses.
The Texas Group advertised "Ecstasy parties" at bars and discos, describing MDMA as a "fun drug" and "good to dance to".
Adverse effects of MDMA use include addiction, memory problems, paranoia, difficulty sleeping, teeth grinding, blurred vision, sweating, and a rapid heartbeat.
Most commercial amphetamine immunoassay screening tests cross-react significantly with MDMA or its major metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish and separately measure each of these substances.
Once the MDP2P intermediate has been prepared, a reductive amination leads to racemic MDMA (an equal parts mixture of (''R'')-MDMA and (''S'')-MDMA).
The author noted that oxytocin and -cycloserine are potentially safer co-drugs in PTSD treatment, albeit with limited evidence of efficacy.
MDMA also has weak agonist activity at postsynaptic serotonin receptors 5-HT1 and 5-HT2 receptors, and its more efficacious metabolite MDA likely augments this action.
, MDMA has no accepted medical uses.
While engaged in scheduling debates in the United States, the DEA also pushed for international scheduling.
This review and a second corroborating review by a different author both concluded that, because of MDMA's demonstrated potential to cause lasting harm in humans (e.g., serotonergic neurotoxicity and persistent memory impairment), "considerably more research must be performed" on its efficacy in PTSD treatment to determine if the potential treatment benefits outweigh its potential to harm to a patient.
Relatively small quantities of essential oil are required to make large amounts of MDMA.
Unwitting substitution with other drugs, such as mephedrone and methamphetamine, as well as legal alternatives to MDMA, such as BZP, MDPV, and methylone, are also thought to have contributed to its decrease in popularity.
There are numerous methods available in the literature to synthesize MDMA via different intermediates.
In the United States, about 0.9 million people used ecstasy in 2010.
Merck was not interested in MDMA itself at the time.
According to some estimates as of 2004, only marijuana attracts more first time users in the US.
By some estimates the Texas Group distributed 500,000 tablets per month in Dallas alone.
MDMA is also sold in the form of the hydrochloride salt, either as loose crystals or in gelcaps.
MDMA is particularly expensive in Australia, costing A$15–A$30 per tablet.
, MDMA has no accepted medical indications.
Shulgin first heard of the psychoactive effects of N-methylated MDA around 1975 from a young student who reported "amphetamine-like content".
Before it was widely banned, it saw limited use in therapy.
However, in part due to the global supply shortage of sassafras oil, substances that are sold as molly frequently contain no MDMA and instead contain methylone, ethylone, MDPV, mephedrone, or any other of the group of compounds commonly known as bath salts.
This allows 500&nbsp;ml of the oil to produce between 150 and 340 grams of MDMA.
Anecdotally, MDMA was said to greatly accelerate therapy.
In 1927, Max Oberlin studied the pharmacology of MDMA while searching for substances with effects similar to adrenaline or ephedrine, the latter being structurally similar to MDMA.
MDMA is legally controlled in most of the world under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances and other international agreements, although exceptions exist for research and limited medical use.
In summary, MDMA enters monoamine neurons by acting as a monoamine transporter substrate.
After pharmacological studies, research on MDMA was not continued.
The CDSA was updated as a result of the Safe Streets Act changing amphetamines from Schedule III to Schedule I in March 2012.
By the early 1980s MDMA was being used in Boston and New York City nightclubs such as Studio 54 and Paradise Garage.
Starting in 1983, the Texas Group mass-produced MDMA in a Texas lab or imported it from California and marketed tablets using pyramid sales structures and toll-free numbers.
A 1920 Merck patent describes a chemical modification to MDMA.
The variability of the induced altered state by MDMA is lower comparing to other psychedelics.
It has stimulant and psychedelic effects.
Thereafter in the late 1980s, the drug spread alongside rave culture to the UK and then to other European and American cities.
80% of MDMA is metabolised in the liver, and about 20% is excreted unchanged in the urine.
, most of the MDMA in the United States is produced in British Columbia, Canada and imported by Canada-based Asian transnational criminal organizations.
Recreational use also increased after several cocaine dealers switched to distributing MDMA following experiences with the drug.
In the next month, the World Health Organization identified MDMA as the only substance out of twenty phenethylamines to be seized a significant number of times.
Depression, substance abuse, relationship problems, premenstrual syndrome, and autism were among several psychiatric disorders MDMA assisted therapy was reported to treat.
As a result of several expert witnesses testifying that MDMA had an accepted medical usage, the administrative law judge presiding over the hearings recommended that MDMA be classified as a Schedule III substance.
In the United Kingdom, MDMA was made illegal in 1977 by a modification order to the existing Misuse of Drugs Act 1971.
In 2008 the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction noted that although there were some reports of tablets being sold for as little as €1, most countries in Europe then reported typical retail prices in the range of €3 to €9 per tablet, typically containing 25–65&nbsp;mg of MDMA.
It is thought that this can result in sustained and higher concentrations of MDMA if the user takes consecutive doses of the drug.
Under the brand name "Sassyfras", MDMA tablets were sold in brown bottles.
Use of MDMA individually or in a small groups in a quiet environment and when concentrating, is described with increased lucidity, capability of concentration, sensitivity of aesthetic aspects of the background and emotions, as well as greater capability of communication with others.
In a Newsweek article published the next year, a DEA pharmacologist stated that the agency had been unaware of its use among psychiatrists.
These novel techniques allow police scientists to facilitate the monitoring of illicit distribution networks.
Evidence suggests that the area under the blood plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) was two to four times higher for the (''R'')-enantiomer than the (''S'')-enantiomer after a 40&nbsp;mg oral dose in human volunteers.
Complex, nonlinear pharmacokinetics arise via autoinhibition of CYP2D6 and CYP2D8, resulting in zeroth order kinetics at higher doses.
A review of the safety and efficacy of MDMA as a treatment for various disorders, particularly PTSD, indicated that MDMA has therapeutic efficacy in some patients; however, it emphasized that issues regarding the control-ability of MDMA-induced experiences and neurochemical recovery must be addressed.
Around 1970, Shulgin sent instructions for N-methylated MDA (MDMA) synthesis to the founder of a Los Angeles chemical company who had requested them.
MDMA is a monoamine transporter substrate (i.e., a substrate for DAT, NET, and SERT), so it enters monoamine neurons via these neuronal membrane transport proteins; by acting as a monoamine transporter substrate, MDMA produces competitive reuptake inhibition at the neuronal membrane transporters (i.e., it competes with endogenous monoamines for reuptake).
Penalties include a maximum of seven years and/or unlimited fine for possession; life and/or unlimited fine for production or trafficking.
The most common salt of MDMA is the hydrochloride salt;  pure MDMA hydrochloride is water-soluble and appears as a white or off-white powder or crystal.
Use may also lead to depression and fatigue.
One method is to isomerize safrole to isosafrole in the presence of a strong base, and then oxidize isosafrole to MDP2P.
MDMA was first made in 1912.
Another method uses the Wacker process to oxidize safrole directly to the MDP2P intermediate with a palladium catalyst.
By 2014 the EMCDDA reported that the range was more usually between €5 and €10 per tablet, typically containing 57–102&nbsp;mg of MDMA, although MDMA in powder form was becoming more common.
MDMA has also been proposed as an adjunct to substance abuse treatment.
MDMA has ten times more affinity for uptake at serotonin transporters compared to dopamine and norepinephrine transporters and consequently has mainly serotonergic effects.
According to psychiatrist George Greer, therapists who used MDMA in their practice were impressed by the results.
Subsequent legally-approved MDMA studies in humans have taken place in the US.
Other courts have upheld the sentencing guidelines.
Having commenced production in 1976, this "Boston Group" did not keep up with growing demand and shortages frequently occurred.
Some researchers such as David Nutt disagree with the legal categorization of MDMA with other more harmful drugs.
Over the following years, Zeff traveled around the US and occasionally to Europe, eventually training an estimated four thousand psychotherapists in the therapeutic use of MDMA.
However, the two enantiomers have been shown to exhibit different kinetics.
Illicit MDMA use became increasingly widespread among young adults in universities and later, in high schools.
When taken by mouth, effects begin after 30–45&nbsp;minutes and last 3–6&nbsp;hours.
MDMA and MDA may be quantitated in blood, plasma or urine to monitor for use, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning or assist in the forensic investigation of a traffic or other criminal violation or a sudden death.
The disposition of MDMA may also be stereoselective, with the S-enantiomer having a shorter elimination half-life and greater excretion than the R-enantiomer.
An August 1970 report at a meeting of crime laboratory chemists indicates MDMA was being used recreationally in the Chicago area by 1970.
Over the following years the number of MDMA samples increased, eventually exceeding the number of MDA samples in the early 1980s.
In the United States, MDMA is currently placed in Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act.
As a free base, MDMA is a colorless oil insoluble in water.
MDMA is often considered the drug of choice within the rave culture and is also used at clubs, festivals and house parties.
It is unclear if Fruhstorfer investigated the effects of MDMA in humans.
Outside of Merck, other researchers began to investigate MDMA.
In the rave environment, the sensory effects from the music and lighting are often highly synergistic with the drug.
By the mid-1980s, MDMA use had spread to colleges around the United States.
Tablets sold as ecstasy sometimes only contain 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA) instead of MDMA; the proportion of seized ecstasy tablets with MDMA-like impurities has varied annually and by country.
Sometimes MDMA is labelled as an “empathogenic” drug, because of its empathy-producing effects.
A small recreational market for MDMA developed by the late 1970s, consuming perhaps 10,000 doses in 1976.
Sessions were usually held in the home of the patient or the therapist.
Once inside a monoamine neuron, MDMA acts as a VMAT2 inhibitor and a TAAR1 agonist.
While intrigued by reports of psychotherapeutic uses for the drug, the committee viewed the studies as lacking appropriate methodological design and encouraged further research.
It is classed as a Schedule 9 Prohibited Substance in the country, meaning it is available for scientific research purposes only.
Shulgin first reported on MDMA in a presentation at a conference in Bethesda, Maryland in December 1976.
The ban took effect one month later on 1 July 1985 in the midst of Nancy Reagan's "Just Say No" campaign.
MDMA became one of the four most widely used illicit drugs in the US, along with cocaine, heroin, and cannabis.
In terms of purity data for Australian MDMA, the average is around 34%, ranging from less than 1% to about 85%.
MDMA belongs to the substituted methylenedioxyphenethylamine and substituted amphetamine classes of drugs.
MDMA is commonly associated with dance parties, raves, and electronic dance music.
The Commission on Narcotic Drugs added MDMA to Schedule I of the convention on 11 February 1986.
A number of drug interactions can occur between MDMA and other drugs, including serotonergic drugs.
Although MDMA was not named explicitly in this legislation, the order extended the definition of Class A drugs to include various ring-substituted phenethylamines.
MDMA could be purchased via credit card and taxes were paid on sales.
She and two close friends had consumed 100&nbsp;mg of MDMA and reported positive emotional experiences.
MDMA also interacts with drugs which inhibit CYP450 enzymes, like ritonavir (Norvir), particularly CYP2D6 inhibitors.
Some pills depict logos of products or shows popular with children, such as Shaun the Sheep.
They described MDMA as inducing "an easily controlled altered state of consciousness with emotional and sensual overtones" comparable "to marijuana, to psilocybin devoid of the hallucinatory component, or to low levels of MDA".
The psychedelic amphetamine quality of MDMA offers multiple reasons for its appeal to users in the rave setting.
MDMA is in the substituted methylenedioxyphenethylamine and substituted amphetamine classes of chemicals.
By mid-1984, MDMA use was becoming more noticed.
Users sometimes use mentholated products while taking MDMA for its cooling sensation.
The DEA was surprised when a number of psychiatrists, psychotherapists, and researchers objected to the proposed scheduling and requested a hearing.
Inhibition of VMAT2 by MDMA results in increased concentrations of the associated neurotransmitter (serotonin, norepinephrine, or dopamine) in the cytosol of a monoamine neuron.
After MDMA was criminalized, most medical use stopped, although some therapists continued to prescribe the drug illegally.
(''S'')-MDMA is more effective in eliciting 5-HT, NE, and DA release, while (''D'')-MDMA is overall less effective, and more selective for 5-HT and NE release (having only a very faint efficacy on DA release).
The essential oil of ''Ocotea cymbarum'', for example, typically contains between 80 and 94% safrole.
Psychotherapists who used MDMA believed the drug eliminated the typical fear response and increased communication.
American chemist and psychopharmacologist Alexander Shulgin reported he synthesized MDMA in 1965 while researching methylenedioxy compounds at Dow Chemical Company, but did not test the psychoactivity of the compound at this time.
It is often sold mixed with other substances such as ephedrine, amphetamine, and methamphetamine.
Among adolescent users in the United States between 1999 and 2008, girls were more likely to use MDMA than boys.
Any other type of sale, use or manufacture is strictly prohibited by law.
The metabolism may be primarily by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 and COMT.
MDMA is a chiral compound and has been almost exclusively administered as a racemate.
This was broadly similar to the percentage of people who use cocaine, amphetamines, and opioids, but fewer than for cannabis.
MDMA acts primarily as a presynaptic releasing agent of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, which arises from its activity at trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) and vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2).
The use of MDMA in Texas clubs declined rapidly after criminalization, although by 1991 the drug remained popular among young middle-class whites and in nightclubs.
The agency cited increased distribution in Texas, escalating street use, and new evidence of MDA (an analog of MDMA) neurotoxicity as reasons for the emergency measure.
MDMA inhibits both vesicular monoamine transporters (VMATs), the second of which (VMAT2) is highly expressed within monoamine neurons at vesicular membranes.
More research is needed to determine if its usefulness outweighs the risk of harm.
Perceiving a business opportunity, Michael Clegg, the Southwest distributor for the Boston Group, started his own "Texas Group" backed financially by Texas friends.
In 1978, he and David E. Nichols published a report on the drug's psychoactive effect in humans.
In turn, these phosphorylated monoamine transporters either reverse transport direction – i.e., move neurotransmitters from the cytosol to the synaptic cleft – or withdraw into the neuron, respectively producing neurotransmitter efflux and noncompetitive reuptake inhibition at the neuronal membrane transporters.
In 1985 the World Health Organization's Expert Committee on Drug Dependence recommended that MDMA be placed in Schedule I of the 1971 United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
A number of ecstasy manufacturers brand their pills with a logo, often being a corporate logo, to help distinguish between suppliers; one of the most notable logos which appeared on pills is the Mitsubishi logo which was popular.
In 2014, between 9 and 29&nbsp;million people between the ages of 15 and 64 used ecstasy (0.2% to 0.6% of the world population).
No double blind studies had yet been conducted as to the efficacy of MDMA for therapy.
MDMA likely emerged as a substitute for its analog methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), a drug at the time popular among users of psychedelics which was made a Schedule 1 substance in the United States in 1970.
Conducted at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, these investigations were declassified in October 1969 and published in 1973.
A California laboratory that analyzed confidentially submitted drug samples first detected MDMA in 1975.
Severe overdose resulting in death has also been reported in people who took MDMA in combination with certain monoamine oxidase inhibitors, such as phenelzine (Nardil), tranylcypromine (Parnate), or moclobemide (Aurorix, Manerix).
Early MDMA distributors were deterred from large scale operations by the threat of possible legislation.
MDMA is sometimes taken in conjunction with other psychoactive drugs, such as LSD, psilocybin mushrooms, and ketamine.
Most MDMA enters Australia from the Netherlands, the UK, Asia, and the US.
An initial hearing was held on 1 February 1985 at the DEA offices in Washington, D.C. with administrative law judge Francis L. Young presiding.
Most illicit MDMA is synthesized using MDP2P (3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl-2-propanone) as a precursor.
The original MDMA synthesis described in Merck's patent involves brominating safrole to 1-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2-bromopropane and then reacting this adduct with methylamine.
A 1960 Polish paper by Biniecki and Krajewski describing the synthesis of MDMA as an intermediate was the first published scientific paper on the substance.
Some drug abuse screening programs rely on hair, saliva, or sweat as specimens.
MDMA may have been in non-medical use in the western United States in 1968.
Activation of TAAR1 by MDMA triggers protein kinase A and protein kinase C signaling events which then phosphorylates the associated monoamine transporters – DAT, NET, or SERT – of the neuron.
MDMA is a ligand at both sigma receptor subtypes, though its efficacies at the receptors have not yet been elucidated.
MDMA is known to be metabolized by two main metabolic pathways: (1) ''O''-demethylenation followed by catechol-''O''-methyltransferase (COMT)-catalyzed methylation and/or glucuronide/sulfate conjugation; and (2) ''N''-dealkylation, deamination, and oxidation to the corresponding benzoic acid derivatives conjugated with glycine.
MDMA was openly distributed in Austin and Dallas-Fort Worth area bars and nightclubs, becoming popular with yuppies, college students, and gays.
Merck wanted to avoid an existing patent held by Bayer for one such compound: hydrastinine.
Research was stopped "particularly due to a strong price increase of safrylmethylamine", which was still used as an intermediate in methylhydrastinine synthesis.
A placebo-controlled study in 15 human volunteers found 100&nbsp;mg MDMA increased blood levels of oxytocin, and the amount of oxytocin increase was correlated with the subjective prosocial effects of MDMA.
It was decided there to hold three more hearings that year: Los Angeles on 10 June, Kansas City, Missouri on 10–11 July, and Washington, D.C. on 8–11 October.
One such person was Leo Zeff, a psychotherapist who had been known to use psychedelic substances in his practice.
