The structure is that of a book, representing the Qur'an,  sitting on a rehal, or book stand.
By the middle of the 6th century, there were three major settlements in northern Arabia, all along the south-western coast that borders the Red Sea, in a habitable region between the sea and the great mountains to the east.
In the last century the most severe one occurred in 1942.
Another name of Mecca is Tihamah.
For example, on 2 July 1990, a pilgrimage to Mecca ended in tragedy when the ventilation system failed in a crowded pedestrian tunnel and 1,426 people were either suffocated or trampled to death in a stampede.
Mecca was regularly hit by cholera outbreaks.
In World War I, the Ottoman Empire was at war with Britain and its allies, having sided with Germany.
The full official name is ''Makkah al-Mukarramah'' or ''Makkatu l-Mukarramah'' (,  or ), which means "Mecca the Honored", but is also loosely translated as "The Holy City of Mecca".
Mecca re-entered Islamic political history during the Second Islamic Civil War, when it was held by Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, an early Muslim who opposed the Umayyad caliphs.
Non-Muslims are not permitted to enter Mecca under Saudi law, and using fraudulent documents to do so may result in arrest and prosecution.
As the Islamic Empire grew, Mecca continued to attract pilgrims from all across the Muslim world and beyond, as Muslims came to perform the annual Hajj pilgrimage.
Yaqut al-Hamawi, the 12th century Syrian geographer, wrote that Fārān was "an arabized Hebrew word.
The siege lasted two weeks, and resulted in several hundred deaths and significant damage to the shrine, especially the Safa-Marwa gallery.
The form Bakkah is used for the name Mecca in the Quran in 3:96, while the form Mecca is used in 48:24.
Population density in Mecca is very high.
Most long-term residents of Mecca live in the Old City, and many work in the industry known locally as the ''Hajj Industry''.
Adding to the Hajj-related diversity, the oil-boom of the past 50 years has brought hundreds of thousands of working immigrants.
The pagan imagery was destroyed by Muhammad's followers and the location Islamized and rededicated to the worship of God.
Hussein bin Ali revolted against the Ottoman Empire from Mecca, and it was the first city captured by his forces in the Battle of Mecca (1916).
The prohibition extends to Ahmadis, as they are considered non-Muslims.
The first were local wells, such as the Zamzam Well, that produced generally brackish water.
Truly the Pagans are unclean; so let them not, after this year of theirs, approach the Sacred Mosque.''
As of 2005, there were 532 public and private schools for males and another 681 public and private schools for female students.
As one academic put it, "Meccans have no means of earning a living but by serving the hajjis."
This was a massive blow to the prestige of the (Turkish) Ottoman Empire, which had exercised sovereignty over the holy city since 1517.
He was born in a minor faction, the Hashemites, of the ruling Quraysh tribe.
Pakistani forces carried out the final assault; they were assisted with weapons, logistics and planning by an elite team of French commandos from The French GIGN commando unit.
The city centers on the Masjid al-Haram area, whose elevation is lower than most of the city.
Saadanius is considered to be a primate closely related to the common ancestor of the Old World monkeys and apes.
King Abdul Aziz Al-Saud (Ibn Saud) pressed them forward as he saw them as a means of convenience and better governance.
However, it was also the time each year that disputes would be arbitrated, debts would be resolved, and trading would occur at Meccan fairs.
Soon after World War II, the existing network was greatly expanded and improved.
The gate was designed in 1979 by an Egyptian architect, Samir Elabd, for the architectural firm IDEA Center.
The reference to the story in Qur'an is rather short.
The rainfall, scant as it is, also presents the threat of flooding and has been a danger since earliest times.
In the 6th century they joined the lucrative spice trade as well, since battles in other parts of the world were causing trade routes to divert from the dangerous sea routes to the more secure overland routes.
The city was twice besieged by the Umayyads, in 683 and 692.
Abraha sent a dispatch inviting Abdul-Muttalib to meet with Abraha and discuss matters.
Ibn Ishaq further states that one of the men of the Quraysh tribe was angered by this, and going to Sana'a, slipped into the church at night and defiled it; it is widely assumed that they did so by defecating in it.
During the Battle of the Trench in 627, the combined armies of Arabia were unable to defeat Muhammad's forces .
In 2010, the Mecca area became an important site for paleontology with respect to primate evolution, with the discovery of a ''Saadanius'' fossil.
Mecca's prominence as a trading center also surpassed the cities of Petra and Palmyra.
It was conquered by Ibn Saud in 1925.
Its resident population in 2012 was roughly 2 million, although visitors more than triple this number every year during the ''hajj'' ("pilgrimage") period held in the twelfth Muslim lunar month of ''Dhu al-Hijjah''.
Limited radio communication was established within the Kingdom under the Hashimites.
It is the entrance to Makkah and the birthplace of Muhammad.
Sharif's revolt proved a turning point of the war on the eastern front.
However, instead of continuing their fight, the city of Mecca surrendered to Muhammad, who declared peace and amnesty for its inhabitants.
There are also many walk-in clinics available for both residents and pilgrims.
In the 20th century, many fast-food chains opened franchises in Mecca, catering to locals and pilgrims alike.
Alliances were struck between the merchants in Mecca and the local nomadic tribes, who would bring goods – leather, livestock, and metals mined in the local mountains – to Mecca to be loaded on the caravans and carried to cities in Syria and Iraq.
Many television stations serving the city area include Saudi TV1, Saudi TV2, Saudi TV Sports, Al-Ekhbariya, Arab Radio and Television Network and various cable, satellite and other specialty television providers.
Nevertheless, many non-Muslims and Ahmadis have visited the city.
Other references to Mecca in the Quran (6:92, 42:5) call it ''Umm al-Qurā'' (), meaning "mother of all settlements."
During the Hajj, several million people of varying nationalities worship in unison.
Another way the Hajj generates income is through services to pilgrims.
Taxes especially increased during the Great Depression, and many of these taxes existed as late as 1972.
Umrah, the lesser pilgrimage, is not obligatory, but is recommended in the Qur'an.
According to early Islamic historians such as Ibn Ishaq, Abraha the Christian ruler of Yemen, which was subject to the Kingdom of Aksum of Ethiopia, built a great church at Sana'a known as ''al-Qullays'' in honor of the Aksumite king Negus.
There are some industries and factories in the city, but Mecca no longer plays a major role in Saudi Arabia's economy, which is mainly based on oil exports.
'''Mecca''' () or '''Makkah''' ( '''') is a city in the Hejaz in Saudi Arabia.
Historical accounts also provide some indication that goods from other continents may also have flowed through Mecca.
For example, when the house of Ali-Oraid was discovered, King Fahd himself ordered that it be bulldozed lest it should become a pilgrimage site.
In pre-modern Mecca the most common sports were impromptu wrestling and foot races.
Up to the 7th century, this journey was intended for religious reasons by the pagan Arabs to pay homage to their shrine, and to drink from the Zamzam Well.
One of the most famous was Richard Francis Burton, who traveled as a Qadiriyyah Sufi from Afghanistan in 1853.
The income was generated in a number of ways.
The Byzantine Empire had previously controlled the Red Sea, but piracy had been on the increase.
The city has grown substantially in the 20th and 21st centuries, as the convenience and affordability of jet travel has increased the number of pilgrims participating in the Hajj.
In South Arabic, the language in use in the southern portion of the Arabian Peninsula at the time of Muhammad, the ''b'' and ''m'' were interchangeable.
An Arabic language word, its etymology, like that of Mecca, is obscure.
It will be built by a business consortium from Spain.
Mecca is at an elevation of  above sea level, and approximately  inland from the Red Sea.
Exotic foods, such as fruits from India and Japan, are often brought by the pilgrims.
During the Hashemite period, it was used to print the city's official gazette, ''al-Qibla''.
Also the Greek historian Diodorus Siculus who lived between 60 BCE and 30 BCE writes about the isolated region of Arabia in his work Bibliotheca historica describing a holy shrine that Muslims see as referring to the Kaaba at Mecca "And a temple has been set up there, which is very holy and exceedingly revered by all Arabians".
Various types of enterprises that have existed since 1970: corrugated iron manufacturing, copper smithies, carpentry shops, upholstering establishments, vegetable oil extraction plants, sweets manufacturies, flour mills, bakeries, poultry farms, frozen food importing, photography processing, secretarial establishments, ice factories, bottling plants for soft drinks, barber shops, book shops, travel agencies and banks.
These annual events gave the tribes a sense of common identity and made Mecca an important focus for the peninsula.
Camel caravans, said to have first been used by Muhammad's great-grandfather, were a major part of Mecca's bustling economy.
One method was taxing the pilgrims.
According to the al-Fil sura, the next day, as Abraha prepared to enter the city, a dark cloud of small birds sent by Allah appeared.
However, just two years later, the Quraysh violated the truce by slaughtering a group of Muslims and their allies.
In the ''Sharḥ al- Asāṭīr,'' a  commentary on the Samaritan  midrashic chronology of the Patriarchs, of unknown date but probably composed in the tenth century C.E., it is claimed that Mecca was built by the sons of Nebaioth, the eldest son of Ishmael.
located at Jeddah, about 100 kilometres from the city centre.
Abdul Muttalib told the Meccans to seek refuge in the hills while he with some leading members of the Quraysh remained within the precincts of the Kaaba.
In 1818, followers of the Salafi juristic school were again defeated, but some of the Al Saud clan survived and founded the Second Saudi State that lasted until 1891 and led on to the present country of Saudi Arabia.
This will be in addition to the Al Mashaaer Al Mugaddassah Metro which carries pilgrims during Hajj.
Another previous route that ran through the Persian Gulf via the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, was also being threatened by exploitations from the Sassanid Empire, as well as being disrupted by the Lakhmids, the Ghassanids, and the Roman–Persian Wars.
The Saudi government adopted ''Makkah'' as the official spelling in the 1980s, but is not universally known or used worldwide.
Muhammad was born in Mecca in 570, and thus Islam has been inextricably linked with it ever since.
Traditional homes are built of local rock and are generally two to three stories.
The Black Death pandemic hit Mecca in 1349.
As in other Arabian cities Kabsa (a spiced dish of rice and meat) is the most traditional lunch but the Yemeni mandi (a dish of rice and tandoori cooked meat) is also popular.
Mecca has been the site of several incidents and failures of crowd control because of the large numbers of people who come to make the Hajj.
Water was transported from it using underground channels.
It has been theorized that an epidemic such as by smallpox could have caused such a failed invasion of Mecca.
Abraha attacked Mecca  However, the lead elephant, known as Mahmud,
Since then, dams have been constructed to ameliorate the problem.
The towers were the third tallest building in the world when completed in 2012.
As mentioned above, because of the Wahhabist hostility to reverence being paid to historic and religious buildings, Mecca has lost most of its heritage in recent years and few buildings from the last 1,500 years have survived Saudi rule.
It was in Mecca, in the nearby mountain cave of Hira on Jabal al-Nour, that, according to Islamic tradition, Muhammad began receiving divine revelations from God through the Archangel Gabriel in 610 AD, and advocated his form of Abrahamic monotheism against Meccan paganism.
While in King Husayn's time there were about 20 telephones in the entire city; in 1936 the number jumped to 450, totalling about half the telephones in the country.
Muhammad's migration to Medina shifted the focus away from Mecca.
Mecca features a hot desert climate.
On 20 November 1979 two hundred armed Islamist dissidents led by Saudi preacher Juhayman al-Otaibi seized the Grand Mosque.
It gained widespread fame, even gaining the notice of the Byzantine Empire.
Guru Nanak Sahib, the founder of Sikhism, visited Mecca in December 1518.
Often, they perform the Umrah, the lesser pilgrimage, while visiting the Masjid al-Haram.
However, the Saudi government removed the structure to give space for hotels and business buildings near to the Grand Mosque.
Summer temperatures are extremely hot and break the  mark in the afternoon dropping to  in the evening.
The harsh conditions and terrain of the Arabian peninsula meant a near-constant state of conflict between the local tribes, but once a year they would declare a truce and converge upon Mecca in an annual pilgrimage.
Mecca owns its hometown paper, ''Al Nadwa''.
According to Islamic tradition, the history of Mecca goes back to Abraham (Ibrahim), who built the Kaaba with the help of his elder son Ishmael in around 2000 BCE when the inhabitants of the site then known as Bakkah had fallen away from the original monotheism of Abraham through the influence of the Amalekites.
It is the capital of that kingdom's Makkah Region.
Due to the difficulty and expense of the Hajj, pilgrims arrived by boat at Jeddah, and came overland, or joined the annual caravans from Syria or Iraq.
However, many have been destroyed without any such reason.
A high speed inter-city rail line (Haramain High Speed Rail Project also known as the "Western Railway"), is under construction in Saudi Arabia.
As the Saudis expanded the Grand Mosque in the center of the city, where there were once hundreds of houses are now replaced with wide avenues and city squares.
In its modern period, Mecca has seen tremendous expansion in size and infrastructure, home to structures such as the Abraj Al Bait, also known as the Makkah Royal Clock Tower Hotel, the world's third tallest building and the building with the third largest amount of floor area.
Year-round, pilgrims stream into the city to perform the rites of Umrah, and during the last weeks of Dhu al-Qi'dah, on average 4 million Muslims arrive in the city to take part in the rites known as Hajj.
The mosque surrounds the Kaaba, which Muslims turn towards while offering daily prayer.
In 1803 the city was captured by the First Saudi State, which held Mecca until 1813.
This 18.1 kilometer elevated metro transports pilgrims to holy sites Mount Arafat, Muzdalifah and Mina in the city during hajj reducing the congestion on the roads.
Muhammad and his companions, now 10,000 strong, marched into Mecca.
On 24 September 2015, 700 pilgrims were killed in a stampede at Mina during stoning ritual at Jamarat.
By 1985, Mecca, like other Saudi cities, possessed modern telephone, telex, radio and television communications.
In 930, Mecca was attacked and sacked by Qarmatians, a millenarian Ismaili Muslim sect led by Abū-Tāhir Al-Jannābī and centered in eastern Arabia.
Many of these pilgrims have remained and become residents of the city.
As a result, Mecca has become one of the most cosmopolitan and diverse cities  in the Muslim world, despite the fact that non-Muslims are prohibited from entering the city.
The total area of Mecca today stands over .
The sources of this spring are the mountains of J̲abal Saʿd (Jabal Sa'd) and Jabal Kabkāb, which lie a few kilometers east of Jabal Arafa or about  southeast of Mecca.
It had successfully repulsed an attack on Istanbul in the Gallipoli Campaign and on Baghdad in the Siege of Kut.
Mecca houses the Masjid al-Haram, the largest mosque in the world.
The word "Mecca" in English has come to be used to refer to any place that draws large numbers of people, and because of this many Muslims regard the use of this spelling for the city as offensive.
During that time, telephone lines were extended to Jeddah and Ta’if, but not to the capital Riyadh.
King Abdulaziz Stadium is the largest stadium in Mecca with capacity of 38,000.
The medium of instruction in both public and private schools is Arabic with emphasis on English as a second language, but some private schools founded by foreign entities such as International schools use the English language for medium of instruction.
The Hajj, the 'greater' pilgrimage is performed annually in Mecca and nearby sites.
They claimed that the Saudi royal family no longer represented pure Islam and that the Masjid al-Haram (The Sacred Mosque) and the Kaaba, must be held by those of true faith.
These dishes are almost always found in Lebanese, Syrian, and Turkish restaurants.
Today, Saggas make money providing sweets such as ''baklava'' and ''basbosa'' along with fruit juice drinks.
For higher education, the city has only one university, Umm Al-Qura University, which was established in 1949 as a college and became a public university in 1979.
Muhammad Ali Pasha successfully returned Mecca to Ottoman control in 1813.
Rain usually falls in Mecca in small amounts scattered between November and January.
When Muhammad ibn Khuza'i got as far as the land of Kinana, the people of the lowland, knowing what he had come for, sent a man of Hudhayl called ʿUrwa bin Hayyad al-Milasi, who shot him with an arrow, killing him.
Traditionally during the month of Ramadan, men (known as Saggas) provided mineral water and fruit juice for Muslims breaking their fast at dusk.
The  Qur'an Gate, located on the Jeddah-Mecca Highway, marks the boundary of the area where non-Muslims are prohibited to enter.
When news of the advance of Abraha's army came, the Arab tribes of the Quraysh, Banu Kinanah, Banu Khuza'a and Banu Hudhayl united in defense of the Kaaba.
The area around the mosque comprises the old city.
The British agent T. E. Lawrence conspired with the Ottoman governor Hussain bin Ali, the Sharif of Mecca.
The fossil habitat, near what is now the Red Sea in western Saudi Arabia, was a damp forest area between 28 million and 29 million years ago.
Between 1830 and 1930 cholera broke out among pilgrims at Mecca 27 times.
In the 5th century, the Quraysh took control of Mecca, and became skilled merchants and traders.
"Mecca" is the familiar form of the English transliteration for the Arabic name of the city, although the official transliteration used by the Saudi government is ''Makkah'', which is closer to the Arabic pronunciation.
The Saudi regime expanded this press into a larger operation, introducing the new Saudi official gazette ''Umm al-Qurā''.
On 16 May 2007, prince Khalid bin Faisal Al Saud was appointed as the new governor.
Mecca's most important pagan deity was Hubal, which had been placed there by the ruling Quraysh tribe and remained until the 7th century.
The school system in Mecca has many public and private schools for both males and females.
The main avenues are ''Al-Mudda'ah'' and ''Sūq al-Layl'' to the north of the mosque, and ''As-Sūg Assaghīr'' to the south.
Sharif Hussein declared a new state, the Kingdom of Hejaz, and declared Mecca as the capital of the new kingdom.
Hira is a cave near Mecca, on the mountain named Jabal Al-Nūr in the Tihamah region of present-day Saudi Arabia.
The Umayyad Caliphate moved the capital to Damascus in Syria and the Abbasid Caliphate to Baghdad, in modern-day Iraq, which remained the center of the Islamic Empire for nearly 500 years.
According to Al-Kurdī, there had been 89 historic floods by 1965, including several in the Saudi period.
This rail line is planned to provide a safe and comfortable transport in  electric trains in-turn reducing the travel time to less than two hours between Mecca and Medina .
''O ye who believe!
Other regional powers such as the Abyssinian, Ghassan, and Lakhm were in decline leaving Meccan trade to be the primary binding force in Arabia in the late 6th century.
The city is now ringed by freeways, and contains shopping malls and skyscrapers.
When Abdul-Muttalib left the meeting he was heard saying, "The Owner of this House is its Defender, and I am sure he will save it from the attack of the adversaries and will not dishonor the servants of His House."
Central Mecca lies in a corridor between mountains, which is often called the "Hollow of Mecca."
The few industries operating in Mecca include textiles, furniture, and utensils.
The reason for much of the destruction of historic buildings has been for the construction of hotels, apartments, parking lots, and other infrastructure facilities for Hajj pilgrims.
Then, Muhammad returned to Medina, after assigning Akib ibn Usaid as governor of the city.
It will link along 444 kilometres (276&nbsp;mi), the Muslim holy cities of Medina and Mecca via King Abdullah Economic City, Rabigh, Jeddah and King Abdulaziz International Airport.
Mecca also attracted a year-round population of scholars, pious Muslims who wished to live close to the Kaaba, and local inhabitants who served the pilgrims.
The mixture of different ethnicities and nationalities amongst Meccan residents has significantly impacted Mecca's traditional cuisine.
Mecca was declared as the holiest site in Islam ordaining it as the center of Muslim pilgrimage, one of the faith's Five Pillars.
Another name for Mecca, or the wilderness and mountains surrounding it, according to Arab and Islamic tradition, is '''Faran''' or '''Pharan''', referring to the Desert of Paran mentioned in the Old Testament at Genesis 21:21.
Income generated from the Hajj, in fact, not only powers the Meccan economy but has historically had far reaching effects on the economy of the entire Arabian Peninsula.
The first such recorded example of non-Muslims is that of Ludovico di Varthema of Bologna in 1503.
During this expansion, Mecca has lost some historical structures and archaeological sites, such as the Ajyad Fortress.
The city has been described as one of the most cosmopolitan Islamic cities, with an international cuisine.
Goods from Africa and the Far East passed through en route to Syria including spices, leather, medicine, cloth, and slaves; in return Mecca received money, weapons, cereals and wine, which in turn were distributed throughout Arabia.
Grilled meat dishes such as shawarma (flat-bread meat sandwich), kofta (meatballs) and kebab are widely sold in Mecca.
Paleontologists involved in the research hope to find further fossils in the area.
The Old Testament chapter Psalm 84:3–6, and a mention of a pilgrimage at the Valley of Baca, that Muslims see as referring to the mentioning of Mecca as Bakkah in Quran Surah 3:96.
The city takes in more than $100 million, while the Saudi government spends about $50 million on services for the Hajj.
A very sporadic third source was rainfall which was stored by the people in small reservoirs or cisterns.
Some time in the 5th century, the Kaaba was a place of worship for the deities of Arabia's pagan tribes.
The Zamzam Well is home to a celebrated water spring.
Every adult, healthy Muslim who has the financial and physical capacity to travel to Mecca and can make arrangements for the care of his/her dependents during the trip, must perform the Hajj at least once in a lifetime.
Mecca is the capital of the Makkah Region, which includes neighboring Jeddah.
Mecca was long ruled by Muhammad's descendants, the sharifs, acting either as independent rulers or as vassals to larger polities.
is said to have stopped at the boundary around Mecca and refused to enter.
The first three are Mecca's (and other Saudi cities') primary newspapers focusing mainly on issues that affect the city, with over a million readers.
Telecommunications in the city were emphasized early under the Saudi reign.
Widely believed to be a synonym for Mecca, it is said to be more specifically the early name for the valley located therein, while Muslim scholars generally use it to refer to the sacred area of the city that immediately surrounds and includes the Kaaba.
Although the area around Mecca was completely barren, it was the wealthiest of the three settlements with abundant water via the renowned Zamzam Well and a position at the crossroads of major caravan routes.
Al Mashaaer Al Mugaddassah Metro is a metro line in mecca opened in 13 November 2010.
The beginnings of Mecca is attributed to Ishmael's descendants.
Football is the most popular sport in Mecca, the city hosting some of the oldest sport clubs in Saudi Arabia such as, Al-Wahda FC (established in 1945).
