4 or larger) being produced.
During 2013 the Meccano brand was acquired in its entirety by the Canadian toy company Spin Master.
The "Krugozor" (English: "Outlook"; Russian: "Кругозор") plant in Moscow produced some sets which included electrical motors and gears.
9 and 10 sets were left largely unchanged.
In 1934 the nine basic Meccano outfits (numbered 00 to 7) were replaced by eleven outfits, labelled 0, A to H, K and L, the old No.
This new colour scheme was only available in the United Kingdom until the end of the Second World War in 1945.
10 Outfit became Meccano's flagship set and remained relatively unchanged until it was discontinued a half-century later in 1992.
In 1970 electronic parts were introduced, and the current black coloured plates were changed to blue.
In 1994 additional theme sets were introduced and a pull-back friction motor was added to the Plastic Meccano System.
the arms do not function).
Meccano still continued to being manufactured in France, as the British and French businesses had different owners.
Meccano today is very different from its heyday in the 1930s to 1950s.
Almost any mechanical device can be built with it, from structures, to complex working cranes, automatic gearboxes or clocks.
Model realisation using Meccano is limited mainly by the imagination and ingenuity of the builder.
Their elements are mainly made of thick stable metal in order to fit to the general approach of Swiss Quality.
In 1961 a Mechanisms Outfit and a Gears Outfit were added to the range, and in 1962 outfit 00 was withdrawn.
Usually the strips and girders were not painted, and the plates could be either unpainted or painted in red, yellow, and blue.
Some models use many more parts than an entire Set 10.
The ideas for Meccano were first conceived by Hornby in 1898 and he developed and patented the construction kit as "Mechanics Made Easy" in 1901.
Particularly well known were the E020, E20R and E15R universal motors, issued after the Second World War.
There were six one-model sets, two five-model sets, and five new sets numbered 10 to 50, the 20 to 50 sets being motorized.
These new sets included many plastic parts and could only build small models.
The robot base does include some standard Meccano hole spacing.
It is now manufactured in France and China by Meccano S.N.
One example is the Swiss brand , which has been manufactured since 1941.
Spin Master Ltd, Canada (Quoted on Toronto Stock Exchange from 2015)
In an attempt to redefine Meccano's image, the colour scheme was changed again, this time to yellow and black plates, with silver strips and girders.
Meccano France made the famous dark blue and red Construction SET 1 to SET 10 Boxes Series until the early 1990s.
7 Outfit becoming the L Outfit.
It was a model construction kit consisting of perforated metal strips, plates and girders, with wheels, pulleys, gears, shaft collars and axles for mechanisms and motion, and nuts and bolts and set screws to connect the pieces.
The spacing between holes was 12.7&nbsp;mm, or 1/2&nbsp;inch, the hole diameter was 4.3&nbsp;mm, or 1/6&nbsp;inch.
With younger model builders in mind, many theme sets were also introduced, including the "Construction and Agricultural" 200-Series & 300-Series, the "Space" 100-Series and the "Dynamic" 400-Series minisets.
often required for large Super Models are becoming more difficult to obtain.
Meccano is frequently used to prototype new ideas and inventions.
The parts for Hornby's new construction kit were initially supplied by outside manufacturers, but as demand began to exceed supply, Hornby set up his own factory in Duke Street, Liverpool.
Meccano was sold out to a French accountant, Marc Rebibo, and, once again, all existing Meccano sets were scrapped.
However, the "purists" look down on these new parts.
There are replica manufacturers who satisfy the needs of enthusiasts who wish to build models requiring these parts.
Individuals and companies worldwide still manufacture parts, some long out of production.
Earlier there had been short-lived (and potentially lethal) mains motors designed for DC mains with a domestic lightbulb in series to drop the voltage, followed by motors of the post-War pattern but wound for 4.5 or 6 V DC and suited to lead/acid accumulator power.
By September 2008, the Spykee robot family numbers five, with each robot having different capabilities.
However, this light red and green period did see the introduction of about 90 new parts, more modern packaging, a new cabinet was introduced for the number 10 set, the first plastic parts were introduced, and the "exploded diagram" instructions made their début.
After a lengthy period of neglect, a restoration effort began in 2003, and a successful "full run through" of this machine was completed on December 16, 2008.
Meccano Evolution has narrower strips, with holes spaced at twice the density of the original system.
For example, it is often difficult to obtain original spares.
This L Outfit is often regarded as the best of the largest Meccano outfits.
Pierre Bastien is a French musical artist who has created a large collection of kinetic experimental musical instruments constructed with Meccano.
These unchanged standards and complete interchangeability of parts results in many modern models functioning perfectly with Meccano components that are more than 100 years old and vice versa.
In 1926, to mark the 25th anniversary of his patent, Hornby introduced "Meccano in Colours" with the familiar red and green coloured Meccano pieces.
Accessory sets were retained, numbered 1A to 9A, that converted a set to the next in the series (for example, accessory set 6A would convert a No.
In 2007, a plastic robot named "Spykee" arrived.
Global rights except Argentina
A complete change from the normal practice (sticking to a single majority colour) was that every set had its own colour scheme, often in bright neon colours.
Argentinian rights licensed to Exacto in 1966
In 1989 Marc Rebibo sold what remained of Meccano to Dominique Duvauchelle.
Development and design remained with Meccano SN, based in Calais, France.
The word "Meccano" was thought to have been derived from the phrase "Make and Know".
The perforations were at a standard ½ inch (12.7&nbsp;mm) spacing, the axles were 8-gauge, and the nuts and bolts used 5/32 inch BSW threads.
Meccano remains a very versatile constructional medium.
Initially plates were a light red and items like the braced girders were a pea-green.
Branded as Mechanics Made Easy
There are annual Meccano exhibitions around the world, notably in France (at a different venue around May each year) and at Skegness in England (around July every year).
As the construction kits gained in popularity they soon became known as Meccano and went on sale across the world.
These included plastic parts, can motors, and modern battery holders.
In 1934, Meccano began to be used in the construction of differential analysers, a type of analogue computer used to solve differential equations which has long since become obsolete.
A recent large model, weighing approximately 500&nbsp;kg and 23&nbsp;m long, was built in September 2009 by TV presenter James May and a team of volunteers from the engineering department of the University of Liverpool, who created a Meccano bridge spanning the Leeds and Liverpool Canal in Liverpool.
In 1981, General Mills bought up Airfix Products and with it what was left of Meccano Ltd UK, giving it complete control of the Meccano franchise.
Meccano SN, France (Owned by Dominique Duvauchelle)
Ingroup: Owned by the Inberg family who ran Meccano.
Revoked Argentinian licence to secure global rights
The fully motorized Krupp 288 Bucket Wheel Excavator (as used on large opencast mining) is complete with auxiliary conveyors.
Today, over a hundred years since its inception, there are thousands of Meccano enthusiasts worldwide, many clubs and hundreds of websites covering Meccano history, model building instructions and nostalgia.
'''Ownership summary'''
Significantly, Nikko radio control and programmable electronics started to appear in the System.
It was modelled after the original 1893 Ferris Wheel built by George Washington Gale Ferris Jr. at the World's Columbian Exposition at Chicago and was shipped to the United States to promote "Erector Meccano" after Meccano S.A. had bought out the "Erector" trade name and began selling Meccano sets in the U.S.
Frank Hornby died in 1936
The robot is controlled using a WiFi interface and has a webcam but cannot climb stairs as is sometimes claimed.
They became better known as the M1, M3 and M5 Electric Motors.
In September 1907, Hornby registered the Meccano trade mark, and in May 1908, he formed Meccano Ltd. To keep pace with demand, a new Meccano factory was built in Binns Road, Liverpool in 1914, which became Meccano Ltd's headquarters for the next 60 years.
Even after it was no longer being sold under the Meccano name, Mamod continued to manufacture the same model (with minor differences) until 1985, under their own name with the model number SP3.
Although reduced in size from the L Outfit, the No.
Some enthusiasts set self-imposed limits on using only parts deemed to be traditional and steer clear of those parts viewed as “not truly Meccano”.
The robot is primarily packaged in a single plastic base component and comprises additional bolt-on plastic parts that are present for aesthetic purposes only (i.e.
In 1934 the Meccano pieces changed colour again: the strips and girders became gold while the plates were changed to blue with gold criss-cross lines on them, but only on one side, the reverse remaining plain blue.
Though invented on paper in the 19th century, the first such machine had only been built in 1931, and normally they would be built by specialist manufacturers, at great cost.
This was a vertically boilered engine in a chassis designed to facilitate it being integrated into Meccano models.
10 set remained unchanged.
At this mass and size, some deviation from Meccano-only parts was a necessity, to prevent it collapsing (mainly in the structural spokes).
From 1965 to 1976, Mamod made a steam engine for Meccano, the design of which was based on the 1929 version, with a similar chassis but using a standard Mamod horizontal boiler and engine parts.
The largest model by mass would certainly be in contention but some models have topped 600&nbsp;kg.
Many parts were introduced since the Liverpool factory closed under the French-and-Japanese running of the company.
All the existing Meccano sets were scrapped and a totally new range of sets were designed for production in Calais, France called "Meccano Junior".
For example, in 1947, UCLA in the US installed a differential analyser built for them by General Electric at a cost of $125,000.
The brand now maintains a manufacturing facility in Calais, France.
Earlier examples were just vertical steam engines, typical of the time, sold under the Meccano name.
As had been the case from early days, Meccano Ltd would also supply individual Meccano parts to complement existing sets.
Airfix Product Ltd, UK (quoted on London Stock Exchange)
The "Yunost" ("Adolescence") series were practically identical to Meccano sets with the same number, but there is no evidence of larger sets (equivalent to No.
Modern dedicated publications include: ''Constructor Quarterly'', ''The International Meccanoman'' and the ''ModelPlans'' series of instructions.
There were instructions for building 44 models.
But manufacturing methods were improving all the time and by 1907 the quality and appearance had improved considerably: the metal strips were now made of thicker steel with rounded ends and were nickel-plated, while the wheels and gears were machined from brass.
Some model construction kits are compatible with Meccano.
Meccano consists of reusable metal strips, plates, angle girders, wheels, axles and gears, and high quality plastic parts that are connected together using nuts, bolts and set screws (also known as grub screws).
After August 2015, the Erector brand was relaunched under the global brand name Meccano.
Lines Brothers went into voluntary liquidation in 1971 and Airfix Industries purchased the Meccano business in the UK and General Mills of the US purchased the French business.
In 1996 "Action Control" sets with infrared controls were added and 1999 saw the introduction of a "Motion System" range of sets that changed the look of Meccano completely.
In 2000 Nikko, a Japanese toy manufacturer, purchased 49 per cent of Meccano and took on its marketing internationally through its established channels for radio-controlled toys.
2 to 8 sets by six completely new sets, labelled A and 1 to 5.
In 1955 outfits 00 to 10 as well as conversion sets 00A to 9A were available.
The model had no official model number, being known simply as the Meccano steam engine.
Metal became an expensive raw material to work with and many of the metal parts were replaced with plastic parts.
While some Airfix divisions were profitable, particularly their model kits, they needed to save money.
Allen (hex-headed) zinc electroplated steel bolts replaced the slotted bolts.
It required substantial timber support frames to facilitate final assembly.
Some Meccano modellers enthusiastically embrace the changes and new parts.
Due to high demand, the old Meccano No.1 to No.10 construction sets from 1981 were re-introduced.
'''Meccano''' is a model construction system created in Liverpool, United Kingdom, by Frank Hornby.
In 1901 Frank Hornby, a clerk from Liverpool, England, invented and patented a new toy called "Mechanics Made Easy" that was based on the principles of mechanical engineering.
Allen head zinc plated steel bolts replaced the original slot-headed brass-plated bolts and the "Plastic Meccano Junior" sets were brought back.
These are inexpensive and suitable for small models that a child might construct from the standard range of sets.
of France, part of the Canadian Spin Master toy company.
In 1937 the alphabetical outfit series was replaced by a numeric series, 0 to 10, the L Outfit being replaced by the smaller No.
Indeed, old and new parts can be intermixed with impunity, the only problem being the odd mixture of colour schemes.
In the United States, a competitive toy with a similar play pattern was launched in 1913 under the Erector Set brand.
The first sets under the new Meccano name were numbered 1 to 6.
In 2013, Meccano launched "Meccano Evolution", a new "back to basics" iteration of Meccano, which allowed smaller and more detailed models to be built using simpler and more "functional" parts than were supplied in previous "new Meccano" sets.
The Korean War in 1950 also disrupted production due to a metal shortage and it was not until the mid-1950s that Meccano production returned to normal with new parts being added to all the sets.
Meccano SN, France (Owned by Marc Redibo)
It was built from "about 100,000 pieces of real Meccano", taking 1,100 hours, and consisted of a 9-metre (29.5&nbsp;ft) "swing bridge" section, and a 12-metre (39.4&nbsp;ft) "drawbridge" section.
9 set and the renumbering of the old No.
Meccano SN, France (Owned 51% Ingroup and 49% by 21 Centrale Partners)
The nuts and bolts included were Metric.
Construction utilised Meccano parts as well as replica and strengthened parts (thickened profile plates and high tensile bolts in areas carrying large loads).
and put on display in their St. Augustine, Florida museum.
21 Centrale Partners: Owned by the Benetton family.
Since the 1920s, construction kits compatible with Meccano were manufactured in the Soviet Union.
They did not have a uniform colour scheme, parts could be in any color.
However, it has since become generally known as the MEC1.
However, a "proof of concept" model of a differential analyser which made extensive use of Meccano parts was built at Manchester University, UK, in 1934, by Douglas Hartree and Arthur Porter: use of Meccano meant that the machine was cheap to build, and it proved "accurate enough for the solution of many scientific problems".
The original large models from the 1930s model leaflets are called the Meccano Super Models, often popular at Meccano and other model engineering exhibitions and sometimes used as nostalgic showpieces by retailers.
These, as well as the latter accumulator are now rare if in good condition.
The model, the largest in size at the time, is 6.5 metres (21.3&nbsp;ft) high, weighs 544 kilograms (1,200 pounds), was made from 19,507 pieces, 50,560 nuts and bolts, and took 1,239 hours to construct.
The current range of Meccano electric motors are small DC types designed to run on domestic batteries.
In 1990 Meccano S.A. built a giant Ferris wheel in France.
It went on display in New York City after which it was purchased by Ripley's Believe It or Not!
Today, many similar kits, mostly Russian and Chinese-produced, are being sold in Russia.
In the early 1960s Meccano Ltd experienced financial problems and was purchased by Lines Bros Ltd (who operated under the brand name "Tri-ang") in 1964.
Shepherd reports the model as being 1,335 kilograms (2,943 pounds) in mass and 17 ft tall.
Nikko distributed Meccano outside France during this period.
In late 2013, the company also opened a public "Meccano Lab" play space and R&D centre, in Calais, France.
The only tools required to assemble models were a screwdriver and spanners (wrenches).
A memorandum written for the British military's Armament Research Department in 1944 describes how this same machine was modified during World War II for improved reliability and enhanced capability, and identifies its wartime applications as including research on the flow of heat, explosive detonations, and simulations of transmission lines.
With unions threatening all out industrial action if there were any job losses, Airfix shut down the Binns Road factory, bringing to an end the manufacture of Meccano in England.
World War II interrupted the production of Meccano in England when the Binns Road factory converted to manufacturing for the war effort.
The silver was soon replaced by zinc in 1967 when it was found that the silver pieces marked easily.
These are low-torque high-speed "can" motors.
Design and marketing in US and Canada.
What has remained the same during all these years is the Imperial ½ inch perforation spacing and the 5/32 inch whitworth thread for nuts and bolts (and other threaded parts).
Nikko launched a successful range of new sets, including "Crazy Inventors" and the "Future Master" range.
In 1973 outfits 1 to 10 were still available, but new kits were added: Army Multikit, Highway Multikit, Plastic Meccano, Pocket Meccano and two Clock Kits.
The target market of youngsters has not changed significantly.
Frank Hornby (inventor) and David Elliott (financier)
In 2005, Tim Robinson displayed his own Meccano differential analyser at the Computer History Museum, at Mountain View, California, US, and Robinson has also built and exhibited two models of Charles Babbage's difference engine, also using Meccano.
In the 1970s, plastic parts were introduced.
100% owned by Frank Hornby's family
7 Meccano Outfit was introduced, which was the largest set of its day, and the most sought after because of its model building capabilities and prestige.
Hornby also established Meccano factories in France, Spain and Argentina.
Commonwealth rights only
Frank Hornby bought David Elliott out and rebranded the business.
The colours of yellow and black were chosen because they were the colours typically used by most large construction vehicles of the day.
These feature large model instructions and ideas for enthusiasts.
The first construction sets had parts that were rather crudely made: the metal strips and plates had a tinplate finish, were not rounded at the ends and were not very sturdy.
However, under commercial pressure, Nikko sold its interest in the Meccano name and System back to Meccano SN, the French parent company, in August 2007.
Other examples are Exacto and .
The "Meccano Junior" sets were replaced with three "Premier Meccano" sets and two "Motor" sets (including a six-speed motor) were introduced.
Rest of world rights except Argentina
Meccano is now manufactured in France and China.
A contender for the largest model on record was built in 2014 by Graham Shepherd of Grahamstown, South Africa.
Lines Bros Ltd, UK (quoted on London Stock Exchange)
The first to be specially designed for Meccano was introduced in 1929.
General Mills Inc, USA (quoted on New York Stock Exchange
General Mills Inc, USA (quoted on New York Stock Exchange)
However, the following year strips and girders were painted dark green, the plates Burgundy red, while the wheels and gears remained brass.
In 2015 Spin Master launched Meccanoids, Meccano modular robots.
A similar machine built by J.B. Bratt at Cambridge University in 1935 is now in the Museum of Transport and Technology (MOTAT) collection in Auckland, New Zealand.
The name was later changed to "Meccano" and manufactured by the British company, Meccano Ltd, between 1908 and 1980.
5 to 10 sets remained in production until 1992.
Erector was purchased by the Meccano company in 2000 and continued to be sold under Erector Sets in the US through early 2015.
Meccano has always had several compatible products on the market (such as X-Series Meccano, Plastic Meccano, Mogul Toys and Speed-Play).
However, the mass market, instant-appeal approach does not always satisfy serious Meccano enthusiasts.
These could be run from a mains Meccano Transformer No.T20 1 AMP 20 Volts Set or, in the case of the E15R, a 12 V car battery.
As with other models of this size and weight some non-Meccano parts were used.
The range of sets was reduced by one with the deletion of the old No.
Adult enthusiasts tend to use a wider range of high-performance motors that are better suited to powering large models.
Meccano SN, France (Owned 51% by Dominique Duvauchelle and 49% by Nikko Toys of Japan)
Publications devoted fully or in part to Meccano included ''Meccano Magazine'' from 1916 to 1981, and numerous Special Model Leaflets aimed at serious enthusiasts, on how to construct very large, complex models and machines.
It enables the building of working models and mechanical devices.
It can also be controlled over the Internet and configured as a security camera.
The French company was known as Miro Meccano.
The largest set of the 1970s–1980s was called "Yunost-3" (Russian: "Юность-3") and contained about 200 parts.
