Meditation may also involve repeating a mantra and closing the eyes.
Scholars have noted that "the term 'meditation' as it has entered contemporary usage" is parallel to the term "contemplation" in Christianity, but in many cases, practices similar to modern forms of meditation were simply called 'prayer'.
However, the study cautioned, "It is plausible that meditation is best thought of as a natural category of techniques best captured by 'family resemblances'... or by the related 'prototype' model of concepts."
This is because magic is often thought to require a particular state of mind in order to make contact with spirits, or because one has to visualize one's goal or otherwise keep intent focused for a long period during the ritual in order to see the desired outcome.
Pranayama&nbsp;– breathing exercises&nbsp;– are performed to strengthen the five ''Pranas'' or vital energy.
In this practice one tenses and then relaxes muscle groups in a sequential pattern whilst concentrating on how they feel.
Contemplation is a very old and important meditation technique.
Meditation has been practiced since antiquity as a component of numerous religious traditions and beliefs.
Meditation is sometimes done while walking, known as kinhin, or while doing a simple task mindfully, known as samu.
This suggests that students who practice TM are more likely to increase test scores than those who do not.
Another suggested contributing factor is the rise of communist political power in Asia, which, "set the stage for an influx of Asian spiritual teachers to the West," oftentimes as refugees.
Some mantra techniques (as with Transcendental Meditation) do not require learning special positions, only sitting comfortably with eyes closed.
These are ethical discipline (yamas), rules (niyamas), physical postures (āsanas), breath control (prāṇāyama), withdrawal from the senses (pratyāhāra), one-pointedness of mind (dhāraṇā), meditation (dhyāna), and finally samādhi, which is often described as the realization of the identity of the Self (ātman) with the omnipresent (Brahman), and is the ultimate aim of all Hindu yogis.
Research on the processes and effects of meditation is a growing subfield of neurological research.
Studies related to meditation in education were evaluated by  to determine how it effects middle school, high school, and college students regarding academic achievement and well-being.
Christian meditation contrasts with Eastern forms of meditation as radically as the portrayal of God the Father in the Bible contrasts with depictions of Krishna or Brahman in Indian teachings.
The method has been seen to help people with many conditions especially extreme anxiety.
Progress on the "intractable" problem of defining meditation was attempted by a recent study of views common to seven experts trained in diverse but empirically highly studied (clinical or Eastern-derived) forms of meditation.
Such techniques, particularly the more audacious, can be, and often have been down the ages, a source of controversy among scholars.
Some authors have even suggested the hypothesis that the emergence of the capacity for focused attention, an element of many methods of meditation, may have contributed to the final phases of human biological evolution.
"Meditation" also refers to the seventh of the eight steps of Yoga in Patanjali's ''Yoga Sutras'', a step called ''dhyāna'' in Sanskrit.
Interactions with Indians, Nepalese or the Sufis may have influenced the Eastern Christian meditation approach to hesychasm, but this can not be proved.
Various forms of meditation have been described in popular culture sources.
Jain meditation can be broadly categorized to ''Dharmya Dhyana'' and ''Shukla Dhyana''.
A Mantra could be either a combination of core letters or words on deity or themes.
Meditation in Jainism aims at realizing the self, attaining salvation, take the soul to complete freedom.
Methods of meditation have been cross-culturally disseminated at various times throughout history, such as Buddhism going to East Asia, and Sufi practices going to many Islamic societies.
Most classical and contemporary Buddhist meditation guides are school-specific.
Herbert Benson of Harvard Medical School conducted a series of clinical tests on meditators from various disciplines, including the Transcendental Meditation technique and Tibetan Buddhism.
These meditative practices sometimes have similarities (often noticed by Westerners), for instance concentration on the breath is practiced in Zen, Tibetan and Theravadan contexts, and these similarities or "typologies" are noted here.
Meditation, hypnosis and biofeedback-induced relaxation are a few of the techniques used with relaxation training.
Some studies have led to suggestions that Sahaja meditation involves 'switching off' irrelevant brain networks for the maintenance of focused internalized attention and inhibition of inappropriate information.
Most prominent has been the transmission of numerous Asian-derived practices to the West.
Mindful breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, and loving kindness meditations for instance have been found to provide cognitive benefits such as relaxation and decentering.
Thereafter, Swami Vivekananda... founded various Vedanta ashrams... Anagarika Dharmapala lectured at Harvard on Theravada Buddhist meditation in 1904; Abdul Baha ... toured the US teaching the principles of Bahai, and Soyen Shaku toured in 1907 teaching Zen...
There is considerable homogeneity across meditative practices&nbsp;&ndash; such as breath meditation and various recollections (''anussati'')&nbsp;&ndash; that are used across Buddhist schools, as well as significant diversity.
The Islamic practice of Dhikr had involved the repetition of the 99 Names of God since the 8th or 9th century.
In several traditional shamanistic ceremonies, drugs are used as agents of ritual.
Native Americans use peyote, as part of religious ceremony, continuing today.
One broad group of ulema, followers of the great Al-Ghazali, for example, have in general been open to such techniques and forms of devotion.
The differences between the various traditions themselves, which have grown up a great distance apart from each other, may be even starker.
In the Rastafari movement, cannabis is believed to be a gift from Jah and a sacred herb to be used regularly, while alcohol is considered to debase man.
During the Nineteen Day Fast, a period of the year during which Bahá'ís adhere to a sunrise-to-sunset fast, they meditate and pray to reinvigorate their spiritual forces.
Between the 10th and 14th centuries, hesychasm was developed, particularly on Mount Athos in Greece, and involves the repetition of the Jesus prayer.
Other criteria deemed important  involve a state of psychophysical relaxation, the use of a self-focus skill or anchor, the presence of a state of suspension of logical thought processes, a religious/spiritual/philosophical context, or a state of mental silence."
Some well-known examples are ''daoyin'' "guiding and pulling", ''qigong'' "life-energy exercises", ''neigong'' "internal exercises", ''neidan'' "internal alchemy",  and ''taijiquan'' "great ultimate boxing", which is thought of as moving meditation.
When Sikhs meditate they aim to feel God's presence and immerge in the divine light.
Meditation practice in these religions usually revolves around visualization, absorbing energy from the universe or higher self, directing one's internal energy, and inducing various trance states.
Mantra chanting is an important part of daily lives of Jain monks and followers.
All the twenty-four Tirthankaras practiced deep meditation and attained enlightenment.
When one reaches this stage through continuous practice meditation becomes a habit that continues whilst walking, talking, eating, awake and even sleeping.
This is called "revolving the vital breath": Your thoughts and deeds seem heavenly."
There was a difference in the English sections as well with 36.8% increasing a level versus 17.2% of the control group.
:* "serenity" or "tranquillity" (Pali: ''samatha'') which steadies, composes, unifies and concentrates the mind;
The practitioner strives to be just a knower-seer (Gyata-Drashta).
New Age meditation as practised by the early hippies is regarded for its techniques of blanking out the mind and releasing oneself from conscious thinking.
As stated by the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, a U.S. government entity within the National Institutes of Health that advocates various forms of Alternative Medicine, "Meditation may be practiced for many reasons, such as to increase calmness and physical relaxation, to improve psychological balance, to cope with illness, or to enhance overall health and well-being."
Originally used with systematic desensitization, relaxation techniques are now used with other clinical problems.
In reviewing the available research, there appears to be a need to explore the design of developmentally appropriate meditation practice programs for children and young adults.
Christian, Judaic, and Islamic forms of meditation are typically devotional, scriptural or thematic, while Asian forms of meditation are often more purely technical.
By the 12th century, the practice of Sufism included specific meditative techniques, and its followers practiced breathing controls and the repetition of holy words.
In ''vipaka vichāya'', one reflects on the eight causes or basic types of ''karma''.
As a result of the popularity in participation of mindfulness, conferences such as Wisdom 2.0 have arisen.
Also evident is some extent of influence over Enlightenment thinking through Diderot's Encyclopédie; although he states, "I find that a meditation practitioner is often quite useless and that a contemplation practitioner is always insane".
Meditation in Hinduism has expanded beyond Hinduism to the West.
Students were given pre/post test to measure psychological distress, stress, and mental health, Researchers adjusted the 7-Step TM program to cut the time spent meditating to 10–15 minutes instead of the prescribed 20 minutes recommended for adults.
One common explanation contrasts "movement in stillness" referring to energetic visualization of ''qi'' circulation in ''qigong'' and ''zuochan'' "seated meditation", versus "stillness in movement" referring to a state of meditative calm in ''taijiquan'' forms.
This became one of the essential elements of Sufism as it was systematized traditionally.
More recently, in the 1960s, another surge in Western interest in meditative practices began.
Observers have suggested many types of explanations for this interest in Eastern meditation and revived Western contemplation.
A shift from using the right prefrontal cortex is claimed to be associated with a trend away from depression and anxiety, and towards happiness, relaxation, and emotional balance.
The term "meditation" in English may also refer to practices from Islamic Sufism, or other traditions such as Jewish Kabbalah and Christian Hesychasm.
The study identified "three main criteria... as essential to any meditation practice: the use of a defined technique, logic relaxation, and a self-induced state/mode.
Numerous Preksha meditation centers came into existence around the world and numerous meditations camps are being organized to impart training in it.
In addition, interest in some Western-based meditative practices has also been revived, and these have been disseminated to a limited extent to Asian countries.
By the 12th century, the practice of Sufism included specific meditative techniques, and its followers practiced breathing controls and the repetition of holy words.
Other authors, such as Rick Strassman, believe that the relationship between religious experiences reached by way of meditation and through the use of psychedelic drugs deserves further exploration.
According to Manmatha Nath Dutt, there is hardly any difference between mainstream Hinduism's Dhyana, Dharana and Samadhi with the Buddhist Dhyana, Bhavana, Samadhi, especially as both require following the precepts (nayas and niyamas).
Volunteers practiced twice a day for 15 minutes and were taught by certified TM teachers who gave introductory hour-long lessons.
a biblical scene involving Jesus and the Virgin Mary) and reflecting on their meaning in the context of the love of God.
There are many schools and styles of meditation within Hinduism.
Numerous Sufi traditions place emphasis upon a meditative procedure which comes from the cognitive aspect to one of the two principal approaches to be found in the Buddhist traditions: that of the concentration technique, involving high-intensity and sharply focused introspection.
The (c. 3rd century BCE) Daoist ''Zhuangzi'' records ''zuowang'' or "sitting forgetting" meditation.
The word derives from the Hebrew word "boded" (בודד), meaning the state of being alone.
It aims to reach and to remain in the pure state of soul which is believed to be pure consciousness, beyond any attachment or aversion.
In 2003, in ''A Christian reflection on the New Age'' the Vatican announced that the "Church avoids any concept that is close to those of the New Age".
There is a distinct taste or flavour when a meditator reaches this lofty stage of meditation, and experiences absolute peace and tranquility inside and outside the body.
point to a lack of available research as a major hurdle to evaluating studies effectively.
An edited book about "meditation" published in 2003, for example, included chapter contributions by authors describing Hindu, Buddhist, Taoist, Jewish, Christian, and Islamic traditions.
Different techniques have shown to work better for different people.
The Buddha is said to have identified two paramount mental qualities that arise from wholesome meditative practice:
In particular, science fiction stories such as Frank Herbert's ''Dune'', ''Star Trek'', ''Artemis Fowl'', ''Star Wars'', ''Maskman'', ''Lost Horizon'' by James Hilton, and ''Stargate SG-1'' have featured characters who practice one form of meditation or another.
Meditation refers to a mental or spiritual ''state'' that may be attained by such practices, and also refers to the ''practice'' of that state.
"exist; be present; survive") has a sense of "to cause to exist; to make present" in the meditation techniques popularized by the Daoist Shangqing and Lingbao Schools.
Research indicates that meditation programs have significant effects on well-being and social competence.
One style, Focused Attention (FA) meditation, entails the voluntary focusing of attention on a chosen object.
Meditation may involve generating an emotional state for the purpose of analyzing that state—such as anger, hatred, etc.—or cultivating a particular mental response to various phenomena, such as compassion.
One hundred and twenty five students participated in a three-month TM program twice a day, while 64 acted as the control group and received no meditation training.
The Musar Movement, founded by Rabbi Israel Salanter in the middle of the nineteenth-century, emphasized meditative practices of introspection and visualization that could help to improve moral character.
Other popular New Religious Movements include the Ramakrishna Mission, Vedanta Society, Divine Light Mission, Chinmaya Mission, Osho, Transcendental Meditation,  Oneness University, and Brahma Kumaris.
The closest words for meditation in the classical languages of Buddhism are ''bhāvanā'', ''jhāna''/''dhyāna'', and ''vipassana''.
For those that participated in TM, 40.7% achieved an increase of at least one level on CTS in math compared to on 15% of the control group.
More recent reviews have pointed out many of these flaws with the hope of guiding current research into a more fruitful path.
The use of the term ''meditatio'' as part of a formal, stepwise process of meditation goes back to the 12th-century monk Guigo II.
There is a rich tradition of Mantra in Jainism.
This study highlights that there are research limitations and that more research is necessary to provide a better understanding about how meditation impacts cognitive functions.
In the Sikh religion, kirtan, otherwise known as singing the hymns of God is seen as one of the most beneficial ways of aiding meditation, and it too in some ways is believed to be a meditation of one kind.
The earliest clear references to meditation in Hindu literature are in the middle Upanishads and the Mahabharata, the latter of which includes the Bhagavad Gita.
The practices of Simran and Nām Japnā encourage quiet internal meditation but may be practiced vocally in the sangat (holy congregation).
However, usage may vary somewhat by context&nbsp;&ndash; readers should be aware that in quotations, or in discussions of particular traditions, more specialized meanings of "meditation" may sometimes be used (with meanings made clear by context whenever possible).
Sahaja yoga meditation is regarded as a mental silence meditation, and has been shown to correlate with particular brain and brain wave activity.
Each bead is counted once as a person recites a mantra until the person has gone all the way around the mala.
Mahavira practiced deep meditation for twelve years and attained enlightenment.
For example, "meditation" is sometimes the translation of ''meditatio'' in Latin.
The mantra is chosen based on its suitability to the individual meditator.
The Silk Road transmission of Buddhism introduced meditation to other Asian countries, and in 653 the first meditation hall was opened in Singapore.
Christian meditation is sometimes taken to mean the middle level in a broad three stage characterization of prayer: it then involves more reflection than first level vocal prayer, but is more structured than the multiple layers of contemplation in Christianity.
On the other hand, the ingestion of psychoactives has been a central feature in the rituals of many religions, in order to produce altered states of consciousness.
Evidence from neuroimaging studies suggests that the categories of meditation, defined by how they direct attention, appear to generate different brainwave patterns.
Meditation and magic practice often overlap in these religions as meditation is often seen as merely a stepping stone to supernatural power, and the meditation sessions may be peppered with various chants and spells.
Most notably, in a comparison of 78 meditating students with high grade point average (GPA) and 78 non-meditating students with low GPA, graduation of meditating students was 82.1% compared to 66.7% for non-meditating students.
To evaluate how meditation affects university students’ cognitive abilities, incorporated meditation training in a sociology class.
Prayer beads or other ritual objects are commonly used during meditation in order to keep track of or remind the practitioner about some aspect of that training.
With training in meditation, depressive rumination can be decreased and overall peace of mind can flourish.
The table shows several definitions of meditation that have been used by influential modern reviews of research on meditation across multiple traditions.
Many practitioners of eastern traditions rejected this idea, including many who had tried LSD themselves.
The tenth invisible hole is the topmost energy level and is called the tenth gate or Dasam Duaar.
Its four formal steps as a "ladder" were defined by the monk Guigo II in the 12th century with the Latin terms ''lectio'', ''meditatio'', ''oratio'', and ''contemplatio'' (i.e.
In modern Jewish practice, one of the best known meditative practices is called ''"hitbodedut"'' (''התבודדות'', alternatively transliterated as "hisbodedus"), and is explained in Kabbalistic, Hasidic, and Mussar writings, especially the Hasidic method of Rabbi Nachman of Breslav.
In the late 19th century, Theosophists adopted the word "meditation" to refer to various spiritual practices drawn from Hinduism, Buddhism and other Indian religions.
This practice is the analytical reflective process of making oneself understand a mystical concept well, that follows and internalises its study in Hasidic writings.
Bahá'u'lláh, the founder of the religion, never specified any particular form of meditation, and thus each person is free to choose their own form.
The first Guru of the Sikhs, Guru Nanak Dev Ji preached the equality of all humankind and stressed the importance of living a householder's life instead of wandering around jungles meditating, the latter of which being a popular practice at the time.
Taylor noted that to refer only to meditation from a particular faith (e.g., "Hindu" or "Buddhist")
:* "insight" (Pali: ''vipassana'') which enables one to see, explore and discern "formations" (conditioned phenomena based on the five aggregates).
The terms "meditative practice" and "meditation" are mostly used here in this broad sense.
Research on meditation began in 1931, with scientific research increasing dramatically during the 1970s and 1980s.
Some of the earliest references to meditation are found in the Hindu Vedas of Nepal and India.
Yogasana and ''Pranayama'' has been an important practice undertaken since ages.
Buddhist meditation refers to the meditative practices associated with the religion and philosophy of Buddhism.
Western Christian meditation was further developed by saints such as Ignatius of Loyola and Teresa of Avila in the 16th century.
The Latin Bible then translated ''hāgâ''/''melete'' into ''meditatio''.
Secular forms of meditation were introduced in India in the 1950s as a Westernized form of Hindu meditative techniques and arrived in the United States and Europe in the 1960s.
Acharya Mahapragya formulated Preksha meditation in the 1970s and presented a well-organised system of meditation.
Thus the English word "meditation" does not exclusively translate to any single term or concept, and can be used to translate words such as the Sanskrit ''dhāraṇā'', ''dhyāna'', ''samādhi'' and ''bhāvanā''.
In ''padāstha dhyāna'' one focuses on Mantra.
Each set of ten is separated by another bead.
Of special relevance to the modern world is the dissemination of meditative practices since the late 19th century, accompanying increased travel and communication among cultures worldwide.
Meditation often involves an internal effort to self-regulate the mind in some way.
Through the meditative development of serenity, one is able to release obscuring hindrances; it is with the release of the hindrances through the meditative development of insight that one gains liberating wisdom.
As suggested by, additional research may lead to a proven form of meditation that works best on young minds who are learning and would benefit from its stress reducing stressful benefits.
Jain meditation and spiritual practices system were referred to as  salvation-path.
Meditation has been of interest to a wide variety of modern Jews.
Meditation is often used to clear the mind and ease many health concerns, such as high blood pressure, depression, and anxiety.
Since the beginning of the '70s more than a thousand studies of meditation in English-language have been reported.
This experience is referred to as moksha by Hindus, and is similar to the concept of nirvana in Buddhism.
He also encouraged people to reflect on one's actions and worth at the end of each day.
When the Hebrew Bible was translated into Greek, ''hāgâ'' became the Greek ''melete''.
Some of the difficulty in precisely defining meditation has been the need to recognize the particularities of the many various traditions.
Meditation has a calming effect and directs awareness inward until pure awareness is achieved, described as "being awake inside without being aware of anything except awareness itself."
Meditation techniques have also been used by Western theories of counseling and psychotherapy.
I have none; Without good deeds one can't even meditate.''"
Classic methods include the mental visualisation of the supernal realms the soul navigates through to achieve certain ends.
Western Christian meditation contrasts with most other approaches in that it does not involve the repetition of any phrase or action and requires no specific posture.
''Ding'' 定 (literally means "decide; settle; stabilize") refers to "deep concentration", "intent contemplation", or "perfect absorption."
Muslim teachings embrace life as a test of one's submission to God.
There may be differences between the theories of one tradition of meditation as to what it means to practice meditation.
Western Christian meditation progressed from the 6th century practice of Bible reading among Benedictine monks called Lectio Divina, i.e.
The Muslim mishbaha has 99 beads.
Some meditative traditions have been encouraged in the school of Judaism known as Kabbalah, and some Jews have described Kabbalah as an inherently meditative field of study.
Nām Japnā involves focusing one's attention on the names or great attributes of God.
The Pāli Canon, which dates to 1st century BCE considers Indian Buddhist meditation as a step towards salvation.
Various postures are taken up in some meditation techniques.
Several methods are used during time set aside specifically for mindfulness meditation, such as body scan techniques or letting thought arise and pass, and also during our daily lives, such as being aware of the taste and texture of the food that we eat.
Buddhists pursue meditation as part of the path toward enlightenment and nirvana.
In India, the soma drink has a long history of use alongside prayer and sacrifice, and is mentioned in the Vedas.
In the Oveyssi-Shahmaghsoudi Sufi order, for example, this is particularly evident, where muraqaba takes the form of tamarkoz, the latter being a Persian term that means ''concentration''.
For instance, "When you enlarge your mind and let go of it, when you relax your vital breath and expand it, when your body is calm and unmoving: And you can maintain the One and discard the myriad disturbances.
Stress is often associated with lower academic achievement and overall well-being of students.
''Tafakkur'' or ''tadabbur'' in Sufism literally means ''reflection upon the universe'': this is considered to permit access to a form of cognitive and emotional development that can emanate only from the higher level, i.e.
In ''agnya vichāya'', one contemplates on seven facts&nbsp;&ndash; life and non-life, the inflow, bondage, stoppage and removal of ''karmas'', and the final accomplishment of liberation.
Over the past 20 years, Mindfulness and mindfulness-based programs have become increasingly important to Westerners and in the Western medical and psychological community as a means of helping people, whether they be clinically sick or healthy.
However, he specifically did state that Bahá'ís should read a passage of the Bahá'í writings twice a day, once in the morning, and once in the evening, and meditate on it.
Some studies offer evidence that mindfulness practices are beneficial for the brain's self-regulation by increasing activity in the anterior cingulate cortex.
One of the eight essential phases of EMDR (developed by Francine Shapiro), bringing adequate closure to the end of each session, also entails the use of relaxation techniques, including meditation.
Livia Kohn distinguishes three basic types of Daoist meditation: "concentrative", "insight", and "visualization".
In 1975, Benson published a book titled ''The Relaxation Response'' where he outlined his own version of meditation for relaxation.
Jacobson is credited with developing the initial progressive relaxation procedure.
Sikhs believe that there are ten 'gates' to the body, the nine visible holes (nostrils, eyes, ears, mouth, urethra, anus) and the tenth invisible hole.
Yoga is generally done to prepare one for meditation, and meditation is done to realize union of one's self, one's ātman, with the omnipresent and non-dual Brahman.
Since the 1950s hundreds of studies on meditation have been conducted, though many of the early studies were flawed and thus yielded unreliable results.
The Tibetan word for meditation "Gom" means "to become familiar with" and has the strong implication of training the mind to be familiar with states that are beneficial: concentration, compassion, correct understanding, patience, humility, perseverance, etc.
They were given pretests in two executive function measures.
Popular in Buddhism, Jainism and Hinduism are the full-lotus, half-lotus, Burmese, Seiza, and kneeling positions.
Most of the ancient religions of the world have a tradition of using some type of prayer beads as tools in devotional meditation.
In a similar study involving TM, identified 189 racial and ethnic minority middle school students who performed below the proficiency level on the California Standards Test (CST) in math and English at baseline.
These two categories are discussed in the following two paragraphs, with concentrative meditation being used interchangeably with focused attention and mindfulness meditation being used interchangeably with open monitoring,
In brief, there are dozens of specific styles of meditation practice, and many different types of activity commonly referred to as meditative practices.
The word meditation comes from the Latin word ''meditari'', which means to concentrate.
Modern scientific techniques and instruments, such as fMRI and EEG, have been used to see what happens in the body of people when they meditate, and how their bodies and brain change after meditating regularly.
