Transparency of information is another factor defining a delivery system.
The main tomes used both by medicine students and expert physicians were Materia Medica and Pharmacopoeia.
* Musculoskeletal (including spine and extremities)
After the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the Greek tradition of medicine went into decline in Western Europe, although it continued uninterrupted in the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.
In North America, it requires at least three years of residency training after medical school, which can then be followed by a one- to three-year fellowship in the subspecialties listed above.
This is intended to ensure that the entire population has access to medical care on the basis of need rather than ability to pay.
The Church also established a network of cathedral schools and universities where medicine was studied.
In many cases these materials were used ritually as magical substances by priests, shamans, or medicine men.
In fact, out of these terms perhaps only ''indigenous medicine'' and ''traditional medicine'' have the same meaning as ''folk medicine'', while the others should be understood rather in a modern or modernized context.
Pharmacology developed in part from herbalism and some drugs are still derived from plants (atropine, ephedrine, warfarin, aspirin, digoxin, vinca alkaloids, taxol, hyoscine, etc.).
Contemporary medicine is in general conducted within health care systems.
Doctors who are negligent or intentionally harmful in their care of patients can face charges of medical malpractice and be subject to civil, criminal, or professional sanctions.
The treatment plan may include ordering additional medical laboratory tests and medical imaging studies, starting therapy, referral to a specialist, or watchful observation.
Physicians like Vesalius improved upon or disproved some of the theories from the past.
* Social history (SH): birthplace, residences, marital history, social and economic status, habits (including diet, medications, tobacco, alcohol).
There are many subspecialities (or subdisciplines) of internal medicine:
Herman Boerhaave is sometimes referred to as a "father of physiology" due to his exemplary teaching in Leiden and textbook 'Institutiones medicae' (1708).
It supplied food to the population during famine and distributed food to the poor.
In addition, fellowships can last an additional one to three years.
On subsequent visits, the process may be repeated in an abbreviated manner to obtain any new history, symptoms, physical findings, and lab or imaging results or specialist consultations.
The field of medical anthropology examines the ways in which culture and society are organized around or impacted by issues of health, health care and related issues.
In the United States, William Williams Keen, William Coley, James D. Watson, Italy (Salvador Luria), Switzerland (Alexandre Yersin), Japan (Kitasato Shibasaburō), and France (Jean-Martin Charcot, Claude Bernard, Paul Broca) and others did significant work.
When moral values are in conflict, the result may be an ethical dilemma or crisis.
In the Commonwealth of Nations and some other countries, specialist pediatricians and geriatricians are also described as ''specialist physicians'' (or internists) who have subspecialized by age of patient rather than by organ system.
Legal, credentialing and financing frameworks are established by individual governments, augmented on occasion by international organizations, such as churches.
Referrals are made for those patients who required the expertise or procedures performed by specialists.
:*''Pulmonology/Pneumology/Respirology/chest medicine''
In the UK, this was traditionally evidenced by passing the examination for the Membership of the Royal College of Physicians (MRCP) or the equivalent college in Scotland or Ireland.
Folk medicine may also be referred to as traditional medicine, alternative medicine, indigenous medicine, or natural medicine.
Later this was described by Renaldus Columbus and Andrea Cesalpino.
Sub-specialties of surgery often require seven or more years.
The clinical examination involves the study of:
In some Asian and African countries, up to 80% of the population relies on traditional medicine for their primary health care needs.
These terms, ''internist'' or ''physician'' (in the narrow sense, common outside North America), generally exclude practitioners of gynecology and obstetrics, pathology, psychiatry, and especially surgery and its subspecialities.
In the UK, most specialities have their own body or college, which have its own entrance examination.
Even in the developed world however, evidence-based medicine is not universally used in clinical practice; for example, a 2007 survey of literature reviews found that about 49% of the interventions lacked sufficient evidence to support either benefit or harm.
Medicine encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness.
Evidence-based medicine is a contemporary movement to establish the most effective algorithms of practice (ways of doing things) through the use of systematic reviews and meta-analysis.
From ancient times, Christian emphasis on practical charity gave rise to the development of systematic nursing and hospitals and the Catholic Church today remains the largest non-government provider of medical services in the world.
In the early modern period, important early figures in medicine and anatomy emerged in Europe, including Gabriele Falloppio and William Harvey.
As science and technology developed, medicine became more reliant upon medications.
The doctor-patient relationship typically begins an interaction with an examination of the patient's medical history and medical record, followed by a medical interview and a physical examination.
* beneficence - a practitioner should act in the best interest of the patient.
The medical encounter is then documented in the medical record, which is a legal document in many jurisdictions.
Most of these have branched from one or other of the two camps above; for example anaesthesia developed first as a faculty of the Royal College of Surgeons (for which MRCS/FRCS would have been required) before becoming the Royal College of Anaesthetists and membership of the college is attained by sitting for the examination of the Fellowship of the Royal College of Anesthetists (FRCA).
While the laws generally require medical doctors to be trained in "evidence based", Western, or Hippocratic Medicine, they are not intended to discourage different paradigms of health.
The medical decision-making (MDM) process involves analysis and synthesis of all the above data to come up with a list of possible diagnoses (the differential diagnoses), along with an idea of what needs to be done to obtain a definitive diagnosis that would explain the patient's problem.
Tertiary care medical services are provided by specialist hospitals or regional centers equipped with diagnostic and treatment facilities not generally available at local hospitals.
* Vital signs including height, weight, body temperature, blood pressure, pulse, respiration rate, and hemoglobin oxygen saturation
(''Voluntas aegroti suprema lex''.)
While stitching technique for sutures is an art learned through practice, the knowledge of what happens at the cellular and molecular level in the tissues being stitched arises through science.
In general, resident work hours in medicine are less than those in surgery, averaging about 60 hours per week in the USA.
Rhazes was one of the first to question the Greek theory of humorism, which nevertheless remained influential in both medieval Western and medieval Islamic medicine.
* respect for persons - the patient (and the person treating the patient) have the right to be treated with dignity.
Medical practitioners upgrade their knowledge in various ways, including medical journals, seminars, conferences, and online programs.
In the European Union, the profession of doctor of medicine is regulated.
In contrast, treatments outside the bounds of safety and efficacy are termed quackery.
In low-income countries, modern healthcare is often too expensive for the average person.
International healthcare policy researchers have advocated that "user fees" be removed in these areas to ensure access, although even after removal, significant costs and barriers remain.
Throughout history and in Europe right until the late 18th century, not only animal and plant products were used as medicine, but also human body parts and fluids.
Earliest records of dedicated hospitals come from Mihintale in Sri Lanka where evidence of dedicated medicinal treatment facilities for patients are found.
Most of our knowledge of ancient Hebrew medicine during the 1st&nbsp;millennium&nbsp;BC comes from the Torah, i.e.&nbsp;the Five Books of Moses, which contain various health related laws and rituals.
A profession is said to be regulated when access and exercise is subject to the possession of a specific professional qualification.
Notable Islamic medical pioneers include the Persian polymath, Avicenna, who, along with Imhotep and Hippocrates, has also been called the "father of medicine".
* Current activity: occupation, hobbies, what the patient actually does.
This was the notion that because some prominent person in the past said something must be so, then that was the way it was, and anything one observed to the contrary was an anomaly (which was paralleled by a similar shift in European society in general – see Copernicus's rejection of Ptolemy's theories on astronomy).
The Schola Medica Salernitana in Salerno, looking to the learning of Greek and Arab physicians, grew to be the finest medical school in Medieval Europe.
In India, the surgeon Sushruta described numerous surgical operations, including the earliest forms of plastic surgery.
Medical history comprises HPI and PMH.
and unique to the United States, must be completed in and delivered from a recognized university.
Modern scientific medicine is highly developed in the Western world, while in developing countries such as parts of Africa or Asia, the population may rely more heavily on traditional medicine with limited evidence and efficacy and no required formal training for practitioners.
The Greek physician Galen was also one of the greatest surgeons of the ancient world and performed many audacious operations, including brain and eye surgeries.
:*''Infectious disease''
Early records on medicine have been discovered from ancient Egyptian medicine, Babylonian Medicine, Ayurvedic medicine (in the Indian subcontinent), classical Chinese medicine (predecessor to the modern traditional Chinese Medicine), and ancient Greek medicine and Roman medicine.
Hippocrates introduced the Hippocratic Oath for physicians, which is still relevant and in use today, and was the first to categorize illnesses as acute, chronic, endemic and epidemic, and use terms such as, "exacerbation, relapse, resolution, crisis, paroxysm, peak, and convalescence".
* Respiratory (large airways and lungs)
* Chief complaint (CC): the reason for the current medical visit.
Pierre Fauchard has been called "the father of modern dentistry".
Also called 'chief concern' or 'presenting complaint'.
Basic diagnostic medical devices (e.g.
The characteristics of any given health care system have significant impact on the way medical care is provided.
Primary care medical services are provided by physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners, or other health professionals who have first contact with a patient seeking medical treatment or care.
Some primary care providers may also take care of hospitalized patients and deliver babies in a secondary care setting.
This can be followed by postgraduate vocational training.
The physical examination is the examination of the patient for medical signs of disease, which are objective and observable, in contrast to symptoms which are volunteered by the patient and not necessarily objectively observable.
They remain commonly used with or instead of scientific medicine and are thus called alternative medicine.
These are collectively known as the Royal Colleges, although not all currently use the term "Royal".
:*''Angiology/Vascular Medicine''
This difference does not apply in the UK where all doctors are now required by law to work less than 48 hours per week on average.
Surgery has many sub-specialties, including ''general surgery, ophthalmic surgery, cardiovascular surgery, colorectal surgery, neurosurgery, oral and maxillofacial surgery, oncologic surgery, orthopedic surgery, otolaryngology, plastic surgery, podiatric surgery, transplant surgery, trauma surgery, urology, vascular surgery, and pediatric surgery.''
Modern medical care also depends on information – still delivered in many health care settings on paper records, but increasingly nowadays by electronic means.
'''Internal medicine''' is the medical specialty dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of adult diseases.
Allergies are also recorded.
The oldest Egyptian medical text is the ''Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus'' from around 2000 BCE, which describes gynaecological diseases.
In modern urban practice, most internists are subspecialists: that is, they generally limit their medical practice to problems of one organ system or to one particular area of medical knowledge.
'''Surgery''' is an ancient medical specialty that uses operative manual and instrumental techniques on a patient to investigate and/or treat a pathological condition such as disease or injury, to help improve bodily function or appearance or to repair unwanted ruptured areas (for example, a perforated ear drum).
Bacteria and microorganisms were first observed with a microscope by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1676, initiating the scientific field microbiology.
blood tests), take a biopsy, or prescribe pharmaceutical drugs or other therapies.
The ''Huangdi Neijing'', the progenitor of Chinese medicine, is a medical text written beginning in the 2nd century BCE and compiled in the 3rd century.
The Islamic Bimaristan hospitals were an early example of public hospitals.
These terms are often considered interchangeable, even though some authors may prefer one or the other because of certain overtones they may be willing to highlight.
:*''Gastroenterology''
During the encounter, properly informing the patient of all relevant facts is an important part of the relationship and the development of trust.
Most tribal societies provide no guarantee of healthcare for the population as a whole.
In Europe, Charlemagne decreed that a hospital should be attached to each cathedral and monastery and the historian Geoffrey Blainey likened the activities of the Catholic Church in health care during the Middle Ages to an early version of a welfare state: "It conducted hospitals for the old and orphanages for the young; hospices for the sick of all ages; places for the lepers; and hostels or inns where pilgrims could buy a cheap bed and meal".
Training in internal medicine (as opposed to surgical training), varies considerably across the world: see the articles on Medical education and Physician for more details.
However, the fourteenth and fifteenth century Black Death devastated both the Middle East and Europe, and it has even been argued that Western Europe was generally more effective in recovering from the pandemic than the Middle East.
Prescientific forms of medicine are now known as traditional medicine and folk medicine.
It is to likely focus on areas of interest highlighted in the medical history and may not include everything listed above.
While the US healthcare system has come under fire for lack of openness,  new legislation may encourage greater openness.
They are in the patient's own words and are recorded along with the duration of each one.
This list is covered by the Directive 2005/36/EC.
Prehistoric medicine incorporated plants (herbalism), animal parts, and minerals.
Four actions are the basis of physical examination: inspection, palpation (feel), percussion (tap to determine resonance characteristics), and auscultation (listen), generally in that order although auscultation occurs prior to percussion and palpation for abdominal assessments.
Conflicts can also arise between health care providers, or among family members.
* Head, eye, ear, nose, and throat (HEENT)
Thus in some cases surgical training will not finish until more than a decade after medical school.
About 90% of medical visits can be treated by the primary care provider.
Practices known as traditional medicines include Ayurveda, Siddha medicine, Unani, ancient Iranian medicine, Irani, Islamic medicine, traditional Chinese medicine, traditional Korean medicine, acupuncture, Muti,  Ifá, and traditional African medicine.
The diagnosis and treatment may take only a few minutes or a few weeks depending upon the complexity of the issue.
''Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah'' by Ali al-Ridha, the eighth Imam of Shia Muslims, is revered as the most precious Islamic literature in the Science of Medicine.
The first antibiotic was arsphenamine (Salvarsan) discovered by Paul Ehrlich in 1908 after he observed that bacteria took up toxic dyes that human cells did not.
A family tree is sometimes used.
Traditional medicine may include formalized aspects of folk medicine, that is to say longstanding remedies passed on and practised by lay people.
Independently from Ibn al-Nafis, Michael Servetus rediscovered the pulmonary circulation, but this discovery did not reach the public because it was written down for the first time in the "Manuscript of Paris" in 1546, and later published in the theological work for which he paid with his life in 1553.
Six of the values that commonly apply to medical ethics discussions are:
Elsewhere, especially in North America, general pediatrics is often a form of Primary care.
Well-known spiritual systems include animism (the notion of inanimate objects having spirits), spiritualism (an appeal to gods or communion with ancestor spirits); shamanism (the vesting of an individual with mystic powers); and divination (magically obtaining the truth).
The line between alternative medicine and quackery is a contentious subject.
For example, some argue that the principles of autonomy and beneficence clash when patients refuse blood transfusions, considering them life-saving; and truth-telling was not emphasized to a large extent before the HIV era.
Medical availability and clinical practice varies across the world due to regional differences in culture and technology.
The word ''medicine'' is derived from Latin ''medicus'', meaning "a physician".
In general, this entails a medical degree from a university and accreditation by a medical board or an equivalent national organization, which may ask the applicant to pass exams.
In Egypt, Imhotep (3rd millennium BC) is the first physician in history known by name.
Medical education and training varies around the world.
* Genitalia (and pregnancy if the patient is or could be pregnant)
:*''Critical care medicine''
* Psychiatric (orientation, mental state, evidence of abnormal perception or thought).
A variety of teaching methods have been employed in medical education, still itself a focus of active research.
After examination for signs and interviewing for symptoms, the doctor may order medical tests (e.g.
In some centers, anesthesiology is part of the division of surgery (for historical and logistical reasons), although it is not a surgical discipline.
The regulated professions database contains a list of regulated professions for doctor of medicine in the EU member states, EEA countries and Switzerland.
Since knowledge, techniques, and medical technology continue to evolve at a rapid rate, many regulatory authorities require continuing medical education.
Folk medicine consists of the healing practices and ideas of body physiology and health preservation known to some in a culture, transmitted informally as general knowledge, and practiced or applied by anyone in the culture having prior experience.
Others include Abulcasis, Avenzoar, Ibn al-Nafis, and Averroes.
The ''Edwin Smith Papyrus'' dating back to 1600 BCE is an early work on surgery, while the ''Ebers Papyrus'' dating back to 1500 BCE is akin to a textbook on medicine.
In recent centuries, since the advent of modern science, most medicine has become a combination of art and science (both basic and applied, under the umbrella of '''medical science''').
As a scholarly discipline, medical ethics encompasses its practical application in clinical settings as well as work on its history, philosophy, theology, and sociology.
In China, archaeological evidence of medicine in Chinese dates back to the Bronze Age Shang Dynasty, based on seeds for herbalism and tools presumed to have been used for surgery.
There is a perceived tension between the need for transparency on the one hand and such issues as patient confidentiality and the possible exploitation of information for commercial gain on the other.
In such societies, healthcare is available to those that can afford to pay for it or have self-insured it (either directly or as part of an employment contract) or who may be covered by care financed by the government or tribe directly.
The healthcare provider uses the senses of sight, hearing, touch, and sometimes smell (e.g., in infection, uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis).
The Hebrew contribution to the development of modern medicine started in the Byzantine Era, with the physician Asaph the Jew.
This restricts the considerable legal authority of the medical profession to physicians that are trained and qualified by national standards.
These are the 'symptoms.'
The Cochrane Collaboration leads this movement.
'''Medicine''' (British English ; American English ) is the science and practice of the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of disease.
Sometimes, no good solution to a dilemma in medical ethics exists, and occasionally, the values of the medical community (i.e., the hospital and its staff) conflict with the values of the individual patient, family, or larger non-medical community.
(''Salus aegroti suprema lex''.)
This welfare system the church funded through collecting taxes on a large scale and possessing large farmlands and estates.
From Germany and Austria, doctors Rudolf Virchow, Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen, Karl Landsteiner and Otto Loewi made notable contributions.
Medical ethics is a system of moral principles that apply values and judgments to the practice of medicine.
Follow-up may be advised.
* Past medical history (PMH/PMHx): concurrent medical problems, past hospitalizations and operations, injuries, past infectious diseases and/or vaccinations, history of known allergies.
In North America, specialists in internal medicine are commonly called "internists."
Surgeons must also manage pre-operative, post-operative, and potential surgical candidates on the hospital wards.
* History of present illness (HPI): the chronological order of events of symptoms and further clarification of each symptom.
Delivery may be via private medical practices or by state-owned hospitals and clinics, or by charities, most commonly by a combination of all three.
These include treatment of acute and chronic illnesses, preventive care and health education for all ages and both sexes.
In most countries, it is a legal requirement for a medical doctor to be licensed or registered.
The major shift in medical thinking was the gradual rejection, especially during the Black Death in the 14th and 15th centuries, of what may be called the 'traditional authority' approach to science and medicine.
* truthfulness and honesty - the concept of informed consent has increased in importance since the historical events of the Doctors' Trial of the Nuremberg trials, Tuskegee syphilis experiment, and others.
Furthermore, surgical training can be very difficult and time-consuming.
* Medications (Rx): what drugs the patient takes including prescribed, over-the-counter, and home remedies, as well as alternative and herbal medicines/herbal remedies.
* autonomy - the patient has the right to refuse or choose their treatment.
Other medical specialties may employ surgical procedures, such as ophthalmology and dermatology, but are not considered surgical sub-specialties per se.
In the United Kingdom, Alexander Fleming, Joseph Lister, Francis Crick and Florence Nightingale are considered important.
For example, gastroenterologists and nephrologists specialize respectively in diseases of the gut and the kidneys.
Contemporary medicine applies biomedical sciences, biomedical research, genetics, and medical technology to diagnose, treat, and prevent injury and disease, typically through pharmaceuticals or surgery, but also through therapies as diverse as psychotherapy, external splints and traction, medical devices, biologics, and ionizing radiation, amongst others.
* Neurological (consciousness, awareness, brain, vision, cranial nerves, spinal cord and peripheral nerves)
It is also intended as an assurance to patients and as a safeguard against charlatans that practice inadequate medicine for personal gain.
The WHO notes however that "inappropriate use of traditional medicines or practices can have negative or dangerous effects" and that "further research is needed to ascertain the efficacy and safety" of several of the practices and medicinal plants used by traditional medicine systems.
The post-18th century modernity period brought more groundbreaking researchers from Europe.
Differential diagnosis methods help to rule out conditions based on the information provided.
:*''Endocrinology''
* non-maleficence - "first, do no harm" (''primum non-nocere'').
Access to information on conditions, treatments, quality, and pricing greatly affects the choice by patients/consumers and, therefore, the incentives of medical professionals.
The movement is facilitated by modern global information science, which allows as much of the available evidence as possible to be collected and analyzed according to standard protocols that are then disseminated to healthcare providers.
Surgical training in the U.S. requires a minimum of five years of residency after medical school.
stethoscope, tongue depressor) are typically used.
Follow-ups may be shorter but follow the same general procedure, and specialists follow a similar process.
The Benedictine order was noted for setting up hospitals and infirmaries in their monasteries, growing medical herbs and becoming the chief medical care givers of their districts, as at the great Abbey of Cluny.
Elsewhere, especially in Commonwealth nations, such specialists are often called physicians.
At present, some specialties of medicine do not fit easily into either of these categories, such as radiology, pathology, or anesthesia.
When adopted outside of its traditional culture, traditional medicine is often called alternative medicine.
Genomics and knowledge of human genetics is having some influence on medicine, as the causative genes of most monogenic genetic disorders have now been identified, and the development of techniques in molecular biology and genetics are influencing medical technology, practice and decision-making.
* Review of systems (ROS) or ''systems inquiry'': a set of additional questions to ask, which may be missed on HPI: a general enquiry (have you noticed any weight loss, change in sleep quality, fevers, lumps and bumps?
Values such as these do not give answers as to how to handle a particular situation, but provide a useful framework for understanding conflicts.
Spanish doctor Santiago Ramón y Cajal is considered the father of modern neuroscience.
* Abdomen and rectum
