When fisheries are discussed, catches are typically divided between the wild capture fishery (i.e., fish and other aquatic animals caught in their natural habitat), and aquaculture (fish reared under controlled conditions).
An estimated 2.56 million tonnes of inland fish and other aquatic animals are consumed in the lower Mekong every year.
As elsewhere in the basin, forest cover has been steadily reduced during the last three decades by shifting agriculture and permanent agriculture.
During this phase of its development the delta was sheltered from the wave action of long-shore currents and was constructed largely through fluvial and tidal processes.
The Mekong delta in Vietnam is farmed intensively and has little natural vegetation left.
Their chief finding was that the Mekong had too many falls and rapids to ever be useful for navigation.
The French invaded the region in the mid-19th century, capturing Saigon in 1861, and establishing a protectorate over Cambodia in 1863.
European interest was sporadic: the Spanish and Portuguese mounted some missionary and trade expeditions, while the Dutch Gerrit van Wuysthoff led an expedition up the river as far as Vientiane in 1641–42.
Since the river flows through a number of countries, it has many names in local languages:
Cần Thơ Bridge crosses the second channel—the right, main distributary of the Mekong, the Bassac (Song Hau).
Fisheries contribute significantly to a diversified livelihood strategy for many people, particularly the poor, who are highly dependent on the river and its resources for their livelihoods.
Only 14 have catchment areas that exceed , yet the greatest amount of loss of forest cover in the entire river system per square kilometer has occurred in this region due to heavy unchecked demand for natural resources.
The Mekong basin is not normally considered a seismically active area as much of the basin is underlain by the relatively stable continental block.
Inaugurated in 2010, it is the longest main span cable-stayed bridge in Southeast Asia.
After 3.5 ka, however, the delta had built out beyond the embayment and became subject to wave action and marine currents.
The seasonal cycle of changing water levels at Phnom Penh results in the unique "flow reversal" of water into and out of the Great Lake via the Tonle Sap River.
Although the hydraulic relationships between the Mekong and the Tonle Sap Great Lake systems during the Holocene are not well understood, it is clear that between 9,000 and 7,500 years ago the confluence of the Tonle Sap and the Mekong was in proximity to the South China Sea.
One of the most striking conclusions of provenance studies is the small contribution of sediment from the other parts of the Mekong basin, notably the Khorat Plateau, the uplands of northern Laos and northern Thailand, and the mountain ranges south of the Three Rivers area.
Downriver countries such as Laos are planning to build an additional 11 large dams on the Mekong, making it the fastest growing large river basin in the world in terms of hydropower construction.
Consequently, although the Mun and Chi Basins drain 15 percent of the entire Mekong basin, they only contribute six percent of the average annual flow.
In the Mekong's case, Mae Nam Khong means "khong, the mother of water".
The -long bridge opened on 8 April 1994.
From 8 Ma to the present, however, the contribution from the Three Rivers Area fell to 40 percent, while that from the Central Highlands rose from 11 to 51 percent.
* Hanoi Agreement between Cambodia and Viet Nam on Waterway Transportation, 13 December 1998.
The last glacial period came to an abrupt end about 19,000 years ago (19 ka) when sea levels rose rapidly, reaching a maximum of about 4.5 m above present levels in the early Holocene about 8 ka.
In Vietnam, distributaries of the eastern (main, Mekong) branch include the Mỹ Tho River, the Ba Lai River, the Hàm Luông River, and the Cổ Chiên River.
The Kizuna Bridge is in Cambodia, in the city of Kampong Cham, on the road linking Phnom Penh with the remote provinces of Ratanakiri and Mondolkiri, and Laos.
In 2009, Mekong trade received a significant boost with the opening of a new deep-water port at Cai Mep in Vietnam.
Thereafter, it turns and runs more or less directly south, crossing into Cambodia.
The biggest include three species of ''Probarbus'' babs, which can grow up to  and weigh , the giant freshwater stingray (''Himantura polylepis'', syn.
In the south of Yunnan, in Simao and Xishuangbanna Prefectures, the river changes as the valley opens out, the floodplain becomes wider, and the river becomes wider and slower.
* Agreement on Commercial Navigation on Lancang–Mekong River among the governments of China, Laos, Myanmar and Thailand, adopted at Tachileik, 20 April 2000.
A European map of 1563 depicts the river, although even by then little was known of the river upstream of the delta.
Although this part of northeast Thailand has an annual rainfall of more than 1,000&nbsp;mm, a high evaporation rate means it is classified as a semi-arid region.
The total economic value of the fishery is between US$3.9 and US$7 billion a year.
Glutinous rice, maize and cassava are the principal crops.
The magnitude of these earthquakes rarely exceeds 6.5 on the Richter magnitude scale and is unlikely to cause material damage.
Excavations at Oc Eo, near modern An Giang, have found coins from as far away as the Roman Empire.
This lasted until the First and Second Indochina Wars expelled French from its former colony and defeated American-supported governments.
One species of freshwater dolphin, the Irrawaddy dolphin (''Orcaella brevirostris''), was once common in the whole of the lower Mekong but is now very rare, with only 85 individuals remaining.
The upper basin makes up 24 percent of the total area and contributes 15-20 percent of the water that flows into the Mekong River.
At Phnom Penh the river is joined on the right bank by the river and lake system the Tonlé Sap.
Unlike the Friendship Bridges, it is not a border crossing.
* Phnom Penh Agreement between Cambodia and Vietnam on the Transit of Goods, 7 September 2000.
For thousands of years the Mekong River has been an important conduit for people and goods between the many towns on its banks.
As the Mekong enters Cambodia, over 95 percent of the flows have already joined the river.
The '''Mekong''' is a trans-boundary river in Southeast Asia.
Phnom Penh itself has no bridge under construction yet, although two new bridges have recently opened on the Tonle Sap, and the main bridge on the highway to Ho Chi Minh was duplicated in 2010.
In Vietnam, since the year 2000 Mỹ Thuận Bridge crosses the first channel—the left, main branch of the Mekong, the Sông Tiền or Tiền Giang—near Vĩnh Long and since 2008 Rạch Miễu Bridge crosses it near Mỹ Tho, between the provinces of Tiền Giang and Bến Tre.
Immediately after the Sap River joins the Mekong by Phnom Penh, the Bassac River branches off the right (west) bank.
Traditional forms of trade in small boats linking communities continue today, however the river is also becoming an important link in international trade routes, connecting the six Mekong countries to each other, and also to the rest of the world.
It is at Pakse in Champasak Province.
Waterborne trade in the lower Mekong countries of Vietnam and Cambodia has grown significantly, with trends in container traffic at Phnom Penh port and general cargo through Can Tho port both showing steady increases until 2009 when a decrease in cargo volumes can be attributed to the global financial crisis and a subsequent decline in demand for the export of garments to the US.
These complex drainage systems have developed in a setting where the underlying geological structure is heterogeneous and active, and is the major factor controlling the course of rivers and the landscapes they carve out.
The earliest known settlements date to 210 BCE, with Ban Chiang being an excellent example of early Iron Age culture.
Biota estimates for the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS) include 20,000 plant species, 430 mammals, 1,200 birds, 800 reptiles and amphibians, and an estimated 850 freshwater fish species (excluding euryhaline species mainly found in salt or brackish water, as well as introduced species).
The Fourth Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge opened to traffic on 11 December 2013.
From there it flows southwest and forms the border of Myanmar and Laos for about  until it arrives at the tripoint of Myanmar, Laos, and Thailand.
In 1995, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam established the Mekong River Commission to assist in the management and coordinated use of the Mekong's resources.
*  ''Mékôngk'' , ទន្លេមេគង្គ ''Tônlé Mékôngk'' , ទន្លេធំ ''Tônlé Thum''  ("Great River").
In Yunnan Province in China, the river and its tributaries are confined by narrow, deep gorges.
Drought is by far the major hydrological hazard in this region.
Wild capture fisheries alone have been valued at US$2 billion a year.
During the wars in Indochina in the 1970s, a significant amount of explosives (sometimes, entire barges loaded with military ordnance) sank in the Cambodian section of the Mekong (as well as in the country's other waterways).
During this period, the delta advanced 200&nbsp;km over the continental shelf of the South China Sea, covering an area of more than 62,500&nbsp;km2.
Among other wetland mammals that have been living in and around the river are the smooth-coated otter (''Lutra perspicillata'') and fishing cat (''Prionailurus viverrinus'').
Laos lies almost entirely within the lower Mekong basin.
Another new bridge is to be built at Neak Leung on the Phnom Penh to Ho Chi Minh highway with Japanese government assistance, anticipated to be opened in 2014.
Even so, the river is a major trade route between western China and Southeast Asia.
At this time the delta was advancing at a rate of 17–18 m per year.
Studies of the provenance of sediments in the Mekong delta reveal a major switch in the source of sediments about eight million years ago (Ma).
All of these are in serious decline, because of dams, flood control, and overfishing.
The Third Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge opened for traffic on 11 November 2011, connecting Nakhon Phanom Province (Thailand) and Thakhek (Laos), as part of Asian Highway 3.
From the Golden Triangle tripoint, the Mekong turns southeast to briefly form the border of Laos with Thailand.
Major tributary systems develop in the lower basin.
The first systematic European exploration began with the French Mekong Expedition led by Ernest Doudard de Lagrée and Francis Garnier, which ascended the river from its mouth to Yunnan between 1866 and 1868.
Typically, such patterns develop in basins with gentle slopes where the underlying geological structure is fairly homogenous and stable, exerting little or no control on river morphology.
Only the Amazon boasts a higher level of biodiversity.
The difficulty of navigating the river has meant that it has divided, rather than united, the people who live near it.
Aquaculture yields about two million tonnes of fish a year.
The present river morphology of the Mekong Delta developed over the last 6,000 years.
The last three can grow up to about  in length and weigh .
The two-lane, -wide, -long bridge opened to the general public on 9 January 2007.
It is the world's 12th-longest river and the 7th-longest in Asia.
Narrower and more turbulent sections of water in the upstream parts of the Mekong River, coupled with large annual water level variations continue to present a challenge to navigation.
In Laos  alone, 71 percent of rural households (2.9 million people) rely on fisheries for either subsistence or additional cash income.
Here, it drops  before it enters the lower basin where the borders of Thailand, Laos, China, and Myanmar come together in the Golden Triangle.
Hence, the lower Mekong basin yields about 4.5 million tonnes of fish and aquatic products annually.
Understanding the nature and timing of the elevation of Tibet (and the Central Highlands of Vietnam) therefore helps explain the provenance of sediment reaching the delta and the Tonle Sap Great Lake today.
In English the river is called the "Mekong River", derived from "Mae Nam Khong", a term of both Thai and Lao origin.
Around the Tonle Sap Lake in Cambodia, more than 1.2 million people live in fishing communes and depend almost entirely on fishing for their livelihoods.
The extreme seasonal variations in flow and the presence of rapids and waterfalls in the Mekong make navigation difficult.
It has two -wide lanes with a single railway line in the middle.
Loss of forest cover in the Thai areas of the lower basin has been the highest in all the lower Mekong countries over the past 60 years.
The Mekong is still a wild river and navigation conditions vary greatly along its length.
The endangered Siamese crocodile (''Crocodylus siamensis'') occurs in small isolated pockets within the northern Cambodian and Laotian portions of the Mekong River.
This new port has generated a renewed focus on the Mekong River as a trade route.
With upland shifting agriculture (slash and burn), soils recover within 10 to 20 years but the vegetation does not.
In the Central Highlands of Vietnam, forest cover was reduced from over 95 percent in the 1950s to around 50 percent in the mid-1990s.
The tributary river systems in this part of the basin are small.
These mother vessels sail directly to Europe or the United States, which means that goods can be shipped internationally to and from Phnom Penh with only a single transshipment at Cai Mep.
The most species richness orders among the freshwater fish in the river basin are cypriniforms (377 species) and catfish (92 species).
Nonetheless, the parts of the basin in northern Laos, northern Thailand, Myanmar and China do experience frequent earthquakes and tremors.
On the Khorat Plateau, which includes the Mun and Chi tributary systems, forest cover was reduced from 42 percent in 1961 to 13 percent in 1993.
From here on downstream the terrain is flat and water levels rather than flow volumes determine the movement of water across the landscape.
chaophraya''), which can have a length of up to , the giant pangasius (''Pangasius sanitwongsei''), giant barb (''Catlocarpio siamensis'') and the endemic Mekong giant catfish (''Pangasianodon gigas'').
These systems can be separated into two groups: tributaries that contribute to the major wet season flows, and tributaries that drain low relief regions of lower rainfall.
The Chinese and Thai governments agreed to build the bridge and share the estimated US$33 million cost.
It is estimated that 40 million rural people, more than two-thirds of the rural population in the lower Mekong basin, are engaged in the wild capture fishery.
* Agreement between and among the Governments of the Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam for Facilitation of Cross border Transport of Goods and People, (amended at Yangon, Myanmar), signed in Vientiane, 26 November 1999.
From 5.3 to 3.5 ka the delta advanced across a broad embayment formed between higher ground near the Cambodian border and uplands north of Ho Chi Minh City.
This extension has since been completed.
Wild capture fisheries are largely open access fisheries, which poor rural people can access for food and income.
The size of this impact has not been established
Shifting cultivation is common in the uplands of northern Laos and is reported to account for as much as 27 percent  of the total land under rice cultivation.
The catchment here is steep and narrow.
From 1893, the French extended their control of the river into Laos, establishing French Indochina by the first decade of the 20th century.
As of 2013, Cambodian volunteers are being trained, with the support of the Office of Weapons Removal and Abatement within the US State Department Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, to conduct underwater explosive removal.
Fish are the cheapest source of animal protein in the region and any decline in the fishery is likely to significantly impact nutrition, especially among the poor.
The Khmer empire of Angkor was the last great Indianized state in the region.
The Mekong Basin can be divided into two parts: the "upper Mekong basin" in Tibet of China, and the "lower Mekong basin" from Yunnan downstream from China to the South China Sea.
This value increases considerably when the multiplier effect is included, but estimates vary widely.
Aquatic resources make up between 47 and 80 percent of animal protein in rural diets for people who live in the Lower Mekong Basin.
The Cai Mep container terminals can accommodate vessels with a draught of 15.2 m, equivalent to the largest container ships in the world.
The Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge () connects Nong Khai city with Vientiane in Laos.
The two rivers, the Bassac to the west and the Mekong to the east, enter Vietnam very soon after this.
They provide a principal form of income for numerous people and act as a safety net and coping strategy in times of poor agricultural harvests or other difficulties.
Such is the case with the ''Mae Nam Ping'' in Chiang Mai which is known as the "Ping River".
Thailand imports a wide variety of products from China, including vegetables, fruit, agricultural products, and fertilisers.
As an international river, a number of agreements exist between the countries that share the Mekong to enable trade and passage between them.
Its climate, landscape and land use are the major factors shaping the hydrology of the river.
Once more, it defines the Laos-Thailand border for some  as it flows first east, passing in front of the capital of Laos, Vientiane, then turns south.
In Vietnam, the Bassac is called the Hậu River (Sông Hậu or Hậu Giang); the main, eastern, branch of the Mekong is called the Tiền River or Tiền Giang.
* Agreement between China and Lao PDR on Freight and Passenger Transport along the Lancang–Mekong River, adopted in November 1994.
Many northern Thai and Laos locals refer to it as the "River Khong".
From around the time of the fall of the Khmer empire, the Mekong was the front line between the emergent states of Siam and Tonkin (North Vietnam), with Laos and Cambodia, then on the coast, torn between their influence.
The earliest recorded civilization was the 1st century Indianised-Khmer culture of Funan, in the Mekong delta.
The Mekong basin is one of the richest areas of biodiversity in the world.
The elevation of the Tibetan Plateau during the Tertiary period was an important factor in the genesis of the south-west monsoon, which is the dominant climatic control influencing the hydrology of the Mekong Basin.
In spite of poor fertility, however, agriculture is intensive.
In Cambodia, wet rice is the main crop and is grown on the flood plains of the Tonle Sap, Mekong, and Bassac (the Mekong delta distributary known as the Hậu in Vietnam) Rivers.
Downstream from the Golden Triangle, the river flows for a further  through Laos, Thailand, and Cambodia before entering the South China Sea via a complex delta system in Vietnam.
Despite these difficulties, the Mekong River is already an important link in the transit chain between Kunming and Bangkok with about 300,000 tonnes of goods shipped via this route each year.
Nearly all the ships carrying cargo to and from Chiang Saen Port are 300 DWT Chinese flag vessels.
Sediments deposited in the Tonle Sap Great Lake about this time (7.9–7.3 ka) also show indications of marine influence, suggesting a connection to the South China Sea.
The saltwater crocodile (''Crocodylus porosus'') once ranged from the Mekong Delta up the river into Tonle Sap and beyond but is now extinct in the river, along with being extinct in all of Vietnam and possibly even Cambodia.
Wild capture fisheries play the most important role in supporting livelihoods.
Here the mainstream begins to break up into an increasing number of branches.
The low tide level of the river in Cambodia is lower than the high tide level out at sea, and the flow of the Mekong inverts with the tides throughout its stretch in Vietnam and up to Phnom Penh.
Volumes of trade being shipped decrease by more than 50 percent, primarily due to the reduced draughts available during the low water season (June–January).
Phnom Penh also marks the beginning of the delta system of the Mekong River.
In marked contrast, the tributary networks of the Salween, Yangtze, and particularly the Mekong, are complex with different sub-basins often exhibiting different, and distinct, drainage patterns.
In Khmer language, Mékôngk means "mother of water" translated as Mé "mother" and kôngk for ''kôngkea'' "water".
Port infrastructure is being expanded to accommodate the expected growth in traffic, with new facilities planned for Chiang Saen port.
From 36 to 8 Ma the bulk (76 percent) of the sediments deposited in the delta came from erosion of the bedrock in the Three Rivers Area.
Forest cover is less than 10 percent.
Soil erosion has been a major problem and approximately 50 percent of the sediment in the river comes from the upper basin.
The most important of these, which address the full length of the river, are:
The cumulative impacts of these activities on the river regime have not been measured.
From the Tibetan Plateau the river runs through China's  Yunnan Province, Myanmar, Laos, Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam.
Besides being a danger for fishermen, unexploded ordnance also creates problems for bridge and irrigation systems construction.
The first European to encounter the Mekong was the Portuguese Antonio de Faria in 1540.
Here, the river landscape is flat.
When the Mekong is low, the Tonle Sap is a tributary; water flows from the lake and river into the Mekong.
The bridge opened for traffic on 11 December 2001.
New species are regularly described from the Mekong.
In 2009, 145 new species were described from the region, including 29 fish species previously unknown to science, two new bird species, 10 reptiles, five mammals, 96 plants, and six new amphibians.
The river's source was located by Pyotr Kuzmich Kozlov in 1900.
It is  long, and was completed in 2000.
The mountainous landscape means that only 16 percent  of the country is farmed under lowland terrace or upland shifting cultivation.
*  (), Sông Lớn ("Great River", ), Sông Cửu Long(九龍) ("Nine Dragons River", ).
It then turns east into the interior of Laos, flowing first east and then south for some  before meeting the border with Thailand again.
Broadly, navigation of the river is divided between upper and lower Mekong, with the "upper" part of the river defined as the stretch north of the Khone Falls in southern Laos and the "lower" part as the stretch below these falls.
The Mekong then meets the tripoint of China, Myanmar and Laos.
Its estimated length is , and it drains an area of , discharging  of water annually.
From the point where it rises to its mouth, the most precipitous drop in the Mekong occurs in the upper Mekong basin, a stretch of some .
In Laos, 50 and 100 DWT vessels are operated for regional trade.
In 1996 China and Myanmar became "dialogue partners" of the MRC and the six countries now work together within a cooperative framework.
The area of this tripoint is sometimes termed the Golden Triangle, although the term also refers to the much larger area of those three countries that is notorious as a drug producing region.
An estimated two million tonnes of fish are landed a year, in addition to almost 500,000 tonnes of other aquatic animals.
Broadly, there are three types of fish habitats in the Mekong: i) the river, including all the main tributaries, rivers in the major flood zone, and the Tonle Sap, which altogether yield about 30 percent of wild catch landings; ii) rain-fed wetlands outside the river-floodplain zone, including mainly rice paddies in formerly forested areas and usually inundated to about 50&nbsp;cm, yielding about 66 percent of wild catch landings; and iii) large water bodies outside the flood zone, including canals and reservoirs yielding about four percent of wild catch landings.
No other river is home to so many species of very large fish.
The Mekong is already heavily dammed, with many more dams planned and under construction.
On 20 March 2004, the Thai and Lao governments agreed to extend the railway to Tha Nalaeng in Laos.
The Mekong Basin has one of the world's largest and most productive inland fisheries.
The second group are those on the right bank, mainly the Mun and Chi rivers, that drain a large part of northeast Thailand.
Cargos carried are timber, agricultural products, and construction materials.
Both drought and flood are common hazards in the Delta, which many people believe is the most sensitive to upstream hydrological change.
This was succeeded by the Khmer culture Chenla state around the 5th century.
* New Agreement on Waterway Transportation between Vietnam and Cambodia, signed in Phnom Penh, 17 December 2009.
More than half of Cambodia remains covered with mixed evergreen and deciduous broadleaf forest, but forest cover has decreased from 73 percent in 1973 to 63 percent in 1993.
Small changes in water level determine the direction of water movement, including the large-scale reversal of flow into and out of the Tonle Sap basin from the Mekong River.
The very flat Mekong delta area in Vietnam is thus prone to flooding, especially in the provinces of An Giang and Dong Thap (Đồng Tháp), near the Cambodian border.
It links Chiang Rai Province, Thailand with Ban Houayxay, Laos.
The Bassac River is the first and main distributary of the Mekong; thus, this is the beginning of the Mekong Delta.
The ''Tonle Sap'' in Cambodia is a similar example, where ''tonle'' translates as "great lake" or "great river", making the ''Tonle Sap River'' an unnecessary repetition of what is in fact the "Sap River".
Sandy and saline soils are the most common soil types, which makes much of the land unsuitable for wet rice cultivation.
OAAs account for about 20 percent of the total Mekong catch.
Agricultural expansion and population pressure are the major reasons for land use and landscape change.
Geomorphologic features normally associated with the alluvial stretches of mature rivers, such as meanders, oxbow lakes, cut-offs, and extensive floodplains are restricted to a short stretch of the mainstream around Vientiane and downstream of Kratie where the river develops alluvial channels that are free of control exerted by the underlying bedrock.
