Gibson got his breakthrough role as the leather-clad post-apocalyptic survivor in George Miller's ''Mad Max''.
Once you've been exposed to it, once or twice or however many times, if you know the facts and see how they're presented, it's mind-boggling.
In response to claims by Grigorieva that an incident of domestic violence occurred in January 2010, the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department launched a domestic violence investigation in July 2010.
In September 2002, Gibson announced that he would direct a film called ''The Passion'' in Aramaic and Latin with no subtitles because he hoped to "transcend language barriers with filmic storytelling."
* People's Choice Awards: Favorite Motion Picture Star in a Comedy (2001)
Wrote ''Time'' magazine: "''The Beaver'' is a somber, sad domestic drama featuring an alcoholic in acute crisis ... It’s hard to separate Gibson’s true-life story from what’s happening onscreen."
* ShoWest Award: Male Star of the Year (1993)
Gibson followed the footsteps of Errol Flynn, Clark Gable, and Marlon Brando by starring as Fletcher Christian in a cinematic retelling of the Mutiny on the Bounty.
After his father's Holocaust denial was sharply criticized in print by ''The New York Times'' writer Frank Rich, Gibson retorted, "I want to kill him.
In March 2011, Mel Gibson agreed to plead no contest to a misdemeanor battery charge.
Gibson played a naïve but ambitious journalist opposite Sigourney Weaver and Linda Hunt in Peter Weir's atmospheric 1982 film ''The Year of Living Dangerously'', based on the novel of the same name by Christopher Koch.
Among those to defend Gibson were Orthodox Jewish Rabbi Daniel Lapin and radio personality Michael Medved.
* American Cinematheque Gala Tribute: American Cinematheque Award (1995)
*BAFTA Award for Best Direction, Directors Guild of America Award, MTV Movie Award for Best Performance - Male, and MTV Movie Award for Most Desirable Male for ''Braveheart'' (1995)
''Braveheart'' influenced the Scottish nationalist movement and helped to revive the film genre of the historical epic; the Battle of Stirling Bridge sequence is considered by critics to be one of the all-time-best-directed battle scenes.
According to Cris Embleton, one of the founders, the Gibsons gave millions to provide lifesaving medical treatment to needy children worldwide.
In June 2010, Gibson was in Brownsville, Texas, filming scenes for the movie, ''How I Spent My Summer Vacation'', about a career criminal put in a tough prison in Mexico.
Gibson was initially reluctant to accept the role of Guy Hamilton.
I just like telling stories.
Gibson made the unusual transition from action to classical drama, playing William Shakespeare's Danish prince in Franco Zeffirelli's ''Hamlet''.
In 2008, he purchased the Malibu home of David Duchovny and Téa Leoni.
On July 9, 2010, some audio recordings alleged to be of Gibson were posted on the internet.
Descendants of the original native inhabitants of Mago, who were displaced in the 1860s, have protested the purchase.
Gibson has also been likened to "a combination Clark Gable and Humphrey Bogart."
My character was, like the film suggests, a puppet.
In a 2011 interview, Gibson stated:
He and Matthew Modine played condemned convict brothers opposite Diane Keaton as the warden's wife who visits them to read the Bible.
1999); and three grandchildren .
In 2011, it was announced that Gibson had commissioned a screenplay from Joe Eszterhas about the Maccabees.
I'm not out there banging a drum for candidates.
During this period he shared a $30 a week apartment in Adelaide with his future wife Robyn.
And you watch Fox claw CNN, and CNN claw Fox.
Icon has grown from being just a production company to also be an international distribution company and film exhibitor in Australia and New Zealand.
Robyn Gibson filed for divorce on April 13, 2009, citing irreconcilable differences.
In 1982, Vincent Canby wrote that "Mr. Gibson recalls the young Steve McQueen...
She's a much better person than I am.
* Outstanding Contribution to World Cinema Award at the Irish Film and Television Awards (2008)
The film was nominated for three Academy Awards and won the People's Choice Award for Favorite Dramatic Motion Picture.
In 2010, following an outburst at his ex-girlfriend that was made public, Gibson was dropped from the talent agency of William Morris Endeavor.
When asked about the Catholic doctrine of "''Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus''", Gibson replied, "There is no salvation for those outside the Church ...
Gibson has cited this screen performance as his personal favorite.
He further apologized for his "despicable" behavior, saying that the comments were "blurted out in a moment of insanity", and asked to meet with Jewish leaders to help him "discern the appropriate path for healing."
It's really the story of two young men."
Gibson directed, produced, co-wrote, and funded the 2004 film ''The Passion of the Christ,'' which chronicled the passion and death of Jesus (Jim Caviezel).
Which is not always the healthiest thing for your psyche or anything else.
Gibson quietly declined the Chevalier des Arts et Lettres from the French government in 1995 as a protest against France's resumption of nuclear testing in the Southwest Pacific.
Following a year hiatus from film acting after the birth of his twin sons, Gibson took on the role of Fletcher Christian in ''The Bounty'' in 1984.
After Gibson's arrest, his publicist said he had entered a recovery program to battle alcoholism.
Because of his mother, Gibson retains dual Irish and American citizenship.
In an interview with the ''Globe and Mail'', Gibson stated, "If anyone has distorted Gospel passages to rationalize cruelty towards Jews or anyone, it's in defiance of repeated Papal condemnation.
In 2004, he directed and produced the financially successful and controversial, biblical drama film ''The Passion of the Christ''.
It's a bit lavatorial and not very sophisticated."
His films in the first half of the decade were ''Forever Young'', ''Lethal Weapon 3'', ''Maverick'', and ''Braveheart''.
The film's depiction of the Prince of Wales as an effeminate homosexual caused the film to be attacked by the Gay Alliance.
Helena Bonham Carter, who appeared alongside him in ''Hamlet'', said of him, "He has a very basic sense of humor.
The move to his grandmother's native Australia was for economic reasons, and his father's expectation that the Australian Defence Forces would reject his eldest son for the draft during the Vietnam War.
* Hasty Pudding Theatricals: Man of the Year (1997)
The movie grossed US$611,899,420 worldwide and $370,782,930 in the US alone, surpassing any motion picture starring Gibson.
Acquaintance Father William Fulco has said that Gibson denies neither the Pope nor Vatican II.
At a May 2007 progress hearing, Gibson was praised for his compliance with the terms of his probation and his extensive participation in a self-help program beyond what was required.
He's terrible to his son, to everybody."
Gibson later backed away from such conspiracy theories saying, "It was like: 'Hey, tell us a conspiracy'...&nbsp;so I laid out this thing, and suddenly, it was like I was talking the gospel truth, espousing all this political shit like I believed in it."
On April 28, 2009, Gibson made a red carpet appearance with Grigorieva.
And I went with that.
Mel Gibson was 12 years old at the time.
In addition to producing or co-producing many of Gibson's own star vehicles, Icon has turned out many other small films, ranging from ''Immortal Beloved'' to ''An Ideal Husband''.
The critically acclaimed film helped to further launch Gibson's career.
The independently financed blockbuster helped to make him an international star.
In 1995, Mel Gibson directed, produced, and starred in ''Braveheart'', a biographical film of Sir William Wallace, a Scottish nationalist who was executed in 1305 for "high treason" against King Edward I of England.
The film went on to become the highest grossing rated R film of all time with $370,782,930 in U.S. box office sales.
Gibson was educated by members of the Congregation of Christian Brothers at St Leo's Catholic College in Wahroonga, New South Wales, during his high school years.
The Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD) accused Gibson of homophobia after a December 1991 interview in the Spanish newspaper ''El País'' in which he made derogatory comments about homosexuals.
* Academy Award: Best Director, for ''Braveheart'' (1995)
In a 2006 interview with Diane Sawyer, Gibson stated that he feels that his "human rights were violated" by the often vitriolic attacks on his person, his family, and his religious beliefs which were sparked by ''The Passion''.
In 2000, Gibson acted in three films that each grossed over $100&nbsp;million: ''The Patriot'', ''Chicken Run'', and ''What Women Want''.
But thanks for coming in, I just wanted to meet you.'
*Golden Globe Award for Best Actor&nbsp;– Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for ''What Women Want'' (2000)
During the filming of ''Hamlet'', Gibson would relieve pressure on the set by mooning the cast and crew, directly following a serious scene.
After the arrest report was leaked on TMZ.com, Gibson issued two apologies through his publicist, and—in a televised interview with Diane Sawyer—he affirmed the accuracy of the quotations.
Gibson donated $500,000 to the El Mirador Basin Project to protect the last tract of virgin rain forest in Central America and to fund archeological excavations in the "cradle of Mayan civilization."
The film is to be distributed by Warner Brothers Pictures.
In 2006, he directed the action-adventure film ''Apocalypto'', his second film to feature sparse dialogue in a non-English language.
The award was honorary because substantive awards are made only to Australian citizens.
In the same interview, Gibson stated,
The same day Gibson was dropped by his agency, William Morris Endeavor.
After graduation in 1977, Gibson immediately began work on the filming of ''Mad Max'', but continued to work as a stage actor, and joined the State Theatre Company of South Australia in Adelaide.
* Australian Film Institute Award: Best Actor in a Lead Role, for ''Tim'' (1979) and ''Gallipoli'' (1981)
"He's not a silver-tongued devil.
I quietly support candidates.
The Gay Alliance was especially enraged by a scene in which King Edward I murders his son's male lover by throwing him out of a castle window.
Following the success of ''Lethal Weapon'', director Richard Donner and principal cast revisited the characters in three sequels, ''Lethal Weapon 2'' (1989), ''Lethal Weapon 3'' (1993), and ''Lethal Weapon 4'' (1998).
* ''The Hollywood Reporter'' Innovator of the Year (2004)
The film ''Gallipoli'' also helped to earn Gibson the reputation of a serious, versatile actor and gained him the Hollywood agent Ed Limato.
He studied acting at the Australian National Institute of Dramatic Art.
That's just the backdrop.
But I have supported a candidate and it's a whole other world.
In December 2004, Gibson sold his  Australian farm in the Kiewa Valley for $6&nbsp;million.
Gibson met Robyn Denise Moore in the late 1970s, soon after filming ''Mad Max'', in Adelaide.
Gibson was cast alongside experienced Shakespearean actors Ian Holm, Alan Bates, and Paul Scofield.
A fourth movie, ''Mad Max: Fury Road'' (2015), was made with Tom Hardy in the title role.
He won the award for Best Actor in a Leading Role from the Australian Film Institute.
It wasn't some star thing, even though they advertised it that way."
The Papacy has condemned racism in any form... Jesus died for the sins of all times, and I'll be the first on the line for culpability".
In 2006, Gibson said that the "fearmongering" depicted in his film ''Apocalypto'' "reminds me a little of President Bush and his guys."
The Anti-Defamation League accused Gibson of anti-semitism over the film's unflattering depiction of Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin.
* People's Choice Awards: Favorite Motion Picture Actor (1991, 1997, 2001, 2003, 2004)
He expanded beyond acting into directing and producing, with: ''The Man Without a Face'', in 1993; ''Braveheart'', in 1995; ''The Passion of the Christ'', in 2004; and ''Apocalypto'', in 2006.
In July 2007, Gibson again visited Central America to make arrangements for donations to the indigenous population.
He has further praised Anthony Hopkins's performance as Lieutenant William Bligh as the best aspect of the film.
At the time, Robyn was a dental nurse and Mel was an unknown actor working for the South Australian Theatre Company.
In the films he played LAPD Detective Martin Riggs, a recently widowed Vietnam veteran with a death wish and a penchant for violence and gunplay.
Mel Gibson's first American film was Mark Rydell's 1984 drama ''The River'', in which he and Sissy Spacek played struggling Tennessee farmers.
After ''Mad Max'', Gibson also played a mentally slow youth in the film ''Tim''.
Gibson stated it was his intention to retain the pristine environment of the undeveloped island.
Gibson met with Costa Rican President Óscar Arias to discuss how to "channel the funds."
* ShoWest Award: Director of the Year (1996)
It's something that's close to me.
In response, Gibson stated that he still intends to make the movie, but will not base it upon Eszterhas' script, which he called substandard.
Although Gibson originally intended to release the film without subtitles; he eventually relented for theatrical exhibition.
Eszterhas then claimed his son had secretly recorded a number of Gibson's alleged "hateful rants".
He had Mark Lee, the angelic-looking, ideal Australian kid, and he wanted something of a modern sensibility.
I want his intestines on a stick....
Shortly after making the film he did a season with the South Australian Theatre Company.
*MTV Movie Award for Best Action Sequence (with Danny Glover) for ''Lethal Weapon 4'' (1998)
After his success in Hollywood with the ''Lethal Weapon'' series, Gibson began to move into producing and directing.
He appeared in serial ''The Sullivans'' as naval lieutenant Ray Henderson, in police procedural ''Cop Shop'', and in the pilot episode of prison serial ''Punishment'' which was produced in 1980, screened 1981.
As students, Gibson and actress Judy Davis played the leads in ''Romeo and Juliet'', and Gibson played the role of Queen Titania in an experimental production of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream.''
The opening weekend in 22 theaters was considered a flop: it made $104,000 which comes to a per-theater average of $4,745.
He's kind of immature and he has some rough edges and I guess you could say the same for me."
While promoting ''Signs'', Gibson said that he no longer wanted to be a movie star and would only act in film again if the script were truly extraordinary.
In 1995, Gibson produced, directed, and starred in the epic historical drama film ''Braveheart'', for which he won the Golden Globe and Academy Award for Best Director, along with the Academy Award for Best Picture.
Gibson's divorce was finalized on December 23, 2011, and the settlement with his ex-wife was said to be the highest in Hollywood history at over $400&nbsp;million.
Gibson is also a supporter of Angels at Risk, a nonprofit organization focusing on education about drug and alcohol abuse among teens.
Gibson questioned the Iraq War in March 2004.
Gibson and his former wife have contributed a substantial amount of money to various charities, one of which is Healing the Children.
He has stated that his character should have been portrayed as the film's antagonist.
* Honorary Doctorate Recipient and Undergraduate Commencement Speaker, Loyola Marymount University (2003)
Gibson has also produced a number of projects for television, including a biopic on The Three Stooges and the 2008 PBS documentary ''Carrier''.
Entertainment is valid and I guess I'll probably do it again before it's over.
She's... Episcopalian, Church of England.
The couple are reportedly expecting their first childGibson's ninth since his first marriage due in 2017.
According to Robert Downey, Jr., studio executives encouraged Gibson in 1989 to try directing, an idea he rebuffed at the time.
In April 2012, Eszterhas wrote a letter to Gibson accusing him of sabotaging their movie about the Maccabees because he "hates Jews", and citing a series of private incidents during which he allegedly heard Gibson express extremely racist views.
In 2002, Gibson appeared in the Vietnam War drama ''We Were Soldiers'' and M. Night Shyamalan's ''Signs'', which became the highest-grossing film of Gibson's acting career.
The climax of the movie centers on the catastrophic AIF offensive known as the Battle of the Nek.
Also that month, he sold a Malibu property for $30&nbsp;million that he had purchased for $24&nbsp;million two years before.
''The Beaver'' premiered at The South by Southwest Festival in Austin, TX on March 16, 2011.
You'd have to be out of your mind to think that of the company that just put out ''The Passion of the Christ''."
During this period Gibson also appeared in Australian television series guest roles.
The original film spawned two sequels: ''Mad Max 2'' (known in North America as ''The Road Warrior''), and ''Mad Max 3'' (known in North America as ''Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome'').
The restraining order was modified the next day regarding Gibson's contact with their child.
Although written as a private letter, it was subsequently published on a film industry website.
None of them ever deliver on anything.
During the 1990s, Gibson alternated between commercial and personal projects.
In a 2011 interview, Gibson stated that the separation began the day following his arrest for drunk driving in Malibu.
Gibson's first name is derived from Saint Mel, fifth-century Irish saint, and founder of Gibson's mother's native diocese, Ardagh, while his second name, Colmcille, is also shared by an Irish saint and is the name of the Aughnacliffe parish in County Longford where Gibson's mother was born and raised.
They also supported the restoration of Renaissance artwork and gave millions of dollars to NIDA.
Newcomer Mark Lee was recruited to play the idealistic Archy Hamilton after participating in a photo session for the director.
Gibson directed a few episodes of ''Complete Savages'' for the ABC network.
He then starred in ''Ransom'', ''Conspiracy Theory'', ''Lethal Weapon 4'', and ''Payback''.
Michael Cieply of ''The New York Times'' observed on June 5, 2011, that the film had cleared just about $1&nbsp;million, making it a certified "flop".
I'll get a newspaper to read between the lines.
They are sent to invade the Ottoman Empire, where they take part in the 1915 Gallipoli Campaign.
She prays, she believes in God, she knows Jesus, she believes in that stuff.
Despite this problem, Gibson gained a reputation in Hollywood for professionalism and punctuality such that ''Lethal Weapon 2'' director Richard Donner was shocked when Gibson confided that he was drinking five pints of beer for breakfast.
I can't define "star quality," but whatever it is, Mr. Gibson has it."
* Honorary fellowship in Performing Arts by Limkokwing University (2007)
In 1999 when asked about the comments to ''El País'', Gibson said, "I shouldn't have said it, but I was tickling a bit of vodka during that interview, and the quote came back to bite me on the ass."
Gibson's paternal grandmother was opera contralto Eva Mylott (1875–1920), who was born in Australia, to Irish parents, while his paternal grandfather, John Hutton Gibson, was a millionaire tobacco businessman from the American South.
He compared working with Scofield to being "thrown into the ring with Mike Tyson".
He has also expressed an intention to direct a movie set during the Viking Age, starring Leonardo DiCaprio.
In April 2007 he purchased a  ranch in Costa Rica for $26&nbsp;million, and in July 2007 he sold his  Tudor estate in Connecticut (which he purchased in 1994 for $9&nbsp;million) for $40&nbsp;million to an unnamed buyer.
The resulting 1984 film ''The Bounty'' is considered to be the most historically accurate version.
But that is a pronouncement from the chair.
In July 2010, Gibson had been recorded during a phone call with Oksana Grigorieva suggesting that if she got "raped by a pack of niggers," she would be to blame.
Gibson's next film was Robert Towne's ''Tequila Sunrise'', followed by ''Lethal Weapon 2'', in 1989.
On July 28, 2006, Gibson was arrested by a deputy James Mee of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department for driving under the influence (DUI) while speeding in his vehicle with an open container of alcohol, which is illegal in much of the United States.
During the same month, Gibson pledged to give financial assistance to a Malaysian company named Green Rubber Global for a tire recycling factory located in Gallup, New Mexico.
In a 2012 interview, Gibson announced that the project, which he has titled ''Berserker'', was still moving forward.
The sparse dialogue is spoken in the Yucatec Maya language by a cast of Native American descent.
On June 7, 1980, Mel and Robyn Gibson were married in a Roman Catholic church in Forestville, New South Wales.
And it's just not fair if she doesn't make it, she's better than I am.
If you take a little time out to think about other people, it's good.
That year, Gibson's attorneys were unsuccessful at blocking the ''Sunday Mirror'' from publishing what Gibson shared at AA meetings.
This theme is further explored by a quote from Will Durant, which is superimposed at the very beginning of the film: "A great civilization is not conquered from without until it has destroyed itself from within."
Gibson inserted a single frame of himself smoking a cigarette into the 2005 teaser trailer of ''Apocalypto''.
Gibson is a property investor, with multiple properties in Malibu, California, several locations in Costa Rica, a private island in Fiji and properties in Australia.
The announcement generated significant controversy.
Gibson turned down the role, reportedly because he feared being typecast.
In 2010, Gibson appeared in ''Edge of Darkness'', which marked his first starring role since 2002 and was an adaptation of the BBC miniseries, ''Edge of Darkness''.
Eventually, the continued media attacks began to anger Gibson.
According to a 2011 article in ''Vanity Fair'', Gibson first told the arresting officer, "My life is over.
They have one daughter, Hannah (b.
He possesses both the necessary talent and the screen presence."
Gibson told Diane Sawyer that he believes non-Catholics and non-Christians can go to heaven.
Gibson starred in ''The Beaver'', a domestic drama about a depressed alcoholic directed by former ''Maverick'' co-star Jodie Foster.
In June 2016, Gibson announced that he will reunite with ''Braveheart'' screenwriter Randall Wallace to make a sequel for ''The Passion of the Christ'', focusing on the  resurrection of Jesus Christ.
In April 2011, Gibson finally broke his silence about the incident in question.
One of Gibson's younger brothers, Donal, is also an actor.
Gibson later said that ''Gallipoli'' is, "Not really a war movie.
