Melbourne's live performance institutions date from the foundation of the city, with the first theatre, the Pavilion, opening in 1841.
The Vietnamese surname Nguyen is the second most common in Melbourne's phone book after Smith.
Holmes selected a site on the northern bank of the Yarra River, declaring that "this will be the place for a village".
In 2008, Melbourne overtook Sydney with the amount of money that domestic tourists spent in the city, accounting for around $15.8&nbsp;billion annually.
Foxtel and Optus are the main pay television providers.
Members of the Melbourne Football Club codified Australian football in 1859, and Yarra rowing clubs and "regattas" became popular about the same time.
This period also saw the expansion of a major radial rail-based transport network.
Numerous telecommunications companies provide Melbourne with terrestrial and mobile telecommunications services and wireless internet services
In 1992 the newly elected Kennett government began a campaign to revive the economy with an aggressive development campaign of public works coupled with the promotion of the city as a tourist destination with a focus on major events and sports tourism.
The first European settlement in Victoria was established by Colonel David Collins in October 1803, at Sullivan Bay, near present-day Sorrento, but this settlement was relocated to what is now Hobart, Tasmania, in February 1804, due to a perceived lack of resources.
Melbourne has the largest tram network in the world which had its origins in the city's 1880s land boom.
The various nationalities involved in the rebellion give some indication of immigration flows at the time.
Although the area is described as the ''centre'', it is not actually the demographic centre of Melbourne at all, due to an urban sprawl to the south east, the demographic centre being located at Glen Iris.
There are also many parks in the surrounding suburbs of Melbourne, such as in the municipalities of Stonnington, Boroondara and Port Phillip, south east of the central business district.
RMIT University was also ranked among the top 51–100 universities in the world in the subjects of: accounting, Business and Management, communication and media studies, computer science and information systems.
In the 2013–2014 financial year, the Melbourne rail network recorded 232.0&nbsp;million passenger trips, the highest in its history.
Bands that have emerged from the Melbourne music scene include Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, Crowded House, TISM, The Living End, Augie March, Men at Work and The Temper Trap.
The post-war period also saw a major renewal of the CBD and St Kilda Road which significantly modernised the city.
The Economist Intelligence Unit ranks Melbourne as the fourth most expensive city in the world to live in according to its worldwide cost of living index in 2013.
With the gold rush largely over by 1860, Melbourne continued to grow on the back of continuing gold mining, as the major port for exporting the agricultural products of Victoria, especially wool, and a developing manufacturing sector protected by high tariffs.
A notable film shot and set in Melbourne during Australia's cinematic lull is ''On the Beach'' (1959).
The University of Melbourne, the second oldest university in Australia, was ranked first among Australian universities in the 2010 THES international rankings.
In 2013–2014, 176.9 million passenger trips were made by tram.
Another recent environmental issue in Melbourne was the Victorian government project of channel deepening Melbourne Ports by dredging Port Phillip Bay—the Port Phillip Channel Deepening Project.
Established in 1861, the National Gallery of Victoria is Australia's oldest public art museum.
Gas is provided by three distribution companies:
The city has rail connections with regional Victorian cities, as well as direct interstate rail services to Sydney and Adelaide and beyond which depart from Melbourne's other major rail terminus, Southern Cross Station in Spencer Street.
Melbourne consists of 31 municipalities.
Office, commercial and public developments in the adjoining districts of Southbank and Docklands have made these redeveloped areas into extensions of the CBD in all but name.
The Swinburne University of Technology, based in the inner city Melbourne suburb of Hawthorn is ranked 76–100 in the world for Physics by the Academic Ranking of World  Universities making Swinburne the only Australian university outside the Group of Eight to achieve a top 100 rating in a science discipline.
Water is stored in a series of reservoirs located within and outside the Greater Melbourne area.
The State Library of Victoria is one of Australia's oldest cultural institutions and one of many public and university libraries across the city.
Other major pollution problems in Melbourne include levels of bacteria including ''E.
While snow is occasionally seen at higher elevations in the outskirts of the city, it has not been recorded in the Central Business District since 1986.
Monash University was ranked as the 99th (60th by QS ranking) best university in the world.
Melbourne extends along the Yarra River towards the Yarra Valley and the Dandenong Ranges to the east.
*  Thessaloniki, Greece (1984)
*  Milan,  Italy (2003)
Television shows are produced in Melbourne, most notably ''Neighbours'', ''Kath & Kim'', ''Winners and Losers'', ''Offspring'', ''Underbelly'' , ''House Husbands'', ''Wentworth'' and ''Miss Fisher's Murder Mysteries'', along with national news-based programs such as ''The Project'', ''Insiders'' and ''ABC News Breakfast''.
A long list of AM and FM radio stations broadcast to greater Melbourne.
The decade of the 1880s was one of extraordinary growth, when consumer confidence, easy access to credit, and steep increases in the price of land, led to an enormous amount of construction.
For fans of classical music there are 3MBS and ABC Classic FM.
The remainder of the party continued and arrived at the mouth of the Yarra River on 15 August 1835.
Major road projects including the remodelling of St Kilda Junction, the widening of Hoddle Street and then the extensive 1969 Melbourne Transportation Plan changed the face of the city into a car-dominated environment.
Relatively narrow streams of heavy showers can often affect the same places (usually the eastern suburbs) for an extended period, while the rest of Melbourne and surrounds stays dry.
Major inner-city urban renewal has occurred in areas such as Southbank, Port Melbourne, Melbourne Docklands and more recently, South Wharf.
Many rail lines, along with dedicated lines and rail yards are also used for freight.
Ship transport is an important component of Melbourne's transport system.
'''Melbourne''' () is the capital and most populous city in the Australian state of Victoria, and the second most populous city in Australia.
Like many urban environments, the city faces significant environmental issues, many of them relating to the city's large urban footprint and urban sprawl and the demand for infrastructure and services.
Melbourne is also prone to isolated convective showers forming when a cold pool crosses the state, especially if there is considerable daytime heating.
The Hoddle Grid (dimensions of ) forms the centre of Melbourne's central business district.
The city was also home to the largest number of Holocaust survivors of any Australian city, indeed the highest per capita outside Israel itself.
At this time, more new jobs were created in Melbourne than any other Australian city—almost as many as the next two fastest growing cities, Brisbane and Perth, combined, and Melbourne's property market remained highly priced, resulting in historically high property prices and widespread rent increases.
The name "Melbourne" refers to the area of urban agglomeration (as well as a census statistical division) spanning  which comprises the broader metropolitan area, as well as being the common name for its city centre.
In May and June 1835, the area which is now central and northern Melbourne was explored by Tom Holmes, a leading member of the Port Phillip Association in Van Diemen's Land (now known as Tasmania), who claimed to have negotiated a purchase of  with eight Wurundjeri elders.
Although Melbourne's crime rate dropped 6.3% in 2014, it still has Victoria's worst crime rate with over 26,000 offences per 100,000 people.
Other strategies included the privatisation of some of Melbourne's services, including power and public transport, and a reduction in funding to public services such as health, education and public transport infrastructure.
These areas were rapidly filled by the ubiquitous terrace house, as well as detached houses and grand mansions, while some of the major roads developed as shopping streets.
From 2006, the growth of the city extended into "green wedges" and beyond the city's urban growth boundary.
These showers are often heavy and can contain hail and squalls and significant drops in temperature, but they pass through very quickly at times with a rapid clearing trend to sunny and relatively calm weather and the temperature rising back to what it was before the shower.
Although Victoria's net interstate migration has fluctuated, the population of the Melbourne statistical division has grown by about 70,000 people a year since 2005.
(owned by SP AusNet after acquisition, but continuing to trade under the brand name Multinet Gas)
Referred to as Australia's "cultural capital", it is the birthplace of Australian impressionism, Australian rules football, the Australian film and television industries, and Australian contemporary dance.
In Greater Melbourne (Greater Capital City Statistical Areas), 63.3% of residents were born in Australia.
The Department of Sustainability and Environment partially addresses this problem by regularly burning off.
Geologically, it is built on the confluence of Quaternary lava flows to the west, Silurian mudstones to the east, and Holocene sand accumulation to the southeast along Port Phillip.
Six free-to-air television stations service Greater Melbourne and Geelong: ABC Victoria, (ABV), SBS Victoria (SBS), Seven Melbourne (HSV), Nine Melbourne (GTV), Ten Melbourne (ATV), C31 Melbourne (MGV) – community television.
Both projects are being conducted under controversial Public-Private Partnerships and a multitude of independent reports have found that neither project is required to supply water to the city and that Sustainable Water Management is the best solution.
An influx of intercolonial and overseas migrants, particularly Irish, German and Chinese, saw the establishment of slums including a temporary "tent city" on the southern banks of the Yarra.
The Little River, and the township of the same name, marks the border between Melbourne and neighbouring Geelong city.
Melbourne quickly became a major finance centre, home to several banks, the Royal Mint, and Australia's first stock exchange in 1861.
The establishment of a hydraulic facility in 1887 allowed for the local manufacture of elevators, resulting in the first construction of high-rise buildings; most notably the APA Building, amongst the world's tallest commercial buildings upon completion in 1889.
''The Story of the Kelly Gang'', the world's first feature film, was shot in Melbourne in 1906.
Deakin University maintains two major campuses in Melbourne and Geelong, and is the third largest university in Victoria.
The metropolis is located on the large natural bay of Port Phillip and expands into the hinterlands towards the Dandenong and Macedon mountain ranges, Mornington Peninsula and Yarra Valley.
The Melbourne rail network has its origins in privately built lines from the 1850s gold rush era, and today the suburban network consists of 209 suburban stations on 16 lines which radiate from the City Loop, a partially underground metro section of the network beneath the Central Business District (Hoddle Grid).
Rowing is also a large part of Melbourne's sporting identity, with a number of clubs located on the Yarra River, out of which many Australian Olympians trained.
In 1880 a telephone exchange was established and in the same year the foundations of St Paul's, were laid; in 1881 electric light was installed in the Eastern Market, and in the following year a generating station capable of supplying 2,000 incandescent lamps was in operation.
The culture of the city is an important drawcard for tourists, of which just under two million international overnight visitors and 57.7 million domestic overnight visited during the year ending March 2014.
* Multinet Gas, which provides gas from Melbourne's inner eastern suburbs to eastern Victoria.
The city previously held the nation's premier long distance swimming event the annual Race to Prince's Bridge, in the Yarra River.
Despite privatisation and successive governments persisting with auto-centric urban development into the 21st century, there have since been large increases in public transport patronage, with the mode share for commuters increasing to 14.8% and 8.4% of all trips.
Within months, the city's population had increased from 25,000 to 40,000 inhabitants.
, Melbourne is home to at least 460 music venues, and its live music industry contributes A$1 billion per annum to the Victorian economy.
The Governor-General of Australia resided at Government House in Melbourne until 1930 and many major national institutions remained in Melbourne well into the twentieth century.
Melbourne's bus network consists of almost 300 routes which mainly service the outer suburbs and fill the gaps in the network between rail and tram services.
The city also features substantial Indian, Sri Lankan, and Malaysian-born communities, in addition to recent South African and Sudanese influxes.
Swinburne University has campuses in Malaysia, while Monash has a research centre based in Prato, Italy.
It was established in 2010 and uses a network of marked road lanes and segregated cycle facilities.
Melbourne also hosted the 2006 Commonwealth Games.
These include "public" (i.e., state-owned ABC and SBS) and community stations.
Melbourne has a highly diversified economy with particular strengths in finance, manufacturing, research, IT, education, logistics, transportation and tourism.
However, later that year the settlement was named "Melbourne" after the British Prime Minister, William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne, whose seat was Melbourne Hall in the market town of Melbourne, Derbyshire.
Many commercial stations are networked-owned: DMG has Nova 100 and Smooth; ARN controls Gold 104.3 and KIIS 101.1; and Southern Cross Austereo runs both Fox and Triple M. Stations from towns in regional Victoria may also be heard (e.g.
Dewpoint temperatures in the summer range from  to .
* Jemena, which provides power to the northern and inner western suburbs
The city also boasts a research and development hub for Ford Australia, as well as a global design studio and technical centre for General Motors and Toyota respectively.
The city celebrates a wide variety of annual cultural events and festivals of all types, including Australia's largest free community festival—Moomba, the Melbourne International Arts Festival, Melbourne International Film Festival, Melbourne International Comedy Festival and the Melbourne Fringe Festival.
Melbourne is regarded as one of the world's major street art centres; readers of ''Lonely Planet'' voted the city's street art and laneways as Australia's most popular cultural attraction.
It remains a prominent Melbourne landmark and meeting place.
In 2011 the most common cited ancestries in Greater Melbourne (Greater Capital City Statistical Areas) were English (21.1%), Australian (20.7%), Irish (6.9%), Scottish (5.7%), and Italian (5.5%).
Victorian terrace housing, townhouses and historic Italianate, Tudor revival and Neo-Georgian mansions are all common in neighbourhoods such as Toorak.
In the meantime, the drought must be weathered.
Over two-thirds of Melburnians speak only English at home (68.1%).
Many of the larger suburban mansions from the boom era were also either demolished or subdivided.
In November 2008, it was announced that the Victorian Major Events Company had informed the Australian Olympic Committee that Melbourne was considering making bids for either the 2024 or 2028 Summer Olympics.
This housing boom has increased house prices and rents, as well as the availability of all types of housing.
*  Osaka, Japan (1978)
The city also has a bicycle sharing system.
In 1888, the Exhibition Building hosted a second event  even larger than the first, the Melbourne Centennial Exhibition, spurring construction of numerous hotels including the 500 room Federal Hotel, The Palace Hotel in Bourke Street (both since demolished), and the doubling in size of the Grand (Windsor).
It is the Australian base for a number of significant manufacturers including Boeing, truck-makers Kenworth and Iveco, Cadbury as well as Bombardier Transportation and Jayco, among many others.
Melbourne has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification ''Cfb'') and is well known for its changeable weather conditions.
During a visit in 1885 English journalist George Augustus Henry Sala coined the phrase "Marvellous Melbourne", which stuck long into the twentieth century and is still used today by Melburnians.
Significant novels set in Melbourne include Fergus Hume's ''The Mystery of a Hansom Cab'', Helen Garner's ''Monkey Grip'' and Christos Tsiolkas' ''The Slap''.
* Powercor, which provides power to the outer western suburbs, as well as all of western Victoria (Citipower and Powercor are owned by the same entity)
Station Pier on Port Phillip Bay is the main passenger ship terminal with cruise ships and the Spirit of Tasmania ferries which cross Bass Strait to Tasmania docking there.
The discovery of gold in Victoria in mid-1851 led to a gold rush, and Melbourne, which served as the major port and provided most services for the region, experienced rapid growth.
* United Energy, which provides power to the inner eastern and southeastern suburbs, and the Mornington Peninsula
Several programs are being implemented to minimise beach and river pollution.
Construction began in February 2006 of a $1&nbsp;billion 5000-seat international convention centre, Hilton Hotel and commercial precinct adjacent to the Melbourne Exhibition and Convention Centre to link development along the Yarra River with the Southbank precinct and multibillion-dollar Docklands redevelopment.
Melbourne is notable as the host city for the 1956 Summer Olympic Games (the first Olympic Games held in the southern hemisphere and Oceania, with all previous games held in Europe and the United States),.
In February 2010, ''The Transition Decade'', an initiative to transition human society, economics and environment towards sustainability, was launched in Melbourne.
Melbourne is typical of Australian capital cities in that after the turn of the 20th century, it expanded with the underlying notion of a 'quarter acre home and garden' for every family, often referred to locally as the Australian Dream.
The first official Test cricket match was played at the Melbourne Cricket Ground in March 1877.
The city centre, Docklands, St. Kilda Road and Southbank areas feature high-density forms.
There are also a number of significant state parks just outside Melbourne.
Port Phillip is often warmer than the surrounding oceans and/or the land mass, particularly in spring and autumn; this can set up a "bay effect" similar to the "lake effect" seen in colder climates where showers are intensified leeward of the bay.
The CBD and surrounds also contain many significant historic buildings such as the Royal Exhibition Building, the Melbourne Town Hall and Parliament House.
The origins of Australian rules football can be traced to matches played next to the MCG in 1858.
The 1970s saw the rise of the Australian New Wave and its Ozploitation offshoot, instigated by Melbourne-based productions ''Stork'' and ''Alvin Purple''.
Melbourne houses the headquarters for many of Australia's largest corporations, including five of the ten largest in the country (based on revenue), and four of the largest six in the country (based on market capitalisation) (ANZ, BHP Billiton (the world's largest mining company), the National Australia Bank and Telstra), as well as such representative bodies and think tanks as the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
It has a population of 4,529,500 , and its inhabitants are called Melburnians.
Melbourne also has Australia's widest range of bookstores, as well the nation's largest publishing sector.
Light FM is a contemporary Christian station.
By the mid 1950s there was just under 200 passenger vehicles per 1000 people by 2013 there was 600 passenger vehicles per 1000 people.
'''Largest overseas born populations'''
Much of the vegetation within the city are non-native species, most of European origin, and in many cases plays host to invasive species and noxious weeds.
The early 20th century saw an increase in popularity of automobiles, resulting in large-scale suburban expansion.
The British Colonial Office appointed five Aboriginal Protectors for the Aborigines of Victoria, in 1839, however their work was nullified by a land policy that favoured squatters to take possession of Aboriginal lands.
Furthermore, Melbourne was ranked the world's fourth top university city in 2008 after London, Boston and Tokyo in a poll commissioned by the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology.
Much of metropolitan Melbourne is accordingly characterised by low density sprawl, whilst its inner city areas feature predominantly medium-density, transit-oriented urban forms.
Melbourne has an extensive transport network.
The Port of Melbourne is Australia's largest container and general cargo port and also its busiest.
The Bolte government sought to rapidly accelerate the modernisation of Melbourne.
The Melbourne financial crisis was a contributing factor in the Australian economic depression of the 1890s and the Australian banking crisis of 1893.
The central city filled up with shops and offices, workshops, and warehouses.
In 1836, Governor Bourke declared the city the administrative capital of the Port Phillip District of New South Wales, and commissioned the first plan for the city, the Hoddle Grid, in 1837.
The city has carved out a niche as Australia's leading centre for superannuation (pension) funds, with 40% of the total, and 65% of industry super-funds including the $109&nbsp;billion-dollar Federal Government Future Fund.
Height limits in the Melbourne CBD were lifted in 1958, after the construction of ICI House, transforming the city's skyline with the introduction of skyscrapers.
CSL, one of the world's top five biotech companies, and Sigma Pharmaceuticals have their headquarters in Melbourne.
The 1850s and 1860s saw the commencement of Parliament House, the Treasury Building, the Old Melbourne Gaol, Victoria Barracks, the State Library,  University, General Post Office,  Customs House, the Melbourne Town Hall,  St Patrick's cathedral, though many remained uncompleted for decades, with some still not finished.
Melbourne has six international sister cities.
It is also home to a wide variety of other manufacturers, ranging from petrochemicals and pharmaceuticals to fashion garments, paper manufacturing and food processing.
During the Victorian gold rush of the 1850s, it was transformed into one of the world's largest and wealthiest cities.
Melbourne is experiencing high population growth, generating high demand for housing.
In early August 1835 a different group of settlers, including John Pascoe Fawkner, left Launceston on the ship Enterprize.
Growing building activity culminated in a "land boom" which, in 1888, reached a peak of speculative development fuelled by consumer confidence and escalating land value.
Melbourne is Australia's second-largest industrial centre.
Flinders Street Station is Melbourne's busiest railway station, and was the world's busiest passenger station in 1926.
JOY 94.9 caters for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender audiences.
Melbourne is often referred to as Australia's garden city, and the state of Victoria was once known as ''the garden state''.
Flinders Street Station was the world's busiest passenger station in 1927 and Melbourne's tram network overtook Sydney's to become the world's largest in the 1940s, at which time 25% of travellers used public transport but by 2003 it had declined to just 7.6%.
The first federal parliament was convened on 9 May 1901 in the Royal Exhibition Building, subsequently moving to the Victorian Parliament House where it was located until 1927, when it was moved to Canberra.
The area was an important meeting place for the clans of the Kulin nation alliance and a vital source of food and water.
There is an abundance of parks and gardens in Melbourne, many close to the CBD with a variety of common and rare plant species amid landscaped vistas, pedestrian pathways and tree-lined avenues.
Since 2006 public transport patronage has grown by over 20%.
The city's East End Theatre District includes theatres that similarly date from 1850s to the 1920s, including the Princess Theatre, Regent Theatre, Her Majesty's Theatre, Forum Theatre, Comedy Theatre, and the Athenaeum Theatre.
''Picnic at Hanging Rock'' and ''Mad Max'', both shot in and around Melbourne, achieved worldwide acclaim.
The state government retains the right to override certain local government decisions, including urban planning, and Melburnian issues often feature prominently in state election.
Free standing dwellings with relatively large gardens are perhaps the most common type of housing outside inner city Melbourne.
By January 1844, there were said to be 675 Aborigines resident in squalid camps in Melbourne.
During the boom, Melbourne had reputedly become the richest city in the world, and the largest after London in the British Empire.
Several major literary prizes are open to local writers including the Melbourne Prize for Literature and the Victorian Premier's Literary Awards.
93.9 Bay FM, Geelong).
Roughly 5,000 Muslims live in Melbourne.
The south-eastern suburb of Scoresby is home to Nintendo's Australian headquarters.
Around 80 per cent of Melbourne's tram network shares road space with other vehicles, while the rest of the network is separated or are light rail routes.
Essendon Airport, which was once the city's main airport also handles passenger flights, general aviation and some cargo flights.
It is also used as a freight and maintenance facility.
In 1885 the first line of the Melbourne cable tramway system was built, becoming one of the worlds most extensive systems by 1890.
Melbourne also has a significant general aviation airport, Moorabbin Airport in the city's south east that also handles a small number of passenger flights.
, Melbourne had the largest population of Polish Jews in Australia.
Melbourne Airport provides an entry point for national and international visitors, and is Australia's second busiest airport.
Melbourne's trams are recognised as iconic cultural assets and a tourist attraction.
AM stations include ABC: 774, Radio National, and News Radio; also Fairfax affiliates 3AW (talk) and Magic (easy listening).
Reality television productions such as ''Dancing with the Stars'', ''MasterChef'', ''The Block'' and ''The Real Housewives of Melbourne'' are all filmed in and around Melbourne.
As the centre of Australia's "rust belt", Melbourne experienced an economic downturn between 1989 and 1992, following the collapse of several local financial institutions.
Australian rules football and cricket are the most popular sports in Melbourne.
In addition, tourism also plays an important role in Melbourne's economy, with about 7.6&nbsp;million domestic visitors and 1.88&nbsp;million international visitors in 2004.
Melbourne is also the second home of the national Opera Australia after it merger with the defunct Victoria State Opera in 1996.
The E Class trams are about 30 metres long and are superior to the C2 class tram of similar length.
C31 is only broadcast from the transmitters at Mount Dandenong and South Yarra.
The Melbourne Arts Precinct in Southbank is home to Arts Centre Melbourne, which includes the State Theatre, Hamer Hall, the Playhouse and the Fairfax Studio.
However, after 10 years of planning policies to encourage medium-density and high-density development in existing areas with greater access to public transport and other services, Melbourne's middle and outer-ring suburbs have seen significant brownfields redevelopment.
Buses and taxis are the only forms of public transport to and from the city's main airports.
In later years, with the rapid rise of motor vehicle ownership, the investment in freeway and highway developments greatly accelerated the outward suburban sprawl and declining inner city population.
Ferries and water taxis run from berths along the Yarra River as far upstream as South Yarra and across Port Phillip Bay.
Thessaloniki is Melbourne's Greek sister city.
Electricity is provided by five distribution companies:
