In the years 1974–77 Yitzhak Rabin's government suffered from instability due to infighting within the labor party (Rabin and Shimon Peres) and the shift to the right by the National Religious Party, as well as numerous corruption scandals.
He was aided by the fact that the British authorities possessed only two photographs of his likeness, of which one, which they believed to be his military identity card, bore only a slight resemblance to him, according to Begin, and were fed misinformation by Yaakov Meridor that he had had plastic surgery, and were thus confused over his appearance.
In 1947, he moved to the heart of Tel Aviv and took the identity of Dr. Yonah Koenigshoffer, the name he found on an abandoned passport in a library.
Begin's impassioned rhetoric, laden with pathos and evocations of the Holocaust, appealed to many, but was deemed inflammatory and demagoguery by others.
In particular, the fact that government spending was not significantly reduced in tandem with the liberalization program triggered a massive bout of inflation.
They led the ''Movement for Stopping the Withdrawal from Sinai'', violently clashing with IDF soldiers during the forceful eviction of Yamit settlement in April 1982.
His open embrace of Judaism stood in stark contrast to the Alignment's secularism, which alienated Mizrahi voters and drew many of them to support Begin, becoming his burgeoning political base.
Begin banked on the international media being attracted to the action, which he referred to as turning Palestine into a "glass house", with the world looking in.
Begin’s most significant achievement as Prime Minister was the signing of a peace treaty with Egypt in 1979, for which he and Anwar Sadat shared the Nobel Prize for Peace.
The move countered the weakening attraction for the earlier revisionist party, Hatzohar, founded by his late mentor Ze'ev Jabotinsky.
The trial lasted 11 years, with one of the highlights being the deposition of Begin's son, Benny, in favor of the defendants.
Rafi also joined the unity government at that time, with Moshe Dayan becoming Defense Minister.
Under the terms of the treaty, brokered by US President, Jimmy Carter, Israel was to hand over the Sinai Peninsula in its entirety to Egypt.
This would draw international attention, and British repression would create global sympathy for the Irgun's cause, which in turn would translate into political pressure on Britain.
During the Holocaust, Begin's father was among the 5,000 Brest Jews rounded up by the Nazis at the end of June 1941.
Public pressure on Begin to resign increased.
This assessment was aided by reconnaissance photos supplied by the United States, and the Israeli cabinet voted to approve an attack.
Begin considered the diplomatic option fruitless, and worried that prolonging the attack would lead to a fatal inability to act in response to the perceived threat.
He was a member of Hashomer Hatzair until the age of 13, and at 16, he joined Betar.
Among the Irgun members waiting on the shore was Menachem Begin, who greeted the arrivals with great emotion.
Given Egypt’s prominent position within the Arab World, especially as Israel’s biggest and most powerful enemy, the treaty had far reaching strategic and geopolitical implications.
In 1937 he was the active head of Betar in Czechoslovakia and became head of the largest branch, that of Poland.
While he initially wished to remain with the Polish army, he was eventually persuaded to change his mind by his contacts in the Irgun, as well as Polish officers sympathetic to the Zionist cause.
Many held Begin personally responsible for the violence, and he was consequently barred from the Knesset for several months.
To save money, he stayed at the homes of Betar members.
Begin had been forced into hiding immediately prior to the declaration of revolt, when Aliza noticed that their house was being watched.
After the British searched the area but missed the street where his house was located, Begin and his family moved to a new home on a Tel Aviv side street, where he assumed the name Yisrael Sassover and masqueraded as a rabbi.
Following Operation Agatha, during which the British arrested many Jews, seized arms caches, and occupied the Jewish Agency building, from which many documents were removed, Begin ordered an attack on the British military and administrative headquarters at the King David Hotel following a request from the Haganah, although the Haganah's permission was later rescinded.
One of the shells hit the ship, which began to burn.
The official Jewish leadership institutions in Palestine, the Jewish Agency and Vaad Leumi, backed up by their military arm, the Haganah, had refrained from directly challenging British authority.
The debate ended in a resolution to empower the army to use force if necessary to overcome the Irgun and to confiscate the ship and its cargo.
He unsuccessfully attempted to smuggle 1,500 Jews into Romania at the end of August 1939.
For several months in 1945–46, the Irgun fought as part of the Jewish Resistance Movement.
In July 1941, just after Germany attacked the Soviet Union, and following his release under the Sikorski–Mayski agreement because he was a Polish national, Begin joined the Free Polish Anders' Army as a corporal officer cadet.
An emergency team of doctors and nurses attempted to resuscitate his failing heart.
Ben-Gurion agreed to Begin's initial request that 20% of the weapons be dispatched to the Irgun's Jerusalem Battalion, which was still fighting independently.
After the passengers had disembarked, members of the fishing village of Mikhmoret helped unload the cargo of military equipment.
Not all the territories; but by all opinion, most of them."
At this time, he became a disciple of Vladimir "Ze'ev" Jabotinsky, the founder of the nationalist Revisionist Zionism movement and its Betar youth wing.
Otherwise, we must decide to disperse our own army.
Revisionist 'purists' alleged nonetheless that Begin was out to steal Jabotinsky's mantle and ran against him with the old party.
The combination of the increased VAT, the end of subsidies, and a rise in the U.S. dollar exchange rate set off a wave of inflation and price increases.
The program continued past Begin's premiership, and switched towards other vulnerable populations.
Ben-Gurion reported on the meetings which had preceded the arrival of the ''Altalena'', and was adamant in his demand that Begin surrender and hand over all of the weapons:
Begin was too frail to overcome the effects of the heart attack, and his condition began to rapidly deteriorate on 9 March at about 3:15 AM.
Begin authorized the construction of a full-scale model of the Iraqi reactor which Israeli pilots could practice bombing.
The vehemence of Revisionist opposition was deep; in March 1952, during the ongoing reparations negotiations, a parcel bomb addressed to Konrad Adenauer, the sitting West German Chancellor, was intercepted at a German post office.
During his studies, he organized a self-defense group of Jewish students to counter harassment by anti-Semites on campus.
'''Menachem Begin''' (;  ''Menahem Begin'', ;  ''Menakhem Volfovich Begin''; 16 August 1913 – 9 March 1992) was an Israeli politician, founder of Likud and the sixth Prime Minister of the State of Israel.
Between 1948 and 1977, under Begin, Herut and the alliances it formed (Gahal in 1965 and Likud in 1973) formed the main opposition to the dominant Mapai and later the Alignment (the forerunners of today's Labor Party) in the Knesset; Herut adopted a radical nationalistic agenda committed to the irredentist idea of Greater Israel that usually included Jordan.
Chancellor Adenauer decided to keep secret the involvement of Israeli opposition party members in the plot, thus avoiding Israeli embarrassment and a likely backlash.
He remained in opposition in the eight consecutive elections (except for a national unity government around the Six-Day War), but became more acceptable to the political center.
Begin quickly made a name for himself as a fierce critic of the dominant Zionist leadership for being too cooperative with the British, and argued that the only way to save the Jews of Europe, who were facing extermination, was to compel the British to leave so that a Jewish state could be established.
Meanwhile, Lehi joined the revolt with a series of shooting attacks on policemen.
This provided Begin with legitimacy as the leader of the Revisionist stream of Zionism.
Begin and his other ministers did not internalize the full meaning of the liberalization plan.
Begin was less resolute in implementing the section of the Camp David Accord calling for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
His seclusion was watched over by his children and his lifetime personal secretary Yechiel Kadishai, who monitored all official requests for meetings.
Begin would not come out of hiding until April 1948, when the British, who still maintained nominal authority over Palestine, were almost totally gone.
His devout followers found it difficult to reconcile Begin’s history as a keen promoter of the Greater Israel agenda with his willingness to relinquish occupied territory.
He proposed a series of guerrilla attacks that would humiliate the British and damage their prestige, which would force them to resort to repressive measures, which would in turn alienate the Yishuv.
After the shelling of the ''Altalena'', more than 200 Irgun fighters were arrested.
On February 1, 1944, the Irgun proclaimed a revolt.
On July 17, 1978, the Israeli cabinet met to discuss rising inflation, but Begin, declaring that "you cannot manage economics over the housewife's back", halted all proposals.
According to Kadishai, Begin spent most of his days reading and watching movies, and would start and finish a book almost every day.
However the weapons arrived after the war had already ended.
They had three children: Binyamin, Leah and Hassia.
Heavy guns were transferred to the area and at four in the afternoon, Ben-Gurion ordered the shelling of the ''Altalena''.
In the wake of the Camp David Accords, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) withdrew from the Sinai Peninsula, which was captured from Egypt in the Six-Day War.
Inflation would continue rapidly rising past Begin's tenure, and was only brought under control after the 1985 Israel Economic Stabilization Plan, which among other things greatly curbed government spending, was introduced.
In 1965, Herut and the Liberal Party united to form the Gahal party under Begin’s leadership, but failed again to win more seats in the election that year.
On his mother's side he was descended from distinguished rabbis.
The fragile partnership collapsed following the bombing, partly because contrary to instructions, it was carried out during the busiest part of the day at the hotel.
His mother and older brother Herzl also died in the Holocaust.
After five hours of rioting, police managed to suppress the riots using water cannons and tear gas.
The objective of Operation ''Peace for Galilee'' was to force the PLO out of rocket range of Israel's northern border.
A confrontation between them and the IDF units started.
Begin was sworn in as Prime Minister of Israel on 20 June 1977.
Notable operations in which they took part were the battles of Jaffa and the Jordanian siege on the Jewish Quarter in the Old City of Jerusalem.
Before going to Washington to meet President Carter, Begin visited Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson for his advice.
After a year of a traditional cheder education Begin started studying at a "Tachkemoni" school, associated with the religious Zionist movement.
Begin had meanwhile boarded the ''Altalena'', which was headed for Tel Aviv where the Irgun had more supporters.
For the next six days, Begin remained in serious condition.
Extensive work was done to eliminate slum conditions in these areas, and to improve the general quality of life.
The day the Six-Day War started in June 1967, Gahal joined the national unity government under Prime Minister Levi Eshkol of the Alignment, resulting in Begin serving in the cabinet for the first time, as a Minister without Portfolio.
The King David Hotel bombing resulted in the destruction of the building's southern wing, and 91 people, mostly British, Arabs, and Jews, were killed.
The plan generated some improvement; cheap and high-quality imported products began to fill consumer shelves, the business sector benefited greatly, and the stock market recorded rising share prices.
During the 1950s Begin was banned from entering the United Kingdom, as the British government regarded him as "leader of the notorious terrorist organisation Irgun"
When Begin took office, preparations were intensified.
His condition slightly improved following treatment, and he regained consciousness after 20 hours.
Begin also continued to be plagued by the ill health and occasional hospitalizations that he had endured for years.
Yet while establishing Begin as a leader with broad public appeal, the peace treaty with Egypt was met with fierce criticism within his own Likud party.
As a result, he blocked attempts by Erlich to lower government spending and government plans to privatize public-sector enterprises out of fear of harming the weaker sectors of society, allowing the privatization of only eighteen government companies during his six-year tenure.
Begin referred to the invasion as an inevitable act of survival, often comparing Yasser Arafat to Hitler.
As Israeli military involvement in Lebanon deepened, and the Sabra and Shatila massacre, carried out by Christian Phalangist militia allies of the Israelis, shocked world public opinion, Begin grew increasingly isolated.
People jumped into the water, whilst their comrades on shore set out to meet them on rafts.
On 1 June Begin signed an agreement with the provisional government headed by David Ben Gurion, where the Irgun agreed to formally disband and to integrate its force with the newly formed Israel Defense Forces (IDF),  but was not truthful of the armaments aboard the Altalena as it was scheduled to arrive during the cease fire ordered by the United Nations and therefore would have put the State of Israel in peril as Britain was adamant the partition of Jewish and Arab Palestine would not occur.
Soon after, the government and Begin expounded on what came to be known as the Begin Doctrine: "On no account shall we permit an enemy to develop weapons of mass destruction (WMD) against the people of Israel."
Begin announced that he would retire from party leadership, but soon reversed his decision when the crowd pleaded with him to stay.
Ultimately, the British would be forced to choose between continued repression or withdrawal, and Begin was certain that in the end, the British would leave.
Drawing on his training as a lawyer in Poland, he preferred wearing a formal suit and tie and evincing the dry demeanor of a legislator to the socialist informality of Mapai, as a means of accentuating their differences.
Returning to Warsaw afterward, he left three days after the German 1939 invasion began, first to the southwest and then to Wilno.
His coffin was carried four kilometers from the Sanhedria Funeral Parlor to Mount of Olives in a funeral procession attended by thousands of people.
You have ten minutes to give me your answer.D.E., Brigade Commander
Living in Warsaw in Poland, Begin encouraged Betar to set up an organization to bring Polish Jews to Palestine.
If you do not agree to carry out this order, I shall use all the means at my disposal in order to implement the order and to requisition the weapons which have reached shore and transfer them from private possession into the possession of the Israel government.
Begin's economic policies sought to liberalize Israel's socialist economy towards a more free-market approach, and he appointed Simha Erlich as Finance Minister.
On 6 June 1982, Begin’s government authorized the Israel Defense Forces invasion of Lebanon, in response to the attempted assassination of the Israeli ambassador to the United Kingdom, Shlomo Argov.
You are required to carry out this order immediately.
In September 1947, the British cabinet voted to leave Palestine, and in November of that year, the United Nations approved a resolution to partition the country between Arabs and Jews.
The Herut party can be seen as the forerunner of today's Likud.
In terms of social justice, however, the legacy of the Begin Government was arguably a questionable one.
The pre-war Polish government actively supported Zionist youth and paramilitary movements.
He was the youngest of three children.
However, the program did not improve the lives of the Israeli people as Begin had hoped.
The financial burden imposed on Britain by the Jewish insurgency, together with the tremendous public opposition to keeping troops in Palestine it generated among the British public was later cited by British officials as a major factor in Britain's decision to evacuate Palestine.
In the first elections in 1949, Herut, with 11.5 percent of the vote, won 14 seats, while Hatzohar failed to break the threshold and disbanded shortly thereafter.
Begin also became disappointed by the war in Lebanon because he had hoped to sign a peace treaty with the government President Bashir Gemayel, who was assassinated.
On 15 May 1948, Begin broadcast a speech on radio declaring that the Irgun was finally moving out of its underground status.
Despite the traumatic scenes from Yamit, political support for the treaty did not diminish and the Sinai was handed over to Egypt in 1982.
Throughout 1944, the Irgun and Lehi attacks intensified.
I have been authorized to demand that you hand over the weapons to me for safekeeping and to inform you that you should establish contact with the supreme command.
After a year, he changed his telephone number due to journalists constantly calling him.
Israel attempted to negotiate with France and Italy to cut off assistance and with the United States to obtain assurances that the program would be halted.
His behavior was strongly condemned in mainstream public discourse, reinforcing his image as a provocateur.
Begin was elected to the first Knesset, as head of Herut, the party he founded, and was at first on the political fringe, embodying the opposition to the Mapai-led government and Israeli establishment.
Referring to the Altalena Affair, Begin stated that "when you fired at me with cannon, I gave the order; 'Don't return fire!'
Following the King David Hotel bombing, when the British searched the entire city of Tel Aviv, Begin evaded capture by hiding in a secret compartment in his home.
After Begin's wife Aliza died in November 1982 while he was away on an official visit to Washington DC, he was thrown into a deep depression.
However, in October 1980, the Mossad informed Begin that the reactor would be fueled and operational by June 1981.
In 1978 Begin, aided by Foreign Minister Moshe Dayan and Defense Minister Ezer Weizman, came to Washington and Camp David to negotiate the Camp David Accords, leading to the 1979 Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty with Egyptian President, Anwar Sadat.
As head of the Irgun, he targeted the British in Palestine.
Known as The Hunting Season, the campaign seriously crippled the Irgun for several months, while Lehi, having agreed to suspend the campaign, was spared.
Implementation of this decision was assigned to the Alexandroni Brigade, commanded by Dan Even (Epstein), which the following day surrounded the Kfar Vitkin area.
Inhabited mainly by Sephardi and Mizrahi immigrants and their descendants, these areas were characterized by slum conditions and substandard housing.
Dash eventually joined his government several months later, thus providing it with the broad support of almost two thirds of the Knesset.
Project Renewal is still being implemented today for at-risk communities in Israel.
Hundreds of thousands gathered in Tel Aviv in what was one of the biggest public demonstrations in Israeli history.
In accordance with his wishes, Begin was given a simple Jewish burial ceremony and buried on the Mount of Olives in the Jewish Cemetery there.
This delivery was the smoking gun Britain would need to urge the UN to end the partition action.
He controversially offered the foreign affairs portfolio to Moshe Dayan, a former IDF Chief of Staff and Defense Minister, and a prominent Alignment politician identified with the old establishment.
Though able to form a narrow coalition with smaller Jewish religious and ultra-orthodox parties, Begin also sought support from centrist elements in the Knesset to provide his government with greater public legitimacy.
Due to the British police conducting searches in the hotel's vicinity, he relocated to a Yemenite neighborhood in Petah Tikva, and after a month, moved to the Hasidof neighborhood near Kfar Sirkin, where he pretended to be a lawyer named Yisrael Halperin.
Gahal's arrangement lasted until August 1970, when Begin and Gahal quit the government, then led by Golda Meir due to disagreements over the Rogers Plan and its "in place" cease-fire with Egypt along the Suez Canal, Other sources, including William B. Quandt, note that the Labor party, by formally accepting UN 242 in mid-1970, had accepted "peace for withdrawal" on all fronts, and because of this Begin had left the unity government.
The Irgun's restraint also earned it much sympathy from the Yishuv, whereas it had been assumed before by many that it had placed its own political interests before those of the Yishuv.
In 1983, shortly before Begin's resignation, a major financial crisis hit Israel after the stocks of the country's four largest banks collapsed and were subsequently nationalized by the state.
Nevertheless, fighting soon escalated into war with Palestinian and Lebanese militias, as well as the Syrian military, and the IDF progressed as far as Beirut, well beyond the 40&nbsp;km limit initially authorized by the government.
In 1944, after Lehi gunmen assassinated Lord Moyne, the British Resident Minister in the Middle East, the official Jewish authorities, fearing British retaliation, ordered the Haganah to undertake a campaign of collaboration with the British.
Popularly known as the ''Mahapakh'' ("upheaval"), the election results had seismic ramifications as for the first time in Israeli history a party other than the Alignment/Mapai was in a position to form a government, effectively ending the left's hitherto unrivalled domination over Israeli politics.
In 1973, Begin agreed to a plan by Ariel Sharon to form a larger bloc of opposition parties, made up from Gahal, the Free Centre, and other smaller groups.
Most of them were released several weeks later, with the exception of five senior commanders (Moshe Hason, Eliyahu Lankin, Yaakov Meridor, Bezalel Amitzur, and Hillel Kook), who were detained for more than two months, until August 27, 1948.
During his term dozens of new settlements were built, and Jewish population in the West Bank and Gaza more than quadrupled.
Among the issues discussed were logistics of the ship's landing and distribution of the cargo between the military organizations.
Upon arriving in Palestine, Begin, like many other Polish Jewish soldiers of the Anders' Army, faced a choice between remaining with the Anders' Army to fight Nazi Germany in Europe, or staying in Palestine to fight for establishment of a Jewish state.
The end result was the Jewish Resistance Movement, a framework under which the Haganah, Irgun, and Lehi launched coordinated series of anti-British operations.
But Sharon resigned as Defense Minister after the death of Emil Grunzweig, who was killed by a grenade tossed into a crowd of demonstrators leaving a Peace Now organized march, which also injured ten others, including the son of an Israeli cabinet minister.
Former members of the Irgun High Command served as pallbearers.
The years of rampant inflation devastated the economic power of the powerful Histadrut labor federation and the kibbutzim, which would help Israel's approach towards a free-market economy.
In order to prevent further bloodshed, the Kfar Vitkin settlers initiated negotiations between Yaakov Meridor (Begin's deputy) and Dan Even, which ended in a general ceasefire and the transfer of the weapons on shore to the local IDF commander.
As Prime Minister, Begin presided over various reforms in the domestic field.
The commission recommended that Sharon be removed from office and never serve in any future Israeli government.
He graduated in 1935, but never practiced law.
Begin's failure to respond was a blow to Even's prestige, and a clash was now inevitable.
One of the fiercest confrontations between Begin and Ben-Gurion revolved around the Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany, signed in 1952.
Dan Even issued the following ultimatum:
After the Israeli Declaration of Independence on 14 May 1948 and the start of the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, Irgun continued to fight alongside Haganah and Lehi.
Instead of being sent to a forced labor camp, they were shot or drowned in the river.
Throughout the period of the rebellion against the British and the civil war against the Arabs, Begin lived openly under a series of assumed names, often while sporting a beard.
The Kahan Commission, appointed to investigate the events, issued its report on February 9, 1983, found the government indirectly responsible for the massacre but that Defense Minister Ariel Sharon "bears personal responsibility."
On 29 May 1939 the couple married.
Begin authorized the bombing of the Osirak nuclear plant in Iraq and the invasion of Lebanon in 1982 to fight PLO strongholds there, igniting the 1982 Lebanon War.
Forty years after the assassination attempt, Begin was implicated as the organizer of the assassination attempt in a memoir written by one of the conspirators, Elieser Sudit.
On 3 March 1992, Begin suffered a severe heart attack in his apartment, and was rushed to Ichilov Hospital, where he was put in the intensive care unit.
Asking Sharon whether PLO fighters had ‘machine guns’, Begin seemed out of touch with the nature and scale of the military campaign he had authorized.
Many Irgun members, who joined the IDF earlier that month, left their bases and concentrated on the Tel Aviv beach.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, President Chaim Herzog, all cabinet ministers present in Israel, Supreme Court justices, Knesset members from most parties and a number of foreign ambassadors attended the funeral.
Three IDF soldiers were killed: two at Kfar Vitkin and one in Tel Aviv.
Begin arrived there unconscious and paralyzed on the left side of his body.
The peace treaty with Egypt was a watershed moment in Middle Eastern history, as it was the first time an Arab state recognized Israel’s legitimacy whereas Israel effectively accepted the land for peace principle as blueprint for resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Many foreign governments, including the United States, condemned the operation, and the United Nations Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 487 condemning it.
He proclaimed a revolt, on 1 February 1944, against the British mandatory government, which was opposed by the Jewish Agency.
Begin’s disoriented appearance on national television while visiting the Beaufort battle site raised concerns that he was being misinformed about the war’s progress.
The five Irgun conspirators were later extradited from both France and Germany, without charge, and sent back to Israel.
Shortly before 6:00 AM, the hospital rabbi arrived at his bedside to say the Kaddish prayer.
He said, "As far as we are concerned, what do the words 'withdrawal from territories administered since 1967 by Israel' mean other than Judea and Samaria.
Begin retained some political influence in the Likud party, which he used to influence it behind the scenes.
Begin agreed the Irgun soldiers would be fully integrated with the IDF and not kept in separate units.
Consequently, General Michał Karaszewicz-Tokarzewski, the second in command of the Army issued Begin with a "leave of absence without an expiration" which gave Begin official permission to stay in Palestine.
In 1944 Begin assumed the Irgun's leadership, determined to force the British government to remove its troops entirely from Palestine.
They came through with a tenuous alliance called the Likud ("Consolidation").
His second request, however, that the remainder be transferred to the IDF to equip the newly incorporated Irgun battalions, was rejected by the Government representatives, who interpreted the request as a demand to reinforce an "army within an army."
Begin was hoping for a short and limited Israeli involvement that would destroy the PLO’s political and military infrastructure in southern Lebanon, effectively reshaping the balance of Lebanese power in favor of the Christian Militias who were allied with Israel.
Furthermore, so as not to disturb the war effort against Germany, only British government and police targets would be attacked, while military targets would only be attacked once the war had ended.
There was danger that the fire would spread to the holds which contained explosives, and Captain Monroe Fein ordered all aboard to abandon ship.
During one such visit, he met his future wife Aliza Arnold, who was the daughter of his host.
Argentine journalist Hernan Dobry has alleged that during this time Begin also ordered an airlift of weapons to Argentina during the Falklands War, because he still hated the British decades after fighting them in the 1940s, and wanted to avenge the hanging of his friend Dov Gruner.
Ben-Gurion famously coined the phrase 'without Herut and Maki' (Maki was the communist party), referring to his refusal to consider them for coalition, effectively pushing both parties and their voters beyond the margins of political consensus.
Twelve days later, it put its plan into action when Irgun teams bombed the empty offices of the British Mandate's Immigration Department in Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, and Haifa.
In August 1948, Begin and members of the Irgun High Command emerged from the underground and formed the right-wing political party Herut ("Freedom") party.
In the following years, Begin failed to gain electoral momentum, and Herut remained far behind Labor with a total of 17 seats until 1961.
