Applications for someone to be involuntarily admitted usually come from a mental health practitioner, a family member, a close relative, or a guardian.
Deinstitutionalization gradually occurred in the West, with isolated psychiatric hospitals being closed down in favor of community mental health services.
schizophrenia, psychotic disorders, and personality disorders.
Rates for specific disorders ranged from 0.8% to 2.8%, differing across countries, and by gender, educational level and other factors.
Other treatments include social interventions, peer support, and self-help.
More recently these concerns have come from insiders who have worked for and promoted the American Psychiatric Association (e.g., Robert Spitzer, Allen Frances).
Cognitive behavioral therapy and other psychotherapies developed.
Research has shown that risk assessment and behavioral interventions in pediatric clinics reduced abuse and neglect outcomes for young children.
Stigma and discrimination can add to the suffering and disability associated with mental disorders, leading to various social movements attempting to increase understanding and challenge social exclusion.
It has been found that most clinicians evaluate patients using an unstructured, open-ended approach, with limited training in evidence-based assessment methods, and that inaccurate diagnosis may be common in routine practice.
Employment discrimination is reported to play a significant part in the high rate of unemployment among those with a diagnosis of mental illness.
The use of drugs (legal or illegal, including alcohol), when it persists despite significant problems related to its use, may be defined as a mental disorder.
So, according to Caplan, getting a psychiatric diagnosis and label often stands in the way of recovery.
The different clinical and scientific perspectives draw on diverse fields of research and theory, and different disciplines may favor differing models, explanations and goals.
* HoNOS is the most widely used measure in English mental health services, being used by at least 61 trusts.
Electroconvulsive therapy was one of these, which was used widely between the 1930s and 1960s.
Sexual disorders and gender dysphoria may be diagnosed, including dyspareunia and ego-dystonic homosexuality.
A physical examination to check for ill health or the effects of medications or other drugs may be conducted.
Different societies or cultures, even different individuals in a subculture, can disagree as to what constitutes optimal versus pathological biological and psychological functioning.
Thus current policy recommends universal programs, with resources within such programs weighted towards high risk groups.
Former US First Lady Rosalynn Carter began the fellowships not only to train reporters in how to sensitively and accurately discuss mental health and mental illness, but also to increase the number of stories on these topics in the news media.
Disordered substance use may be due to a pattern of compulsive and repetitive use of the drug that results in tolerance to its effects and withdrawal symptoms when use is reduced or stopped.
* Basic activities of daily living.
** the Hunter Institute of mental health in Australia published it's "Prevention First" strategic framework for prevention.
** the official journal of the World Psychiatric Association included a survey of public mental health which concluded ''"the evidence base for public mental health interventions is convincing, and the time is now ripe to move from knowledge to action"''.
as its first goal for 2012–16.
Compulsory admission to mental health facilities (also known as involuntary commitment) is a controversial topic.
The extent to which unipolar and bipolar mood phenomena represent distinct categories of disorder, or mix and merge along a dimension or spectrum of mood, is subject to some scientific debate.
* The 2006 Canadian "Out of the Shadows at last" included a section on prevention.
Suicide, which is often attributed to some underlying mental disorder, is a leading cause of death among teenagers and adults under 35.
The mediating factors of violent acts, however, are most consistently found to be mainly socio-demographic and socio-economic factors such as being young, male, of lower socioeconomic status and, in particular, substance abuse (including alcoholism) to which some people may be particularly vulnerable.
There is also a carers rights movement of people who help and support people with mental health conditions, who may be relatives, and who often work in difficult and time-consuming circumstances with little acknowledgement and without pay.
via a painful symptom), disability (impairment in one or more important areas of functioning), increased risk of death, or causes a significant loss of autonomy; however it excludes normal responses such as grief from loss of a loved one, and also excludes deviant behavior for political, religious, or societal reasons not arising from a dysfunction in the individual.
Somatoform disorders may be diagnosed when there are problems that appear to originate in the body that are thought to be manifestations of a mental disorder.
The DSM and then ICD adopted new criteria-based classifications, and the number of "official" diagnoses saw a large expansion.
People who are abnormally unable to resist certain urges or impulses that could be harmful to themselves or others, may be classed as having an impulse control disorder, and disorders such as kleptomania (stealing) or pyromania (fire-setting).
In anxiety risk factors may include family history (e.g.
But just what they feel is bizarre or incomprehensible is ambiguous and subjective.
However, available evidence may range from nonverbal behaviors—including physiological responses and homologous facial displays and acoustic utterances—to neurochemical studies.
Time and budgetary constraints often limit practicing psychiatrists from conducting more thorough diagnostic evaluations.
Despite public or media opinion, national studies have indicated that severe mental illness does not independently predict future violent behavior, on average, and is not a leading cause of violence in society.
Sleep disorders such as insomnia involve disruption to normal sleep patterns, or a feeling of tiredness despite sleep appearing normal.
Despite the different conventional names of the drug groups, there may be considerable overlap in the disorders for which they are actually indicated, and there may also be off-label use of medications.
Activists campaign for improved mental health services and for more involvement and empowerment within mental health services, policies and wider society.
The definition and classification of mental disorders are key issues for researchers as well as service providers and those who may be diagnosed.
Universal prevention (aimed at a population that has no increased risk for developing a mental disorder, such as school programs or mass media campaigns) need very high numbers of people to show effect (sometimes known as the "power" problem).
Some disorders may be very limited in their functional effects, while others may involve substantial disability and support needs.
* Occupational functioning.
The turn of the 20th century saw the development of psychoanalysis, which would later come to the fore, along with Kraepelin's classification scheme.
Clear descriptions of some syndromes may be rare prior to the 19th century.
All participants in both studies were previously diagnosed by a licensed mental health provider as having a serious mental illness.
Although the diagnostic categories are referred to as 'disorders', they are presented as medical diseases, but are not validated in the same way as most medical diagnoses.
This hinders their chance for a fast recovery and may even prevent them from seeking further treatment
Mental disorders can arise from multiple sources, and in many cases there is no single accepted or consistent cause currently established.
* The 2011 US National Prevention Strategy included mental and emotional well-being, with recommendations including (i) better parenting and (ii) early intervention.
It is pointed out that human psychiatric classification is often based on statistical description and judgment of behaviors (especially when speech or language is impaired) and that the use of verbal self-report is itself problematic and unreliable.
** the UK NHS Mental Health Taskforce included 'preventing mental health' in its 3 Priorities, focusing on children and young ages, and the importance of employment.
Other affective (emotion/mood) processes can also become disordered.
In clinical psychiatry, persistent distress and disability indicate an internal disorder requiring treatment; but in another context, that same distress and disability can be seen as an indicator of emotional struggle and the need to address social and structural problems.
The DSM and ICD approach remains under attack both because of the implied causality model and because some researchers believe it better to aim at underlying brain differences which can precede symptoms by many years.
Schizotypy is a category used for individuals showing some of the characteristics associated with schizophrenia but without meeting cutoff criteria.
One study conducted by, School of Health and Human Sciences, University of Essex showed that males and females had a hard time telling their friends about their recent diagnosis and felt alienated.
A US survey that incidentally screened for personality disorder found a rate of 14.79%.
For bipolar disorder, stress (such as childhood adversity) is not a specific cause, but does place genetically and biologically vulnerable individuals at risk for a more severe course of illness.
The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) also developed a section on mental disorders.
There is significant scientific debate about the relative merits of categorical versus such non-categorical (or hybrid) schemes, also known as continuum or dimensional models.
The social stigma associated with mental disorders is a widespread problem.
Approximately 7% of a preschool pediatric sample were given a psychiatric diagnosis in one clinical study, and approximately 10% of 1- and 2-year-olds receiving developmental screening have been assessed as having significant emotional/behavioral problems based on parent and pediatrician reports.
Psychoanalysis, addressing underlying psychic conflicts and defenses, has been a dominant school of psychotherapy and is still in use.
The recognition and understanding of mental health conditions have changed over time and across cultures and there are still variations in definition, assessment and classification, although standard guideline criteria are widely used.
Second to this were accidental injuries (mainly traffic collisions) accounting for 12 percent of disability, followed by communicable diseases at 10 percent.
The general public have been found to hold a strong stereotype of dangerousness and desire for social distance from individuals described as mentally ill. A US national survey found that a higher percentage of people rate individuals described as displaying the characteristics of a mental disorder as "likely to do something violent to others", compared to the percentage of people who are rating individuals described as being "troubled".
In order to improve their quality of life the people involved in the patient's care must make them aware that stigmas may arise and prepare them for the reality of being diagnosed with a serious mental illness.
This includes the medical specialty of psychiatry (including psychiatric nursing), the field of psychology known as clinical psychology, and the practical application of sociology known as social work.
Evolutionary psychology may be used as an overall explanatory theory, while attachment theory is another kind of evolutionary-psychological approach sometimes applied in the context of mental disorders.
Milder but still prolonged depression can be diagnosed as dysthymia.
The degree of ability or disability may vary over time and across different life domains.
Robert Spitzer, a lead architect of the DSM-III, has argued that adding cultural formulations was an attempt to appease cultural critics, and has stated that they lack any scientific rationale or support.
A 2004 cross-Europe study found that approximately one in four people reported meeting criteria at some point in their life for at least one of the DSM-IV disorders assessed, which included mood disorders (13.9%), anxiety disorders (13.6%) or alcohol disorder (5.2%).
Long-term international studies of schizophrenia have found that over a half of individuals recover in terms of symptoms, and around a fifth to a third in terms of symptoms and functioning, with some requiring no medication.
Routine diagnostic practice in mental health services typically involves an interview known as a mental status examination, where evaluations are made of appearance and behavior, self-reported symptoms, mental health history, and current life circumstances.
Schizoaffective disorder is a category used for individuals showing aspects of both schizophrenia and affective disorders.
Compulsory contraception has been used to prevent future mental illness.
Proxy consent (also known as surrogate or substituted decision-making) may be transferred to a personal representative, a family member or a legally appointed guardian.
Various kinds of paraphilia are considered mental disorders (sexual arousal to objects, situations, or individuals that are considered abnormal or harmful to the person or others).
These interventions included CBT.
Counseling (professional) and co-counseling (between peers) may be used.
Research has demonstrated that cultures vary in the relative importance placed on, for example, happiness, autonomy, or social relationships for pleasure.
Moreover, patients may be able to make, when they are considered well, an advance directive stipulating how they wish to be treated should they be deemed to lack mental capacity in future.
Prevention programs have been shown to reduce depression.
In addition, the public perception of the level of disability associated with mental disorders can change.
Many things have been found to help at least some people, and a placebo effect may play a role in any intervention or medication.
There was also concern about the large increase in prescribing psychiatric drugs for children.
Approximately one in ten met criteria within a 12-month period.
Common hybrid views argue that the concept of mental disorder is objective even if only a "fuzzy prototype" that can never be precisely defined, or conversely that the concept always involves a mixture of scientific facts and subjective value judgments.
Even those disorders often considered the most serious and intractable have varied courses i.e.
Other classification schemes may be used in non-western cultures, for example the ''Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders'', and other manuals may be used by those of alternative theoretical persuasions, for example the ''Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual''.
The most influential of these was R.D.
* In 2014 the UK Chief Medical Officer chose mental health for her major annual report, and included prevention of mental illness heavily in this.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder can sometimes involve an inability to resist certain acts but is classed separately as being primarily an anxiety disorder.
Depressive disorders account for close to 41.9% of the disability from neuropsychiatric disorders among women compared to 29.3% among men.
Rates varied by region.
Some advocate dietary supplements.
Mental health can be defined as an absence of mental disorder.
Each year 73 million women are affected by major depression, and suicide is ranked 7th as the cause of death for women between the ages of 20–59.
Since the 1980s, Paula Caplan has been concerned about the subjectivity of psychiatric diagnosis, and people being arbitrarily “slapped with a psychiatric label”.
They have deliberately converged their codes in recent revisions so that the manuals are often broadly comparable, although significant differences remain.
An eclectic or pluralistic mix of models may be used to explain particular disorders.
Particular causes of problems in captivity have included integration of strangers into existing groups and a lack of individual space, in which context some pathological behaviors have also been seen as coping mechanisms.
There are conflicting findings about the extent to which certain specific symptoms, notably some kinds of psychosis (hallucinations or delusions) that can occur in disorders such as schizophrenia, delusional disorder or mood disorder, are linked to an increased risk of serious violence on average.
For many years, marginalized psychiatrists (such as Peter Breggin, Thomas Szasz) and outside critics (such as Stuart A. Kirk) have "been accusing psychiatry of engaging in the systematic medicalization of normality".
Prevention is currently a very small part of the spend of mental health systems.
Controversy has often surrounded psychiatry, and the term anti-psychiatry was coined by psychiatrist David Cooper in 1967.
Services are based in psychiatric hospitals or in the community, and assessments are carried out by psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, and clinical social workers, using various methods but often relying on observation and questioning.
Of 293 Christian church members, more than 32 percent were told by their church pastor that they or their loved one did not really have a mental illness, and that the cause of their problem was solely spiritual in nature, such as a personal sin, lack of faith or demonic involvement.
Systemic therapy or family therapy is sometimes used, addressing a network of significant others as well as an individual.
Conduct disorder, if continuing into adulthood, may be diagnosed as antisocial personality disorder (dissocial personality disorder in the ICD).
The application of the concept of mental illness to the phenomena described by these authors has in turn been critiqued by Seamus Mac Suibhne.
Research has been supportive of HoNOS, although some questions have been asked about whether it provides adequate coverage of the range and complexity of mental illness problems, and whether the fact that often only 3 of the 12 scales vary over time gives enough subtlety to accurately measure outcomes of treatment.
of anxiety), temperament and attitudes (e.g.
Compulsory treatment while in the community versus non-compulsory treatment does not appear to make much of a difference except by maybe decreasing victimization.
According to DSM-IV, a mental disorder is a psychological syndrome or pattern which is associated with distress (e.g.
Stimulants are commonly used, notably for ADHD.
People with a diagnosis may find it more difficult to secure prosecutions, however, due in part to prejudice and being seen as less credible.
Three quarters of countries around the world have mental health legislation.
Environmental events surrounding pregnancy and birth have also been implicated.
Concepts of antisocial, borderline and schizoid personality disorders have also been applied to non-human great apes.
In the United States the frequency of disorder is: anxiety disorder (28.8%), mood disorder (20.8%), impulse-control disorder (24.8%) or substance use disorder (14.6%).
Caplan says because psychiatric diagnosis is unregulated, doctors are not required to spend much time interviewing patients or to seek a second opinion.
Categories of disorder in this area include anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, exercise bulimia or binge eating disorder.
Other memory or cognitive disorders include amnesia or various kinds of old age dementia.
DSM-IV precedes the definition with caveats, stating that, as in the case with many medical terms, ''mental disorder'' "lacks a consistent operational definition that covers all situations", noting that different levels of abstraction can be used for medical definitions, including pathology, symptomology, deviance from a normal range, or etiology, and that the same is true for mental disorders, so that sometimes one type of definition is appropriate, and sometimes another, depending on the situation.
or looking after accommodation (chores, DIY tasks etc.)
Although researchers have been looking for decades for clear linkages between genetics and mental disorders to provide better diagnosis and facilitate the development of better treatments, that work has yielded almost nothing.
Unipolar (also known as Major) depressive disorder is the third leading cause of disability worldwide, of any condition mental or physical, accounting for 65.5 million years lost.
In order for involuntary treatment to be administered (by force if necessary), it should be shown that an individual lacks the mental capacity for informed consent (i.e.
The DSM does not currently use the common term drug addiction, and the ICD simply refers to "harmful use".
For a mental state to classify as a disorder, it generally needs to cause dysfunction.
Antidepressants are used for the treatment of clinical depression, as well as often for anxiety and a range of other disorders.
In the eastern Mediterranean region it was unipolar major depression (12%) and schizophrenia (7%), and in Africa it was unipolar major depression (7%) and bipolar disorder (5%).
Treatments are provided by various mental health professionals.
Numerous different classification schemes and diagnostic terms were developed by different authorities, and the term psychiatry was coined (1808), though medical superintendents were still known as alienists.
In many cases, there appears to be a continuum between mental health and mental illness, making diagnosis complex.
Furthermore, continued disability has been linked to institutionalization, discrimination and social exclusion as well as to the inherent effects of disorders.
A review of anxiety disorder surveys in different countries found average lifetime prevalence estimates of 16.6%, with women having higher rates on average.
A 2015 review found that in the United States, about 4% of violence is attributable to people diagnosed with mental illness, and a 2014 study found that 7.5% of crimes committed by mentally ill people were directly related to the symptoms of their mental illness.
* The 2008 EU "Pact for Mental Health" made recommendations for youth and education including (i) promotion of parenting skills, (ii) integration of socio-emotional learning into education curricular and extracurricular activities, and (iii) early intervention throughout the educational system.
Benzodiazepines gained widespread use in the 1970s for anxiety and depression, until dependency problems curtailed their popularity.
* The US Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) advocates a 5-step prevention framework.
Among those controversially considered by the official committees of the diagnostic manuals include self-defeating personality disorder, sadistic personality disorder, passive-aggressive personality disorder and premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Kleinman's negative view towards the culture-bound syndrome is largely shared by other cross-cultural critics.
Factitious disorders, such as Munchausen syndrome, are diagnosed where symptoms are thought to be experienced (deliberately produced) and/or reported (feigned) for personal gain.
Common mental disorders include depression, which affects about 400 million, dementia which affects about 35 million, and schizophrenia, which affects about 21 million people globally.
The researchers also found that women were more likely than men to get this response.
In the United States 46% qualifies for a mental illness at some point.
Patterns of belief, language use and perception of reality can become disordered (e.g., delusions, thought disorder, hallucinations).
Assembling collaborations of interested bodies appears to be an effective model for achieving sustained commitment and funding.
An ongoing survey indicates that anxiety disorders are the most common in all but one country, followed by mood disorders in all but two countries, while substance disorders and impulse-control disorders were consistently less prevalent.
In the United States, the Carter Center has created fellowships for journalists in South Africa, the U.S., and Romania, to enable reporters to research and write stories on mental health topics.
The individual should also have personal access to independent advocacy.
Electroconvulsive therapy, insulin shock therapy, lobotomies and the "neuroleptic" chlorpromazine came to be used by mid-century.
Also during the 1990s, a recovery approach developed.
The total DALY does not necessarily indicate what is the most individually disabling, because it also depends on how common a condition is; for example, schizophrenia is found to be the most individually disabling mental disorder on average but is less common.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders can lead a psychiatrist to focus on narrow checklists of symptoms, with little consideration of what is actually causing the patient’s problems.
There should at the very least be shared decision-making as far as possible.
Cultural and religious beliefs, as well as social norms, should be taken into account when making a diagnosis.
The term insanity, sometimes used colloquially as a synonym for mental illness, is often used technically as a legal term.
There have been some tentative inconsistent links found to certain viral infections, to substance misuse, and to general physical health.
Some ex-patient groups have become militantly anti-psychiatric, often referring to themselves as "survivors".
Early childhood home visitation also reduced abuse and neglect, but results were inconsistent.
An Australian study found that having a mental illness is a bigger barrier to employment than a physical disability.
Frances was also concerned about "unpredictable overdiagnosis".
A spectrum approach may incorporate elements of both.
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), over a third of people in most countries report problems at some time in their life which meet criteria for diagnosis of one or more of the common types of mental disorder.
Biological psychiatry follows a biomedical model where many mental disorders are conceptualized as disorders of brain circuits likely caused by developmental processes shaped by a complex interplay of genetics and experience.
A consumer/survivor movement gained momentum.
There are a number of uncommon psychiatric syndromes, which are often named after the person who first described them, such as Capgras syndrome, De&nbsp;Clerambault syndrome, Othello syndrome, Ganser syndrome, Cotard delusion, and Ekbom syndrome, and additional disorders such as the Couvade syndrome and Geschwind syndrome.
Such features may be persistent, relapsing and remitting, or occur as a single episode.
Women and younger people of either gender showed more cases of disorder.
There may be specific problems with accurate diagnosis in developing countries.
People who suffer severe disturbances of their self-identity, memory and general awareness of themselves and their surroundings may be classed as having a dissociative identity disorder, such as depersonalization disorder or Dissociative Identity Disorder itself (which has also been called multiple personality disorder, or "split personality").
Socialization has been found to work 90% of the time in disturbed chimpanzees, although restoration of functional sexuality and care-giving is often not achieved.
The causes of mental disorders are often unclear.
An anti-psychiatry movement fundamentally challenges mainstream psychiatric theory and practice, including in some cases asserting that psychiatric concepts and diagnoses of 'mental illness' are neither real nor useful.
Psychoeducation programs may provide people with the information to understand and manage their problems.
Reasonable accommodations (adjustments and supports) might be put in place to help an individual cope and succeed in environments despite potential disability related to mental health problems.
Clinical psychology and social work developed as professions.
Likewise, the fact that a behavior pattern is valued, accepted, encouraged, or even statistically normative in a culture does not necessarily mean that it is conducive to optimal psychological functioning.
Ability to acquire a job and hold it, cognitive and social skills required for the job, dealing with workplace culture, or studying as a student.
* The 2011 mental health strategy of Manitoba (Canada) included intents to (i) reduce risk factors associated with mental ill-health and (ii) increase mental health promotion for both adults and children.
In addition, comorbidity is very common in psychiatric diagnosis, where the same person meets the criteria for more than one disorder.
There are a number of specific therapies used for particular disorders, which may be offshoots or hybrids of the above types.
Psychopathology has generally been traced, at least in captivity, to adverse rearing conditions such as early separation of infants from mothers; early sensory deprivation; and extended periods of social isolation.
The risk of anthropomorphism is often raised with regard to such comparisons, and assessment of non-human animals cannot incorporate evidence from linguistic communication.
* In 2013 the Faculty of Public Health, the UK professional body for public health professionals, produced it's 'Better Mental Health for All" resource, which aims at ''"the promotion of mental wellbeing and the primary prevention of mental illness"''.
The ICD also has a category for enduring personality change after a catastrophic experience or psychiatric illness.
Mental disorders were described, and treatments developed, in Persia, Arabia and in the medieval Islamic world.
A belief or experience can sometimes be shown to produce distress or disability—the ordinary standard for judging mental disorders.
Two recent unique unofficial proposals are solastalgia by Glenn Albrecht and hubris syndrome by David Owen.
Early in the 20th century in the United States, a mental hygiene movement developed, aiming to prevent mental disorders.
