With the hand-over of power to the Iraqi government, if one does not consider the coalition forces to be continuing parties to the conflict in Iraq, but that their soldiers are "sent by a State which is not a Party to the conflict on official duty as a member of its armed forces" (APGC77 Art 47.f), then, unless U.S. citizens working as armed guards are lawfully certified residents of Iraq, i.e., "a resident of territory controlled by a Party to the conflict" (APGC77 Art 47.d), and they are involved with a fire-fight in the continuing conflict, they are mercenary soldiers.
* Mithridates VI Eupator recruited a large number of Iranians along with the Galatians into the Pontic army during the Mithridatic Wars against Rome, using the Leucosyri, Persians and Scythians.
In other words, a mercenary is a person who fights for personal gains of money or other recompense instead of fighting for the ideological interests of a country, whether they be for or against the existing government.
His rationale was that since the sole motivation of mercenaries is their pay, they will not be inclined to take the kind of risks that can turn the tide of a battle, but may cost them their lives.
In the late Roman Empire, it became increasingly difficult for Emperors and generals to raise military units from the citizenry for various reasons: lack of manpower, lack of time available for training, lack of materials, and, inevitably, political considerations.
They were a heavily armed and armored elite force that often doubled as a chieftain's bodyguard.
In addition, small numbers of Eastern European mercenaries have also turned up supporting the Gaddafi regime.
CNN reported on 25 August, that:
The BBC reported in an article entitled "Q&A: Equatorial Guinea coup plot":
Their attempts were thwarted by NATO air activity shortly before the death of Libya's ousted strongman.
* In Anabasis, Xenophon recounts how Cyrus the Younger hired a large army of Greek mercenaries (the "Ten Thousand") in 401&nbsp;BC to seize the throne of Persia from his brother, Artaxerxes II.
United States ex rel.
Free Companies would often specialize in forms of combat that required longer periods of training that was not available in the form of a mobilized militia.
The Free Syrian Army claimed the Bashar al-Assad regime recruited mercenaries from Iran, Hezbollah militia and the Iraqi Mahdi Army militia during the Syrian uprising.
The Varangian Guard of the Byzantine Empire is the best known formation made up of barbarian mercenaries (see next section).
Officers like De Jesus Antonio, TT D Abreu Capt Ndume and Da Costa were the forefront because of their combat and language skills and also the exploits of South African pilot Neall Ellis and his MI-24 Hind gunship.
Later, in 1966 and 1967, some former Tshombe mercenaries and Katangese gendarmes staged the Mercenaries' Mutinies.
Although the Serbian government has denied that any of their nationals are currently serving as mercenary soldiers in North Africa, five such men have been captured by anti-Gaddafi rebels in Tripoli and several others have also allegedly fought during the Second Battle of Benghazi.
It has been alleged that the firms provided soldiers who took an active part in the fighting against the Revolutionary United Front (RUF).
They were chosen among war-prone peoples, of whom the Varangians (Norsemen) were preferred.
''Weinberger v. Equifax'', 557 F.2d 456, 462 (5th Cir.
At the same time Bob Denard commanded the French-speaking "6 Commando", "Black Jack" Schramme commanded "10 Commando" and William "Rip" Robertson commanded a company of anti-Castro Cuban exiles.
Certain observers, however, speculate that they may be from Poland or Belarus.
Reports say around 800 had been recruited from Niger, Mali, Algeria, Ghana and Burkina Faso.
* Executive Outcomes – Angola, Sierra Leone, and other locations worldwide (closed 31 December 1998)
The best known post-World War II example of this was on 28 June 1976 when, at the end of the Luanda Trial, an Angolan court sentenced three Britons and an American to death and nine other mercenaries to prison terms ranging from 16 to 30 years.
During the reign of Louis XV there were also a Scottish (''Garde Écossaise''), a Swedish (''Royal-Suédois''), an Italian (''Royal-Italien'') and a Walloon (''Horion-Liegeois'') regiments recruited outside the borders of France.
Both sides hired mercenaries in the Eritrean–Ethiopian War from 1998 to 2000.
The British government considered using the Act against British subjects fighting for the International Brigade in the Spanish Civil War and the FNLA in the Angolan Civil War, though in the end it chose not to on both occasions.
Sir Thomas More in his Utopia advocated the use of mercenaries in preference to citizens.
This law does not prevent French citizens from serving as volunteers in foreign forces.
Other units were German and one Irish Brigade (the "Wild Geese") had originally been made up of Irish volunteers.
The question is whether or not PMC soldiers are as accountable for their war zone actions.
Nevertheless, PMCs may use armed force, hence defined as: "legally established enterprises that make a profit, by either providing services involving the potential exercise of armed force in a systematic way and by military means, and/or by the transfer of that potential to clients through training and other practices, such as logistics support, equipment procurement, and intelligence gathering."
The officers however continued to be drawn from long established Franco-Irish families.
The stratioti were pioneers of light cavalry tactics during this era.
The legal status of civilian contractors depends upon the nature of their work and their nationalities with respect to that of the combatants.
The stradioti were recruited in Albania, Greece, Dalmatia, Serbia and later Cyprus.
If a person is proven to have worked as a mercenary for any other country while retaining Austrian citizenship, his or her Austrian citizenship will be revoked.
The report also investigated the failures of the UN Peacekeeping Force, and the involvement of mercenaries and private military contractors in providing vital support to UN operations and British military Special Operations in Sierra Leone in 1999–2000.
Between the 13th and 17th Century the Gallowglass fought within the Islands of Britain and also mainland Europe.
The only possible exception to GC IV Art 5 is when he is a national of the authority imprisoning him, in which case he would not be a mercenary soldier as defined in APGC77 Art 47.d.
The private military company (PMC) is the contemporary strand of the mercenary trade, providing logistics, soldiers, military training, and other services.
These comprised three Irish regiments (Irlanda, Hiberni and Ultonia); one Italian (Naples) and five Swiss (Wimpssen, Reding, Betschart, Traxer and Preux).
In the Greek War of Independence, British volunteers fought with the Greek rebels, which could have been unlawful; it was unclear whether or not the Greek rebels were a "state" per the Foreign Enlistment Act, but the law was clarified, saying that the rebels were a state.
Most sources have described these troops as professional Serbian veterans of the Yugoslavia conflict, including snipers, pilots and helicopter experts.
:''Simon Mann, the British leader of a group of 67 alleged mercenaries accused of plotting a coup in Equatorial Guinea has been sentenced to seven years in jail...
In 2004 the PMC business was boosted when the U.S. and Coalition governments hired them for security in Iraq.
Yet, after considering using PMCs to support UN operations, the UN Secretary General, Kofi Annan, decided against it.
In the 1990s, the media identified four mercenary companies:
Otherwise, civilians with U.S. Armed Forces lose their law of war protection from direct attack if and for such time as they directly participate in hostilities.
One interpretation is that this authorizes contractors to engage in combat on behalf of the U.S. government.
If they have not "in fact, taken a direct part in the hostilities" (APGC77 Art 47.b), they are not mercenaries but civilians who have non-combat support roles and are entitled to protection under the Third Geneva Convention (GCIII 4.1.4).
The foreign infantry regiments comprised about 20,000 men in 1733, rising to 48,000 at the time of the Seven Years' War and being reduced in numbers thereafter.
However, whether or not a person is a mercenary may be a matter of degree, as financial and national interests may overlap.
The Stratioti or Stradioti (Italian: Stradioti or Stradiotti; Greek: Στρατιώτες, Stratiotes) were mercenary units from the Balkans recruited mainly by states of southern and central Europe from the 15th until the middle of the 18th century.
In September 2005, Brigadier General Karl Horst, deputy commander of the Third Infantry Division charged with Baghdad security after the 2003 invasion, said of DynCorp and other PMCs in Iraq: "These guys run loose in this country and do stupid stuff.
* Gurkha Security Guards, Ltd – Sierra Leone.
So in 1941 the Roosevelt administration authorized the formation of three American Volunteer Groups, of which the 1st AVG was deployed to Burma and China and became famous as the Flying Tigers.
During the ages of the Taifa kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula, Christian knights like El Cid could fight for some Muslim ruler against his Christian or Muslim enemies.
He was killed at the Battle of Stamford Bridge in 1066 when his army was defeated by an English army commanded by King Harold Godwinson.
American Robert C. MacKenzie was killed in the Malal Hills in February 1995, while commanding Gurkha Security Guards (GSG) in Sierra Leone.
The order followed an unusual series of events set off when a U.S. Army veteran, Brian X. Scott, filed a protest against the government practice of hiring what he calls mercenaries, according to sources familiar with the matter."
In England at the time of the Norman Conquest, Flemings (natives of Flanders) formed a substantial mercenary element in the forces of William the Conqueror with many remaining in England as settlers under the Normans.
Six Armenian aircrew, also convicted of involvement in the plot, were released in 2004 after receiving a presidential pardon.
In 2006, a U.S. congressional report listed a number of PMCs and other enterprises that have signed contracts to carry out anti-narcotics operations and related activities as part of Plan Colombia.
In 2013, security firm G4S is reported to be the second largest private employer in the world.
During the later Middle Ages, Free Companies (or ''Free Lances'') were formed, consisting of companies of mercenary troops.
The case, which is being heard by the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, puts on trial one of the most controversial and least understood aspects of the Iraq war: the outsourcing of military security to an estimated 20,000 armed contractors.
The latter has denied the claims outright; the former is investigating them.
About a third of the infantry regiments of the French Royal Army prior to the French Revolution were recruited from outside France.
At this time, a number of mercenaries, arriving from several countries found employment in India.
In 1998 South Africa passed the Foreign Military Assistance Act that banned citizens and residents from any involvement in foreign wars, except in humanitarian operations, unless a government committee approved its deployment.
The unit's mission was to fight a rebel group called Simbas, who already had captured almost two thirds of the country.
Human Rights Watch has indicated that while many foreign migrants were erroneously accused of fighting with Gaddafi, there were also genuine mercenaries from several nations who participated in the conflict.
The laws of some countries forbid their citizens to fight in foreign wars unless they are under the control of their own national armed forces.
Carthage was unique for relying primarily on mercenaries to fight its wars.
That said, PMC "civilian contractors" have poor repute among professional government soldiers and officers—the U.S. Military Command have questioned their war zone behavior.
If, after a regular trial, a captured soldier is found to be a mercenary, then he can expect treatment as a common criminal and may face execution.
A Welshman Owain Lawgoch (Owain of the Red Hand) formed a free company and fought for the French against the English during the Hundred Years' War, before being assassinated by a Scot by the name of Jon Lamb under the orders of the English Crown in 1378 during the siege of Mortagne.
Afghan war operations also boosted the business.
In 2003, France criminalized mercenary activities, as defined by the protocol to the Geneva convention for French citizens, permanent residents and legal entities (Penal Code,  L436-1,  L436-2,  L436-3,  L436-4,  L436-5).
* A figure in oral legend, Milesius was given the princess Scota after conducting a successful campaign for Ancient Egypt.
In 1615, the Dutch invaded the Ai Island with Japanese mercenaries.
Contingents of mercenary Flemish soldiers were to form significant forces in England throughout the time of the Norman and early Plantagenet dynasties (11th and 12th centuries).
Their mission was to protect the Emperor and Empire and since they did not have links to the Greeks, they were expected to be ready to suppress rebellions.
In Operation Dragon Rouge, "5 Commando" worked in close cooperation with Belgian paratroopers, Cuban exile pilots, and CIA hired mercenaries.
A class of mercenaries known as the Gallowglass dominated warfare in Ireland and Scotland between the 13th and 16th centuries.
Article 47 of the protocol provides the most widely accepted international definition of a mercenary, though not endorsed by some countries, including the United States.
This resulted in their American opponents referring to all of King George's German mercenaries as "Hessians", whether the Germans were actually from Hesse-Kassel or not.
Ninjas possibly originated around the 14th century, but were not widely known or used till the 15th century and carried on being hired till the mid 18th century.
Executive Outcomes employees, Captains Daniele Zanata and Raif St Clair (who was also involved in the aborted Seychelles Coup of 1981), fought on behalf of the MPLA against the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) in the 1990s in violation of the Lusaka Protocol.
Russian mercenaries were believed to be flying in the air forces of both sides.
While the United States governed Iraq, no U.S. citizen working as an armed guard could be classified as a mercenary because he was ''a national of a Party to the conflict'' (APGC77 Art 47.d).
* Carthage contracted Balearic Islands shepherds as slingshooters during the Punic Wars against Rome.
Some of the mercenaries emerged to become independent rulers.
47'' are designed to cover the activities of mercenaries in post-colonial Africa and do not address adequately the use of private military companies (PMCs) by sovereign states.
Private paramilitary forces are functionally mercenary armies, not security guards or advisors; however, national governments reserve the right to control the number, nature, and armaments of such private armies, arguing that, provided they are not pro-actively employed in front-line combat, they are not mercenaries.
The contract, worth about $400&nbsp;million, calls for a private company to provide intelligence services to the U.S. Army and security for the Army Corps of Engineers on reconstruction work in Iraq.
Catalan and German mercenaries also had prominent role in the Serbian victory over Bulgarians in the Battle of Velbuzd in 1330.
Though Scott had filed the protest at the Court of Federal Claims, the court order was the result of other bidders intervening in the case.
In 2005, the legislation was reviewed by the government because of South African citizens working as security guards in Iraq during the American occupation of Iraq and the consequences of the mercenary soldier sponsorship case against Mark Thatcher for the "possible funding and logistical assistance in relation to an alleged attempted coup in Equatorial Guinea" organized by Simon Mann.
In the early 16th century heavy cavalry in the European armies was principally remodeled after Albanian stradioti of the Venetian army, Hungarian hussars and German mercenary cavalry units (Schwarzreitern).
denied, 434 U.S. 1035 (1978).
Alexander also employed Greek mercenaries during his campaigns.
The United States could not become overtly involved in the conflict, due to Congressional restrictions, yet felt an obligation to assist the Chinese in stopping Japanese aggression.
Protocol Additional GC 1977 (APGC77) is a 1977 amendment protocol to the Geneva Conventions.
Gurkhas, however, operate in dedicated Gurkha units of the British Army (specifically units that are administered by the Brigade of Gurkhas) and the Indian Army.
Currently eight South African apartheid-era soldiers, organised by Neves Matias (former Recce major and De Jesus Antonio former Captain in 2sai BN) with (the leader of whom is Nick du Toit) and five local men are in Black Beach prison on the island.
Hoare chronicled his exploits in his books ''Congo Mercenary and Congo Warriors''.
In 1964 Moïse Tshombe (then Prime Minister of Congo) hired Major Hoare to lead a military unit called "5 Commando" made up of about 300 men, most of whom were from South Africa.
The other passengers got 12 months in jail for breaking immigration laws while the two pilots got 16 months...The court also ordered the seizure of Mann's $3m Boeing 727 and $180,000 found on board.''
It is the combatant commander's responsibility to ensure that private security contract mission statements do not authorize performance of inherently governmental military functions, i.e.
Other mercenaries flew aircraft for the Biafrans.
By 1789 difficulties in obtaining genuinely Irish recruits had led to German and other foreigners making up the bulk of the rank and file.
Nation-states lacked the funds needed to maintain standing forces, so they tended to hire free companies to serve in their armies during wartime.
He astutely pointed out that a successful mercenary army no longer needs its employer if it is more militarily powerful than its supposed superior.
The four mercenaries sentenced to death were shot by a firing squad on 10 July 1976.
On 4 December 1989, the United Nations passed resolution 44/34, the ''International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries''.
The Anti-Pinkerton Act of 1893 () forbade the U.S. government from using Pinkerton National Detective Agency employees, or similar private police companies.
The United Nations disapproves of PMCs (still, the UN hired ''Executive Outcomes'' for African logistic support work).
One of the most famous guards was the future king Harald III of Norway, also known as Harald Hardrada ("Hard-counsel"), who arrived in Constantinople in 1035 and was employed as a Varangian Guard.
The barbarian mercenaries employed by the Utopians are thought to be inspired by the Swiss mercenaries.
Numerous reports have indicated that the team was still protecting Saif al-Islam Gaddafi shortly before his recent apprehension.
They are accused of being an advanced guard for a coup to place Severo Moto in power.
Byzantine Emperors followed the Roman practice and contracted foreigners especially for their personal corps guard called the Varangian Guard.
An early recorded use of foreign auxiliaries dates back to Ancient Egypt, the thirteenth century BC, when Pharaoh Ramesses II used 11,000 mercenaries during his battles.
* Illyrians were hired across the Balkans and further.
They had some notable successes also against French heavy cavalry during the Italian Wars.
A spokesman for the U.S. Mission to U.N. denied that Blackwater security guards were mercenaries, saying "Accusations that U.S. government-contracted security guards, of whatever nationality, are mercenaries is inaccurate and demeaning to men and women who put their lives on the line to protect people and facilities every day."
The situation during the Iraq War and the continuing occupation of Iraq after the United Nations Security Council-sanctioned hand-over of power to the Iraqi government shows the difficulty of defining a mercenary soldier.
It was not planned, allegedly, by Simon Mann, a former SAS officer.
A prominent example of these were the Flemings that fought during the English civil wars, known as the Anarchy or the Nineteen-Year Winter (AD 1135 to 1154), under the command of William of Ypres, who was King Stephen's chief lieutenant from 1139 to 1154 and who was made Earl of Kent by Stephen.
Both were employed by the Sierra Leone government as military advisers and to train the government soldiers.
* Memnon of Rhodes (380 – 333&nbsp;BC): was the commander of the Greek mercenaries working for the Persian King Darius III when Alexander the Great of Macedonia invaded Persia in 334&nbsp;BC and won the Battle of the Granicus River.
However, those who acknowledge the United States and other coalition forces as continuing parties to the conflict might insist that U.S. armed guards cannot be called mercenaries (APGC77 Art 47.d).
Article 1 contains the definition of a mercenary.
These were men who fought for him directly and not those who fought in city-state units attached to his army.
French Foreign Legionnaires are formed units of the French Foreign Legion, which deploys and fights as an organized unit of the French Army.
Three more were executed: American  Daniel Gearhart was sentenced to death for advertising himself as a mercenary in an American newspaper; Andrew McKenzie and Costas Georgiou (the self-styled "Colonel Callan"), who had both served in the British army, were sentenced to death for murder.
A common argument for using PMCs (used by the PMCs themselves), is that PMCs may be able to help combat genocide and civilian slaughter where the UN is unwilling or unable to intervene.
Muammar Gaddafi in Libya was alleged to have been using mercenary soldiers during the 2011 Libyan civil war, including Tuaregs from various nations in Africa.
Foreign nationals recruited from countries of the Commonwealth of Nations in the British Army swear allegiance to the British monarch and are liable to operate in any unit.
In 1977, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit interpreted this statute as forbidding the U.S. government from employing companies offering "mercenary, quasi-military forces" for hire.
:''Defendant Nick du Toit said he was introduced to Thatcher in South Africa last year by Simon Mann, the leader of 70 men arrested in Zimbabwe in March suspected of being a group of mercenaries heading to Equatorial Guinea.''
If PMC employees participate in pro-active combat, the press calls them mercenaries, and the PMCs '''mercenary companies'''.
* DynCorp International – Bosnia, Somalia, Angola, Haiti, Colombia, Kosovo, Kuwait, Afghanistan (active)
The Atholl Highlanders, a private Scottish infantry regiment of the Duke of Atholl, was formed in 1839 purely for ceremonial purposes.
A U.S. Department of Defense interim rule (effective 16 June 2006) revises DoD Instruction 3020.41 to authorize contractors, other than private security contractors, to use deadly force against enemy armed forces only in self-defense.
According to the GC III, a captured soldier must be treated as a lawful combatant and, therefore, as a protected person with prisoner-of-war status until facing a competent tribunal (GC III Art 5).
During the American Revolution, King George III of England, hired German mercenary soldiers from some of the German principalities to supplement his Royal Army.
* The Sons of Mars were Italian mercenaries used by the Greek kings of Syracuse until after the Punic Wars.
After the Qin conquest of the Warring States, the Qin and later Han Empires would also employ mercenaries – ranging from nomadic horse archers in the Northern steppes or soldiers from the Yue kingdoms of the South.
This explained the frequent, violent betrayals that characterized mercenary/client relations in Italy, because neither side trusted the other.
In the 7 June 1978 Letter to the Heads of Federal Departments and Agencies, the Comptroller General interpreted this decision in a way that carved out an exemption for "Guard and Protective Services".
They shoot people, and someone else has to deal with the aftermath.
Many of them had been part of his Islamic Legion created in 1972.
The 7th century Tang Dynasty was also prominent for its use of mercenaries, when they hired Tibetan and Uyghur soldiers against invasion from the Göktürks and other steppe civilizations.
The objective of Operation Dragon Rouge was to capture Stanleyville and save several hundred civilians (mostly Europeans and missionaries) who were hostages of the Simba rebels.
They were hired out by many as mercenaries to perform capture, infiltration and retrieval, and, most famously, assassinations.
Most recently, a number of unidentified white South African mercenaries were hired to smuggle Gaddafi and his sons to exile in Niger.
There's no authority over them, so you can't come down on them hard when they escalate force...
The Spanish Army also made use of permanently established foreign regiments.
Other companies from different countries, including Israel, have also signed contracts with the Colombian Defense Ministry to carry out security or military activities.
The ''Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts'', (Protocol I), 8 June 1977 states:
In some ways, these tactics echoed those of the Ottoman sipahis and akinci.
That tribunal, using criteria in APGC77 or some equivalent domestic law, may decide that the soldier is a mercenary.
The White Company commanded by Sir John Hawkwood is the best known English Free Company of the 14th century.
Yet, on 1 June 2007, the Washington Post reported: "A federal judge yesterday ordered the military to temporarily refrain from awarding the largest security contract in Iraq.
The pilots earned $600–$750 basic pay per month, plus $500 for each Japanese aircraft confirmed destroyed in the air or on the ground.
Scott's case had been dismissed at GAO and was eventually dismissed at the court.
Von Rosen was assisted by ex-RCAF fighter pilot Lynn Garrison.
At that juncture, the mercenary soldier becomes an unlawful combatant but still must be "treated with humanity and, in case of trial, shall not be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial", being still covered by GC IV Art 5.
It is alleged that there is a paper trail from him which implicates Sir Mark Thatcher, Lord Archer and Ely Calil (a Lebanese-British oil trader).
Stranded deep in enemy territory, the Spartan general Clearchus and most of the other Greek generals were subsequently killed by treachery.
He participated in eighteen battles and became Akolythos, the commander of the Guard, before returning home in 1043.
Critics have argued that the convention and ''APGC77 Art.
Amnesty International has claimed that such allegations against Gaddafi and the Libyan state turned out to either be false or lacking any evidence.
Though Cyrus' army was victorious at the Battle of Cunaxa, Cyrus himself was killed in battle and the expedition rendered moot.
In February 2002, a British Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) report about PMCs noted that the demands of the military service from the UN and international civil organizations might mean that it is cheaper to pay PMCs than use soldiers.
In 2000, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's (ABC-TV) international affairs program ''Foreign Correspondent'' broadcast a special report "Sierra Leone: Soldiers of Fortune", focusing on former 32BN and Recce members who operated in Sierra Leone while serving for SANDF.
Thus, PMC contractors are civilians (in governmental, international, and civil organizations) authorized to accompany an army to the field; hence, the term ''civilian contractor''.
Mercenaries fought for the Biafrans in the Fourth Commando Brigade during the Nigerian Civil War (1967–1970).
The 2nd AVG, a bomber group, was recruited in November 1941 but aborted following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
The report found that the use of contractors such as Blackwater was a "new form of mercenary activity" and illegal under International law.
Therefore, beginning in the late 4th century, the empire often contracted whole bands of barbarians either within the legions or as autonomous foederati.
The veteran soldiers thus looked for other forms of employment, often becoming mercenaries.
It entered into force on 20 October 2001 and is usually known as the UN Mercenary Convention.
Most modern historians have indicated that the Stratioti were mostly Albanians.
It was then that the German landsknechts, colorful mercenaries with a redoubtable reputation, took over the Swiss forces' legacy and became the most formidable force of the late 15th and throughout the 16th century, being hired by all the powers in Europe and often fighting at opposite sides.
* Sandline International – Papua New Guinea, Sierra Leone (closed 16 April 2004)
One complication arising from the use of non-national troops occurred at the Battle of Bailén in 1808 when the "red Swiss" (so-called from their uniforms) of the invading French Army clashed bloodily with "blue Swiss" in the Spanish service.
As mercenary soldiers may not qualify as PoWs, they cannot expect repatriation at war's end.
At approximately the same period, Niccolò Machiavelli argued against the use of mercenary armies in his book of political advice ''The Prince''.
In August 2004 there was a plot, which later became known as the "Wonga Coup", to overthrow the government of Equatorial Guinea in Malabo.
On 18 August 2006, the U.S. Comptroller General rejected bid protest arguments that U.S. Army contracts violated the Anti-Pinkerton Act by requiring that contractors provide armed convoy escort vehicles and labor, weapons, and equipment for internal security operations at Victory Base Complex, Iraq.
DynCorp was among those contracted by the State Department, while others signed contracts with the Defense Department.
The operation saved many lives; however, the Operation damaged the reputation of Moïse Tshombe as it saw the return of white mercenaries to the Congo soon after independence and was a factor in Tshombe's loss of support from president of Congo Joseph Kasa-Vubu who dismissed him from his position
A long established foreign corps in the Egyptian forces were the Medjay — a generic term given to tribal scouts and light infantry recruited from Nubia serving from the late period of the Old Kingdom through that of the New Kingdom.
Xenophon played an instrumental role in encouraging "The Ten Thousand" Greek army to march north to the Black Sea in an epic fighting retreat.
