Longworth believes that Streep's performance was "crucial to transforming what could have been a weak soap opera into a vibrant work of historical fiction implicitly critiquing postwar America's stifling culture of domesticity".
Hoping to divert herself from the grief of Cazale's death, Streep accepted a role in ''The Seduction of Joe Tynan'' (1979) as the chirpy love interest of Alan Alda, later commenting that she played it on "automatic pilot".
Her mother had English, German, and Irish ancestry.
In 2003, the government of France made her a Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters.
However, film critic Molly Haskell has stated, "None of her heroines are feminist, strictly speaking.
Pauline Kael believed that Streep had been miscast.
Al Pacino remarked that "I've hardly ever seen a person so devoted to someone who is falling away like John was.
Streep is one of the six actors to have won three or more competitive Academy Awards for acting.
At the National Board of Review Awards in 2013, Streep labeled Walt Disney as "anti-semitic" and a "gender bigot."
Streep was next cast in the 2005 comedy film ''Prime'', directed by Ben Younger.
In the film, Streep starred as the Danish writer Karen Blixen opposite Robert Redford's Denys Finch Hatton.
Streep travelled to Germany and Austria for filming while Cazale remained in New York.
On October 4, 2012, Streep donated $1&nbsp;million to The Public Theater in honor of both its late founder, Joseph Papp, and her friend, the author Nora Ephron.
This is one of the most astonishing and yet one of the most unaffected and natural performances I can imagine."
Her next films did not appeal to a wide audience; she co-starred with Jack Nicholson in the dramas ''Heartburn'' (1986) and ''Ironweed'' (1987), in which she sang onscreen for the first time since the television movie, ''Secret Service'' (1977).
The film was a box office hit and grossed over $70&nbsp;million in the United States.
In 2008, Streep found major commercial success when she starred in Phyllida Lloyd's ''Mamma Mia!
She also lent her voice to Mrs. Felicity Fox in the stop-motion film ''Fantastic Mr. Fox''.
Like ''Evening'', critics felt that the talent of the cast was wasted and that it suffered from slow pacing, although one critic announced that Streep positively stood out, being "natural, unforced, quietly powerful", in comparison to Redford's forced performance.
Streep starred alongside Kevin Kline and Austin Pendleton in this three-and-a-half-hour play.
In February 2016, Streep served in her first appearance as president of the main competition jury at the 66th Berlin International Film Festival.
Cited in the media as the "best actress of her generation", — a designation she objects to — Streep is particularly known for her versatility in her roles, transformation into the characters she plays, and her accent adaptation.
I don't belong to a church or a temple or a synagogue or an ashram."
Streep moved to New York City in 1975, and was cast by Joseph Papp in a production of ''Trelawny of the Wells'' at the Public Theater, opposite Mandy Patinkin and John Lithgow.
As of the announcement, the Writers Lab is the only initiative in the world for female screenwriters over forty years old.
Streep is also a distant relative of William Penn, the founder of Pennsylvania; records show that her family is among the first purchasers of land in the state.
He also noted that Streep's acting ability had a profound impact on her co-stars and that "one could improve by 1000% purely by watching her."
Longworth believes that in nearly every film, Streep has "sly infused" a feminist point of view in her portrayals.
But I just can't go there."
Streep perfected an English accent for the part, but considered herself a misfit for the role: " I couldn't help wishing that I was more beautiful".
Emma Brockes of ''The Guardian'' notes that despite Streep's being "one of the most famous actresses in the world", it is "strangely hard to pin an image on Streep", in a career where she has "laboured to establish herself as an actor whose roots lie in ordinary life".
The year 1983 saw Streep play her first non-fictional character, the nuclear whistleblower and labor union activist Karen Silkwood who died in a suspicious car accident while investigating alleged wrongdoing at the Kerr-McGee plutonium plant, in Mike Nichols's biographical film ''Silkwood''.
In July 2016, it was reported that Streep was in talks to re-team with Rob Marshall and Emily Blunt in ''Mary Poppins Returns'' where she would play the title character's cousin Topsy.
In 1999, Streep portrayed Roberta Guaspari, a real-life New Yorker who found passion and enlightenment teaching violin to the inner-city kids of East Harlem, in the music drama ''Music of the Heart''.
In 2002 Streep appeared alongside Nicole Kidman and Julianne Moore in Stephen Daldry's ''The Hours'', based on the 1999 novel by Michael Cunningham.
In 2007, Streep was cast in four films.
Streep felt a personal connection to Silkwood, and in preparation she met with people close to the woman, and in doing so realized that each person saw a different aspect of her personality.
She performed the role of Katherine in ''The Taming of the Shrew'' for Shakespeare in the Park, and also played a supporting role in ''Manhattan'' (1979) for Woody Allen.
Streep demonstrated an early ability to mimic accents and to quickly memorize her lines.
A ''New York Magazine'' article commented that, while many female stars of the past had cultivated a singular identity in their films, Streep was a "chameleon", willing to play any type of role.
I do have a sense of trying to make things better.
Keen to get involved in a thriller film, Streep welcomed the opportunity to star in a film genre for which she was not usually offered scripts and immediately signed on to the project.
Set in 2048, the social science fiction film tells the story of a post-apocalyptic community without war, pain, suffering, differences or choice, where a young boy is chosen to learn the real world.
Streep has stated that she grew up listening to artists such as Barbra Streisand, The Beatles and Bob Dylan, and she learned a lot about how to use her voice, her "instrument," by listening to Barbra Streisand's albums.
In 1978, she won an Emmy Award for her role in the miniseries ''Holocaust'', and received her first Academy Award nomination for ''The Deer Hunter''.
In the 1978 miniseries ''Holocaust'', Streep played the leading role of a German woman married to a Jewish artist in Nazi era Germany.
This is what you get".
A modest mainstream success, it eventually grossed US$67.9&nbsp;million internationally.
President Barack Obama awarded her the 2010 National Medal of Arts and in 2014 the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
The makers agreed with her, and the script was revised.
Mike Nichols, who directed Streep in ''Silkwood'', ''Heartburn'' and ''Postcards from the Edge'', praised Streep's ability to transform herself into her characters, remarking that "in every role she becomes a totally new human being.
She made her screen debut in the 1977 television film ''The Deadliest Season'', and made her film debut later that same year in ''Julia''.
A comedic ensemble piece featuring Lindsay Lohan, Tommy Lee Jones, Kevin Kline and Woody Harrelson, the film revolves around the behind-the-scenes activities at the long-running public radio show of the same name.
This is not Streep's voice, but someone else's – with a certain flat quality, as if later education and refinement came after a somewhat unsophisticated childhood."
Vincent Canby of ''The New York Times'' referred it to her performance as "another stunning performance", played with "the kind of virtuosity that seems to redefine the possibilities of screen acting".
Streep persuaded writer David Koepp to rewrite several of the scenes, particularly the one in which her character has an affair with a younger man, which she believed was "unrealistically male" in its conception.
Later that year, Streep played a cancer sufferer caught in a difficult family situation, playing the mother of Renée Zellweger and wife of William Hurt in ''One True Thing''.
In 1979, Streep began workshopping ''Alice in Concert'', a musical version of ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland'', with writer and composer Elizabeth Swados and director Joseph Papp; the show was put on at New York's Public Theater from December 1980.
Dalloway'' by Virginia Woolf, the film was generally well received and won all three leading actresses a Silver Bear for Best Actress.
Robert De Niro, who had spotted Streep in her stage production of ''The Cherry Orchard'', suggested that she play the role of his girlfriend in the war film ''The Deer Hunter'' (1978).
The director Robert Benton allowed Streep to write her own dialogue in two key scenes, despite some objection from Hoffman, who "hated her guts".
Streep's first feature film role came opposite Jane Fonda in the 1977 film ''Julia'', in which she had a small role during a flashback sequence.
Though the film was dismissed by some critics such as Mark Kermode as "irritating naffness", Streep's performance earned her Academy Award, Golden Globe, SAG, and Critic's Choice Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress.
One of her teachers was Robert Lewis, one of the co-founders of the Actors Studio.
The drama received negative to mixed reviews upon its limited 2008 release.
The same year, she also had a small role in the period drama film ''The Homesman''.
Streep also enrolled as a visiting student at Dartmouth College in the fall of 1970, and received an Honorary Doctor of Arts degree from the college in 1981.
When asked if religion plays a part in her life in 2009, Streep replied: "I follow no doctrine.
Though critical reaction was generally mixed, Peter Travers of ''Rolling Stone'' found her to be "strong, sassy and looser than she has ever been onscreen".
Emma Brockes of ''The Guardian'' believes the scene in which Streep is ordered by an SS guard at Auschwitz to choose which one of her two children would be gassed and which would proceed to the labor camp, is her most famous scene, remarking: "It's classic Streep, the kind of scene that makes your scalp tighten, but defter in a way is her handling of smaller, harder-to-grasp emotions".
The film, unlike the novel, was warmly received by critics.
Streep began auditioning for film roles, and underwent an unsuccessful audition for the lead role in Dino De Laurentiis's ''King Kong''.
Such is Streep's contemporary position in world cinema that ''Vanity Fair'' has commented that "it's hard to imagine that there was a time before Meryl Streep was the greatest-living actress".
A significant commercial and critical success, the film earned Streep another Academy Award nomination for Best Actress, also winning Best Picture.
Streep is the spokesperson for the National Women's History Museum, to which she has donated a significant amount of money (including her fee for ''The Iron Lady, ''which was $1&nbsp;million) and hosted numerous events.
The film grossed more than US$26&nbsp;million, the majority of which came from domestic markets.
In 2001, Streep returned to the stage for the first time in more than twenty years, playing Arkadina in The Public Theater's revival of Anton Chekhov's ''The Seagull'', directed by Mike Nichols and co-starring Kevin Kline, Natalie Portman, and Philip Seymour Hoffman.
Nominated for another Golden Globe, Streep's performance was generally well received by critics, with Wesley Morris of the ''Boston Globe'' commenting "the greatest actor in American movies has finally become a movie star."
I just tried to look at what she did.
Director Sydney Pollack was initially dubious about Streep in the role as he did not think she was sexy enough, and had considered Jane Seymour for the part.
Roger Ebert stated that "Streep and Keaton, in their different styles, find ways to make Lee and Bessie into much more than the expression of their problems."
A drama revolving around the stern principal nun (Streep) of a Bronx Catholic school in 1964 who brings charges of pedophilia against a popular priest (Hoffman), the film became a moderate box office success, but was hailed by many critics as one of the best of 2008.
Everything the viewer need know about Kate Mundy, the woman she plays here, is written on that prim, lonely face and its flabbergasted gaze".
She also supports Gucci's "Chime For Change" campaign that aims to spread female empowerment.
Upon its release, ''Rendition'' was less commercially successful, and received mixed reviews.
And I believed her."
Throughout her career, Streep has narrated numerous audio books, including three by children's book author William Steig: ''Brae Irene,'' ''Spinky Sulks,'' and ''The One and Only Shrek!.''
Streep lived with actor John Cazale for three years until his death from bone cancer in March 1978.
She appeared in Jonathan Demme's moderately successful remake of ''The Manchurian Candidate'', co-starring Denzel Washington, playing the role of a woman who is both a U.S. senator and the manipulative, ruthless mother of a vice-presidential candidate.
Streep's last film of 2007 was Robert Redford's ''Lions for Lambs'', a film about the connection between a platoon of United States soldiers in Afghanistan, a U.S. senator, a reporter, and a California college professor.
For the latter, Roger Ebert wrote that she conveyed "great subtlety; it is hard to play an unbalanced, neurotic, self-destructive woman, and do it with such gentleness and charm... Streep creates a whole character around a woman who could have simply been a catalogue of symptoms."
Another line of her father's family was from Giswil, Switzerland.
They have four children: musician Henry (born 1979), actresses Mamie (born 1983) and Grace (born 1986), and model Louisa (born 1991).
In 2015, Streep signed an open letter for which the ONE Campaign had been collecting signatures; the letter was addressed to Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, urging them to focus on women as they served as the head of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa respectively, which was set to set the priorities in development funding before a main UN summit in September 2015 to establish new development goals for the generation.
Where does that come from?"
In 1989, Streep lobbied to play the lead role in Oliver Stone's adaption of the play ''Evita'', but two months before filming was due to commence she dropped out, citing "exhaustion" initially, although it was later revealed that there was a dispute over her salary.
The same year, she began work on Spike Jonze's comedy-drama ''Adaptation'' (2002), in which she portrayed real-life journalist Susan Orlean.
There was no shielding between her and me."
No matter what you do, the pain is always there in some recess of your mind, and it affects everything that happens afterwards.
She made her professional stage debut in ''The Playboy of Seville'' in 1971, and went on to receive a 1976 Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actress in a Play for ''A Memory of Two Mondays/27 Wagons Full of Cotton''.
Streep has commented that using accents as part of her acting is a technique she views as an obvious requirement in her portrayal of a character.
However, Streep cites Fonda as having a lasting influence on her as an actress, and has credited her as "opening probably more doors than I probably even know about".
I thought, I've made a terrible mistake, no more movies.
became Streep's highest-grossing film to date, with box office receipts of US$602.6&nbsp;million, also ranking it first among the highest-grossing musical films for now.
In 2009, Streep played chef Julia Child in Nora Ephron's ''Julie & Julia'', co-starring Amy Adams and Stanley Tucci.
Co-starring Amanda Seyfried, Pierce Brosnan, Stellan Skarsgård and Colin Firth, Streep played a single mother and a former girl-group singer, whose daughter (Seyfried), a bride-to-be who never met her father, invites three likely paternal candidates to her wedding on an idyllic Greek island.
At the age of 12, Streep was selected to sing at a school recital, which led to her having opera lessons from Estelle Liebling.
But I really don't believe in the power of prayer, or things would have been avoided that have happened, that are awful.
Former advisers, friends and family of Thatcher criticized Streep's portrayal of her as inaccurate and biased.
In ''The Iron Lady'', she reproduced the vocal style of Margaret Thatcher from the time before Thatcher became Britain's Prime Minister, and after she had taken elocution lessons to change her pitch, pronunciation, and delivery.
Streep and Pollack often clashed during the 101-day shoot in Kenya, particularly over Blixen's voice.
She really taught herself".
Vincent Canby, writing for ''The New York Times'', noted that the film was an homage to the works of Alfred Hitchcock, but that one of its main weaknesses was a lack of chemistry between Streep and Scheider, concluding that Streep "is stunning, but she's not on screen anywhere near long enough".
Streep was raised as a Presbyterian in Bernardsville, New Jersey, where she attended Bernards High School.
Although Streep was naturally more introverted than her mother, at times when she later needed an injection of confidence in adulthood she would consult her mother, asking her for advice.
Unknown to Laurentiis, Streep understood Italian and she remarked, "I'm very sorry that I'm not as beautiful as I should be but, you know—this is it.
In 2014, Streep established two scholarships for students at the University of Massachusetts Lowell – the Meryl Streep Endowed Scholarship for English majors, and the Joan Hertzberg Endowed Scholarship (named for Streep's former classmate at Vassar College) for math majors.
In the film, she played Lisa Metzger, the Jewish psychoanalyst of a divorced and lonesome business-woman, played by Uma Thurman, who enters a relationship with Metzger's 23-year-old son (Bryan Greenberg).
In 1993, Streep appeared with Jeremy Irons, Glenn Close and Winona Ryder in ''The House of the Spirits'', set during the military dictatorship of Chile.
Streep has also received 29 Golden Globe nominations, winning eight—more nominations, and more competitive (non-honorary) wins than any other actor (male or female).
The film was not well received by critics.
'', a film adaptation of the musical of the same name, based on the songs of Swedish pop group ABBA.
Streep's net worth is estimated to be $75-million.
In preparing for the part, Streep spoke to her own mother about her life as a wife with a career, and frequented the Upper East Side neighborhood in which the film was set, watching the interactions between parents and children.
Nominated for 19 Academy Awards in total, Streep has more nominations than any other actor or actress; she won Best Supporting Actress for ''Kramer vs. Kramer'' (1979), and Best Actress for ''Sophie's Choice'' (1982) and for ''The Iron Lady'' (2011).
Switching between the present and the past, it tells the story of a bedridden woman, who remembers her tumultuous life in the mid-1950s.
Yet they uncannily embody various crosscurrents of experience in the last twenty years, as women have redefined themselves against the background of the women's movement".
The Public Theater production was a new translation by playwright Tony Kushner (''Angels in America''), with songs in the Weill/Brecht style written by composer Jeanine Tesori (''Caroline, or Change''); veteran director George C. Wolfe was at the helm.
Janet Maslin of ''The New York Times'' wrote that Eastwood had managed to create "a moving, elegiac love story at the heart of Mr. Waller's self-congratulatory overkill", while Joe Morgenstern of ''The Wall Street Journal'' described it as "one of the most pleasurable films in recent memory".
Nothing I can count on and that makes it more dangerous.
To see her in that act of love for this man was overwhelming."
She found the role in ''She-Devil'' (1989), a satire that parodied Hollywood's obsession with beauty and cosmetic surgery, in which she played a glamorous writer.
By 1980, Streep had progressed to leading roles in films.
Streep has said of perfecting the Australian accent in the film: "I had to study a little bit for Australian because it's not dissimilar to American, so it's like coming from Italian to Spanish.
It relates the story of Robert Kincaid (Eastwood), a photographer working for ''National Geographic'', who has a love affair with a middle-aged Italian farm wife in Iowa named Francesca (Streep).
Streep later said that Allen did not provide her with a complete script, giving her only the six pages of her own scenes, and did not permit her to improvise a word of her dialogue.
Streep's other film of 2008 was ''Doubt'' featuring Philip Seymour Hoffman, Amy Adams, and Viola Davis.
Streep's first film of 2014 was the motion picture adaptation of the young adult novel ''The Giver''.
Pauline Kael on the contrary called the film an "infuriatingly bad movie" and thought that Streep "decorporealizes" herself, which she believed explained why her movie heroines "don't seem to be full characters, and why there are no incidental joys to be had from watching her".
She said in 1987, "I have a smattering of things I've learned from different teachers, but nothing I can put into a valise and open it up and say 'Now which one would you like'?
In an interview in December 2008, she also alluded to her lack of religious belief when she said: "So I've always been really, deeply interested, because I think I can understand the solace that's available in the whole construct of religion.
To find the thing that I could feel through".
Her work has also earned her two Screen Actors Guild Awards, a Cannes Film Festival award, five New York Film Critics Circle Awards, two BAFTA awards, two Australian Film Institute awards, five Grammy Award nominations, and five Drama Desk Award nominations, among several others.
She quit after four years.
Streep thought that the script portrayed the female character as "too evil" and insisted that it was not representative of real women who faced marriage breakdown and child custody battles.
For the former, she received a Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play nomination.
Most of her scenes were edited out, but the brief time on screen horrified the actress: "I had a bad wig and they took the words from the scene I shot with Jane and put them in my mouth in a different scene.
The black comedy received generally favorable reviews from critics, and won the Academy Award for Best Makeup.
You get a little mixed up".
She received her MFA from Yale in 1975.
The Walt Disney Family Museum issued a statement rebuking Streep's allegations indirectly, citing, among others, Disney's contributions to Jewish charities and his published letters stating that women "have the right to expect the same chances for advancement as men."
The film was controversial among feminists, but it was a role which film critic Stephen Farber believed displayed Streep's "own emotional intensity", writing that she was one of the "rare performers who can imbue the most routine moments with a hint of mystery".
There is hardly an emotion that Streep doesn't touch in this movie, and yet we're never aware of her straining.
Unlike other stars at the time such as Sylvester Stallone and Tom Cruise, Streep "never seemed to play herself", and certain critics felt her technical finesse led people to literally see her acting.
If you're lazy, you're not going to get it done.
Streep next played opposite Robert De Niro in the romance ''Falling in Love'' (1984), which was poorly-received, and portrayed a fighter for the French Resistance during World War II in the British drama ''Plenty'' (1985).
Jaffee and Hoffman later spoke of Streep's tirelessness, with Hoffman commenting, "She's extraordinarily hardworking, to the extent that she's obsessive.
She transmits a sense of danger, a primal unease lying just below the surface of normal behavior".
The film paired Streep with Jeremy Irons as contemporary actors, telling their modern story, as well as the Victorian era drama they were performing.
The first major motion picture based on a blog, ''Julie and Julia'' contrasts the life of Child in the early years of her culinary career with the life of young New Yorker Julie Powell (Adams), who aspires to cook all 524 recipes in Child's cookbook ''Mastering the Art of French Cooking''.
That was an important lesson—not to do that.
Longworth believes her caricature of Julia Child was "quite possibly the biggest performance of her career while also drawing on her own experience to bring lived-in truth the story of a late bloomer".
She continued to work on Broadway, appearing in the 1976 double bill of Tennessee Williams' ''27 Wagons Full of Cotton'' and Arthur Miller's ''A Memory of Two Mondays''.
The film was well received by critics.
In April 2015, it was announced that Streep had funded a screenwriters lab for female screenwriters over forty years old, called the Writers Lab, to be run by New York Women in Film & Television and the collective IRIS.
She is so instinctive and natural – so thoroughly in the moment and operating on flights of inspiration – that she's able to give us a woman who's at once wildly idiosyncratic and utterly believable."
In March 2016 Streep, among others, signed a letter asking for gender equality throughout the world, in observance of International Women's Day; this was also organized by the ONE Campaign.
However, Disney's grandniece, Abigail Disney, wholeheartedly agreed with Streep's statements, stating that he was an "anti-Semite," and "racist" who was also an exemplary filmmaker whose work "made billions of people happy."
She returned to the stage for the first time in over 20 years in The Public Theater's 2001 revival of ''The Seagull'', won a second Emmy Award in 2004 for the HBO miniseries ''Angels in America'' (2003), and starred in the Public Theater's 2006 production of ''Mother Courage and Her Children''.
At Yale she supplemented her course fees by waitressing and typing, and appeared in over a dozen stage productions a year, to the point that she became overworked, developing ulcers.
Upon her return, Streep found that Cazale's illness had progressed, and she nursed him until his death on March 12, 1978.
Based on Tracy Letts's Pulitzer Prize-winning play of the same name, Streep received positive reviews for her portrayal of the family's strong-willed and contentious matriarch, who is suffering from oral cancer and an addiction to narcotics, and was subsequently nominated for another Golden Globe, SAG, and Academy Award.
Roger Ebert said of her delivery, "Streep plays the Brooklyn scenes with an enchanting Polish-American accent (she has the first accent I've ever wanted to hug), and she plays the flashbacks in subtitled German and Polish.
Streep, who plays the community's leader, was aware of the book before being offered the role by co-star and producer Jeff Bridges.
In 2008, Molly Haskell praised Streep's performance in ''Plenty'', believing it to be "one of Streep's most difficult and ambiguous" films and "most feminist" role.
Lauded by critics and viewers alike, the film won Streep her fourth Golden Globe in the Best Supporting Actress category.
Streep and Jones play a middle-aged couple, who attend a week of intensive marriage counseling to try to bring back the intimacy missing in their relationship.
Longworth considers ''Death Becomes Her'' to have been "the most physical performance Streep had yet committed to screen, all broad weeping, smirking, and eye-rolling".
Anthony Lane of ''The New Yorker'' wrote: "This is really quite an achievement.
Her eighth great-grandfather, Lawrence Wilkinson, was one of the first Europeans to settle in Rhode Island.
She has stated that she has no particular method when it comes to acting, learning from the days of her early studies that she can't be articulate.
She was featured on the cover of ''Newsweek'' magazine with the headline "A Star for the 80s", with Jack Kroll commenting, "There's a sense of mystery in her acting; she doesn't simply imitate (although she's a great mimic in private).
While the film had a mixed reception, Streep's performance got rave reviews, earning her Best Actress awards at the Golden Globes and the BAFTAs as well as her third win at the 84th Academy Awards.
Pollack recalls that Streep impressed him in a different way: "She was so direct, so honest, so without bullshit.
The film also starred a young Leonardo DiCaprio as Streep's character's rebellious son.
She has stated that her ideal director is one who gives her complete artistic control, and allowing a degree of improvisation and her to learn from her own mistakes.
Grim, red-eyed, deathly pale Sister Aloysius may be the scariest nun of all time."
She found the material to be "unrelentingly noble" and professed to have taken on the role for financial gain.
Upon its release, ''The Giver'' was met with generally mixed to negative reviews from critics.
Streep's mother, whom she has compared in both appearance and manner to Dame Judi Dench, strongly encouraged her daughter and instilled confidence in her from a very young age.
Ebert, who awarded the film the full four stars, highlighted Streep's caricature of a nun, who "hates all inroads of the modern world", while Kelly Vance of ''The East Bay Express'' remarked: "It's thrilling to see a pro like Streep step into an already wildly exaggerated role and then ramp it up a few notches just for the sheer hell of it.
Streep said of his death, "I didn't get over it.
''Time''s Richard Corliss wrote approvingly of Streep's "wicked-witch routine" but dismissed the film as "''She-Devil'' with a make-over" and one which "hates women".
Why did you bring me ''this''".
She contemplated quitting acting and switching to study law.
In 2004, Streep was awarded the AFI Life Achievement Award by the board of directors of the American Film Institute.
Her father's lineage traces back to Loffenau, Germany, from where her second great-grandfather, Gottfried Streeb, immigrated to the United States, and where one of her ancestors served as mayor (the surname was later changed to "Streep").
The seven-month shoot was the longest of Streep's career, during which she got into character by "thinking about being slightly pissed off all of the time".
Upon its commercial release, the film became Streep's biggest commercial success yet, grossing more than US$326.5&nbsp;million worldwide.
She received Drama Desk Award nominations for both productions.
