While much of the construction in these sites is consistent with common Pueblo architectural forms, including kivas, towers, and pit-houses, the space constrictions of these alcoves necessitated what seems to have been a far denser concentration of their populations.
The 13th century saw 69 years of below average rainfall in the Mesa Verde region, and after 1270 the area suffered from especially cold temperatures.
They also crafted hide and basket shields that were used only during battles.
On December 18, 1888, Richard Wetherill and cowboy Charlie Mason rediscovered Cliff Palace after spotting the ruins from the top of Mesa Verde.
With the introduction of corn to the Mesa Verde region  BCE and the trend away from nomadism toward permanent pithouse settlements, the Archaic Mesa Verdeans transitioned into what archaeologists call the Basketmaker culture.
This altered the function of pithouses from all-purpose spaces to ones used primarily for community ceremonies, although they continued to house large extended families, particularly during winter months.
By the end of the 19th century, it was clear that Mesa Verde needed protection from people in general who came to Mesa Verde and created or sold their own collection of artifacts.
Cretaceous clays from both the Dakota and Menefee Formations were used in black-on-white wares, and Mancos Formation clays for corrugated jars.
The park offers hiking trails, a campground, and, during peak season, facilities for food, fuel, and lodging; these are unavailable in the winter.
Trench kilns were constructed away from pueblos and closer to sources of firewood.
Clays from southeastern Utah turned red when fired in a high-oxygen environment.
Chapin Mesa (the most popular area) is  beyond the visitor center.
It was formed after the Cretaceous sea had completely receded and as a result has a high sand content from beaches, dunes, etc.
Mesa Verde's population remained fairly stable during the 12th century drought.
The most Mesa Verdeans practiced dry farming, which relied on rain to water their crops, but others utilized runoff, springs, seeps, and natural collection pools.
Visitors can enter Balcony House through ranger-guided tours.
At , the middle mesa areas were typically ten degrees cooler than the mesa top, which reduced the amount of water needed for farming.
The archaeological record indicates that, rather than being isolated to the Mesa Verde region, violent conflict was widespread in North America during the late 13th and early 14th centuries, and was likely exacerbated by global climate changes that negatively affected food supplies throughout the continent.
The murals were typically located on the face of the kiva bench and usually encircled the room.
Reports by both Jackson and Holmes were included in the 1876 report of the Hayden Survey, one of the four federally financed efforts to explore the American West.
The cliff dwelling features 150 rooms, a kiva, a tower, and a central plaza.
One log was dated at 1278, so it was likely built not long before the Mesa Verde people migrated out of the area.
Later in the tertiary, the last period of uplift and rock tilting towards the south caused these streams to cut rapidly into the rock removing loose sediment and forming the vast canyons seen today.
The Mesa Verde National Park Post Office has the ZIP code 81330.
The structures contained within these alcoves were mostly blocks of hard sandstone, held together and plastered with adobe mortar.
Archaeologists believe the Mesa Verdeans who settled in the areas near the Rio Grande, where Mesa Verde black-on-white pottery became widespread during the 14th century, were likely related to the households they joined and not unwelcome intruders.
Starting in the 6th century, the farmers living in central Mesa Verde cultivated corn, beans, squash, and gourds.
After there had become an interest in land in western Colorado, a new treaty in 1873 left the Ute with a strip of land in southwestern Colorado between the border with New Mexico and 15 miles north.
While most of the violence, which peaked between 1275 and 1285, is generally ascribed to in-fighting amongst Mesa Verdeans, archaeological evidence found at Sand Canyon Pueblo, in Canyons of the Ancients National Monument, suggests that violent interactions also occurred between Mesa Verdeans and people from outside the region.
The Mesa Verde black-on-white pottery was produced at three locations: Sand Canyon, Castle Rock, and Mesa Verde.
Like the Point Lookout Sandstone, it is about 400 feet thick.
Archaeologists refer to this period as the "Great Drought".
The Mesa Verde region saw unusually cold and dry conditions during the beginning of the 13th century.
Starting during the late Pueblo II period (1020) and continuing through Pueblo III (1300), the Ancestral Puebloans of the Mesa Verde region created plaster murals in their great houses, particularly in their kivas.
As the extensive Chacoan system collapsed, people increasingly migrated to Mesa Verde, causing major population growth in the area.
Hot rocks dropped into containers could bring water to a brief boil, but because beans must be boiled for an hour or more their use was not widespread until after pottery had disseminated throughout the region.
Continuing through the Cretaceous period and into the early Tertiary, there was uplifting in the area of the Colorado Plateau, the San Juan Mountains, and the La Plata Mountains, which led to the formation of the Mesa Verde pediment with the help of erosion.
Mesa Verde National Park is an area of federal exclusive jurisdiction.
Examples open to public access include the Far View Complex and Cedar Tree Tower on Chapin Mesa, and Badger House Community, on Wetherill Mesa.
One ledge seems to include an overlook with small holes in the wall to see the rest of the village below.
Development of the atlatl during this period made it easier for them to hunt smaller game, a crucial advance at a time when most of the region's big game had disappeared from the landscape.
Others colonized canyon rims and slopes in multi-family structures that grew to unprecedented size as populations swelled.
The Ute wintered in the warm, deep canyons and found sanctuary there and the high plateaus of Mesa Verde.
Archaeologists view this migration as a continuation, versus a dissolution, of Ancestral Puebloan society and culture.
Specimens of shallow, unfired clay bowls found at Canyon de Chelly indicate the innovation might have been derived from using clay bowls to parch seeds.
At the bottom of the canyon is the Sun Temple fire pit, which is illuminated by the first rays of the rising sun during the winter solstice.
The extent of the network is unclear, but no roads have been discovered leading to the Chacoan Great North Road, or directly connecting Mesa Verde and Chacoan sites.
The combination of corn and beans provided the Mesa Verdeans with the amino acids of a complete protein.
Access to park facilities vary by season.
It analyses data pertaining to how sites are constructed and utilized.
In marked contrast to earlier constructions and villages on top of the mesas, the cliff dwellings of Mesa Verde reflected a region-wide trend towards the aggregation of growing regional populations into close, highly defensible quarters during the 13th century.
6000 BCE marks the beginning of the Archaic period in North America.
In addition to numerous settlements along the Rio Grande, contemporary descendants of the Mesa Verdeans live in pueblos at Acomo, Zuni, Jemez, and Laguna.
By 1150, drought had once again stressed the region's inhabitants, leading to a temporary cessation of great house construction at Mesa Verde.
This brought increased security against raids and encouraged greater cooperation amongst residents.
They began to domesticate turkeys starting around 1000, and by the 13th century consumption of the animal peaked, supplanting deer as the primary protein source at many sites.
The painted murals include the colors red, green, yellow, white, brown, and blue.
Year-round settlements first appear around this time.
White pottery with black designs emerged, the pigments coming from plants.
Cliff Palace was home to approximately 125 people, but was likely an important part of a larger community of sixty nearby pueblos, which housed a combined six hundred or more people.
Dense undergrowth and tree cover kept many ancient sites hidden from view, but after the Chapin V, Bircher and Pony fires, 593 previously undiscovered sites were revealed&nbsp;– most of them date to the Basketmaker III and Pueblo I periods.
Her efforts included enlisting support from 250,000 women through the Federation of Women's Clubs, writing and having published poems in popular magazines, giving speeches domestically and internationally, and forming the Colorado Cliff Dwellers Association.
It also aided corn cultivation, as legumes add much needed nutrients to soils they are grown in, which likely increased corn yields.
With excavation and study of eleven Wetherill Mesa sites, it is considered the largest archaeological effort in the US.
When Nordenskiöld shipped the collection that he made of Mesa Verde artifacts, the event initiated concerns about the need to protect Mesa Verde land and its resources.
Their skeletal remains reveal signs of hard labor and extensive travel, including degenerative joint disease, healed fractures, and moderate anemia associated with iron deficiency.
It received its name from four mugs the Charles Mason and the Wetherill brothers found strung together at the site.
Beans and new varieties of corn were introduced to the region .
Mesa Verdean villages thrived during the mid-Pueblo III Era, when architects constructed massive, multi-story buildings, and artisans adorned pottery with increasingly elaborate designs.
It was constructed sometime between 1211 and 1278.
The temple is D-shaped, and its alignment is 10.7 degrees off true east-west.
By the 11th century these corrugated vessels, which dissipated heat more efficiently than smoother ones, had largely replaced the older style, whose tendency to retain heat made them prone to boiling over.
There is no evidence of ancient pottery markets in the region, but archaeologists believe that local potters exchanged decorative wares between families.
In 1889, Goodman Point Pueblo became the first pre-Columbian archaeological site in the Mesa Verde region to gain federal protection.
They followed herds of big game and camped near rivers and streams, many of which dried up as the glaciers that once covered parts of the San Juan Mountains receded.
They were typically located near their fields and walking distance to sources of water.
The first is the Point Lookout Sandstone, which is named for the Point Lookout feature in the park (elevation 8427 feet).
The early Archaic people living near Mesa Verde utilized the atlatl and harvested a wider variety of plants and animals than the Paleo-Indians had, while retaining their primarily nomadic lifestyle.
He described the landscape and ruins in an 1890 article and later in an 1892 book, ''The Land of the Cliff-Dwellers'', which he illustrated with hand-drawn maps and personal photographs.
Due to its depositional environment and the organic material in its composition, there are thin coal seams running through the Menefee Formation.
The short trail to Spruce Tree House begins at the Chapin Mesa Archeological Museum.
In addition to the cliff dwellings, Mesa Verde boasts a number of mesa-top ruins.
Spruce Tree House is the third-largest village, within several hundred feet of a spring, and had 130 rooms and eight kivas.
Pueblo III masonry buildings were typically occupied for approximately fifty years, more than double the usable lifespan of the Pueblo II jacal structures.
Many of the rooms were brightly painted.
Geometric patterns that resemble symbols used in pottery and zigzag that represent stitches used in basket making are common motifs.
Several ancient roads, averaging  wide and lined with earthen berms, have been identified in the region.
Water management and conservation techniques, including the use of reservoirs and silt-retaining dams, also emerged during this period.
In its 2015 travel awards, ''Sunset'' magazine named Mesa Verde National Park "the best cultural attraction" in the Western United States.
During the late 8th century, Mesa Verdeans began building square pit structures that archaeologists call protokivas.
The technique created a rough exterior surface that was easier to hold on to than regular grey wares, which were smooth.
An alternate theory suggests that pottery originated in the Mogollon Rim area to the south, where brown-paste bowls were used during the first few centuries of the common era.
Next is the Menefee Formation, the middle formation whose content features interbedded carbonaceous shales, siltstones, and sandstones.
Her party rediscovered Echo Cliff House, Three Tier House, and Balcony House in 1885; these discoveries inspired her to protect the dwellings and artifacts.
By 1260, the majority of Mesa Verdeans lived in large pueblos that housed several families and more than one hundred people.
Examples are relatively rare on Mesa Verde proper, but abundant in the middle San Juan River area, which might indicate the river's importance as a travel route and key source of water.
While drought, resource depletion, and overpopulation all contributed to instability during the last two centuries of Ancestral Puebloan occupation, their overdependence on maize crops is considered the "fatal flaw" of their subsistence strategy.
Styles also vary over time.
With the increased availability of ceramics after 600, beans became much easier to cook.
By 860, there were approximately 8,000 people living in Mesa Verde.
Dating back more than 700 years, the dwelling is constructed of sandstone, wooden beams, and mortar.
Pottery became more versatile, including pitchers, ladles, bowls, jars and dishware for food and drink.
There was a major decline in ceramic imports to the region during this time, but local production remained steady.
The Ute Mountain Tribal Park, adjoining Mesa Verde National Park to the east of the mountains, is approximately  along the Mancos River.
Evidence of partly burned villages and post-mortem trauma has been uncovered, and the residents of one village appear to have been the victims of a site-wide massacre.
Their sizes vary, but the larger ones were up to  long and thought to have been shared kilns that served several families.
The fires, many of which were started by lightning during times of drought, burned  of forest, more than half the park.
Several great houses in the region were aligned to the cardinal directions, which positioned windows, doors, and walls along the path of the sun, whose rays would indicate the passing of seasons.
The assaults, which also occurred at the national monument's Castle Rock Pueblo, were dated to , and are considered to have effectively ended several centuries of Puebloan occupation at those sites.
As Mesa Verdeans migrated south, to where many of their ancestors had emigrated two hundred years before, the influence of Chaco Canyon grew, and by 950 Chaco had supplanted Mesa Verde as the region's cultural center.
During the years 1996 to 2003, the park suffered from several wildfires.
Mesa Verde is best known for a large number of well-preserved cliff dwellings, houses built in alcoves, or rock overhangs along the canyon walls.
The park is made up of several smaller cuestas located between canyons.
Stones were used without shaping for fit and stability.
Occasional trappers and prospectors visited, with one prospector, John Moss, making his observations known in 1873.
Despite their participation in the vast Chacoan system, Mesa Verdeans retained a distinct cultural identity while melding regional innovation with ancient tradition, inspiring further architectural advancements; the 9th century Mesa Verdean pueblos influenced two hundred years of Chacoan great house construction.
Although the rate of settlement is unclear, increases in sparsely populated areas, such as Rio Chama, Pajarito Plateau, and Santa Fe, correspond directly with the period of migration from Mesa Verde.
The late Archaic is marked by increased trade in exotic materials such as obsidian and turquoise.
A family of cattle ranchers, the Wetherills, befriended members of the Ute tribe near their ranch southwest of Mancos, Colorado.
In 1966, as with all historical areas administered by the National Park Service, Mesa Verde was listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and in 1987, the Mesa Verde Administrative District was listed on the register.
It was designated a World Heritage Site in 1978.
Many emigrants relocated to southern Arizona and New Mexico.
Its sediments are approximately 400 feet thick, and its upper layers feature fossiliferous invertebrates.
A fellow activist for protection of Mesa Verde and prehistoric archaeological sites included Lucy Peabody, who, located in Washington, D.C., met with members of Congress to further the cause.
They were named: Chapin V (1996), Bircher and Pony (2000), Long Mesa (2002), and the Balcony House Complex fires (2003), which were five fires that began on the same day.
Ceramic vessels were a major improvement over pitch-lined baskets, gourds, and animal hide containers, which had been the primary water storage containers in the region.
As local populations grew, Puebloans found it difficult to survive on hunting, foraging, and gardening, which made them increasingly reliant on domesticated corn.
The location was excavated from 1959 through 1961, as part of the Wetherhill Mesa Archaeological Project.
By 600, Mesa Verdeans were using clay pots to cook soups and stews.
Its location and orientation indicate that its builders understood the cycles of both the sun and the moon.
Styles for these sandstone/mortar constructions, both surface and cliff dwellings, included T-shaped windows and doors.
This multi-storied ruin, the best-known cliff dwelling in Mesa Verde, is located in the largest alcove in the center of the Great Mesa.
Archeological evidence indicates that nearly every household had at least one member who worked as a potter.
Starting in the 9th century, they dug and maintained reservoirs that caught runoff from summer showers and spring snowmelt; some crops were watered by hand.
Most of Mesa Verde lies within this strip of land.
Potters also selected clays and altered firing conditions to achieve specific colors.
Civic leaders in the region likely attained power and prestige by distributing food during times of drought.
Two overhead ledges contain storage space for grain.
They buried their dead near or amongst their settlements, and often included luxury items as gifts, which might indicate differences in relative social status.
Others were scalped, dismembered, and cannibalized.
This provided a high quality protein that reduced reliance on hunting.
Population increases also led to expanded tree felling that reduced habitat for many wild plant and animal species that the Mesa Verdeans had relied on, further deepening their dependency on domesticated crops that were susceptible to drought-related failure.
Marine shells and abalone from the Pacific coast made their way to Mesa Verde from Arizona, and the Archaic people worked them into necklaces and pendants.
Scholars are divided as to whether pottery was invented in the Four Corners region or introduced from the south.
Dendrochronology indicates that the last tree felled for construction on the mesa was cut in 1281.
Basketmaker III people established a tradition of holding large ceremonial gatherings near community pit structures.
A spring is accessible within several hundred feet, and seeps are located in the rear of the village.
The Ancestral Puebloans had a long history of migration in the face of environmental instability, but the depopulation of Mesa Verde at the end of the 13th century was different in that the region was almost completely emptied, and no descendants returned to build permanent settlements.
The Mesa Verdeans survived using a combination of hunting, gathering, and subsistence farming of crops such as corn, beans, and squash.
During the early 12th century, the locus of regional control shifted away from Chaco to Aztec, New Mexico, in the southern Mesa Verde region.
The Pueblo II Period is marked by the growth and outreach of communities centered around the great houses of Chaco Canyon.
750 marks the end of the Basketmaker III Era and the beginning of the Pueblo I period.
It was the first such site to be protected in the US.
They also smoked wild tobacco.
Before the introduction of pottery, foods were baked, roasted, and parched.
''National Geographic Traveler'' chose it as one of "80 World Destinations for Travel in the 21st Century", one of only nine places selected in the US.
Pottery also protected seeds against mold, insects, and rodents.
Although they left evidence of their presence throughout the region, there is little indication that they lived in central Mesa Verde during this time.
They often incorporated hidden tunnels connecting the towers to associated kivas.
There, Jackson both photographed and publicized a typical stone cliff dwelling.
Nordenskiöld was a trained mineralogist who introduced scientific methods to artifact collection, recorded locations, photographed extensively, diagrammed sites, and correlated what he observed with existing archaeological literature as well as the home-grown expertise of the Wetherills.
They built the mesa's first pueblos sometime after 650, and by the end of the 12th century, they began to construct the massive cliff dwellings for which the park is best known.
Despite robust growth during the early and mid-9th century, unpredictable rainfall and periodic drought led to a dramatic reversal of settlement trends in the area.
Because of its protective location, it is well preserved.
Paleo-Indians began inhabiting the mesa in increasing numbers , though it is unclear whether they were seasonal occupants or year-round residents.
The area saw moderate population increases during the following decades, and dramatic ones from 1225 to 1260.
Soon afterward, work began on two more: the Far View and Sagebrush reservoirs, which were approximately  across and constructed on the mesa top.
Prior to the fires of 1996 to 2003, archaeologists had surveyed approximately ninety percent of the park.
The Visitor and Research Center opened in December 2012.
Mug House is located on Wetherill Mesa; it contains 94 rooms, a large kiva, and a nearby reservoir.
During the Pueblo III period (1150 to 1300), Mesa Verdeans built numerous stone masonry towers that likely served as defensive structures.
Corrugation likely developed as ancient potters attempted to mimic the visual properties of coiled basketry.
A shift from medium and large game animals, such as deer, bighorn sheep, and antelope, to smaller ones like rabbits and turkey during the mid-10th to mid-13th centuries might indicate that Mesa Verdean subsistence hunting had dramatically altered faunal populations on the mesa.
By the mid-10th and early 11th centuries, protokivas had evolved into smaller circular structures called kivas, which were usually  across.
They depicted animals and people, in both abstract and realistic forms, in single works and more elaborate panels.
Periodic warfare occurred on the mesa throughout the 13th century.
Later, Archaic people established semi-permanent rockshelters in and around the mesa.
Former Mesa Verde National Park superintendent Robert Heyder communicated his belief that the park might have been far more significant with the hundreds of artifacts taken by Nordenskiöld.
At the start of the 13th century, approximately 22,000 people lived there.
The Wetherills also hosted Gustaf Nordenskiöld, the son of polar explorer Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld, in 1891.
The exit, a series of toe-holds in a cleft of the cliff, was believed to be the only entry and exit route for the cliff dwellers, which made the small village easy to defend and secure.
The tower is the tallest structure in Mesa Verde.
The population of Mesa Verde  was approximately 1,000 to 1,500 people.
The transition is characterized by major changes in the design and construction of buildings and the organization of household activities.
Basketmaker II people are characterized by their combination of foraging and farming skills, use of the atlatl, and creation of finely woven baskets in the absence of earthen pottery.
The Square Tower House is one of the stops on the Mesa Top Loop Road driving tour.
Many of the victims showed signs of skull fractures, and the uniformity of the injuries suggest that most were inflicted with a small stone axe.
Warfare was conducted using the same tools the Mesa Verdeans used for hunting game, including bows and arrows, stone axes, and wooden clubs and spears.
Mesa Verde's slant contributed to the formation of the alcoves that have preserved the area's cliff dwellings.
Located on the Wetherill Mesa, Long House is the second-largest Mesa Verdean village; approximately 150 people lived there.
The terrain in the park is now a transition zone between the low desert plateaus and the Rocky Mountains.
Because of this all law enforcement, emergency medical service, and wildland/structural fire duties are conducted by federal National Park Service Law Enforcement Rangers.
Far View House, the largest of these, is considered a classic Chaco "outlier," on which construction likely began between 1075 and 1125, although some archaeologists argue that it was begun as early as 1020.
Nordenskiöld published, in 1893, ''The Cliff Dwellers of the Mesa Verde''.
The shale zones in this feature determine where alcoves formed where the Ancestral Puebloans constructed their dwellings.
They were the first white men to travel the route through much of the Colorado Plateau into Utah and back through Arizona to New Mexico.
Also uncovered during the fires were extensive water containment features, including 1,189 check dams, 344 terraces, and five reservoirs that date to the Pueblo II and III periods.
Many other dwellings are visible from the road but not open to tourists.
With the Ute tribe's approval, the Wetherills were allowed to bring cattle into the lower, warmer plateaus of the present Ute reservation during winter.
The anthropophagy (cannibalism) might have been undertaken as a survival strategy during times of starvation.
