Ceremonial centers were the nuclei of Mesoamerican settlements.
During the Early and Middle Preclassic, the site developed some of the earliest examples of defensive palisades, ceremonial structures, the use of adobe, and hieroglyphic writing.
The Late Classic period (beginning ca.
A recently discovered queen's tomb in the Classic Maya site of Waka (also known as El Perú) had a ceremonial stingray spine placed in her genital area, suggesting that women also performed bloodletting in their genitalia.
Aspects of the Mesoamerican cultural heritage still survive among the indigenous peoples who inhabit Mesoamerica, many of whom continue to speak their ancestral languages, and maintain many practices harking back to their Mesoamerican roots.
The geographic vision is also tied to the cardinal points.
The death of the warrior is the greatest sacrifice and gives the gods the energy to go about their daily activities, such as the bringing of rain.
* a religious complex based on a combination of shamanism and natural deities, and a shared system of symbols
At its highest point, the Isthmus is 224&nbsp;m (735&nbsp;ft) above mean sea level.
Following Chichén Itzá, whose political structure collapsed during the Early Postclassic, Mayapán rose to prominence during the Middle Postclassic and dominated the north for c. 200 years.
Monte Alban in Oaxaca is another Classic-period polity that expanded and flourished during this period, but the Zapotec capital exerted less interregional influence than the other two sites.
Fishing also was a major provider of food to lowland and coastal Mesoamericans creating a further disincentive to settle down in permanent communities.
The settlement of Teotihuacan is dated to the later portion of the Late Preclassic, or roughly AD 50.
File:Sayil, three story palace.jpg|Sayil, three-story palace, AD 600-900
* '''Zac Cimi'', Bacab of the West, associated with the color black and the ''Ix'' years
The typical Mesoamerican cosmology sees the world as separated into a day world watched by the sun and a night world watched by the moon.
No Precolumbian Mesoamerican society is known to have had widespread literacy, and literacy was probably restricted to particular social classes, including scribes, painters, merchants, and the nobility.
Ultimately, the ceremonial centers were the architectural translation of the identity of each city, as represented by the veneration of their gods and masters.
An exchange network centered at Tikal distributed a variety of goods and commodities throughout southeast Mesoamerica, such as obsidian imported from central Mexico (e.g., Pachuca) and highland Guatemala (e.g., El Chayal, which was predominantly used by the Maya during the Early Classic), and jade from the Motagua valley in Guatemala.
Overall, it generally correlates with the rise to prominence of Puuc settlements in the northern Maya lowlands, so named after the hills in which they are mainly found.
The Classic period through the Postclassic are differentiated by the cyclical crystallization and fragmentation of the various political entities throughout Mesoamerica.
Death creates life – divine energy is liberated through death and returns to the gods, who are then able to create more life.
The names given to the days, months, and years in the Mesoamerican calendar came, for the most part, from animals, flowers, heavenly bodies, and cultural concepts that held symbolic significance in Mesoamerican culture.
Slightly thereafter, other crops began to be cultivated by the semi-agrarian communities throughout Mesoamerica.
The earliest example of maize dates to c. 4000 BC and comes from Guilá Naquitz, a cave in Oaxaca.
The best documented and deciphered Mesoamerican writing system, and therefore the most widely known, is the classic Maya script.
The name of this complex is based on Uaxactun’s “Group E,” the first known observatory in the Maya area.
The ceremonial centers were always built to be visible.
Puuc settlements are specifically associated with a unique architectural style (the "Puuc architectural style") that represents a technological departure from previous construction techniques.
While the game was played casually for simple recreation, including by children and perhaps even women, the game also had important ritual aspects, and major formal ballgames were held as ritual events, often featuring human sacrifice.
The East was linked to the world priests and associated with vegetative fertility, or, in other words, tropical exuberance.
The act was typically performed with obsidian prismatic blades or stingray spines, and blood was drawn from piercing or cutting the tongue, earlobes, and/or genitals (among other locations).
Mesoamerican cultures that lived in the lowlands and coastal plains settled down in agrarian communities somewhat later than did highland cultures due to the fact that there was a greater abundance of fruits and animals in these areas, which made a hunter-gatherer lifestyle more attractive.
Sacrifice had great importance in the social and religious aspects of Mesoamerican culture.
The Classic period is marked by the rise and dominance of several polities.
Research over the past few decades has established that it was first settled during the Early/Late Classic transition but rose to prominence during the Terminal Classic and Early Postclassic.
The last three periods, representing the core of Mesoamerican cultural fluorescence, are further divided into two or three sub-phases.
Pachuca obsidian, whose trade and distribution is argued to have been economically controlled by Teotihuacan, is found throughout Mesoamerica.
The pages were often covered and protected by elaborately carved book boards.
Mesoamerican writing is found in several mediums, including large stone monuments such as stelae, carved directly onto architecture, carved or painted over stucco (e.g., murals), and on pottery.
In the Maya area, for example, stele depict bloodletting rituals performed by ruling elites, eagles and jaguars devouring human hearts, jade circles or necklaces that represented hearts, and plants and flowers that symbolized both nature and the blood that provided life.
Some of the more important ones served as loci of human occupation in the area.
Others include the Olmec, Zapotec, and Epi-Olmec/Isthmian writing systems.
Finally, it justifies the control of power by the two ruling classes, the priests and the warriors.
In central Mexico, the early portion of the Postclassic correlates with the rise of the Toltec and an empire based at their capital, Tula (also known as Tollan).
Its participation in the circum-peninsular exchange route, possible through its port site of Isla Cerritos, allowed Chichén Itzá to remain highly connected to areas such as central Mexico and Central America.
* '''Hozanek''', Bacab of the South, associated with the color yellow and the ''Cauac'' years.
The rainfall varies from the dry Oaxaca and north Yucatan to the humid southern Pacific and Caribbean lowlands.
The Tarascans (also known as the P'urhépecha) were located in Michoacán and Guerrero.
The temples provided spatial orientation, which was imparted to the surrounding town.
The latter site, Kaminaljuyú, is one of the longest occupied sites in Mesoamerica and was continuously inhabited from c. 800 BC to around AD 1200.
First, it showed death transformed into the divine.
These four times of the year were, and still are, important as they indicate seasonal changes that directly impact the lives of Mesoamerican agriculturalists.
The cities with their commercial and religious centers were always political entities, somewhat similar to the European city-state, and each person could identify himself with the city in which he lived.
Beginning as early as 7000 BC, the domestication of cacao, maize, beans, tomato, squash and chili, as well as the turkey and dog, caused a transition from paleo-Indian hunter-gatherer tribal grouping to the organization of sedentary agricultural villages.
During this period, the first true Mesoamerican writing systems were developed in the Epi-Olmec and the Zapotec cultures, and the Mesoamerican writing tradition reached its height in the Classic Maya hieroglyphic script.
This calendar was used throughout the history of Mesoamerican by nearly every culture.
At this time during the Epi-Classic period, the Nahua peoples began moving south into Mesoamerica from the North, and became politically and culturally dominant in central Mexico, as they displaced speakers of Oto-Manguean languages.
The distinct Mesoamerican cultural tradition ended with the Spanish conquest in the 16th century.
The other glyphic writing systems of Mesoamerica, and their interpretation, have been subject to much debate.
Outside of the northern Maya lowlands, rivers are common throughout Mesoamerica.
The priests controlled the religious ideology, and the warriors supplied the sacrifices.
Perhaps the earliest observatory documented in Mesoamerica is that of the Monte Alto culture.
* vigesimal (base 20) number system
Big-game hunting, similar to that seen in contemporaneous North America, was a large component of the subsistence strategy of the Mesoamerican Paleo-Indian.
More importantly, the three superposed levels of the world are united by a Ceiba tree (''Yaxche''' in Mayan).
The term was first used by the German ethnologist Paul Kirchhoff, who noted that similarities existed among the various pre-Columbian cultures within the region that included southern Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, El Salvador, western Honduras, and the Pacific lowlands of Nicaragua and northwestern Costa Rica.
In representing numbers, a series of bars and dots were employed.
Conversely, the sister terms Aridoamerica and Oasisamerica, which refer to northern Mexico and the western United States, respectively, have not entered into widespread usage.
In the Maya area, the Late Classic ended with the so-called "Maya collapse", a transitional period coupling the general depopulation of the southern lowlands and development and florescence of centers in the northern lowlands.
* the use of bark paper for ritual purposes and as a medium for writing
Agriculturally based people historically divide the year into four seasons.
The rabbit, the principal symbol of the west, was associated with farmers and with pulque.
Another form of autosacrifice was conducted by pulling a rope with attached thorns through the tongue or earlobes.
The longest river in Mesoamerica is the Usumacinta, which forms in Guatemala at the convergence of the Salinas or Chixoy and La Pasion River and runs north for 970&nbsp;km (600&nbsp;mi) – 480&nbsp;km (300&nbsp;mi) of which are navigable – eventually draining into the Gulf of Mexico.
Many other cultural groups did not acquiesce until later.
At the same time, cotton, yucca and agave were exploited for fibers and textile materials.
The ball was made of solid rubber, and weighed up to 4&nbsp;kg or more, with sizes that differed greatly over time or according to the version played.
Although the northern side of the Isthmus is swampy and covered with dense jungle, the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, as the lowest and most level point within the Sierra Madre mountain chain, was nonetheless a main transportation, communication, and economic route within Mesoamerica.
In the subsequent Preclassic period, complex urban polities began to develop among the Maya, with the rise of centers such as El Mirador, Calakmul and Tikal, and the Zapotec at Monte Albán.
The concept of zero was also used, and its representation at the Late Preclassic occupation of Tres Zapotes is one of the earliest uses of zero in human history.
Autosacrifice was not limited to male rulers, as their female counterparts often performed these ritualized activities.
Other volcanoes of note include Tacana on the Mexico–Guatemala border, Tajumulco and Santamaría in Guatemala, Izalco in El Salvador, Momotombo in Nicaragua, and Arenal in Costa Rica.
Among the many types of calendars the Maya maintained, the most important include a 260-day cycle, a 360-day cycle or 'year', a 365-day cycle or year, a lunar cycle, and a Venus cycle, which tracked the synodic period of Venus.
Well-known examples of these include the El Castillo pyramid at Chichen Itza and the Observatorio at Xochicalco.
This Formative period saw the spread of distinct religious and symbolic traditions, as well as artistic and architectural complexes.
This volcano, which retains its Nahuatl name, is located 70&nbsp;km (43&nbsp;mi) southeast of Mexico City.
Earlier maize samples have been documented at the Los Ladrones cave site in Panama, c. 5500 BC.
* the use of locally developed pictographic and hieroglyphic (logo-syllabic) writing systems
Remains of other early cultures interacting with the Olmec have been found at Takalik Abaj, Izapa, and Teopantecuanitlan, and as far south as in Honduras.
They are typically shown performing the rope and thorns technique.
Other large lakes include Lake Atitlán, Lake Izabal, Lake Güija, Lemoa, and Lake Managua.
Research in the Pacific Lowlands of Chiapas and Guatemala suggest that Izapa and the Monte Alto Culture may have preceded the Olmec.
The different forms of sacrifice are reflected in the imagery used to evoke ideological structure and sociocultural organization in Mesoamerica.
* '''South''': rabbit, the lizard, dried herbs, the buzzard, and flowers.
The northern lowlands cover the remainder of the northern portion of the Yucatán Peninsula.
By 2000 BC, corn was the staple crop in the region and remained so through modern times.
Tikal came to dominate much of the southern Maya lowlands politically, economically, and militarily during the Early Classic.
The main source of water in this area is aquifers that are accessed through natural surface openings called cenotes.
The Ramón or Breadnut tree (''Brosimum alicastrum'') was an occasional substitute for maize in producing flour.
Often, the architectural organization of Mesoamerican sites was based on precise calculations derived from astronomical observations.
Although specific dates vary, these sites were occupied from roughly 1200 to 400 BC.
A main distinction groups these different niches into two broad categories: the lowlands (those areas between sea level and 1000 meters) and the ''altiplanos'', or highlands (situated between 1,000 and 2,000 meters above sea level).
It is commonly seen or represented through iconography as performed by ruling elites in highly ritualized ceremonies, but it was easily practiced in mundane sociocultural contexts (i.e., non-elites could perform autosacrifice).
These sites had obsidian blades and Clovis-style fluted projectile points.
The latter portion of the Postclassic is generally associated with the rise of the Mexica and the Aztec Empire.
Some Mesoamerican cultures never achieved dominant status or left impressive archaeological remains but are nevertheless noteworthy.
The history of human occupation in Mesoamerica is divided into stages or periods.
Generally, sacrifice can be divided into two types: autosacrifice and human sacrifice.
The well-known Coxcatlan cave site in the Valley of Tehuacán, Puebla, which contains over 10,000 teosinte cobs (an antecedent to maize), and Guilá Naquitz in Oaxaca represent some of the earliest examples of agriculture in Mesoamerica.
This is largely based on the fact that most works that survived the Spanish conquest were public monuments.
Middle to Late Preclassic Maya sites include Kaminaljuyú, Cival, Edzná, Cobá, Lamanai, Komchen, Dzibilchaltun, and San Bartolo, among others.
As a cultural area, Mesoamerica is defined by a mosaic of cultural traits developed and shared by its indigenous cultures.
Observatories were built at some sites, including the round observatory at Ceibal and the “Observatorio” at Xochicalco.
Among the earliest complex civilizations was the Olmec culture, which inhabited the Gulf coast of Mexico and extended inland and southwards across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.
The Preclassic in western Mexico, in the states of Nayarit, Jalisco, Colima, and Michoacán also known as the Occidente, is poorly understood.
These monuments were typically erected by rulers who sought to visually legitimize their sociocultural and political position; by doing so, they intertwined their lineage, personal attributes and achievements, and legacy with religious concepts.
Radiocarbon samples associated with various sculptures found at the Late Preclassic site of Izapa suggest a date of between 1800 and 1500 BC.
During the Early Classic, Teotihuacan participated in and perhaps dominated a far-reaching macro-regional interaction network.
* '''North''': wind, death, the dog, the jaguar, and flint (or chert).
Autosacrifice, also called bloodletting, is the ritualized practice of drawing blood from oneself.
Even today, several Maya groups in Guatemala, including the K'iche', Q'eqchi', Kaqchikel, and the Mixe people of Oaxaca continue using modernized forms of the Mesoamerican calendar.
Towards the end of the Early Classic, this conflict lead to Tikal’s military defeat at the hands of Caracol in 562, and a period commonly known as the Tikal Hiatus.
The gods are at once three: creator, preserver, and destroyer, and at the same time just one.
By roughly 6000 BC, hunter-gatherers living in the highlands and lowlands of Mesoamerica began to develop agricultural practices with early cultivation of squash and chilli.
The Mesoamerican scripts deciphered to date are logosyllabic combining the use of logograms with a syllabary, and they are often called hieroglyphic scripts.
The rules of the ballgame are not known, but it was probably similar to volleyball, where the object is to keep the ball in play.
Mesoamerica is one of only five regions of the world where writing was independently developed.
Tikal was often in conflict with other polities in the Petén Basin, as well as with others outside of it, including Uaxactun, Caracol, Dos Pilas, Naranjo, and Calakmul.
The initial phases of the Archaic involved the cultivation of wild plants, transitioning into informal domestication and culminating with sedentism and agricultural production by the close of the period.
An extensive Mesoamerican literature has been conserved partly in indigenous scripts and partly in the postinvasion transcriptions into Latin script.
Lake Chapala is Mexico’s largest freshwater lake, but Lake Texcoco is perhaps most well known as the location upon which Tenochtitlan, capital of the Aztec Empire, was founded.
In the tradition of cultural history, the prevalent archaeological theory of the early to middle 20th century, Kirchhoff defined this zone as a cultural area based on a suite of interrelated cultural similarities brought about by millennia of inter- and intra-regional interaction (i.e., diffusion).
Chronological data refutes this early interpretation, and it is now known that Chichén Itzá predated the Toltec; Mexican architectural styles are now used as an indicator of strong economic and ideological ties between the two regions.
* the practice of various forms of sacrifice, including Human sacrifice
This period is best represented by the thousands of figurines recovered by looters and ascribed to the "shaft tomb tradition".
Additionally, no lakes exist in the northern peninsula.
All of the ceremonial edifices were built in various phases, one on top of the other, to the point that what we now see is usually the last stage of construction.
AD 600 until AD 909 varies) is characterized as a period of interregional competition and factionalization among the numerous regional polities in the Maya area.
Dogs were the primary source of animal protein in ancient Mesoamerica, and dog bones are common in midden deposits throughout the region.
According to the Michigan Technological University, 16 of these are still active.
The pyramids were meant to stand out from the rest of the city, to represent its gods and their powers.
Mesoamerican artistic expression was conditioned by ideology and generally focused on themes of religion and/or sociopolitical power.
Upon the collapse of Teotihuacán around AD 600, competition between several important political centers in central Mexico, such as Xochicalco and Cholula, ensued.
Other areas include Central Mexico, West Mexico, the Gulf Coast Lowlands, Oaxaca, the Southern Pacific Lowlands, and Southeast Mesoamerica (including northern Honduras).
10° and 22° northern latitude, Mesoamerica possesses a complex combination of ecological systems, topographic zones, and environmental contexts.
* '''West''': the house, the deer, the monkey, the eagle, and rain.
In Maya cosmology, each cardinal point was assigned a specific color and a specific jaguar deity (Bacab).
Fruit was also important in the daily diet of Mesoamerican cultures.
The dog (xoloitzcuintle) has a very specific meaning, as it accompanies the deceased during the trip to the lands of the dead and helps them cross the river of death that leads into nothingness.
Some books were composed of square pages while others were composed of rectangular pages.
Generally applied to the Maya area, the Terminal Classic roughly spans the time between AD 800/850 and ca.
The northern Maya lowlands, especially the northern portion of the Yucatán peninsula, are notable for their nearly complete lack of rivers (largely due to the absolute lack of topographic variation).
The Huastec resided north of the Totonac, mainly in the modern-day states of Tamaulipas and northern Veracruz.
The Maya closely observed and duly recorded the seasonal markers.
Secondly, it justifies war, since the most valuable sacrifices are obtained through conflict.
The biodiversity is among the richest in the world, although the number of species in the red list of the IUCN is growing every year.
Another characteristic feature of the ceremonial centers is historic layers.
* sedentism based on maize agriculture
Also in this period, villages began to become socially stratified and develop into chiefdoms with the development of large ceremonial centers, interconnected by a network of trade routes for the exchange of luxury goods, such as obsidian, jade, cacao, cinnabar, ''Spondylus'' shells, hematite, and ceramics.
It is related on the one hand to the luminous Sun and the noon heat, and on the other with rain filled with alcoholic drink.
The main Maya centers were located in the northern lowlands.
; and the negative, exemplified by darkness, the feminine, repose, peace, the moon, etc.
Frequent contact and cultural interchange between the early Olmec and other cultures in Chiapas, Guatemala and Oaxaca laid the basis for the Mesoamerican cultural area.
The Mesoamerican book was typically written with brush and colored inks on a paper prepared from the inner bark of the ficus amacus.
This type of arithmetic was combined with a symbolic numerology: '2' was related to origins, as all origins can be thought of as doubling; '3' was related to household fire; '4' was linked to the four corners of the universe; '5' expressed instability; '9' pertained to the underworld and the night; '13' was the number for light, '20' for abundance, and '400' for infinity.
Stelae were common public monuments throughout Mesoamerica, and served to commemorate notable successes, events and dates associated with the rulers and nobility of the various sites.
These included the two solstices and the two equinoxes, which could be thought of as the four "directional pillars" that support the year.
(European ideology, Manichaeism).
Below are the symbols and concepts associated with each direction:
The west was associated with the cycles of vegetation, specifically the temperate high plains that experience light rains and the change of seasons.
The great breadth of the Mesoamerican pantheon of deities is due to the incorporation of ideological and religious elements from the first primitive religion of Fire, Earth, Water and Nature.
Mesoamerica lacked animals suitable for domestication, most notably domesticated large ungulates – the lack of draft animals to assist in transportation is one notable difference between Mesoamerica and the cultures of the South American Andes.
A unique and common architectural complex found among many Mesoamerican sites are E-Groups, which are aligned so as to serve as astronomical observatories.
Most of the time following the arrival of the Spanish in the 16th century is classified as the Colonial period.
Societies of this region did hunt certain wild species to complement their diet.
Of paramount importance are Teotihuacán in central Mexico and Tikal in Guatemala; the Early Classic’s temporal limits generally correlate to the main periods of these sites.
Around 710, Tikal arose again and started to build strong alliances and defeat its worst enemies.
Other important highland Maya groups include the K'iche' of Utatlán, the Mam in Zaculeu, the Poqomam in Mixco Viejo, and the Kaqchikel at Iximche in the Guatemalan highlands.
The highlands present mixed and coniferous forest.
The term ''Mesoamerica'' – literally, "middle America" in Greek – is defined as the area that is home to the Mesoamerican civilization, which comprises a group of peoples with close cultural and historical ties.
* '''Can Tzicnal''', Bacab of the North, assigned the color white and the ''Muluc'' years
The Mesoamerican Paleo-Indian period precedes the advent of agriculture and is characterized by a nomadic hunting and gathering subsistence strategy.
Over the next centuries, Mesoamerican indigenous cultures were gradually subjected to Spanish colonial rule.
In the most well-known version of the game, the players struck the ball with their hips, although some versions used forearms or employed rackets, bats, or handstones.
La Blanca, Ocós, and Ujuxte in the Pacific Lowlands of Guatemala yielded pottery dated to c. 2500 BC.
These sub-regions are more conceptual than culturally meaningful, and the demarcation of their limits is not rigid.
Death is the consequence of a human sacrifice, but it is not the end; it is but the continuation of the cosmic cycle.
One important topographic feature is the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, a low plateau that breaks up the Sierra Madre chain between the Sierra Madre del Sur to the north and the Sierra Madre de Chiapas to the south.
Other rivers of note include the Rio Grande de Santiago, the Grijalva River, the Motagua River, the Ulúa River, and the Hondo River.
While generally concentrated within the area in and around the Puuc hills, the style has been documented as far away as at Chichen Itza to the east and Edzna to the south.
The southern Maya lowlands are generally regarded as encompassing northern Guatemala, southern Campeche and Quintana Roo in Mexico, and Belize.
In the Valley of Oaxaca, San José Mogote represents one of the oldest permanent agricultural villages in the area, and one of the first to use pottery.
The north contrasts with the east in that it is conceptualized as dry, cold, and oppressive.
The qualities of these gods and their attributes changed with the passage of time and with cultural influences from other Mesoamerican groups.
The Preclassic in the central Mexican highlands is represented by such sites as Tlapacoya, Tlatilco, and Cuicuilco.
The first complex civilization to develop in Mesoamerica was that of the Olmec, who inhabited the gulf coast region of Veracruz throughout the Preclassic period.
The lowlands are further divided into the southern and northern Maya lowlands.
There are 83 inactive and active volcanoes within the Sierra Madre range, including 11 in Mexico, 37 in Guatemala, 23 in El Salvador, 25 in Nicaragua, and 3 in northwestern Costa Rica.
During the Middle and Late Preclassic period, the Maya civilization developed in the southern Maya highlands and lowlands, and at a few sites in the northern Maya lowlands.
