They developed from copper, bronze, and gold on to iron.
This is the source of the 60-minute hour, the 24-hour day, and the 360-degree circle.
Most boys were taught their father's trade or were apprenticed out to learn a trade.
An Early Dynastic II king (Ensi) of Uruk in Sumer, Gilgamesh (c. 2600 BC), was commended for military exploits against Humbaba guardian of the Cedar Mountain, and was later celebrated in many later poems and songs in which he was claimed to be two-thirds god and only one-third human.
Over time the southernmost parts of Sumerian Mesopotamia suffered from increased salinity of the soils, leading to a slow urban decline and a centring of power in Akkad, further north.
The Mesopotamians believed their kings and queens were descended from the City of Gods, but, unlike the ancient Egyptians, they never believed their kings were real gods.
The climate of the region is semi-arid with a vast desert expanse in the north which gives way to a  region of marshes, lagoons, mud flats, and reed banks in the south.
Other Mesopotamian innovations include the control of water by dams and the use of aqueducts.
Later, the term Mesopotamia was more generally applied to all the lands between the Euphrates and the Tigris, thereby incorporating not only parts of Syria but also almost all of Iraq and southeastern Turkey.
This was an important contribution to astronomy and the philosophy of science and some scholars have thus referred to this new approach as the first scientific revolution.
(The Arabic name, with the definite article, is the source of the word 'lute'.)
Its name is derived from the Arabic word العود al-‘ūd 'the wood', which is probably the name of the tree from which the oud was made.
They also believed that water was everywhere, the top, bottom and sides, and that the universe was born from this enormous sea.
# Commemoration of specific historical events (founding, military victories, temple holidays, etc.)
Seleucus is known from the writings of Plutarch.
Upper Mesopotamia, also known as the ''Jazira'', is the area between the Euphrates and the Tigris from their sources down to Baghdad.
Mesopotamia, as shown by successive law codes, those of Urukagina, Lipit Ishtar and Hammurabi, across its history became more and more a patriarchal society, one in which the men were far more powerful than the women.
The oldest pictorial record of the Oud dates back to the Uruk period in Southern Mesopotamia over 5000 years ago.
A few have been found wrapped in mats and carpets.
They attributed answers to these questions to explanations provided by their gods.
This helped to form unions between cities, leading to regional states.
Overland routes in Mesopotamia usually follow the Euphrates because the banks of the Tigris are frequently steep and difficult.
They began studying philosophy dealing with the ideal nature of the early universe and began employing an internal logic within their predictive planetary systems.
They measured the circumference of a circle as three times the diameter and the area as one-twelfth the square of the circumference, which would be correct if pi were fixed at 3.
The most renowned of these was that of Hammurabi, as mentioned above, who was posthumously famous for his set of laws, the Code of Hammurabi (created c. 1780 BC), which is one of the earliest sets of laws found and one of the best preserved examples of this type of document from ancient Mesopotamia.
This instrument appears hundreds of times throughout Mesopotamian history and again in ancient Egypt from the 18th dynasty onwards in long- and short-neck varieties.
They compared the genetic signatures to those of modern populations and found similarities with the DNA of people living in today's Turkey and Iraq.
The geography of Mesopotamia had a profound impact on the political development of the region.
17 graves have been found with very precious objects in them.
Another common name was “shepherd”, as kings had to look after their people.
Women as well as men learned to read and write, and for the Semitic Babylonians, this involved knowledge of the extinct Sumerian language, and a complicated and extensive syllabary.
The Babylonians are also known for the Babylonian mile, which was a measure of distance equal to about seven modern miles (11&nbsp;km).
Each division contains the story of a single adventure in the career of Gilgamesh.
Many Assyrian and Babylonian palace walls were decorated with the pictures of the successful fights and the enemy either desperately escaping or hiding amongst reeds.
Subartuan a language of the Zagros, perhaps related to the Hurro-Urartuan language family is attested in personal names, rivers and mountains and in various crafts.
They were also one of the first Bronze Age societies in the world.
Each of these were named after their main cities, like Nineveh, Samaria, Damascus, and Arpad.
In the extreme south, the Euphrates and the Tigris unite and empty into the Persian Gulf.
In Seleucid and Parthian times, the astronomical reports were thoroughly scientific; how much earlier their advanced knowledge and methods were developed is uncertain.
They divided the year into two seasons: summer and winter.
The image depicts a female crouching with her instruments upon a boat, playing right-handed.
It was later called Babylonia, which meant "the gateway of the gods."
These include the symptoms for many varieties of epilepsy and related ailments along with their diagnosis and prognosis.
Also, copper, bronze, and iron were used for armor as well as for different weapons such as swords, daggers, spears, and maces.
Mesopotamia became a battleground between the Romans and Parthians, with parts of Mesopotamia coming under ephemeral Roman control.
From the many subsequent periods before the ascendency of the Neo-Assyrian Empire Mesopotamian art survives in a number of forms: cylinder seals, relatively small figures in the round, and reliefs of various sizes, including cheap plaques of moulded pottery for the home, some religious and some apparently not.
Esagil-kin-apli discovered a variety of illnesses and diseases and described their symptoms in his ''Diagnostic Handbook''.
In particular, the Babylonian text ''Dialogue of Pessimism'' contains similarities to the agonistic thought of the sophists, the Heraclitean doctrine of contrasts, and the dialectic and dialogs of Plato, as well as a precursor to the maieutic method of Socrates.
The Oud (Arabic:العود) is a small, stringed musical instrument used by the Mesopotamians.
The region was one of the four riverine civilizations where writing was invented, along with the Nile valley in Egypt, the Indus Valley Civilization in the Indian subcontinent, and the Yellow River in China.
Along with Sumerian, Semitic languages were also spoken in early Mesopotamia.
Sumerian temples functioned as banks and developed the first large-scale system of loans and credit, but the Babylonians developed the earliest system of commercial banking.
During this period Mesopotamia housed some of the world's most ancient highly developed and socially complex states.
The text contains a list of medical symptoms and often detailed empirical observations along with logical rules used in combining observed symptoms on the body of a patient with its diagnosis and prognosis.
These songs provided a means of passing on through the centuries highly important information about historical events.
Mesopotamian settlers were some of the first people to make beer and wine.
In this way, it was easier to keep control of a large empire.
A number of primarily neo-Assyrian and Christian native Mesopotamian states existed between the 1st century BC and 3rd century AD, including Adiabene, Osroene, and Hatra.
This measurement for distances eventually was converted to a time-mile used for measuring the travel of the Sun, therefore, representing time.
The earliest form of logic was developed by the Babylonians, notably in the rigorous nonergodic nature of their social systems.
Communication among the isolated cities was difficult and, at times, dangerous.
The Akkadian Empire was the first successful empire to last beyond a generation and see the peaceful succession of kings.
The only Greek Babylonian astronomer known to have supported a heliocentric model of planetary motion was Seleucus of Seleucia (b.
During the third millennium BC, there developed a very intimate cultural symbiosis between the Sumerian and the Akkadian language users, which included widespread bilingualism.
Ancient Mesopotamian religion was the first recorded.
Houses are mostly known from Old Babylonian remains at Nippur and Ur.
The study of ancient Mesopotamian architecture is based on available archaeological evidence, pictorial representation of buildings, and texts on building practices.
The Aramaic term ''biritum/birit narim'' corresponded to a similar geographical concept.
An even earlier Greek usage of the name ''Mesopotamia'' is evident from ''The Anabasis of Alexander'', which was written in the late 2nd century AD, but specifically refers to sources from the time of Alexander the Great.
Mesopotamian people invented many technologies including metal and copper-working, glass and lamp making, textile weaving, flood control, water storage, and irrigation.
The most notable architectural remains from early Mesopotamia are the temple complexes at Uruk from the 4th millennium BC, temples and palaces from the Early Dynastic period sites in the Diyala River valley such as Khafajah and Tell Asmar, the Third Dynasty of Ur remains at Nippur (Sanctuary of Enlil) and Ur (Sanctuary of Nanna), Middle Bronze Age remains at Syrian-Turkish sites of Ebla, Mari, Alalakh, Aleppo and Kultepe, Late Bronze Age palaces at Bogazkoy (Hattusha), Ugarit, Ashur and Nuzi, Iron Age palaces and temples at Assyrian (Kalhu/Nimrud, Khorsabad, Nineveh), Babylonian (Babylon), Urartian (Tushpa/Van,  Kalesi, Cavustepe, Ayanis, Armavir, Erebuni, Bastam) and Neo-Hittite sites (Karkamis, Tell Halaf, Karatepe).
Akkadian came to be the dominant language during the Akkadian Empire and the Assyrian empires, but Sumerian was retained for administrative, religious, literary and scientific purposes.
The earliest language written in Mesopotamia was Sumerian, an agglutinative language isolate.
Stone stelae, votive offerings, or ones probably commemorating victories and showing feasts, are also found from temples, which unlike more official ones lack inscriptions that would explain them; the fragmentary Stele of the Vultures is an early example of the inscribed type, and the Assyrian Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III a large and solid late one.
Some songs were written for the gods but many were written to describe important events.
They also played ''majore'', a game similar to the sport rugby, but played with a ball made of wood.
Governors also had to call up soldiers to war and supply workers when a temple was built.
The volume of a cylinder was taken as the product of the area of the base and the height; however, the volume of the frustum of a cone or a square pyramid was incorrectly taken as the product of the height and half the sum of the bases.
Although Babylon was quite a small state in the Sumerian, it grew tremendously throughout the time of Hammurabi's rule.
As city-states began to grow, their spheres of influence overlapped, creating arguments between other city-states, especially over land and canals.
Mesopotamians believed that the world was a flat disc, surrounded by a huge, holed space, and above that, heaven.
If a patient could not be cured physically, the Babylonian physicians often relied on exorcism to cleanse the patient from any curses.
Different varieties of Akkadian were used until the end of the Neo-Babylonian period.
Although the beliefs described above were held in common among Mesopotamians, there were also regional variations.
This is why the development of irrigation was very important for settlers of Mesopotamia.
The characters of the syllabary were all arranged and named, and elaborate lists were drawn up.
The neighbouring steppes to the west of the Euphrates and the western part of the Zagros Mountains are also often included under the wider term Mesopotamia.
The geography of southern Mesopotamia is such that agriculture is possible only with irrigation and good drainage, a fact which has had a profound effect on the evolution of early Mesopotamian civilization.
Most kings named themselves “king of the universe” or “great king”.
Scholarly literature usually concentrates on temples, palaces, city walls and gates, and other monumental buildings, but occasionally one finds works on residential architecture as well.
He codified over 200 laws for Mesopotamia.
He was also responsible for enforcing the laws.
Thus songs were passed on through many generations as an oral tradition until writing was more universal.
The influence of Sumerian on Akkadian (and vice versa) is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence.
This has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the third millennium as a sprachbund.
The Burney Relief is an unusual elaborate and relatively large (20 x 15&nbsp;inches) terracotta plaque of a naked winged goddess with the feet of a bird of prey, and attendant owls and lions.
Many Babylonian literary works are still studied today.
They believed that Enlil was the most powerful god.
Mesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the Neolithic Revolution from around 10,000 BC.
The Guennol Lioness is an outstanding small limestone figure from Elam of about 3000–2800 BC, part man and part lion.
Deceased children were put in big "jars" which were placed in the family chapel.
In AD 226, it fell to the Sassanid Persians and remained under Persian rule until the 7th century Muslim conquest of Persia of the Sasanian Empire.
In the early period down to Ur III temples owned up to one third of the available land, declining over time as royal and other private holdings increased in frequency.
This irrigation is aided by a high water table and by melting snows from the high peaks of the northern Zagros Mountains and from the Armenian Highlands, the source of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers that give the region its name.
The unpredictable Mesopotamian weather was often hard on farmers; crops were often ruined so backup sources of food such as cows and lambs were also kept.
Akkadian fell into disuse, but both it and Sumerian were still used in temples for some centuries.
With irrigation, the food supply in Mesopotamia was compabale to the Canadian prairies.
In the ''Anabasis'', Mesopotamia was used to designate the land east of the Euphrates in north Syria.
The early logographic system of cuneiform script took many years to master.
The regional toponym ''Mesopotamia'' comes from the ancient Greek root words μέσος (''meso'') "middle" and ποταμός (''potamos'') "river" and literally means "(Land) between rivers".
The last Akkadian texts date from the late 1st century AD.
Old Aramaic, which had already become common in Mesopotamia, then became the official provincial administration language of first the Neo-Assyrian Empire, and then the Achaemenid Empire: the official lect is called Imperial Aramaic.
It was not until the widespread use of a syllabic script was adopted under Sargon's rule that significant portions of Mesopotamian population became literate.
There were too many risks involved to make slavery practical (i.e.
Babylonian thought was also based on an open-systems ontology which is compatible with ergodic axioms.
It is usually used to designate the area until the Muslim conquests, with names like Syria, Jazirah, and Iraq being used to describe the region after that date.
It is on a cylinder seal currently housed at the British Museum and acquired by Dr. Dominique Collon.
The whole story is a composite product, although it is probable that some of the stories are artificially attached to the central figure.
A considerable amount of Babylonian literature was translated from Sumerian originals, and the language of religion and law long continued to be the old agglutinative language of Sumer.
Mesopotamia housed historically important cities such as Uruk, Nippur, Nineveh, Assur and Babylon, as well as major territorial states such as the city of Eridu, the Akkadian kingdoms, the Third Dynasty of Ur, and the various Assyrian empires.
4th millennium BC), and the documented record of actual historical events &mdash; and the ancient history of lower Mesopotamia &mdash; commence in the mid-third millennium BC with cuneiform records of early dynastic kings, and ends with either the arrival of the Achaemenid Empire in the late 6th century BC, or with the Muslim conquest and the establishment of the Caliphate in the late 7th century AD, from which point the region came to be known as Iraq.
The demands for labor has from time to time led to population increases that push the limits of the ecological carrying capacity, and should a period of climatic instability ensue, collapsing central government and declining populations can occur.
The Ionian philosopher Thales was influenced by Babylonian cosmological ideas.
The need for irrigation led the Sumerians, and later the Akkadians, to build their cities along the Tigris and Euphrates and the branches of these rivers.
Vocabularies, grammars, and interlinear translations were compiled for the use of students, as well as commentaries on the older texts and explanations of obscure words and phrases.
It has been argued that these later euphemisms are Eurocentric terms attributed to the region in the midst of various 19th-century Western encroachments.
Early settlers of fertile land in Mesopotamia used wooden plows to soften the soil before planting crops such as barley, onions, grapes, turnips, and apples.
In the marshlands to the south of the area, a complex water-borne fishing culture has existed since prehistoric times, and has added to the cultural mix.
Some of the important historical Mesopotamian leaders were Ur-Nammu (king of Ur), Sargon of Akkad (who established the Akkadian Empire), Hammurabi (who established the Old Babylonian state), Ashur-uballit II and Tiglath-Pileser I (who established the Assyrian Empire).
The arid environment which ranges from the northern areas of rain-fed agriculture to the south where irrigation of agriculture is essential if a surplus energy returned on energy invested (EROEI) is to be obtained.
The ziggurat is the most distinctive form, and cities often had large gateways, of which the Ishtar Gate from Neo-Babylonian Babylon, decorated with beasts in polychrome brick, is the most famous, now largely in the Pergamon Museum in Berlin.
As a result of the skill involved in farming in the Mesopotamian, farmers did not depend on slaves to complete farm work for them, but there were some exceptions.
The Sumerian word for universe is '''an-ki''', which refers to the god An and the goddess Ki.
Babylonian astronomy served as the basis for much of Greek, classical Indian, Sassanian, Byzantine, Syrian, medieval Islamic, Central Asian, and Western European astronomy.
They all had their own governor who had to make sure everyone paid their taxes.
He supported Aristarchus of Samos' heliocentric theory where the Earth rotated around its own axis which in turn revolved around the Sun.
Irrigated agriculture spread southwards from the Zagros foothills with the Samara and Hadji Muhammed culture, from about 5,000 BC.
The Babylonians also had theorems on how to measure the area of several shapes and solids.
Palaces were decorated with hundreds of kilograms of these very expensive metals.
This form of mathematics was instrumental in early map-making.
Early in Mesopotamia's history (around the mid-4th millennium BC) cuneiform was invented for the Sumerian language.
Studies have reported that most Irish and Britons are descendants of farmers who left modern day Iraq and Syria 10,000 years ago.
As a result, the political history of Sumer is one of almost constant warfare.
Periodic breakdowns in the cultural system have occurred for a number of reasons.
Songs were sung to children who passed them on to their children.
It was comparable in some ways to modern post-Keynesian economics, but with a more "anything goes" approach.
During the 8th and 7th centuries BC, Babylonian astronomers developed a new approach to astronomy.
The word Ensi was used to describe the official who organized the work of all facets of temple agriculture.
The Assyrians developed a style of extremely large schemes of very finely detailed narrative low reliefs in stone for palaces, with scenes of war or hunting; the British Museum has an outstanding collection.
They produced very little sculpture in the round, except for colossal guardian figures, often the human-headed lamassu, which are sculpted in high relief on two sides of a rectangular block, with the heads effectively in the round (and also five legs, so that both views seem complete).
Mesopotamia encompasses the land between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, both of which have their headwaters in the Armenian Highlands.
Around 150 BC, Mesopotamia was under the control of the Parthian Empire.
For example, during the earliest Sumerian period, the ''"en"'', or high priest of male gods was originally a woman, that of female goddesses, a man.
Cuneiform literally means "wedge-shaped", due to the triangular tip of the stylus used for impressing signs on wet clay.
This new approach to astronomy was adopted and further developed in Greek and Hellenistic astronomy.
Rich of various periods, have been discovered to have sought burial in Bahrein, identified with Sumerian Dilmun.
Villeins are known to have worked most frequently within agriculture, especially in the grounds of temples or palaces.
The area is generally lacking in building stone, precious metals and timber, and so historically has relied upon long-distance trade of agricultural products to secure these items from outlying areas.
Their son was Enlil, the air god.
As for schooling, only royal offspring and sons of the rich and professionals, such as scribes, physicians, temple administrators, went to school.
The pre-history of the Ancient Near East begins in the Lower Paleolithic period, but writing began with a pictographic script in the Uruk IV period (ca.
Other remains have been found buried in common city graveyards.
The oud is regarded as a precursor to the European lute.
It has been identified as having "inspired some of the most important developments in human history including the invention of the wheel, the planting of the first cereal crops and the development of cursive script, mathematics, astronomy and agriculture."
It comes from the 18th or 19th centuries BC, and may also be moulded.
In the city of Ur, most people were buried in family graves under their houses, along with some possessions.
Sculptures from the Sumerian and Akkadian period generally had large, staring eyes, and long beards on the men.
They could own property and, if they had good reason, get a divorce.
With the end of the Uruk phase, walled cities grew and many isolated Ubaid villages were abandoned indicating a rise in communal violence.
Among the textual sources on building construction and associated rituals are Gudea's cylinders from the late 3rd millennium are notable, as well as the Assyrian and Babylonian royal inscriptions from the Iron Age.
One of the most famous of these was the Epic of Gilgamesh, in twelve books, translated from the original Sumerian by a certain Sîn-lēqi-unninni, and arranged upon an astronomical principle.
The Babylonian astronomers were very adept at mathematics and could predict eclipses and solstices.
The empire was relatively short-lived, as the Babylonians conquered them within only a few generations.
It is assumed that these were royal graves.
In addition, the ''Diagnostic Handbook'' introduced the methods of therapy and aetiology and the use of empiricism, logic, and rationality in diagnosis, prognosis and therapy.
From this point forwards, warfare was incorporated into the Mesopotamian political system.
The later Stele of the Vultures at the end of the Early Dynastic III period  (2600–2350 BC), commemorating the victory of Eannatum of Lagash over the neighbouring rival city of Umma is the oldest monument in the world that celebrates a massacre.
250 BC) to translate the Hebrew equivalent ''Naharaim''.
The earliest texts (7 archaic tablets) come from the É, a temple dedicated to the goddess Inanna at Uruk, from a building labeled as Temple C by its excavators.
Equally, centripetal tendencies amongst city states has meant that central authority over the whole region, when imposed, has tended to be ephemeral, and localism has fragmented power into tribal or smaller regional units.
The rivers provided the further benefits of fish (used both for food and fertilizer), reeds, and clay (for building materials).
When Assyria grew into an empire, it was divided into smaller parts, called provinces.
The codes of Urukagina and Lipit Ishtar have been found.
Thus, each Sumerian city became a city-state, independent of the others and protective of its independence.
Although the rivers sustained life, they also destroyed it by frequent floods that ravaged entire cities.
Later, during the Parthian or Sasanian periods, the Baghdad Battery, which may have been the world's first battery, was created in Mesopotamia.
It also became one of history's greatest centers of learning.
Thorkild Jacobsen, as well as many others, has suggested that early Mesopotamian society was ruled by a "council of elders" in which men and women were equally represented, but that over time, as the status of women fell, that of men increased.
Many masterpieces have also been found at the Royal Cemetery at Ur (c. 2650 BC), including the two figures of a ''Ram in a Thicket'', the ''Copper Bull'' and a bull's head on one of the Lyres of Ur.
Thus, only a limited number of individuals were hired as scribes to be trained in its use.
Girls had to stay home with their mothers to learn housekeeping and cooking, and to look after the younger children.
Boxing and wrestling feature frequently in art, and some form of polo was probably popular, with men sitting on the shoulders of other men rather than on horses.
Mesopotamian astronomers worked out a 12-month calendar based on the cycles of the moon.
Most of these related to religion and omens.
Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as the spoken language of Mesopotamia somewhere around the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium BC (the exact dating being a matter of debate), but Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary, and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the 1st century AD.
Some children would help with crushing grain or cleaning birds.
Major cities, such as Ur and Uruk, took root on tributaries of the Euphrates, while others, notably Lagash, were built on branches of the Tigris.
He was the chief god of the pantheon.
A further distinction is usually made between Northern or Upper Mesopotamia and Southern or Lower Mesopotamia.
In addition, Mesopotamian religion was polytheistic.
