The nonmetallic character of selenium is shown by its brittleness and the low electrical conductivity (~10−9 to 10−12&nbsp;S•cm−1) of its highly purified form.
Antimony nanocrystals may enable lithium-ion batteries to be replaced by more powerful sodium ion batteries.
This comprises one-atom thick sheets of hydrogen-terminated germanium atoms, analogous to graphane.
Grey tin has the same crystalline structure as that of diamond.
The bonding between adjacent atoms in a chain is covalent, but there is evidence of a weak metallic interaction between the neighbouring atoms of different chains.
Elemental tellurium is not considered particularly toxic; two grams of sodium tellurate, if administered, can be lethal.
In 1950 astatine was described as a halogen and (therefore) a reactive nonmetal.
Its many metal alloys are mostly brittle.
It behaves as a semiconductor (with a band gap of 0.08&nbsp;eV), but has the electronic band structure of a semimetal.
Metalloids lie on either side of the dividing line between metals and nonmetals.
Boron trifluoride and trichloride are used as catalysts in organic synthesis and electronics; the tribromide is used in the manufacture of diborane.
Phosphorus, sulfur, zinc, selenium and iodine are essential nutrients, and aluminium, tin and lead may be.
Further indications of a tendency for astatine to behave like a (heavy) metal are: "...&nbsp;the formation of pseudohalide compounds&nbsp;... complexes of astatine cations&nbsp;... complex anions of trivalent astatine&nbsp;... as well as complexes with a variety of organic solvents".
The six commonly recognised metalloids are boron, silicon, germanium, arsenic, antimony, and tellurium.
Such elements include boron, silicon, germanium, antimony, selenium and tellurium.
Arsenic is attacked by nitric acid and concentrated sulfuric acid.
Many polonium salts are known.
Boron trioxide is used as a glass fibre additive, and is also a component of borosilicate glass, widely used for laboratory glassware and domestic ovenware for its low thermal expansion.
Nonstoichiometry is pervasive, especially with transition metals.
Its solution chemistry is characterised by the formation of oxyanions.
Carbon (as graphite) occurs naturally and is extracted by crushing the parent rock and floating the lighter graphite to the surface.
Aluminium is extracted by dissolving its oxide Al2O3 in molten cryolite Na3AlF6 and then by high temperature electrolytic reduction.
The polymeric borates, comprising linked trigonal and tetrahedral BO3 or BO4 units, are built on similar structural principles.
Its solution chemistry is characterised by the formation of oxyanions.
They can form alloys with metals.
Crystalline tellurium has a structure consisting of parallel infinite spiral chains.
Its origin lies in attempts, dating from antiquity, to describe metals and to distinguish between typical and less typical forms.
Its solution chemistry is characterised by the formation of oxyanions.
It has a lustrous appearance and is a fairly good electrical conductor.
It can form alloys with one or more metals such as aluminium, iron, nickel, copper, zinc, tin, lead and bismuth.
It has a density of 6.24 g/cm3, is brittle, and is the softest of the commonly recognised metalloids, being marginally harder than sulfur.
Bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3), alloyed with selenium and antimony, is a component of thermoelectric devices used for refrigeration or portable power generation.
They and their compounds are used as (or in) alloying components, biological agents (toxicological, nutritional and medicinal), catalysts, flame retardants, glasses (oxide and metallic), optical storage media and optoelectronics, pyrotechnics, semiconductors and electronics.
This indicates the proximity of boron to the metal-nonmetal borderline.
The additional pull on outer electrons as nuclear charge increases generally outweighs the screening effect of having more electrons.
Boron carbide has been identified as a possible replacement for more toxic barium or hexachloroethane mixtures in smoke munitions, signal flares and fireworks.
listed twelve (Emsley's plus boron, carbon, silicon, selenium, bismuth, polonium, ununpentium and livermorium).
Polonium shows nonmetallic character in its halides, and by the existence of polonides.
Phosphorus can be found in smoke and incendiary munitions, paper caps used in toy guns, and party poppers.
Phosphate glass has a substrate of phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5), rather than the silica (SiO2) of conventional silicate glasses.
Among the lighter metalloids, alloys with transition metals are well-represented.
It has some marked metallic properties and is sometimes instead classified as either a metalloid or (less often) as a metal.
It has a density of 6.697 g/cm3 and is brittle, and moderately hard (more so than arsenic; less so than iron; about the same as copper).
Simpler or more complex extraction methods may be employed depending on the starting form and economic factors.
Metalloids sometimes are called semimetals, a practice that has been discouraged, as the term ''semimetal'' has a different meaning in physics than in chemistry.
Other authors have relied on, for example, atomic conductance or bulk coordination number.
Various abundance estimates have been published; these often disagree to some extent.
It melts at 938&nbsp;°C.
Boron, silicon, germanium, arsenic, antimony, and tellurium are recognised commonly as metalloids.
Unlike its heavier congeners, it is not known to form a simple B3+ or hydrated B(H2O)43+ cation.
The same motif can be seen, as are deltahedral variants or fragments, in metal borides and hydride derivatives, and in some halides.
It has been referred to as either a very poor metal, a metalloid, a nonmetal or a near metalloid.
Masterton and Slowinski used three criteria to describe the six elements commonly recognised as metalloids: metalloids have ionization energies around 200 kcal/mol (837 kJ/mol) and electronegativity values close to 2.0.
Germanium is a semiconductor with an electrical conductivity of around 2 × 10−2&nbsp;S•cm−1 and a band gap of 0.67&nbsp;eV.
Aluminium hydroxide has been used as a wood-fibre, rubber, plastic and textile flame retardant since the 1890s.
Antimony trisulfide Sb2S3 is found in white-light fireworks and in flash and sound mixtures.
The development of a germanium-wire based anode that more than doubles the capacity of lithium-ion batteries was reported in 2014.
Aluminium is a common pyrotechnic ingredient, and is widely employed for its capacity to generate light and heat, including in thermite mixtures.
Of the non-metallic elements less often recognised as metalloids, selenium—in the form of ferroselenium (50–58% selenium)—is used to improve the machinability of stainless steels.
It is not affected by molten alkali.
Antimony has an extensive organometallic chemistry (see organoantimony chemistry).
Elements to the lower left of the line generally display increasing metallic behaviour; elements to the upper right display increasing nonmetallic behaviour.
To the right of the dividing line are carbon, phosphorus, selenium and iodine.
Antimony has fewer tendencies to anionic behaviour than ordinary nonmetals.
Selenium and polonium are suspected as not in this scheme, while astatine's status is uncertain.
Production methods for the elements less frequently recognised as metalloids involve natural processing, electrolytic or chemical reduction, or irradiation.
By applying heat, they can be switched between amorphous (glassy) and crystalline states.
Despite the lack of specificity, the term remains in use in the literature of chemistry.
The resulting materials are referred to as "carbon alloys".
Boron can form intermetallic compounds and alloys with such metals of the composition M''n''B, if ''n'' > 2.
Varying compositions of GeSbTe ("GST alloys") and Ag- and In- doped Sb2Te ("AIST alloys"), being examples of phase-change materials, are widely used in rewritable optical discs and phase-change memory devices.
Selenium is used in the production of solar cells and in high-energy surge protectors.
It has a relatively high electronegativity (2.55 revised Pauling scale).
Its reaction chemistry is mainly that of its nonmetallic anionic forms Se2−, SeO and SeO.
Iodine is used as a disinfectant in various forms.
Germanium also reacts with molten caustic soda to yield sodium germanate Na2GeO3 and hydrogen gas.
They did so on the basis of detailed comparative studies of the known and interpolated properties of 72 elements.
TeO2 forms a glass but this requires a "heroic quench rate" or the addition of an impurity, otherwise the crystalline form results.
Tellurium is expected to find such use.
They and their compounds are used in alloys, biological agents, catalysts, flame retardants, glasses, optical storage and optoelectronics, pyrotechnics, semiconductors, and electronics.
Carbon, aluminium, phosphorus and selenium continue the theme.
The higher, less stable, pentavalent state has strongly acidic (nonmetallic) properties.
A phosphate (HPO4)2Ge·H2O and highly stable trifluoroacetate Ge(OCOCF3)4 have been described, as have Ge2(SO4)2, Ge(ClO4)4 and GeH2(C2O4)3.
Arsenic in drinking water, which causes lung and bladder cancer, has been associated with a reduction in breast cancer mortality rates.
It can form alloys with metals such as aluminium and gold.
The oxide SiO2 is polymeric in structure, weakly acidic, and a glass former.
The halides are hydrolysed by water but these reactions, particularly those of the chloride, are reversible with the addition of a hydrohalic acid.
Silicon is present in silatrane, a highly toxic rodenticide.
Use of this latter term has more recently been discouraged by Atkins et al.
Phosphorus is used in trace amounts as a dopant for n-type semiconductors.
Liquid arsenic is a semiconductor with a band gap of 0.15&nbsp;eV.
These compounds are preferred for some special applications.
The properties of ''form, appearance,'' and ''behaviour when mixed with metals'' are more like metals.
The recognised metalloids and their closer neighbours mostly cost less than silver; only polonium and astatine are more expensive than gold.
Tellurium, and its dioxide and tetrachloride, are strong catalysts for air oxidation of carbon above 500&nbsp;°C.
Boron, germanium and arsenic samples average about three-and-a-half times the cost of silver.
The heavier metalloids continue the theme.
Carbon can form ionic salts, including a hydrogen sulfate, perchlorate, and nitrate (CX−.2HX, where X = HSO4, ClO4; and CNO.3HNO3).
Going down a main group, the effect of increasing nuclear charge is generally outweighed by the effect of additional electrons being further away from the nucleus.
It shows fewer tendencies to anionic behaviour than ordinary nonmetals.
It has some properties that are unusual for a metal; taken together, these are sometimes used as a basis to classify aluminium as a metalloid.
Difficulty of categorisation is a key attribute.
Some periodic tables distinguish elements that are metalloids and display no formal dividing line between metals and nonmetals.
According to Rochow, the massive crystalline form (especially if pure) is "remarkably inert to all acids, including hydrofluoric".
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) previously recommended abandoning the term metalloid, and suggested using the term ''semimetal'' instead.
As of 5 April 2014, prices for small samples (up to 100 g) of silicon, antimony and tellurium, and graphite, aluminium and selenium, average around one third the cost of silver (US$1.5 per gram or about $45 an ounce).
Metalloids are shown as occurring in a diagonal band or diffuse region.
In the same year, Lee at al.
Boron has a strong affinity for oxygen and a duly extensive borate chemistry.
Both form type III-V semiconductors (such as GaAs, AlSb or GaInAsSb) in which the average number of valence electrons per atom is the same as that of Group 14 elements.
The diamond allotrope of carbon is clearly nonmetallic, being translucent and having a low electrical conductivity of 10−14 to 10−16&nbsp;S·cm−1.
It reacts with fused caustic soda to give the arsenate Na3AsO3 and hydrogen gas.
Each layer comprises carbon atoms bonded to three other carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice arrangement.
Tellurium is a semiconductor with an electrical conductivity of around 1.0&nbsp;S•cm−1 and a band gap of 0.32 to 0.38&nbsp;eV.
Silicon compounds such as silicones, silanes, silsesquioxane, silica and silicates, some of which were developed as alternatives to more toxic halogenated products, can considerably improve the flame retardancy of plastic materials.
A '''metalloid''' is any chemical element which has properties in between those of metals and nonmetals, or that has a mixture of them.
Arsenic is notoriously poisonous and may also be an essential element in ultratrace amounts.
These are alloys or compounds which, at ultracold temperatures or room temperature (depending on their composition), are metallic conductors on their surfaces but insulators through their interiors.
''Elasticity'' and ''general chemical behaviour'' are more like nonmetals.
"Amphoteric element" is sometimes used more broadly to include transition metals capable of forming oxyanions, such as chromium and manganese.
A metalloid is an element with properties in between, or that are a mixture of, those of metals and nonmetals, and which is therefore hard to classify as either a metal or a nonmetal.
Selenium has the electronic band structure of a semiconductor and retains its semiconducting properties in liquid form.
Metallic bonding is the usual result among the heavier congenors of boron but this generally requires low ionization energies.
When it melts, silicon becomes a reasonable metal with an electrical conductivity of 1.0–1.3 × 104&nbsp;S•cm−1, similar to that of liquid mercury.
It reacts (to varying degrees) with nitric, sulfuric and hydrochloric acids to give compounds such as the sulfoxide TeSO3 or tellurous acid H2TeO3, the basic nitrate (Te2O4H)+(NO3)−, or the oxide sulfate Te2O3(SO4).
Such compounds include astatides (XAt), astatates (XAtO3), and monovalent interhalogen compounds.
Tellurium dioxide has been used to treat seborrhoeic dermatitis; other tellurium compounds were used as antimicrobial agents before the development of antibiotics.
Sulfur, gallium, selenium, iodine and bismuth have medicinal applications.
It shows some cationic behaviour.
Some do not classify elements bordering the metal–nonmetal dividing line as metalloids, noting that a binary classification can facilitate the establishment of rules for determining bond types between metals and nonmetals.
The origin and usage of the term ''metalloid'' is convoluted.
Prices for the applicable elements traded as commodities tend to range from two to three times cheaper than the sample price (Ge), to nearly three thousand times cheaper (As).
Silicon is a semiconductor with an electrical conductivity of 10−4&nbsp;S•cm−1 and a band gap of about 1.11&nbsp;eV.
Arsenic is isolated from its pyrite (FeAsS) or arsenical pyrite (FeAs2) by heating; alternatively, it can be obtained from its oxide by reduction with carbon: 2 As2O3 + 3 C → 2 As + 3 CO2.
The most recent IUPAC publications on nomenclature and terminology do not include any recommendations on the usage of the terms metalloid or semimetal.
A metallic glass having a strength and toughness not previously seen, of composition Pd82.5P6Si9.5Ge2, was reported in 2011.
It is stable in air and moisture at room temperature.
Carbon is brittle, and behaves as a semiconductor in a direction perpendicular to its planes.
They exhibit metallic lustre, semiconducting properties and bonding or valence bands with delocalized character.
It moves through the aquatic environment similarly to arsenic and antimony; its water-soluble salts, in higher concentrations, have a similar toxicological profile to that of arsenic.
Germanium dioxide is sometimes used as a catalyst in the production of PET plastic for containers; cheaper antimony compounds, such as the trioxide or triacetate, are more commonly employed for the same purpose despite concerns about antimony contamination of food and drinks.
Traditional organometallic chemistry includes the carbon compounds of silicon (see organosilicon).
Rayner-Canham has argued that these similarities extend to carbon-phosphorus, nitrogen-sulfur, and into three d-block series.
On a standard periodic table, all eleven are in a diagonal area in the p-block extending from boron at the upper left to astatine at lower right, along the dividing line between metals and nonmetals shown on some periodic tables.
Phosphorus, sulfur, arsenic, selenium, antimony and bismuth also have less stable allotropes that display different behaviours.
Organometallic compounds of boron have been known since the 19th century (see organoboron chemistry).
It shows fewer tendencies to anionic behaviour than ordinary nonmetals.
The oxide GeO2 is polymeric, amphoteric, and a glass former.
The commonly recognised metalloids have packing efficiencies of between 34% and 41%.
It is lustrous, malleable and ductile, and has high electrical and thermal conductivity.
Tellurides of composition X''x''Te''y'' are easily formed with most other elements and represent the most common tellurium minerals.
Of the elements less often recognised as metalloids, beryllium and lead are noted for their toxicity; lead arsenate has been extensively used as an insecticide.
As with all the elements commonly recognised as metalloids, germanium has an established organometallic chemistry (see organogermanium chemistry).
It is the stable form below 13.2&nbsp;°C and has an electrical conductivity of between (2–5) × 102&nbsp;S·cm−1 (~1/250th that of white tin).
Silicon is a crystalline solid with a blue-grey metallic lustre.
Carbon can form anions such as C4− (methanide), C (acetylide) and C (sesquicarbide or allylenide), in compounds with metals of main groups 1–3, and with the lanthanides and actinides.
It shows reluctance to acquire "the high positive oxidation numbers characteristic of nonmetals".
The small size of the boron atom enables the preparation of many interstitial alloy-type borides.
Tellurium readily alloys with iron, as ferrotellurium (50–58% tellurium), and with copper, in the form of copper tellurium (40–50% tellurium).
Most of its known compounds resemble those of iodine, which is a halogen and a nonmetal.
Most of its chemistry is nonmetallic; it has a relatively high ionization energy and, compared to most metals, a relatively high electronegativity.
Sulfur is one of the oldest of the fungicides and pesticides.
When presented as a regular stairstep, elements with the highest critical temperature for their groups (Li, Be, Al, Ge, Sb, Po) lie just below the line.
The inclusion of antimony, polonium, and astatine as metalloids also has been questioned.
Going along a period, the nuclear charge increases with atomic number as do the number of electrons.
Like most metals it has a close-packed crystalline structure,  and forms a cation in aqueous solution.
Arsenic can form alloys with metals, including platinum and copper; it is also added to copper and its alloys to improve corrosion resistance and appears to confer the same benefit when added to magnesium.
Astatine may be metallic in the liquid state on the basis that elements with an enthalpy of vaporization (∆Hvap) greater than ~42 kJ/mol are metallic when liquid.
Boron, silicon, germanium, antimony and tellurium, as well as heavier metals and metalloids such as Sm, Hg, Tl, Pb, Bi and Se, can be found in topological insulators.
Depending on the author, one or more from selenium, polonium, or astatine sometimes are added to the list.
Several names are sometimes used synonymously although some of these have other meanings that are not necessarily interchangeable: ''amphoteric element,'' ''boundary element,'' ''half-metal,'' ''half-way element,'' ''near metal,'' ''meta-metal,'' ''semiconductor,'' ''semimetal'' and ''submetal''.
Estimated values for ∆Hvap of diatomic astatine are 50 kJ/mol or higher; diatomic iodine, with a ∆Hvap of 41.71, falls just short of the threshold figure.
The recognised metalloids have either pyrotechnic applications or associated properties.
It is not known to form a cation.
Like a metal, the conductivity of graphite in the direction of its planes decreases as the temperature is raised; it has the electronic band structure of a semimetal.
These two classes of material are thought to have potential quantum computing applications.
Doped germanium can act as a variable speed thermite fuel.
Since iodine is a semiconductor in the direction of its planes, and since the halogens become more metallic with increasing atomic number, it has been presumed that astatine would be a metal if it could form a condensed phase.
Polonium is available for about $100 per microgram, which is $100,000,000 a gram.
Antimony is derived from its sulfide by reduction with iron: Sb2S3 → 2 Sb + 3 FeS.
''Electrical conductivity, band structure, ionization energy, electronegativity,'' and ''oxides'' are intermediate between the two.
Some other elements are included for comparison: oxygen and xenon (the most and least abundant elements with stable isotopes); iron and the coinage metals copper, silver and gold; and rhenium, the least abundant stable metal (aluminium is normally the most abundant metal).
Moody says that, "aluminium is on the 'diagonal borderland' between metals and non-metals in the chemical sense."
Antimony trioxide is a flame retardant.
Carbon, in black powder, is a constituent of fireworks rocket propellants, bursting charges, and effects mixtures, and military delay fuses and igniters.
The oxide B2O3 is polymeric in structure, weakly acidic, and a glass former.
The oxides B2O3, SiO2, GeO2, As2O3 and Sb2O3 readily form glasses.
Of the less often recognised metalloids, phosphorus, gallium (in particular) and selenium have semiconductor applications.
Arsenic and antimony are not semiconductors in their standard states.
It is a semimetal with an electrical conductivity of around 3.9 × 104&nbsp;S•cm−1 and a band overlap of 0.5&nbsp;eV.
The dioxide is soluble in acidic solutions (the monoxide GeO, is even more so), and this is sometimes used to classify germanium as a metal.
Immediately following its production in 1940, early investigators considered it a metal.
Typical metalloids have a metallic appearance, but they are brittle and only fair conductors of electricity.
This is a generic definition that draws on metalloid attributes consistently cited in the literature.
Arsenic trioxide is used in the glass industry as a decolourizing and fining agent (for the removal of bubbles), as is antimony trioxide.
It is the stable form at or above room temperature and has an electrical conductivity of 9.17 × 104&nbsp;S·cm−1 (~1/6th that of copper).
It has a density of 5.727 g/cm3 and is brittle, and moderately hard (more than aluminium; less than iron).
Silicon is an essential trace element.
It dissolves in boiling alkalis, to give the tellurite and telluride: 3 Te + 6 KOH = K2TeO3 + 2 K2Te + 3 H2O, a reaction that proceeds or is reversible with increasing or decreasing temperature.
Antimony is a silver-white solid with a blue tint and a brilliant lustre.
