Alfred North Whitehead was a twentieth-century exponent of this approach.
Related ideas are panpsychism and panexperientialism, which say everything ''has'' a mind rather than everything exists ''in'' a mind.
Adherents of this view include Thomas Hobbes and many modern philosophers such as John Martin Fischer.
He concludes his ''Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding'' with the statement:
Other philosophers, such as Gottfried Leibniz, have dealt with the idea of possible worlds as well.
The nature of matter was a problem in its own right in early philosophy.
Inasmuch as it is about reality, it differs from abstract mathematical propositions (which he terms analytical apriori), and being apriori it is distinct from empirical, scientific knowledge (which he terms synthetic aposteriori).
The Second stage is in identifying the "I-within" with the Self, that we are in essential nature entirely identical with the pure Self.
Carnap took a similar line with the controversy over the reality of the external world.
Realization of the nature of Self-identity is the principal object of the Vedanta system of Indian metaphysics.
Alexandre Koyré led this movement, declaring in his book ''Metaphysics and Measurement'', "It is not by following experiment, but by outstripping experiment, that the scientific mind makes progress."
It is worth noting, however, that the grounds necessary to ensure validity to the proposed theory's veridical nature were not scientific, but just as philosophical as those traditions espoused by Thales and Anaximander.
The first main focus in the Metaphysics is attempting to determine how intellect "advances from sensation through memory, experience, and art, to theoretical knowledge".
For example, it is possible that cats could have had two tails, or that any particular apple could have not existed.
Another central branch is metaphysical cosmology: which seeks to understand the origin and meaning of the universe by thought alone.
A number of individuals have suggested that much or all of metaphysics should be rejected.
In the 1930s, A. J. Ayer and Rudolf Carnap endorsed Hume's position; Carnap quoted the passage above.
The word "metaphysics" derives from the Greek words μετά (''metá'', "beyond", "upon" or "after") and φυσικά (''physiká'', "physics").
Nineteenth century philosophy was overwhelmingly influenced by Kant and his successors.
The particular example of analytic truth being necessary is not universally held among philosophers.
Again, it was understood to refer to the chronological or pedagogical order among our philosophical studies, so that the "metaphysical sciences" would mean "those that we study after having mastered the sciences that deal with the physical world" (St. Thomas Aquinas, ''Expositio in librum Boethii De hebdomadibus'', V, 1).
John Stuart Mill, Thomas Reid and John Locke were less sceptical, embracing a more cautious style of metaphysics based on realism, common sense and science.
The efficient cause corresponds to what is now known as a cause ''simpliciter''.
For example, any theory of fundamental physics is based on some set of axioms, which may postulate the existence of entities such as atoms, particles, forces, charges, mass, and/or fields.
The Fourth stage is in realising "I am the Absolute" - ''Aham Brahman Asmi''.
It claims that existence consists of a single substance that in itself is neither mental nor physical, but is capable of mental and physical aspects or attributesthus it implies a dual-aspect theory.
It is Self-realisation; the realisation of the Self consisting of consciousness that leads all else.
While the Samkhya school considers the Vedas as a reliable source of knowledge, it is an atheistic philosophy according to Paul Deussen and other scholars.
Some philosophers and scientists, such as the logical positivists, reject the entire subject of metaphysics as meaningless, while others disagree and think that it is legitimate.
A person who studies metaphysics is called a ''metaphysician''.
The phenomenology of Husserl and others was intended as a collaborative project for the investigation of the features and structure of consciousness common to all humans, in line with Kant's basing his synthetic apriori on the uniform operation of consciousness.
of Prana which is Brahman.
Apriori knowledge of space and time is all that remains of metaphysics as traditionally conceived.
Aristotle claims that eyesight provides us with the capability to recognize and remember experiences, while sound allows us to learn.
The universe is described by this school as one created by purusa-prakṛti entities infused with various permutations and combinations of variously enumerated elements, senses, feelings, activity and mind.
Samkhya is strongly dualist.
The strong, first assumes that the objects studied by metaphysics exist independently of any observer, so that the subject is the most fundamental of all sciences.
They argued that metaphysical statements are neither true nor false but meaningless since, according to their verifiability theory of meaning, a statement is meaningful only if there can be empirical evidence for or against it.
Metaphysicians investigate questions about the ways the world could have been.
Idealism is a monistic theory which holds that there is a single universal substance or principle.
Proposed solutions often have ramifications about the nature of mind as a whole.
For the last one hundred years, the dominant metaphysics has without a doubt been materialistic monism.
Other Miletians, such as Anaximander and Anaximenes, also had a monistic conception of the first cause.
It means the consciousness of our own real being, the primary reality.
Why then do we perceive it as flowing in one direction, the arrow of time, and as containing causation flowing in the same direction?
Stances on these questions can form the foundation for philosophy of religion and theology, but the metaphysical questions are prior to these disciplines.
Arguing against such rejections, the Scholastic philosopher Edward Feser has observed that Hume's critique of metaphysics, and specifically Hume's fork, is "notoriously self-refuting".
William of Ockham is remembered for his principle of ontological parsimony.
Determinism is the philosophical proposition that every event, including human cognition, decision and action, is causally determined by an unbroken chain of prior occurrences.
Whereas Platonic Forms are existentially apparent in the visible world, Aristotelian essences "indwell" in particulars.
Type identity theory, token identity theory, functionalism, reductive physicalism, nonreductive physicalism, eliminative materialism, anomalous monism, property dualism, epiphenomenalism and emergence are just some of the candidates for a scientifically informed account of the mind.
The nature of the mind and its relation to the body has been seen as more of a problem as science has progressed in its mechanistic understanding of the brain and body.
It seemingly remains an open question whether major "Continental" figures such as the late Martin Heidegger, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault, or Jacques Derrida should be included.
Potentiality and Actuality are principles of a dichotomy which Aristotle used throughout his philosophical works to analyze motion, causality and other issues.
His philosophy, expressed in brief aphorisms, is quite cryptic.
Historically, it has had a broad scope, and in many cases was founded in religion.
In the eighteenth century, David Hume took an extreme position, arguing that all genuine knowledge involves either mathematics or matters of fact and that metaphysics, which goes beyond these, is worthless.
As did the systems builders, he had an overarching framework in which all questions were to be addressed.
Although fundamental orthodoxies could not be challenged, there were nonetheless deep metaphysical disagreements, particularly over the problem of universals, which engaged Duns Scotus and Pierre Abelard.
System-building metaphysics, with a fresh inspiration from science, was revived by A. N. Whitehead and Charles Hartshorne.
It is described as the rationalist school of Indian philosophy.
Self-consciousness means Self-knowledge, the knowledge of Prajna i.e.
* What is the origin of the Universe?
Brentano's concept of intentionality would become widely influential, including on analytical philosophy.
Water was claimed by Thales, air by Anaximenes, ''Apeiron'' (the Boundless) by Anaximander, fire by Heraclitus.
Robert Kane and Alvin Plantinga are modern defenders of this theory.
During the state of imbalance, one of more constituents overwhelm the others, creating a form of bondage, particularly of the mind.
Or can they be expressed using only objects, or only properties?
However, the focus of analytical philosophy generally is away from the construction of all-encompassing systems and toward close analysis of individual ideas.
For example, do all theories of physics require the existence of space and time, objects, and properties?
Kant described the shift between the two conceptions as a Copernican turn.
Hume was notorious among his contemporaries as one of the first philosophers to openly doubt religion, but is better known now for his critique of causality.
If one were to look at a tree one day, and the tree later lost a leaf, it would seem that one could still be looking at that same tree.
Evidence of a close relationship between brain and mind, such as the Phineas Gage case, have made this form of dualism increasingly unpopular.
Proponents range from Baruch Spinoza to Ted Honderich.
Guṇa, it states, are of three types: ''sattva'' being good, compassionate, illuminating, positive, and constructive; ''rajas'' is one of activity, chaotic, passion, impulsive, potentially good or bad; and ''tamas'' being the quality of darkness, ignorance, destructive, lethargic, negative.
However, Aristotle himself did not call the subject of these books "Metaphysics": he referred to it as "first philosophy."
The scientific method, however, transformed natural philosophy into an empirical activity deriving from experiment unlike the rest of philosophy.
In chemistry, Gilbert Newton Lewis addressed the nature of motion, arguing that an electron should not be said to move when it has none of the properties of motion.
If they believe in determinism, they will therefore believe free will to be an illusion, a position known as ''Hard Determinism''.
Another school was the Eleatics, Italy.
For it is by nature the source of all the other axioms."
Much recent work has been devoted to analyzing the role of metaphysics in scientific theorizing.
The Sāmkhya is an enumerationist philosophy whose epistemology accepts three of six pramanas (proofs) as the only reliable means of gaining knowledge.
Other controversial categories of objects and properties which may be argued to exist or not include aesthetic and moral properties, and social constructs such as money and ownership.
Heraclitus of Ephesus, in contrast, made change central, teaching that "all things flow".
Is the distinction between objects and properties fundamental to the physical world and/or to our perception of it?
An ontology may give an account of which words refer to entities, which do not, why, and what categories result.
If we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, ''Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number?''
Classing himself an existentialist, Sartre wrote an extensive study of ''Being and Nothingness''.
They have given form to three schools of thought – a) the ''Dualistic school'', b) the ''Quasi-dualistic school'' and c) the ''Monistic school'', as the result of their varying mystical experiences.
The opening arguments in Aristotle's ''Metaphysics'', Book I,  revolve around the senses, knowledge, experience, theory, and wisdom.
Classical philosophy recognized a number of causes, including teleological future causes.
Samkhya is known for its theory of guṇas (qualities, innate tendencies).
It was first used as the title for several of Aristotle's works, because they were usually anthologized after the works on physics in complete editions.
Another proposal discussing the mind–body problem is idealism, in which the material is sweepingly eliminated in favor of the mental.
The group was founded in the early fifth century BCE by Parmenides, and included Zeno of Elea and Melissus of Samos.
This fusion, state the Samkhya scholars, led to the emergence of ''buddhi'' ("spiritual awareness") and ''ahaṅkāra'' (ego consciousness).
Democritus, in conjunction with his mentor, Leucippus, conceived of an atomic theory many centuries before it was accepted by modern science.
Stating such postulates is considered to be the "end" of a science theory.
Jiva (a living being) is that state in which puruṣa is bonded to prakṛti in some form.
The existence of God or supreme being is not directly asserted, nor considered relevant by the Samkhya philosophers.
Darwin's ignorance of metaphysics made it more difficult for him to respond to his critics because he could not readily grasp the ways in which their underlying metaphysical views differed from his own.
The editor of Aristotle's works, Andronicus of Rhodes, is thought to have placed the books on first philosophy right after another work, ''Physics'', and called them  (''ta meta ta physika biblia'') or "the books that come after the books on physics".
There ''is'' a reality beyond sensory data or phenomena, which he calls the realm of noumena; however, we cannot know it as it is in itself, but only as it appears to us.
The weaker, second assumes that the objects studied by metaphysics exist inside the mind of an observer, so the subject becomes a form of introspection and conceptual analysis.
Idealists, such as George Berkeley, claim that material objects do not exist unless perceived and only as perceptions.
By the end of the 18th century, it had begun to be called "science" to distinguish it from philosophy.
Immanuel Kant attempted a grand synthesis and revision of the trends already mentioned: scholastic philosophy, systematic metaphysics, and skeptical empiricism, not to forget the burgeoning science of his day.
Quasi-dualism is reflected in the Vaishnavite-monotheism of Ramanuja and the absolute Monism, in the teachings of Adi Shankara.
Imre Lakatos maintained that all scientific theories have a metaphysical "hard core" essential for the generation of hypotheses and theoretical assumptions.
The Aristotelian theory of change and causality stretches to four causes: the material, formal, efficient and final.
Feser argues that Hume's fork itself is not a conceptual truth and is not empirically testable.
Prakrti and Atman, when treated as two separate and distinct aspects form the basis of the Dualism of the Shvetashvatara Upanishad.
The principal consequence of the deterministic claim is that it poses a challenge to the existence of free will.
Kant saw rationalist philosophers as aiming for a kind of metaphysical knowledge he defined as the ''synthetic apriori''—that is knowledge that does not come from the senses (it is a priori) but is nonetheless about reality (synthetic).
The sceptic David Hume famously declared that most metaphysics should be consigned to the flames (see below).
The analytic view is of metaphysics as studying phenomenal human concepts rather than making claims about the noumenal world, so its style often blurs into philosophy of language and introspective psychology.
These are the four states of individual consciousness.
Originally, the term "science" (Latin ''scientia'') simply meant "knowledge".
It was officially neutral with regards to ontology, but was nonetheless to spawn a number of metaphysical systems.
Compared to system-building, it can seem very dry, stylistically similar to computer programming or mathematics.
Some philosophers, notably of the Platonic school, contend that all nouns (including abstract nouns, called universals) refer to existent entities.
Although he followed Hume in rejecting much of previous metaphysics, he argued that there was still room for some ''synthetic a priori'' knowledge, concerned with matters of fact yet obtainable independent of experience.
Neutral monism, associated in different forms with Baruch Spinoza and Bertrand Russell, seeks to be less extreme than idealism, and to avoid the problems of substance dualism.
A. N. Whitehead is famous for creating a process philosophy metaphysics inspired by electromagnetism and special relativity.
Aristotle himself introduced the idea of matter in general to the Western world, adapting the term ''hyle'', which originally meant "lumber."
Cosmogony deals specifically with the origin of the universe.
The interplay of these guṇas defines the character of someone or something, of nature and determines the progress of life.
A key difference between Samkhya and Yoga schools, state scholars,  is that Yoga school  accepts a "personal, yet essentially inactive, deity" or "personal god".
(It should be noted that while many of these positions are dualisms, none of them are ''substance'' dualism.)
It is distinguished from religious cosmology in that it approaches these questions using philosophical methods (e.g.
Although he saw himself as having disposed of metaphysics, in a sense, he has generally been regarded in retrospect as having a metaphysics of his own.
Addressing this problem requires understanding the relation between freedom and causation, and determining whether the laws of nature are causally deterministic.
According to the Upanishads the Atman or Paramatman is phenomenally unknowable; it is the object of realisation.
Incompatibilists who accept free will but reject determinism are called Libertarians, a term not to be confused with the political sense.
If they change, then are they still the same object?
What is its first cause?
By contrast, certain propositions seem necessarily true, such as analytic propositions, e.g., "All bachelors are unmarried."
René Descartes proposed substance dualism, a theory in which mind and body are essentially different, with the mind having some of the attributes traditionally assigned to the soul, in the seventeenth century.
In special relativity and quantum field theory the notions of space, time and causality become tangled together, with temporal orders of causations becoming dependent on who is observing them.
Prominent recent philosophers of mind include David Armstrong, Ned Block, David Chalmers, Patricia and Paul Churchland, Donald Davidson, Daniel Dennett, Fred Dretske, Douglas Hofstadter, Jerry Fodor, David Lewis, Thomas Nagel, Hilary Putnam, John Searle, John Smart, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and Fred Alan Wolf.
Parmenides' chief doctrine was that reality is a single unchanging and universal Being.
There is a widespread use of the term in current popular literature which replicates this understanding, i.e.
An example from biology of Lakatos' thesis: David Hull has argued that changes in the ontological status of the species concept have been central in the development of biological thought from Aristotle through Cuvier, Lamarck, and Darwin.
The ancient Greeks drew no distinction between this use and their model for the cosmos.
(see monism, pantheism, emanationism and creationism)
Some philosophers, known as Incompatibilists, view determinism and free will as mutually exclusive.
(see mechanism, dynamism, hylomorphism, atomism)
These included fundamental structures of space, time, and causality.
The idealistic impulse continued into the early twentieth century with British idealists such as F. H. Bradley and J. M. E. McTaggart.
From a European perspective, there was a very significant and early Whiteheadian influence on the works of outstanding scholars such as Émile Meyerson (1859–1933), Louis Couturat (1868–1914), Jean Wahl (1888–1974), Robin George Collingwood (1889–1943), Philippe Devaux (1902–1979), Hans Jonas (1903–1993), Dorothy M. Emmett (1904–2000), Maurice Merleau Ponty (1908–1961), Enzo Paci (1911–1976), Charlie Dunbar Broad (1887–1971), Wolfe Mays (1912–), Ilya Prigogine (1917–2003), Jules Vuillemin (1920–2001), Jean Ladrière (1921–), Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995), Wolfhart Pannenberg (1928–), and Reiner Wiehl (1929–2010).
These include ''pratyakṣa'' (perception), ''anumāṇa'' (inference) and ''śabda'' (''āptavacana'', word/testimony of reliable sources).
Zeno used ''reductio ad absurdum'', to demonstrate the illusory nature of change and time in his paradoxes.
Plato's pupil Aristotle wrote widely on almost every subject, including metaphysics.
* What is the ultimate reason for the existence of the Universe?
Stances about the status of such things may form the foundation for other branches of philosophy such as aesthetics, ethics and political philosophy.
The Atman is unknowable in its essential nature; it is unknowable in its essential nature because it is the eternal subject who knows about everything including itself.
Commit it then to the flames: for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.
Do the objects have to retain their identity over time or do they change?
that the metaphysical equates to the non-physical: thus, "metaphysical healing" means healing by means of remedies that are not physical.''
British empiricism marked something of a reaction to rationalist and system-building philosophy, or ''speculative'' metaphysics as it was pejoratively termed.
In a strict sense, process metaphysics may be limited to the works of a few founding fathers: G. W. F. Hegel, Charles Sanders Peirce, William James, Henri Bergson, A. N. Whitehead, and John Dewey.
He allows himself to speculate that the origins of God, morality, and free will ''might'' exist in the noumenal realm, but these possibilities have to be set against its basic unknowability for humans.
a world composed of "atomical facts".
The problem of free will is the problem of whether rational agents exercise control over their own actions and decisions.
Final causes are explicitly teleological, a concept now regarded as controversial in science.
The Samkhya theory of guṇas was widely discussed, developed and refined by various schools of Indian philosophies, including Buddhism.
Identity, sometimes called Numerical Identity, is the relation that a "thing" bears to itself, and which no "thing" bears to anything other than itself (cf.
Also, adherence to a deterministic metaphysics in the face of the challenge posed by the quantum-mechanical uncertainty principle led physicists such as Albert Einstein to propose alternative theories that retained determinism.
According to process thinkers, novelty, flux and accident do matter, and sometimes they constitute the ultimate reality.
Katherine Hawley notes that the metaphysics even of a widely accepted scientific theory may be challenged if it can be argued that the metaphysical presuppositions of the theory make no contribution to its predictive success.
"Samkhya", Webster's College Dictionary (2010), Random House, ISBN 978-0-375-40741-3, Quote: "'''Samkhya is a system of Hindu philosophy stressing the reality and duality of spirit and matter'''."
''Sāṃkhya'' is an ancient system of Indian philosophy based on a dualism involving the ultimate principles of consciousness and matter.
For instance, it was understood to mean "the science of the world beyond nature" (''physis'' in Greek), that is, the science of the immaterial.
There are two fundamental aspects of everyday experience: change and persistence.
The idea of necessity is that any necessary fact is true across all possible worlds.
framework blending Christian theology with Aristotelian teachings.
The Matter/Form dichotomy was to become highly influential in later philosophy as the substance/essence distinction.
Prior to the modern history of science, scientific questions were addressed as a part of metaphysics known as natural philosophy.
Everything, all life forms and human beings, state Samkhya scholars, have these three guṇas, but in different proportions.
His solution to the problem of universals contrasts with Plato's.
The only synthetic apriori knowledge we can have is of how our minds organise the data of the senses; that organising framework is space and time, which for Kant have no mind-independent existence, but nonetheless operate uniformly in all humans.
It holds that nothing happens that has not already been determined.
Philosophers such as David K. Lewis and David Armstrong developed elaborate theories on a range of topics such as universals, causation, possibility and necessity and abstract objects.
Self-consciousness is the Fourth state of consciousness or ''Turiya'', the first three being ''Vaisvanara'', ''Taijasa'' and ''Prajna''.
In a broad sense, process metaphysics is as old as Western philosophy, with figures such as Heraclitus, Plotinus, Duns Scotus, Leibniz, David Hume, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling, Gustav Theodor Fechner, Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg, Charles Renouvier, Karl Marx, Ernst Mach, Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche, Émile Boutroux, Henri Bergson, Samuel Alexander and Nicolas Berdyaev.
In the Upanishads, self-consciousness is not the first-person indexical self-awareness or the self-awareness which is self-reference without identification, and also not the self-consciousness which as a kind of desire is satisfied by another self-consciousness.
The word ''Self-consciousness'' in the Upanishads means the knowledge about the existence and nature of Brahman.
Early debates centered on identifying a single underlying principle.
The end of this imbalance, bondage is called liberation, or moksha, by the Samkhya school.
According to Leibniz, if some object '''''x''''' is identical to some object '''''y''''', then any property that '''''x''''' has, '''''y''''' will have as well.
In this latter view, ''mind'', instead of referring to an entity, refers to a collection of ''mental events'' experienced by a ''person''; ''society'' refers to a collection of ''persons'' with some shared characteristics, and ''geometry'' refers to a collection of a specific kind of intellectual activity.
The "German idealists" such as Fichte, Hegel and Schopenhauer took Kant as their starting-point, although it is debatable how much of an idealist Kant himself was.
Rejecting mythological and divine explanations, he sought a single first cause or ''Arche'' (origin or beginning) under which all phenomena could be explained, and concluded that this first cause was in fact moisture or water.
The First stage is in mystically apprehending the glory of the Self within us as though we were distinct from it.
The laws of physics are symmetrical in time, so could equally well be used to describe time as running backwards.
Other philosophers contend that nouns do not always name entities, but that some provide a kind of shorthand for reference to a collection of either objects or events.
The philosophy of fiction, the problem of empty names, and the debate over existence's status as a property have all come of relative obscurity into the limelight, while perennial issues such as free will, possible worlds, and the philosophy of time have had new life breathed into them.
Heidegger, author of ''Being and Time'', saw himself as re-focusing on Being-qua-being, introducing the novel concept of ''Dasein'' in the process.
