One of the strongest current Methodist churches in the world is that of South Korea; the "Daehan Methodist Church" (기독교대한감리회).
In 1968, the Evangelical United Brethren Church's Canadian congregations joined after their American counterparts joined the United Methodist Church.
In the first eight years of the Church's life, 11 out of 21 missionaries who worked in the Gold Coast died.
It was also very strong in the old mill towns of Yorkshire and Lancashire, where the Methodists stressed that the working classes were equal to the upper classes in the eyes of God.
In the winter of the same year another brick built church, located on the hill in the suburbs on the south bank of the Min, was finished and dedicated, called the "Church of Heavenly Peace" (天安堂).
He returned to the West Indies that same year and on his subsequent return began to preach to his slaves in Antigua.
Missionaries from Britain, North America, and Australia founded Methodist churches in many Commonwealth countries.
On 21 June 1953, Taipei Methodist Church was erected, then local churches and chapels with a baptized membership numbering over 2,500.
The royal family of the country are prominent members, and the late king was a lay preacher.
A new  Methodist denomination in Australia is the Chinese Methodist Church in Australia.
The influence of Whitefield and Lady Huntingdon on the Church of England was a factor in the founding of the Free Church of England in 1844.
Methodists, stemming from John Wesley's own practices of theological reflection, make use of tradition, drawing primarily from the teachings of the Church fathers, as a source of authority.
Although practice varies between different national churches, most Methodist churches annually follow the call of John Wesley for a renewal of their covenant with God.
Methodist churches in the United States have also strengthened ties with other Christian traditions.
The father of Methodism in Canada was William Black who began preaching in settlements along the Petitcodiac River of New Brunswick in 1781.
somewhat more than a third of Tongans adhered to the Methodist tradition.
Ken Howcroft, Methodist minister and the Ecumenical Officer for the Methodist Church of Great Britain, noted that "these conversations have been immensely fruitful."
The awakening in so many cities in 1858 started the movement, but in the North it was interrupted by the Civil War.
These are now independent and many of them are stronger than the former "mother" churches.
In those days, many members of England's established church feared that new doctrines promulgated by the Methodists, such as the necessity of a new birth for salvation, of justification by faith and of the constant and sustained action of the Holy Spirit upon the believer's soul, would produce ill effects upon weak minds.
In addition to the United Methodist Church, there are over 40 other denominations that descend from John Wesley's Methodist movement.
The latter church was a result of union between the Methodist Protestant Church and the northern and southern factions of the Methodist Episcopal Church.
The Methodist revival began with a group of men, including John Wesley (1703–1791) and his younger brother Charles (1707–1788), as a movement within the Church of England in the 18th century.
A few years later the principal of the school created a Methodist university, the first and only Protestant university in Mexico.
During Kingdomtide, Methodist liturgy emphasises charitable work and alleviating the suffering of the poor.
Many such denominations highlight Methodism's traditional emphasis upon holiness.
In more recent times in Barbados, Victor Alphonso Cooke (born 1930) and Lawrence Vernon Harcourt Lewis (born 1932) are strong influences on the Methodist Church on the island.
The first missionaries sent out were Judson Dwight Collins and Moses Clark White, who sailed from Boston 15 April 1847, and reached Foochow 6 September.
Francis Asbury founded the Methodist Episcopal Church at the Baltimore Christmas Conference in 1784, Coke (already ordained in the Church of England) ordained Asbury deacon, elder, and bishop each on three successive days.
The Foochow Conference was organised by Isaac W. Wiley on 6 December 1867, by which time the number of members and probationers had reached 2,011.
From the 1970s onward, the Methodist Church also started several Local Ecumenical Projects (LEPs, later renamed Local Ecumenical Partnerships) with local neighbouring denominations, which involved sharing churches, schools and in some cases ministers.
On 26 June 2009, Methodists celebrated the 120th year since Methodism arrived in Czarist Russia by erecting a new Methodist centre in Saint Petersburg.
In 1972 the Methodist Church in the Republic of China became autonomous and the first bishop was installed in 1986.
In 1786 the missionary endeavour in the Caribbean was officially recognised by the Conference in England, and that same year Rev.
The early movement acted against perceived apathy in the Church of England, preaching in the open air and establishing Methodist societies wherever they went.
The seceding Hungarian Evangelical Fellowship also remains a Methodist church in its organisation and theology.
It is common, at least in British Methodism, for each congregation to normally hold an annual Covenant Service on the first convenient Sunday of the year, and Wesley's Covenant Prayer is still used, with minor modification, in the order of service:
Wesley took the attempted mockery and turned it into a title of honour.
He was later followed by renowned Barbadian Augustus Rawle Parkinson (1864–1932), who also was the first principal of the Wesley Hall School, Bridgetown in Barbados (which celebrated its 125th anniversary in September 2009).
British Methodists, in particular the Primitive Methodists, took a leading role in the temperance movement of the 19th and early 20th centuries.
The college includes the historic Piula Monastery as well as Piula Cave Pool, a natural spring situated beneath the church by the sea.
Some of the charismatic or Pentecostal churches such as the Pentecostal Holiness Church and the Assemblies of God also have roots in or draw from Wesleyan thought.
A member of the resulting Bible study groups, William De-Graft, requested Bibles through Captain Potter of the ship ''Congo''.
The Italian Methodist Church (; Entity for Methodist Churches in Italy) is a small Protestant community in Italy, with around 7,000 members.
By 1827 Fraser assisted in building a new chapel.
Some, such as the African Methodist Episcopal Church, the Free Methodists and the Wesleyan Church (formerly Wesleyan Methodist), are explicitly Methodist.
Methodism in the Philippines began shortly after the United States acquired the Philippines in 1898 as a result the Spanish–American War.
It is still a Methodist school, and it is one of the most elite, selective, expensive and prestigious private schools in the country, with two campuses in Puebla State, and one in Oaxaca.
Since enthusiastic congregational singing was a part of the early evangelical movement, Wesleyan theology took root and spread through this channel.
In France, the Methodist movement was founded in the 1820s by Charles Cook near Nîmes and Montpellier, for example in the village of Congénies in Languedoc with the most important chapel of department built in 1869, where there had been a Quaker community since the 18th century.
This church was rebuilt in 1844 since the earlier structure was collapsing.
Methodism affirms the traditional Christian belief in the triune Godhead: Father, Son and Holy Spirit, as well as the orthodox understanding of the consubstantial humanity and divinity of Jesus.
While United Methodist Church in America membership has been declining, associated groups in developing countries are growing rapidly.
Whitefield, who had been a fellow student of the Wesley brothers at Oxford, became well known for his unorthodox ministry of itinerant open-air preaching and inspired Wesley to likewise preach to those excluded from the Anglican Church.
He was one of the group of Protestant churchmen who met with Provisional IRA officers in Feakle, County Clare to try to broker peace.
Today, the church has a prelate, eight archbishops and 44 bishops.
The Hungarian Methodist Church, the Salvation Army and the Church of the Nazarene and other Wesleyan groups formed the Wesley Theological Alliance for theological and publishing purposes in 1998.
At this time there were about 100 Methodist members in all of Madras, and they were either Europeans or Eurasians (European and Indian descent).
Methodist evangelisation of northern Gold Coast began in 1910.
It was occasionally nicknamed the "Methodist Rome", the implication being that Toronto was as central to Canadian Methodism as Rome is to Catholicism.
Hok Chau 周學 (also known as Lai-Tong Chau, 周勵堂) was the first Chinese ordained minister of the South China District of the Methodist Church (incumbent 1877–1916).
To this day, alcohol remains banned in Methodist premises, however, the choice to consume alcohol is now a personal decision for any member.
Though not infallible like holy Scripture, tradition may serve as a lens through which Scripture is interpreted (see also ''Prima scriptura'' and the Wesleyan Quadrilateral).
In strongly Reformed areas such as Wales, however, Calvinistic Methodists remain, forming the denomination now called the Presbyterian Church of Wales.
The AME, AMEZ and CME are historically African Methodist denominations.
In 1949, however, the Methodist Church moved to Taiwan with the Kuomintang government.
The Primitive Methodist Church had branches in the US which still continue.
Picot as chairman and Yoruba and Popo District, with John Milum as chairman.
It has eight full congregations and several mission groups, and runs a range of charitable organisations: hostels and soup kitchens for the homeless, a non-denominational theological college, a dozen schools of various kinds, and four old people's homes.
Wesley came to believe that the New Testament evidence did not leave the power of ordination to the priesthood in the hands of bishops but that other priests could ordain.
As a result of having read this book Gilbert, two years later, journeyed to England with three of his slaves and there in a drawing room meeting arranged in Wandsworth on 15 January 1759, met the preacher John Wesley.
The Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia was founded on his work.
Thomas Birch Freeman, who arrived at the Gold Coast in 1838 was a pioneer of missionary expansion.
Baxter was a Methodist and had heard of the work of the Gilberts and their need for a new preacher.
Liang (age 63) baptized Chau (quite young) in 1852.
Not only were Bibles sent, but also a Methodist missionary.
However the centrality of women's role sharply diminished after 1790 as the church became more structured and more male dominated.
After Whitefield's death in 1770, however, American Methodism entered a more lasting Wesleyan and Arminian phase of development.
Methodism is represented on the island by a number of churches including the Free Church of Tonga and the Free Wesleyan Church, which is the largest church in Tonga.
The British Methodist Church tend to be less liturgical in worship, but makes use of the ''Methodist Worship Book'' (similar to the Church of England's ''Common Worship''), containing worship services (or liturgies) and rubrics for the celebration of other rites, such as marriage.
The Methodist Church came to Mexico in 1872, with the arrival of two Methodist commissioners from the United States to observe the possibilities of evangelistic work in México.
There are currently 48 students enrolled in residential and extension degree programs at the United Methodist Seminary in Moscow.
He began preaching and meeting with the Methodist leaders, and within a year the Methodist community had grown to 600 persons.
It was his research and published works that enlightened much of this information on Caribbean Methodism.
Because of vigorous missionary activity, the movement spread throughout the British Empire, the United States and beyond, today claiming approximately 80 million adherents worldwide.
Dr. Thomas Coke, having been made Superintendent of the Church two years previously in America by Wesley, was travelling to Nova Scotia, but providence forced his ship to Antigua.
In 1896 the work in the Hinghua prefecture (modern-day Putian) and surrounding regions was also organized as a Mission Conference.
Whitefield consistently begged Wesley not to let these differences sever their friendship and, in time their friendship was restored, though this was seen by many of Whitefield's followers to be a doctrinal compromise.
Today, millions belong to Methodist churches, which are present on all populated continents.
This gave recognition to Hungarian Methodist Church and the Salvation Army, which was banned in Hungary in 1949 but had returned in 1990, but not to the Hungarian Evangelical Fellowship.
Disputes over slavery placed the church in difficulty in the first half of the 19th century, with the northern church leaders fearful of a split with the South, and reluctant to take a stand.
It was originally known as the Methodist Church in Australia, but disagreement rose over its name with the Uniting Church in Australia, with the latter refusing to allow its entry into the World Methodist Council.
In 1862, the number of members was 87.
Methodist preachers were notorious for their enthusiastic sermons and often accused of fanaticism.
Methodist branches included the Wesleyan Church, the Primitive Methodist Church, the Bible Christian Church, and the Methodist New Connexion.
There are also the IEMELIF Reform Movement (IRM), The Wesleyan (Pilgrim Holiness) Church of the Philippines, the Philippine Bible Methodist Church, Inc., the Pentecostal Free Methodist Church, Inc., the Fundamental Christian Methodist Church, The Reformed Methodist Church, Inc., The Methodist Church of the Living Bread, Inc., and the Wesley Evangelical Methodist Church & Mission, Inc.
Paul Adu was the first indigenous missionary to northern Gold Coast.
In many towns and villages there are United Churches which are sometimes with Anglican or Baptist churches, but most commonly are Methodist and URC, simply because in terms of belief, practice and churchmanship, many Methodists see themselves as closer to the United Reformed Church than to other denominations such as the Church of England.
In America, United Methodism has a wide variety of forms of worship, ranging from high church to low church in liturgical usage.
Other Methodist denominations in Britain include: The Salvation Army, founded by Methodist minister William Booth in 1865; the Free Methodist Church, a holiness church; and the Church of the Nazarene.
The Fellowship was granted official church status by the state in 1981.
The Methodist Church is the third largest denomination throughout the Samoan Islands, in both Samoa and American Samoa.
In Britain, the Methodist Church had a major effect in the early decades of the making of the working class (1760–1820).
Lynch conducted the first Methodist missionary service on 2 March 1817, in a stable.
The Methodist Church of Australasia merged with the majority of the Presbyterian Church of Australia and the Congregational Union of Australia in 1977, becoming the Uniting Church.
It now has 126 local churches in Metro Manila, Palawan, Bataan, Zambales, Pangasinan, Bulacan, Aurora, Nueva Ecija, as well as parts of Pampanga and Cavite.
Various types of educational, medical and social services are provided (including Tunghai University).
Waldensians are a Protestant movement which started in Lyon, France, in the late 1170s.
This foundation paved the way for missionary work by Methodist missionary societies from Great Britain, many of whom sent missionaries with the 1820 English settlers to the Western and Eastern Cape.
A Methodist presence was continued in Russia for 14 years after the Russian Revolution of 1917 through the efforts of Deaconess Anna Eklund.
The Holiness Revival was primarily among people of Methodist persuasion, who felt that the church had once again become apathetic, losing the Wesleyan zeal.
It is the fruit of a fusion in 2005 between the ''Methodist Church of France'' and the ''Union of Methodist Churches'' (in France).
In 1828 Upper Canadian Methodists were permitted by the General Conference in the United States to form an independent Canadian Conference and, in 1833, the Canadian Conference merged with the British Wesleyans to form the Wesleyan Methodist Church in Canada.
The chapel for the First Methodist Church was built on the corner of King Street and Jordan Street, the entire cost of the building was $250, an amount that took the congregation three years to raise.
By reason, it is said, one reads and is able to interpret the Bible coherently and consistently.
Methodist districts often correspond approximately, in geographical terms, to counties—as do Church of England dioceses.
In July of the same year, in Seoul, South Korea, the Member Churches of the World Methodist Council (WMC) voted to approve and sign a "Methodist Statement of Association" with the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification (JDDJ), the agreement which was reached and officially accepted in 1999 by the Catholic Church and the Lutheran World Federation and which proclaimed that:
Today the school is called "Instituto Mexicano Madero."
The two denominations are working on a document called "Confessing Our Faith Together."
A chapel at Broadway (Black Town) was later built and dedicated on 25 April 1822.
They were followed by Henry Hickok and Robert Samuel Maclay, who arrived 15 April 1848.
Traditionally, Methodism was particularly prominent in Devon and Cornwall and, in its Calvinistic form, in Wales, these regions were noted for their non-conformism and resistance to change in the established church.
Methodism in Ghana came into existence as a result of the missionary activities of the Wesleyan Methodist Church, inaugurated with the arrival of Joseph Rhodes Dunwell to the Gold Coast in 1835.
The Nova Scotia Methodist Minister noted young Fraser's sincerity and commitment to his congregation and encouraged him by appointing him as assistant.
One popular expression of Methodist doctrine is in the hymns of Charles Wesley.
A good example of such schools are the Methodist Boys' School in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and Anglo-Chinese School, Methodist Girls' School, Paya Lebar Methodist Girls School and Fairfield Methodist Schools in Singapore.
The evangelist James Mills Thoburn established the Thoburn Memorial Church in Calcutta in 1873 and the Calcutta Boys' School in 1877.
In October 1999, an executive committee of the World Methodist Council resolved to explore the possibility of its Member Churches becoming associated with the doctrinal agreement which had been reached by the Catholic Church and Lutheran World Federation (LWF).
The Wesleyan Education Committee, which existed from 1838 to 1902, has documented the Methodist Church's involvement in the education of children.
It is a historical position of the church that any disciplined theological work calls for the careful use of reason.
Methodism came to India twice, in 1817 and in 1856, according to P. Dayanandan who has done extensive research on the subject.
In April 2005, bishops in the United Methodist Church approved ''A Proposal for Interim Eucharistic Sharing.''
At its heart, the theology of John Wesley stressed the life of Christian holiness: to love God with all one's heart, mind, soul and strength and to love one's neighbour as oneself.
Among names associated with the founding period of Methodism in India are Elijah Hoole and Thomas Cryer, who came as missionaries to Madras.
Upper and Lower Canada were both part of the New York Episcopal Methodist Conference until 1810 when they were transferred to the newly formed Genesee Conference.
Temperance appealed strongly to the Methodist doctrines of sanctification and perfection.
Originally modelled on the British structure, since independence most of these churches have adopted an episcopal model.
George Buenaventura, Chita Milan and Atty.
# People are all, by nature, "dead in sin", and, consequently, "children of wrath".
The UEEM is a part of the world organization, the United Methodist Church.
On 21 June 1898, after the Battle of Manila Bay but before the Treaty of Paris, executives of the American Mission Society of the Methodist Episcopal Church expressed their desire to join other Protestant denominations in starting mission work in the islands and to enter into a Comity Agreement that would facilitate the establishment of such missions.
A second distinctive liturgical feature of Methodism is the use of Covenant services.
In this merger also joined the Methodist Protestant Church.
Theological discourse for Methodists almost always makes use of Scripture read inside the great theological tradition of Christendom.
Through vigorous missionary activity, Methodism spread throughout the British Empire and, mostly through Whitefield's preaching during what historians call the First Great Awakening, in colonial America.
The Church of the Nazarene, Free Methodists and Wesleyans are Wesleyan Holiness churches.
In May 2006, the International Methodist–Catholic Dialogue Commission completed its most recent report, entitled "The Grace Given You in Christ: Catholics and Methodists Reflect Further on the Church," and submitted the text to Methodist and Catholic authorities.
The first Methodist lay preacher at the Cape, George Middlemiss, was a soldier of the 72nd regiment of the British Army stationed at the Cape in 1805.
He also established Methodist Societies in Badagry and AbeoKuta in Nigeria with the assistance of William De-Graft.
There are, however, important unresolved doctrinal differences separating Roman Catholicism and Methodism, which include "the nature and validity of the ministry of those who preside at the Eucharist, the precise meaning of the Eucharist as the sacramental 'memorial' of Christ's saving death and resurrection, the particular way in which Christ is present in Holy Communion, and the link between eucharistic communion and ecclesial communion.
In 1868, Piula Theological College was established in Lufilufi on the north coast of Upolu island in Samoa and serves as the main headquarters of the Methodist church in the country.
A school was established in Cape Coast by the Anglicans during the time of Philip Quaque, a Ghanaian priest.
The best-known is the "UEEM" ''(l'Union de l'Eglise Evangélique Méthodiste de France)'', the Union of Evangelical Methodist Churches of France.
The northern and southern branches were reunited in 1939, when slavery was no longer an issue.
Coke, then 66, died en route.
In the summer of 1818 the first place of public worship was erected for the Wesleyan Methodists in York, later Toronto.
In these new places, it often takes shapes that diverge from its roots.
This second attempt resulted in the emergence of the Methodist Church in the Caribbean and the Americas (MCCA) in May 1967.
When war came in 1941, the vast majority of Methodists strongly supported the national war effort, but there were also a few (673) conscientious objectors.
In 1914–1917 many Methodist ministers made strong pleas for world peace.
'''Methodism''', or the '''Methodist movement''', is a group of historically related denominations of Protestant Christianity which derive their inspiration from the life and teachings of John Wesley.
Three sites in particular carried the torch—Samara, Moscow and Ekaterinburg.
These books contain the liturgies of the church that are generally derived from Wesley's ''Sunday Service'' and from the 20th century liturgical renewal movement.
In August 1856, a brick built church, called the "Church of the True God" (真神堂), the first substantial church building erected at Foochow by Protestant Missions, was dedicated to the worship of God.
This distinguishes Methodism from the Calvinist tradition prevalent in Reformed churches.
The United Methodist Church (UMC) was formed in 1968 as a result of a merger between the Evangelical United Brethren Church (EUB) and The Methodist Church.
Several sections of the Methodist Church joined the Reformed Church of France in 1938.
Today, the primary liturgical books of the United Methodist Church are ''The United Methodist Hymnal'' and ''The United Methodist Book of Worship''.
Methodist denominations typically give lay members representation at regional and national Conferences at which the business of the church is conducted, making it different from most episcopal government.
There are seven World Methodist Council denominations in the United States: the African Methodist Episcopal Church; the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church; the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church; the Church of the Nazarene; the Free Methodist Church; the Wesleyan Church; and the United Methodist Church.
It was started by members from the Methodist Churches of Malaysia and Singapore who were either sent to Australia or emigrated there and is found in all the major cities of Australia.
Initially the Methodists merely sought reform, by way of a return to the gospel, within the Church of England, but the movement spread with revival and soon a significant number of Anglican clergy became affiliated with the movement in the mid-18th century.
Others do not call themselves Methodist, but grew out of the Methodist movement: for example, The Salvation Army and the Church of the Nazarene.
They established "Jeongdong Metheodist Church"(정동감리교회), "Sangdong Pharmacy Store"(상동약국) becoming "Sangdong Methodist Church"(상동감리교회) and "Paichai Hakdang"(배재학당).
By 1783, the first Methodist chapel was built in Antigua, with John Baxter as the local preacher, its wooden structure seating some 2,000 people.
Distinguishing Methodist doctrines include Christian perfection, an assurance of salvation, the priesthood of all believers, the primacy of scripture and works of piety.
John Wesley's influence meant that, in Methodism, the two practices were combined, a situation which remained characteristic of the movement.
Some southerners, conservative in theology, and strongly segregationist, opposed the merger, and formed the Southern Methodist Church in 1940.
Conversely, George Whitefield, Howell Harris, and Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon were notable for being Calvinistic Methodists.
He was later was appointed to the Legislative Council of Barbados, and fought for the rights of pensioners.
Dr. Kingsley Ridgway offered himself as a Melbourne-based "field representative" for a possible Australian branch of the Wesleyan Methodist Church of America, after meeting an American serviceman who was a member of that denomination.
For example, the Arminian heritage is ignored or simply unknown, and an exclusive, Neo-Calvinist emphasis is played up.
In the United States it became the religion of many slaves who later formed "black churches" in the Methodist tradition.
These ideals are put into practice by the establishment of hospitals, universities, orphanages, soup kitchens and schools to follow Jesus Christ's command to spread the Good News and serve all people.
Thomas Coke and six other missionaries set sail for India on New Year's Day in 1814.
However, the Methodist Federation did call for a boycott of Japan, which had invaded China and was disrupting missionary activity there.
Methodist women formed a community that cared for the vulnerable, extending the role of mothering beyond physical care.
On 18 January 1885, the first Annual Conference of the United Episcopal Church of México was established.
In November 1880, the West China Mission was established in Sichuan Province.
preaching services, with Holy Communion being observed infrequently.
The superintendent and other ministers are assisted in the leadership and administration of the Circuit by Circuit Stewards, lay people who may have particular skills who collectively with the ministers form what is normally known as the Circuit Leadership Team.
Benjamin Hobson (1816–1873), a medical missionary sent by the London Missionary Society in 1839, set up a highly successful Wai Ai Clinic (惠愛醫館)  Liang Fa (Leung Fat in Cantonese, 梁發, 1789–1855, ordained by the London Missionary Society), Hok Chau and others worked there.
The group finally declared full autonomy and legal incorporation with the Securities and Exchange Commission was approved on 7 December 2011 with papers held by present procurators.
American Methodist churches are generally organized on a ''connectional'' model, related, but not identical to that used in Britain.
This document was the first step toward full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA).
In 1874, M. D. William Butler established the first Protestant Methodist school of México, in Puebla.
The ELCA approved this same document in August 2005.
The merged church had approximately nine million members as of the late 1990s.
At that time, Wesley sent Thomas Coke to America.
The English Methodist preacher George Whitefield played a major role, traveling across the colonies and preaching in a dramatic and emotional style, accepting everyone as his audience.
