In the countries of the Commonwealth of Nations the metric system has replaced the imperial system by varying degrees: Australia, New Zealand and Commonwealth countries in Africa are almost totally metric, India is mostly metric while Canada is partly metric.
This list includes various units of measure used in atomic and nuclear physics and in astronomy such as the dalton, the electron mass, the electron volt, the astronomical unit, the solar mass, and a number of other units of measure that are well-established, but dependent on experimentally-determined physical quantities.
In the metric system, multiples and submultiples of units follow a decimal pattern, a concept identified as a possibility in 1586 by Simon Stevin, the Flemish mathematician who had introduced decimal fractions into Europe.
His proposal used a pendulum that had a beat of one second as the basis of the unit of length.
In the original version of the metric system the base units could be derived from a specified length (the metre) and the weight mass of a specified volume ( of a cubic metre) of pure water.
Among many other things, the act requires federal agencies to use metric measurements in nearly all of their activities, although there are still exceptions allowing traditional units to be used in documents intended for consumers.
After the Congress of Vienna in 1815, France lost the territories that she had annexed; some, such as the Papal States reverted to their pre-revolutionary units of measure, others such as Baden adopted a modified version of the ''mesures usuelles'', but France kept her system of measurement intact.
The meeting also proposed two sets of units for electrical and magnetic properties – the electrostatic set of units and the electromagnetic set of units.
Although the metric system has changed and developed since its inception, its basic concepts have hardly changed.
In SI, which is a coherent system, the unit of power is the "watt" which is defined as " joule per second".
With the launch of SI in 1960, the 11th CGPM adopted the IAU definition.
Certain German states adopted similar systems and in 1852 the German Zollverein (customs union) adopted the zollpfund (customs pound) of 500&nbsp;g for intrastate commerce.
He then suggested a system of sub-units, dividing successively by factors of ten into the centuria, decuria, virga, virgula, decima, centesima, and millesima.
* retire the international prototype kilogram
When applying prefixes to derived units of area and volume that are expressed in terms of units of length squared or cubed, the square and cube operators are applied to the unit of length including the prefix, as illustrated below.
A common set of decimal-based prefixes that have the effect of multiplication or division by an integer power of ten can be applied to units which are themselves too large or too small for practical use.
Temperature has always been based on observable phenomena—in 1744 the degree Centigrade was based on the freezing and boiling points of water.
The system's characteristics are that density is expressed in , force expressed in dynes and mechanical energy in ergs.
This is not strictly true: In 1988, Congress passed the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act, which designates "the metric system of measurement as the preferred system of weights and measures for United States trade and commerce."
In 1921 the Metre Convention was extended to cover all units of measure, not just length and mass and in 1933 the 8th CGPM resolved to work with other international bodies to agree standards for electrical units that could be related back to the international prototypes.
The usage of the metric system varies around the world.
This was remedied at the 1893 International Electrical Congress held in Chicago by defining the "international" ampere and ohm using definitions based on the metre, kilogram and second.
The second first became a ''de facto'' base unit within the metric system when, in 1832, Carl Friedrich Gauss used it, the centimetre and the gram to derive the units associated with values of absolute measurements of the Earth's magnetic field.
According to the US Central Intelligence Agency's ''Factbook'' (2007), the International System of Units has been adopted as the official system of weights and measures by all nations in the world except for Myanmar (Burma), Liberia and the United States, while the NIST has identified the United States as the only industrialised country where the metric system is not the predominant system of units.
During the 20th century, efforts were made to rationalise these units, and in 1960, the CGPM published the International System of Units, which has since then been the internationally recognised standard metric system.
The metre-kilogram-second-coulomb (MKSC) and metre-kilogram-second-ampere (MKSA) systems are examples of such systems.
The recommendation also catalogued symbols for the most important MKS and CGS units of measure and for the first time the CGPM made recommendations concerning derived units.
* tighten the wording of the definitions of all the base units
The 9th CGPM met in 1948, three years after the end of the Second World War and fifteen years after the 8th CGPM.
In 1889 there was no generally accepted theory regarding the nature of light but by 1960 the wavelength of specific light spectra could give a more accurate and reproducible value than a prototype metre.
These changes should not affect the average person.
In the years that followed, atomic clocks became significantly more reliable and precise; and in 1968 the 13th CGPM redefined the second in terms of a specific frequency from the emission spectrum of the caesium 133 atom, a component of atomic clocks.
The leaders of the assembly accepted the views of the commission.
In 1817 the Netherlands reintroduced the metric system, but used pre-revolutionary names—for example 1&nbsp;centimetre became the ''duim'' (thumb), the ''ons'' (ounce) became 100&nbsp;g and so on.
Gravitational metric systems use the kilogram-force (kilopond) as a base unit of force, with mass measured in a unit known as the hyl, ''Technische Mass Einheit'' (TME), mug or metric slug.
The base units used in the metric system must be realisable, ideally with reference to natural phenomena rather than unique artefacts.
Where possible, definitions of the base units were developed so that any laboratory equipped with proper instruments would be able to realise a standard without reliance on an artefact held by another country.
Copies were made and distributed around France.
In the same year, Gottfried Leibniz independently made proposals similar to those of Mouton.
The commission was of the opinion that the country should adopt a completely new system of measure based on the principles of logic and natural phenomena.
These base units are used to derive larger and smaller units that could replace a huge number of other units of measure in existence.
= (1&nbsp;mm)2&nbsp;
The definitions for the ohm and volt that had previously been in use were discarded and these units became derived units based on the metre, ampere, second and kilogram.
Logic dictated that such a system should be based on the radix used for counting.
* '''Non-SI units associated with the CGS and the CGS-Gaussian system of units (Table 9)'''.
Variations are also found with the spelling of unit names in countries using the same language, including differences in American English and British spelling.
On 22 June 1799 these prototypes were adopted as the definitive reference pieces, deposited in the ''Archives nationales'' and became known as the  and the .
Resistance to metrication, particularly in the UK and the US, has been connected to the perceived cost involved, a sense of patriotism and lack of desire to conform internationally.
His ideas attracted interest at the time, and were supported by both Jean Picard and Christiaan Huygens in 1673, and also studied at the Royal Society in London.
Thus the ''kilogram'' and ''kilometre'' are a thousand grams and metres respectively, and a ''milligram'' and ''millimetre'' are one thousandth of a gram and metre respectively.
This was particularly prevalent in France where the huge inconsistency in the size of units of measure was one of the causes that, in 1789, led to the outbreak of the French Revolution.
In languages where the distinction is made, unit names are common nouns (i.e.
In October 2011, at the 24th CGPM proposals were made to change the definitions of four of the base units.
By 1872 the only principal European countries not to have adopted the metric system were Russia and the United Kingdom.
By 1920 countries comprising 22% of the world's population, mainly English-speaking, used the imperial system; 25% used mainly the metric system and the remaining 53% used neither.
Although SI, as published by the CGPM, should, in theory, meet all the requirements of commerce, science and technology, certain units of measure have acquired such a position within the world community that it is likely they will be used for many years to come.
:1&nbsp;mg = 0.001&nbsp;g
However, 1935 extensions to the prefix system did not follow this convention: the prefixes ''nano-'' and ''micro-'', for example have Greek roots.
Prefixes are not usually used to indicate multiples of a second greater than 1; the non-SI units of minute, hour and day are used instead.
Similarly, neither the US gallon nor the imperial gallon is  cubic foot or  cubic yard— the US gallon is 231&nbsp;cubic inches and the imperial gallon is 277.42&nbsp;cubic inches.
The CIPM meeting of October 2010 found that "the conditions set by the General Conference at its 23rd meeting have not yet been fully met.
In the United Kingdom, the metric system, the use of which was first permitted for trade in 1864,  is used in much government business, in most industries including building, health and engineering and for pricing by measure or weight in most trading situations, both wholesale and retail.
However the units of mass and length were related to each other through the physical properties of water, the gram having been designed as being the mass of one cubic centimetre of water at its freezing point.
France officially adopted the metric system on 10 December 1799.
Insofar as was possible, the new prototypes were exact copies of the original prototypes, but used a later technology to ensure better stability.
In 1586 the Flemish mathematician Simon Stevin published a small pamphlet called ''De Thiende'' ("the tenth").
This list catalogues a number of units of measure that have been used internationally in certain well-defined spheres including the bar for pressure, the ångström for atomic physics, the nautical mile and the knot in navigation.
This list includes the hour and minute, the angular measures (degree, minute and second of arc) and the historic non-coherent metric units, the litre, tonne and hectare (originally agreed by the CGPM in 1879)
The concept of using consistent classical (Latin or Greek) names for the prefixes was first proposed in a report by the French Revolution|French Revolutionary Commission on Weights and Measures in May 1793.
In the US customary system of measurement, which is non-coherent, the unit of power is the "horsepower" which is defined as "550 foot-pounds per second" (the pound in this context being the pound-force).
The CCU proposed to
Each of the base units in SI is accompanied by a ''mise en pratique'' practical realisation published by the BIPM that describes in detail at least one way in which the base unit can be measured.
Decimal fractions had been employed for the extraction of square roots some five centuries before his time, but nobody used decimal numbers in daily life.
The ''hectare'', equal to a hundred ''ares'', the area of a square 100 metres on a side (about 2.47 acres), is still in use.
These categories are:
In 1901, Giovanni Giorgi showed that by adding an electrical unit as a fourth base unit, the various anomalies in electromagnetic systems could be resolved.
For example, the SI unit symbol for kilometre is "km" everywhere in the world, even though the local language word for the unit name may vary.
Initially the ''de facto'' French Government of the day, the ''Assemblée nationale constituante'', considered defining the metre as the length of a pendulum that has a period of one second at 45°N and an altitude equal to sea level.
The CGS absolute unit of electric current, the abampere, had been defined in terms of the force between two parallel current-carrying wires in 1881.
* '''Non-SI units accepted for use with the International System of Units (Table 6)'''.
One of each of the kilogram and metre prototypes were chosen by lot to serve as the definitive international reference piece with the remainder being distributed to signatories of the Metre Convention.
The petition was opposed by the manufacturing industry, citing the cost of the conversion.
= (0.001&nbsp;m)2&nbsp;
In accordance with Giorgi's proposals of 1901, the CIPM also recommended that the ampere be the base unit from which electromechanical units would be derived.
However, reports published since 2007 hold this is no longer true of Myanmar or Liberia.
The available technology of the 1790s made it impracticable to use these definitions as the basis of the kilogram and the metre, so prototypes that represented these quantities insofar as was practicable were manufactured.
Although it was decreed that its use was to be mandatory in Paris that year and across the provinces the following year, the decree was not universally observed across France.
During the early years of the revolution, savants including the Marquis de Condorcet, Pierre-Simon Laplace, Adrien-Marie Legendre, Antoine Lavoisier and Jean-Charles de Borda set up a Commission of Weights and Measures.
In 1948 the CGPM adopted the Centigrade scale, renamed it the "Celsius" temperature scale name and defined it in terms of the triple point of water.
His suggestion was that a unit, the milliare, be defined as a minute of arc along a meridian.
At the same time the CGPM formally adopted a recommendation for the writing and printing of unit symbols and of numbers.
Initially France attempted to work with other countries towards the adoption of a common set of units of measure.
They appear frequently in the literature, but their continued use is discouraged by the CGPM.
After negotiations with the International Commission on Illumination (CIE) and IUPAP, two further base units, the degree kelvin and the candela were also proposed as base units.
Reports from Myanmar suggest that the country is also planning to adopt the metric system.
The centimetre gram second system of units (CGS) was the first coherent metric system, having been developed in the 1860s and promoted by Maxwell and Thomson.
In practice, such realisation is done under the auspices of a mutual acceptance arrangement (MAA).
Since 1954 the CIPM committee that oversees the definition of units of measurement, the Consultative Committee for Units, has representatives from many international organisations including the ISR, IEC and ISO under the chairmanship of the CIPM.
Although the originators intended to devise a system that was equally accessible to all, it proved necessary to use prototype units in the custody of national or local authorities as standards.
Therefore, Einstein's mass-energy equation, ''E''&nbsp;=&nbsp;''mc''2, does not require extraneous constants when expressed in coherent units.
The CIPM's draft proposal, which was an extensive revision and simplification of the metric unit definitions, symbols and terminology based on the MKS system of units, was put to the 10th CGPM in 1954.
''Gram'' is also sometimes spelled ''gramme'' in English-speaking countries other than the United States, though this older usage is declining.
It is an extension of Giorgi's MKSA system—its base units are the metre, kilogram, second, ampere, kelvin, candela and mole.
In 1812 Napoleon introduced a system known as ''mesures usuelles'' which used the names of pre-metric units of measure, but defined them in terms of metric units – for example, the ''livre metrique'' (metric pound) was 500&nbsp;g and the ''toise metrique'' (metric fathom) was 2&nbsp;metres.
The metre-tonne-second system of units (MTS) was based on the metre, tonne and second – the unit of force was the sthène and the unit of pressure was the pièze.
At a meeting of the CCU held in Reading, United Kingdom in September 2010, a resolution and draft changes to the SI brochure that were to be presented to the next meeting of the CIPM in October 2010 were agreed to in principle.
The CIPM did however sponsor a resolution at the 24th CGPM in which the changes were agreed in principle and which were expected to be finalised at the 25th CGPM in 2014.
However the mathematician Borda persuaded the assembly that a survey having its ends at sea level and based on a meridian that spanned at least 10% of the earth's quadrant would be more appropriate for such a basis.
Language variants for the kilometre unit name include: '''' (Italian), '''' (German), '''' (Dutch), '''' (French), '''' (Greek), '''' (Portuguese), '''' (Spanish) and '''' (Russian).
In 1872 the newly formed German Empire adopted the metric system as its official system of weights and measures and the newly formed Kingdom of Italy likewise, following the lead given by Piedmont, adopted the metric system in 1861.
Two years later, in 1670, Gabriel Mouton, a French abbot and scientist, proposed a decimal system of length based on the circumference of the Earth.
The uncoordinated use of the metric system by different scientific and engineering disciplines, particularly in the late 19th century, resulted in different choices of base units even though all were based on the same definitions of the metre and the kilogram.
1&nbsp;km2 (square kilometre)&nbsp;
* '''Other non-SI units (Table 8)'''.
In pre-revolutionary Europe, each state had its own system of units of measure.
For example, ''meter'' and ''liter'' are used in the United States whereas ''metre'' and ''litre'' are used in other English-speaking countries.
The commission's final recommendation was that the assembly should promote a decimal-based system of measurement.
For this reason the CIPM does not propose a revision of the SI at the present time".
When the mole and the candela were accepted by the CGPM in 1971 and 1975 respectively, both had been defined by third parties by reference to phenomena rather than artefacts.
Some countries, such as Spain and Russia, saw the advantages of harmonising their units of measure with those of their trading partners.
1&nbsp;mm3 (cubic millimetre)
At the 23rd CGPM (2007), the CIPM was mandated to investigate the use of natural constants as the basis for all units of measure rather than the artefacts that were then in use.
Many sources also cite Liberia and Myanmar as the only other countries not to have done so.
The prefix ''kilo'', for example, is used to multiply the unit by 1000, and the prefix ''milli'' is to indicate a one-thousandth part of the unit.
In order that such units are used consistently around the world, the CGPM catalogued such units in Tables 6 to 9 of the SI brochure.
However, vested interests who profited from variations in units of measure opposed this.
The '''metric system''' is an internationally agreed decimal system of measurement.
Therefore, the metre was redefined in terms of the speed of light.
The CGS system had two units of energy, the erg that was related to mechanics and the calorie that was related to thermal energy; so only one of them (the erg) could bear a coherent relationship to the base units.
The report was considered but not adopted by Congress.
This is done at the cost of losing the simplicity associated with many traditional systems of units where division by 3 does not result in awkward fractions; for example one third of a foot is four inches, a simplicity that in 1790 was debated, but rejected by the originators of the metric system.
The SI symbols for the metric units are intended to be identical, regardless of the language used but unit names are ordinary nouns and use the character set and follow the grammatical rules of the language concerned.
Stevin declared that using decimals was so important that the universal introduction of decimal weights, measures and coinage was only a matter of time.
In response to formal requests made by the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics and by the French Government to establish a practical system of units of measure, the CGPM requested the CIPM to prepare recommendations for such a system, suitable for adoption by all countries adhering to the Metre Convention.
The name ''mètre'' was suggested by Auguste-Savinien Leblond in May 1790.
Measurements of time were made using extrapolation from readings based on astronomy.
In addition, the official US spelling for the rarely used SI prefix for ten is ''deka''.
The metric system has been officially sanctioned for use in the United States since 1866, but the US remains the only industrialised country that has not adopted the metric system as its official system of measurement.
The ''Exposition Universelle (1867)'' (Paris Exhibition) devoted a stand to the metric system and by 1875 two thirds of the European population and close to half the world's population had adopted the metric system.
This table catalogues a number of units of measure based on the CGS system and dating from the nineteenth century.
This provided the means to measure the time associated with astronomical phenomena rather than using astronomical phenomena as the basis from which time measurements were made.
It was invented in France for industrial use and from 1933 to 1955 was used both in France and in the Soviet Union.
In 2007, the European Commission announced that it was to abandon the requirement for metric-only labelling on packaged goods in the UK, and to allow dual metric–imperial marking to continue indefinitely.
In American English the term ''metric ton'' is the normal usage whereas in other varieties of English ''tonne'' is common.
Areas annexed by France during the Napoleonic era were the first to inherit the metric system.
In the United States metric units, authorised by Congress in 1866, are widely used in science, medicine, military, and partially in industry, but customary units predominate in household use.
Once a set of coherent units have been defined, other relationships in physics that use those units will automatically be true.
They use the character set and follow the grammatical rules of the language concerned, for example "", "''''", but each unit has a symbol that is independent of language, for example "km" for "kilometre", "V" for "volts" etc.
Although the system was first developed for commercial use, the development of coherent units of measure made it particularly suitable for science and engineering.
During the years that followed the definitions of the base units and particularly the methods of applying these definitions have been refined.
1&nbsp;mm2 (square millimetre)
This had been known for many years; consequently in 1952 the International Astronomical Union (IAU) defined the second in terms of the Earth's rotation in the year 1900.
* '''Non-SI units whose values in SI units must be obtained experimentally (Table 7)'''.
On the other hand, non-metric units are used in certain regulated environments such as nautical miles and knots in international aviation.
The full system and name "Système International d'Unités" were adopted at the 11th CGPM in October 1960.
In the early days, multipliers that were positive powers of ten were given Greek-derived prefixes such as  ''kilo-'' and ''mega-'', and those that were negative powers of ten were given Latin-derived prefixes such as ''centi-'' and ''milli-''.
On the other hand, prefixes are used for multiples of the non-SI unit of volume, the litre (l, L) such as millilitres (ml).
The eighth edition of the brochure ''Le Système International d'Unités—The International System of Units'' was published in 2006 and is available on the internet.
However, the word ''grave'', being a synonym for the title "count", had aristocratic connotations and was renamed the ''kilogramme''.
Designed for transnational use, it consisted of a basic set of units of measurement, now known as base units.
At retail stores the litre is a commonly used unit for volume, especially on bottles of beverages, and milligrams are used to denominate the amounts of medications, rather than grains.
In 1874, this system was formally promoted by the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS).
:1&nbsp;km = 1000&nbsp;m
The early metric system included only a few prefixes from ''milli'' (one thousandth) to ''myria'' (ten thousand).
The altitude and latitude were specified to accommodate variations in gravity;  the specified latitude was a compromise between the latitude of ,  and the median parallel of the United States (38°N) to accommodate variations.
Although the United Kingdom uses the metric system for most administrative and trade purposes, Imperial units are widely used by the public and are permitted or obligatory for some purposes, such as road signs.
In 1854, in the introduction to the proceedings of the British Decimal Association, the mathematician Augustus de Morgan summarised the advantages of a decimal-based system over a non-decimal system thus: "In the ''simple'' rules of arithmetic, we practice a pure decimal system, nowhere interrupted by the entrance of any other system: ''from column to column we never carry anything but tens''".
The second, if based on the Earth's rotation, is not a constant as the Earth's rotation is slowing down—in 2008 the solar day was 0.002&nbsp;s longer than in 1820.
The CGS units of electricity were cumbersome to work with.
These relations can be written symbolically as:
* revise the current definitions of the kilogram, ampere, kelvin and mole to make use of the above four constants of nature
1&nbsp;km3 (cubic kilometre)
These artefacts were replaced in 1889 by the new prototypes manufactured under international supervision.
By 1983 it was accepted that the speed of light in vacuum was constant and that this constant provided a more reproducible procedure for measuring length.
Coherence was a design aim of SI resulting in only one unit of energy being defined – the joule.
Although the CGPM passed a resolution in 1901 defining the standard value of acceleration due to gravity to be 980.665&nbsp;cm/s2, gravitational units are not part of the International System of Units (SI).
* in addition to the speed of light, define four constants of nature—Planck's constant, an elementary charge, Boltzmann constant and Avogadro constant – to have exact values
Control of the prototype units of measure was maintained by the French government until 1875, when it was passed to an intergovernmental organisation, the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM).
hold without the introduction of unit conversion factors.
Although a number of variants of the metric system emerged in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the term is now often used as a synonym for "SI" or the "International System of Units"—the official system of measurement in almost every country in the world.
From its beginning, the main features of the metric system were the standard set of interrelated base units and a standard set of prefixes in powers of ten.
In the 1940s, the International Electrotechnical Commission adopted an MKS variant of this definition for the ampere which was adopted in 1948 by the CGPM.
In that year the prototype metre was replaced by a formal definition which defines the metre in terms of the wavelength of specified light spectra.
The concept of coherence was only introduced into the metric system in the third quarter of the 19th century; in its original form the metric system was non-coherent—in particular the litre was 0.001&nbsp;m3 and the are (from which the hectare derives) was 100&nbsp;m2.
Among the supporters of such an international system of units was Thomas Jefferson who, in 1790, presented a document ''Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and Measures of the United States'' to Congress in which he advocated a decimal system that used traditional names for units (such as ten inches per foot).
One of the earliest proposals for a decimal system in which length, area, volume and mass were linked to each other was made by John Wilkins, first secretary of the Royal Society of London in his 1668 essay "''An Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language''".
Originally the ''kilogramme'', defined as being one ''pinte'' (later renamed the ''litre'') of water at the melting point of ice, was called the ''grave''; the ''gramme'' being an alternative name for a thousandth of a ''grave''.
An Agence France-Presse report from 2010 stated that Sierra Leone had passed a law to replace the imperial system with the metric system thereby aligning its system of measurement with that used by its Mano River Union (MRU) neighbours Guinea and Liberia.
It was originally based on the  and the  introduced by the First French Republic in 1799, but over the years the definitions of the metre and the kilogram have been refined, and the metric system has been extended to incorporate many more units.
This system continued the tradition of having separate base units for geometrically related dimensions, e.g., ''mètre'' for lengths, ''are'' (100&nbsp;m2) for areas, ''stère'' (1&nbsp;m3) for dry capacities, and ''litre'' (1 dm3) for liquid capacities.
Derived units were built up from the base units using logical rather than empirical relationships while multiples and submultiples of both base and derived units were decimal-based and identified by a standard set of prefixes.
Their report of March 1791 to the ''Assemblée nationale constituante'' considered but rejected the view of Laplace that a duodecimal system of counting should replace the existing decimal system; the view such a system was bound to fail prevailed.
The International System of Units (''Système international d'unités'' or SI) is the current international standard metric system and is also the system most widely used around the world.
During the 19th century the prefix ''myria-'', derived from the Greek word μύριοι (''mýrioi''), was used as a multiplier for .
Some other jurisdictions, such as Hong Kong, have laws mandating or permitting other systems of measurement in parallel with the metric system in some or all contexts.
These definitions give a much better reproducibility and also allow anyone, anywhere with a suitably equipped laboratory, to make a standard metre.
In 1927 several million people in the United States sent over 100,000 petitions backed by the Metric Association and The General Federation of Women's Clubs urging Congress to adopt the metric system.
Thermal energy was defined in calories, one calorie being the energy required to raise the temperature of one gram of water from 15.5&nbsp;°C to 16.5&nbsp;°C.
However the imperial system is widely used by the British public, such as feet and inches as a measurement of height, weight in stone and pounds, and is legally mandated in various cases, such as road-sign distances, which must be given in yards and miles.
The formal definition of International System of Units (SI) along with the associated resolutions passed by the CGPM and the CIPM are published by the BIPM in brochure form at regular intervals.
