Less than 1.2% of Mexico's population has significant African ancestry, with 1.38 million recognized during the 2015 Mexican Census.
Major players in the broadcasting industry are Televisa—the largest media company in the Spanish-speaking world—and TV Azteca.
At the time  Mercedes-Benz and Nissan were already building a $1.4 billion plant near Puebla, while BMW was planning a $1-billion assembly plant in San Luis Potosí.
The whole project was projected to cost 240&nbsp;billion pesos, or about 25&nbsp;billion US$ and is being paid for jointly by the Mexican government and the local private sector including the wealthiest man in the world, Mexico's billionaire business tycoon Carlos Slim.
Only a few speak any Arabic, and such knowledge is often limited to a few basic words.
Maya rebels, or Cruzob, maintained relatively independent enclaves in the peninsula until the 1930s.
In 2013, Mexico's basketball team won the Americas Basketball Championship and qualified for the 2014 Basketball World Cup where it reached the playoffs.
The first decades of the post-independence period were marked by economic instability, which led to the Pastry War in 1836.
Mexico is now firmly established as an upper middle-income country.
Covering almost two million square kilometers (over 760,000&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi), Mexico is the sixth largest country in the Americas by total area and the 13th largest independent nation in the world.
The remittances from Mexican citizens working in the United States account for 0.2% of Mexico's GDP which was equal to US$20 billion per year in 2004 and is the tenth largest source of foreign income after oil, industrial exports, manufactured goods, electronics, heavy industry, automobiles, construction, food, banking and financial services.
11.6 million Americans listed their ancestry as Mexican .
From its farthest land points, Mexico is a little over  in length.
His successor and brother Cuitláhuac took control of the Aztec empire, but was among the first to fall from the first smallpox epidemic in the area a short time later.
Some indigenous communities have a degree of autonomy under the legislation of "usos y costumbres", which allows them to regulate some internal issues under customary law.
There is also extensive microwave radio relay network and considerable use of fiber-optic and coaxial cable.
In 2008, president Calderón proposed a major reform of the judicial system, which was approved by the Congress of the Union, which included oral trials, the presumption of innocence for defendants, the authority of local police to investigate crime—until then a prerogative of special police units—and several other changes intended to speed up trials.
Though Mexico had a significant number of African slaves during colonial times, most of the African-descended population were absorbed into the surrounding Mestizo (mixed European/indigenous) and indigenous populations through unions among the groups.
By 2050, Mexico could become the world's fifth or seventh largest economy.
Because of its high biodiversity Mexico has also been a frequent site of bioprospecting by international research bodies.
Roughly 100,000 Arabic-speakers settled in Mexico during this time period.
The telecommunications industry is mostly dominated by Telmex (''Teléfonos de México''), privatized in 1990.
Drug cartels are a major concern in Mexico.
In Puebla alone, 70 industrial part-makers cluster around Volkswagen.
It required another two centuries to complete the conquest: rebellions broke out within the old empire and wars continued with other native peoples.
Mexico is the largest source of immigration to the United States.
Mexican politicians and reformers such as José Vasconcelos and Manuel Gamio were instrumental in building a Mexican national identity on the concept of mestizaje.
A large majority of Mexicans have been classified as "Mestizos", meaning in modern Mexican usage that they identify fully neither with any indigenous culture nor with a particular non-Mexican heritage, but rather identify as having cultural traits and heritage incorporating elements from indigenous and European traditions.
During this period, the frontier borderlands to the north became quite isolated from the government in Mexico City, and its monopolistic economic policies caused suffering.
Spanish colonists created an elaborate racial caste system, classifying people by racial mixture.
As such, the majority of the Mexican central and northern territories are located at high altitudes, and the highest elevations are found at the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt: Pico de Orizaba (), Popocatepetl () and Iztaccihuatl () and the Nevado de Toluca ().
Both presidents were unharmed and the summit was held.
The executive is the President of the United Mexican States, who is the head of state and government, as well as the commander-in-chief of the Mexican military forces.
According to the National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples (''Comisión Nacional para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Indígenas'', or CDI in Spanish) and the INEGI (official census institute), there are 15.7 million indigenous people in Mexico, of many different ethnic groups, which constitute 14.9% of the population in the country.
File:Centenario Oil platform Pemex.jpg|''Pemex oil platform in Campeche''
In May 2009, Mexico's National Institute of Genomic Medicine issued a report on a genomic study of 300 mestizos from the states of Guerrero, Sonora, Veracruz, Yucatán, Zacatecas, and Guanajuato.
Mexico is the site of the domestication of maize, tomato and beans, which produced an agricultural surplus.
A day trip to the south of Cancún is the historic port of Tulum.
The government of the state of Yucatán is also funding the construction of a high speed line connecting the cities of Cozumel to Mérida and Chichen Itza and Cancún.
Geopolitically, however, Mexico is entirely considered part of North America, along with Canada and the United States.
Land north of the twenty-fourth parallel experiences cooler temperatures during the winter months.
Mexico is located between latitudes 14° and 33°N, and longitudes 86° and 119°W in the southern portion of North America.
The hegemonic nature of the Aztec empire was demonstrated by their restoration of local rulers to their former position after their city-state was conquered.
For example, many cities in the north like Monterrey, Hermosillo, and Mexicali experience temperatures of  or more in summer.
GDP annual average growth for the period of 1995–2002 was 5.1%.
A third force, the constitutional army led by Venustiano Carranza managed to bring an end to the war, and radically amended the 1857 Constitution to include many of the social premises and demands of the revolutionaries into what was eventually called the 1917 Constitution.
In 1929, Calles founded the National Revolutionary Party (PNR), later renamed the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), and started a period known as the Maximato, which ended with the election of Lázaro Cárdenas, who implemented many economic and social reforms.
Other sources, however, mentioned that the death toll of the Aztecs might have reached 15 million (out of a population of less than 30 million) although such a high number conflicts with the 350,000 Aztecs who ruled an empire of 5 million or 10 million.
File:Buffalo in Chihuahua.jpg|''Janos Biosphere Reserve'''''Semi-arid climate (BSk)'''
The Aztec of Central Mexico built a tributary empire covering most of central Mexico.
The Senate is made up of 128 senators.
Mexico has the fifteenth largest nominal GDP and the eleventh largest by purchasing power parity.
From east to west at the center, the country is crossed by the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt also known as the Sierra Nevada.
By law, all defendants have the rights that assure them fair trials and human treatment; however, the system is overburdened and overwhelmed with several problems.
Mexico is crossed from north to south by two mountain ranges known as Sierra Madre Oriental and Sierra Madre Occidental, which are the extension of the Rocky Mountains from northern North America.
The Mesoamerican writing tradition reached its height in the Classic Maya Hieroglyphic script.
They made no concerted effort to settle the northern desert regions in what is now the United States until the end of the 16th century (Santa Fe, 1598).
The inter-ethnic marriage in the Arab community, regardless of religious affiliation, is very high; most community members have only one parent who has Arab ethnicity.
From the beginning, the slaves, who were mostly male, intermarried with indigenous women.
Twelve institutes were integrated into UNAM from 1929 to 1973.
Post-revolutionary art in Mexico had its expression in the works of renowned artists such as David Alfaro Siqueiros, Federico Cantú Garza, Frida Kahlo, Juan O'Gorman, José Clemente Orozco, Diego Rivera, and Rufino Tamayo.
In Chiapas the word "Ladino" is used instead of mestizo.
The Mexican drug cartels have as many as 100,000 members.
Mexico's total area is , making it the world's 14th largest country by total area, and includes approximately  of islands in the Pacific Ocean (including the remote Guadalupe Island and the Revillagigedo Islands), Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean, and Gulf of California.
This sound, as well as the voiced postalveolar fricative , represented by a 'j', evolved into a voiceless velar fricative  during the 16th century.
The President is responsible for executing and enforcing the law, and has the power to veto bills.
Mexico is home to the largest number of U.S. citizens abroad (estimated at one million in 1999).
Instead the majority, especially those of younger generations, speak Spanish as a first language.
In the subsequent formative eras, maize cultivation and cultural traits such as a mythological and religious complex, and a vigesimal numeric system, were diffused from the Mexican cultures to the rest of the Mesoamerican culture area.
All of the indices of social development for the indigenous population are considerably lower than the national average.
File:Aura Solar Baja California Sur.jpg|''Aura Solar in Baja California Sur''
Some Mexican actors have achieved recognition as Hollywood stars.
Mexican films from the ''Golden Age'' in the 1940s and 1950s are the greatest examples of Latin American cinema, with a huge industry comparable to the Hollywood of those years.
Beyond that, the etymology is uncertain.
The new Constitution drafted in 1857 established a secular state, federalism as the form of government, and several freedoms.
Small numbers of illegal immigrants come from Ecuador, Cuba, China, South Africa, and Pakistan.
These areas developed in different directions from the center of the country.
Another source, the 2010 census, found that 14.86% of the population self-identified as indigenous.
Three centuries later, this territory became Mexico following recognition in 1821 after the colony's Mexican War of Independence.
In addition, since the 1990s Mexico has sought a reform of the United Nations Security Council and its working methods with the support of Canada, Italy, Pakistan and other nine countries, which form a group informally called the Coffee Club.
The remains of the victims were frequently mutilated.
The meandering Río Bravo del Norte (known as the Rio Grande in the United States) defines the border from Ciudad Juárez east to the Gulf of Mexico.
The 18th century sees a great increase in the percentage of mestizos (The Penguin Atlas of World Population History, pp.&nbsp;291–92).
This sparked a diplomatic crisis with the countries whose citizens had lost businesses by Cárdenas' radical measure, but since then the company has played an important role in the economic development of Mexico.
Both the mission system and the ''presidios'' had collapsed after the Spanish withdrew from the colony, causing great disruption especially in Alta California and New Mexico.
Mexico, as the center of New Spain has some of the most renowned buildings built in this style.
This enabled the transition from paleo-Indian hunter-gatherers to sedentary agricultural villages beginning around 5000 BCE.
The National Human Rights Commission has had little impact in reversing this trend, engaging mostly in documentation but failing to use its powers to issue public condemnations to the officials who ignore its recommendations.
On September 16, 1810, a "loyalist revolt" against the ruling Junta was declared by priest Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla, in the small town of Dolores, Guanajuato.
The train, which will travel at 300 kilometers per hour, will allow passengers to travel from Mexico City to Guadalajara in just 2&nbsp;hours.
To be implemented, the bill needed to be passed by both houses of Congress, as well as a majority of Mexico's 31 State legislatures.
The constitution establishes three levels of government: the federal Union, the state governments and the municipal governments.
''Evolution of the Race''.
The first highly successful instance being the discovery in 1947 of the tuber "Barbasco" (''Dioscorea composita'') which has a high content of diosgenin, revolutionizing the production of synthetic hormones in the 1950s and 1960s and eventually leading to the invention of combined oral contraceptive pills.
Veal is common in the Yucatan.
Assassinated in 1920, Carranza was succeeded by another revolutionary hero, Álvaro Obregón, who in turn was succeeded by Plutarco Elías Calles.
Approximately 2,500 species are protected by Mexican legislations.
Morelos was captured and executed on December 22, 1815.
Many of these immigrants came with money to invest and/or ties to allow them to become prominent in business and other aspects of Mexican society.
The category of ''indígena'' (indigenous) can be defined narrowly according to linguistic criteria including only speakers of one of Mexico's 62 indigenous languages or people who self-identify as having an indigenous cultural background.
The perpetrators are often the boyfriend, father-in-law, ex-husbands or husbands but only 1.6% of the murder cases led to an arrest and sentencing.
The Tejano grew more separate from the government and due to its neglect, many supported the idea of independence and joined movements to that end, collaborating with the English-speaking Americans.
The roadway network in Mexico has an extent of , of which  are paved, making it the largest paved-roadway network in Latin America.
Among the achievements is a significant increase in access to piped water supply in urban areas (88% to 93%) as well as in rural areas (50% to 74%) between 1990 and 2010.
The Pastry War, the Franco-Mexican War, a civil war, two empires and a domestic dictatorship occurred through the 19th century.
It was designed to observe regions of space obscured by stellar dust.
In this period, villages became more dense in terms of population, becoming socially stratified with an artisan class, and developing into chiefdoms.
Mexico ranks first in biodiversity in reptiles with 707 known species, second in mammals with 438 species, fourth in amphibians with 290 species, and fourth in flora, with 26,000 different species.
A revolt against him in 1823 established the United Mexican States.
President Miguel de la Madrid resorted to currency devaluations which in turn sparked inflation.
The mestizo identity promoted by the government is more a cultural identity than a biological one, giving it a strong influence in the country.
The country is bordered to the north by the United States; to the south and west by the Pacific Ocean; to the southeast by Guatemala, Belize, and the Caribbean Sea; and to the east by the Gulf of Mexico.
Because of Mexican orography, providing a landline telephone service at remote mountainous areas is expensive, and the penetration of line-phones per capita is low compared to other Latin American countries, at 40 percent; however, 82% of Mexicans over the age of 14 own a mobile phone.
In 2012, Mexico passed a comprehensive climate change bill, a first in the developing world, that has set a goal for the country to generate 35% of its energy from clean energy sources by 2024, and to cut emissions by 50% by 2050, from the level found in 2000.
File:Eurus CFE Oaxaca.jpg|''Eurus Wind Farm in Oaxaca''
The only state where "whites" outnumbered Mestizos was Sonora, in which "whites" composed 41.85% of the population, and Mestizos 40.38%.
UNAM provides world class education in science, medicine, and engineering.
The name of the city-state was transliterated to Spanish as México with the phonetic value of the letter 'x' in Medieval Spanish, which represented the voiceless postalveolar fricative .
Genetic variation is largely based upon where in the country an individual is from.
Still another hypothesis suggests that the word is derived from Mēctli, the goddess of maguey.
Public security is enacted at the three levels of government, each of which has different prerogatives and responsibilities.
In 2014 alone, more than $10 billion in investment was committed.
In 1988, alleged electoral fraud prevented the leftist candidate Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas from winning the national presidential elections, giving Carlos Salinas de Gortari the presidency and leading to massive protests in Mexico City.
Mexico is one of the founding members of several international organizations, most notably the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the Organization of Ibero-American States, the OPANAL and the Rio Group.
In some cases Spanish colonists had unions with female slaves.
Mexican singers of traditional music are: Lila Downs, Susana Harp, Jaramar, GEO Meneses and Alejandra Robles.
Diego Rivera, the most well-known figure of Mexican muralism, painted the Man at the Crossroads at the Rockefeller Center in New York City, a huge mural that was destroyed the next year because of the inclusion of a portrait of Russian communist leader Lenin.
Education was encouraged by the Crown from the very beginning.
The absolute indigenous population is growing, but at a slower rate than the rest of the population so that the percentage of indigenous peoples is nonetheless falling.
The formative period saw the spread of distinct religious and symbolic traditions, as well as artistic and architectural complexes.
Mexican teams have won the Caribbean Series nine times.
Smallpox was a devastating disease: it generally killed Aztecs but not Spaniards, who as Europeans had already been exposed to it in their cities for centuries and therefore had developed acquired immunity.
The study found that the Mestizo population of these Mexican states were on average 55% of indigenous ancestry followed by 41.8% of European, 1.8% of African, and 1.2% of East Asian ancestry.
Health care costs in private institutions and prescription drugs in Mexico are on average lower than that of its North American economic partners.
Just offshore is the beach island of Isla Mujeres, and to the east is the Isla Holbox.
The Tropic of Cancer effectively divides the country into temperate and tropical zones.
The history of blacks in Mexico has been lesser known for a number of reasons: their relatively small numbers, regular intermarriage with other ethnic groups, and Mexico's tradition of defining itself as a "mestizaje" or mixing culture.
This included the Mexican oil expropriation in March 1938, which nationalized the U.S. and Anglo-Dutch oil company known as the Mexican Eagle Petroleum Company.
Other writers include Alfonso Reyes, José Joaquín Fernández de Lizardi, Ignacio Manuel Altamirano, Carlos Fuentes, Octavio Paz (Nobel Laureate), Renato Leduc, Carlos Monsiváis, Elena Poniatowska, Mariano Azuela ("Los de abajo") and Juan Rulfo ("Pedro Páramo").
Other institutions of the judiciary are the Federal Electoral Tribunal, collegiate, unitary and district tribunals, and the Council of the Federal Judiciary.
Mexico has the largest media industry in Latin America, producing Mexican artists who are famous in Central and South America and parts of Europe, especially Spain.
In the 2011 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index report, Mexico was ranked 43rd in the world, which was 4th in the Americas .
Professional wrestling (or Lucha libre in Spanish) is a major crowd draw with national promotions such as AAA, LLL, CMLL and others.
Obregón was reelected in 1928 but assassinated before he could assume power.
After the War of Independence, the relations of Mexico were focused primarily on the United States, its northern neighbor, largest trading partner, and the most powerful actor in hemispheric and world affairs.
South of the twenty-fourth parallel, temperatures are fairly constant year round and vary solely as a function of elevation.
By the deliberate efforts of post-revolutionary governments the "Mestizo identity" was constructed as the base of the modern Mexican national identity, through a process of cultural synthesis referred to as mestizaje.
Dissatisfaction with Santa Anna's return to power led to the liberal "Plan of Ayutla", initiating an era known as La Reforma.
A 2012 study published by the Journal of Human Genetics found the ancestry of the Mexican mestizo population to be predominately European (65%), followed by Native American (31%) and African (4%).
The dictatorship was overthrown in the Mexican Revolution of 1910, which culminated with the promulgation of the 1917 Constitution and the emergence of the country's current political system.
The discovery of the Americas brought to the rest of the world many widely used food crops and edible plants.
The principles of the foreign policy are constitutionally recognized in the Article 89, Section 10, which include: respect for international law and legal equality of states, their sovereignty and independence, non-intervention in the domestic affairs of other countries, peaceful resolution of conflicts, and promotion of collective security through active participation in international organizations.
In recent years the Real Academia Española, which regulates the Spanish language, determined that both variants are acceptable in Spanish but that the normative recommended spelling is México.
Numerous Afro-Mexicans in the 21st century are naturalized black immigrants from Africa and the Caribbean.
Many Southerners intended that slavery should be extended to the west in these newly acquired territories but the United States generally would not permit it, except in Texas.
The ''telenovelas'' are very traditional in Mexico and are translated to many languages and seen all over the world with renowned names like Verónica Castro, Lucía Méndez and Thalía.
This was founded in 1524 on top of the ancient Mexica capital of Mexico-Tenochtitlan.
, Mexico has the 16th highest rate of homicides committed against women in the world  The prevalence of domestic violence against women in Mexican marital relationships varies at between 30 and 60 percent of relationships.
In addition to its beaches, the town of Tulum is notable for its cliff-side Mayan ruins.
The category of "indigena" (indigenous) can be defined narrowly according to linguistic criteria including only persons that speak one of Mexico's 62 indigenous languages, this is the categorization used by the National Mexican Institute of Statistics.
All of the electricity will be sold directly to the CFE and absorbed into the utility's transmission system for distribution throughout their existing network.
Some public universities in Mexico, such as the University of Guadalajara, have signed agreements with the U.S. to receive and train American students in Medicine.
The Aztec were noted for practicing human sacrifice on a large scale.
File:Mexico Highway1 San Diego.jpg|''Mexican Federal Highway 1''
It was also reported that 9.3% of Afro-Mexicans speak an indigenous language.
The most internationally recognized dishes include chocolate, tacos, quesadillas, enchiladas, burritos, tamales and mole among others.
On its south, Mexico shares an  border with Guatemala and a  border with Belize.
On three occasions (1325–1521, 1821–1823, and 1863–1867), the country was known as  (Mexican Empire).
In the 1980s the first cracks emerged in PRI's monopolistic position.
The Mexican economy is strongly linked to those of its North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) partners, especially the United States.
With limited trade, the people had difficulty meeting tax payments and resented the central government's actions in collecting customs.
Roman Catholicism in Mexico has shaped societal attitudes about women's social role, emphasizing the role of women as nurturers of the family, with the Virgin Mary as a model.
Temperatures here remain high throughout the year, with only a  difference between winter and summer median temperatures.
Some of Mexico's native culinary ingredients include: chocolate, avocado, tomato, maize, vanilla, guava, chayote, epazote, camote, jícama, nopal, zucchini, tejocote, huitlacoche, sapote, mamey sapote, many varieties of beans, and an even greater variety of chiles, such as the habanero and the jalapeño.
In light of the various ethnicities that formed the Mexican people, José Vasconcelos in his publication ''La Raza Cósmica'' (The Cosmic Race) (1925) defined Mexico to be the melting pot of all races (thus extending the definition of the ''mestizo'') not only biologically but culturally as well.
The largest hydro plant in Mexico is the 2,400 MW Manuel Moreno Torres Dam in Chicoasén, Chiapas, in the Grijalva River.
But then he ran for reelection anyway and in a show of U.S. support, Díaz and William Howard Taft planned a summit in El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, for October 16, 1909, an historic first meeting between a Mexican and a U.S. president and also the first time an American president would cross the border into Mexico.
Closer to the United States border is the weekend draw of San Felipe, Baja California.
President Felipe Calderón made abating organized crime one of the top priorities of his administration by deploying military personnel to cities where drug cartels operate.
Mexico has the 15th largest nominal GDP and the 11th largest by purchasing power parity.
Mexican directors Alejandro González Iñárritu (''Amores perros'', ''Babel'', ''Birdman'', ''The Revenant''), Alfonso Cuarón (''Children of Men'', ''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban'', ''Gravity''), Guillermo del Toro, Carlos Carrera (''The Crime of Father Amaro''), screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga and photographer Emmanuel Lubezki are some of the most known present-day film makers.
The cuisine of Southeastern Mexico also has quite a bit of Caribbean influence, given its geographical location.
European ancestry is most prevalent in the north (Chihuahua, 50%; Sonora, 62%; Nuevo León, 55%), but in a recent sample from Nuevo León and elsewhere in the country, Amerindian ancestry is dominant."
That year, oil prices plunged, interest rates soared, and the government defaulted on its debt.
Territories populated by nomadic peoples were hard to conquer and hold.
, Mexico had the second fastest rate of deforestation in the world, second only to Brazil.
Along with this practice, they avoided killing enemies on the battlefield.
From the late 1990s onwards, the majority of the population has been part of the growing middle class.
After twelve years, in 2012, the PRI won the Presidency again with the election of Enrique Peña Nieto, the governor of the State of Mexico from 2005–2011.
A 2014 publication summarizing population genetics research in Mexico, which have included three nationwide surveys and several region-specific surveys, found that in the studies done to date, counting only studies that looked at the ancestry of both parents: "Amerindian ancestry is most prevalent (51% to 56%) in the three general estimates, followed by European ancestry (40% to 45%); the African share represents only 2% to 5%.
They allowed for religious freedom for the new settlers, who were primarily Protestant English speakers from the United States.
Regional dishes include mole poblano, chiles en nogada and chalupas from Puebla; cabrito and machaca from Monterrey, cochinita pibil from Yucatán, Tlayudas from Oaxaca, as well as barbacoa, chilaquiles, milanesas, and many others.
Three major urban agglomerations are located in the valleys between these four elevations: Toluca, Greater Mexico City and Puebla.
Televisa is also the largest producer of Spanish-language content in the world and also the world's largest Spanish-language media network.
In 1824, a Republican Constitution was drafted and Guadalupe Victoria became the first president of the newly born country.
Mexico is a federation comprising thirty-one states and a Federal District, its capital and largest city.
File:Presa de El Cajón.jpg|''El Cajón Dam in Nayarit''
Local and state police departments are primarily in charge of law enforcement, whereas the Mexican Federal Police are in charge of specialized duties.
It is generally considered to be a toponym for the valley which became the primary ethnonym for the Aztec Triple Alliance as a result, or vice versa.
Since that time, as accentuated during the Mexican Revolution, cultural identity has had its foundation in the ''mestizaje'', of which the indigenous (i.e.
