The Estadio Azul, which seats 33,042 fans, is near the World Trade Center Mexico City in the Nochebuena neighborhood, and is home to the giants Cruz Azul.
The Viaducto Miguel Alemán crosses the city east-west from Observatorio to the airport.
On the other hand, Mexico City is also home to large communities of expatriates and immigrants, most notably from the rest of North America (U.S. and Canada), from South America (mainly from Argentina and Colombia, but also from Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and Venezuela), from Central America and the Caribbean (mainly from Cuba, Guatemala, El Salvador, Haiti and Honduras); from Europe (mainly from Spain, Germany and Switzerland, but also from Czech Republic, Hungary, France, Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands, Poland and Romania), from the Middle East (mainly from Egypt, Lebanon and Syria); and recently from Asia-Pacific (mainly from China and South Korea).
Due to these initiatives and others, the air quality in Mexico City has begun to improve, with the air becoming cleaner since 1991, when the air quality was declared to be a public health risk for 355 days of the year.
In the centre of the city informal street vendors are increasingly targeted by laws and prosecution.
While no official figures have been reported, population estimates of each of these communities are quite significant.
This valley has no natural drainage outlet for the waters that flow from the mountainsides, making the city vulnerable to flooding.
The two main candidates to become the capital were Mexico City and Querétaro.
Even though proportionality is confined to the proportional seats to prevent a part from being overrepresented, several restrictions apply in the assignation of the seats; namely, that no party can have more than 63% of all seats, both uninominal and plurinominal.
Mexico City is currently home to Mexican League baseball's Mexico Red Devils, considered Triple-A by U.S/Canadian Major League Baseball.
On January 29, 2016, it ceased to be called the ''Federal District'' (Spanish: ''Distrito Federal'' or D.F.)
Cárdenas promised a more democratic government, and his party claimed some victories against crime, pollution, and other major problems.
The existing central place of the Aztecs was effectively and permanently transformed to the ceremonial center and seat of power during the colonial period, and remains to this day in modern Mexico, the central place of the nation.
The Greater Mexico City has a gross domestic product (GDP) of US$411&nbsp;billion in 2011, making Mexico City urban agglomeration one of the economically largest metropolitan areas in the world.
In 2000 Andrés Manuel López Obrador was elected, and resigned in 2005 to run in the 2006 presidential elections, Alejandro Encinas being designated by the Legislative Assembly to finish the term.
The seventh plague was the construction of the great City of Mexico, which, during the early years used more people than in the construction of Jerusalem.
Mexico City has numerous museums dedicated to art, including Mexican colonial, modern and contemporary art, and international art.
In 1900, the population of Mexico City was about 500,000.
UNAM's main campus, also in the southern part of the city, is home to the Centro Cultural Universitario (the University Culture Center) (CCU).
You can admire eagles, ajolotes, coyotes, macaws, bobcats, Mexican wolves, raccoons, mountain lions, teporingos, foxes, white-tailed deer.
These kind of slums are now found on the eastern edges of the metropolitan area in the Chalco area.
Originally much of the valley laid beneath the waters of Lake Texcoco, a system of interconnected salt and freshwater lakes.
Between 1325 and 1521, Tenochtitlan grew in size and strength, eventually dominating the other city-states around Lake Texcoco and in the Valley of Mexico.
The PGJDF maintains 16 precincts (delegaciones) with an estimated 3,500 judicial police, 1,100 investigating agents for prosecuting attorneys (agentes del ministerio público), and nearly 1,000 criminology experts or specialists (peritos).
This led to decentralization and a shift in Mexico City's economic base, from manufacturing to services, as most factories moved away to either the State of Mexico, or more commonly to the northern border.
The most significant episode of this period for the city was the February 1913 La decena trágica ("The Ten Tragic Days"), when forces counter to the elected government of Francisco I. Madero staged a successful coup.
Spaniards sought to keep Indians separate from Spaniards but since the Zócalo was a center of commerce for Indians, they were a constant presence in the central area, so strict segregation was never enforced.
There is a double-decker bus, known as the "Turibus", that circles most of these sites, and has timed audio describing the sites in multiple languages as they are passed.
Political scientist Markus-Michael Müller argues that mostly informal street vendors are hit by these measures.
In response to the demands, in 1987 the Federal District received a greater degree of autonomy, with the elaboration the first Statute of Government (''Estatuto de Gobierno''), and the creation of an Assembly of Representatives.
Having been capital of a vast pre-Hispanic empire, and also the capital of richest viceroyalty within the Spanish Empire (ruling over a vast territory in the Americas and Spanish West Indies), and, finally, the capital of the United Mexican States, Mexico City has a rich history of artistic expression.
This amendment was later introduced into the second article of the Statute of Government of the Federal District.
Historically, and since Pre-Columbian times, the Valley of Anahuac has been one of the most densely populated areas in Mexico.
These include the Hard Rock Live, Bataclán, Foro Scotiabank, Lunario, Circo Volador and Voilá Acoustique.
One of the best examples of this is the Monument to the Mexican Revolution.
There is an environmental program, called Hoy No Circula ("Today Does Not Run", or "One Day without a Car"), whereby vehicles that have not passed emissions testing are restricted from circulating on certain days according to the ending digit of their license plates; this in an attempt to cut down on pollution and traffic congestion.
An alternate option is Lic.
Recent additions include the 20,000-seat Arena Ciudad de México, the 3,000-seat Pepsi Center World Trade Center, and the 2,500-seat Auditorio Blackberry.
Visitors can see about 243 specimens of different species including kangaroos, giant panda, gorillas, caracal, hyena, hippos, jaguar, giraffe, lemur, lion, among others.
This was the case even though this government could not handle the population and pollution problems adequately.
* Atizapan de Zaragoza ( 489,775)
Since 2013, to refer to the City particularly in relation to government campaigns, the abbreviation '''CDMX''' has been used (from Ciudad de México).
During this battle, on September 13, the 4th Division, under John A. Quitman, spearheaded the attack against Chapultepec and carried the castle.
Also notable is the Basque-Mexican fusion restaurant Biko (run and co-owned by Bruno Oteiza and Mikel Alonso), which placed outside the list at 59th, but in previous years has ranked within the top 50.
and is now in transition to become the country's 32nd federal entity, giving it a level of autonomy comparable to that of a state.
A branch of the National University's CCU cultural center was inaugurated in 2007 in the facilities of the former Ministry of Foreign Affairs, known as Tlatelolco, in north-central Mexico City.
The city was originally built on an island of Lake Texcoco by the Aztecs in 1325 as Tenochtitlan, which was almost completely destroyed in the 1521 siege of Tenochtitlan, and subsequently redesigned and rebuilt in accordance with the Spanish urban standards.
Villagers from the countryside who continued to pour into the city to escape poverty only compounded the city's problems.
The city of Mexico-Tenochtitlan was founded by the Mexica people in 1325.
According to the 1921 census, 54.78% of the city's population was considered Mestizo (Indigenous mixed with European), 22.79% considered European, and 18.74% considered Indigenous.
Benito Juárez borough had the highest HDI of the country (.9510) followed by Miguel Hidalgo which came up 4th nationally with a HDI of (.9189) and Coyoacán (5th nationally) with a HDI value of (.9169).
Although the Spanish preserved Tenochtitlán's basic layout, they built Catholic churches over the old Aztec temples and claimed the imperial palaces for themselves.
The Olympic Stadium in Ciudad Universitaria is home to the football club giants Universidad Nacional, with a seating capacity of over 52,000.
There are numerous venues for smaller musical ensembles and solo performers.
Mexico City tops the world in number of IMAX theatres,  providing residents and visitors access to films ranging from documentaries to popular blockbusters on these especially large, dramatic screens.
Other guests are the golden eagle, pronghorn, bighorn sheep, caracara, zebras, African elephant, macaw, hippo, among others.
The average annual temperature varies from , depending on the altitude of the borough.
Mexico City is the only city in the world to use the icon reference and has become a popular culture trademark for the city.
There are also growing numbers of irreligious people, whether agnostic or atheist.
From 1980 to 1981 and again from 2002 to 2007, it hosted the Champ Car World Series Gran Premio de México.
Some political groups even proposed that the Federal District be converted into the 32nd state of the federation.
Mexico City is home to a number of orchestras offering season programs.
Double parking is common (with ''franeleros'' moving the cars as required), impeding on the available lanes for traffic to pass.
Eventually, in December 1928, the federal government decided to abolish all the municipalities of the Federal District.
Venetian Masters and Contemporary New York artists).
The city of Pachuca will also provide additional expansion to central Mexico's airport network.
Lucha libre is a Mexican style of wrestling, and is one of the more popular sports throughout the country.
Benito Juárez (pop.
Mexico City's golf courses have hosted Women's LPGA action, and two Men's Golf World Cups.
After independence from Spain was achieved, the federal district was created in 1824.
This area did not include the population centers of the towns of Coyoacán, Xochimilco, Mexicaltzingo and Tlalpan, all of which remained as part of the State of Mexico.
Since the mesoamerican pre-Classical period the inhabitants of the settlements around Lake Texcoco produced many works of art and complex craftsmanship, some of which are today displayed at the world-renowned National Museum of Anthropology and the ''Templo Mayor'' museum.
It is located in the Valley of Mexico (''Valle de México''), a large valley in the high plateaus at the center of Mexico, at an altitude of .
Nevertheless, areas of lower income ''colonias'' exist in some cases cheek-by-jowl with rich neighborhoods, particularly in the case of Santa Fe.
(The Templo Mayor was discovered in 1978 while workers were digging to place underground electric cables).
It is the 8th busiest metro system in the world, behind Tokyo (10.0&nbsp;million), Beijing (9.3&nbsp;million), Shanghai (7.8 million), Seoul (7.3 million), Moscow (6.7&nbsp;million), Guangzhou (6.2&nbsp;million), and New York City (4.9 million).
Many local firms also compete in the sector, including Alazraki, Olabuenaga/Chemistri, Terán, Augusto Elías, and Clemente Cámara, among others.
The José Vasconcelos Library, a national library, is located on the grounds of the former Buenavista railroad station in the northern part of the city.
Mexico City remains the only Latin American city to host the Olympic Games, having held the Summer Olympics in 1968, winning bids against Buenos Aires, Lyon and Detroit.
The Mexican forces fell back from Chapultepec and retreated within the city.
Many other religions and philosophies are also practiced in the city: many different types of Protestant groups, different types of Jewish communities, Buddhist, Islamic and other spiritual and philosophical groups.
Also construction of an underground rail system was begun in 1968 in order to help curb air pollution problems and alleviate traffic congestion.
When the Federal District was created in 1824, the urban area of Mexico City extended approximately to the area of today's Cuauhtémoc borough.
As part of its recent changes in autonomy, the budget is administered locally; it is proposed by the head of government and approved by the Legislative Assembly.
A special case is that of El Colegio Nacional, created during the district's governmental period of Miguel Alemán Valdés to have, in Mexico, an institution similar to the College of France.
From 1962 to 1970 and again from 1986 to 1992, the track hosted the Formula 1 Mexican Grand Prix.
Nevertheless, discontent and protests began in the 1960s leading to the massacre of an unknown number of protesting students in Tlatelolco.
Cinépolis and Cinemex, the two biggest film business chains, also have several film festivals throughout the year, with both national and international movies.
Along Avenida Insurgentes from Paseo de la Reforma, near the center, south past the World Trade Center and UNAM university towards the Periférico ring road, is another important corridor of corporate office space.
In terms of population, the biggest municipalities that are part of Greater Mexico City (excluding Mexico City proper) are:
After a decade of war, Mexico's independence from Spain was effectively declared in the Declaration of Independence of the Mexican Empire on September 27, 1821.
In 1970 Mexico City was split into four different ''delegaciones'': Cuauhtémoc, Miguel Hidalgo, Venustiano Carranza and Benito Juárez, increasing the number of ''delegaciones'' to sixteen.
The two largest media companies in the Spanish-speaking world, Televisa and Azteca, are headquartered in Mexico City.
Due to the limited non-urbanized space at the south—most of which is protected through environmental laws—the contribution of the Federal District in agriculture is the smallest of all federal entities in the country.
The city's first bus rapid transit line, the Metrobús, began operation in June 2005, along Avenida Insurgentes.
Recent exhibits have included those on David LaChapelle, Antony Gormley and Ron Mueck.
Aeroméxico (Skyteam) is based at this airport, and provide codeshare agreements with non-Mexican airlines that span the entire globe.
Popular arts in the form of cartoons and illustrations flourished, e.g.
Despite the cleanup, the metropolitan area is still the most ozone-polluted part of the country, with ozone levels 2.5 times beyond WHO-defined safe limits.
Another American author, William S. Burroughs, also lived in the Colonia Roma neighborhood of the city for some time.
The American invasion into the Federal District was first resisted during the Battle of Churubusco on August 8 where the Saint Patrick's Battalion, which was composed primarily of Catholic Irish and German immigrants, but also Canadians, English, French, Italians, Poles, Scots, Spaniards, Swiss, and Mexican people, fought for the Mexican cause repelling the American attacks.
Best known are the Colegio Alemán (German school with three main campuses), the Liceo Mexicano Japonés (Japanese), the Centro Cultural Coreano en México (Korean), the Lycée Franco-Mexicain (French), the American School, The Westhill Institute (American School), the Edron Academy and the Greengates School (British).
Mexico City is home to some of the best private hospitals in the country; Hospital Ángeles, Hospital ABC and Médica Sur to name a few.
Zoo San Juan de Aragon is near the San Juan de Aragon Park in the Gustavo A. Madero.
As such, the PRD was not assigned any plurinominal seat to comply with the law that prevents over-representation.
However, the census had the particularity that, unlike racial/ethnic census in other countries, it was focused in the perception of cultural heritage rather than in a racial perception, leading to a good number of white people to identify with "Mixed heritage" due cultural influence.
City agency Red de Transporte de Pasajeros operates a network of large buses.
Mexico City has three zoos.
The first elected head of government was Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas.
This dry season subdivides into a cold period and a warm period.
In this zoo, opened in 1964, there are species that are in danger of extinction such as the jaguar and the Mexican wolf.
It has a minimum altitude of  above sea level and is surrounded by mountains and volcanoes that reach elevations of over .
Geophysical maps of the Federal District
In the Mexico City airport, the government engaged in an extensive restructuring program that includes the addition of a new second terminal, which began operations in 2007, and the enlargement of four other airports (at the nearby cities of Toluca, Querétaro, Puebla and Cuernavaca) that, along with Mexico City's airport, comprise the ''Grupo Aeroportuario del Valle de México'', distributing traffic to different regions in Mexico.
They have phased out diesel buses and mandated new emission controls on new cars; since 1993 all new cars must be fitted with a catalytic converter, which reduces the emissions released.
The Aztecs thought the Spaniards were permanently gone, and they elected a new king, Cuitláhuac, but he soon died; the next king was Cuauhtémoc.
Mexico City has some 10 Little Leagues for young baseball players.
In 1854 president Antonio López de Santa Anna enlarged the area of the Federal District almost eightfold from the original , annexing the rural and mountainous areas to secure the strategic mountain passes to the south and southwest to protect the city in event of a foreign invasion.
These include Paris' Au Pied de Cochon and Brasserie Lipp, Philippe (by Philippe Chow); Nobu, Morimoto; Pámpano, owned by Mexican-raised opera legend Plácido Domingo.
According to a study conducted by PwC, Mexico City had a GDP of $390&nbsp;billion, ranking it as the eighth richest city in the world after the greater metropolitan areas of Tokyo, New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Paris, London and Osaka/Kobe (and the richest in the whole of Latin America).
Explosive growth in the population of the city started from the 1960s, with the population overflowing the boundaries of the Federal District into the neighboring state of Mexico, especially to the north, northwest and northeast.
By that time, the city had again become a city-state, having power that extended far beyond its borders.
Mexico City is served by the ''Sistema de Transporte Colectivo'', a  metro system, which is the largest in Latin America.
The overall composition of the Legislative Assembly is:
Mexico City primarily rests on what was Lake Texcoco.
In recent years much of northern Mexico City's industry has moved to nearby municipalities in the State of Mexico.
Nonetheless, it is the Congress of the Union that sets the ceiling to internal and external public debt issued by the Federal District.
Many of Mexico City's major attractions and landmarks were built during this era in this style.
The U.S. Army under Winfield Scott scored a major success that ended the war.
Its construction began during the presidency of Porfirio Díaz and ended in 1934, after being interrupted by the Mexican Revolution in the 1920s.
The city began to grow rapidly westward in the early part of the 20th century and then began to grow upwards in the 1950s, with the Torre Latinoamericana becoming the city's first skyscraper.
The city proper (Federal District) produces 15.8% of the country's gross domestic product.
In order to mitigate that and other problems and to raise revenue, 721 parking meters (as of October 2013), have been installed in the west-central neighborhoods Lomas de Chapultepec, Condesa, Roma, Polanco and Anzures, in operation from 8 AM to 8 PM on weekdays and charging a rate of 2 pesos per 15 minutes, with offenders' cars booted, costing about 500 pesos to remove.
The world-renowned market of Tepito occupies 25 blocks, and sells a variety of products.
The government also instituted industrial technology improvements, a strict biannual vehicle emission inspection and the reformulation of gasoline and diesel fuels.
While many pieces of pottery and stone-engraving have survived, the great majority of the Amerindian iconography was destroyed during the Conquest of Mexico.
According to the most recent definition agreed upon by the federal and state governments, the Greater Mexico City population is 21.2&nbsp;million people, making it the largest metropolitan area of the world's western hemisphere and both the tenth-largest agglomeration and largest Spanish-speaking city in the world.
Mexico City's HDI for the 2005 report was of .9012 (very high), and its 2010 value of .9225 (very high) or (by newer methodology) .8307, and Mexico's highest.
Since then, and through a policy of decentralization in order to reduce the environmental pollutants of the growing conurbation, the annual rate of growth of the agglomeration has decreased, and it is lower than that of the other four largest metropolitan areas (namely Greater Guadalajara, Greater Monterrey, Greater Puebla and Greater Toluca) even though it is still positive.
Serving in the Mexican defense were the cadets later immortalized as ''Los Niños Héroes'' (the "Boy Heroes").
During the 20th century, many artists immigrated to Mexico City from different regions of Mexico, such as Leopoldo Méndez, an engraver from Veracruz, who supported the creation of the socialist Taller de la Gráfica Popular (Popular Graphics Workshop), designed to help blue-collar workers find a venue to express their art.
Mexico City served as the political, administrative and financial center of a major part of the Spanish colonial empire.
The city had been the capital of the Aztec empire and in the colonial era, Mexico City became the capital of New Spain.
Magdalena Contreras (pop.
Traditional markets downtown include the La Merced Market; the Mercado de Jamaica specializes in fresh flowers, the Mercado de Sonora in the occult, and La Lagunilla in furniture.
Overall precipitation is heavily concentrated in the summer months, and includes dense hail.
West of Santa Fe district are the pine forests of the Desierto de los Leones National Park.
The principal fish market is known as La Nueva Viga, in the same complex as the Central de Abastos.
Many of these palaces can still be seen today, leading to Mexico City's nickname of "The city of palaces" given by Alexander Von Humboldt.
This area was then separated from the State of Mexico, forcing that state's government to move from the Palace of the Inquisition (now Museum of Mexican Medicine) in the city to Texcoco.
As a stand-alone country, in 2013, Mexico City would be the fifth-largest economy in Latin America—five times as large as Costa Rica's and about the same size as Peru's.
Some of the policies enacted included the installation of 11,000 security cameras around the city and a very large expansion of the police force.
The country hosted the FIFA World Cup in 1970 and 1986, and Azteca Stadium is the first stadium in World Cup history to host the final twice.
For their part those living in Mexico City designate insultingly those who live elsewhere as living in ''la provincia'' ("the provinces", the periphery) and many proudly embrace the term chilango.
Northwest of Mexico City itself is Ciudad Satélite, a vast middle to upper-middle-class residential and business area.
Cárdenas resigned in 1999 to run in the 2000 presidential elections and designated Rosario Robles to succeed him, who became the first woman (elected or otherwise) to govern Mexico City.
In 2002, Mexico City had a Human Development Index score of 0.915, identical to that of South Korea.
It also has a large collection of Dalí sculptures, and recently began showing pieces in its masters collection including El Greco, Velázquez, Picasso and Canaletto.
30 percent of the monthly 16 million-peso (as of October 2013) income from the parking-meter system (named "ecoParq") is earmarked for neighborhood improvements.
This was the last Mexican Census which asked people to self-identify themselves with an heritage other than Amerindian.
The second largest higher-education institution is the National Polytechnic Institute (IPN), which includes among many other relevant centers the Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados (Cinvestav), where varied high-level scientific and technological research is done.
Several other larger parks such as the Bosque de Tlalpan and Viveros de Coyoacán, and in the east Alameda Oriente, offer many recreational activities.
Approximately 75% (10 million) of the state of México's population live in municipalities that are part of Greater Mexico City's conurbation.
The national public healthcare institution for private-sector employees, IMSS, has its largest facilities in Mexico City—including the National Medical Center and the La Raza Medical Center—and has an annual budget of over 6&nbsp;billion pesos.
The net migration rate of Mexico City proper from 1995 to 2000 was negative, which implies that residents are moving to the suburbs of the metropolitan area, or to other states of Mexico.
Attacks on the Belén and San Cosme Gates came afterwards.
The Federal District does not have a constitution, like the states of the Union, but rather a Statute of Government.
The city is colloquially known as ''Chilangolandia'' after the locals' nickname ''chilangos''.
After the Mexican Revolution, an avant-garde artistic movement originated in Mexico City: muralism.
These include the Mexico City Philharmonic, which performs at the Sala Ollin Yoliztli; the National Symphony Orchestra, whose home base is the Palacio de Bellas Artes (Palace of the Fine Arts), a masterpiece of art nouveau and art decó styles; the Philharmonic Orchestra of the National Autonomous University of Mexico (OFUNAM), and the Minería Symphony Orchestra, both of which perform at the Sala Nezahualcóyotl, which was the first wrap-around concert hall of the world's western hemisphere when inaugurated in 1976.
The Federal District is divided into 40 electoral constituencies of similar population which elect one representative by first-past-the-post plurality (FPP), locally called "uninominal deputies".
From 1941 to 1970, the Federal District comprised twelve ''delegaciones'' and Mexico City.
If approved by the government the project will contribute to the supply of water from natural sources to the Valley of Mexico, the creation of new natural spaces, a great improvement in air quality, and greater population establishment planning.
The Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral, the seat of the Archbishopric of New Spain, was constructed on another side of the Zócalo, as was the archbishop's palace, and across from it the building housing the City Council or ''ayuntamiento'' of the city.
Since the beginning of the 20th century the city has sunk as much as  in some areas.
The high spending power of Mexico City inhabitants makes the city attractive for companies offering prestige and luxury goods.
There are branches of the exclusive Japanese restaurant Suntory, Rome's famed Alfredo, as well as New York steakhouses Morton's and The Palm, and Monte Carlo's BeefBar.
On Thursday, September 19, 1985, at 7:19&nbsp;am local time, Mexico City was struck by an earthquake of magnitude 8.1 on the Richter scale.
A famous late seventeenth-century painting of the Zócalo by Cristóbal de Villalpando depicts the main square, which had been the old Aztec ceremonial center.
In December 2009, the Federal District became the first city in Latin America, and one of very few in the world, to legalize same-sex marriage.
Greater Mexico City is the largest metropolitan area in Mexico and the area with the highest population density.
Since then, in a ''de facto'' manner, the whole Federal District, whose ''delegaciones'' had by then almost formed a single urban area, began to be considered a synonym of Mexico City.
UNAM conducts 50% of Mexico's scientific research and has presence all across the country with satellite campuses, observatories and research centres.
Nonetheless, the annual rate of growth of the Metropolitan Area of Mexico City is much lower than that of other large urban agglomerations in Mexico, a phenomenon most likely attributable to the environmental policy of decentralization.
Excluding the rest of the Mexican economy,  Mexico City alone would rank as the 30th largest economy in the world.
The history of the rest of the 20th century to the present focuses on the phenomenal growth of the city and its environmental and political consequences.
The central valley of Mexico rarely gets precipitation in the form of snow during winter; the two last recorded instances of such an event were on March 5, 1940 and January 12, 1967.
* Chimalhuacán (pop.
The Historic Center of Mexico City is widely known for specialized, often low-cost retailers.
Unrest followed for the next several decades, as different factions fought for control of Mexico.
During this time the city developed a modern infrastructure, such as roads, schools, transportation systems and communication systems.
Urban sprawl continues further east for many miles into the State of Mexico, including Ciudad Nezahualcoyotl, now increasingly middle-class, but once full of informal settlements.
It was opened in 1924.
within  of one another and are fully automatic using a transponder based card.
The collection includes pieces by Picasso, Klee, Kandinsky, Warhol and many others, though most of the collection is stored while visiting exhibits are shown.
The Grito de Dolores ("Cry of Dolores"), also known as El Grito de la Independencia ("Cry of Independence"), marked the beginning of the Mexican War of Independence.
The last changes to the limits of the Federal District were made between 1898 and 1902, reducing the area to the current  by adjusting the southern border with the state of Morelos.
This motto was quickly adopted as a city nickname, but has faded since the new motto ''Capital en Movimiento'' ("Capital in Movement") was adopted by the administration headed by Marcelo Ebrard, though the latter is not treated as often as a nickname in media.
In some cases a modest fee may be charged.
The National Museum of Art (Museo Nacional de Arte) is also located in a former palace in the historic center.
