In an attempt to buffer his regime against further coups, Calles began arming peasants and factory workers with surplus weapons.
When Juárez died in office in 1872, Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada succeeded him.
After the war ended in 1929, supporters of Calles and Obregón began to form a united political party called the National Revolutionary Party or PNR.
Some of his reforms began to anger the officer corps, leading to an attempted coup in 1924 that Obregón was able to crush with relative ease.
This was accomplished by memorializing revolutionary figures and creating anti-western murals.
There were also foreign governments, primarily the United States, who feared Mexico would take a communist turn such as Russia was to do in 1918.
Another revolutionary monument is to General Álvaro Obregón, who defeated Villa in the 1915 Battle of Celaya; the monument is on the site of the restaurant La Bombilla, where he was assassinated in 1928.
The majority of Zapata's supporters were indigenous peasants from Morelos and surrounding areas, but intellectuals from urban areas later joined the Zapatistas and played a significant part in their movement, specifically the structure and communication of the Zapatista ambitions.
The Federal Army, while still large, was increasingly an ineffective force with aging leadership and troops dragooned into service.
Huerta had moved swiftly upon taking power to consolidate his hold in the North.
The regime confiscated large sections of land, which caused major losses to the agrarian work force.
It was clear that Madero, a member of a rich northern ''hacendado'' family, was not going to implement comprehensive agrarian reform for aggrieved peasants.
The reorganized party was named Party of the Mexican Revolution.
Some supporters criticized Madero for appearing weak by not simply seizing the presidency from Diaz, and for failing to pass immediate reforms; however, by following the electoral process, Madero established a liberal democracy and received support from the United States and popular leaders such as Orozco, Villa, and Zapata.
From the point of view of revolutionaries at the time and the construction of historical memory of the Revolution, it is without any positive aspects.
Huerta had "Gabriel Somellera, president of the National Catholic Party arrested; ''La Nación'', which, like other Catholic papers, had protested Congress's dissolution and the rigged elections of October 1913, locked horns with the official press and was finally closed down.
The Constitutionalist Army was renamed the "Mexican National Army" and Carranza sent some of its most able generals to eliminate threats.
Madero was an inexperienced politician who had never held office before, but his election as president in October 1911, following the exile of Porfirio Díaz in May 1911 and the interim presidency of Francisco León de la Barra, raised high expectations for positive change.
Over time the Revolution changed from a revolt against the established order under Díaz to a multi-sided civil war in particular regions with frequently shifting power struggles among factions in the Mexican Revolution.
These included expropriation of hacienda lands and redistribution to peasants.
Although Carranza agreed to do so, he laid out conditions for it.
Most prominent in the PLM were Ricardo Flores Magón and his two brothers, Enrique Flores Magón and Jesús Flores Magón.
Carranza rewarded her efforts by lobbying for women's equality.
The revolutionary generals of the Convention called on Carranza to resign executive power.
In the Historical Museum of the Mexican Revolution, there is a recreation of Adelita, the idealized female revolutionary combatant or soldadera.
Specifically, they wanted to establish communal land rights for Mexico's peasants, who had lost their land to the wealthy elite.
In late 1910 revolutionary movements broke out in response to Madero's Plan de San Luis Potosí.
The next year, 1936, to further stabilize his rule, Cárdenas further armed the peasants and workers and begins to organize them into formal militias.
In his early years in the presidency Díaz was a master politician, playing factions off against one another while retaining and consolidating his own power.
Madero sent the Federal Army to deal with the Zapata, unsuccessfully.
The populace was demanding reforms, promised by the 1917 constitution.
The anarcho-syndicalist Casa del Obrero Mundial (House of the World Worker) was founded in September 1912 by Antonio Díaz Soto y Gama, Manuel Sarabia, and Lázaro Gutiérrez de Lara and served as a center of agitation and propaganda, but was not formally a labor union.
A young and able revolutionary, Orozco, along with governor Abraham González, formed a powerful military union in the north, and, although they were not especially committed to Madero, took Mexicali and Chihuahua City.
Madero did not know that Huerta had been invited to join the conspiracy but had held back.
Madero attracted the forces of rebel leaders such as Pascual Orozco, Pancho Villa, Ricardo Flores Magón, Emiliano Zapata, and Venustiano Carranza.
Perhaps 1.5 million people died; nearly 200,000 refugees fled abroad, especially to the United States.
To ensure Madero did not win, Díaz had him thrown in jail before the election.
Madero met personally with Zapata, telling the guerrilla leader that the agrarian question needed careful study.
During a visit to Huerta's headquarters in June 1912, after an incident in which he refused to return a number of stolen horses, Villa was imprisoned on charges of insubordination and robbery and sentenced to death.
The German ship landed its cargo - largely American-made rifles, in a deal brokered by American businessmen - at a different port.
He rigged elections, arguing that only he knew what was best for his country, and he enforced his belief with a strong hand.
Madero's vague promises of land reform in Mexico attracted many peasants throughout Mexico.
The rurales were only 2,500 in number, as opposed to the 30,000 in the Federal Army and another 30,000 in the Federal Auxiliaries, Irregulars, and National Guard, but despite their small numbers, the rurales were highly effective in bringing control to the countryside, especially along the 12,000 miles of railway lines.
The Convention of Aguascalientes brought that opposition out in an open forum.
Organized labor, which had been suppressed under Díaz, could and did stage strikes, which foreign entrepreneurs saw as threatening their interests.
Turner posed as a rich businessman looking for good investments in Mexico and thereby gained entry into some of the most repressive and lucrative enterprises.
Many issues faced the working poor, such as debt peonage and company stores that kept the populace poor.
The revolt was quickly put down due to lack of official support from the Catholic Church, who told rebels to surrender themselves to the government.
In practice, the alliance between Villa and Zapata as the Army of the Convention did not function beyond this initial victory against the Constitutionalists.
As the war went on in 1919, Zapata began to run out of essential supplies, such as ammunition, and decided to acquire them from Guajardo.
With the expansion of Mexican agriculture, landless peasants were forced to work for low wages or move to the cities.
Villa was deeply entrenched in the mountains of northern Mexico, and knew the terrain too well to be captured.
Zapata was low on supplies and his lines were moving further south.
A sideways commemoration was Metro División del Norte, named after the Army that Pancho Villa commanded until its demise in the Battle of Celaya in  1915.
Zapata remained true to the demands of the Plan de Ayala and in rebellion against every central government up until his assassination by an agent of President Venustiano Carranza in 1919.
The U.S. offered Mexico a loan, if Huerta accepted the proposal.
However, the Treaty of Ciudad Juárez guaranteed that the essential structure of the Díaz regime, including the Federal Army, was kept in place.
Lázaro Cárdenas, revolutionary general and president of Mexico, who is often credited with revitalizing the Revolution, is commemorated on a banknote.
In this the Mexican Revolution was not revolutionary, only making the mechanisms of power less autocratic and more efficient in the attainment of its interests.
Díaz's reversal on retiring from the presidency set off tremendous activity among opposition groups.
He fought for political and economic emancipation of the peasants in southern and central Mexico.
The revolutionary forces had no problem with voluntary recruitment.
“Economic and social conditions improved in accordance with revolutionary policies, so that the new society took shape within a framework of official revolutionary institutions,” with the constitution providing that framework.
In June 1912 congressional elections, "militarily quiescent states...the Catholic Party (PCN) did conspicuously well."
When United States intelligence agents received word that the ''Ypiranga'', a German merchant ship, contained illegal firepower for Huerta, President Wilson ordered American troops to the port of Veracruz to stop the ship from docking.
In Article 123 the constitution codified major labor reforms, including an 8-hour work day, a right to strike, equal pay laws for women, and an end to exploitative practices such as child labor and company stores.
Although leftist groups were small in number, through their publications they became highly influential and helped articulate reasons to oppose the Díaz regime.
Political cartoons by José Guadalupe Posada lampooned politicians and cultural elites with mordant humor, portraying them as skeletons.
Cárdenas left office in 1940, marking the end of the social revolution and ushering in half a century of relative stability.
Mexican banknotes also commemorate Mexican revolutionaries, most prominently Plutarco Elías Calles, revolutionary general, president of Mexico, and founder of the political party that has dominated Mexico almost continuously from 1919.
The rapid and brutal uprooting of the peasantry contributed greatly to the violent furies unleashed in the Mexican Revolution and its subsequent course, giving it the character of a gigantic peasant war for land that attacked the structure of the Mexican state.
The  signed treaty stated that Díaz would abdicate the presidency along with his vice president Ramón Corral by the end of May 1911, and be replaced by an interim president, Francisco León de la Barra, until elections were held.
The U.S. timed its exit from Veracruz, brokered at the Niagara Falls peace conference, to benefit Carranza, and allowed munitions to flow to the Constitutionalists.
Regional caciques (chiefs) were still fighting each other in small skirmishes.
The Party has been very authoritarian and hierarchical, leaving little room for opposition.
He renewed guerrilla warfare in the state of Morelos.
With the Federal Army defeated in a string of battles, Diaz's government began negotiations with the revolutionaries.
After a series of interim presidents controlled by the party, Lázaro Cárdenas took power in 1934.
This caused Emiliano Zapata’s forces to lose some support, pushing their forces further south.
Madero chose as his running mate a physician who had opposed Díaz, Francisco Vázquez Gómez.
The Party's name expresses the Mexican state's incorporation of the idea of revolution, and especially a continuous, nationalist, anti-imperialist, Mexican revolution, into political discourse, and its legitimization as a popular, revolutionary party.
Madero placed Huerta in charge of suppressing the Mexico City revolt as interim commander.
The convention declared Carranza in rebellion against it.
Its outbreak in 1910 resulted from the failure of the 35-year long regime of Porfirio Díaz to find a managed solution to the presidential succession.
Former Zapatistas still had strong influence in the post-revolutionary government, so most of the reforms began in Morelos, the birthplace of the Zapatista movement.
The destruction of what little the poor starving peasants had caused them to revolt.
In 1906, the office of vice president was revived, with Díaz choosing his close ally Ramón Corral from among his Cientifico advisers to serve in the post.
In particular, the memory of the revolution was used as justification for the party's policies with regard to economic nationalism, educational policies, labour policies, ''indigenismo'' and land reform.
Despite pressures from the U.S., Obregón flirted with the newly formed USSR.
Madero had put Orozco in charge of the large force of rurales in Chihuahua, but to a gifted revolutionary fighter who had helped bring about Díaz’s fall, Madero’s reward was insulting.
Their forces moved separately on the capital and took Mexico City, which Carranza’s forces had abandoned, in December 1914.
Despite the sympathy towards socialism, the government began to ferment nationalism amongst the peasantry.
The brilliant northern revolutionary general Pascual Orozco, who had helped take Ciudad Juárez for the revolutionaries, had expected to become governor of Chihuahua, a powerful position.
Mexican copper miners in the northern state of Sonora took action in the 1906 Cananea strike.
The document brought numerous reforms demanded by populist factions of the revolution, with article 27 empowering the state to expropriate resources deemed vital to the nation.
Later that year, Carranza held elections for the presidency.
In 1912, under pressure from his cabinet, Madero had called on Huerta to suppress Orozco's rebellion.
Zapata himself had received a limited education in Morelos, only going to school for a few years.
Díaz thought he could control this election, as he had the previous seven; however, Madero campaigned vigorously and effectively.
In October 1911, Madero was overwhelmingly elected in a free and fair election.
These were, however, quite limited.
Wealth, political power, and access to education were concentrated among a handful of elite landholding families, overwhelmingly of European descent, known as ''hacendados'', who controlled vast swaths of the country by virtue of their huge estates (for example, the Terrazas had one estate in Sonora that alone comprised more than a million acres).
After two years the church protested the movement by refusing to give the blessed sacrament to the populace.
Most revolutionary gains were reversed in the early 1990s by President Salinas, who began moving away from the agrarian socialist policies of the late post revolution period in favor of modern finance capitalism.
In the elections of 1871 that elected Benito Juárez, Díaz alleged fraud and unsuccessfully rebelled against Lerdo under the Plan de La Noria.
Seeking to get himself and his family out of Mexico, he turned to the German government, which had generally supported his presidency; the Germans were not eager to allow him to be transported into exile on one of their ships, but relented.
Madero escaped and fled for a short period to San Antonio, Texas.
His remains were not placed in the Monument to the Revolution until 1942, when Manuel Ávila Camacho was president.
After Madero refused to agree to social reforms calling for better working hours, pay, and conditions, Orozco organized his own army, the "Orozquistas", also called the Colorados ("Red Flaggers").
Mexico continues to consider the meaning of the Revolution.
He died in January 1916, six months after going into exile.
In 1970, Metro Revolución opened, with the station at the Monument to the Revolution.
He negotiated a peace deal with Carranza, ending all hostilities and granting him a small estate, thus ending the war.
Initially Huerta was able to recruit to his regime Andrés Molina Enríquez, author of the ''The Great National Problems'' (''Los grandes problemas nacionales''), a key work urging land reform in Mexico.
Earlier, there was a leftist party the Authentic Party of the Mexican Revolution, which never functioned as a full political party fielding presidential candidates, but asserted its legitimacy as the party of Revolution in Mexico until its demise.
The Mexican Revolution, on which was founded the political regime which ruled from 1928 and for nearly seventy years is a cultural construction".
Carranza's attempt to impose his civilian candidate for the 1920 election and the opposition of the generals who had ousted him meant that Carranza was not honored as a revolutionary hero in the 1920s and 30s, and Carrancismo was seen as a "deviation", "the tragic interim of the Carrancista period during which the values of ''la Revolución'' were transmuted and for a time defeated."
Alvaro Obregón, Carranza's best general and a reformist who pushed for the new constitution, was to oppose him for the seat.
This proved to be useful later in his presidency as the militias came to his aid in the final military coup in revolutionary Mexico in 1938.
During his presidency, Carranza relied on his personal secretary and close aide, Hermila Galindo de Topete, to rally and secure support for him.
This was to unite the various revolutionary factions of the civil war to prevent further Cristero revolts and build stability.
In the midst of the mobilized worker’s militias, land reform, and anti-church actions, the American government began to openly declare Mexico a Bolshevik regime.
What was emerging during the Madero regime was "Díaz's old policy of Church-state detente was being continued, perhaps more rapidly and on surer foundations."
Díaz created a formidable political machine, first working with regional strongmen and bringing them into his regime, then replacing them with ''jefes políticos'' (political bosses) who were loyal to him.
His first acts of reform in 1935 were aimed towards peasants.
Wilson urged other European powers to likewise not recognize Huerta's government; he also attempted to persuade Huerta to call prompt elections "and not present himself as a candidate."
To appease workers, Cárdenas furthered provisions to end debt peonage and company stores, which were largely eliminated under his rule, except in the most backwater areas of Mexico.
Then the revolutionaries' attempt to come to a political agreement following Huerta's ouster failed, and Mexico was plunged into a civil war (1914-15).
He then attempted to marginalize him by sending him on a "military mission" to Europe, taking him away from Mexico and potential political supporters.
It was his "undeclared intention to step down from the presidency in 1904."
Other reforms included nationalization of key industries such as petroleum, land, and the railroads.
For Díaz, "the potential challenge from Reyes would remain one of Díaz's political obsessions through the rest of the decade, which ultimately blinded him to the danger of the challenge of Francisco Madero's anti-reelectionist campaign."
He had governors in various states push forward the reforms promised in the 1917 constitution.
Zapata went to Guajardo's camp to negotiate with the colonel, whom he had not met before.
Villa had previously been friendly toward the U.S., but its recognition of Carranza, as well as Villa's decisive defeat at Celaya, finished him as a major force in Mexico.
Intimately knowing the inhospitable terrain, Villa had little trouble evading his pursuers.
Meanwhile, in 1927 another military coup was attempted, this time receiving support from land owners.
The construction of historical memory is manifested in the built landscape, such as the Monument to the Revolution in Mexico City, names of Mexico City Metro stations, and names of towns and neighborhoods of major cities.
By 1894 one out of every five acres of Mexican land was owned by a foreign interest.
While he was elected constitutional president in 1917, he did not implement its most radical elements.
There were also female ''Zapatista'' soldiers who served from the beginning of the revolution.
He tried to weaken the powers of the ultra-conservative officer corps, who were not friendly to his regime.
Specifically he moved to restore "ejido lands to the Yaquis and Mayos of Sonora and advanced proposals for distribution of government lands to small-scale farmers."
Carranza sent Generals Francisco Murguía and Manuel M. Diéguez to track down and eliminate Villa.
In 1996, low denomination Mexican peso notes were printed with the image of peasant revolutionary Emiliano Zapata.
In the summer of 1913 President Wilson recalled Wilson as U.S.
The revolutionary factions that had united in opposition to Huerta's regime now faced a new political landscape with the counter-revolutionaries decisively defeated.
Octavio Paz wrote that the revolution strengthened the Mexican state more than ever, making Mexico a very state-centered and patrimonialist society.
Rather than First Chief Carranza being named president of Mexico at the convention, General Eulalio Gutiérrez was chosen for a term of 20 days.
Col. María de la Luz Espinosa Barrera was one of the few whose service was formally recognized with a pension as a veteran of the Mexican Revolution.
The press embraced their new-found freedom and Madero became a target of their criticism.
For the country's conservative elite, "there was a growing disillusionment with Huerta, and disgust at his strong-arm methods."
Díaz became concerned about him as a rival, and forced his resignation from his cabinet.
Cárdenas reorganized the party that Calles founded, creating formal sectors for interest groups, including one for the Mexican military.
Carranza is now buried in the Monument to the Revolution and there is a museum in his honor.
Raising that number of men in so short a time would not occur with volunteers, and the army resorted to the ''leva'', forced conscription.
Women joined the Zapatistas as soldiers for various reasons, including revenge for dead family members or to perform raids.
Although the National Catholic Party was an opposition party to the Madero regime, "Madero clearly welcomed the emergence of a kind of two party system (Catholic and liberal); he encouraged Catholic political involvement, echoing the exhortations of the episcopate."
In mid July 1914, after his army suffered several defeats, he stepped down and fled to Puerto México.
The Monument to Álvaro Obregón was completed in 1935, during the presidential term of fellow revolutionary general Lázaro Cárdenas and contained Obregón's arm, preserved in formaldehyde container.
Lerdo offered an amnesty, which Díaz accepted.
The obverse of the withdrawn banknote depicted the Zapata statue erected in Cuautla in 1932 by Oliverio Martínez showing Zapata in full ''charro'' attire seated on a fine horse, placing his hand on the shoulder of a peasant with a machete.
Zapata agreed that intellectuals could work on political strategy, but he had the chief role in proclaiming Zapatista ideology.
Carranza chose to back Ignacio Bonillas, a civilian and political unknown.
Wilson never actually declared war on Mexico.
To alleviate this, Cárdenas co-opted the support of capitalists to build large commercial farms to feed the urban population.
Huerta changed allegiance from Madero to the rebels under Félix Díaz (Bernardo Reyes having been killed early in the conflict).
The United States played an especially significant role.
The Constitutionalists’ victory was complete.
"Zapatista" originally referred to a member of the revolutionary guerrilla movement founded about 1910 by Zapata.
Ambassador and sent as his "personal representative" John Lind, a Swedish-American progressive who sympathized with the Mexican revolutionaries.
He had been a national hero, opposing the French Intervention in the 1860s and distinguishing himself in the Battle of Puebla on May 5, 1862 ("Cinco de Mayo").
Díaz attempted the same kind of manipulation he executed with the Mexican political system with business interests, with favoritism to European interests against those of the U.S.
Among the artists employed was Diego Rivera, who had a Mexican nationalist and Marxist tinge to his government murals.
After the presidency of his ally, General Manuel González (1880-1884), Díaz ran for the presidency again and legally remained in office until 1911.
Madero did not  have the experience or the ideological inclination to reward men who had helped bring him to power.
Reyes, an opponent of the Cientificos, was a moderate reformer with a considerable base of support.
The American intervention, known as the Punitive Expedition, was limited to the western sierras of Chihuahua, and was notable as the U.S. Army's first use of airplanes in military operations.
Others wanted major reforms, most especially Emiliano Zapata and Andrés Molina Enríquez, who had long worked for land reform in Mexico.
The regime appears relentlessly bent on suicide."
Shortly after the failed coup, Obregón’s term ended and Sonoran revolutionary Plutarco Elías Calles took power.
The first time the United States intervened with this revolution was in 1914, during the ''Ypiranga'' incident.
Pershing could not continue with his mission and was forced to turn back.
The constitution was far more radical than Carranza himself.
In such a development they betrayed their acknowledged liberal predecessors of the Restored Republic of 1867–1876 which saw the most significant break from authoritarian politics in Mexico's history.
There was what one scholar has called “agrarian compression,” but regions of greatest repression were not the ones that rebelled.
Murals with Lenin and Trotsky began to appear in government buildings.
Regardless, his rule was the most radical phase of the post revolution, social revolution.
Huerta, however, viewed Villa as an ambitious competitor.
In a 1908 interview with U.S. journalist James Creelman, Diaz stated that Mexico was ready for democracy and that he would step down to allow other candidates to compete for the presidency.
Union and peasant leaders themselves gained power of patronage, and the discontent of the membership was channeled through them.
In 1909, Díaz and U.S. President William Howard Taft conducted a historic summit, held in both El Paso, Texas and Ciudad Juárez, Mexico; it was the first meeting between a U.S. and Mexican president, and the first time a sitting U.S. president crossed the border into Mexico.
Díaz had ruled continuously since 1884.
Madero fervently held to his position that Mexico needed real democracy, which included regime change by valid election, a free press, and the right of labor to organize and strike.
But this is a concept, not a fact.
Madero had created no continuing political organization that would survive his death and he had demobilized and alienated the revolutionary fighters who had helped bring him to power.
Morelos was very close to Mexico City and not having it under Carranza's control constituted a vulnerability for his government.
The rebels who brought him to power were demobilized and Madero called on the men of action to return to civilian life.
Madero's political plan did not outline major socioeconomic revolution, but it offered the hope of change for many disadvantaged Mexicans.
When Madero was overthrown in February 1913 by counter-revolutionaries, the conservative wing of the Church supported the coup.
