Miami has the world's largest amount of cruise line headquarters, home to: Carnival Cruise Lines, Celebrity Cruises, Norwegian Cruise Line, Oceania Cruises, and Royal Caribbean International.
Additionally, the city has the largest concentration of international banks in the country, primarily along Brickell Avenue in Brickell, Miami's financial district.
Alternatively, nearby Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport also serves commercial traffic in the Miami area.
Several expansion projects are being funded by a transit development sales tax surcharge throughout Miami-Dade County.
Downtown has the largest concentration of international banks in the U.S. along Brickell Avenue.
Non-denominational private schools in Miami are Ransom Everglades, Gulliver Preparatory School, and Miami Country Day School.
Miami-Dade County Public Schools
The Art Deco District in South Beach, is reputed as one of the most glamorous in the world for its nightclubs, beaches, historical buildings, and shopping.
The city's nickname, ''The Magic City'', comes from this rapid growth.
Much of the year's  of rainfall occurs during this period.
The Florida Panthers play in nearby Sunrise at the BB&T Center.
was located at the mouth of the Miami River.
Miami is also the home of the world's largest art exhibition, dubbed the "Olympics of Art", Art Basel Miami.
Miami is also host to many fashion shows and events, including the annual Miami Fashion Week and the Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami held in the Wynwood Art District.
An Indian village of hundreds of people dating to 500–600 B.C.
In 2008, ''Forbes'' magazine ranked Miami "America's Cleanest City", for its year-round good air quality, vast green spaces, clean drinking water, clean streets, and citywide recycling programs.
The event is held annually in December, and attracts thousands of visitors from around the world.
The city streets has hosted professional auto races, the Miami Indy Challenge and later the Grand Prix Americas.
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Miami's metro area is the eighth-most populous and fourth-largest urban area in the U.S., with a population of around 5.5 million.
This was also a period of alternatives to nightclubs, the warehouse party, acid house, rave and outdoor festival scenes of the late 1980s and early 1990s were havens for the latest trends in electronic dance music, especially house and its ever-more hypnotic, synthetic offspring techno and trance, in clubs like the infamous Warsaw Ballroom better known as '''Warsaw''' and '''The Mix''' where DJs like David Padilla (who was the resident DJ for both) and radio.
The Miami Dolphins play at Hard Rock Stadium in suburban Miami Gardens.
As of September 2008 it has a student enrollment of 385,655 and over 392 schools and centers.
Spain and Great Britain successively "controlled" Florida, and Spain ceded it to the United States in 1821.
The 2010 US Census file for Hispanic or Latino origin reports that 34.4% of the population were of Cuban origin, 15.8% shared a Central American background (7.2% Nicaraguan, 5.8% Honduran, 1.2% Salvadoran, and 1.0% Guatemalan), 8.7% were of South American descent (3.2% Colombian, 1.4% Venezuelan, 1.2% Peruvian, 1.2% Argentinean, and 0.7% Ecuadorian), 4.0% had other Hispanic or Latino origins (0.5% Spaniard), 3.2% descended from Puerto Ricans, 2.4% were Dominican, and 1.5% had Mexican ancestry.
The Heat and the Marlins play within Miami's city limits.
Just northwest of Downtown, is the Civic Center, which is Miami's center for hospitals, research institutes and biotechnology with hospitals such as Jackson Memorial Hospital, Miami VA Hospital, and the University of Miami's Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine.
Super Bowl (2) — 1972, 1973
Downtown Miami is home to the largest concentration of international banks in the United States, and many large national and international companies.
The surface bedrock under the Miami area is called ''Miami oolite'' or ''Miami limestone''.
Indie/folk acts Cat Power and Iron & Wine are based in the city, while alternative hip hop artist Sage Francis, electro artist Uffie, and the electroclash duo Avenue D were born in Miami, but musically based elsewhere.
Miami is also one of the very few cities where its local government went bankrupt, in 2001.
79th Street Causeway
The Julia Tuttle Causeway connects Midtown and Miami Beach.
(There It Is)" by Tag Team in 1993, "Tootsee Roll" by 69 Boyz in 1994, and "C'mon N' Ride It (The Train)" by the Quad City DJ's in 1996.
Miami is regarded as more of a multicultural mosaic, than it is a melting pot, with residents still maintaining much of, or some of their cultural traits.
During the mid-2000s, the city witnessed its largest real estate boom since the Florida land boom of the 1920s.
Florida Power and Light Company
Metrorail connects the urban western suburbs of Hialeah, Medley, and inner-city Miami with suburban The Roads, Coconut Grove, Coral Gables, South Miami and urban Kendall via the central business districts of Miami International Airport, the Civic Center, and Downtown.
Carnival Cruise Lines
By 2014, a private project known as All Aboard Florida by a company of the historic Florida East Coast Railway began construction of a higher-speed rail line in South Florida that is planned to eventually terminate at Orlando International Airport.
In a 2009 UBS study of 73 world cities, Miami was ranked as the richest city in the United States (of four U.S. cities included in the survey) and the world's fifth-richest city, in terms of purchasing power.
The church was built as a center for the 10,000 Scandinavians that live in Florida.
The metro area has one of the highest violent crime rates in the country and workers face lengthy daily commutes.
In the late 19th century, reports described the area as a promising wilderness.
Other major newspapers include ''Miami Today'', headquartered in Brickell, ''Miami New Times'', headquartered in Midtown, ''Miami Sun Post'', ''South Florida Business Journal'', ''Miami Times'', and ''Biscayne Boulevard Times''.
Miami has several major newspapers, the main and largest newspaper being ''The Miami Herald''.
North Miami and Bal Harbour
Major east/west streets to the south of downtown are multiples of 16, though the beginning point of this system is at SW 8th St, one half mile south of Flagler ("zeroth") Street.
Julia Tuttle subsequently convinced Henry Flagler, a railroad tycoon, to expand his Florida East Coast Railway to the region, for which she became known as "the mother of Miami."
'''Miami''' (; ) is a seaport city at the southeastern corner of the U.S. state of Florida.
This rapid high-rise construction, has led to fast population growth in the city's inner neighborhoods, primarily in Downtown, Brickell and Edgewater, with these neighborhoods becoming the fastest-growing areas in the city.
Miami's main four sports teams are the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League, the Miami Heat of the National Basketball Association, the Miami Marlins of Major League Baseball, and the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League.
The most likely time for Miami to be hit is during the peak of the Cape Verde season, which is mid-August through the end of September.
The legacy of Jim Crow was embedded in these developments.
In 2011, Miami was ranked as the sixth-most-read city in the U.S. with high book sales.
Additionally, Miami is a major center, worldwide, for Spanish-language television and film production.
Miami has a tropical monsoon climate (Köppen climate classification ''Am'') with a marked drier season in the winter.
As a result of the aquifer, it is not possible to dig more than  beneath the city without hitting water, which impedes underground construction, though some underground parking garages exist.
*SR 826 (Palmetto Expressway): Golden Glades Interchange to U.S. Route 1/Pinecrest
Miami is also home to both for-profit and nonprofit organizations that offer a range of professional training and other, related educational programs.
For every 100 females there were 99.2 males.
Black labor played a crucial role in Miami's early development.
, those of African ancestry accounted for 19.2% of Miami's population, which includes African Americans.
Because of its proximity to Latin America, Miami serves as the headquarters of Latin American operations for more than 1400 multinational corporations, including AIG, American Airlines, Cisco, Disney, Exxon, FedEx, Kraft Foods, LEO Pharma Americas, Microsoft, Yahoo, Oracle, SBC Communications, Sony, Symantec, Visa International, and Wal-Mart.
The Homestead-Miami Speedway oval hosts NASCAR national races.
Other popular cultural destinations in or near Miami include Zoo Miami, Jungle Island, Miami Seaquarium, Monkey Jungle, Coral Castle, St. Bernard de Clairvaux Church, Charles Deering Estate, Fairchild Botanical Gardens, and Key Biscayne.
Dewpoints in the warm months range from  in June to  in August.
National Basketball Association
The city is home to numerous museums as well, many of which are in Downtown.
World Series (2) — 1997, 2003
Miami is also a major music recording center, with the Sony Music Latin and Universal Music Latin Entertainment headquarters in the city, along with many other smaller record labels.
Unsurprisingly, these officers enforced social codes far beyond the written law.
It is the 11th-largest cargo container port in the United States.
In October 2009, the city also approved an extensive 20-year plan for bike routes and paths around the city.
The corner of Flagler Street and Miami Avenue is in the middle of Downtown in front of the Downtown Macy's (formerly the Burdine's headquarters).
West Indians and Caribbean people have brought, reggae, soca, calypso, and steel pan to the area as well.
, those of (non-Hispanic white) European ancestry accounted for 11.9% of Miami's population.
Along with finance and business, the beaches, conventions, festivals and events draw over 38 million visitors annually into the city, from across the country and around the world, spending $17.1&nbsp;billion.
Coconut Grove was established in 1825 and is the location of Miami's City Hall in Dinner Key, the Coconut Grove Playhouse, CocoWalk, many nightclubs, bars, restaurants and bohemian shops, and as such, is very popular with local college students.
The city commission consists of five commissioners which are elected from single member districts.
By 15,000 years ago, the sea level had dropped to  below the contemporary level.
Baptist Health South Florida
Some of these notable DJs are John Benetiz (better known as JellyBean Benetiz), Danny Tenaglia, and David Padilla.
The event began in November 2008, and has doubled in popularity from 1,500 participants to about 3,000 in the October 2009 Bike Miami.
Kendall, + 16 = 104th (originally S. Kendall), + 16 = 120th/Montgomery, + 16 = 136th/Howard, + 16 = 152nd/Coral Reef, + 16 = 168th/Richmond, + 16 = 184th/Eureka, + 16 = 200th/Quail Roost, + 16 = 216th/Hainlin Mill, + 16 = 232nd/Silver Palm, + 16 = 248th/Coconut Palm, etc., well into the 300's.
There are also several rap and hip hop artists out of Miami.
Miami is the 42nd-most populous city in the United States.
In 2011, 85% of Telemundo's original programming was filmed in Miami.
Other schools in the area include Samuel Scheck Hillel Community Day School, Dade Christian School, Palmer Trinity School, and Westminster Christian School.
''The Miami Herald'' and ''El Nuevo Herald'' are Miami's and South Florida's main, major and largest newspapers.
The newspapers are now headquartered at the former home of U.S. Southern Command in Doral.
Cool air usually settles after the passage of a cold front, which produces much of the little amount of rainfall during the season.
Examples of these songs are "Whoomp!
Miami is the twelfth largest radio market and the seventeenth largest television market in the United States.
Univisión, Telemundo and UniMÁS have their headquarters in Miami, along with their production studios.
The city also attracts many artists for music video and film shootings.
The city currently has the eight tallest (as well as thirteen of the fourteen tallest) skyscrapers in the state of Florida, with the tallest being the  Four Seasons Hotel & Tower.
Two new light rail systems, Baylink and the Miami Streetcar, have been proposed and are currently in the planning stage.
Among North American ports, it ranks second only to the Port of South Louisiana in New Orleans in terms of cargo tonnage imported/exported from Latin America.
In recent years the city government, under Mayor Manny Diaz, has taken an ambitious stance in support of bicycling in Miami for both recreation and commuting.
Quigg, for example, "personally and publicly beat a colored bellboy to death for speaking directly to a white woman."
Miami's explosive population growth has been driven by internal migration from other parts of the country, primarily up until the 1980s, as well as by immigration, primarily from the 1960s to the 1990s.
Miami-Dade County is served by four Interstate Highways (I-75, I-95, I-195, I-395) and several U.S.
In 2010, Miami was ranked as the 44th-most bike-friendly city in the US according to ''Bicycling Magazine''.
Public schools in Miami are governed by Miami-Dade County Public Schools, which is the largest school district in Florida and the fourth-largest in the United States.
Remarkably, even Miami natives are often unaware of this pattern.
Lows fall below , an average of 10-15 nights during the winter season following the passage of cold fronts.
The northern side of Miami also has notable African American and Caribbean immigrant communities such as Little Haiti, Overtown (home of the Lyric Theater), and Liberty City.
The median age was 38.8 years.
In 2010, Miami ranked seventh in the United States in terms of finance, commerce, culture, entertainment, fashion, education, and other sectors.
Miami's skyline is ranked third-most impressive in the U.S., behind New York City and Chicago, and 19th in the world according to the Almanac of Architecture and Design.
''The Miami Herald'' is Miami's primary newspaper with over a million readers and is headquartered in Downtown in Herald Plaza.
Tri-Rail, a commuter rail system operated by the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority (SFRTA), runs from Miami International Airport northward to West Palm Beach, making eighteen stops throughout Miami-Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach counties.
Whatever their role in the city's growth, their community's growth was limited to a small space.
The Tequestas occupied the area for a thousand years before encountering Europeans.
The Miami area has a unique dialect, (commonly called the "Miami accent") which is widely spoken.
It was named for the nearby Miami River, derived from Mayaimi, the historic name of Lake Okeechobee.
The Miami Marlins home ballpark is Marlins Park, located in Little Havana on the site of the old Orange Bowl stadium.
Every month, the city hosts "Bike Miami", where major streets in Downtown and Brickell are closed to automobiles, but left open for pedestrians and bicyclists.
About 6.3% spoke other Indo-European languages at home.
It ranked 33rd among global cities.
Television stations serving the Miami area include: WAMI (Telefutura), WBFS (My Network TV), WSFL (The CW), WFOR (CBS), WHFT (TBN), WLTV (Univision), WPLG (ABC), WPXM (Ion), WSCV (Telemundo), WSVN (Fox), WTVJ (NBC), WPBT (PBS), and WLRN (also PBS).
Other performing arts venues in Miami include the Gusman Center for the Performing Arts, Coconut Grove Playhouse, Colony Theatre, Lincoln Theatre, New World Center, Actor's Playhouse at the Miracle Theatre, Jackie Gleason Theatre, Manuel Artime Theater, Ring Theatre, Playground Theatre, Wertheim Performing Arts Center, the Fair Expo Center and the Bayfront Park Amphitheater for outdoor music events.
''Per'' Scholas, for example is a nonprofit organization that offers free professional certification training directed towards successfully passing CompTIA A+ and Network+ certification exams as a route to securing jobs and building careers.
National Hockey League
This bedrock is covered by a thin layer of soil, and is no more than  thick.
The 1980s and '90s also brought the genre of high energy Miami Bass to dance floors and car subwoofers throughout the country.
Miami International is the busiest airport in Florida, and is the United States' second-largest international port of entry for foreign air passengers behind New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport, and is the seventh-largest such gateway in the world.
The game begins in the film's final scene, with Tony Montana's mansion being raided by Alejandro Sosa's (Robert Davi) assassins.
A free, elevated people mover, Metromover, operates 21 stations on three different lines in greater Downtown Miami, with a station at roughly every two blocks of Downtown and Brickell.
Miami is noted as "the only major city in the United States conceived by a woman, Julia Tuttle", a local citrus grower and a wealthy Cleveland native.
The scene in SoBe, along with a bustling secondhand market for electronic instruments and turntables, had a strong democratizing effect, offering amateur, "bedroom" DJs the opportunity to become proficient and popular as both music players and producers, regardless of the whims of the professional music and club industries.
In 2007, Miami was identified as having the rudest drivers in the United States, the second year in a row to have been cited, in a poll commissioned by automobile club AutoVantage.
*SR 112 (Airport Expressway): Interstate 95 to MIA
, the United Nations estimates that the Miami Urban Agglomeration is the 44th-largest in the world.
The northernmost causeway, the Broad Causeway, is the smallest of Miami's six causeways, and connects North Miami with Bal Harbour.
Edgewater, and Wynwood, are neighborhoods of Midtown and are made up mostly of high-rise residential towers and are home to the Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts.
The Gulf Stream, a warm ocean current, runs northward just  off the coast, allowing the city's climate to stay warm and mild all year.
The Bee Gees moved to Miami in 1975 and have lived here ever since then.
The stadium has also hosted the Super Bowl; the Miami metro area has hosted the game a total of ten times (five Super Bowls at the current Hard Rock Stadium, including Super Bowl XLI and five at the Miami Orange Bowl), tying New Orleans for the most games.
This is the longest-running such event in the US.
In 2007, however, the housing market crashed causing lots of foreclosures on houses.
The new sound fed back into mainstream clubs across the country.
Julia Tuttle Causeway
The city has numerous marinas, rivers, bays, canals, and the Atlantic Ocean, which make boating, sailing, and fishing popular outdoors activities.
33.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older (4.0% male and 7.3% female.)
Miami FC of the North American Soccer League, the second tier of the American soccer pyramid, play at FIU Stadium, and the Fort Lauderdale Strikers play at Lockhart Stadium in nearby Fort Lauderdale, also in the North American Soccer League.
Today, these are part of the local culture, and can be found throughout the city in window cafés, particularly outside of supermarkets and restaurants.
The following table shows the Miami area major professional teams and Division I teams with an average attendance of more than 10,000:
One neighborhood, The Roads, is thusly named because its streets run off the Miami Grid at a 45-degree angle, and therefore are all named roads.
Because its point of origin is in Downtown, which is close to the coast, therefore, the "NW" and "SW" quadrants are much larger than the "SE" and "NE" quadrants.
In 1970, the Census Bureau reported Miami's population as 45.3% Hispanic, 32.9% non-Hispanic White, and 22.7% Black.
In addition to such annual festivals like Calle Ocho Festival and Carnaval Miami, Miami is home to many entertainment venues, theaters, museums, parks and performing arts centers.
Construction is currently underway on the Miami Intermodal Center and Miami Central Station, a massive transportation hub servicing Metrorail, Amtrak, Tri-Rail, Metrobus, Greyhound Lines, taxis, rental cars, MIA Mover, private automobiles, bicycles and pedestrians adjacent to Miami International Airport.
Some of these include the Florida Grand Opera, FIU School of Music, Frost School of Music, Miami City Ballet, Miami Conservatory, Miami Wind Symphony, New World School of the Arts, New World Symphony Orchestra, as well as the music, theater and art schools of the city's many universities and schools.
All of southern Florida was covered by a shallow sea.
Miami has six major causeways that span over Biscayne Bay connecting the western mainland, with the eastern barrier islands along the Atlantic Ocean.
Miami is also the headquarters and main production city of many of the world's largest television networks, record label companies, broadcasting companies and production facilities, such as Telemundo, TeleFutura, Galavisión, Mega TV, Univisión, Univision Communications, Inc., Universal Music Latin Entertainment, RCTV International and Sunbeam Television.
A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Miami the eighth-most walkable of the fifty largest cities in the United States, but a 2013 survey by Travel + Leisure ranked Miami 34th for "public transportation and pedestrian friendliness."
Hard Rock Stadium (80,120)
Major north/south avenues generally end in "7" - e.g., 17th, 27th, 37th/Douglas Aves., 57th/Red Rd., 67th/Ludlam, 87th/Galloway, etc., all the way west beyond 177th/Krome Avenue.
The center attracts many large-scale operas, ballets, concerts, and musicals from around the world and is Florida's grandest performing arts center.
Population, percent change, 2000 to 2010
Like other metro areas in the United States, crime in Miami is localized to specific neighborhoods.
One of the busiest international airports in the world, Miami International Airport caters to over 35 million passengers a year.
Miami is the home to the National Hurricane Center and the headquarters of the United States Southern Command, responsible for military operations in Central and South America.
+ '''Largest employers in Miami'''
The Miami area subsequently became a site of fighting during the Second Seminole War.
The city proper is home to less than one-thirteenth of the population of South Florida.
In 2010, the city population was spread out with 18.8% under the age of 18, 9.4% from 18 to 24, 33.1% from 25 to 44, 25.0% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older.
NCAA D-I (Conference USA)
Major League Soccer
In the mid-2000s, Miami started to become a popular backdrop for reality television shows.
In 2012, ''Forbes'' magazine named Miami the most miserable city in the United States because of a crippling housing crisis that has cost multitudes of residents their homes and jobs.
The area was also characterized as "one of the finest building sites in Florida."
National Football League
The sea level rose quickly after that, stabilizing at the current level about 4000 years ago, leaving the mainland of South Florida just above sea level.
Miami music is varied.
*SR 874 (Don Shula Expressway): 826/Bird Road to Homestead Extension of Florida's Turnpike/Kendall
The highest undulations are found along the coastal Miami Rock Ridge, whose substrate underlies most of the eastern Miami metropolitan region.
Downtown and South Beach
Upper East Side and North Beach
Wynwood/Edgewater and Miami Beach
The church is also an important place for the 150 Norwegians that work at Disney World.
'''Hispanic'''(of any race)
There are over 80 parks and gardens in the city.
Miami is a major center of commerce, finance, and boasts a strong international business community.
However, since that time, Miami has experienced a revival: in 2008, Miami was ranked as "America's Cleanest City" according to ''Forbes'' for its year-round good air quality, vast green spaces, clean drinking water, clean streets and citywide recycling programs.
M-DCPS is also one of a few public school districts in the United States to offer optional bilingual education in Spanish, French, German, Haitian Creole, and Mandarin Chinese.
Miami International Airport serves as the primary international airport of the Greater Miami Area.
In November 2011, Crown Princess Mette-Marit opened a new building for the church.
When World War II began, Miami, well-situated on the southern coast of Florida, became a base for US defense against German submarines.
Starting about 100,000 years ago the Wisconsin glaciation began lowering sea levels, exposing the floor of the lagoon.
Winter visitors remarked that the city grew so much from one year to the next that it was like magic.
Miami has numerous orchestras, symphonies and performing art conservatories.
The elevation of the area never rises above  and averages at around  above mean sea level in most neighborhoods, especially near the coast.
NBA Finals (3) — 2006, 2012, 2013
Around 4,000 of them are Norwegian.
Cuban immigrants in the 1960s brought the Cuban sandwich, medianoche, Cuban espresso, and croquetas, all of which have grown in popularity to all Miamians, and have become symbols of the city's varied cuisine.
Due to English-speakers moving away from the area, the percentage of residents who speak only English is expected to continue to decline.
