His first stop to Gabon was greeted with an enthusiastic reception of more than 100,000 people, some of them carrying signs that read, "Welcome Home Michael."
The videocassette of the documentary ''The Making of Michael Jackson's Thriller'' sold over 350,000 copies in a few months.
In March 2007, Jackson gave a brief interview to the Associated Press in Tokyo, where he said: "I've been in the entertainment industry since I was 6 years old, and as Charles Dickens would say, 'It's been the best of times, the worst of times.'
''Rolling Stone'' later described the young Michael as "a prodigy" with "overwhelming musical gifts" who "quickly emerged as the main draw and lead singer."
It was the best-selling album worldwide in 1983, and became the best-selling album of all time in the United States and the best-selling album of all time worldwide, selling an estimated  copies.
Jackson sang from childhood, and over time his voice and vocal style changed noticeably.
Jackson was reportedly not breathing and CPR was performed.
The ''Dangerous'' album won a Grammy for Best Engineered – Non Classical, awarding the work of Bruce Swedien and Teddy Riley.
For much of Jackson's career, he had an unparalleled worldwide influence over the younger generation through his musical and humanitarian contributions.
AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine states that ''Dangerous'' presents Jackson as a very paradoxical individual.
As Jackson began to emerge as a solo performer in the early 1970s, he maintained ties to the Jackson 5 and Motown.
Although the group's sales began to decline in 1973, and the band members chafed under Motown's refusal to allow them creative input, they achieved several top 40 hits, including the top five single "Dancing Machine" (1974), before leaving Motown in 1975.
"Jam" gained two nominations: Best R&B Vocal Performance and Best R&B Song.
Jackson's live rendition of "You Were There" at Sammy Davis Jr.'s 60th birthday celebration won Jackson a second Emmy nomination.
"You Are Not Alone" was the second single released from ''HIStory''; it holds the ''Guinness World Record'' for the first song ever to debut at number one on the ''Billboard'' Hot 100 chart.
Wearing a distinctive black-sequined jacket and a golf glove decorated with rhinestones, he debuted his signature dance move, the moonwalk, which former ''Soul Train'' dancer and Shalamar member Jeffrey Daniel had taught him three years earlier.
Jackson left the project before completion and was never officially credited, allegedly due to his dissatisfaction with the Sega Genesis console's audio chip.
Reportedly, Jordan had also previously drawn accurate pictures of a dark spot on Jackson's penis only visible when his penis was lifted.
At the end of 1992, ''Dangerous'' was awarded the best-selling album of the year worldwide and "Black or White" was awarded best-selling single of the year worldwide at the Billboard Music Awards.
On January 27, 1984, Michael and other members of the Jacksons filmed a Pepsi commercial overseen by executive Phil Dusenberry, a BBDO ad agency executive, and Alan Pottasch, Pepsi's Worldwide Creative Director, at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles.
Biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli writes that "''Thriller'' stopped selling like a leisure item—like a magazine, a toy, tickets to a hit movie—and started selling like a household staple."
The divorce was relatively amicable, but a subsequent custody suit was not settled until 2006.
The surviving brothers reunited in the studio for the first time since 1989 to record backing vocals.
In December 2015, Jackson's album ''Thriller'' became the first album in the United States to surpass 30 million shipments, certifying it 30× platinum by the RIAA.
He also relied heavily on Klein for medical and business advice.
The song and its accompanying video are a response to the backlash Jackson received from the media after being accused of child molestation in 1993.
He describes Sneddon as an antisocial, white supremacist who wanted to "get my ass, dead or alive".
In 1986, the tabloids ran a story claiming that Jackson slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber to slow the aging process; he was pictured lying in a glass box.
The music video for "You Rock My World", which is thirteen and a half minutes long, was directed by Paul Hunter, and was released in 2001.
In 1984, ''Time'' magazine's pop critic Jay Cocks wrote that "Jackson is the biggest thing since the Beatles.
Jackson was also concerned about the fact that for years, Sony had been pressuring him to sell his share in its music catalog venture.
Jackson's sound, style, movement and legacy continues to inspire artists of all genres."
His work in film began in 1978, when he starred as the Scarecrow in ''The Wiz'', a musical directed by Sidney Lumet that also starred Diana Ross, Nipsey Russell, and Ted Ross.
Michael Jackson was inducted onto the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1980 as member of the Jacksons and in 1984 as solo artist.
Jackson described the search in an emotional public statement, and proclaimed his innocence.
Jackson feared that Sony might have a conflict of interest, since if Jackson's career failed, he would have to sell his share of the catalog at a low price.
Jackson later apologized for the incident, calling it "a terrible mistake".
To accomplish this move live, Jackson and designers developed a special shoe that locks the performer's feet to the stage, allowing them to lean forward.
In 1988, Jackson released his only autobiography, ''Moonwalk'', which took four years to complete and sold 200,000 copies.
Jackie, Tito, Jermaine and Marlon have also said that their father was not abusive and that the whippings, which were harder on Michael because he was younger, kept them disciplined and out of trouble.
He was referred to Dr. Steven Hoefflin, who performed Jackson's second rhinoplasty and subsequent operations.
Jackson's casket was present during the memorial but no information was released about the final disposition of the body.
Sony Music reportedly paid the Jackson estate  for the deal, plus royalties, making it the most expensive music contract pertaining to a single artist in history.
A second, larger and more theatrical Cirque show, ''Michael Jackson: One,'' designed for residency at the Mandalay Bay resort in Las Vegas, was announced on February 21, 2013.
The London residency was increased to 50 dates after record-breaking ticket sales: over one million were sold in less than two hours.
Most of these rehearsals took place at the Staples Center, owned by AEG.
The video had an environmental theme, showing images of animal cruelty, deforestation, pollution and war.
In 1991, he released his eighth album, ''Dangerous'', co-produced with Teddy Riley.
The group set a chart record when its first four singles—"I Want You Back" (1969), "ABC" (1970), "The Love You Save" (1970), and "I'll Be There" (1970)—peaked at number one on the ''Billboard'' Hot 100.
According to Forbes, he has been the top-earning dead celebrity each year since his death, with triple-digit millions per annum ($115 million in 2015).
While Little Richard had a substantial influence on Jackson, James Brown was Jackson's greatest inspiration.
In 1985, ''The Making of Michael Jackson's Thriller'' won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Longform.
8,750 names were drawn at random, with each recipient receiving two tickets each.
''Time'' described Jackson's influence at that point as "star of records, radio, rock video.
Before ''Thriller'', Jackson struggled to receive coverage on MTV, allegedly because he was African American.
When commenting on ''Invincible'', ''Rolling Stone'' were of the opinion that—at the age of 43—Jackson still performed "exquisitely voiced rhythm tracks and vibrating vocal harmonies".
A security staff of 40 patrolled the grounds.
Their analysis was also that "Jackson's feathery-timbred tenor is extraordinarily beautiful.
It was not on the setlists for the concerts, and the recording was based on an old demo tape.
In October 2006, Fox News entertainment reporter Roger Friedman said that Jackson had been recording at a studio in rural Westmeath, Ireland.
In a high-profile visit to Africa, Jackson visited several countries, among them Gabon and Egypt.
In May 1985, Jackson's team left talks after having spent more than $1 million and four months of due diligence work on the negotiations.
At the time of death, Jackson had been administered propofol, lorazepam, and midazolam, and the Los Angeles coroner decided to treat the death as a homicide.
The British soap opera ''EastEnders'' added a last-minute scene to the June 26 episode in which one character tells another about the news.
Jackson had a troubled relationship with his father, Joe.
The young Jackson owed his vocal technique in large part to Diana Ross.
Through it, my music, I know I will live forever."
The video features appearances from Chris Tucker and Marlon Brando.
When singing of brotherhood or self-esteem the musician would return to "smooth" vocals.
According to a friend of Presley's, "their adult friendship began in November 1992 in L.A." They stayed in contact every day over the telephone.
Jackson's other albums, including ''Off the Wall'' (1979), ''Bad'' (1987), ''Dangerous'' (1991), and ''HIStory'' (1995), also rank among the world's best-selling albums.
Jordan Chandler had reportedly given police a description of Jackson's intimate parts, and the strip search revealed that Jordan had correctly claimed Jackson had patchy-colored buttocks, short pubic hair, and pink and brown marked testicles.
In September 2001, two 30th Anniversary concerts were held at Madison Square Garden to mark Jackson's 30th year as a solo artist.
The project's creators received two special AMA honors: one for the creation of the song and another for the USA for Africa idea.
He began his solo career in 1971.
It was not known at the time what Jackson had working on, or who had paid for the sessions, since his publicist had recently issued a statement claiming that he had left Two Seas.
In September 2008, Jackson entered negotiations with Julien's Auction House to display and auction a large collection of memorabilia amounting to approximately 1,390 lots.
Songwriters for the album included Jackson, Rod Temperton, Stevie Wonder, and Paul McCartney.
Slightly different versions were released in various countries, based on polls of local fans.
In August 1993, Jackson's home was raided by the police who, according to court documents, found books and photographs in his bedroom featuring young boys with little or no clothing.
The vitiligo partially lightened his skin, and the lupus was in remission.
The album is Jackson's first where social ills become a primary theme; "Why You Wanna Trip on Me", for example, protests against world hunger, AIDS, homelessness and drugs.
He joined Luciano Pavarotti for a benefit concert in Modena, Italy.
Jackson became the subject of increasingly sensational reports.
In 2010, two university librarians found that Jackson's influence extended to academia, with references to Jackson in reports concerning music, popular culture, chemistry and an array of other topics.
Jackson submitted a bid of $46 million on November 20, 1984.
They married in the Dominican Republic in secrecy, denying it for nearly two months afterwards.
At the turn of the century, Jackson won an American Music Award as Artist of the 1980s.
Jackson alleged in July 2002 that the-then Sony Music chairman Tommy Mottola was a "devil" and a "racist" who did not support his African-American artists, using them merely for his own personal gain.
And when I saw him move, I was mesmerized.
''Invincible'' found Jackson working heavily with producer Rodney Jerkins.
Through stage and video performances, Jackson popularized a number of complicated dance techniques, such as the robot and the moonwalk, to which he gave the name.
It topped the ''Billboard'' 200 chart for 37 weeks and was in the top 10 of the 200 for 80 consecutive weeks.
Following this surge in sales, Sony announced that they had extended their distribution rights for Jackson's material, which had been due to expire in 2015.
The single had the highest debut on the ''Billboard'' Hot 100 at number five, and received a Grammy nomination for "Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals".
In the US, the album was certified platinum, but only reached number 24.
In July 2009, the Lunar Republic Society, which promotes the exploration, settlement and development of the Moon, named a Moon crater after Jackson.
Jackson performed 82 concerts in five continents, 35 countries and 58 cities to over 4.5 million fans, and grossed a total of , becoming Jackson's most successful tour in terms of audience figures.
Jackson's death triggered a global outpouring of grief.
Jackson also won an award as best-selling artist of the 1980s.
The charity organization brought underprivileged children to Jackson's ranch to enjoy theme park rides that Jackson had built on the property.
Jackson's work continues to influence numerous artists of various music genres.
On March 16, 2010, Sony Music Entertainment, spearheaded by its Columbia/Epic Label Group division, signed a new deal with the Jackson estate to extend their distribution rights to his back catalogue until at least 2017, and release ten new albums of previously unreleased material and new collections of released work.
It received double-platinum certification in the U.S.
Set in ancient Egypt, it featured groundbreaking visual effects and appearances by Eddie Murphy, Iman, and Magic Johnson, along with a distinct complex dance routine.
The marriage was, in her words, "a married couple's life ... that was sexually active."
On December 19, 2014, the British Council of Cultural Relations named Jackson's life one of the 80 most important cultural moments of the 20th century.
In the same year, Jackson published his second book, ''Dancing the Dream,'' a collection of poetry, revealing a more intimate side of his nature.
The film was a box-office failure.
Many of the fans were carrying sunflowers and other tribute items to leave at the sites.
The $30 million movie was a popular attraction at all three parks.
Throughout June 1999, Jackson was involved in a number of charitable events.
In 1996, Jackson won a Grammy for Best Music Video, Short Form for "Scream" and an American Music Award for Favorite Pop/Rock Male Artist.
A decade after the fact, during the second round of child abuse allegations, Jackson's lawyers would file a memo stating that the 1994 settlement was done without his consent.
The Jackson 5 also performed at clubs and cocktail lounges, where striptease shows and other adult acts were featured, and at local auditoriums and high school dances.
However, sales for ''Invincible'' were lower than Jackson's previous releases, due in part to the record label dispute and the lack of promotion or tour, and its release at a bad time for the music industry in general.
Both TMZ and the ''Los Angeles Times'' suffered outages.
A dancer with the fanciest feet on the street.
In an interview with Martin Bashir for the 2003 documentary ''Living with Michael Jackson'', Jackson recalled that Joe often sat in a chair with a belt in his hand as he and his siblings rehearsed, and that "if you didn't do it the right way, he would tear you up, really get you."
Jackson sought an early exit from his contract.
While some have made deliberate attempts to hurt me, I take it in stride because I have a loving family, a strong faith and wonderful friends and fans who have, and continue, to support me."
Anna Kisselgoff of ''The New York Times'' later wrote: "The moonwalk that he made famous is an apt metaphor for his dance style.
In the same year, Michael Jackson won three American Music Awards for Favorite Pop/Rock Album (''Dangerous''), Favorite Soul/R&B Single ("Remember the Time"), and was the first to win the International Artist Award of Excellence, for his global performances and humanitarian concerns.
The video for ''Ghosts'' is over 38 minutes long and holds the ''Guinness World Record'' as the world's longest music video.
On June 26, there was a protest march in front of the Los Angeles Police Department's Robbery-Homicide Division at the old Parker Center building and a petition with thousands of signatures demanding justice.
As a technician, he is a great illusionist, a genuine mime.
AOL called it a "seminal moment in internet history ... We've never seen anything like it in terms of scope or depth."
In March 1991, Jackson renewed his contract with Sony for $65 million, a record-breaking deal at the time, displacing Neil Diamond's renewal contract with Columbia Records.
Jones was arranging the film's musical score and agreed to produce Jackson's next solo album, ''Off the Wall''.
With the industry expecting another major hit, Jackson's first album in five years, ''Bad'' (1987), was highly anticipated.
In 2003, ''Daily Telegraph'' writer Tom Utley described Jackson as "extremely important" and a "genius".
''HIStory'' creates an atmosphere of paranoia.
In November 2003, Sony released ''Number Ones'', a compilation of Jackson's hits on CD and DVD.
In August 1967, while touring the East coast, the group won a weekly amateur night concert at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
Jackson later used the recording to argue that he was the victim of a jealous father whose only goal was to extort money from the singer.
The baby was briefly extended over a railing, four stories above ground level, prompting widespread criticism in the media.
The terms were never made public.
Jackson recorded with Queen singer Freddie Mercury from 1981 to 1983, including a demo of "State of Shock", "Victory" and "There Must Be More to Life Than This".
On December 29, 2009, the American Film Institute recognized Jackson's death as a "moment of significance" saying, "Michael Jackson's sudden death in June at age 50 was notable for the worldwide outpouring of grief and the unprecedented global eulogy of his posthumous concert rehearsal movie ''This Is It''."
"Black or White" was Grammy-nominated for best vocal performance.
In 1993, he was accused of child sexual abuse, but the civil case was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount and no formal charges were brought.
Jackson stated that he was physically and emotionally abused during incessant rehearsals, though he credited his father's strict discipline with playing a large role in his success.
Jackson founded the Heal the World Foundation in 1992.
In 1990, ''Vanity Fair'' cited Jackson as the most popular artist in the history of show business.
The concerts would have commenced on July 13, 2009, and finished on March 6, 2010.
His ability to keep one leg straight as he glides while the other bends and seems to walk requires perfect timing."
From a young age, Jackson often punctuated his verses with a sudden exclamation of ''oooh''.
Jackson went on to record the single "State of Shock" with Mick Jagger for the Jacksons' album ''Victory'' (1984).
Reports show the LAPD and DCFS did not find credible evidence of abuse or sexual misconduct.
Jackson is one of the few artists to have been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice, and was also inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Dance Hall of Fame as the only dancer from pop and rock music.
Jackson agreed to produce the soundtrack for Sega's 1994 video game ''Sonic the Hedgehog 3'' with collaborators Brad Buxer, Bobby Brooks, Darryl Ross, Geoff Grace, Doug Grigsby, and Cirocco Jones.
In the U.S., the album was certified triple platinum by the RIAA; in the UK it was certified six times platinum for shipments of at least 1.2 million units.
Because of a dwindling interest during halftime in the preceding years, the NFL decided to seek big-name talent that would keep ratings high, with Jackson selected for his universal appeal.
It helped usher in morphing as an important technology in music videos.
Jackson, Quincy Jones, and entertainment promoter Ken Kragan received special awards for their roles in the song's creation.
Michael Joseph Jackson Jr (commonly known as Prince) was born on February 13, 1997; his sister Paris-Michael Katherine Jackson was born a year later on April 3, 1998.
''Invincible'' spawned three singles, "You Rock My World", "Cry", and "Butterflies", the latter without a music video.
In February 2014, the Internal Revenue Service reported that Jackson's estate owed $702 million, including $505 million in taxes and $197 million in penalties after they claimed the estate undervalued Jackson's fortune.
BET described Jackson "as quite simply the greatest entertainer of all time" and someone who "revolutionized the music video and brought dances like the moonwalk to the world.
In 2003, it was valued at approximately $100 million.
Jackson's purchase of ATV Music was finalized on August 10, 1985.
Jackson's 11-year-old daughter Paris Katherine, speaking publicly for the first time, wept as she told the crowd: "Ever since I was born, Daddy has been the best father you could ever imagine ...
After an initial probe from the LAPD and DCFS was conducted in February 2003, they had initially concluded that molestation allegations were "unfounded" at the time.
Jackson did not use the hiccup technique—somewhat like a gulping for air or gasping—fully until the recording of ''Off the Wall'': it can be seen in full force in the "Shake Your Body (Down to the Ground)" promotional video.
Two of the remixes were released as singles with modest success: "The Girl Is Mine 2008" (with will.i.am) and "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin' 2008" (with Akon).
In 1989, Jackson's annual earnings from album sales, endorsements, and concerts were estimated at $125 million for that year alone.
Michael Jackson also received an Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters Degree from the United Negro College Fund and also an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters from Fisk University.
The Wikimedia Foundation reported nearly a million visitors to Jackson's biography within one hour, probably the most visitors in a one-hour period to any article in Wikipedia's history.
The choreography in ''Thriller'' has become a part of global pop culture, replicated everywhere from Indian films to prisons in the Philippines.
Robson had previously testified in defence of Jackson at the singer's 2005 child molestation trial.
The Jackson 5 were later described as "a cutting-edge example of black crossover artists."
On November 4, 2010, Sony announced the first posthumous album, ''Michael'', released on December 14, with the promotional single, "Breaking News", released to radio on November 8.
They visited Jackson's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, his family's home, and Forest Lawn Memorial Park.
Video game developer Ubisoft announced a dancing-and-singing game featuring Michael Jackson for the 2010 holiday season, ''Michael Jackson: The Experience;'' it is among the first games to use Kinect and PlayStation Move, the motion-detecting camera systems for Microsoft's Xbox 360 and Sony's PlayStation 3 respectively.
AllMusic's Steve Huey describes Jackson as "an unstoppable juggernaut, possessed of all the skills to dominate the charts seemingly at will: an instantly identifiable voice, eye-popping dance moves, stunning musical versatility and loads of sheer star power".
Worldwide sales stand at  copies, making it the best-selling remix album of all time.
The memorial service was one of the most watched events in streaming history, with an estimated U.S. audience of 31.1 million, an amount comparable to the estimated  that watched the 2004 burial of former president Ronald Reagan, and the estimated  Americans who watched the 1997 funeral for Princess Diana.
During the tour, Jackson married his longtime friend Deborah Jeanne Rowe, a dermatology nurse, in an impromptu ceremony in Sydney, Australia.
Reverend Lucious Smith provided a closing prayer.
The offending scenes in the final half of the 14-minute version were edited out to prevent the video from being banned, and Jackson apologized.
Jackson's 1987 album ''Bad'' spawned the U.S. ''Billboard'' Hot 100 number-one singles "I Just Can't Stop Loving You", "Bad", "The Way You Make Me Feel", "Man in the Mirror", and "Dirty Diana", becoming the first album to have five number-one singles on the ''Billboard'' Hot 100.
Bahrain was also where the family intended to send Jackson if he was convicted (though Jackson did not know about the plan), according to a statement by Jermaine Jackson printed in ''The Times'' of London in September 2011.
The second campaign had a global reach of more than 20 countries and would provide financial support for Jackson's ''Bad'' album and 1987–88 world tour.
Unusually for someone coming from a black American soul tradition, he did not often sing straight, unadorned ballads, though when he did (from 'Ben' to 'She's Out of My Life') the effect was of a powerful simplicity and truth."
At the time, ''Rolling Stone'' compared his vocals to the "breathless, dreamy stutter" of Stevie Wonder.
The first single released from the album was "Scream/Childhood".
He retained ownership of half the company, earning $95 million up front as well as the rights to more songs.
Along with Jackson, it featured Macaulay Culkin, Peggy Lipton, and George Wendt.
When asked by Oprah in the 1993 interview about why he grabbed his crotch, he replied, "I think it happens subliminally" and he described it as something that was not planned, but rather, as something that was compelled by the music.
While it was a commercial success, it received mostly negative reviews.
The change gained widespread media coverage, including rumors that he might have been bleaching his skin.
His agents thought they had a deal several times, but encountered new bidders or new areas of debate.
On May 12, 2014, another young man, Jimmy Safechuck, sued Jackson's estate, claiming Jackson sexually abused him "from the age of 10 to about 14 or 15" in the 1980s.
In the spring of 2007, Jackson and Sony teamed up to buy another music publishing company, Famous Music LLC, formerly owned by Viacom.
''Thriller'' is the best-selling album of all time, with estimated sales of 65 million copies worldwide.
Since the books were legal to purchase and own, the jury decided not to indict Jackson.
On June 25, 2010, the first anniversary of Jackson's death, fans traveled to Los Angeles to pay tribute.
MTV and BET aired marathons of Jackson's music videos.
The collaborations were not officially released until 2014.
Jackson first used a technique called the "vocal hiccup" in 1973, starting with the song "It's Too Late to Change the Time" from the Jackson 5's ''G.I.T.
