No major damage or injuries were reported, according to Governor Rick Snyder's office.
Michigan's public universities attract more than $1.5 B in research and development grants each year.
The Detroit Tigers played at Tiger Stadium (formerly known as Navin Field and Briggs Stadium) from 1912 to 1999.
The state is an important source of engineering job opportunities.
The domestic auto industry accounts directly and indirectly for one of every ten jobs in the U.S.
The hundred soldiers and workers who accompanied Cadillac built a fort enclosing one arpent (about , the equivalent of just under  per side) and named it Fort Pontchartrain.
Marie is the home of the Soo Locks and Sault Ste.
Particularly noteworthy are the Fisher Building, Cadillac Place, and the Guardian Building, each of which is a National Historic Landmark (NHL).
The new route brought a large influx of settlers, who became farmers and merchants and shipped out grain, lumber, and iron ore. By the 1830s, Michigan had 80,000 residents, more than enough to apply and qualify for statehood.
Missionaries in 1671–75 founded outlying stations at Saint Ignace and Marquette.
Cadillac later departed to serve as the French governor of Louisiana from 1710 to 1716.
The Roman Catholic Church is the largest denomination by number of adherents, according to the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) 2010 survey, with 1,717,296 adherents.
The Gerald R. Ford Museum is located in Grand Rapids, and the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library is located on the campus of his alma mater, the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor.
It is composed of fossilized coral (''Hexagonaria pericarnata'') from long ago when the middle of the continent was covered with a shallow sea.
Charter boats are based in many Great Lakes cities to fish for salmon, trout, walleye and perch.
A number of forts, including Fort Wayne were built in Michigan during the 19th century out of fears of renewed fighting with Britain.
Hunting and fishing are significant industries in the state.
The state has 54,800 farms utilizing  of land which sold $6.49&nbsp;billion worth of products in 2010.
Michigan State University has the eighth largest campus population of any U.S. school.
The Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.
With the exception of two small areas that are drained by the Mississippi River by way of the Wisconsin River in the Upper Peninsula and by way of the Kankakee-Illinois River in the Lower Peninsula, Michigan is drained by the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence watershed and is the only state with the majority of its land thus drained.
The Hmong community also had a prominent portrayal in the 2008 film ''Gran Torino'', which was set in Detroit.
In 1927 a school bombing took place in Clinton County; the Bath School disaster, which resulted in the deaths of 38 schoolchildren, constitutes the deadliest mass murder in a school in U.S. history.
The Pistons played at Detroit's Cobo Arena until 1978 and at the Pontiac Silverdome until 1988 when they moved into The Palace of Auburn Hills.
By 1920, Detroit was the fourth-largest city in the US.
At the same time, the French strengthened Fort Michilimackinac at the Straits of Mackinac to better control their lucrative fur-trading empire.
France offered free land in an effort to attract families to Detroit, which grew to 800 people in 1765, the largest city between Montreal and New Orleans.
Kellogg's cereal is based in Battle Creek, Michigan and processes many locally grown foods.
* State tree: white pine (since 1955)
In August 2009, Michigan and Detroit's auto industry received $1.36 B in grants from the U.S. Department of Energy for the manufacture of electric vehicle technologies which is expected to generate 6,800 immediate jobs and employ 40,000 in the state by 2020.
Most of the inhabitants were French-Canadians or Native Americans, many of whom had been allied with the French.
Michigan rarely experiences earthquakes, thus far mostly smaller ones that do not cause significant damage.
A survey found that 70% of all tourism business comes directly from Michigan residents, and the Michigan Hotel, Motel, & Resort Association claimed that the shorter summer in between school years cut into the annual tourism season in the state.
The state averages from  of precipitation annually, however some areas in the northern lower peninsula and the upper peninsula average almost 160" of snowfall per year.
The Lower Peninsula, to which the name Michigan was originally applied, is often noted to be shaped like a mitten.
A sighting in February 2004 near Ubly was the first confirmed sighting in Michigan in 200 years.
An attempt to retake Detroit resulted in a severe American defeat in the River Raisin Massacre.
District courts are often responsible for handling the preliminary examination and for setting bail in felony cases.
Amtrak passenger rail services the state, connecting many southern and western Michigan cities to Chicago, Illinois.
The geography of the Thumb is mainly flat with a few rolling hills.
Wolverines are, however, extremely rare in Michigan.
Livestock products accounted for 38% of the value of agricultural products while crops accounted for the majority.
Many individuals, including Ransom E. Olds, John and Horace Dodge, Henry Leland, David Dunbar Buick, Henry Joy, Charles King, and Henry Ford, provided the concentration of engineering know-how and technological enthusiasm to start the birth of the automotive industry.
After World War II, housing was developed in suburban areas outside city cores; newly constructed U.S. Interstate Highways allowed commuters to navigate the region more easily.
Event tourism draws large numbers to occasions like the Tulip Time Festival and the National Cherry Festival.
Leading crops include corn, soybeans, flowers, wheat, sugar beets and potatoes.
Michigan consists of two peninsulas that lie between 82°30' to about 90°30' west longitude, and are separated by the Straits of Mackinac.
Under British rule, it made public executions a regular practice.
The Michigan Underwater Preserves are 11 underwater areas where wrecks are protected for the benefit of sport divers.
From 1997 to 2004, Michigan was the only state to top the 10,000 mark for the number of major new developments; however, the effects of the late 2000s recession have slowed the state's economy.
More than 124,000 students attend private schools and an uncounted number are home-schooled under certain legal requirements.
The town quickly became a major fur-trading and shipping post.
These parks and forests include Holland State Park, Mackinac Island State Park, Au Sable State Forest, and Mackinaw State Forest.
This peninsula projects out into Lake Huron and the Saginaw Bay.
* State motto: ''Si quaeris peninsulam amoenam circumspice'' (Latin: "If you seek a pleasant peninsula, look about you") adopted in 1835 on the coat-of-arms, but never as an official motto.
It is  long from north to south and  from east to west and occupies nearly two-thirds of the state's land area.
During the winter through the middle of February the state is frequently subjected to heavy lake-effect snow.
What is now Michigan was first settled by various Native American tribes before being colonized by French explorers in the 17th century and becoming a part of New France.
In general, charter townships have many of the same powers as a city but without the same level of obligations.
The three nations co-existed peacefully as part of a loose confederation called the Council of Three Fires.
The fifteen state universities have broad power and can do anything within the parameters of their status as educational institutions that is not prohibited by the state constitution.
For 2010, the Big Three domestic automakers have reported significant profits indicating the beginning of rebound.
Collegiate sports in Michigan are popular in addition to professional sports.
Historically, the first county-level meeting of the Republican Party took place in Jackson on July 6, 1854, and the party thereafter dominated Michigan until the Great Depression.
The current governor is Rick Snyder.
The Republican Party currently holds a majority in both the House and Senate of the Michigan Legislature.
On March 8, 1833, the Holy See formally established a diocese in the Michigan territory, which included all of Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and the Dakotas east of the Mississippi River.
Circuit court judges are elected to terms of six years.
Michigan remained fairly reliably Republican at the presidential level for much of the 20th century.
Flint Bishop International Airport is the third largest airport in the state, served by four airlines to several primary hubs.
Michigan's state sales tax is 6%, though items such as food and medication are exempted from sales tax.
'''Michigan'''  is a state located in the Great Lakes and midwestern regions of the United States.
Michigan's public universities attract more than $1.5 B in research and development grants each year.
Property taxes are assessed on the local level, but every property owner's local assessment contributes six mills (a rate of $6 per $1000 of property value) to the statutory State Education Tax.
Detroit continued to expand through the 1950s, at one point doubling its population in a decade.
The Detroit Lions played at Tiger Stadium in Detroit until 1974, then moved to the Pontiac Silverdome where they played for 27 years between 1975 and 2002 before moving to Ford Field in Detroit in 2002.
The three-term Republican Governor John Engler (1991–2003) preceded the former two-term Democratic Governor Jennifer Granholm (2003–2011).
The state's two largest athletic programs are the Michigan Wolverines and Michigan State Spartans, which play in the NCAA Big Ten Conference.
With almost ten million residents, Michigan is a large and influential state, ranking tenth in population among the fifty states.
The state of Michigan soon became an important center of industry and trade in the Great Lakes region and a popular immigrant destination.
The governor and the other state constitutional officers serve four-year terms and may be re-elected only once.
The forest products industry and recreational users contribute $12&nbsp;billion and 200,000 associated jobs annually to the state's economy.
Michigan's two U.S.
Islam was introduced by immigrants from the Near East during the 20th century.
For this reason, many communities in the very southern portions of the state are equipped with tornado sirens to warn residents of approaching tornadoes.
Michigan typically ranks third or fourth in overall Research & development (R&D) expenditures in the US.
Michigan's tourists spend $17.2&nbsp;billion per year in the state, supporting 193,000 tourism jobs.
The Ojibwe, whose numbers are estimated to have been between 25,000 and 35,000, were the largest.
Michigan is the only state to consist of two peninsulas.
Senators serve four-year terms concurrent to those of the governor, while representatives serve two-year terms.
As of April 2001, there were 127 charter townships in Michigan.
Potatoes are grown in Northern Michigan, and corn is dominant in Central Michigan.
Alfalfa, cucumbers, and asparagus are also grown.
Michigan is the tenth most populous of the 50 United States, with the 11th most extensive total area (the largest state by total area east of the Mississippi River).
GM began its initial public offering (IPO) of stock in 2010.
Michigan is home to very fertile land in the Saginaw Valley and "Thumb" areas.
The Upper Peninsula exhibits Lower Silurian sandstones, limestones, copper and iron bearing rocks, corresponding to the Huronian system of Canada.
* State quarter: U.S. coin issued in 2004 with the Michigan motto "Great Lakes State".
State government is decentralized among three tiers—statewide, county and township.
They are sometimes called "Yoopers" (from "U.P.
The vast majority of rail service in Michigan is devoted to freight, with Amtrak and various scenic railroads the exceptions.
People of Scandinavian descent, and those of Finnish ancestry, have a notable presence in the Upper Peninsula.
Because of imprecise cartography and unclear language defining the boundaries in the 1783 Treaty of Paris, the British retained control of Detroit and Michigan after the American Revolution.
Senator Spencer Abraham in the 2000 elections.
Many school districts in rural areas of Michigan cancel school on the opening day of firearm deer season, because of attendance concerns.
When the first European explorers arrived, the most populous tribes were Algonquian peoples, which include the Anishinaabe groups of Ojibwe (called "Chippewa" in French), Odaawaa/Odawa (Ottawa), and the Boodewaadamii/Bodéwadmi (Potawatomi).
By the mid-18th century, the French also occupied forts at present-day Niles and Sault Ste.
As of 2007 most lived in northeastern Detroit, but they had been increasingly moving to Pontiac and Warren.
There are plans for commuter rail for Detroit and its suburbs (see SEMCOG Commuter Rail).
Other Algonquian tribes in Michigan, in the south and east, were the Mascouten, the Menominee, the Miami, the Sac (or Sauk), and the Fox, and the non-Algonquian Wyandot, who are better known by their French name, the Huron.
As of April 2013, the largest Japanese national population is in Novi, with 2,666 Japanese residents, and the next largest populations are respectively in Ann Arbor, West Bloomfield Township, Farmington Hills, and Battle Creek.
* State bird: American robin (since 1931)
Ford's development of the moving assembly line in Highland Park marked the beginning of a new era in transportation.
While the original building does not survive, the congregation of that name continues to be active today.
There are two types of township in Michigan: ''general law'' township and ''charter''.
The largest section of the North Country National Scenic Trail passes through Michigan.
In 2009, GM and Chrysler emerged from Chapter 11 restructurings with financing provided in part by the U.S. and Canadian governments.
* State soil: Kalkaska sand (since 1990), ranges in color from black to yellowish brown, covers nearly  in 29 counties.
* State animal: wolverine (traditional)
Metro Detroit receives more than 15 million visitors each year.
Michigan's current senior U.S.
French attempts to consolidate the fur trade led to the Fox Wars involving the Meskwaki (Fox) and their allies versus the French and their Native allies.
The Michigan Supreme Court consists of seven members who are elected on non-partisan ballots for staggered eight-year terms.
* State game animal: white-tailed deer (since 1997)
The Upper Peninsula (often referred to as "the U.P.")
The more northern areas were held by the British until the peace treaty restored the old boundaries.
The Great Lakes that border Michigan from east to west are Lake Erie, Lake Huron, Lake Michigan and Lake Superior.
Other peninsulas of Michigan include the Keweenaw Peninsula, making up the Copper Country region of the state.
There are several administrative courts and specialized courts.
Detroit Metropolitan Airport is one of the nation's most recently expanded and modernized airports with six major runways, and large aircraft maintenance facilities capable of servicing and repairing a Boeing 747 and is a major hub for Delta Air Lines.
* State fossil: mastodon (since 2000)
The state has elected successive Republican attorneys general twice since 2003.
A second wave of French Canadian immigrants settled in Michigan during the late 19th to early 20th century, particularly in lumbering areas in counties on the Lake Huron side of the Lower Peninsula, such as the Saginaw Valley, Alpena, and Cheboygan counties as well as throughout the Upper Peninsula with large concentrations in Escanaba and the Keweenaw Peninsula.
District court judges are elected to terms of six years.
Michigan produces wines, beers and a multitude of processed food products.
Cherry Capital Airport is located in Traverse City.
The state also levies a 6% sales tax within the state and a Use tax on goods purchased outside the state (that are brought in and used in state).
A wide variety of commodity crops, fruits, and vegetables are grown in Michigan, making it second only to California among U.S. states in the diversity of its agriculture.
Under terms negotiated in the 1794 Jay Treaty, Britain withdrew from Detroit and Michilimackinac in 1796.
As of 2007, almost 8,000 Hmong people lived in the State of Michigan, about double their 1999 presence in the state.
The state has the highest number of golf courses and registered snowmobiles in the nation.
The entire state averages 30 days of thunderstorm activity per year.
The state averages 17 tornadoes per year, which are more common in the extreme southern portion of the state.
The state has maintained its early commitment to public education.
Michigan is a leading grower of fruit in the U.S., including blueberries, cherries, apples, grapes, and peaches.
When Michigan became a state in 1837, the boundary of the Diocese of Detroit was redrawn to coincide with that of the State; the other dioceses were later carved out from the Diocese of Detroit but remain part of the Ecclesiastical Province of Detroit.
Democratic strongholds include Wayne County, which includes the city of Detroit, Washtenaw County (Ann Arbor), Ingham County (Lansing), and Genesee County (Flint).
Benton Harbor is the poorest city in Michigan, with a per capita income of $8,965, while Barton Hills is the richest with a per capita income of $110,683.
The Lower Peninsula is shaped like a mitten and many residents hold up a hand to depict where they are from.
The state has 481 Japanese employment facilities providing 35,554 local jobs.
Thornapple Valley, Ball Park Franks, Koegel Meat Company, and Hebrew National sausage companies are all based in Michigan.
The 45th parallel north runs through the state - marked by highway signs and the Polar-Equator Trail - along a line including Mission Point Light near Traverse City, the towns of Gaylord and Alpena in the Lower Peninsula and Menominee in the Upper Peninsula.
Battle Creek, Michigan is also the birthplace of the Seventh-day Adventist Church, which was founded on May 21, 1863.
The large majority of Michigan's population is Caucasian.
Michigan held its first United States presidential primary election in 1910.
Congressman Fred Upton, a Republican, serves as Chairman of the US House Committee on Energy and Commerce and Congressman Mike Rogers, also a Republican, serves as Chairman of US House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.
The area was organized as part of the larger Northwest Territory until 1800, when western Michigan became part of the Indiana Territory.
Michigan has had four constitutions, the first of which was ratified on October 5 and 6, 1835.
Products and services include automobiles, food products, information technology, aerospace, military equipment, furniture, and mining of copper and iron ore. Michigan is the third leading grower of Christmas trees with  of land dedicated to Christmas tree farming.
Modern advances in the auto industry have resulted in increased automation, high tech industry, and increased suburban growth since 1960.
'ers"), and their speech (the "Yooper dialect") has been heavily influenced by the numerous Scandinavian and Canadian immigrants who settled the area during the lumbering and mining boom of the late 19th century.
* State nicknames: ''Wolverine State'', ''Great Lake State'', ''Mitten State'', ''Water-Winter Wonderland''
The association is well and long established: for example, many Detroiters volunteered to fight during the American Civil War and George Armstrong Custer, who led the Michigan Brigade, called them the "Wolverines".
Michigan has approved plans to expand Medicaid coverage in 2014 to adults with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level (approximately $15,500 for a single adult in 2014).
Senator Debbie Stabenow, a Democrat, has served since 2001 after narrowly beating former Republican U.S.
The first statewide meeting of the Republican Party took place July 6, 1854, in Jackson, Michigan, where the party adopted its platform.
Wieber was also a member of the gold medal winning team at the London Olympics in 2012.
Michigan has a number of public universities spread throughout the state and numerous private colleges as well.
Counties are administrative divisions of the state, and townships are administrative divisions of a county.
The origins of this association are obscure; it may derive from a busy trade in wolverine furs in Sault Ste.
The use tax applies to internet sales/purchases from outside Michigan, and is equivalent to the sales tax.
Detroit is the centrally located metropolitan area of the Great Lakes Megalopolis and the second-largest metropolitan area in the U.S. linking the Great Lakes system.
There are 83 counties in Michigan.
In 1899, it became the first normal college in the nation to offer a four-year curriculum.
General Motors, Ford, and Chrysler reached agreements with the United Auto Workers Union to transfer the liabilities for their respective health care and benefit funds to a 501(c)(9) Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association (VEBA).
In 1691, the French established a trading post and Fort St. Joseph along the St. Joseph River at the present day city of Niles.
The state is bounded on the south by the states of Ohio and Indiana, sharing land and water boundaries with both.
Many other private colleges were founded as well, and the smaller cities formed high schools late in the century.
A person from Michigan is called a Michigander or Michiganian; also at times, but rarely, a "Michiganite".
Like the steamship and railroad, it was a far-reaching development.
The Leelanau Peninsula lies in the Northern Lower Michigan region.
Michigan's education system provides services to 1.6&nbsp;million K-12 students in public schools.
Michigan's tourism website ranks among the busiest in the nation.
Detroit's Saint Anne's parish, established in 1701 by Antoine de la Mothe Cadillac, is the second-oldest Roman Catholic parish in the United States.
bays indent the Lower Peninsula.
Manufacturing in the state grew 6.6% from 2001 to 2006, but the high speculative price of oil became a factor for the U.S. auto industry during the economic crisis of 2008 impacting industry revenues.
More than the forms of public transportation, the automobile transformed private life.
By the 1930s, so many immigrants had arrived that more than 30 languages were spoken in the public schools, and ethnic communities celebrated in annual heritage festivals.
French ''voyageurs'' and ''coureurs des bois'' explored and settled in Michigan in the 17th century.
The Michigan judiciary consists of two courts with primary jurisdiction (the Circuit Courts and the District Courts), one intermediate level appellate court (the Michigan Court of Appeals), and the Michigan Supreme Court.
Some parts of the state average high temperatures below freezing from December through February, and into early March in the far northern parts.
It is divided by a low water divide running north and south.
The National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory is located at Michigan State University.
Republican strongholds of the state include rural areas of Western Michigan, Northern Michigan, Livingston County, and the Grand Rapids metro area.
It has more public golf courses, registered boats, and lighthouses than any other state.
Michigan's highest recorded temperature is  at Mio on July 13, 1936, and the coldest recorded temperature is  at Vanderbilt on February 9, 1934.
A feature of Michigan that gives it the distinct shape of a mitten is the Thumb.
The state has 11,037 inland lakes - totaling  of inland water - in addition to  of Great Lakes waters.
The Roman Catholic Church was the only organized religion in Michigan until the 19th century, reflecting the territory's French colonial roots.
Circuit courts are also the only trial courts in the State of Michigan which possess the power to issue equitable remedies.
