Michelangelo used his own discretion to create the composition of the Medici Chapel, which houses the large tombs of two of the younger members of the Medici family,  Giuliano, Duke of Nemours, and Lorenzo, his nephew.
The interiors of the older churches were covered with frescos (mostly in Late Medieval, but also in the Early Renaissance style), begun by Giotto and continued by Masaccio in the Brancacci Chapel – both of whose works Michelangelo studied and copied in drawings.
:Which without motion moves every balance.
There Michelangelo gained his love for marble, as Giorgio Vasari quotes him:
He employed Francesco Granacci, who was his fellow pupil at the Medici Academy, and became one of several assistants on the Sistine Chapel ceiling.
In 1488, at the age of 13, Michelangelo was apprenticed to Ghirlandaio.
The legs and a detached arm remain from a previous stage of the work.
The ''Madonna of the Steps'' is Michelangelo's earliest known work.
Everything about Michelangelo's angel is dynamic.
The dead rise from their graves, to be consigned either to Heaven or to Hell.
The latter was based on a theme suggested by Poliziano and was commissioned by Lorenzo de Medici.
It is carved in shallow relief, a technique often employed by the master-sculptor of the early 15th century, Donatello, and others such as Desiderio da Settignano.
File:'Ignudo' by Michelangelo JBU33.jpg|''Ignudo''
Upon completion, the work was rejected by the cardinal, and subsequently entered the collection of the banker Jacopo Galli, for his garden.
Michelangelo's grandnephew, Michelangelo Buonarroti the Younger, published the poems in 1623 with the gender of pronouns changed, and it was not until John Addington Symonds translated them into English in 1893 that the original genders were restored.
Michelangelo returned to Florence but received no commissions from the new city government under Savonarola.
The Prophet Jeremiah, contemplating the downfall of Jerusalem, is an image of the artist himself.
The city of Florence was at that time the greatest centre of the arts and learning in Italy.
The ''Bound Slave'' is one of the later figures for Pope Julius' tomb.
It is extremely rare, since he destroyed his designs later in life.
01 crop.JPG|''Battle of the Centaurs'' (1492)
In 1527, Florentine citizens, encouraged by the sack of Rome, threw out the Medici and restored the republic.
In 1547 he took on the job of completing St Peter's Basilica, begun to a design by Bramante, and with several intermediate designs by several architects.
Despite making few forays beyond the arts, his versatility in the disciplines he took up was of such a high order that he is often considered a contender for the title of the archetypal Renaissance man, along with his rival and fellow Florentine Medici client, Leonardo da Vinci.
Michelangelo left the security of the Medici court and returned to his father's house.
Pope Clement also commissioned the Laurentian Library, for which Michelangelo also designed the extraordinary vestibule with columns recessed into niches, and a staircase that appears to spill out of the library like a flow of lava, according to Pevsner, ''...&nbsp;revealing Mannerism in its most sublime architectural form.''
Condivi recalls Michelangelo's saying that his sole regret in life was that he did not kiss the widow's face in the same manner that he had her hand.
On 7 December 2007, a red chalk sketch for the dome of St Peter's Basilica, possibly the last made by Michelangelo before his death, was discovered in the Vatican archives.
It reflects the earlier relief in the energy and diversity of the figures, with many different postures, and many being viewed from the back, as they turn towards the approaching enemy and prepare for battle.
File:Dying slave Louvre MR 1590.jpg|''Dying slave'', Louvre (1513)
He had the largest workshop in Florence, at that period.
In his old age, Michelangelo created a number of ''Pietàs'' in which he apparently reflects upon mortality.
Shortly before his death in 1534 Pope Clement VII commissioned Michelangelo to paint a fresco of ''The Last Judgement'' on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel.
In the ''Crucifixion of Peter'' soldiers busy themselves about their assigned duty of digging a post hole and raising the cross while various people look on and discuss the events.
The attempts by subsequent artists to imitate Michelangelo's impassioned and highly personal style resulted in Mannerism, the next major movement in Western art after the High Renaissance.
Neither work was completed and both were lost forever when the chamber was refurbished.
The two paintings are very different: Leonardo depicts soldiers fighting on horseback, while Michelangelo has soldiers being ambushed as they bathe in the river.
The sketch is a partial plan for one of the radial columns of the cupola drum of Saint Peter's.
A siege of the city ensued, and Michelangelo went to the aid of his beloved Florence by working on the city's fortifications from 1528 to 1529.
File:Michelangelo, centauromachia, 1492 ca.
In fact, two biographies were published during his lifetime; one of them, by Giorgio Vasari, proposed that he was the pinnacle of all artistic achievement since the beginning of the Renaissance, a viewpoint that continued to have currency in art history for centuries.
The exterior niches of the Church of Or' San Michele contained a gallery of works by the most acclaimed sculptors of Florence – Donatello, Ghiberti, Andrea del Verrocchio, and Nanni di Banco.
He returned to the concepts of Bramante, and developed his ideas for a centrally planned church, strengthening the structure both physically and visually.
File:Buonarotti-scala.jpg|The ''Madonna of the Steps'' (1490–92)
The scheme is of nine panels illustrating episodes from the Book of Genesis, set in an architectonic frame.
Because of his reclusive nature, he had little to do with either artist and outlived both of them by more than forty years.
Michelangelo was persuaded to take over the project.
Other architectural works include San Giovanni dei Fiorentini, the Sforza Chapel (Capella Sforza) in the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore and the Porta Pia.
Michelangelo was a devout Catholic whose faith deepened at the end of his life.
He is surrounded by saints, among which Saint Bartholomew holds a drooping flayed skin, bearing the likeness of Michelangelo.
Four small cupolas cluster around the dome.
The city, previously under threat from the French, was no longer in danger as Charles VIII had suffered defeats.
In the same year, Giorgio Vasari published his ''Vita'', including a biography of Michelangelo.
In the so-called ''Dying Slave'', Michelangelo has again utilised the figure with marked contraposto to suggest a particular human state, in this case waking from sleep.
The works give a unique insight into the sculptural methods that Michelangelo employed and his way of revealing what he perceived within the rock.
File:Michelangelo Buonarroti 027.jpg|''The Prophet Jeremiah'' (1511)
At this time, Michelangelo sculpted the reliefs ''Madonna of the Steps'' (1490–1492) and ''Battle of the Centaurs'' (1491–1492).
Despite holding a low opinion of painting, Michelangelo also created two of the most influential frescoes in the history of Western art: the scenes from Genesis on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Rome, and ''The Last Judgment'' on its altar wall.
The composition stretches over 500 square metres of ceiling and contains over 300 figures.
Such a complex disarray of figures was rare in Florentine art, where it would usually only be found in images showing either the Massacre of the Innocents or the Torments of Hell.
Michelangelo was 24 at the time of its completion.
File:Ivresse de noe.jpg|''The Drunkenness of Noah''
Bruges, Belgium (1504)
At later times, during his mother's prolonged illness and after her death in 1481, when he was just six years old, Michelangelo lived with a nanny and her husband, who was a stonecutter, in the town of Settignano, where his father owned a marble quarry and a small farm.
At the academy, both Michelangelo's outlook and his art were subject to the influence of many of the most prominent philosophers and writers of the day, including Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Mirandola and Poliziano.
They are heralded by the ''Victory'', perhaps created for the tomb of Pope Julius II but left unfinished.
Also during this period, Michelangelo was commissioned by Angelo Doni to paint a "Holy Family" as a present for his wife, Maddalena Strozzi.
The subject, which is not part of the Biblical narrative of the Crucifixion, was common in religious sculpture of Medieval Northern Europe and would have been very familiar to the Cardinal.
Michelangelo responded by completing his most famous work, the statue of David, in 1504.
He sculpted two of his best-known works, the ''Pietà'' and ''David'', before the age of thirty.
Although the two angels form a pair, there is a great contrast between the two works, the one depicting a delicate child with flowing hair clothed in Gothic robes with deep folds, and Michelangelo's depicting a robust and muscular youth with eagle's wings, clad in a garment of Classical style.
File:Madonna michelangelo1.jpg|''Madonna and Child''.
File:Pietà per Vittoria Colonna.jpg|The ''Pietà of Vittoria Colonna'' (c. 1540)
The twisting motion present in the ''Bruges Madonna'' is accentuated in the painting.
13.PNG|Michelangelo's design for St Peter's is both massive and contained, with the corners between the apsidal arms of the Greek Cross filled by square projections.
Contemporary opinion was summarised by Vasari: "It is certainly a miracle that a formless block of stone could ever have been reduced to a perfection that nature is scarcely able to create in the flesh."
Michelangelo persuaded Pope Julius to give him a free hand and proposed a different and more complex scheme, representing the Creation, the Fall of Man, the Promise of Salvation through the prophets, and the genealogy of Christ.
The ''Taddeo Tondo'' of 1502 shows the Christ Child frightened by a Bullfinch, a symbol of the Crucifixion.
Of the other statues intended for the tomb, two, known as the ''Rebellious Slave'' and the ''Dying Slave'', are now in the Louvre.
In 1520 the Medici came back to Michelangelo with another grand proposal, this time for a family funerary chapel in the Basilica of San Lorenzo.
(see whole image above)
The library was not opened until 1571, and the vestibule remained incomplete until 1904.
He returned to the employment of the Medici.
His body was taken from Rome for interment at the Basilica of Santa Croce, fulfilling the maestro's last request to be buried in his beloved Florence.
In November 1497, the French ambassador to the Holy See, Cardinal Jean de Bilhères-Lagraulas, commissioned him to carve a ''Pietà'', a sculpture showing the Virgin Mary grieving over the body of Jesus.
He also worked on the figure of Mary Magdalene.
The work is part of a larger scheme of decoration within the chapel that represents much of the doctrine of the Catholic Church.
Michelangelo worked for a time with the sculptor Bertoldo di Giovanni.
::— (Michael Sullivan, translation)
Although Michelangelo worked on the tomb for 40 years, it was never finished to his satisfaction.
The city fell in 1530, and the Medici were restored to power.
File:Michelangelo, paolina, martirio di san pietro 01.jpg|''The Crucifixion of St. Peter''
He also may have painted the Madonna and Child with John the Baptist, known as the ''Manchester Madonna'' and now in the National Gallery, London, United Kingdom.
Between 1493 and 1494 he bought a block of marble, and carved a larger than life statue of Hercules, which was sent to France and subsequently disappeared sometime c. 18th century.
As construction was progressing on St Peter's, there was concern that Michelangelo would pass away before the dome was finished.
While Michelangelo's ''David'' is the most famous male nude of all time and destined to be reproduced in order to grace cities around the world, some of his other works have had perhaps even greater impact on the course of art.
The figure reproduced may be seen in context in the above image of the ''Separation of Light from Darkness''.
The Buonarrotis claimed to descend from the Countess Mathilde of Canossa; this claim remains unproven, but Michelangelo himself believed it.
When he was seventeen, another pupil, Pietro Torrigiano, struck him on the nose, causing the disfigurement that is conspicuous in all the portraits of Michelangelo.
The kneeling angel is an early work, one of several that Michelangelo created as part of a large decorative scheme for the Arca di San Domenico in the church dedicated to that saint in Bologna.
The lively form of the child was later adapted by Raphael in the ''Bridgewater Madonna''.
A group of horrified women cluster in the foreground, while another group of Christians is led by a tall man to witness the events.
File:Creación de Adám.jpg|''The Creation of Adam''  (1510)
These two works were to have a profound influence on later sculpture, through Rodin who studied them at the Louvre.
This dynamic quality was later to find its major expression in Michelangelo's centrally planned St Peter's, with its giant order, its rippling cornice and its upward-launching pointed dome.
It now stands in the Academia while a replica occupies its place in the square.
It is now located in St Peter's Basilica.
The openly homoerotic nature of the poetry was a source of discomfort to later generations.
In this image, Mary's upraise arms and upraised hands are indicative of her prophetic role.
As an architect, Michelangelo pioneered the Mannerist style at the Laurentian Library.
The ''Doni Tondo'', depicting the Holy Family, has elements of all three previous works: the frieze of figures in the background has the appearance of a low-relief, while the circular shape and dynamic forms echo the Taddeo Tondo.
Michelangelo was born on 6 March 1475 in Caprese near Arezzo, Tuscany (known today as Caprese Michelangelo).
The tombs display statues of the two Medici and allegorical figures representing Night and Day, and Dusk and Dawn.
As the model for the Creator, Michelangelo has depicted himself in the action of painting the ceiling.
:That burns me from afar and keeps itself ice-chill;
He agreed reluctantly and spent three years creating drawings and models for the façade, as well as attempting to open a new marble quarry at Pietrasanta specifically for the project.
File:Michelangelo, Deluge 02.jpg|''The Deluge'' (detail)
During Michelangelo's childhood, a team of painters had been called from Florence to the Vatican, in order to decorate the walls of the Sistine Chapel.
Several months after Michelangelo's birth, the family returned to Florence, where he was raised.
In 1546 Michelangelo produced the highly complex ovoid design for the pavement of the Campidoglio and began designing an upper storey for the Farnese Palace.
From 1490 to 1492, Michelangelo attended the Humanist academy that the Medici had founded along Neo-Platonic lines.
:A strength I feel two shapely arms to fill
This apparent success in selling his sculpture abroad as well as the conservative Florentine situation may have encouraged Michelangelo to accept the prelate's invitation.''.
In 1505, Michelangelo was invited back to Rome by the newly elected Pope Julius II.
Michelangelo ignored the usual artistic conventions in portraying Jesus, showing him as a massive, muscular figure, youthful, beardless and naked.
File:Michelangelo Bacchus.jpg|''Bacchus'' by Michelangelo, early work (1496–97)
During the half year he spent in Florence, he worked on two small statues, a child ''St.
Towards the end of 1494, the political situation in Florence was calmer.
In the ''Florentine Pietà'', Michelangelo again depicts himself, this time as the aged Nicodemus lowering the body of Jesus from the cross into the arms of Mary his mother and Mary Magdalene.
Fearing for his life, he fled to Rome, leaving assistants to complete the Medici chapel and the Laurentian Library.
Both works were much admired, and copies remain of them, Leonardo's work having been copied by Rubens and Michelangelo's by Bastiano da Sangallo.
He may not have minded, since he was by nature a solitary and melancholy person, ''bizzarro e fantastico,'' a man who "withdrew himself from the company of men."
Several other artists had worked on the scheme,  beginning with Nicola Pisano in the 13th century.
File:Michelangelo pietà rondanini.jpg|The ''Rondanini Pietà'' (1552–64)
Once completed, the depiction of Christ and the Virgin Mary naked was considered sacrilegious, and Cardinal Carafa and Monsignor Sernini (Mantua's ambassador) campaigned to have the fresco removed or censored, but the Pope resisted.
Michelangelo, who was reluctant to take the job, persuaded the Pope to give him a free hand in the composition.
Despite Michelangelo's support of the republic and resistance to the Medici rule, he was welcomed by Pope Clement, who reinstated an allowance that he had previously granted the artist and made a new contract with him over the tomb of Pope Julius.
While the work is plainly inspired by Classical sculpture, it is innovative for its rotating movement and strongly three-dimensional quality, which encourages the viewer to look at it from every angle.
It was left to assistants to interpret his plans and carry out instruction.
Michelangelo smashed the left arm and leg of the figure of Jesus.
Probably Michelangelo's last sculpture, the ''Rondanini Pietà'' could never be completed because Michelangelo carved it away until there was insufficient stone.
File:First Day of Creation.jpg|''The First day of Creation''
File:CampidoglioEng.jpg|Michelangelo's redesign of the ancient Capitoline Hill included a complex spiralling pavement with a star at its centre.
Never have I loved a man more than I love you, never have I wished for a friendship more than I wish for yours."
File:Laurentian Library vestibule.jpg|The vestibule of the Laurentian Library has Mannerist features which challenge the Classical order of Brunelleschi's adjacent church.
In the process of painting the ceiling, Michelangelo made studies for different figures, of which some, such as that for ''The Libyan Sibyl'' have survived, demonstrating the care taken by Michelangelo in details such as the hands and feet.
The ''Bruges Madonna'' was, at the time of its creation, unlike other such statues depicting the Virgin proudly presenting her son.
During the same period, Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, which took approximately four years to complete (1508–1512).
Both Lorenzo and Michelangelo were unwittingly cheated out of the real value of the piece by a middleman.
Michelangelo's architectural commissions included a number that were not realised, notably the façade for Brunelleschi's Church of San Lorenzo in Florence,  for which Michelangelo had a wooden model constructed, but which remains to this day unfinished rough brick.
Cardinal Raffaele Riario, to whom Lorenzo had sold it, discovered that it was a fraud, but was so impressed by the quality of the sculpture that he invited the artist to Rome.
The contract was agreed upon in August of the following year.
Michelangelo worked on a number of architectural projects at this time.
A number of Michelangelo's works of painting, sculpture, and architecture rank among the most famous in existence.
According to Condivi, Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, for whom Michelangelo had sculpted ''St.
His biographer Paolo Giovio says, "His nature was so rough and uncouth that his domestic habits were incredibly squalid, and deprived posterity of any pupils who might have followed him."
At the same church, Giulio de' Medici (later Pope Clement VII) commissioned him to design the Medici Chapel and the tombs of Giuliano and Lorenzo Medici.
Melozzo had depicted figures from different angles, as if they were floating in the Heaven and seen from below.
The process of replacing the Constantinian basilica of the 4th century had been underway for fifty years and in 1506 foundations had been laid to the plans of Bramante.
At this time Michelangelo studied the robust reliefs carved by Jacopo della Quercia around main portal of the Basilica of St Petronius, including the panel of ''The Creation of Eve'' the composition of which was to reappear on the Sistine Chapel ceiling.
Michelangelo's foyer of the Laurentian Library was one of the earliest buildings to utilise Classical forms in a plastic and expressive manner.
File:'Cumaean Sibyl Sistine Chapel ceiling' by Michelangelo JBU35.jpg|'' The Cumaean Sibyl''
Michelangelo fell out of favour with the young Alessandro Medici, who had been installed as the first Duke of Florence.
The masterwork definitively established his prominence as a sculptor of extraordinary technical skill and strength of symbolic imagination.
File:Angel by Michelangelo - 3.JPG|Angel by Michelangelo, early work (1494–95)
In the right foreground, Michelangelo walks out of the painting with an expression of disillusionment.
In the same year, the Medici were expelled from Florence as the result of the rise of Savonarola.
Michelangelo died in Rome in 1564, at the age of 88 (three weeks before his 89th birthday).
The basilica lacks a façade to this day.
The ceiling is a flattened barrel vault supported on twelve triangular pendentives that rise from between the windows of the chapel.
For several generations, his family had been small-scale bankers in Florence, but the bank failed, and his father, Ludovico di Leonardo Buonarroti Simoni, briefly took a government post in Caprese, where Michelangelo was born.
Condivi said he was indifferent to food and drink, eating "more out of necessity than of pleasure" and that he "often slept in his clothes and&nbsp;...
It is located in the Church of San Pietro in Vincoli in Rome and is most famous for the central figure of Moses, completed in 1516.
His pupil Tiberio Calcagni repaired the arm and drilled a hole in which to fix a replacement leg.
File:Michelangelo libyan.jpg|Studies for ''The Libyan Sibyl''
Michelangelo appears to have used assistants mainly for the more manual tasks of preparing surfaces and grinding colours.
John the Baptist'' and a sleeping ''Cupid''.
John the Baptist'', asked that Michelangelo "fix it so that it looked as if it had been buried" so he could "send it to Rome&nbsp;... pass it off as an ancient work and&nbsp;... sell it much better."
In the early 15th century, the architect Filippo Brunelleschi had studied the remains of Classical buildings in Rome and created two churches, San Lorenzo's and Santo Spiritu, which embodied the Classical precepts.
Pope Leo X died in 1521 and was succeeded briefly by the austere Adrian VI, and then by his cousin Giulio Medici as Pope Clement VII.
Michelangelo referred to them as "ignudi".
In ''The Last Judgment'' it is said that Michelangelo drew inspiration from a fresco by Melozzo da Forlì in Rome's Santi Apostoli.
It is known as the ''Doni Tondo'' and hangs in the Uffizi Gallery in its original magnificent frame, which Michelangelo may have designed.
'''Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni''' (; 6 March 1475 – 18 February 1564) was an Italian sculptor, painter, architect, and poet of the High Renaissance who exerted an unparalleled influence on the development of Western art.
In 1542 Michelangelo met Cecchino dei Bracci who died only a year later,  inspiring Michelangelo to write forty-eight funeral epigrams.
Here, the Christ Child, restrained by his mother's clasping hand, is about to step off into the world.
He was commissioned to build the Pope's tomb, which was to include forty statues and be finished in five years.
Michelangelo's ''Bacchus'' was a commission with a specified subject, the youthful God of Wine.
Some of the objects of Michelangelo's affections, and subjects of his poetry, took advantage of him: the model Febo di Poggio asked for money in response to a love-poem, and a second model, Gherardo Perini, stole from him shamelessly.
File:Michelangelo- Tondo Doni - tone corrected.jpg|The ''Doni Tondo'' (1504–06)
As supporters to the smaller scenes, Michelangelo painted twenty youths who have variously been interpreted as angels, as muses, or simply as decoration.
In early 1504 Leonardo da Vinci had been commissioned to paint ''The Battle of Anghiara'' in the council chamber of the Palazzo Vecchio, depicting the battle between Florence and Milan in 1434.
:I feel as lit by fire a cold countenance
Michelangelo began painting with the later episodes in the narrative, the pictures including locational details and groups of figures, the ''Drunkenness of Noah''  being the first of this group.
Michelangelo's relief of the ''Battle of the Centaurs'', created while he was still a youth associated with the Medici Academy, is an unusually complex relief in that it shows a great number of figures involved in a vigorous struggle.
Successive architects had worked on it, but little progress had been made.
The twisting forms and tensions of the ''Victory'', the ''Bruges Madonna'' and the ''Medici Madonna'' make them the heralds of the Mannerist art.
Even in modern times some scholars continue to insist that, despite the restoration of the pronouns, they represent "an emotionless and elegant re-imagining of Platonic dialogue, whereby erotic poetry was seen as an expression of refined sensibilities".
The dome of St Peter's was to influence the building of churches for many centuries, including Sant'Andrea della Valle in Rome and St Paul's Cathedral, London, as well as the civic domes of many public buildings and the state capitals across America.
Michelangelo returned to Bramante's design, retaining the basic form and concepts by simplifying and strengthening the design to create a more dynamic and unified whole.
