The Walt Disney Company has become well known for protecting its trademark on the Mickey Mouse character—whose likeness is closely associated with the company—with particular zeal.
Together, Mickey, Donald Duck, and Goofy would go on several adventures together.
New York Law School professor Edward Samuels said, "The Air Pirates set parody back twenty years."
But this change would only last for a short period of time before returning to the one in "''The Pointer''", with the exception of his pants.
''The Karnival Kid'' (1929) was the first time Mickey spoke.
"Mickey Mouse is the most miserable ideal ever revealed...Healthy emotions tell every independent young man and every honorable youth that the dirty and filth-covered vermin, the greatest bacteria carrier in the animal kingdom, cannot be the ideal type of animal...Away with Jewish brutalization of the people!
We ain't even Betty Boop!"
In the spring of 1928, Disney asked Ub Iwerks to start drawing up new character ideas.
Mickey's Toontown (Disneyland and Tokyo Disneyland) is a themed land which is a recreation of Mickey's neighborhood.
In 1994, ''The Band Concert'' was voted the third-greatest cartoon of all time in a poll of animation professionals.
Stan Freberg voiced Mickey in the Freberg-produced record ''Mickey Mouse's Birthday Party''.
But after coming to power several years later, the later Nazi regime unambiguously propagandized against Disney.
The earliest known mention of Mickey Mouse as a write-in candidate dates back to the 1932 New York City mayoral elections.
However, these cartoons did not keep the sound synchronized throughout the film.
so loved this short that, upon first seeing it, he asked the projectionist to run it again.
''The Barnyard Battle'' (April 25, 1929) was the only film to depict Mickey as a soldier and also the first to place him in combat.
The storyline was completed on September 20, 1930, and later reprinted in comic book form as ''Mickey Mouse in Death Valley''.
* In the 1993 Warner Bros. film ''Demolition Man'', as Sylvester Stallone's character is fighting the malfunctioning AI of his out-of-control police car, he shouts for the system to "Brake!
Walt Disney himself was voice actor for both Mickey and Minnie, and would remain the source of Mickey's voice through 1946 for theatrical cartoons.
In the film ''The Opry House'' (1929), Mickey was first given white gloves as a way of contrasting his naturally black hands against his black body.
Since most states' electoral systems do not provide for blank balloting or a choice of "None of the Above", most protest votes take the form of a clearly non-serious candidate's name entered as a write-in vote.
In his final theatrical cartoons in the 1950s, he was given eyebrows, which were removed in the more recent cartoons.
Mickey first was seen in a single test screening (''Plane Crazy'').
The Cat replied, "Mickey Mouse?
In these new shorts, Mickey has a more modern appearance, but his appearance is also very close to his original 1928 look.
''Mickey's Follies'' (1929) introduced the song "Minnie's Yoo-Hoo" which would become the theme song for ''Mickey Mouse'' films for the next several years.
Mickey generally appears alongside his girlfriend Minnie Mouse, his pet dog Pluto, his friends Donald Duck and Goofy, and his nemesis Pete, among others (see Mickey Mouse universe).
'''Mickey Mouse''' is a funny animal cartoon character and the official mascot of The Walt Disney Company.
In the 2000s, the ''Disney's Magical Quest'' series were ported to the Game Boy Advance, while Mickey made his sixth generation era debut in ''Disney's Magical Mirror Starring Mickey Mouse'', a Nintendo GameCube title aimed at younger audiences.
, an attraction at the Disney theme parks.
Mickey plays a major role in the ''Kingdom Hearts'' series, as the king of Disney Castle and aide to the protagonist, Sora.
Let Fredo take care of some Mickey Mouse night club somewhere!"
Mickey was most famously featured on wrist watches and alarm clocks, typically utilizing his hands as the actual hands on the face of the clock.
Unfortunately, audiences did not respond well to Felix's transition to sound and by 1930, Felix had faded from the screen.
In 2006, he appeared in the Italian fantasy comic saga ''Wizards of Mickey''.
His hand would look like a bunch of bananas.
Besides Gottfredson artists for the strip over the years included Roman Arambula, Rick Hoover, Manuel Gonzales, Carson Van Osten, Jim Engel, Bill Wright, Ted Thwailes and Daan Jippes; writers included Ted Osborne, Merrill De Maris, Bill Walsh, Dick Shaw, Roy Williams, Del Connell, and Floyd Norman.
It was claimed that the film would "reawaken the latest anti-German feeling existing abroad since the War".
These inspired Ub Iwerks to create a new mouse character for Disney.
Mickey Mouse's name has also been known to appear fraudulently on voter registration lists, most recently in the 2008 U.S. Presidential Election.
The cartoon was co-directed by Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks.
At the time of his 80th anniversary celebration in 2008, ''Time'' declared Mickey Mouse one of the world's most recognized characters, even when compared against Santa Claus.
The next Mickey short was also unusual.
Mickey's face currently graces the Mickey's Fun Wheel at Disney California Adventure Park, where a figure of him also stands on top of Silly Symphony Swings.
In the 1950s, Mickey became more known for his appearances on television, particularly with ''The Mickey Mouse Club''.
Art Spiegelman used this quote on the opening page of the second volume of his graphic novel ''Maus''.
Disney had to assure him the assignment was only temporary and that he would eventually return to animation.
From Walt, and now from Jimmy."
Walt Disney apparently intended to take advantage of this new trend and, arguably, managed to succeed.
Mickey was the main character for the series'' MM Mickey Mouse Mystery Magazine'', published in Italy from 1999 to 2001.
Slicker and the Egg Robbers'', first printed between September 22 and December 26, 1930, which introduced Marcus Mouse and his wife as Minnie's parents.
The departure is considered a turning point in Mickey's career, as well as that of Walt Disney.
This short was intended as a parody of Buster Keaton's ''Steamboat Bill Jr.'', first released on May 12 of the same year.
The first Mickey watch was sold at the Century of Progress in Chicago, 1933 for $3.75.
In addition to Mickey's overt presence in the parks, numerous images of him are also subtly included in sometimes unexpected places.
At the time Gottfredson was reportedly eager to work in animation and somewhat reluctant to accept his new assignment.
Iwerks tried sketches of various animals, such as dogs and cats, but none of these appealed to Disney.
This is evident only when Mickey blinks.
There have been numerous parodies of Mickey Mouse, such as the Mad Magazine parody ''"Mickey Rodent"'' by Will Elder in which the mouse walks around unshaven and jails Donald Duck out of jealousy over the duck's larger popularity.
On the Comedy Central series ''South Park'', Mickey is depicted as the sadistic, greedy, foul-mouthed boss of The Walt Disney Company, only interested in money.
The ''Barnyard Battle'' incident did not reflect wider anti-Mickey sentiment in Germany in 1930.
However, Disney's focus had always been in animation and Smith was soon assigned with the scripting as well.
On November 18, 1978, in honor of his 50th anniversary, Mickey became the first cartoon character to have a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
The "Minnie's Yoo-Hoo" song sequence was also later reused with different background animation as its own special short shown only at the commencement of 1930s theater-based Mickey Mouse Clubs.
His first words were "Hot dogs!
The use of white gloves would prove to be an influential design for cartoon characters, particularly with later Disney characters, but also with non-Disney characters such as Bugs Bunny, Woody Woodpecker, and Mario.
But in 1988, in a historic moment in motion picture history, the two rivals finally shared screen time in the Robert Zemeckis Disney/Amblin film ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit''.
This early adventure expanded the cast of the strip which to this point only included Mickey and Minnie.
As an election supervisor in Georgia observed, "If Mickey Mouse doesn’t get votes in our election, it’s a bad election."
* In the 1996 Warner Bros. film ''Space Jam'', Bugs Bunny derogatorily comments on Daffy Duck's idea for the name of their basketball team, asking: "What kind of Mickey Mouse organization would name a team 'The Ducks?'"
He went on to appear in over 130 films, including ''The Band Concert'' (1935), ''Brave Little Tailor'' (1938), and ''Fantasia'' (1940).
Financially, not having an extra finger in each of 45,000 drawings that make up a six and one half minute short has saved the Studio millions."
The game is part of an effort by The Walt Disney Company to re-brand the Mickey Mouse character by moving away from his current squeaky clean image and reintroducing the mischievous side of his personality.
Examples of the former two of the three usages include the following.
Beginning in 1930, Mickey has also been featured extensively as a comic strip character.
In the same period Romano Scarpa in Italy for the magazine ''Topolino'' began to revitalize Mickey in stories that brought back the Phantom Blot and Eega Beeva along with new creations such as the Atomo Bleep-Bleep.
''The Cactus Kid'' (April 11, 1930) was the last film to be animated by Ub Iwerks at Disney.
The cartoon was not the first cartoon to feature a soundtrack connected to the action.
However, in parts of Australia it can mean excellent or very good (rhyming slang for "grouse").
Allwine would eventually marry Russi Taylor, the voice of Minnie Mouse since 1986.
His first Mickey tale appeared in 1950 but Mickey did not become a speciality until Murry's first serial for ''Walt Disney's Comics and Stories'' in 1953 ("The Last Resort").
Kamen was recognized by The Walt Disney Company as having a significant part in Mickey's rise to stardom and was named a Disney Legend in 1998.
Mickey's stories were replaced by the adventures of ''Tuffolino'', a new human character created by Federico Pedrocchi (script) and Pier Lorenzo De Vita (art).
His self-titled newspaper strip, drawn primarily by Floyd Gottfredson, ran for 45 years.
But Mintz instead demanded that Walt take a 20 percent budget cut, and as leverage, he reminded Disney that Universal owned the character, and revealed that he had already signed most of Disney's current employees to his new contract.
The new Disney Studio initially consisted of animator Ub Iwerks and a loyal apprentice artist, Les Clark, who together with Wilfred Jackson were among the few who remained loyal to Walt.
* In the United States armed forces, actions that look good but have little or no practical use (such as the specific manner of making beds in basic training or the polishing of brass fittings on board ship) are commonly referred to as "Mickey Mouse work."
Mickey has also appeared in comic books and in television series such as ''The Mickey Mouse Club'' (1955–1996) and others.
Prior to all these, Mickey was also featured as an unseen character in the ''Bonkers'' episode "You Oughta Be In Toons".
He has also voiced the character in the next games for the ''Kingdom Hearts'' series.
Walt Disney got the inspiration for Mickey Mouse from a tame mouse at his desk at Laugh-O-Gram Studio in Kansas City, Missouri.
The grotesque Rat Fink character was created by Ed "Big Daddy" Roth over his hatred of Mickey Mouse.
Largely responsible for Disney merchandising in the 1930s was Kay Kamen (d. 1949) who was called a "stickler for quality."
Peter Renaday voiced Mickey in the 1980s Disney albums ''Yankee Doodle Mickey'' and ''Mickey Mouse Splashdance''.
As a result Mickey would soon become the most prominent animated character of the time.
Mickey was first seen in a test screening of the cartoon short ''Plane Crazy'', on May 15, 1928, but it failed to impress the audience and to add insult to injury, Walt could not find a distributor.
"Mortimer Mouse" had been Disney's original name for the character before his wife, Lillian, convinced him to change it, and ultimately Mickey Mouse came to be.
* In the beginning of the 1980s, then-British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher once called the European Parliament a "Mickey Mouse parliament", meaning a discussion club without influence.
on the Game Boy, and many others.
A fourth Mickey short, ''The Barn Dance'', was also put into production; however, Mickey does not actually speak until ''The Karnival Kid'' in 1929 when his first spoken words were "Hot dogs, Hot dogs!"
As O'Neill explained, "The air pirates were…some sort of bizarre concept to steal the air, pirate the air, steal the media….Since we were cartoonists, the logical thing was Disney."
In fact, Iwerks was the main animator for every Disney short released in 1928 and 1929.
Disney sued for copyright infringement, and after a series of appeals, O'Neill eventually lost and was ordered to pay Disney $1.9 million.
Supposedly one reason for adding the white gloves was to allow audiences to distinguish the characters' hands when they appeared against their bodies, as both were black.
Among these, ''Lend a Paw'' was the only film to actually win the award.
He selected Floyd Gottfredson, a recently hired employee.
This phenomenon is known as "Hidden Mickey", involving hidden images in Disney films, theme parks and merchandise.
It would later show up in Iwerks' own ''Flip the Frog'' series.
Mickey plays a central role in ''Fantasmic!''
While Disney and his cartoon shorts would continue to focus on comedy, the comic strip effectively combined comedy and adventure.
Also during this era, Mickey would star in ''Brave Little Tailor'' (1938), an adaptation of ''The Valiant Little Tailor'', which was nominated for an Academy Award.
It was in response to losing the right to distribute Disney's cartoons that Powers made the deal with Iwerks, who had long harbored a desire to head his own studio.
This renaissance has been spearheaded by Byron Erickson, David Gerstein, Noel Van Horn, Michael T. Gilbert and César Ferioli.
Mickey has recently been announced to star in two films.
He also created the Phantom Blot, Eega Beeva, Morty and Ferdie, Captain Churchmouse, and Butch.
Bret Iwan, a former Hallmark greeting card artist, is the current voice of Mickey.
This made Mickey easily recognizable to audiences and made his ears an unofficial personal trademark.
As with other characters, Mickey is often portrayed by a non-speaking costumed actor.
During the recording of the ''Mickey and the Beanstalk'' section of ''Fun and Fancy Free'', Mickey's voice was handed over to veteran Disney musician and actor Jimmy MacDonald.
Buildings are built in a cartoon style and guests can visit Mickey or Minnie's houses, Donald Duck's boat, or Goofy's garage.
* Musicians often refer to a film score that directly follows each action on screen as ''Mickey Mousing'' (also ''mickey-mousing'' and ''mickeymousing'').
Gottfredson accepted and ended up holding this "temporary" assignment from May 5, 1930, to November 15, 1975.
Disney and his remaining staff continued the production of the Mickey series, and he was able to eventually find a number of animators to replace Iwerks.
Mickey also features in several specific attractions at the Disney parks.
At the 5th Academy Awards in 1932, Mickey received his first Academy Award nomination, received for ''Mickey's Orphans'' (1931).
In total, approximately 40% of Disney's revenues for consumer products are derived from Mickey Mouse merchandise, with revenues peaking in 1997.
Mickey has been announced to star in two films.
This adventurous version of Mickey would continue to appear in comic strips and later comic books throughout the 20th and into the 21st century.
* In schools a "Mickey Mouse course," "Mickey Mouse major," or "Mickey Mouse degree" is a class, college major, or degree where very little effort is necessary in order to attain a good grade (especially an A) and/or one where the subject matter of such a class is not of any importance in the labor market.
However, by 1946, Disney was becoming too busy with running the studio to do regular voice work which meant he could not do Mickey's voice anymore.
In animation in the 1940s Mickey's ears were animated in a more realistic perspective.
In an episode of "Full Frontal Nerdity," by Aaron Williams, Mickey is shown as desperately trying to unload Miramax.
Mickey and Minnie would later appear the size of regular humans in their own setting.
However, by 1938, the more manic Donald Duck would surpass the passive Mickey, resulting in a redesign of the mouse between 1938 and 1940 that put Mickey at the peak of his popularity.
Mickey was redesigned by animator Fred Moore which was first seen in ''The Pointer'' (1939).
Mickey's dog Pluto first appeared as Mickey's pet in ''The Moose Hunt'' (1931) after previously appearing as Minnie's dog "Rover" in ''The Picnic'' (1930).
Before this he had only whistled, laughed, and grunted.
Mickey was the Grand Marshal of the Tournament of Roses Parade on New Year's Day 2005.
Actually Mussolini's children were fond of Mickey Mouse, so they managed to delay his ban as long as possible.
Despite Iwan being Mickey's primary voice actor, the character's voice is provided by Chris Diamantopoulos in the 2013 animated series, as the producers were looking for a retro voice to match the vintage look of the series.
This is a common place to meet the characters.
MacDonald voiced Mickey in the remainder of the theatrical shorts, and for various television and publicity projects up until his retirement in the mid-1970s, although Walt voiced Mickey again for the introductions to the original 1955—1959 run of ''The Mickey Mouse Club'' TV series and the "Fourth Anniversary Show" episode of the Disneyland TV series aired on September 11, 1958.
In the United States, protest votes are often made in order to indicate dissatisfaction with the slate of candidates presented on a particular ballot, or to highlight the inadequacies of a particular voting procedure.
Since his early years Mickey Mouse has been licensed by Disney to appear on many different kinds of merchandise.
In 1989, Disney threatened legal action against three daycare centers in Florida for having Mickey Mouse and other Disney characters painted on their walls.
Mickey was also a central character in the now defunct Mickey Mouse Revue (Magic Kingdom, Tokyo Disneyland) which was an indoor show featuring animatronic characters.
(Disneyland Resort, Disney's Hollywood Studios) a live nighttime show which famously features Mickey in his role as the Sorcerer's Apprentice.
Brake now, you ''Mickey Mouse piece of shit!''"
This new Mickey first appeared in 1938 on the cover of a party program, and in animation the following year with the release of ''The Pointer''.
Many of his theatrical cartoon shorts were rereleased on television series such as ''Ink & Paint Club'', various forms of the Walt Disney anthology television series, and on home video.
In 1938, based on the Ministry of Popular Culture's recommendation that a reform was necessary "to raise children in the firm and imperialist spirit of the Fascist revolution," the Italian Government banned foreign children's literature except Mickey; Disney characters were exempted from the decree for the "acknowledged artistic merit" of Disney's work.
''Willie'' featured changes to Mickey's appearance (in particular, simplifying his eyes to large dots) that established his look for later cartoons and in numerous Walt Disney films.
(Both Disney's and MacDonald's voices can be heard on the final soundtrack.)
After the downfall of Italy's fascist government, the ban was removed.
His most recent theatrical cartoon short was 2013's ''Get a Horse!''
His first video game voice-over of Mickey Mouse can be found on ''Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep'', a video game for PlayStation Portable.
Iwerks again served as the head animator, assisted by Johnny Cannon, Les Clark, Wilfred Jackson and Dick Lundy.
This was followed up in 1990 with ''The Prince and the Pauper''.
One is being based on the Magic Kingdom theme park at the Walt Disney World Resort, while the other is a film idea pitched by Walt Disney Animation Studios veteran Burny Mattinson centering on Mickey, Donald and Goofy.
In 1994, four of Mickey's cartoons were included in the book ''The 50 Greatest Cartoons'' which listed the greatest cartoons of all time as voted by members of the animation field.
In early 1930, after Iwerks' departure, Disney was at first content to continue scripting the Mickey Mouse comic strip, assigning the art to Win Smith.
Disney officials have stated that 98% of children aged 3–11 around the world are at least aware of the character.
Since June 28, 2013, Disney Channel has been airing new 3-minute ''Mickey Mouse'' shorts.
Fisher-Price has recently produced a line of talking animatronic Mickey dolls including "Dance Star Mickey" (2010) and "Rock Star Mickey" (2011).
Although it was the third Mickey cartoon produced, it was the first to find a distributor, and thus is considered by The Disney Company as Mickey's debut.
Mickey's eyes were later re-imagined as only consisting of the small black dots which were originally his pupils, while what were the upper edges of his eyes became a hairline.
They had already signed their contracts with Charles Mintz, but he was still in the process of forming his new studio and so for the time being they were still employed by Disney.
"Mickey Mouse" is a slang expression meaning small-time, amateurish or trivial.
While the stories at Western Publishing during the Silver Age emphasized Mickey as a detective in the style of Sherlock Holmes, in the modern era several editors and creators have consciously undertaken to depict a more vigorous Mickey in the mold of the classic Gottfredson adventures.
''When the Cat's Away'' (April 18, 1929), essentially a remake of the ''Alice Comedy'', "Alice Rattled by Rats", was an unusual appearance for Mickey.
He was the first cartoon character to receive the honor, and only the second fictional character after Kermit the Frog in 1996.
When Mickey is not wearing his red shorts, he is often still wearing red clothing such as a red bandmaster coat (''The Band Concert'', ''The Mickey Mouse Club''), red overalls (''Clock Cleaners'', ''Boat Builders''), a red cloak (''Fantasia'', ''Fun and Fancy Free''), a red coat (''Squatter's Rights'', ''Mickey's Christmas Carol''), or a red shirt (''Mickey Down Under'', ''The Simple Things'').
Disney then searched for a replacement among the remaining staff of the Studio.
Each of Mickey's hands has only three fingers and a thumb.
Composer Carl W. Stalling was the very first person to provide lines for Mickey in the 1929 short ''The Karnival Kid''.
A female cow and male horse were also rejected.
Throughout the decades, Mickey Mouse competed with Warner Bros.' Bugs Bunny for animated popularity.
The first feature-length movie with dialogue sequences, ''The Jazz Singer'' starring Al Jolson, was released on October 6, 1927.
Ten of Mickey's cartoons were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film, one of which, ''Lend a Paw'', won the award in 1942.
A mid-1930s Nazi German newspaper article read:
The 1983 short film ''Mickey's Christmas Carol'' marked the theatrical debut of the late Wayne Allwine as Mickey Mouse, who was the voice of Mickey until his death in 2009.
Animation historians have long debated who had served as the composer for the film's original music.
The seconds were indicated by a turning disk below Mickey.
Smith was apparently discontent at the prospect of having to script, draw, and ink a series by himself as evidenced by his sudden resignation.
Mickey's PhilharMagic (Magic Kingdom, Tokyo Disneyland, Hong Kong Disneyland) is a 4D film which features Mickey in the familiar role of symphony conductor.
The first Mickey Mouse watches were manufactured in 1933 by the Ingersoll Watch Company.
Most other cartoon studios were still producing silent products and so were unable to effectively act as competition to Disney.
Les Perkins did the voice of Mickey in two TV specials "Down and Out with Donald Duck" and "DTV Valentine" in the mid-1980s.
Mickey wears them in almost all of his subsequent appearances and many other characters followed suit.
It was co-directed by Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks.
Although immensely popular with children, there was controversy with the appointment: some Melburnians wanted a 'home-grown' choice, e.g.
They had better stop running a ''Mickey Mouse organization'' and put somebody on the ice".
Mickey Mouse was created as a replacement for Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, an earlier cartoon character created by the Disney studio for Charles Mintz, a film producer who distributed product through Universal Studios.
The Muppets have otherwise spoofed and referenced Mickey over a dozen times since the 1970s.
Gottfredson's first task was to finish the storyline Disney had started on April 1, 1930.
Disney was dismayed at the betrayal by his staff, but determined to restart from scratch.
Blinky Bill; when it was revealed that Patricia O'Carroll (from Disneyland's Disney on Parade show) was performing the mouse, Australian newspapers reported "Mickey Mouse is really a girl!"
Starting with these two early comic strip stories, Mickey's versions in animation and comics are considered to have diverged from each other.
In Europe, Mickey Mouse became the main attraction of a number of comics magazines, the most famous being ''Topolino'' in Italy from 1932 on, ''Le Journal de Mickey'' in France from 1934 on, ''Don Miki'' in Spain and the Greek ''Miky Maous''.
In 1935, Disney began to phase out the Mickey Mouse Clubs, due to administration problems.
