When Mantle finally fell short, finishing with 52, there seemed to be a collective sigh of relief from the New York traditionalists.
Mantle was called up to the Yankees after 40 games with Kansas City, this time wearing uniform #7.
Mantle was invited to the Yankees instructional camp before the 1951 season.
Mantle hit his first professional home run on June 30, 1949 at Shulthis Stadium.
Like Mickey, Merlyn and three of their sons became alcoholics, and Billy developed Hodgkin's disease, as had several previous men in Mantle's family.
Mantle immediately broke out of his slump, going on to hit .361 with 11 homers and 50 RBIs during his stay in Kansas City.
Roy Clark sang and played "Yesterday, When I Was Young."
Also helping Mantle to make the decision to go to the Betty Ford Clinic was sportscaster Pat Summerall, who had played for the New York Giants football team while they played at Yankee Stadium, by then a recovering alcoholic and a member of the same Dallas-area country club as Mantle; Summerall himself had been treated at the clinic in 1992.
On May 22, 1963, against Kansas City's Bill Fischer, Mantle hit a ball that fellow players and fans claimed was still rising when it hit the  high facade, then caromed back onto the playing field.
In 2003, Tom Russell's album ''Modern Art'' included the song "The Kid from Spavinaw", retelling the arc of Mantle's career.
In 1993 and 1996, Mantle is referenced multiple times in the sitcom ''Seinfeld'', specifically the episodes "The Visa" (1993), where Kramer punches him while at a baseball fantasy camp, and "The Seven" (1996), where George Costanza wants to name his future baby 'Seven' based on Mickey Mantle's uniform number.
During the 1957 World Series, Milwaukee Braves second baseman Red Schoendienst fell on Mantle's left shoulder in a collision at second base.
In 1962, Mantle and Maris starred as themselves in the movie ''Safe at Home!''
In 1998, "The Sporting News" placed Mantle at 17th on its list of "Baseball's 100 Greatest Players".
However, he was not able to find the power he once had in the lower minors.
There are no other power hitters in the rest of the top ten.
At Mantle's funeral, Eddie Layton played "Somewhere Over the Rainbow" on the Hammond organ because Mickey had once told him it was his favorite song.
Mantle accepted the position, regardless, as he felt the rule was "stupid."
Mantle was selected an AL All-Star again, as a reserve player, but did not make the 28-player squad for the second and last time due to an injury and was replaced by Tony Oliva.
Mantle's last "unofficial" home run was in 1973 during the "Old Timers" game with Whitey Ford pitching.
Mantle was one of the best players and sluggers, and is regarded by many as the greatest switch hitter in baseball history.
Mantle was not entirely discreet about them, and when he went to his retirement ceremony in 1969, he brought his mistress along with his wife.
In 1960, Mantle started in both All-Star games, getting two walks in the first and a single in the second game.
He hit two more homers in the series to set the existing World Series record of 18 home runs.
In 1981, the song "Talkin' Baseball" by Terry Cashman had the refrain, "Willie, Mickey, and The Duke".
His grandfather died at the age of 60 in 1944, and his father died of Hodgkin's disease at the age of 40 on May 7, 1952.
Costas added: "In the last year of his life, Mickey Mantle, always so hard on himself, finally came to accept and appreciate the distinction between a role model and a hero.
Mantle's wife, mother, and mother-in-law were in attendance and received recognition at the ceremony held in honor of him.
Mantle won the Triple Crown in 1956, leading the major leagues in batting average, home runs, and runs batted in (RBI); he later wrote a book about his best year in baseball.
Mantle's top salary was $100,000, which he reached for the 1963 season.
Mantle was noted for his ability to hit for both average and power, especially tape measure home runs.
Mickey Mantle's salary for the 1951 season was $7,500.
Mantle was arguably the greatest offensive threat of any center fielder in baseball history.
Mantle hit the park's first home run.
After the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City on April 19, 1995, Mantle joined with fellow Oklahoman and Yankee Bobby Murcer to raise money for the victims.
On May 14, 1967 (Mother's Day), Mantle became the sixth member of the 500 home run club.
Some felt that his fame had permitted him to receive a donor liver in just one day, bypassing other patients who had been waiting for much longer.
He was selected an "All-Star" for the first time and made the AL team, but did not play in the 5-inning All-Star game that had Boston Red Sox Dom DiMaggio at center field.
It became one of New York's most popular restaurants, and his original Yankee Stadium Monument Park plaque is displayed at the front entrance.
Mantle's original plaque, along with DiMaggio's, are now on display at the Yogi Berra Museum and Learning Center, with the DiMaggio plaque still hung higher than Mantle's.
Mantle became a born-again Christian because of his former teammate Bobby Richardson, an ordained Baptist minister who shared his faith with him.
Shortly after Mantle completed treatment, his son Billy died on March 12, 1994, at age 36 of heart problems brought on by years of substance abuse.
Out of frustration, he called his father one day and told him, "I don't think I can play baseball anymore."
Nor had the New York press been all that kind to Mantle in his early years with the team: he struck out frequently, was injury-prone, was a "true hick" from Oklahoma, and was perceived as being distinctly inferior to his predecessor in center field, Joe DiMaggio.
The words were indeed carved on the plaque marking his resting place at the family mausoleum in Dallas.
He broke his foot and didn't return playing again until August 4 when he hit a pinch-hit home run against the Baltimore Orioles in Yankee Stadium.
Mantle spoke warmly of his father, and said he was the bravest man he ever knew.
The 1959 season was the first of four consecutive seasons that two All-Star games were played and Mantle played in seven of these games.
He admitted he had often been cruel and hurtful to family, friends, and fans because of his alcoholism, and sought to make amends.
He gave a "farewell" speech on "Mickey Mantle Day", June 8, 1969, in Yankee Stadium.
He has the highest career OPS+ of any center fielder and he had the highest stolen base percentage in history at the time of his retirement.
This popularity continues long after his death, as Mantle-related items far outsell those of any other player except possibly Babe Ruth, whose items, due to the distance of years, now exist in far smaller quantities.
Mantle won his second consecutive MVP in 1957 behind league leads in runs and walks, a career-high .365 batting average (second to Ted Williams' .388), and hitting into a league-low five double plays.
He occasionally attended the local Methodist church, and sometimes ate Sunday dinner with members of the congregation.
His 372 to 164 home run disparity was due to Mantle having batted left-handed much more often, as the large majority of pitchers are right-handed.
In one interview, Mantle stated that the people of Greensboro had "gone out of their way to make me feel welcome, and I've found something there I haven't enjoyed since I was a kid."
"This is a role model: Don't be like me", a frail Mantle said.
Described by him as his "favorite summer", his major league leading .353 batting average, 52 home runs, and 130 runs batted in brought home both the Triple Crown and first of three MVP awards.
"I'm not gonna be cheated", he would say.
In 1949, he received a draft-examine notice and was about to be drafted by the US Army but failed the physical exam and was rejected as unqualified and was given a 4-F deferment for any military service.
Mantle's off-field behavior is the subject of the book ''The Last Boy: Mickey Mantle and the End of America's Childhood'', written in 2010 by sports journalist Jane Leavy.
Later in his life, Mantle expressed relief that his father had not known Cochrane's true first name, as he would have hated to be named Gordon.
Mantle played his entire  Major League Baseball (MLB) career with the New York Yankees as a center fielder and first baseman, from 1951 through 1968.
Mantle made a (talking) cameo appearance in Teresa Brewer's 1956 song "I Love Mickey", which extolled Mantle's power hitting.
The ball went over the center field fence, which was 460 feet.
In his first complete World Series (1952), Mantle was the Yankees hitting star, with an on-base percentage above .400 and a slugging percentage above .600.
Mantle's cards, especially his 1952 Topps, are extremely popular and valuable among card collectors.
In addition, compared to the four other center fielders on the all-century team, he had the lowest career rate of grounding into double plays (by far) and he had the highest World Series on-base percentage and World Series slugging percentage.
He was selected an AL All-Star and pinched hit at the All-Star Game on July 11.
Mantle three times hit balls off the third-deck facade at Yankee Stadium, nearly becoming the only player to hit a fair ball out of the stadium during a game.
Mantle hit the home run in the original Yankee Stadium with  46,000 spectators in attendance.
Mantle was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1974  and was elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team in 1999.
Danny later battled prostate cancer.
He is in 10th place in number of bases-empty bunt singles for his career with 80, in only 148 at-bats.
During the movie, Mickey Mantle is seen in the Yankees dugout with Roger Maris and Yogi Berra, sitting next to Day and Grant as Day shouts her dissatisfaction with the umpire, Art Passarella.
1951, 1952, 1953, 1956, 1958, 1961, 1962
In 2013–14, the Broadway play ''Bronx Bombers'' includes Mantle as a character.
He also hit 26 home runs and recorded 136 runs batted in.
Baseball scholars often ponder "what if" had he not been injured, and had been able to lead a healthy career.
Kicked in the left shin during a practice game during his sophomore year, Mantle developed osteomyelitis in his left ankle, a crippling disease that was incurable just a few years earlier.
In 1966, his batting average increased to .288 with 23 home runs and 56 RBI.
During the 1961 season, Mantle and teammate Roger Maris, known as the M&M Boys, chased Babe Ruth's 1927 single-season home run record.
Mantle hit .237 with 18 home runs and 54 RBI during his final season in 1968.
When Mantle was four years old, his family moved to the nearby town of Commerce, Oklahoma, where his father worked in lead and zinc mines.
He was placed on the list, but reinstated on March 18, 1985, by Kuhn's successor, Peter Ueberroth.
A statue of Mantle is located at Mickey Mantle Plaza at Chickasaw Bricktown Ballpark, the home stadium of the Triple-A Oklahoma City Dodgers, 2 South Mickey Mantle Drive in Oklahoma City.
He was well-liked by the citizens of Greensboro, and seemed to like them in return.
Mays' fly was hit to shallow center, and as Mantle came over to back up DiMaggio, Mantle's cleats caught a drainage cover in the outfield grass.
In July, he had recovered enough to deliver a press conference at Baylor, and noted that many fans had looked to him as a role model.
In 2006, Mantle was featured on a United States postage stamp, one of a series of four including fellow baseball legends Mel Ott, Roy Campanella, and Hank Greenberg.
When he retired, Mantle was third on the all-time home run list with 536, and he was the Yankees all-time leader in games played with 2,401, which was broken by Derek Jeter on August 29, 2011.
Shulthis Stadium, the baseball stadium in Independence where Mantle played, was the site of the first night game in organized baseball.
Bill Dickey called Mantle "the greatest prospect he's seen in his time."
I see I raised a coward instead.
On June 29, he had been selected an All-Star as a starting center fielder, but for the first time, he didn't make the 25-player team due to the foot injury.
On December 23, 1951, Mantle married Merlyn Johnson (1932–2009) in Commerce, Oklahoma; they had four sons.
Mantle became the highest-paid active player of his time.
In 1963, he batted .314 in 65 games.
During the game, Mantle hit three home runs.
He hit .267 with 13 home runs and 65 RBI in 96 games.
After an impressive spring training, Yankees manager Casey Stengel decided to promote Mantle to the majors as a right fielder instead of sending him to the minors.
Over the course of time, however, Mantle (with a little help from his teammate Whitey Ford, a native of New York's Borough of Queens) had gotten better at "schmoozing" with the New York media, and had gained the favor of the press.
As a 19-year-old rookie in his first World Series, Mantle tore the cartilage in his right knee on a fly ball by Willie Mays while playing right field.
The plaque was officially presented to Mantle by Joe DiMaggio.
Beginning in high school, he suffered both acute and chronic injuries to bones and cartilage in his legs.
The first, he often was not.
Mantle's career was plagued with injuries.
He was an All-Star for 16 seasons, playing in 16 of the 20 All-Star Games that were played.
On January 16, 1961, Mantle became the highest-paid player in baseball by signing a $75,000 ($ today) contract.
Another Mantle homer, hit right-handed off Chuck Stobbs at Griffith Stadium in Washington, D.C. on April 17, 1953, was measured by Yankees traveling secretary Red Patterson (hence the term "tape-measure home run") to have traveled 565 feet (172&nbsp;m).
The song was included in one of the ''Baseball's Greatest Hits'' CDs.
In 1998, award-winning poet B. H. Fairchild published a narrative baseball poem ''Body and Soul'' that depicted the young Mickey Mantle in 1946.
Mantle was interred in the Sparkman-Hillcrest Memorial Park Cemetery in Dallas.
This was the first of numerous injuries that plagued his 18-year career with the Yankees.
The Yankees played Cleveland that day and honored him with a tribute.
Mutt drove up to Kansas City that day.
His rationale was that the men in his family had all died young, so he expected to die young as well.
In the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 3 of the 1964 World Series against the St. Louis Cardinals, Mantle blasted Barney Schultz's first pitch into the right field stands at Yankee Stadium, which won the game for the Yankees 2–1.
Mantle was played by Thomas Jane, and Maris by Barry Pepper.
On September 10, 1960, he hit a ball left-handed that cleared the right-field roof at Tiger Stadium in Detroit and, based on where it was found, was estimated years later by historian Mark Gallagher to have traveled 643 feet (196&nbsp;m).
But Mantle was suspended from baseball by Commissioner Bowie Kuhn on the grounds that any affiliation with gambling was grounds for being placed on the "permanently ineligible" list.
In 1950, Mantle was promoted to the Class-C Joplin Miners of the Western Association.
Shortly before his death, Mantle videotaped a message to be played on Old-Timers' Day, which he was too ill to attend.
Eventually, the two sides reached a settlement, ensuring the sale of some of Mickey Mantle's belongings for approximately $500,000.
Mantle appeared in 12 World Series including 7 championships, and holds World Series records for the most home runs (18), RBIs (40), extra-base hits (26), runs (42), walks (43), and total bases (123).
During this time, Mantle lived with his agent, Greer Johnson, who was not related to Mantle's wife.
After Mantle's death, his family pursued a federal court lawsuit against Greer Johnson, his agent and a live-in aide during the last decade of his life, to stop her from auctioning many of Mantle's personal items, including a lock of hair, a neck brace, and expired credit cards.
Mantle's parents drove him at midnight to Tulsa, Oklahoma, where he was treated with the newly available penicillin, which reduced the infection and saved his leg from requiring amputation.
Over the next decade, Mantle experienced increasing difficulty hitting from his left side.
So as 1961 progressed, the Yanks were now "Mickey Mantle's team," and Maris was ostracized as the "outsider," and said to be "not a true Yankee."
Mantle had a breakout season in 1956 after showing progressive improvement each of his first five years.
His knee twisted awkwardly and he instantly fell.
He said, "When I die, I wanted on my tombstone, 'A great teammate.'
Richardson did oblige in reading the poem at Mantle's funeral, something he described as being extremely difficult.
Mantle's performance was so exceptional he was bestowed the Hickok Belt (unanimously) as the top American professional athlete of the year.
Joe DiMaggio, in the last year of his career, was playing center field.
Greenwade returned in 1949, after Mantle's high school graduation, to sign Mantle to a minor league contract.
Mantle insisted that the promoters of baseball card shows always include one of the lesser-known Yankees of his era, such as Moose Skowron or Hank Bauer so that they could earn some money from the event.
Overall, he hit slightly more home runs away (270) than home (266).
Mantle reached base more times than he made outs (319 to 312), one of two seasons in which he achieved the feat.
He checked into the Betty Ford Clinic on January 7, 1994, after being told by a doctor that his liver was so badly damaged from almost 40 years of drinking that it "looked like a doorstop."
You can come back to Oklahoma and work the mines with me."
Five years earlier, in 1956, Mantle had challenged Ruth's record for most of the season, and the New York press had been protective of Ruth on that occasion also.
Mantle received a liver transplant at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, on June 8, 1995.
'''Mickey Charles Mantle''' (October 20, 1931 – August 13, 1995), nicknamed "'''The Commerce Comet'''" and "'''The Mick'''", was an American professional baseball player.
Mickey Jr. later died of liver cancer on December 20, 2000, at age 47.
While his drinking became public knowledge during his lifetime, the press (per established practice at the time) kept quiet about his many marital infidelities.
Mantle hit .313 for the Independence Yankees.
The second, he always will be.
Despite the fears of those who knew him that this tragedy would send him back to drinking, he remained sober.
The homer, his 16th World Series round tripper, broke the World Series record of 15 set by Babe Ruth.
Mantle was an all-around athlete at Commerce High School, playing basketball as well as football (he was offered a football scholarship by the University of Oklahoma) in addition to his first love, baseball.
Hall of Famer Willie Mays, who had also taken a similar position, had already had action taken against him.
Mantle began his professional baseball career in Kansas with the semi-professional Baxter Springs Whiz Kids.
Mantle hit some of the longest home runs in Major League history.
37 on its "50 Greatest Athletes" series.
In spite of short foul pole dimension of 296 feet (90&nbsp;m) to left and 301 feet (92&nbsp;m) to right in original Yankee Stadium, Mantle gained no advantage there as his stroke both left and right-handed drove balls there to power alleys of 344' to 407' and 402' to 457' feet (139&nbsp;m) from the plate.
His football playing nearly ended his athletic career.
This was a talent that Maris, a blunt-spoken upper-Midwesterner, was never willing or able to cultivate; as a result, he wore the "surly" jacket for his duration with the Yankees.
When Yankee Stadium was reopened in 1976 following its renovation, the plaques and monuments were moved to a newly created Monument Park behind the left-center field fence.
After the 1966 season, he was moved to first base with Joe Pepitone taking over his place in the outfield.
Mantle let others run the business operations, but made frequent appearances.
Mantle and former teammate Whitey Ford were elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame together in 1974, Mantle's first year of eligibility, Ford's second.
In 1992, Mantle wrote ''My Favorite Summer 1956'' about his 1956 season.
Mantle signed for $140 per month with a $1,500 signing bonus.
He also had an excellent 0.984 fielding percentage when playing center field.
He played the rest of his career with a torn ACL.
Although he was a feared power hitter from either side of the plate and hit more home runs batting left-handed than right, Mantle considered himself a better right-handed hitter.
Topps un-retired the #7 in 2006 to use exclusively for cards of Mantle made with each year's design.
Beginning in 1997, the Topps Baseball Card company retired card #7 in its baseball sets in tribute to Mantle, whose career was taking off just as Topps began producing them.
The Cardinals ultimately won the World Series in 7 games.
Kuhn warned Mantle before he accepted the position that he would have to place him on the list if Mantle went to work there.
This was probably because the town respected Mantle's privacy, refusing either to talk about their famous neighbor to outsiders or to direct fans to his home.
He also bluntly told Mantle that the damage to his system was so severe that  "your next drink could be your last."
Excerpts from the book have been published in ''Sports Illustrated''.
Witnesses say it looked "like he had been shot."
On June 5, he tried to prevent a home run by Brooks Robinson in Baltimore and got his shoe spikes caught in the center field chain link fence as he leaped against the fence for the ball and was coming down.
Mantle was unexpectedly hospitalized by an abscessed hip he got from a flu shot late in the season, leaving Maris to break the record (he finished with 61).
He also hit his second All-Star Game home run that season.
On August 25, 1996, about a year after his death, Mantle's Monument Park plaque was replaced with a monument, bearing the words "A great teammate" and keeping a phrase that had been included on the original plaque: "A magnificent Yankee who left a legacy of unequaled courage."
Mantle played center field full-time for the Yankees until 1965, when he was moved to left field.
In 1983, Mantle worked at the Claridge Resort and Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey, as a greeter and community representative.
Mantle was a prized guest at any baseball card show, commanding fees far in excess of any other player for his appearances and autographs.
To inaugurate the Astrodome, the world's first multi-purpose, domed sports stadium, the Houston Astros and the New York Yankees played an exhibition game on April 9, 1965.
Mantle finished with 54 home runs while leading the American league in runs scored and walks.
His lifestyle was restored to one of luxury, and his hold on his fans raised to an amazing level, by his position of leadership in the sports memorabilia craze that swept the USA, beginning in the 1980s.
In getting out of DiMaggio's way, Mantle tripped over an exposed drain pipe and severely injured his right knee.
DiMaggio, Hank Greenberg, and Ted Williams, who had just retired, had been paid over $100,000 in a season, and Ruth had a peak salary of $80,000.
And, in the end, people got it."
In the second game of the 1951 World Series, New York Giants rookie Willie Mays hit a fly ball to right-center field.
Though Mantle was very popular, his liver transplant was a source of some controversy.
But I didn't think it would be this soon."
He hit .255 with 19 home runs and 46 RBI.
The 2001 film ''61*'', produced by Yankee fan Billy Crystal, chronicled Mantle and Roger Maris chasing Babe Ruth's 1927 single season home run record in 1961.
The team played the rest of the season with black mourning bands topped by a small number 7 on their left sleeves.
He also established the Mickey Mantle Foundation to raise awareness for organ donations.
He was an American League (AL) Most Valuable Player (MVP) three times and a Gold Glove winner once.
Mantle won the Western Association batting title, with a .383 average.
Mantle, playing right field, raced for the ball together with center fielder Joe DiMaggio, who called for the ball (and made the catch).
Well before he finally sought treatment for alcoholism, Mantle admitted his hard living had hurt both his playing and his family.
