One of his biographers, Christopher Andersen, describes him as "one of the dominant cultural figures of our time", adding that Jagger was "the story of a generation".
Following the successful comeback of the Rolling Stones' ''Steel Wheels'' (1989), which saw the end of Jagger and Richards' well-publicised feud, after acquiring Rick Rubin as co-producer in January 1992 Jagger began recording the album in Los Angeles over seven months until September 1992, recording simultaneously as Richards was making ''Main Offender''.
More recently, his cultural legacy is also associated with his ageing accompanied by some vitality.
It was officially released to iTunes on 4 February 2012.
I don't know how the hell Mick Jagger does it at 67.
Jagger set up the The L'Wren Scott scholarship at London's prestigious Central Saint Martins college for 2015, 2016, & 2017.
In September 1950, Keith Richards and Jagger were classmates at Wentworth Primary School, Dartford, Kent.
But will we still be doing 150 shows per tour?
He auditioned for the role of Dr. Frank N. Furter in the 1975 film adaptation of ''The Rocky Horror Show'', a role that was eventually played by the original performer from its run on London's West End, Tim Curry.
The show went ahead as scheduled.
Bowie would also offer that "I think Mick Jagger would be astounded and amazed if he realized that to many people he is not a sex symbol, but a mother image."
Its first release was the World War II drama ''Enigma'' in 2001.
He also co-produced the 2014 James Brown biopic, ''Get On Up''.
Pop artist Andy Warhol painted a series of silkscreen portraits of Jagger in 1975, one of which was owned by Farah Diba, wife of the Shah of Iran.
He was listed as one of the fifty best-dressed over 50s by the ''Guardian'' in March 2013.
Although brought up to follow his father's career path, Jagger "was always a singer" as he stated in ''According to the Rolling Stones''.
On 15 October 2010, the Associated Press published an article stating that Richards refers to Jagger as "unbearable" in the book and notes that their relationship has been strained "for decades."
It would be his only solo album release of the 1990s.
He founded Jagged Internetworks to cover English cricket.
It hung on a wall inside the royal palace in Tehran.
Meredith Curly Hunter, Jr. (24 October 1951 – 6 December 1969) was an 18-year-old African-American man who was killed at the 1969 Altamont Free Concert.
This core songwriting partnership would flourish in time; one of their early compositions, "As Tears Go By", was a song written for Marianne Faithfull, a young singer Loog Oldham was promoting at the time.
The group's first appearance under the name the Rollin' Stones (after one of their favourite Muddy Waters tunes) was at the Marquee Club in London, a jazz club, on 12 July 1962.
However, Richards states in ''Life'' that "The drummer that night was Mick Avory--not Tony Chapman, as history has mysteriously handed it down..."
As wrote biographer Laura Jackson, "It is impossible to imagine current culture without the unique influence of Mick Jagger."
At the same time I'd hope Mick realises that I'm a friend who is just trying to bring him into line and do what needs to be done."
Although Don McLean does not use Jagger's name in his famous song "American Pie", he alludes to Jagger onstage at Altamont, calling him Satan.
Richards said that he did not want to take the stage with someone wearing a "coronet and sporting the old ermine.
After the band's acrimonious split with their second manager, Allen Klein, in 1971, Jagger took control of their business affairs after speaking with an up-and-coming front man, J.
Passaro was charged with murder.
Charlie Watts was quoted in the book ''According to the Rolling Stones'' as saying, "Anybody else would be lynched: 18 wives and 20 children and he's knighted, fantastic!"
His performance style has been studied in the academic field as an analysis concerning gender, image and sexuality.
The party made the front pages of the leading New York newspapers.
He also did a cover of "Dancing in the Street" with David Bowie, who himself appeared at Wembley Stadium.
Jagger's father, Basil "Joe" Jagger died of pneumonia on 11 November 2006 at age 93.
When Jagger held out a mic to him, Obama sang twice the line "Come on, baby don't you want to go" of the blues cover 'Sweet Home Chicago', the blues anthem of Obama's home town.
By 1963 they were finding their musical stride as well as popularity.
In 2010 a retrospective exhibition of portraits of Mick Jagger was presented at the festival Rencontres d'Arles, in France.
Richards' autobiography, ''Life'', was released on 26 October 2010.
Richards himself said in a 1998 interview: "I think of our differences as a family squabble.
The marriage and the marriage ceremony were declared invalid, unlawful, and null and void by the High Court of England and Wales in London in 1999.
Mick Taylor, Brian Jones's replacement, left the band in December 1974 and was replaced by Faces guitarist Ronnie Wood in 1975, who also operated as a mediator within the group, and between Jagger and Richards in particular.
For the Rolling Stones' highly publicised 1972 American tour, Jagger wore glam-rock clothing and glittery makeup on stage.
His personal fortune was estimated in 2010 at £190&nbsp;million (~$298&nbsp;million&nbsp;US).
In October 2009 Jagger and U2 performed "Gimme Shelter" (with Fergie and will.i.am) and "Stuck in a Moment You Can't Get Out Of" at the 25th Anniversary Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Concert.
It's not what the Stones is about, is it?"
The 2000 film ''Almost Famous'', set in 1973, refers to Jagger: "Because if you think Mick Jagger'll still be out there, trying to be a rock star at age 50... you're sadly, sadly mistaken."
This event inspired him to write "Street Fighting Man" that same year.
Jagger gained press notoriety for his admitted drug use and romantic involvements, and was often portrayed as a countercultural figure.
While continuing to tour and release albums with the Rolling Stones, Jagger began a solo career.
In the words of British dramatist and novelist Philip Norman, "the only point concerning Mick Jagger's influence over 'young people' that doctors and psychologists agreed on was that it wasn't, under any circumstances, fundamentally harmless."
Jagger and Richards lost contact with each other when they went to different schools, but after a chance encounter at Dartford Station in July 1960, resumed their friendship and discovered their shared love of rhythm and blues, which for Jagger had begun with Little Richard.
Since his early career Jagger has embodied what some authors describes as a "Dionysian archetype" of "eternal youth" personified by many rock stars and the rock culture.
For his own personal contributions in the 1985 Live Aid multi-venue charity concert, he performed at Philadelphia's JFK Stadium; he did a duet with Tina Turner of "It's Only Rock and Roll", and the performance was highlighted by Jagger tearing away Turner's skirt.
They married on 12 May 1971 in a Catholic ceremony in Saint-Tropez, France.
In 1989 he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and in 2004 into the UK Music Hall of Fame with the Rolling Stones.
In 1954, Jagger passed the eleven-plus and went to Dartford Grammar School, which now has the Mick Jagger Centre installed within the school's site, named after its most famous alumnus.
To express "virility and unrestrained passion" he developed techniques previously used by African American preachers and gospel singers such as "the roar, the guttural belt style of singing, and the buzz, a more nasal and raspy sound".
Jagger hosted the season finale of ''Saturday Night Live'' on 19 and 20 May 2012, doing several comic skits and playing some of the Rolling Stones' hits with Arcade Fire, Foo Fighters, and Jeff Beck.
Three other people also died at the event, attended by 350,000 people.
The relationship ended in June 1970, when Hunt was pregnant with Jagger's first child, Karis.
In early 2009, Jagger joined the electric supergroup SuperHeavy.
The group released several successful albums, including ''December's Children (And Everybody's)'', ''Aftermath'' and ''Between the Buttons'', but in their personal lives their behaviour was brought into question.
Jagger retorted: "I think he would probably like to get the same honour himself.
''Wandering Spirit'' was the third solo album by Jagger and was released in 1993.
Their interest in the blues, however, had been made manifest in the 1972 album ''Exile on Main St''.
Jagger was on record as saying "apart from the Rolling Stones, the Queen is the best thing Britain has got", but was absent from the Queen's Golden Jubilee pop concert at Buckingham Palace that marked her 50 years on the throne.
For the Rolling Stones, the duo would write "The Last Time", the group's third No.
The catalogue of the exhibition is the first photo album of Mick Jagger and shows his evolution over 50 years.
In 2008, it was revealed that members of the Hells Angels had plotted to murder Jagger in 1975.
In 2007 the Rolling Stones made US$437&nbsp;million on their A Bigger Bang Tour, which got them into the current edition of ''Guinness World Records'' for the most lucrative music tour.
Jagger is an avid cricket fan.
The incident was caught on camera and became a central scene in the documentary ''Gimme Shelter''.
The Red Rooster name is taken from the title of one of the Rolling Stones earliest singles.
She left her entire estate, estimated at about US$9 million, to him.
His mother, Eva Ensley Mary (née Scutts; 6 April 1913&nbsp;– 18 May 2000), born in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, of English descent, was a hairdresser and an active member of the Conservative Party.
Suddenly, Eric Burdon and Van Morrison weren't so weird – even Bob Dylan."
Jagger is a supporter of music in schools, and is the Patron of The Mick Jagger Centre in Dartford, United Kingdom, and sponsors music through his Red Rooster Programme in local schools.
It also established the Rolling Stones' image as defiant troublemakers in contrast to the Beatles' "lovable moptop" image.
On 21 February 2012 Mick Jagger, B.B.
Avory himself has categorically denied "on many occasions" that he played with the Rollin' Stones that night.
In the late 1960s, Jagger began acting in films (starting with ''Performance'' and ''Ned Kelly''), to mixed reception.
Later in the decade they ventured into genres like disco and punk with the album ''Some Girls'' (1978).
Jagger's distinctive voice and performance, along with Keith Richards' guitar style, have been the trademark of the Rolling Stones throughout the career of the band.
I just can't see it.
They separated in 1977, and in May 1978 she filed for divorce on the grounds of his adultery.
Some time later the band went on their first tour in the United Kingdom; this was known as the "training ground" tour, because it was a new experience for all of them.
In their earliest days the members played for no money in the interval of Alexis Korner's gigs at a basement club opposite Ealing Broadway tube station (subsequently called "Ferry's" club).
However, the illness of main actor Jason Robards (later replaced by Klaus Kinski) and a delay in the film's notoriously difficult production resulted in his being unable to continue, due to schedule conflicts with a band tour; some of the footage of Jagger's work is shown in the documentaries ''Burden of Dreams'' and ''My Best Fiend''.
In 2003, he was knighted for his services to popular music.
Martin Scorsese worked with Jagger on ''Shine a Light'', a documentary film featuring the Rolling Stones with footage from the A Bigger Bang Tour during two nights of performances at New York's Beacon Theatre.
Jagger was slated to appear in the 1982 film ''Fitzcarraldo'' and some scenes were shot with him, but he had to leave for a Rolling Stones tour and his character was eliminated.
In 1988 he produced the songs "Glamour Boys" and "Which Way to America" on Living Colour's album ''Vivid''.
Jagger appeared on ''Rolling Stone'' List of 100 Greatest Singers at number 16; in the article, Lenny Kravitz wrote: "I sometimes talk to people who sing perfectly in a technical sense who don't understand Mick Jagger.
They would later change their name to "the Rolling Stones" as it seemed more formal.
At the time, the group had very little equipment and needed to borrow Alexis' gear to play.
Jagger was allegedly a contender for the anonymous subject of Carly Simon's 1973 hit song "You're So Vain", in which he sings backing vocals.
His father, Basil Fanshawe "Joe" Jagger (13 April 1913&nbsp;– 11 November 2006), and grandfather, David Ernest Jagger, were both teachers.
I was one of those kids who just ''liked'' to sing.
While Richards and Jones planned to start their own rhythm and blues group, Jagger continued to study business as an undergraduate student at the London School of Economics, and had seriously considered becoming either a journalist or a politician, comparing the latter to a pop star.
In 1985, he released his first solo album, ''She's the Boss''.
The Stones finally played the Glastonbury festival in 2013, headlining on Saturday 29 June.
Jagger is an avid supporter of the England national football team and has regularly attended FIFA World Cup games, appearing at France 98, Germany 2006, South Africa 2010 and Brazil 2014.
I wasn't trying to push the edge of anything.
It screened in Berlin in February 2008.
In 2008 the company began work on ''The Women'', an adaptation of the George Cukor film of the same name.
The two have performed together.
We've got no plans to stop any of that really."
Although the Rolling Stones were on the A Bigger Bang Tour, Jagger flew to Britain on Friday to see his father before returning to Las Vegas the same day, where he was to perform on Saturday night.
But all those songs we sang were pretty tame, really.
The song reached number one in the UK the same year.
It was directed by Diane English.
Jagger would keep the celebrity guests to a minimum on ''Wandering Spirit'', only having Lenny Kravitz as a vocalist on his cover of Bill Withers' "Use Me" and bassist Flea from Red Hot Chili Peppers on three tracks.
(The Hardest Ever)".
Jagger has refused to say when the band will retire, stating in 2007: "I'm sure the Rolling Stones will do more things and more records and more tours.
They attended an unofficial private marriage ceremony in Bali, Indonesia, on 21 November 1990, and lived at Downe House in Richmond, London.
Jagger's career has spanned over 50 years, and he has been described as "one of the most popular and influential frontmen in the history of Rock & Roll".
If I shout and scream at him, it's because no one else has the guts to do it or else they're paid not to do it.
1 hits had been cover versions) based on "This May Be the Last Time", a traditional Negro spiritual song recorded by the Staple Singers in 1955.
During this period, he collaborated with the Jacksons on the song "State of Shock", sharing lead vocals with Michael Jackson.
"I always sang as a child.
Following the end of the Rolling Stones' Sony Music contract and their signing to Virgin Records, Jagger signed with Atlantic Records (which had signed the Stones in the 1970s) to distribute what would be his only album with the label.
His emotional singing on the gospel-influenced "Let It Loose", one of the album's tracks, has been described by music critic Russell Hall as having been Jagger's finest-ever vocal achievement.
This was followed by two concerts in London's Hyde Park as part of their 50th anniversary celebrations, their first in the Park since their famous 1969 performance.
That would be the first question I'd ask him.
Between 15 and 28 March he had a solo concert tour in Japan (Tokyo, Nagoya and Osaka).
The line-up did not at that time include drummer Charlie Watts or bassist Bill Wyman.
In late 1977 Jagger began seeing model Jerry Hall; they moved in together and had four children.
... His sense of pitch and melody is really sophisticated.
The group continued to mine the works of American rhythm and blues artists such as Chuck Berry and Bo Diddley, but with the strong encouragement of Andrew Loog Oldham, Jagger and Richards soon began to write their own songs.
A variety of celebrities attended a lavish party at New York's St. Regis Hotel to celebrate Jagger's 29th birthday and the end of the band's 1972 American tour.
Musician David Bowie joined many rock bands with blues, folk and soul orientations in his first attempts as a musician in the mid-1960s, and he was to recall: "I used to dream of being their Mick Jagger".
Jagger has featured on will.i.am's 2011 single "T.H.E.
The Rolling Stones have been the subjects of numerous documentaries, including ''Gimme Shelter'', which was filmed during the band's 1969 tour of the US, and 1968's ''Sympathy for the Devil'' directed by French New Wave director Jean-Luc Godard.
Jagger’s father and daughters Karis and Elizabeth were in attendance.
During the performance by The Rolling Stones, Hunter approached the stage, and was violently driven off by members of the Hells Angels motorcycle club who had been contracted to serve as ushers and security guards.
Jagger himself acknowledged the song in an interview, calling the concept "very flattering."
The ceremony took place in December 2003.
The Hells Angels reportedly conspired to murder Jagger using a boat to approach a residence he was staying at on Long Island.
He runs around the stage as much as I do yet he's got almost 20 years on me."
His vocals are stunning, flawless in their own kind of perfection."
In 1983 he starred in Faerie Tale Theatre's ''The Nightingale'' as the emperor.
Silver, and has managed them ever since in collaboration with his friend and colleague, Rupert Löwenstein.
His voice has been described as a powerful expressive tool for communicating feelings to his audience and expressing an alternative vision of society.
His stage personas also contributed significantly to the British tradition of popular music that always featured the character song and where the art of singing becomes a matter of acting—which creates a question concerning the singer's relationship to his own words.
He developed a reputation for playing the heavy later in his acting career in films including ''Freejack'' (1992), ''Bent'' (1997), and ''The Man From Elysian Fields'' (2002).
In fact he only rehearsed twice with them in the Bricklayers Arms pub, before they became known as the Rollin' Stones.
Richards, along with Johnny Depp, tried unsuccessfully to persuade Jagger to appear in ''Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides'', alongside Depp and Richards.
In 1967 Cecil Beaton photographed Jagger's naked buttocks, a photo that sold at Sotheby's auction house in 1986 for $4,000.
Jagger is also referenced in Kesha's song "Tik Tok", the Black Eyed Peas' hit "The Time (Dirty Bit)", and his vocal delivery is referenced by rapper Kanye West in the T.I.
Bon Jovi frontman Jon Bon Jovi, also a veteran, has said: "We continue to make Number One records and fill stadiums.
In 1970 he met Nicaraguan-born Bianca De Macias.
He also has five grandchildren, and became a great-grandfather on 19 May 2014, when Jade's daughter Assisi gave birth to a daughter.
Mick Jagger's knighthood received mixed reactions.
Released in February 1993, ''Wandering Spirit'' was commercially successful, reaching No.12 in the UK and No.11 in the US.
AllMusic has described Jagger as "one of the most popular and influential frontmen in the history of rock & roll".
Jagger aimed to re-introduce himself as a solo artist in a musical climate vastly changed from that of his first two albums, ''She's the Boss'' and ''Primitive Cool''.
King, Buddy Guy and Jeff Beck, along with a blues ensemble, performed at the White House concert series before President Barack Obama.
It sold fairly well, and the single "Just Another Night" was a Top Ten hit.
Jagger performed in 12-12-12: The Concert for Sandy Relief with the Rolling Stones on 12 December 2012.
Jagger, who at the time described himself as an anarchist and espoused the leftist slogans of the era, took part in a demonstration against the Vietnam War outside the US Embassy in London in 1968.
Jagger's knighthood also caused some friction between him and bandmate Keith Richards, who was irritated when Jagger accepted the "paltry honour".
Jagger's younger brother, Chris (born 19 December 1947), is also a musician.
Norman also associates the early performances of Jagger with the Rolling Stones in the 1960s as a male ballet dancer, with "his conflicting and colliding sexuality: the swan's neck and smeared harlot eyes allied to an overstuffed and straining codpiece."
''Variety'''s Todd McCarthy said the film "takes full advantage of heavy camera coverage and top-notch sound to create an invigorating musical trip down memory lane, as well as to provoke gentle musings on the wages of ageing and the passage of time."
This was before Andrew Loog Oldham became their manager.
1 single in the UK (their first two UK No.
Maroon 5's popular song "Moves like Jagger" is about Jagger.
He appeared as himself in the Rutles' film ''All You Need Is Cash'' in 1978.
Victor Bockris states that the band members included Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Brian Jones, Ian Stewart on piano, Dick Taylor on bass and Tony Chapman on drums.
He broke open the door for everyone else.
Some kids sing in choirs; others like to show off in front of the mirror.
By 1964 two unscientific opinion polls rated them as Britain's most popular group, even outranking the Beatles.
I'm being me and ordinary, the guy from suburbia who sings in this band, but someone older might have thought it was just the most awful racket, the most terrible thing, and where are we going if this is music?...
Jagger and Richards moved into a flat in Edith Grove in Chelsea, London with a guitarist they had encountered named Brian Jones.
Jagger told Stephen Schiff in a 1992 ''Vanity Fair'' profile: "I wasn't trying to be rebellious in those days; I was just being me.
It has been written for example that his performance style "opened up definitions of gendered masculinity and so laid the foundations for self-invention and sexual plasticity which are now an integral part of contemporary youth culture".
They were angered by Jagger having publicly blamed the Angels, who had been hired to provide security at the Altamont Free Concert in December 1969, for much of the crowd violence at the event, in which Meredith Hunter was stabbed and beaten to death by several Angels.
He composed an improvised soundtrack for Kenneth Anger's film ''Invocation of My Demon Brother'' on the Moog synthesiser in 1969.
and Jay-Z single "Swagga Like Us".
That same year it produced a documentary on Jagger entitled ''Being Mick.''
Jagger was honoured with a knighthood ''for services to popular music'' in the Queen's Birthday Honours 2002  and on 12 December 2003 he received the accolade by The Prince of Wales.
In 1968 he met Marsha Hunt.
In 2013 Mick Jagger teamed up with his brother Chris Jagger for two new duets to mark the 40th anniversary of Chris' debut album.
In 1967 Jagger and Richards were arrested on drug charges and were given unusually harsh sentences: Jagger was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for possession of four over-the-counter pep pills he had purchased in Italy.
Some fans were disappointed when he accepted the honour as it seemed to contradict his anti-establishment stance.
After an eight-man, four-woman jury deliberated for 12 and a half hours, following 17 days of testimony, Passaro was acquitted on grounds of self-defense.
Richards' opinion had softened by 2015, still calling Jagger a "snob" (and giving supporting evidence from Jagger's daughter), but adding "I still love him dearly... your friends don't have to be perfect."
Jagger has also had an intermittent acting career, most notably in Donald Cammell and Nicolas Roeg's ''Performance'' (1968) and as Australian bushranger ''Ned Kelly'' (1970).
In the late 1970s Jagger was cast as Wilbur, a main character in Werner Herzog's ''Fitzcarraldo''.
The traditionally conservative editor of ''The Times'', William Rees-Mogg, wrote an article critical of the sentences; and on appeal Richards' sentence was overturned and Jagger's was amended to a conditional discharge (although he ended up spending one night inside London's Brixton Prison).
I was in the church choir and I also loved listening to singers on the radio&mdash;the BBC or Radio Luxembourg&mdash;or watching them on TV and in the movies."
Another fruit of this collaboration was their first international hit, "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction".
From the time that the Rolling Stones developed their anti-establishment image in the mid-1960s, Mick Jagger, with guitarist Keith Richards, has been an enduring icon of the counterculture.
Queen Elizabeth II  reportedly refused to award Jagger in person, sharing as she did many of the popular prejudices against the singer.
In 1995 Jagger founded Jagged Films with Victoria Pearman.
The programme, which first aired on television 22 November, coincided with the release of his fourth solo album, ''Goddess in the Doorway.''
The video was shown simultaneously on the screens of both Wembley and JFK Stadiums.
Jagger left school in 1961 after obtaining seven O-levels and three A-levels.
However the Rolling Stones continued to face legal battles for the next decade.
