The eastern parts of the Frankish kingdoms, especially Germany and Italy, were under continual Magyar assault until the invader's defeat at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955.
Just before 1000 there was a great wave of building stone churches all over Europe.
No silver coins denominated in multiple units were minted.
By the late 10th century Italy had been drawn into the Ottonian sphere after a period of instability; Otto III (r. 996–1002) spent much of his later reign in the kingdom.
This movement tried to employ a systemic approach to truth and reason and culminated in the thought of Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274), who wrote the ''Summa Theologica'', or ''Summary of Theology''.
It was dominated by efforts to regain the dignity and classicism of imperial Roman and Byzantine art, but was also influenced by the Insular art of the British Isles.
Ecclesiastical officials convened at the Council of Constance in 1414, and in the following year the council deposed one of the rival popes, leaving only two claimants.
The need for revenue led to increased taxes and a decline in numbers of the curial, or landowning, class, and decreasing numbers of them willing to shoulder the burdens of holding office in their native towns.
In the early 15th century, France again came close to dissolving, but in the late 1420s the military successes of Joan of Arc (d. 1431) led to the victory of the French and the capture of the last English possessions in southern France in 1453.
One feature of the crusades was the pogroms against local Jews that often took place as the crusaders left their countries for the East.
The importance of infantry and light cavalry began to decline during the early Carolingian period, with a growing dominance of elite heavy cavalry.
There were fewer invasions of the eastern section of the empire; most occurred in the Balkans.
In Iberia, the Christian states, which had been confined to the north-western part of the peninsula, began to push back against the Islamic states in the south, a period known as the ''Reconquista''.
Elsewhere in Gaul, the Franks and Celtic Britons set up small polities.
Monasteries were founded as campaigns to Christianise pagan Europe continued.
The large portal with coloured sculpture in high relief became a central feature of façades, especially in France, and the capitals of columns were often carved with narrative scenes of imaginative monsters and animals.
Strong, royalty-based nation states rose throughout Europe in the Late Middle Ages, particularly in England, France, and the Christian kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula: Aragon, Castile, and Portugal.
The Byzantines also faced a revived Bulgaria, which in the late 12th and 13th centuries spread throughout the Balkans.
Monks were also the authors of new works, including history, theology, and other subjects, written by authors such as Bede (d. 735), a native of northern England who wrote in the late 7th and early 8th centuries.
Non-local goods appearing in the archaeological record are usually luxury goods.
The Crusades, first preached in 1095, were military attempts by Western European Christians to regain control of the Holy Land from Muslims.
Charlemagne's court seems to have been responsible for the acceptance of figurative monumental sculpture in Christian art, and by the end of the period near life-sized figures such as the Gero Cross were common in important churches.
They faced a powerful rival in the Dukes of Normandy, who in 1066 under William the Conqueror (duke 1035–1087), conquered England (r. 1066–87) and created a cross-channel empire that lasted, in various forms, throughout the rest of the Middle Ages.
These were especially brutal during the First Crusade, when the Jewish communities in Cologne, Mainz, and Worms were destroyed, and other communities in cities between the rivers Seine and Rhine suffered destruction.
The Eastern Empire was marked by closer relations between the political state and Christian Church, with doctrinal matters assuming an importance in eastern politics that they did not have in Western Europe.
Many of the surviving manuscripts of the Latin classics were copied in monasteries in the Early Middle Ages.
The crusades were intended to seize Jerusalem from Muslim control.
There was debate between the realists and the nominalists over the concept of "universals".
Benedict of Nursia (d. 547) wrote the Benedictine Rule for Western monasticism during the 6th century, detailing the administrative and spiritual responsibilities of a community of monks led by an abbot.
In addition, the spinning wheel replaced the traditional distaff for spinning wool, tripling production.
The English crown under Henry VII sponsored the voyage of John Cabot (d. 1498) in 1497, which landed on Cape Breton Island.
Tripartite periodisation became standard after the German 17th-century historian Christoph Cellarius divided history into three periods: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern.
The High Middle Ages was the formative period in the history of the modern Western state.
An additional problem to face the empire came as a result of the involvement of Emperor Maurice (r. 582–602) in Persian politics when he intervened in a succession dispute.
Northern Europe and Spain continued to use Gothic styles, which became increasingly elaborate in the 15th century, until almost the end of the period.
They could supplement the household income by spinning or brewing at home.
These crusades also spawned a military order, the Order of the Sword Brothers.
The emperor saw the protection of the Church as one of his responsibilities as well as wanting to preserve the right to appoint his own choices as bishops within his lands, but the papacy insisted on the Church's independence from secular lords.
Besides the Crusades and monastic reforms, people sought to participate in new forms of religious life.
These peasants were often subject to noble overlords and owed them rents and other services, in a system known as manorialism.
Rome, for instance, shrank from a population of hundreds of thousands to around 30,000 by the end of the 6th century.
The development of a three-field rotation system for planting crops increased the usage of land from one half in use each year under the old two-field system to two-thirds under the new system, with a consequent increase in production.
During the tumultuous 14th century, disputes within the leadership of the Church led to the Avignon Papacy of 1305–78, also called the "Babylonian Captivity of the Papacy" (a reference to the Babylonian captivity of the Jews), and then to the Great Schism, lasting from 1378 to 1418, when there were two and later three rival popes, each supported by several states.
The settlement did not go smoothly, and when Roman officials mishandled the situation, the Goths began to raid and plunder.
Intellectual life was marked by scholasticism, a philosophy that emphasised joining faith to reason, and by the founding of universities.
Normans also settled in Sicily and southern Italy, when Robert Guiscard (d. 1085) landed there in 1059 and established a duchy that later became the Kingdom of Sicily.
As Western Europe witnessed the formation of new kingdoms, the Eastern Roman Empire remained intact and experienced an economic revival that lasted into the early 7th century.
Nobles, both the titled nobility and simple knights, exploited the manors and the peasants, although they did not own lands outright but were granted rights to the income from a manor or other lands by an overlord through the system of feudalism.
In 330, after a period of civil war, Constantine the Great (r. 306–337) refounded the city of Byzantium as the newly renamed eastern capital, Constantinople.
African goods stopped being imported into Europe, first disappearing from the interior and by the 7th century found only in a few cities such as Rome or Naples.
Wages rose as landlords sought to entice the reduced number of available workers to their fields.
Most intellectual efforts went towards imitating classical scholarship, but some original works were created, along with now-lost oral compositions.
During the High Middle Ages, which began after 1000, the population of Europe increased greatly as technological and agricultural innovations allowed trade to flourish and the Medieval Warm Period climate change allowed crop yields to increase.
Although some were allowed back into France, most were not, and many Jews emigrated eastwards, settling in Poland and Hungary.
Copper or bronze coins were not struck, nor were gold except in Southern Europe.
Secular law, or Roman law, was advanced greatly by the discovery of the ''Corpus Juris Civilis'' in the 11th century, and by 1100 Roman law was being taught at Bologna.
of Aquitaine (d. after 864), the emperor's grandson, rebelled in a contest for Aquitaine, while Louis the German tried to annex all of East Francia.
By the end of the 7th century, under the impact of the Muslim conquests, African products were no longer found in Western Europe.
For Spain, dates commonly used are the death of King Ferdinand II in 1516, the death of Queen Isabella I of Castile in 1504, or the conquest of Granada in 1492.
Southern Iberia remained under control of Islamic states, initially under the Caliphate of Córdoba, which broke up in 1031 into a shifting number of petty states known as ''taifas'', who fought with the Christians until the Almohad Caliphate re-established centralised rule over Southern Iberia in the 1170s.
The High Middle Ages was a period of tremendous expansion of population.
Monastic ideals spread from Egypt to Western Europe in the 5th and 6th centuries through hagiographical literature such as the ''Life of Anthony''.
The creation of heavily armoured cataphract-type soldiers as cavalry was an important feature of the 5th-century Roman military.
Family ties within the elites were important, as were the virtues of loyalty, courage, and honour.
All these strands came together with the emergence of Islam in Arabia during the lifetime of Muhammad (d. 632).
One feature of the basilica is the use of a transept, or the "arms" of a cross-shaped building that are perpendicular to the long nave.
Cluny quickly established a reputation for austerity and rigour.
Kings became the heads of centralised nation states, reducing crime and violence but making the ideal of a unified Christendom more distant.
His successors continued to struggle against the papacy as well as the German nobility.
It sought to maintain a high quality of spiritual life by placing itself under the protection of the papacy and by electing its own abbot without interference from laymen, thus maintaining economic and political independence from local lords.
Another change was the Christianisation, or conversion of the empire to Christianity, a gradual process that lasted from the 2nd to the 5th centuries.
The first years of the 14th century were marked by famines, culminating in the Great Famine of 1315–17.
Greek remained the language of the Byzantine Empire, but the migrations of the Slavs added Slavic languages to Eastern Europe.
Early in the war the English under Edward III (r. 1327–77) and his son Edward, the Black Prince (d. 1376), won the battles of Crécy and Poitiers, captured the city of Calais, and won control of much of France.
Some peasants lived in large settlements that numbered as many as 700 inhabitants.
One exception was Anglo-Saxon England, where the armies were still composed of regional levies, known as the ''fyrd'', which were led by the local elites.
Much literature remained religious in character, and although a great deal of it continued to be written in Latin, a new demand developed for saints' lives and other devotional tracts in the vernacular languages.
This involved Pope Gregory VII (pope 1073–85) and Emperor Henry IV, who initially clashed over episcopal appointments, a dispute that turned into a battle over the ideas of investiture, clerical marriage, and simony.
In 987 the Carolingian dynasty was replaced in the western lands, with the crowning of Hugh Capet (r. 987–996) as king.
The Late Middle Ages was marked by difficulties and calamities including famine, plague, and war, which significantly diminished the population of Europe; between 1347 and 1350, the Black Death killed about a third of Europeans.
The first patent law in 1447 in Venice protected the rights of inventors to their inventions.
Other heresies were manufactured, such as the accusations against the Knights Templar that resulted in their suppression in 1312 and the division of their great wealth between the French King Philip IV (r. 1285–1314) and the Hospitallers.
The Magyars settled Hungary around 900 under King Árpád (d. c. 907) after a series of invasions in the 9th century.
Roman city life and culture changed greatly in the early Middle Ages.
Increasingly the Byzantine Church differed in language, practices, and liturgy from the western Church.
By the middle of the 10th century, Alfred's successors had conquered Northumbria, and restored English control over most of the southern part of Great Britain.
The Frankish kingdom in northern Gaul split into kingdoms called Austrasia, Neustria, and Burgundy during the 6th and 7th centuries, all of them ruled by the Merovingian dynasty, who were descended from Clovis.
Throughout the 14th century, French kings sought to expand their influence at the expense of the territorial holdings of the nobility.
By about 1150, the Christian north had coalesced into the five major kingdoms of León, Castile, Aragon, Navarre, and Portugal.
Warfare was common between and within the kingdoms.
Canon law was also studied, and around 1140 a monk named Gratian (fl.
Increasing prosperity during the 12th century resulted in greater production of secular art; many carved ivory objects such as gaming-pieces, combs, and small religious figures have survived.
In Anglo-Saxon society the lack of many child rulers meant a lesser role for women as queen mothers, but this was compensated for by the increased role played by abbesses of monasteries.
The military was reorganised, which allowed the emperors John I (r. 969–976) and Basil II (r. 976–1025) to expand the frontiers of the empire on all fronts.
Others joined the Cathars, another heretical movement condemned by the papacy.
At the emperor's death, the Byzantines had control of most of Italy, North Africa, and a small foothold in southern Spain.
English historians often use the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485 to mark the end of the period.
In the 13th century mendicant orders—the Franciscans and the Dominicans—who swore vows of poverty and earned their living by begging, were approved by the papacy.
In the 10th century the establishment of churches and monasteries led to the development of stone architecture that elaborated vernacular Roman forms, from which the term "Romanesque" is derived.
Bruni and later historians argued that Italy had recovered since Petrarch's time, and therefore added a third period to Petrarch's two.
Besides new trading opportunities, agricultural and technological improvements enabled an increase in crop yields, which in turn allowed the trade networks to expand.
The Roman Empire reached its greatest territorial extent during the second century AD; the following two centuries witnessed the slow decline of Roman control over its outlying territories.
Shipbuilding improved with the use of the rib and plank method rather than the old Roman system of mortise and tenon.
The greatest change in military affairs during the invasion period was the adoption of the Hunnic composite bow in place of the earlier, and weaker, Scythian composite bow.
This meant there was less need for large tax revenues and so the taxation systems decayed.
Often the stories were written down in the ''chansons de geste'', or "songs of great deeds", such as ''The Song of Roland'' or ''The Song of Hildebrand''.
Landlords also became more conscious of common interests with other landholders, and they joined together to extort privileges from their governments.
The empire was administered by an itinerant court that travelled with the emperor, as well as approximately 300 imperial officials called counts, who administered the counties the empire had been divided into.
The papacy, long attached to an ideology of independence from secular kings, first asserted its claim to temporal authority over the entire Christian world; the Papal Monarchy reached its apogee in the early 13th century under the pontificate of  (pope 1198–1216).
Between the 5th and 8th centuries, new peoples and individuals filled the political void left by Roman centralised government.
The alternative term "medieval" (or occasionally "mediaeval" or "mediæval") derives from ''medium aevum''.
Kings in France, England, and Spain consolidated their power, and set up lasting governing institutions.
Charles, more often known as Charles the Great or Charlemagne, embarked upon a programme of systematic expansion in 774 that unified a large portion of Europe, eventually controlling modern-day France, northern Italy, and Saxony.
In 774, Charlemagne conquered the Lombards, which freed the papacy from the fear of Lombard conquest and marked the beginnings of the Papal States.
These ties led to the prevalence of the feud in aristocratic society, examples of which included those related by Gregory of Tours that took place in Merovingian Gaul.
Under Louis IX (r. 1226–70), royal prestige rose to new heights as Louis served as a mediator for most of Europe.
These troubles were followed in 1347 by the Black Death, a pandemic that spread throughout Europe during the following three years.
Knights were the lowest level of nobility; they controlled but did not own land, and had to serve other nobles.
The caricature of the period is also reflected in some more specific notions.
One of his descendants, Charles Martel (d. 741), won the Battle of Poitiers in 732, halting the advance of Muslim armies across the Pyrenees.
In Northern Europe, cities also shrank, while civic monuments and other public buildings were raided for building materials.
Philosophical discourse was stimulated by the rediscovery of Aristotle and his emphasis on empiricism and rationalism.
Around the Mediterranean, pottery remained prevalent and appears to have been traded over medium-range networks, not just produced locally.
The Eastern Roman Empire, often referred to as the Byzantine Empire after the fall of its western counterpart, had little ability to assert control over the lost western territories.
Although the Templars and Hospitallers took part in the Spanish crusades, similar Spanish military religious orders were founded, most of which had become part of the two main orders of Calatrava and Santiago by the beginning of the 12th century.
Although the movements of peoples during this period are usually described as "invasions", they were not just military expeditions but migrations of entire peoples into the empire.
Early Netherlandish painting by artists such as Jan van Eyck (d. 1441) and Rogier van der Weyden (d. 1464) rivalled that of Italy, as did northern illuminated manuscripts, which in the 15th century began to be collected on a large scale by secular elites, who also commissioned secular books, especially histories.
The English also employed longbowmen, but other countries were unable to create similar forces with the same success.
There remained a few free peasants throughout this period and beyond, with more of them in the regions of Southern Europe than in the north.
New kingdoms such as Hungary and Poland, after their conversion to Christianity, became Central European powers.
The English monk Alcuin (d. 804) was invited to Aachen and brought the education available in the monasteries of Northumbria.
There are survivals from the large brooches in fibula or penannular form that were a key piece of personal adornment for elites, including the Irish Tara Brooch.
It was used mainly in churches and cathedrals, and continued in use until the 16th century in much of Europe.
Christian forces advanced again in the early 13th century, culminating in the capture of Seville in 1248.
The "Middle Ages" first appears in Latin in 1469 as ''media tempestas'' or "middle season".
Judaism was an active proselytising faith, and at least one Arab political leader converted to it.
The division was disputed.
Most feuds seem to have ended quickly with the payment of some sort of compensation.
Astronomy advanced following the translation of Ptolemy's ''Almagest'' from Greek into Latin in the late 12th century.
In the 560s the Avars began to expand from their base on the north bank of the Danube; by the end of the 6th century they were the dominant power in Central Europe and routinely able to force the eastern emperors to pay tribute.
In the history of Europe, the '''Middle Ages''' or '''medieval period''' lasted from the 5th to the 15th century.
There were also areas where the pattern was a mix of two or more of those systems.
His grave was discovered in 1653 and is remarkable for its grave goods, which included weapons and a large quantity of gold.
Officially they were tolerated, if subject to conversion efforts, and at times were even encouraged to settle in new areas.
The long conflicts of the period strengthened royal control over their kingdoms and were extremely hard on the peasantry.
The basic learning of the letters and numbers remained the province of the family or a village priest, but the secondary subjects of the trivium—grammar, rhetoric, logic—were studied in cathedral schools or in schools provided by cities.
Economic issues, including inflation, and external pressure on the frontiers combined to create the Crisis of the Third Century, with emperors coming to the throne only to be rapidly replaced by new usurpers.
There were perhaps as many as 150 local kings in Ireland, of varying importance.
Charlemagne's chancery—or writing office—made use of a new script today known as Carolingian minuscule, allowing a common writing style that advanced communication across much of Europe.
The construction of cathedrals and castles advanced building technology, leading to the development of large stone buildings.
It began gradually, but by the late 540s Slavic tribes were in Thrace and Illyrium, and had defeated an imperial army near Adrianople in 551.
The Turks also had difficulties, losing control of Jerusalem to the Fatimids of Egypt and suffering from a series of internal civil wars.
In the 19th century, the entire Middle Ages were often referred to as the "Dark Ages", but with the adoption of these subdivisions, use of this term was restricted to the Early Middle Ages, at least among historians.
Another change was the introduction of the stirrup, which increased the effectiveness of cavalry as shock troops.
Another development was the increasing use of longswords and the progressive replacement of scale armour by mail armour and lamellar armour.
Others lived in small groups of a few families and still others lived on isolated farms spread over the countryside.
Military expenses increased steadily during the third century, mainly in response to the war with the Sasanian Empire, which revived in the middle of the third century.
In 1203, the Fourth Crusade was diverted from the Holy Land to Constantinople, and captured the city in 1204, setting up a Latin Empire of Constantinople and greatly weakening the Byzantine Empire.
Although the Byzantines regrouped and recovered somewhat, they never fully regained Asia Minor and were often on the defensive.
12th century), a teacher at Bologna, wrote what became the standard text of canon law—the ''Decretum''.
Charlemagne sponsored changes in church liturgy, imposing the Roman form of church service on his domains, as well as the Gregorian chant in liturgical music for the churches.
Commerce revived and the emperors oversaw the extension of a uniform administration to all the provinces.
Louis the German was in control of Bavaria and the eastern lands in modern-day Germany.
One misconception, first propagated in the 19th century and still very common, is that all people in the Middle Ages believed that the Earth was flat.
Only in Italy does it appear that women were always considered under the protection and control of a male relative.
Other works were more clearly history, such as Otto von Freising's (d. 1158) ''Gesta Friderici Imperatoris'' detailing the deeds of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, or William of Malmesbury's (d. c. 1143) ''Gesta Regum'' on the kings of England.
Gold continued to be minted until the end of the 7th century, when it was replaced by silver coins.
Commercial secondary schools spread, and some Italian towns had more than one such enterprise.
By the late 6th century, the principal means of religious instruction in the Church had become music and art rather than the book.
In Scandinavia, Margaret I of Denmark (r. in Denmark 1387–1412) consolidated Norway, Denmark, and Sweden in the Union of Kalmar, which continued until 1523.
Chivalry and the ethos of courtly love developed in royal and noble courts.
Most of the people were peasants settled on small farms.
The percentage of serfs amongst the peasantry declined from a high of 90 to closer to 50 per cent by the end of the period.
Carolingian art was produced for a small group of figures around the court, and the monasteries and churches they supported.
The Hunnic threat remained until Attila's death in 453, when the Hunnic confederation he led fell apart.
The use of militia-type levies of the free population declined over the Carolingian period.
Barbarossa's grandson Frederick II (r. 1220–1250), who was also heir to the throne of Sicily through his mother, clashed repeatedly with the papacy.
In 400, the Visigoths invaded the Western Roman Empire and, although briefly forced back from Italy, in 410 sacked the city of Rome.
This culture was expressed in the vernacular languages rather than Latin, and comprised poems, stories, legends, and popular songs spread by troubadours, or wandering minstrels.
Christianity had active missions competing with the Persians' Zoroastrianism in seeking converts, especially among residents of the Arabian Peninsula.
Wycliffe's teachings influenced two of the major heretical movements of the later Middle Ages: Lollardy in England and Hussitism in Bohemia.
Although royalty owned huge collections of plate, little survives except for the Royal Gold Cup.
The Byzantine emperors maintained a claim over the territory, but while none of the new kings in the west dared to elevate himself to the position of emperor of the west, Byzantine control of most of the Western Empire could not be sustained; the reconquest of the Mediterranean periphery and the Italian Peninsula (Gothic War) in the reign of Justinian (r. 527–565) was the sole, and temporary, exception.
Charles the Bald received the western Frankish lands, comprising most of modern-day France.
It also had the permanent consequence of empowering German princes at the expense of the German emperors.
Land settlement also varied greatly.
Classic examples of Gothic architecture include Chartres Cathedral and Reims Cathedral in France as well as Salisbury Cathedral in England.
By 714, Islamic forces controlled much of the peninsula in a region they called Al-Andalus.
As much as 90 per cent of the European population remained rural peasants.
Major technological advances included the invention of the windmill, the first mechanical clocks, the manufacture of distilled spirits, and the use of the astrolabe.
The only role open to women in the Church was that of nuns, as they were unable to become priests.
Although the Palaeologi emperors recaptured Constantinople from the Western Europeans in 1261, they were never able to regain control of much of the former imperial lands.
During the 12th and 13th centuries, the ranks of the townsmen expanded greatly as existing towns grew and new population centres were founded.
In modern-day Germany, the Holy Roman Empire continued to rule, but the elective nature of the imperial crown meant there was no enduring dynasty around which a strong state could form.
The political structure of Western Europe changed with the end of the united Roman Empire.
Conditions were further unsettled by the return of the plague throughout the rest of the 14th century; it continued to strike Europe periodically during the rest of the Middle Ages.
These changes from Latin to the new languages took many centuries.
Umayyad descendants took over the Iberian Peninsula, the Aghlabids controlled North Africa, and the Tulunids became rulers of Egypt.
In 406 the Alans, Vandals, and Suevi crossed into Gaul; over the next three years they spread across Gaul and in 409 crossed the Pyrenees Mountains into modern-day Spain.
Among the uprisings were the ''jacquerie'' in France, the Peasants' Revolt in England, and revolts in the cities of Florence in Italy and Ghent and Bruges in Flanders.
