Today the water well tradition is gone.
Because of Finland's location spanning around the Arctic Circle the nights near the midsummer day are short or non-existent.
This gives a great contrast to the darkness of the winter time.
In Slovenia so called Kresna noč used to be celebrated on June 21., but during Jugoslavia holiday was changed with maj. 1, international workers day.
Celebrations consist of a lot of traditional and mostly pagan elements – eating, Jāņi cheese, drinking beer, baking pīrāgi, singing Latvian folk songs dedicated to Jāņi, burning bonfires to keep light all through the night and jumping over it, wearing wreaths of flowers (for women) and oak leaves (for men) together with modern commercial products and ideas.
The girls, for example, would float their flower garlands on the water of rivers and tell their fortunes from their movement.
In Sweden the Midsummer is such an important festivity that there have been serious discussions to make the Midsummer's Eve into the National Day of Sweden, instead of June 6.
In Kaleva,  is celebrated annually on or near the Summer Solstice by Gathering at the Village Roadside Park.
According to the ''Vita'' by his companion Ouen, he'd say: "No Christian on the feast of Saint John or the solemnity of any other saint performs ''solestitia'' summer solstice rites or dancing or leaping or diabolical chants."
Drăgaica is celebrated by a dance performed by a group of 5–7 young girls of which one is chosen as ''the Drăgaica''.
The celebration is attended by many people from the community, and from around the country.
Nowadays many spend a few days there, and some Finns take their whole vacation in a cottage.
The festivities also coincide with the corn harvest, dishes served during this period are commonly made with corn, such as canjica and pamonha; dishes also include boiled or baked vegetable corn (often buttered), sausages, sweet potatoes, peanuts, and numerous sweet dishes such as rice pudding.
It takes place on June 24, on Midsummer day (St John's day).
In recent years on the Summer Solstice, English Heritage has run a "Managed Open Access" to Stonehenge for the Summer Solstice celebrations.
The Swedish "language village" (summer camp) , run by Concordia College in Minnesota, also celebrates Midsummer.
Anyone seeing the sunrise will be healthy throughout the year.
In Latvia, Midsummer is called ''Jāņi''  (plural of Latvian name Jānis, which is equivalent to John) or Līgo svētki (svētki = festival).
As forms of Neopaganism can be quite different and have very different origins, these representations can vary considerably, despite the shared name.
In modern times, due to increasing secularization, it is possible to find Kupala being celebrated in a manner closer to its pagan roots.
The fire also frightened away mischievous spirits who avoided it at all costs, thus ensuring a good harvest.
Some celebrate in a manner as close as possible to how they believe the Ancient Pagans observed the tradition, while others observe the holiday with rituals culled from numerous other unrelated sources, the Germanic culture being just one of the sources used.
Geneva hosts a Swedish Day () festival on the third Sunday of June.
In the Middle Ages it was primarily an ecclesiastical festivity, but from the 16th century on the sources recall it as a folk custom.
This week long festival normally starts on the Friday nearest St John's Day.
Traditionally the longest day of the year in Ireland falls on June 21.
This burning sends the "witch" away to Bloksbjerg, the Brocken mountain in the Harz region of Germany where the great witch gathering was thought to be held on this day.
The Midnight Sun Game is an annual tradition in the city of Fairbanks, in which a regulation game of baseball is played at 10:30 p.m. local time, through the midnight hour, with no artificial lighting.
The way of arranging the participants by age and by sex has suggested the possibility that these groups sang by answering each other, but there are hardly any remnants that appear to support this possibility.
For many families the Midsummer is the time when they move to the countryside to their summer cottage by the sea or lake.
In Newfoundland and Labrador, St. John's Day is observed on the Monday nearest June 24 and commemorates John Cabot's discovery of Newfoundland in 1497.
In some areas, these are arranged in a bunch and hung in doorways.
The name was invented by the late 18th century Welsh Romantic author and prolific literary forger Iolo Morganwg.
In Quebec, the celebration of June 24 was brought to New France by the first French colonists.
In Austria the midsummer solstice is celebrated each year with a spectacular procession of ships down the Danube River as it flows through the wine-growing Wachau Valley just north of Vienna.
Sweden Day, a Midsummer celebration which also honors Swedish heritage and history, has been held annually on the sound in Throgs Neck in New York City since 1941.
Traditionally the midsummers celebration is called  meaning sign or oracle, and was considered a time when unmarried girls would discover their potential mates through a ritual.
It was an official holiday until 1770, and in accordance with the Danish tradition of celebrating a holiday on the evening before the actual day, it takes place on the evening of 23 June.
In Romania, the Midsummer celebrations are named ''Drăgaica'' or ''Sânziene''.
It is believed that on Enyovden a variety of herbs have the greatest healing power, and that this is especially true at sunrise.
In Sweden, Finland, Latvia and Estonia, Midsummer's Eve is the greatest festival of the year, comparable only with Walpurgis Night, Christmas Eve, and New Year's Eve.
In the  region and in the Southern part of , this huge bonfire is named ''''.
Póvoa de Varzim's Saint Peter Festival keeps traditional midsummer elements, such as the bonfire, the celebrations occur in the streets and include the ''rusgas'', in which inhabitants of one quarter (''bairro'') visit in a parade other neighborhoods in the evening of June 28.
Also, on some beaches, it was traditional for women who wanted to be fertile to bathe in the sea until they were washed by 9 waves.
Since St John the Baptist's birth is celebrated at this time, some elements of Kupala's pagan origins were seen to be roughly synonymous with Christian meanings, most notably the parallel of Baptism as cleansing from sins, so the holiday in a Christian-modified form has been accepted into the Orthodox Christian calendar.
In 1834, Ludger Duvernay, printer and editor of ''La Minerve'' took the leadership of an effort to make June 24 the national holiday of the ''Canadiens'' (French Canadians).
It's prepared a typical hot drink called "quentão" (very hot) that consists in a mix of fruits and spices with a lacing of Cachaça.
The exact dates vary between different cultures.
lasts several days and culminates in Mazey Day.
In Denmark, the solstitial celebration is called ''sankthans'' or ''sankthansaften'' ("St. John's Eve").
Will-o'-the-wisps were believed to appear at midsummer night, particularly to finders of the mythical "fern in bloom" and possessors of the "fern seed", marking a treasure.
The celebrations are very colorful and festive and include the use of fireworks and bonfires.
Many rites of this holiday are connected with water, fertility and autopurification.
The whole month of June was once called the Month of St. Ivan until the 19th century.
Rituals include bonfires, cookouts, a sauna and spending time together.
In Sweden Midsummer's day is a Saturday between the 19th and 26th of June, but as is usual in Sweden the actual celebration is on the eve, i.e.
* Fire: Bonfires are lit, usually around midnight both on beaches and inland, so much so that one usually cannot tell the smoke from the mist common in this Atlantic corner of Iberia at this time of the year, and it smells burnt everywhere.
On the islands of Saaremaa and Hiiumaa, old fishing boats may be burned in the large pyres set ablaze.
Bonfires in Cornwall were once common as part of '''', which is now celebrated at Penzance, Cornwall.
The best-known Jaanik, or midsummer, ritual is the lighting of the bonfire and jumping over it.
Likewise, to not light the fire is to invite the destruction of your house by fire.
Ringing the ''bachîn'' (a large brass preserving pan) at midsummer to frighten away evil spirits survived as a custom on some farms until the 1940s and has been revived as a folk performance in the 21st century.
The wedding was meant to symbolize the blossoming of new life.
The Yakut people of the Sakha Republic celebrate a solstitial ceremony, ''Ysyakh'', involving tethering a horse to a pole and circle dancing around it.
To decorate with greens was called ''att maja'' (to may) and may be the origin of the word ''majstång'', ''maja'' coming originally from the month May, or vice versa.
Estonians celebrate "Jaaniõhtu" on the eve of the Summer Solstice (June 23) with bonfires.
Ivan Kupala Day is the day of summer solstice celebrated in Ukraine and Russia on June 23 NS and July 6 OS.
People decorate their houses and lands with birch or sometimes oak branches and flowers as well as leaves, especially fern.
Girls jumped over it, while boys watched the spectacle.
A prominent Ivan Kupala night scene is featured in Andrei Tarkovsky's film ''Andrei Rublev''.
However, on the southernmost island of Suðuroy it is observed by lighting a bonfire.
This tradition harks back to pagan times and is now associated with "St. John's Night".
In Wales it is called '''', or '''' (St John's of Midsummer) to distinguish it from '''' (St John's of Midwinter, the feast of John the Evangelist).
Only one bonfire is lit on the island as one of the two biggest towns hosts the celebration alternately every other year.
The NYC Swedish Midsummer celebrations in Battery Park, New York City, attracts some 3,000–5,000 people annually, which makes it one of the largest celebrations after the ones held in Leksand and at the Skansen Park in Stockholm.
These vary from area to area, but mostly include fennel, different species of fern (e.g.
There are tens and hundreds of different beliefs and traditions all over Latvia on what should be done on that day for good harvest, for predicting the future, for attracting your future spouse etc.
* Water: Tradition holds it that the medicinal plants mentioned above are most effective when dipped in water collected from seven different springs.
Some Finland Swedes call the holiday ''Johannes'' after the Finnish term ''juhannus'' – or more accurately after the Biblical John the Baptist  (="Johannes Döparen" in Swedish).
The celebrations that accompany Jaaniõhtu carry on usually through the night, they are the largest and most important of the year, and the traditions are almost identical to Finland (read under Finland) and similar to neighbors Latvia and Sweden (read under Sweden).
In Alicante, since 1928, the bonfires of Saint John were developed into elaborate constructions inspired by the Falles, or Fallas, of Valencia.
The oldest and best known midsummer fair in Romania is the Drăgaica fair, held in Buzău between 10 and 24 June every year.
The parade was permanently banned in 1675.
Often branches from birch trees (''koivu'') are placed on both side of the front door to welcome visitors.
However, since 1977, a folk-dance revival started in Cardiff, and is held now annually on this feast day
In certain French towns, a tall bonfire is built by the inhabitants in order to be lit on St John's Day.
The Eve of St. John has special magical significance and was used by Sir Walter Scott as the title, and theme, for a pseudo-ballad poem.
Nights on the Eve of Ivan Kupala inspired Modest Mussorgsky to create his ''Night on Bald Mountain''.
In rural areas livestock is also decorated.
Raising and dancing around a maypole (''majstång'' or ''midsommarstång'') is an activity that attracts families and many others.
It is a national holiday celebrated from the night of June 23 through June 24 on a large scale by almost everyone in Latvia and by people of Latvian origin abroad.
Many Finns leave the cities for Midsummer and spend time in the countryside.
The custom survived longest and in the most complete form in the northwestern part of the linguistic region, where as late as the 1930s they still lit a Midsummer Night fire.
Saint John the Baptist is the patron saint of Genoa, Florence and Turin where a fireworks display takes place during the celebration on the river.
The ''quadrilha'' features couple formations around a mock wedding whose bride and groom are the central attraction of the dancing.
A large bonfire is held and all are invited to throw a handful of red soil into the fire in hopes that they get their wish granted.
The day of sun solstice is called '''' in German.
Bonfires on the beach, speeches, picnics and songs are traditional, although bonfires are built in many other places where beaches may not be close by (i.e.
Women–sorceresses and enchantresses go to gather herbs by themselves to cure and make charms.
The day is also called ''Jonsok'', which means "John's wake", important in Roman Catholic times with pilgrimages to churches and holy springs.
Midsummer celebrations held throughout the United States are largely derived from the cultures of immigrants who arrived from various European nations since the 19th century.
The traditional midsummer party in Spain is the celebration in honour of Saint John the Baptist (Spanish: ''San Juan'', Catalan: ''Sant Joan'', Galician: ''San Xoán'', Asturian: ''San Xuan'') and takes place in the evening of June 23 St John's Eve.
Other Midsummer festivities had uneasy relations with the Reformed establishment.
Saints’ days are full of fun and merriment.
The day is still known by its many names as: leedopäev, suvine pööripäiv, suvepööripäev, püäripääv, päevakäänak, päiväkäänäk, päiväkäändjäne, päevapesa, pesapäev and suured päevad.
In 1885, Holger Drachmann wrote a ''midsommervise'' (Midsummer hymn) called ''"Vi elsker vort land..."'' ("We Love Our Country") with a melody composed by P.E.
In 1908, Pope Pius X designated John the Baptist as the patron saint of the French-Canadians.
On St. John's Day eve celebration, it's sometimes placed a ritual of walking on live-coal made of the remnants of the main bonfire, which is a traditional part of the party, on barefoot by midnight.
Nowadays Saint John is the patron saint of Turin and he is celebrated on June 24 which is a city public holiday.
Heavy drinking is also associated with the Finnish midsummer.
Parties are organized usually at beaches, where bonfires are lit and a set of firework displays usually take place.
He invented a legend in which the lady of Smailholm Tower, near Kelso, keeps vigil by the midnight fires three nights in a row (see above) and is visited by her lover; but when her husband returns from battle, she learns he slew that lover on the first night, and she has been entertained by a very physical ghost.
On St John's Day 1333 Petrarch watched women at Cologne rinsing their hands and arms in the Rhine "so that the threatening calamities of the coming year might be washed away by bathing in the river."
This tradition was revived by the Old Cornwall Society in the early 20th century.
As Christianity entered pagan areas, midsummer celebrations came to be often borrowed and transferred into new Christian holidays, often resulting in celebrations that mixed Christian traditions with traditions derived from pagan Midsummer festivities.
Midsummer festivals are celebrated throughout Scotland, notably in the Scottish Borders where Peebles holds its Beltane Week.
People jumped over the fire after they lit it.
The 13th-century monk of Winchcomb, Gloucestershire, who compiled a book of sermons for the feast days, recorded how St. John's Eve was celebrated in his time:
Runners are rewarded with beer, and police are on hand in case any "puritans" attempt to interfere with the naked run.
On that day in big Polish cities (like Warsaw and Kraków) there are many organized events, the most popular event being in Kraków, called the ''Wianki,'' which means wreaths.
Many music festivals of all sizes are organized on the Midsummer weekend.
Earlier it was always on June 24.
Starting in 1963, people have also carried a small plastic hammer which they use to bang their neighbors over the head.
A solstitial celebration is held on Casper Mountain at Crimson Dawn park.
Finnish Canadians in the New Finland district, Saskatchewan, Canada celebrate Juhannus.
Especially in northern Poland – the Eastern Pomeranian and Kashubian regions – midsummer is celebrated on June 23.
On the same day the Eastern Orthodox church celebrates the day of John the Baptist and the rites and traditions of both holidays are often mixed.
Although the Arab historian Ibn Rusta speaks of the Hungarians' fire worshipping, so far there is no data that could connect it to this day.
Today, however, ''Sankthansaften'' is largely regarded as a secular or even pre-Christian event.
In the western town of Kuldīga, revellers mark the holiday by running naked through the town at three in the morning.
Mirk adds that at the time of his writing, "...in worship of St John the Baptist, men stay up at night and make three kinds of fires: one is of clean bones and no wood and is called a "bonnefyre"; another is of clean wood and no bones, and is called a ''wakefyre'', because men stay awake by it all night; and the third is made of both bones and wood and is called, "St. John's fire" (Festial 182)."
Swedish-speaking Finns often celebrate by erecting a midsummer or maypole (Swedish ''midsommarstång'', ''majstång'').
In some areas, bonfires are traditionally named ''tequeos'', which means people of the dance.
People dress in traditional Polka dress, and girls throw wreaths made of flowers into the Baltic Sea, and into lakes or rivers.
For instance, up until 1840, there was a pilgrimage to the Røldal Stave Church in Røldal (southwest Norway) whose crucifix was said to have healing powers.
This practice is mentioned as early as the 16th century, although at that time in connection with a wedding; still, it is called "Midsummer Night fire".
These are customs brought from pagan culture and beliefs.
Jaanipäev is usually spent in a summer cottage, where people light bonfires, or at a festival, such as Pühajärve Jaanituli in Otepää.
Occasionally, a dummy is placed at the top, representing a witch or the devil.
The celebration of Midsummer's Eve (St. John's Eve among Christians) was from ancient times a festival of the summer solstice.
In the 1920s, a tradition of putting a witch made of straw and cloth (probably made by the elder women of the family) on the bonfire emerged as a remembrance of the church's witch burnings from 1540 to 1693.
It is also said that, if a girl puts flowers under her pillow that night, she will dream of her future husband.
Bonfires were lit to protect against evil spirits which were believed to roam freely when the sun was turning southward again.
The Seattle neighborhood of Fremont puts on a large Summer Solstice Parade and Pageant, which for many years has controversially included painted naked cyclists.
The traditions include singing songs and dancing until the sun sets, telling tales, searching to find the magic fern blossom at midnight, jumping over bonfires, greeting the rising midsummer sun and washing the face with a morning dew, young girls float flower wreaths on the water of river or lake.
Lighted castle ruins also erupt with fireworks during the 90-minute cruise downstream.
In Neo-druidism, the term ''Alban Hefin'' is used for the summer solstice.
In Shoreland, The Fire Department holds a "Summerfest" with rides, games, and live music on the Saturday of Midsummer.
It's believed that if the one who walks is strong in faith, he shall not be hurt.
Midsummer, or '''Litha''', is part of the reconstructed Germanic calendar used by some Germanic Neopagans.
In 1925, June 24 became a legal holiday in Quebec and in 1977, it became the secular National Holiday of Quebec.
Many towns and cities have 'Midsummer Carnivals' with fairs, concerts and fireworks either on or on the weekend nearest to Midsummer.
Council of Nürnberg town neither can nor ought to forbear to do away with all such unbecoming superstition, paganism, and peril of fire on this coming day of St.
Bonfires are still a custom in many areas of Germany.
The latter Christian tradition is based on the reverence of Saint John.
In Lisbon, in Avenida da Liberdade, there are the ''Marchas'', a parade of folklore and costumes of the inhabitants from the city's different traditional quarters, with hundreds of singers and dancers and a vast audience applauding their favorite participants.
Greenery placed over houses and barns were supposed to bring good fortune and health to people and livestock; this old tradition of decorating with greens continues, even though most don't take it seriously.
June 24, Midsummer Day, the feast of St. John the Baptist, is one of the quarter days in England.
In later years, witches were also thought to be on their way to meetings with other powerful beings.
The streets are decorated with balloons and arches made out of brightly colored paper; people dance in the city's small squares, and altars, dedicated to the saints, are put up as a way of asking for good fortune.
The traditions are derived from Tengriism, the ancient sun religion of the region which has since been driven out by the Russian empire, Russian Orthodox Church and finally the Communist Party.
The church fathers decided to put a stop to these practices and ordained that people should fast on the evening before, and thus turned waking into fasting.
Understandably, some of the rituals of Jaanipäev have very strong folkloric roots.
It is a tradition for people to become Godfathers and blood brothers on this day, as John is a symbol of character and rectitude.
These are commemorated by many Christian denominations.
In most others, they are dipped in a vessel with water and left outside exposed to the dew of night until the following morning (o dia de San Xoan -St. John's day), when people use the resulting flower water to wash their faces.
Young and old gather around them and feast mostly on pilchards, potatoes boiled in their skins and maize bread.
Up to 30 ships sail down the river in line as fireworks erupt from the banks and hill tops while bonfires blaze and the vineyards are lit up.
Some Danes regard the relatively new symbolic witch burning as inappropriate.
The event features a walk through a giant labyrinth, musicians, healers, ceremony, etc.
Midsummer is also sprung from pagan rites, it has a lot to do with Freyja and Freyr which has a phallic symbol, and during the Viking age there were rituals centered around this, as a worshipping of fertility and a rich harvest, which is the older meaning of the celebration and the German merchant influence has very little to do with it overall.
It still is the tradition to light great fires on the night of the 24th of June.
Other researchers say the term came from German merchants who raised the maypole in June because the Swedish climate made it impossible to find the necessary greens and flowers in May, and continued to call it a maypole.
The Estonian flag is not lowered in the night between these two days.
Midsummer tradition is also especially strong in northern areas of the country, such as Galicia, Asturias and Cantabria where one can easily identify the rituals that reveal the pagan beliefs widespread throughout Europe in Neolithic times.
Traditionally  (Finnish Oven Baked Pancake) and strawberry shortcake is enjoyed followed by a bonfire or ''''.
On Jaaniõhtu, Estonians all around the country will gather with their families, or at larger events to celebrate this important day with singing and dancing, as Estonians have done for centuries.
Midsummer's Eve is a de facto public holiday in Sweden with offices and many shops closed.
Among traditions are that girls watch the sunrise through their wreath, to become red as the sun, towards the evening in the heights, ''Ivanjske vatre'' (kresovi, ''bonfire'') are lit, and dancing and singing takes place.
Most significant among the customs of the summer is lighting the fire of Midsummer Night ('''') on the day of St. John (June 24), when the sun follows the highest course, when the nights are the shortest and the days the longest.
on the shores of lakes and other waterways, parks, etc.)
In the old days, maidens would use special charms and bend over a well, naked, in order to see their future husband’s reflection.
Each neighborhood has its own festival and colors for identification.
In folk magic, midsummer was a very potent night and the time for many small rituals, mostly for young maidens seeking suitors and fertility.
Many of the celebrations of midsummer take place on midsummer eve, when many workplaces are closed and shops may close their doors at noon.
The herbs gathered for the winter must be 77 and a half – for all diseases and for the nameless disease.
In late 14th-century England, John Mirk of Lilleshall Abbey, Shropshire, gives the following description: "At first, men and women came to church with candles and other lights and prayed all night long.
He complained about those who went to church, but did not enter, and instead spent their time lighting bonfires, drinking, dancing, singing and following pagan rituals.
In the 21st century, younger population although participating strongly in this festival, now use contemporary ways to celebrate it, such as the very popular ''Saint Peter raves'' in the waterfront.
So, the bigger the fire, the further the mischievous spirits stayed away.
Let us speak of the revels which are accustomed to be made on St. John's Eve, of which there are three kinds.
In another tradition that continues still today, an unmarried woman collects seven different flowers and places them under her pillow to dream of her future husband.
In most places, the main event is the burning of a large bonfire.
It takes place on May 30 and May 31.
Jāņi has been a strong aspect of Latvian culture throughout history, originating in pre-Christian Latvia as an ancient fertility cult.
These holidays are days of festivities with good food and refreshments, people eat Caldo verde (cabbage and potato soup), Sardinha Assada (grilled sardines), bread and drink red wine and água-pé (grape juice with a small percentage of alcohol).
Lithuanians with the names Jonas, Jonė, Janina receive many greetings from their family, relatives and friends.
In the 7th century, Saint Eligius (died 659/60) warned the recently converted inhabitants of Flanders against the age-old pagan solstice celebrations.
was founded in 1900 by Finnish immigrants.
In 1578, Balthasar Russow wrote in his Livonian Chronicle about Estonians who placed more importance on the festival than going to church.
