It was said that Don King and others saw former champion Holyfield, who was 34 at the time of the fight and a huge underdog, as a washed-up fighter.
This made him the first heavyweight boxer to simultaneously hold the WBA, WBC, and IBF titles, and the only heavyweight to successively unify them.
These comments were then reprinted on the Daily Caller website.
As most state athletic commissions honor sanctions imposed by other states, this effectively made Tyson unable to box in the United States.
I don't deserve to have the wife that I have; I don't deserve the kids that I have, but I do, and I'm very grateful."
After being stripped of the WBC title in the same year, Tyson lost the WBA title to Evander Holyfield by an eleventh-round stoppage.
Kirkpatrick died in 1992.
Due to his conviction, Tyson is required to register as a ''tier II'' sex offender under federal law.
Their infamous 1997 rematch ended when Tyson was disqualified for biting Holyfield's ears.
Tyson was convicted on the rape charge on February 10, 1992 after the jury deliberated for nearly 10 hours.
The rationale offered for the revised outcome was that the fight was actually stopped because Ferguson could not (rather than would not) continue boxing.
In August 2013, Tyson teamed up with Acquinity Interactive CEO Garry Jonas to form Iron Mike Productions, a boxing promotions company, formerly known as Acquinity Sports.
He fought Henry Tillman twice as an amateur, losing both bouts by decision.
Tyson regained one belt by easily winning the WBC title from Frank Bruno in March 1996.
16 on ''Ring Magazine'''s 2003 list of 100 greatest punchers of all time.
As of May, 2016, he is so registered, as Michael Tyson, in Henderson, Nevada.
In 1959, Jimmy Kirkpatrick left his family and moved to Brooklyn, where he met Tyson's mother, Lorna Mae (Smith) Tyson.
Journalist Greta van Susteren criticized Tyson and the Daily Caller over the comments, which she described as "smut" and "violence against women".
One bite was severe enough to remove a piece of Holyfield's right ear, which was found on the ring floor after the fight.
During the sixth round, Ferguson began to hold and clinch Tyson in an apparent attempt to avoid further punishment.
Ruddock was seen as the most dangerous heavyweight around and was thought of as one of the hardest punching heavyweights.
It was the second fight between the two, and Tyson knocked Bruno out in the third round.
He faced the popular British boxer Frank Bruno in February.
Mike Tyson was born in 1966.
The result was later changed to no contest after Tyson refused to take a pre-fight drug test and then tested positive for marijuana in a post-fight urine test.
Consequently, the bout was ruled a no contest.
Tyson was well known for his ferocious and intimidating boxing style as well as his controversial behavior inside and outside the ring.
On December 29, 2006, Tyson was arrested in Scottsdale, Arizona, on suspicion of DUI and felony drug possession; he nearly crashed into a police SUV shortly after leaving a nightclub.
Turner filed for divorce from Tyson in January 2002, claiming that he committed adultery during their five-year marriage, an act that "has neither been forgiven nor condoned."
Tyson was a huge betting favorite; indeed, the Mirage, the only casino to put out odds for the fight, made Tyson a 42/1 favorite.
On September 24, 2007, Mike Tyson pleaded guilty to possession of cocaine and driving under the influence.
But I have an awesome life, I have an awesome wife who cares about me.
Novelist and commentator Katherine Dunn wrote a column that criticized Holyfield's sportsmanship in the controversial bout and charged the news media with being biased against Tyson.
Fighting frequently, Tyson won 26 of his first 28 fights by KO or TKO; 16 of those came in the first round.
Botha was ahead on points on all scorecards and was confident enough to mock Tyson as the fight continued.
The book received positive reviews and claimed the fight was essentially the beginning of the end of boxing's popularity in mainstream sports.
As such, Tyson has appeared in myriad popular media in cameo appearances in film and television.
Tyson, without headgear at 5&nbsp;ft 10.5&nbsp;in and 216 pounds, was in great shape, but far from his prime against Sanders, with headgear at 6&nbsp;ft 8&nbsp;in and 293 pounds, a loser of his last seven pro bouts and nearly blind from a detached retina in his left eye.
I'm really embarrassed with myself and my life.
According to an interview in ''Details'', his first fight was with a bigger youth who had pulled the head off one of Tyson's pigeons.
Tyson successfully defended the world heavyweight championship nine times, including victories over Larry Holmes and Frank Bruno.
On August 1 he took the International Boxing Federation (IBF) title from Tony Tucker in a twelve round unanimous decision.
After multiple states balked at granting Tyson a license, the fight eventually occurred on June 8 at the Pyramid Arena in Memphis, Tennessee.
Published in 2007, author Joe Layden's book ''The Last Great Fight: The Extraordinary Tale of Two Men and How One Fight Changed Their Lives Forever'', chronicled the lives of Tyson and Douglas before and after their heavyweight championship fight.
However, Spinks did become the lineal champion by beating Holmes and many (including ''Ring'' magazine) considered him to have a legitimate claim to being the true heavyweight champion.
Tyson appeared to be "holding back" in these exhibitions to prevent an early end to the "show".
In another Memphis fight on February 22, 2003, Tyson beat fringe contender Clifford Etienne 49 seconds into round one.
He continued: "I just want to escape.
He has also been featured in video games and as a subject of parody or satire.
The Blackstreet single "Booti Call" was written about Tyson's rape trial and conviction.
The quality of his opponents gradually increased to journeyman fighters and borderline contenders, like James Tillis, David Jaco, Jesse Ferguson, Mitch Green and Marvis Frazier.
After witnessing one of Tyson's fights, Nintendo of America president Minoru Arakawa was impressed by the fighter's "power and skill", prompting him to suggest Tyson be included in the upcoming Nintendo Entertainment System port of the ''Punch Out
In 2002, Tyson fought for the world heavyweight title at the age of 35, losing by knockout to Lennox Lewis.
On July 30, 2004, Tyson faced British boxer Danny Williams in another comeback fight, this time staged in Louisville, Kentucky.
During this time, Tyson came to the attention of gaming company Nintendo.
He served nine months of that sentence.
Tyson, who was the number one contender, faced number two contender Donovan "Razor" Ruddock on March 18, 1991, in Las Vegas.
According to Douglas Quenqua of ''The New York Times'', "The 1990s began with Mike Tyson, considered by many to be the last great heavyweight champion, losing his title to the little-known Buster Douglas.
He won the WBC and WBA titles in 1996, after defeating Frank Bruno and Bruce Seldon by knockout.
With Donnie Yen reprising his role as the titular character, Bruce Lee's martial arts master, Ip Man, while Mike Tyson has been confirmed to join the cast.
He held the undisputed heavyweight championship and holds the record as the youngest boxer to win the WBA, WBC, and IBF heavyweight titles at 20 years, 4 months, and 22 days old.
Tyson knocked down Ferguson with an uppercut in the fifth round that broke Ferguson's nose.
Lorenzo Boyd, Jesse Ferguson and Jose Ribalta were among the boxers knocked down by the combination.
The highly anticipated rematch was dubbed ''The Sound and the Fury'', and it was held at the Las Vegas MGM Grand Garden Arena, site of the first bout.
In March 2011, Tyson appeared on ''The Ellen DeGeneres Show'' to discuss his new Animal Planet reality series, ''Taking on Tyson.''
Alan Dershowitz, acting as Tyson's counsel, filed an appeal urging error of law in the Court's exclusion of evidence of the victim's past sexual conduct, the exclusion of three potential defense witnesses, and the lack of a jury instruction on honest and reasonable mistake of fact.
His first marriage was to actress Robin Givens, from February 7, 1988 to February 14, 1989.
During this time, Tyson was also an unofficial member of D-Generation X. Tyson was paid $3&nbsp;million for being guest enforcer of the match at WrestleMania XIV.
Rooney eventually took over all training duties for the young fighter.
Seldon was severely criticized and mocked in the popular press for seemingly collapsing to innocuous punches from Tyson.
In September 2011, Tyson gave an interview in which he made comments about former Alaska governor Sarah Palin that included crude and violent descriptions of interracial sex.
Now I can go out and really have fun.".
In an interview with ''USA Today'' published on June 3, 2005, Tyson said, "My whole life has been a waste&nbsp;– I've been a failure."
Despite criticism of facing underwhelming competition during his run as champion, Tyson's knockout power and intimidation factor made him the sport's most dynamic box office attraction.
He has fathered seven children, one deceased, by three women;  in addition to his biological children, Tyson includes the oldest daughter of his second wife as one of his own.
Tyson made his professional debut as an 18-year-old on March 6, 1985, in Albany, New York.
In 1989, Tyson had only two fights amid personal turmoil.
He failed to find a way past Douglas's quick jab that had a  reach advantage over his own.
He holds the Junior Olympic record for quickest knockout (8 seconds).
He was convicted of these charges in November 2007 and sentenced to 24 hours in jail, 360 hours community service and 3 years probation.
Norris injured his knee when he went down and said he was unable to continue the fight.
The fight ended after 91 seconds when Tyson knocked Spinks out in the first round; many consider this to be the pinnacle of Tyson's fame and boxing ability.
Tyson and Holyfield fought again on June 28, 1997.
Tyson received $30&nbsp;million and Holyfield $35&nbsp;million, the highest paid professional boxing purses until 2007.
In 1987, Tyson added the WBA and IBF titles after defeating James Smith and Tony Tucker.
Tyson has held entertainment boxing shows at a casino in Las Vegas and started a tour of exhibition bouts to pay off his numerous debts.
In late 1988, Tyson parted with manager Bill Cayton and fired longtime trainer Kevin Rooney, the man many credit for honing Tyson's craft after the death of D'Amato.
This was Tyson's fifth career defeat.
He also fought Lou Savarese in June 2000 in Glasgow, winning in the first round; the fight lasted only 38 seconds.
Kirkpatrick abandoned the Tyson family around the time Mike was born, leaving Tyson's mother to care for the children on her own.
Tyson knocked down Norris with a left hook thrown after the bell sounded to end the first round.
Partial corroboration of Washington's story came via testimony from Tyson's chauffeur, Virginia Foster, who confirmed Desiree Washington's state of shock.
Tyson was roundly condemned in the news media but was not without defenders.
Tyson's first nationally televised bout took place on February 16, 1986, at Houston Field House in Troy, New York against journeyman heavyweight Jesse Ferguson.
I had a lot of fun.
Originally, Halpern was supposed to be the referee, but after Tyson's camp protested, Halpern stepped aside in favor of Mills Lane.
When Tyson fired everyone working for him and got new accountants in 2000, they prepared a statement showing he started the year $3.3 million in the hole but made $65.7 million.
Kevin Rooney also trained Tyson, and he was occasionally assisted by Teddy Atlas, although Atlas was dismissed by D'Amato when Tyson was 15.
'''Michael Gerard''' "'''Mike'''" '''Tyson''' (; born June 30, 1966), also known as '''Malik Abdul Aziz''', is an American former professional boxer who competed from 1985 to 2005.
Holmes had previously given up all but the IBF title, and that was eventually stripped from Spinks after he elected to fight Gerry Cooney (winning by a 5th-round TKO) rather than IBF Number 1 Contender Tony Tucker, as the Cooney fight provided him a larger purse.
After the loss, Tyson recovered with first-round knockouts of Henry Tillman and Alex Stewart in his next two fights.
However, after the match resumed, Tyson did it again; Tyson was disqualified and Holyfield won the match.
In the confusion that followed the ending of the bout and announcement of the decision, a near riot erupted in the arena and several people were injured.
During their marriage, the couple lived in a mansion in Bernardsville, New Jersey.
Having joined Tyson in his limousine, Washington testified that Tyson made sexual advances towards her.
In August 2007, Tyson pleaded guilty to drug possession and driving under the influence in an Arizona court, which stemmed from an arrest in December where authorities said Tyson, who has a long history of legal problems, admitted to using cocaine that day and to being addicted to the drug.
Tyson pleaded not guilty on January 22, 2007 in Maricopa County Superior Court to felony drug possession and paraphernalia possession counts and two misdemeanor counts of driving under the influence of drugs.
Tyson then knocked out Carl "The Truth" Williams in one round in July.
The knockout victory by Douglas over Tyson, the previously undefeated "baddest man on the planet" and arguably the most feared boxer in professional boxing at that time, has been described as one of the most shocking upsets in modern sports history.
Just 35 seconds into the 10th round, Douglas unleashed a brutal uppercut, followed by a four-punch combination of hooks that sent Tyson to the canvas for the first time in his career.
Tyson attempted to defend the WBA title against Evander Holyfield, who was in the fourth fight of his own comeback.
To help pay off his debts, Tyson returned to the ring in 2006 for a series of four-round exhibitions against journeyman heavyweight Corey "T-Rex" Sanders in Youngstown, Ohio.
In February 2013, Tyson took his one-man show ''Mike Tyson: Undisputed Truth'' on a 36-city, three-month national tour.
Throughout his childhood, Tyson lived in and around high-crime neighborhoods.
The film was directed by James Toback and has interviews with Tyson and clips of his fights and from his personal life.
Sky Sports rated him as "the scariest boxer ever" and described him as "perhaps the most ferocious fighter to step into a professional ring."
The couple had two children; son Amir, and daughter Rayna.
Brown's corner threw in the towel in the first round.
These bouts set up an elimination match for another shot at the undisputed world heavyweight championship, which Evander Holyfield had taken from Douglas in his first defense of the title.
The 89-second fight elicited criticism that Tyson's management lined up "tomato cans" to ensure easy victories for his return.
On November 22, 1986, Tyson was given his first title fight against Trevor Berbick for the World Boxing Council (WBC) heavyweight championship.
Tyson was repeatedly caught committing petty crimes and fighting those who ridiculed his high-pitched voice and lisp.
Tyson has stayed in the limelight by promoting various websites and companies.
Tyson insisted he hadn't altered the style that made him a world champion.
He won the WBC title in 1986 after stopping Trevor Berbick in two rounds.
Tyson sought to fight Lewis in Nevada for a more lucrative box-office venue, but the Nevada Boxing Commission refused him a license to box as he was facing possible sexual assault charges at the time.
Kirkpatrick was from Grier Town, North Carolina (a predominantly black neighborhood that was annexed by the city of Charlotte), where he was one of the neighborhood's top baseball players.
Tyson and Ruddock met again on June 28 that year, with Tyson knocking down Ruddock twice and winning a 12 round unanimous decision.
He became the first heavyweight to own all three major belts&nbsp;– WBA, WBC, and IBF&nbsp;– at the same time.
Tyson resides in Seven Hills, Nevada.
Because of Tyson's strength, many fighters were intimidated by him.
A fight between Tyson and Holyfield for the undisputed championship was scheduled for November 8, 1991 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, but Tyson pulled out after sustaining a rib cartilage injury during training.
I never got a chance to talk to her or know about her.
I want to get this part of my life over as soon as possible.
Referee Mills Lane deducted two points from Tyson and the fight resumed.
He is the titular character in ''Mike Tyson Mysteries'', which started airing on October 27, 2014 on Adult Swim.
Holding his hands high in the Peek-a-Boo style taught by his mentor Cus D'Amato, he slipped and weaved out of the way of the opponent's punches while closing the distance to deliver his own punches.
Alternative locations were discussed, but the fight ultimately failed to happen.
Legal problems caught up with Tyson once again.
Some said that he took time out from training to party in Las Vegas and get a new facial tattoo.
The third round was even, with Williams getting in some clean blows and also a few illegal ones, for which he was penalized.
In the fourth round, Tyson was unexpectedly knocked out.
Two days after the fight, Tyson issued a statement, apologizing to Holyfield for his actions and asked not to be banned for life over the incident.
The fight was initially ruled a win for Tyson by disqualification (DQ) of his opponent.
Lennox Lewis held the WBC, IBF, IBO and Lineal titles at the time.
I'm not going to be depressed", explained Tyson about the reasons for his "comeback".
Tyson is played by Michael Jai White.
A month later, Givens announced that she was seeking a divorce from the allegedly abusive Tyson.
The first time Tyson bit him, the match was temporarily stopped.
The remarks included the statement "I want your heart, I want to eat your children."
Tyson's victory over Tillman, the 1984 Olympic heavyweight gold medalist, enabled Tyson to avenge his amateur losses at Tillman's hands.
He was counted out by referee Octavio Meyran.
Soon to become one of the most controversial events in modern sports, the fight was stopped at the end of the third round, with Tyson disqualified for biting Holyfield on both ears.
He underwent surgery for the ligament four days after the fight.
''TV Guide'' included the Tyson-McNeeley fight in their list of the 50 Greatest TV Sports Moments of All Time in 1998.
According to a police probable-cause statement, filed in Maricopa County Superior Court, "Tyson admitted to using drugs today and stated he is an addict and has a problem."
No charges were filed.
On June 12, 2011, Tyson was inducted to the International Boxing Hall of Fame alongside legendary Mexican champion Julio César Chávez, light welterweight champion Kostya Tszyu, and actor/screenwriter Sylvester Stallone.
Tyson declared bankruptcy in 2003, despite having received over $30&nbsp;million for several of his fights and $300&nbsp;million during his career.
During this period, Tyson's problems outside boxing were also starting to emerge.
After his release in 1995, he engaged in a series of comeback fights.
Tyson's dominant performance brought many accolades.
Kirkpatrick married and had a son, Tyson's half-brother Jimmie Lee Kirkpatrick, who would help to integrate Charlotte high school football in 1965.
(After the fight, the Tyson camp would complain that the count was slow and that Douglas had taken longer than ten seconds to get to his feet.)
Tyson and Ruddock went back and forth for most of the fight, until referee Richard Steele controversially stopped the fight during the seventh round in favor of Tyson.
Matters came to a head when Tyson and Givens gave a joint interview with Barbara Walters on the ABC TV newsmagazine show ''20/20'' in September 1988, in which Givens described life with Tyson as "torture, pure hell, worse than anything I could possibly imagine."
Tyson's marriage to Givens was especially tumultuous, with allegations of violence, spousal abuse and mental instability on Tyson's part.
A 1998 ranking of "The Greatest Heavyweights of All-Time" by ''Ring'' magazine placed Tyson at No.14 on the list.
In 1992, Tyson was convicted of rape and sentenced to six years in prison, but was released after serving three years.
Tyson talks about his personal and professional life on stage.
In the interview with DeGeneres, Tyson discussed some of the ways he had improved his life in the past two years, including sober living and a vegan diet.
In September 2013, Tyson was featured on a six-episode television series on Fox Sports 1 that documented his personal and private life entitled "Being Mike Tyson".
The Felice Brothers, a folk-rock band from Upstate New York, released a song on their 2011 album ''Celebration, Florida'' titled "Cus's Catskill Gym".
Another fight, in October of that year, ended with a victory for Tyson over 1984 Olympic super heavyweight gold medalist Tyrell Biggs by knockout in the seventh round.
The referee had to be escorted from the ring.
In October 2012, Tyson launched the Mike Tyson Cares Foundation.
At the height of his fame and career in the late 1980s and throughout the 1990s, Tyson was one of the most recognized sports personalities in the world.
In 1988, Tyson became the lineal champion when he knocked out Michael Spinks in 91 seconds of the first round.
On June 27, 1988, Tyson faced Michael Spinks.
Tillman went on to win heavyweight gold at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles.
In 2003, amid all his economic troubles, he was named by ''The Ring'' at number 16, right behind Sonny Liston, among the 100 greatest punchers of all time.
Hakeem Olajuwon claims that during his incarceration, Tyson converted to Islam.
Spinks, who had taken the heavyweight championship from Larry Holmes via a 15-round decision in 1985, had not lost his title in the ring but was not recognized as champion by the major boxing organizations.
While on the American talk show ''The View'' in early May 2010, Tyson revealed that he is now forced to live paycheck to paycheck.
Contrary to reports that Tyson was out of shape, it has been noted at the time of the fight that he had pronounced muscles, an absence of body fat and weighed 220 and 1/2 pounds, only two pounds more than he had weighed when he beat Michael Spinks 20 months earlier.
However, in August 2013 he admitted publicly that he had lied about his sobriety and was on the verge of death from alcoholism.
Tyson won the title by second round TKO, and at the age of 20 years and 4 months became the youngest heavyweight champion in history.
Tyson was respectful after the fight and praised Lewis on his victory.
His marriage to Robin Givens was heading for divorce, and his future contract was being fought over by Don King and Bill Cayton.
On January 22, 2002, the two boxers and their entourages were involved in a brawl at a New York press conference to publicize the planned event.
In March, Tyson then fought contender Tony Tubbs in Tokyo, Japan, fitting in an easy two-round victory amid promotional and marketing work.
"My father was just a regular street guy caught up in the street world", Tyson said.
On November 9, 1996, in Las Vegas, Nevada, Tyson faced Holyfield in a title bout dubbed "Finally."
He has been inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame and the World Boxing Hall of Fame.
1 in the ESPN.com list of "The hardest hitters in heavyweight history".
A few weeks later, the Nevada State Athletic Commission refused to grant Tyson a license for the fight, forcing the promoters to make alternative arrangements.
Tyson continued punching after the referee had stopped the fight, knocking the referee to the floor as he tried to separate the boxers.
Two years prior to the bout, Tyson had made several inflammatory remarks to Lewis in an interview following the Savarese fight.
He faced Larry Holmes on January 22, 1988, and defeated the legendary former champion by a fourth round KO.
Tyson has been diagnosed with bipolar disorder.
