Bakunin played a leading role in the May Uprising in Dresden in 1849, helping to organize the defense of the barricades against Prussian troops with Richard Wagner and Wilhelm Heine.
Following the death of Nicholas I, the new Tsar, Alexander II personally struck Bakunin's name off the amnesty list.
While Bakunin rebuked Nechayev upon discovery of his duplicity as well as his amoral politics, he did retain a streak of ruthlessness, as indicated by a 2 June 1870 letter: "Lies, cunning and entanglement are a necessary and marvelous means for demoralising and destroying the enemy, though ''certainly not'' a useful means of obtaining and attracting new friends."
Richard Wagner writes in his autobiography about Bakunin's visit:
Bakunin grew up in Pryamukhino, a family estate in Tver Governorate, where he moved to study philosophy and began to read the French encyclopédistes, leading to enthusiasm for the philosophy of Fichte.
He was replaced by Korsakov, who perhaps was even more sympathetic to the plight of the Siberian exiles.
Taking Bakunin's word, Korsakov issued him with a letter giving him passage on all ships on the Amur River and its tributaries as long as he was back in Irkutsk when the ice came.
This same reason forbids me, then, to recognise a fixed, constant and universal authority, because there is no universal man, no man capable of grasping in all that wealth of detail, without which the application of science to life is impossible, all the sciences, all the branches of social life."
I do not content myself with consulting a single authority in any special branch; I consult several; I compare their opinions, and choose that which seems to me the soundest.
Collectivist anarchism advocates the abolition of both the state and private ownership of the means of production.
Much later in 1871 Bakunin was to write: "I must openly admit that in this controversy Marx and Engels were in the right.
Consequently, society would be organized "on the basis of the absolute freedom of individuals, of the productive associations, and of the communes," with "every individual, every association, every commune, every region, every nation" having "the absolute right to self-determination, to associate or not to associate, to ally themselves with whomever they wish."
Bakunin immediately went to London to see Herzen.
He broke with Marx over the latter's criticism of Herwegh.
They seceded from the League establishing their own International Alliance of Socialist Democracy which adopted a revolutionary socialist program.
His name had appeared frequently in Weitling's correspondence seized by the police.
The Paris Commune closely corresponded to many elements of Bakunin's anarchist programme – self-management, mandates delegates, a militia system with elected officers, and decentralisation.
The dispute between Mikhail Bakunin and Karl Marx highlighted the differences between anarchism and Marxism.
It was here that he first began to develop his anarchist ideas.
For Bakunin, the fundamental contradiction is that for the Marxists, "anarchism or freedom is the aim, while the state and dictatorship is the means, and so, in order to free the masses, they have first to be enslaved."
In August 1858 Bakunin received a visit from his second cousin, General Count Nikolay Muravyov-Amursky, who had been governor of Eastern Siberia for ten years.
In 1840, Bakunin traveled to St. Petersburg and Berlin with the intention of preparing himself for a professorship in philosophy or history at the University of Moscow.
However, at a time when unions largely ignored the unskilled, Bakunin placed great emphasis on the need to organize as well amongst "the rabble," "the great masses of the poor and exploited, the so-called "lumpenproletariat," to "inaugurate and bring to triumph the Social Revolution."
Bakunin argued that the "State has always been the patrimony of some privileged class: a priestly class, an aristocratic class, a bourgeois class.
Bakunin was also criticized by Marx and the delegates of the International specifically because his methods of organization were similar to those of Sergey Nechayev, with whom Bakunin was closely associated.
I have only the honor and the conscience that I have never betrayed anyone who has confided in me, and this is why I will not give you any names."
This led to reports being circulated to the imperial police.
In the period before the transcontinental railroads had been completed, the quickest way to New York was via Panama.
Bakunin's attempt to draw Alexander Herzen and Vissarion Belinsky into conspiratorial action for revolution in Russia fell on deaf ears.
In a positive sense, liberty consists of "the fullest development of all the faculties and powers of every human being, by education, by scientific training, and by material prosperity."
In 1870, he was involved in an insurrection in Lyon, France, which foreshadowed the Paris Commune.
In the matter of boots, I refer to the authority of the bootmaker; concerning houses, canals, or railroads, I consult that of the architect or the engineer.
In the spring of 1814, Mikhail Alexandrovich Bakunin "was born to a noble family of only modest means" – the family owned 500 serfs – in the village of Pryamukhino (Прямухино), between Torzhok and Kuvshinovo, in Tver Governorate, northwest of Moscow.
Anarchists believe that the classless, stateless society should be established by the direct action of the masses, culminating in social revolution, and refuse any intermediate stage such as the dictatorship of the proletariat, on the basis that such a dictatorship will become a self-perpetuating fundament.
For the collectivization of the means of production, it was originally envisaged that workers will revolt and forcibly collectivize the means of production.
Bakunin remained, however, a direct participant in struggles.
''God and the State'' was translated multiple times by other anarchists, such as Benjamin Tucker, Marie Le Compte, and Emma Goldman, and he continues to be an influence on modern-day anarchists, such as Noam Chomsky.
In 1860, while still in Irkutsk Bakunin and his political associates had been greatly impressed by Giuseppe Garibaldi and his expedition to Sicily, during which he declared himself dictator in the name of Victor Emmanuel II.
Bakunin tired of his job as a commercial traveller, but thanks to Muravyov's influence, was able to keep his sinecure (worth 2,000 roubles a year) without having to perform any duties.
Therefore, Bakunin considers religion as necessarily authoritarian.
This approach was exemplified by syndicalism, an anarchist strategy championed by Bakunin, according to which trade unions would provide both the means to defend and improve workers' conditions, rights and incomes in the present, and the basis for a social revolution based upon workplace occupations.
He remained active in the worker's and peasant's movements of Europe and was also a major influence on movements in Egypt and Latin America.
Others note, moreover, that Bakunin never sought to take personal control of the International, that his secret organisations were not subject to his autocratic power, and that he condemned terrorism as counter-revolutionary.
Finally, in May 1851, Bakunin was handed over to the Russian authorities.
Once collectivization takes place, money would be abolished to be replaced with labour notes and workers' salaries would be determined in democratic organizations based on job difficulty and the amount of time they contributed to production.
He supported freedom of association and the right of secession for each unit of the federation, but emphasized that this freedom must be joined with socialism for: "Liberty without socialism is privilege, injustice; socialism without liberty is slavery and brutality.
In turn Marx wrote of the rebels in the Dresden insurrection of 1848 that "In the Russian refugee Michael Bakunin they found a capable and cool headed leader."
The script of Bakunin's dialectic, Cutler argues, gave the Alliance the purpose of providing the International with a real revolutionary organisation.
During this period he met slavophile Konstantin Aksakov, Piotr Tschaadaev and the socialists Alexander Herzen and Nikolay Ogarev.
Lelewel greatly influenced him; however, he clashed with the Polish nationalists over their demand for a historic Poland based on the borders of 1776 (before the Partitions of Poland) as he defended the right of autonomy for the non-Polish peoples in these territories.
Bakunin obtained funding from some socialists in the Provisional Government, Ferdinand Flocon, Louis Blanc, Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin and Alexandre Martin, for a project for a Slav federation liberating those under the rule of Prussia, Austro-Hungary and Ottoman Empire.
He remained there until 1857, when he was exiled to a work camp in Siberia.
His stated plan at the time was still to become a university professor (a “priest of truth,” as he and his friends imagined it), but he soon encountered and joined students of the Young Hegelians and the socialist movement in Berlin.
They planned to sail across the Baltic in the SS ''Ward Jackson'' to join the insurrection.
Charles A. Madison claimed that:  Madison contended that it was Bakunin's scheming for control of the First International that brought about his rivalry with Karl Marx and his expulsion from it in 1872.
In 1842, Bakunin moved from Berlin to Dresden.
Later, another commemorative plate was added, showing the following Bakunin's quote: "By striving to do the impossible, man has always achieved what is possible".
Anarchists like Élisée Reclus, and those in the tradition of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon – who had greatly influenced Bakunin – were key figures in the Commune.
In December 1844, Emperor Nicholas issued a decree that stripped Bakunin of his privileges as a noble, confiscated his land in Russia, and condemned him to lifelong exile in Siberia.
Until 1848 he remained on friendly terms with the German communists, occasionally calling himself a communist and writing articles on communism in the ''Schweitzerische Republikaner''.
That led to his embrace of Hegelianism, bedazzled by Hegel's famous maxim, "Everything that exists is rational."
At the Bern Congress of the League (1868) he and other socialists (Élisée Reclus, Aristide Rey, Jaclard, Giuseppe Fanelli, N. Joukovsky, V. Mratchkovsky and others) found themselves in a minority.
Religious people are in many cases obedient to the priests, because many religious people believe that the statements of priests are based on direct divine revelation or scripture.
After long wrangles with his father, Bakunin went to Berlin in 1840.
Thompson, Neil Postman, and A.S. Neill, down to the anarchists gathered these days under the banner of 'anti-globalization.'"
Meanwhile, the peasants were to "take the land and throw out those landlords who live by the labor of others."
Marx wrote to Engels of meeting Bakunin in 1864 after his escape to Siberia saying "On the whole he is one of the few people whom I find not to have retrogressed after 16 years, but to have developed further."
While in Barcelona again, he met with painter Josep Lluís Pellicer and his cousin, Rafael Farga Pellicer along with others who were to play an important role establishing the International in Barcelona, as well as the Alliance section.
Korsakov was also related to Bakunin, Bakunin's brother Paul having married his cousin.
In his 1842 essay "The Reaction in Germany", he argued in favor of the revolutionary role of negation, summed up in the phrase "the passion for destruction is a creative passion."
The Congress was followed by an abortive insurrection that Bakunin had sought to promote and intensify but which was violently suppressed.
With the collapse of those regimes – and growing awareness of how closely those regimes corresponded to the dictatorships Bakunin predicted – Bakunin's ideas have rapidly gained ground amongst activists, in some cases again overshadowing Marxism.
Thus, for Bakunin, the workers' unions would "take possession of all the tools of production as well as buildings and capital."
Bakunin did not dismiss the skilled workers, as is sometimes claimed; indeed, the watchmakers of the Jura region were central to the St. Imier International's creation and operations.
Significantly, Jews would always play a large and prominent role in the anarchist movement, among them Emma Goldman, Alexander Berkman, and Voline.
Bakunin argues that oppressors receive authority from religion.
According to Bakunin, the alternative for a religious power monopoly is the acknowledgement that all humans are equally inspired by God, but that means that multiple contradictory teachings are assigned to an infallible God, which is logically impossible.
Bakunin was an early proponent of the term "political theology" in his 1871 text "The Political Theology of Mazzini and the International" to which Schmitt's book was a response.
Consequently, Bakunin reversed Voltaire's famous aphorism that if God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent Him, writing instead that "if God really existed, it would be necessary to abolish Him."
In a negative sense, liberty is "the revolt of the individual against all divine, collective, and individual authority."
Fanellis trip and the meeting he organised during his travels provided the catalyst for the Spanish exiles, the largest workers' and peasants' movement in modern Spain and the largest Anarchist movement in modern Europe.
For such or such special knowledge I apply to such or such a savant.
As the revolutionary movement of 1848 broke out, Bakunin was ecstatic, despite disappointment that little was happening in Russia.
Bakunin's increasing radicalism – including staunch opposition to imperialism in east and central Europe by Russia and other powers – changed his life, putting an end to hopes of a professorial career.
He returned to Breslau, where Marx republished the allegation that Bakunin was an imperial agent, claiming that George Sand had proof.
His father was a career diplomat who, as a young attache, had lived for years in Florence and Naples.
In March 1846 in another letter to the ''Constitutionel'' he defended Poland, following the repression of Catholics there.
But I recognise no infallible authority, even in special questions; consequently, whatever respect I may have for the honesty and the sincerity of such or such individual, I have no absolute faith in any person."
Their influence would be ideological, and freely accepted:
Von Siebold's son wrote some 40 years later:
Political theology is a branch of both political philosophy and theology that investigates the ways in which theological concepts or ways of thinking underlie political, social, economic and cultural discourses.
Bakunin did not reduce the revolution to syndicalist unions, however, stressing the need to organize working-class neighborhoods, as well as the unemployed.
In 1849, Bakunin was apprehended in Dresden for his participation in the Czech rebellion of 1848, and turned over to Russia where he was imprisoned in the Peter-Paul Fortress in Saint Petersburg.
After three years in the underground dungeons of the Fortress of St Peter and St Paul, he spent another four years in the castle of Shlisselburg.
In 1868, Bakunin joined the socialist International Working Men's Association, a federation of trade unions and workers' organizations, which had sections in many European countries, as well as in Latin America and (after 1872) in North Africa and the Middle East.
In October 1868 Bakunin sponsored Fanelli to travel to Barcelona to share his libertarian visions and recruit revolutionists to the International Workingmen's Association.
In Moscow, Bakunin soon became friends with a group of former university students, and engaged in the systematic study of Idealist philosophy, grouped around the poet Nikolay Stankevich, "the bold pioneer who opened to Russian thought the vast and fertile continent of German metaphysics" (E. H. Carr).
By 17 July he was on board the Russian warship ''Strelok'' bound for Kastri.
His original epitaph reads: "Remember those who sacrificed everything for the freedom of their country".
Around this time the Russian embassy circulated rumours that Bakunin was a Russian agent who had exceeded his orders.
:If you could have seen as I did the passionate enthusiasm of the whole town of Irkutsk, the capital of Eastern Siberia, at the news of your triumphal march across the possession of the mad king of Naples, you would have said as I did that there is no longer space or frontiers.
Here he also read Lorenz von Stein's ''Der Sozialismus und Kommunismus des heutigen Frankreich'' and developed a passion for socialism.
Robert M. Cutler goes further, pointing out that it is impossible fully to understand either Bakunin's participation in the League of Peace and Freedom or the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy, or his idea of a secret revolutionary organisation that is immanent in the people, without seeing that they derive from his interpretation of Hegel's dialectic from the 1840s.
The circle included Muravyov's young Chief of Staff, Kukel&nbsp;– who Kropotkin related had the complete works of Alexander Herzen&nbsp;– the civil governor Izvolsky, who allowed Bakunin to use his address for correspondence, and Muravyov's deputy and eventual successor, General Alexander Dondukov-Korsakov.
He also did not support their clericalism and they did not support his calls for the emancipation of the peasantry.
This might be taken as evidence of a basic disinterest in Asia, but that would be incorrect.
However, in the port of Olga, Bakunin managed to persuade the American captain of the SS ''Vickery'' to take him on board.
Bakunin's disagreements with Marx, which led to the attempt by the Marx party to expel him at the Hague Congress (see below), illustrated the growing divergence between the "anti-authoritarian" sections of the International, which advocated the direct revolutionary action and organization of the workers and peasants in order to abolish the state and capitalism, and the sections allied with Marx, which advocated the conquest of political power by the working class.
The philosophy of Kant initially was central to their study, but they progressed to Schelling, Fichte, and Hegel.
By 6 August he had reached Hakodate in the northernmost Japanese island of Hokkaidō and was soon in Yokohama.
This enabled Bakunin to be part of the circle involved in political discussions centred on Muravyov's colonial headquarters.
Since that time, the fate of the Polish national liberation struggle became Bakunin's constant interest.
The founding conference was attended by 6,000 people.
The "Bakuninist" or anarcho-socialist trend rapidly expanded in influence, especially in Spain, which constituted the largest section of the International at the time.
In a series of powerful pamphlets, he defended the Commune and the First International against the Italian nationalist Giuseppe Mazzini, thereby winning over many Italian republicans to the International and the cause of revolutionary socialism.
Fanelli stayed in Madrid until the end of January 1869, conducting meetings to introduce Spanish workers, including Anselmo Lorenzo, to the First International.
With Stankevich he also read Goethe, Schiller, and E.T.A.
For Bakunin, the revolutionary archetype is found in a peasant milieu (which is presented as having longstanding insurrectionary traditions, as well as a communist archetype in its current social form—the peasant commune) and amongst educated unemployed youth, assorted marginals from all classes, brigands, robbers, the impoverished masses, and those on the margins of society who have escaped, been excluded from, or not yet subsumed in the discipline of emerging industrial work...in short, all those whom Marx sought to include in the category of the lumpenproletariat."
Bakunin is remembered as a major figure in the history of anarchism and as an opponent of Marxism, especially of Marx's idea of dictatorship of the proletariat, and for his predictions that Marxist regimes would be one-party dictatorships over the proletariat, not of the proletariat itself.
On his refusal his property was confiscated.
When he left for Italy in August, Mazzini wrote to Maurizio Quadrio, one of his key supporters that Bakunin was a good and dependable person.
Bakunin argued in his book ''God and the State'' that "the idea of God implies the abdication of human reason and justice; it is the most decisive negation of human liberty, and necessarily ends in the enslavement of mankind, in theory and practice."
Libertarian Marxists argue Marx used the phrase to mean the worker control at the point of production, not a party, would still be a state until society is reorganized according to socialist principles.
Bakunin had a different view as compared to Marx's on the revolutionary potential of the ''lumpenproletariat'' and the proletariat.
Some Polish refugees from Kraków, following the defeat of the uprising there, invited him to speak at the meeting in November 1847 commemorating the Polish November Uprising of 1830.
It instead envisions the means of production being owned collectively and controlled and managed by the producers themselves.
This aspect of his thought dates from before he became an anarchist, and his anarchist works consistently envisaged a global social revolution, including both Africa and Asia.
His father's commitment to liberal ideas led to his involvement with one of the Decembrist clubs.
He left for Germany travelling through Baden to Frankfurt and Köln.
Although Bakunin accepted elements of Marx’s class analysis and theories regarding capitalism, acknowledging "Marx’s genius", he thought Marx's analysis was one-sided, and that Marx's methods would compromise the social revolution.
Bakunin's faction present at the conference lost, and Bakunin was (in Marx's view) expelled for supposedly maintaining a secret organisation within the international.
The 1872 Hague Congress was dominated by a struggle between Marx and his followers, who argued for the use of the state to bring about socialism, and the Bakunin/anarchist faction, which argued instead for the replacement of the state by federations of self-governing workplaces and communes.
He saw that "Therefore there is no fixed and constant authority, but a continual exchange of mutual, temporary, and, above all, voluntary authority and subordination.
More importantly, Bakunin criticized "authoritarian socialism" (which he associated with Marxism) and the concept of dictatorship of the proletariat which he adamantly refused.
However, the anarchists insisted the congress was unrepresentative and exceeded its powers, and held a rival conference of the International at Saint-Imier in Switzerland in 1872.
He responded with a long letter to ''La Réforme'', denouncing the Emperor as a despot and calling for democracy in Russia and Poland (Carr, p.&nbsp;139).
Now he focussed again on going to Italy and his friend Aurelio Saffi wrote him letters of introduction for Florence, Turin and Milan.
While Bakunin, at this time, located the national liberation and democratic struggles of the Slavs in a larger European revolutionary process, he did not pay much attention to other regions.
Such a conception of liberty is "eminently social, because it can only be realized in society," not in isolation.
According to this religious way of thinking, humans cannot know by themselves what is just, but that only God decides what is good or wrong.
He is considered among the most influential figures of anarchism, and one of the principal founders of the social anarchist tradition.
Bakunin boarded the ''Orizaba'' for Panama, where after waiting for two weeks he boarded the ''Champion'' for New York.
Following his return to London, he wrote to Garibaldi on 31 January 1862:
The great majority of sections of the International affiliated to the St. Imier body, making Marx's victory rather more illusory than pro-Marxist accounts suggest.
It was here that he suffered from scurvy and all his teeth fell out as a result of the diet.
From Fichte, Bakunin went on to immerse himself in the works of Hegel, the most influential thinker among German intellectuals at the time.
In his ''Catechism of a Revolutionary'' of 1866, he opposed religion and the state, advocating the "absolute rejection of every authority including that which sacrifices freedom for the convenience of the state."
During the 1867–1868 period, Bakunin responded to Émile Acollas's call and became involved in the League of Peace and Freedom (LPF), for which he wrote a lengthy essay ''Federalism, Socialism, and Anti-Theologism'' Here he advocated a federalist socialism, drawing on the work of Proudhon.
After two years he left the Imperial Guard, as he could not agree on how the Polish people were treated by the Russian authorities.
Though his father wished him to continue in either the military or the civil service, Bakunin abandoned both in 1835, and made his way to Moscow, hoping to study philosophy.
As such "Both agreed that the proletariat would play a key role, but for Marx the proletariat was the exclusive, leading revolutionary agent while Bakunin entertained the possibility that the peasants and even the lumpenproletariat (the unemployed, common criminals, etc.)
In short, Bakunin has had a major influence on labour, peasant and leftwing movements, although this was overshadowed from the 1920s by the rise of Marxist regimes.
However, with the news of the failure at Aspromonte Bakunin paused in Paris where he was briefly involved with Ludwik Mierosławski.
The Russian government, becoming aware of this activity, ordered him to return to Russia.
In a face-to-face confrontation with them, I heatedly defended Herwegh, and our mutual dislike began then."
The anti-authoritarian majority, which included most sections of the International, created their own First International at the St. Imier Congress, adopted a revolutionary anarchist program, and repudiated the Hague resolutions, rescinding Bakunin's alleged expulsion.
They arrived in San Francisco on 15 October.
Bakunin’s methods of realizing his revolutionary program were consistent with his principles.
Within a year of arriving in Tomsk, Bakunin married Antonia Kwiatkowska, the daughter of a Polish merchant.
However, antisemitism was not central to Bakunin's work, which stressed proletarian internationalism and a class analysis of society.
Bakunin was taken to the Peter and Paul Fortress.
Therefore, each statement which is considered derived from an infallible God cannot be criticized by humans.
Moreover, by early 1836, Bakunin was back in Moscow, where he published translations of Fichte's ''Some Lectures Concerning the Scholar's Vocation'' and ''The Way to a Blessed Life'', which became his favorite book.
In June 1850, he was handed over to the Austrian authorities.
By federalism, Bakunin meant the organization of society "from the base to the summit—from the circumference to the center—according to the principles of free association and federation."
Bakunin was a strong supporter of the Commune, which was brutally suppressed by the French government.
He also developed a (resultantly prescient) critique of Marxism,  predicting that if the Marxists were successful in seizing power, they would create a party dictatorship "all the more dangerous because it appears as a sham expression of the people's will."
This repudiated the Hague meeting, including Bakunin's supposed expulsion.
When the Polish insurrection broke out in January 1863, he sailed to Copenhagen where he hoped to join the Polish insurgents.
Bakunin supported the German Democratic Legion led by Herwegh in an abortive attempt to join Friedrich Hecker's insurrection in Baden.
After three semesters in Berlin, Bakunin went to Dresden where he became friends with Arnold Ruge.
Bakunin's political beliefs were based on several interrelated concepts: (1) liberty; (2) socialism; (3) federalism; (4) anti-theism; and (5) materialism.
By July 1866 Bakunin was informing Herzen and Ogarev about the fruits of his work over the previous two years.
Oppressors take advantage from religion, according to Bakunin, because many religious people reconcile themselves with injustice on earth by the promise of happiness in heaven.
In his speech, Bakunin called for an alliance between the Polish and Russian peoples against the Emperor, and looked forward to "the definitive collapse of despotism in Russia."
Mazzini wrote letters of commendation to Federico Campanella in Genoa and Giuseppe Dolfi in Florence.
He then sailed for Liverpool arriving on December 27.
But I allow neither the bootmaker nor the architect nor savant to impose his authority upon me.
While both social anarchists and Marxists share the same final goal, the creation of a free, egalitarian society without social classes and government, they strongly disagree on how to achieve this goal.
In this period he began to develop his panslavic views.
On 5 June 1861 Bakunin left Irkutsk under cover of company business, ostensibly employed by a Siberian merchant to make a trip to Nikolaevsk.
With characteristic insolence, they attacked Herwegh personally when he was not there to defend himself.
Heco was a Japanese American, who eight years later played a significant role giving political advice to Kido Takayoshi and Itō Hirobumi during the revolutionary overthrow of the feudal Tokugawa shogunate.
In 1863, he left to join the insurrection in Poland, but he failed to reach his destination and instead spent some time in Switzerland and Italy.
He recruited Italians, Frenchmen, Scandinavians, and Slavs into the International Brotherhood, also called the Alliance of Revolutionary Socialists.
After Nicolas I became Tsar, however, Bakunin senior gave up politics and devoted himself to the care of his estate and the education of his children, five girls and five boys, the oldest of whom was Mikhail (Michael).
Bakunin went on to Berlin but was stopped by the police from traveling to Posen, part of Polish territories gained by Prussia in the Partitions of Poland, where a nationalist insurrection was taking place.
In February 1857 his mother's pleas to the Tsar were finally heeded and he was allowed to go into permanent exile in the western Siberian city of Tomsk.
Reclus and Fanelli were at odds over Reclus' friendships with Spanish republicans, and Fanelli soon left Barcelona for Madrid.
His grave can be found in ''Bremgarten Cemetery'' of Bern, box 9021, grave 68.
He established contact with Karl Marx and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, who greatly impressed him and with whom he formed a personal bond.
He spoke at a meeting organised by Lelewel in February 1848 about a great future for the Slavs, whose destiny was to rejuvenate the Western world.
In Brussels, Bakunin renewed his contacts with revolutionary Poles and Karl Marx.
Fanelli's tour took him first to Barcelona, where he met and stayed with Elisée Reclus.
However, Bakunin also wrote of meeting Marx in 1844 that:
Bakunin thought that religion originated from the human ability for abstract thinking and fantasizing.
However Bakunin rejected Mieroslawski's chauvinism and refusal to grant any concessions to the peasants.
In 1844 Bakunin went to Paris, then a centre of the European political current.
These ideas and corresponded strikingly closely with the program of the Paris Commune of 1871, much of which was developed by followers of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon; Marxists were almost entirely absent from the Commune.
However, Bakunin's supporters argue that this "invisible dictatorship" is not a dictatorship in any conventional sense of the word, as Bakunin was careful to point out that its members would not exercise any official political power in the sense of a Leninist vanguard.
