Filippo Marinetti, the founder of Italian Futurism wrote in his 1909 "''Futurist Manifesto''" (in Italian, ''Manifesto Futuristico''), that Milan was "''grande...tradizionale e futurista''" ("''grand...traditional and futuristic''", in English).
The greatest ''verista'' novelist, Giovanni Verga, was born in Sicily but wrote his most important books in Milan.
In addition, it has also seen a rapid increase in internet companies with both domestic and international companies such as Altervista, Google, Lycos, Virgilio and Yahoo!
There were an estimated 1,324,169 official residents in the commune of Milan at the end of 2013 and 3,196,825 in its administrative metropolitan city.
It has hosted an F1 race nearly every year since the first year of competition, with the exception of 1980.
In terms of GDP, it has the 2nd-largest economy among EU cities after Paris, and the largest among European non-capital cities.
Springs and autumns are generally pleasant, with temperatures ranging between ; these seasons are characterised by higher rainfall, especially in April and May.
During the second half of the 4th century, Saint Ambrose, as bishop of Milan, had a strong influence on the layout of the city, reshaping the centre (although the cathedral and baptistery built in Roman times are now lost) and building the great basilicas at the city gates: Sant'Ambrogio, San Nazaro in Brolo, San Simpliciano and Sant'Eustorgio, which still stand, refurbished over the centuries, as some of the finest and most important churches in Milan.
An important example of Art Deco, which blended such styles with Fascist architecture, is the huge Central railway station inaugurated in 1931.
114), the Municipal Statute and several laws, notably the Legislative Decree 267/2000 or Unified Text on Local Administration (''Testo Unico degli Enti Locali'').
In the first years of the 19th century, the ideals of the Romantic movement made their impact on the cultural life of the city and its major writers debated the primacy of Classical versus Romantic poetry.
Art Nouveau, also known as ''Liberty'' in Italy, is recognisable in Palazzo Castiglioni, built by architect Giuseppe Sommaruga between 1901 and 1904.
Cesare, Marquis of Beccaria, with his famous ''Dei delitti e delle pene'', and Count Pietro Verri, with the periodical ''Il Caffè'' were able to exert a considerable influence over the new middle-class culture, thanks also to an open-minded Austrian administration.
During winter, daily average temperatures can fall below freezing () and accumulations of snow can occur: the historic average of Milan's area is  in the period between 1961 and 1990, with a record of  in January, 1985.
Milan's climate is similar to much of Northern Italy's inland plains, with hot, sultry summers and cold, foggy winters.
The legislative body of the municipality is the City Council (''Consiglio Comunale''), which is composed by 48 councillors elected every five years with a proportional system, contextually to the mayoral elections.
The Modern Art Gallery, situated in the Royal Villa, hosts collections of Italian and European painting from the 18th to the early 20th centuries.
Founded in 1863, the Politecnico di Milano is the oldest university in Milan.
The ensuing civil war caused more damage to Milan's population and economy, lasting for more than a decade.
Milan is synonymous with the Italian prêt-à-porter industry,  as many of the most famous Italian fashion brands, such as Valentino, Gucci, Versace, Prada, Armani and Dolce & Gabbana, are headquartered in the city.
The province of Milan is home to about 45% of businesses in the Lombardy region and more than 8 percent of all businesses in Italy, including three Fortune 500 companies.
Milan's main upscale fashion district, ''quadrilatero della moda'', is home to the city's most prestigious shopping streets (Via Monte Napoleone, Via della Spiga, Via Sant'Andrea, Via Manzoni and Corso Venezia), in addition to Galleria Vittorio Emanuele II, one of the world's oldest shopping malls.
In recent years, de-industrialization, urban decay and gentrification led to a vast urban renewal of former industrial areas, that have been transformed into modern residential and financial districts, notably Porta Nuova in downtown Milan and FieraMilano in the suburb of Rho.
One of the city's oldest surviving cafés, Caffè Cova, was established in 1817.
One theory holds that the Latin name ''Mediolanum'' comes from the Latin words ''medio'' (in the middle) and ''planus'' (plain),.
The Meazza Stadium hosted the 2016 UEFA Champions League Final, in which Real Madrid C.F.
Modern skyscrapers, such as the Pirelli Tower and the Torre Velasca were built, and artists such as Bruno Munari, Lucio Fontana, Enrico Castellani and Piero Manzoni gathered in the city.
In the late 18th century, and throughout the 19th, Milan was an important centre for intellectual discussion and literary creativity.
The Ambrosian rite is also practiced in other surrounding locations in Lombardy, parts of Piedmont and in the Swiss canton of Ticino.
Milan is a major world fashion centre, where the sector can count on 12,000 companies, 800 show rooms, and 6,000 sales outlets (with brands such as Armani,  Prada, Versace, Valentino and Luxottica),  while four weeks a year are dedicated to top shows and other fashion events.
Here in the 1770s Mozart had premiered three operas at the Teatro Regio Ducal.
The Napoleonic rule of the city in 1805–1814, having established Milan as the capital of a satellite Kingdom of Italy, took steps in order to reshape it accordingly to its new status, with the construction of large boulevards, new squares (Porta Ticinese by Luigi Cagnola and Foro Bonaparte by Giovanni Antonio Antolini) and cultural institutions (Art Gallery and the Academy of Fine Arts).
In the second half of the 19th century, Milan quickly became the main industrial center in of the new Italian nation, drawing inspiration from the great European capitals that were hubs of the second industrial revolution.
However, after defeating the Sardinian forces at Custoza on 24 July, Radetzky was able to reassert Austrian control over Milan and northern Italy.
Around 400 BC, the Celtic Insubres settled Milan and the surrounding region.
Milan notably hosts the oldest and largest Chinese community in Italy, with almost 21,000 people in 2011.
Milan is the capital of the eponymous administrative province and of Lombardy, one of the twenty regions of Italy.
The alliance between Francesco Sforza and Florence's Cosimo de' Medici bore to Milan Tuscan models of Renaissance architecture, apparent in the Ospedale Maggiore and Bramante's work in the city, which includes Santa Maria presso San Satiro (a reconstruction of a small 9th-century church), the tribune of Santa Maria delle Grazie and three cloisters for Sant'Ambrogio.
After his death, the War of the Spanish Succession began in 1701 with the occupation of all Spanish possessions by French troops backing the claim of the French Philippe of Anjou to the Spanish throne.
In the 1950s and 60s, as the main industrial centre of Italy and one of Europe's most dynamic cities, Milan became a world capital of design and architecture.
Milan's population, like that of Italy as a whole, is mostly Catholic.
Today, Milan is still particularly well known for its high-quality furniture and interior design industry.
Later, he declared Milan capital of the Kingdom of Italy and was crowned in the Duomo.
Overall the network covers nearly  reaching 86 municipalities.
Hence, ''Mediolanum'' could signify the central town or sanctuary of a Celtic tribe.
The seat of the regional government is Palazzo Lombardia that, standing at , is the second tallest building in Milan.
The Ghibelline Visconti family was to retain power in Milan for a century and a half from the early 14th century until the middle of the 15th century.
Milan is served by three international airports.
Milan is the second Italian city with the highest number of accredited stars from the Michelin Guide.
The population of the city proper is 1,346,000, and that of the Metropolitan City of Milan is 3,209,000.
Milan is the only city in Europe that is home to two European Cup/Champions League winning teams – Serie A renewed football clubs A.C. Milan and F.C.
The city is often shrouded in heavy fog, although the removal of rice paddies from the southern neighborhoods and the urban heat island effect have reduced this occurrence in recent decades.
Milano Bresso Airport, operated by Aero Club Milano, is a general aviation airport.
The Milan Synagogue was designed by Luca Beltrami in 1892.
The most important industries in this period were armaments and wool production, a whole catalogue of activities and trades is given in Bonvesin della Riva's "de Magnalibus Urbis Mediolani".
In 1706, the French were defeated in Ramillies and Turin and were forced to yield northern Italy to the Austrian Habsburgs.
A third team, Brera Calcio F.C.
At the beginning of the 1990s, Milan already had a population of foreign-born residents of approximately 58,000 (or 4% of the then population), that rose rapidly to over 117,000 by the end of the decade (about 9% of the total).
The massive Arch of Peace, situated at the bottom of Corso Sempione, is often compared to the Arc de Triomphe in Paris.
According to the last governmental dispositions concerning administrative reorganization, the urban area of Milan is one of the 15 Metropolitan municipalities (''città metropolitane''), new administrative bodies fully operative since 1 January 2015.
In the suburbs the average can reach .
Its five major railway stations, such as the Milan Central station, are among Italy's busiest.
Another late 19th century eclectic monument in the city is the Cimitero Monumentale graveyard, built in a Neo-Romanesque style between 1863 and 1866.
With the Edict of Milan of 313, Emperor Constantine I guaranteed freedom of religion for Christians.
As the war came to an end, the American 1st Armored Division advanced on Milan – but before they arrived, the resistance seized control of the city and executed Mussolini along with several members of his government.
Both the Guelph and the Ghibelline factions worked together to bring about the Ambrosian Republic in Milan.
The sounding of church bells uses a peculiar technique.
He was commissioned to paint the ''Virgin of the Rocks'' for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception and ''The Last Supper'' for the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie.
Milan is home to two of Europe's major football teams, AC Milan and FC Internazionale.
Umberto Boccioni was also an important Futurism artist who worked in the city.
Milanese traditional dishes includes ''cotoletta alla milanese,'' a breaded veal (pork and turkey can be used) cutlet pan-fried in butter (similar to Viennese Wiener Schnitzel).
Empress Maria Theresa of Austria was responsible for the significant renovations carried out in Milan during the 18th century.
In 1556, Charles V abdicated in favour of his son Philip II and his brother Ferdinand I. Charles's Italian possessions, including Milan, passed to Philip II and remained with the Spanish line of Habsburgs, while Ferdinand's Austrian line of Habsburgs ruled the Holy Roman Empire.
In the 1950s and 1960s, a strong demand for new residential and commercial areas drove to extreme urban expansion, that has produced some of the major milestones in the city's architectural history, including Gio Ponti's Pirelli Tower (1956–60), Velasca Tower (1956–58), and the creation of brand new residential satellite towns, as well as huge amounts of low quality public housings.
A new section was opened in the Palazzo della Banca Commerciale Italiana in 2012.
In addition, even though Milan is located in one of the most urbanised regions of Italy, it's surrounded by a belt of green areas and features numerous gardens even in its very centre.
Many of these projects are in preparation contextually to Expo 2015.
Schuster, archbishop of Milan, and raised according to the rules by the Holy See in 1940, is – similarly to the Pontifical Institute of Sacred Music in Rome, which is consociated with – an Institute "ad instar facultatis" and is authorized to confer university qualifications with canonical validity and the Milan Conservatory, a college of music established in 1807, currently Italy's largest with more than 1,700 students and 240 music teachers.
However, some scholars believe ''lanum'' comes from the Celtic root ''lan'',  meaning an enclosure or demarcated territory (source of the Welsh word 'llan', meaning a sanctuary or church) in which Celtic communities used to build shrines.
There was such a revolutionary change that Milan’s fashion exports accounted for $726 million (U.S. currency) in 1952, and by 1955 that number grew to $2.5 billion.
Decades of continuing high immigration have made the city the most cosmopolitan and multicultural in Italy.
There are only few remains of the ancient Roman colony, notably the well-preserved Colonne di San Lorenzo.
During the Middle Ages, Milan prospered as a centre of trade due to its position.
Other key sectors in the city's economy are advanced research in health and biotechnologies, chemicals and engineering, banking and finance.
A new, more eclectic form of architecture can be seen in buildings such as Castello Cova, built the 1910s in a distinctly neo-medieval style, evoking the architectural trends of the past.
In addition, the city's decades-long population decline seems to have come to an end in recent years, with signs of recovery as it grew by seven percent since the last census.
Later La Scala became the reference theatre in the world, with its premières of Bellini, Donizetti, Rossini and Verdi.
In 1256 the archbishop and leading nobles were expelled from the city.
Commonly referred to as "Il Passante", it has a train running every 6 minutes (and in the city functions as a subway line with full transferability to the Milan Metro).
Other private ventures dedicated to contemporary art include the exhibiting spaces of the Prada Foundation and HangarBicocca.
Milan has also taxi services operated by private companies and licensed by the City council of Milan.
In addition, another theory links the name to the boar sow (the ''Scrofa semilanuta'') an ancient emblem of the city, fancifully accounted for in Andrea Alciato's ''Emblemata'' (1584), beneath a woodcut of the first raising of the city walls, where a boar is seen lifted from the excavation, and the etymology of ''Mediolanum'' given as "half-wool", explained in Latin and in French.
plays in Seconda Categoria.
Museo delle Culture (MUDEC) opened in April 2015.
In the 15th century, when the Sforza ruled the city, an old Viscontean fortress was enlarged and embellished to become the Castello Sforzesco, the seat of an elegant Renaissance court surrounded by a walled hunting park.
Amatori Rugby Milano, the most titled rugby team in Italy, was founded in Milan in 1927.
Immigrants came mainly from Africa (in particular Egyptian, Moroccans, Senegalese, and Nigerian), and the former socialist countries of Eastern Europe (notably Albania, Romania, Ukraine, Macedonia, Moldova), in addition to a growing number of Asians (in particular Chinese, Sri Lankans and Filipinos) and Latin Americans (Mainly South Americans).
The Castello complex also includes The Museum of Ancient Art, The Furniture Museum, The Museum of Musical Instruments and the Applied Arts Collection, The Egyptian and Prehistoric sections of the Archaeological Museum and the Achille Bertarelli Print Collection.
Milan is the home to Italy's main banking groups (198 companies), including Banca Popolare di Milano, Mediobanca, Banca Mediolanum and UniCredit and over forty foreign banks.
Since 21 June 2016 Giuseppe Sala, as mayor of the capital city, has been the mayor of the Metropolitan City.
Also in 1395, Gian Galeazzo Visconti became duke of Milan.
In summer, humidity levels are high and peak temperatures can reach temperatures above .
The team play at the Velodromo Vigorelli, with a capacity of 8,000.
The Politecnico is organized in 16 departments and a network of 9 Schools of engineering, architecture and industrial design spread over 7 campuses in the Lombardy region.
In the 19th century other important theatres were ''La Cannobiana'' and the ''Teatro Carcano''.
This period led the mass media to nickname the metropolis ''"Milano da bere"'', literally "Milan to drink".
It also led to a flurry of railway construction that had started under Austrian partronage (Venice–Milan; Milan–Monza) that made Milan the rail hub of northern Italy.
He also brought the Milanese treasury to collapse; the use of often reckless mercenary units further angered the population, granting an increasing support for the Della Torre's traditional enemies, the Visconti.
However, Milan's conurbation extends well beyond the limits of its administrative area and was home to 5,270,000 people in 2015, while its wider metropolitan area has a population of between 7 and 10 million depending on the definition used.
Diocletian chose to stay in the Eastern Roman Empire (capital Nicomedia) and his colleague Maximianus ruled the Western one.
The Montanelli gardens, created in the 18th century, hosts the Natural History Museum of Milan and a planetarium.
Season-related pastries include ''chiacchiere'' (flat fritters dusted with sugar) and ''tortelli'' (fried spherical cookies) for Carnival, ''colomba'' (glazed cake shaped as a dove) for Easter, ''pane dei morti'' ("Deads' Day bread", cookies aromatized with cinnamon) for All Souls' Day and panettone for Christmas.
Since 1990, the farmlands and woodlands north (Parco Nord Milano) and south (Parco Agricolo Sud Milano) of the urban area have been protected as regional parks.
Milan in the 20th century was the epicenter of the Futurist artistic movement.
In 1713-1714  the Treaties of Utrecht and Rastatt formally confirmed Austrian sovereignty over most of Spain's Italian possessions including Lombardy and its capital, Milan.
Milan has a humid subtropical climate (''Cfa''), according to the Köppen climate classification, or a temperate climate (''Doa''), according to the Trewartha climate classification.
Milan is an Alpha leading global city, with strengths in the arts, commerce, design, education, entertainment, fashion, finance, healthcare, media, services, research, and tourism.
The tumultuous period of early 20th century brought several, radical innovations in Milanese architecture.
Foscolo's poem ''Dei sepolcri'' was inspired by a Napoleonic law that—against the will of many of its inhabitants—was being extended to the city.
The Metropolitan City of Milan covers  and in 2015 had a population estimated at 3,196,825, with a resulting density of .
In this policy framework, the Mayor of Milan is designated to exercise the functions of Metropolitan mayor (''Sindaco metropolitano''), presieding over a Metropolitan Council formed by 16 mayors of municipalities within the Metro municipality.
During the post-war economic boom, a large wave of internal migration (especially from rural areas of Southern Italy), moved to Milan.
The Museum of Risorgimento is specialized on the history of Italian unification Its collections include iconic paintings like Baldassare Verazzi's ''Episode from the Five Days'' and Francesco Hayez's 1840 ''Portrait of Emperor Ferdinand I of Austria''.
Usually this season enjoys clearer skies with an average of more than 13 hours of daylight: when precipitations occur though, there is a higher likelihood of them being thunderstorms and hailstorms.
The Gallerie di Piazza Scala, a modern and contemporary museum located in Piazza della Scala in the Palazzo Brentani and the Palazzo Anguissola, hosts 195 artworks from the collections of Fondazione Cariplo with a strong representation of nineteenth century Lombard painters and sculptors, including Antonio Canova and Umberto Boccioni.
The great Galleria Vittorio Emanuele II, realized by Giuseppe Mengoni between 1865 and 1877 to celebrate Vittorio Emanuele II, is a covered passage with a glass and cast iron roof, inspired by the Burlington Arcade in London.
Many historical restaurants and bars are found in the historic centre, the Brera and Navigli districts.
Meanwhile, as Milanese banks dominated Italy's financial sphere, the city became the country's leading financial centre.
'''Milan''' ( or ;  ; Lombard, Milanese variant: ''Milan'' ), is the capital of the Lombardy region, and the most populous metropolitan area and the second most populous commune in Italy.
The team play at the Mediolanum Forum, with a capacity of 12,000 where it has been hosted the final of the 2013-14 Euroleague.
It is one of the world's oldest car racing circuits.
The city hosts numerous cultural institutions, academies and universities, with 11% of the national total enrolled students.
However, in the 1990s, Milan was badly affected by Tangentopoli, a political scandal in which many politicians and businessmen were tried for corruption.
The suburbs of the city have expanded mainly to the north, swallowing up many communes to reach Varese, Como, Lecco and Bergamo.
Here, too, Giuseppe Parini, and Ugo Foscolo published their most important works, and were admired by younger poets as masters of ethics, as well as of literary craftsmanship.
Milan has also a substantial English-speaking community (more than 3,000 American, British and Australian expatriates), and several English schools and language publications, such as Hello Milano, Where Milano and Easy Milano.
The Triennale is a design museum and events venue located in Palazzo dell'Arte, in Sempione Park.
The Ambrosian Republic took its name from St. Ambrose, popular patron saint of the city of Milan.
In the third decade of the 19th century, Alessandro Manzoni wrote his novel ''I Promessi Sposi'', considered the manifesto of Italian Romanticism, which found in Milan its centre; in the same period Carlo Porta, reputed the most renowned local vernacular poet, wrote his poems in Lombard Language.
The etymology of Milan (Lombard: ''Milan'' ) is uncertain.
Nonetheless, the Republic collapsed when, in 1450, Milan was conquered by Francesco Sforza, of the House of Sforza, which made Milan one of the leading cities of the Italian Renaissance.
Thereafter, during the following thirty years, almost one third of the population moved to the outer belt of new suburbs and satellite settlements that grew around the city proper.
This episode is considered one of the last outbreaks of the centuries-long pandemic of plague that began with the Black Death.
A larger urban area, comprising parts of the provinces of Milan, Monza e Brianza, Como, Lecco and Varese is  wide and has a population of 5,270,000 with a density of .
Milan is also home to Italy's oldest American football team: Rhinos Milano, that won 4 Italian Super Bowls.
The Nicola Trussardi Foundation is renewed for organising temporary exhibition in venues around the city.
After the victory of Louis's successor François I over the Swiss at the Battle of Marignan, the duchy was promised to the French king François I.
The Gregorian chant was completely unused in Milan and surrounding areas, because the official one was its own Ambrosian chant, definitively established by the Council of Trent (1545–1563) and earlier than the Gregorian.
Many notable churches and Baroque mansions were built in the city during this period by the architects, Pellegrino Tibaldi, Galeazzo Alessi and Ricchino himself.
Milan is widely regarded as a global capital in industrial design, fashion and architecture.
Not only did they impose themselves as moral guides to the people of Milan, but they also gave a great impulse to culture, with the creation of the Biblioteca Ambrosiana, in a building designed by Francesco Maria Ricchino, and the nearby Pinacoteca Ambrosiana.
Milan is well known for its world-class restaurants and cafés, characterized by innovative cuisine and design.
Its exhibition centre moved to a much larger site in Rho, New business districts such as Porta Nuova and CityLife  were constructed.
After the 2016 administrative reform, the Borough Councils have the power to advise the Mayor with nonbinding opinions on a large spectrum of topics and are responsible for running most local services, such as schools, social services, waste collection, roads, parks, libraries and local commerce; in addition they are supplied with an autonomous funding in order to finance local activities.
The gilt bronze statue of the Virgin Mary, placed in 1774 on the highest pinnacle of the Duomo, soon became one of the most enduring symbols of Milan.
Milan is currently undergoing a great urban renewal.
The city saw also a marked rise in international tourism, notably from America and Japan, while the stock exchange increased its market capitalization more than five-fold.
It hosts exhibitions and events highlighting contemporary Italian design, urban planning, architecture, music, and media arts, emphasizing the relationship between art and industry.
Milan's figurative art flourished in the Middle-Ages, and with the Visconti family being major patrons of the arts, the city became an important centre of Gothic art and architecture (Milan Cathedral being the city's most formidable work of Gothic architecture).
Another important difference concerns the liturgical music.
On 18 March 1848, the Milanese rebelled against Austrian rule, during the so-called "Five Days" (Italian: ''Le Cinque Giornate''), and Field Marshal Radetzky was forced to withdraw from the city temporarily.
Air pollution levels rise significantly in wintertime when cold air clings to the soil, causing Milan to be one of Europe’s most polluted cities.
Most of the time the Guelphs were successful in the city of Milan.
Both teams play at the UEFA 5-star rated Giuseppe Meazza Stadium, more commonly known as the San Siro, that is one of the biggest stadiums in Europe, with a seating capacity of over 80,000.
The city tram network consists of approximately  of track and 17 lines.
The political unification of Italy cemented Milan's commercial dominance over northern Italy.
After the city was besieged by the Visigoths in 402, the imperial residence was moved to Ravenna.
Relative humidity typically ranges between 45% (comfortable) and 95% (very humid) throughout the year, rarely dropping below 27% (dry) and reaching as high as 100% Wind is generally absent: over the course of the year typical wind speeds vary from  (calm to gentle breeze), rarely exceeding  (fresh breeze), except during summer thunderstorms when winds can blow strong.
The Visconti succeeded in ousting the della Torre permanently, and proceeded to rule Milan and its possessions until the 15th century.
With the decline in manufacturing, the city has sought to develop on its other sources of revenue, including publishing, finance, banking, fashion design, information technology, logistics, transport and tourism.
The economic prosperity was however overshadowed in the late 1960s and early 1970s during the so-called Years of Lead, when Milan witnessed an unprecedented wave of street violence, labour strikes and political terrorism.
Milan's last independent ruler, Lodovico il Moro, called French king Charles VIII into Italy in the expectation that France might be an ally in inter-Italian wars.
In the early 1990s architect David Chipperfield was invited to convert the premises of the former Ansaldo Factory into a Museum.
When the Spanish Habsburg Charles V defeated François I at the Battle of Pavia in 1525, northern Italy, including Milan, passed to Habsburg Spain.
In 539, the Ostrogoths conquered and destroyed Milan during the Gothic War against Byzantine Emperor Justinian I.
The city hosted the Universal Exposition in 1906 and 2015.
In the early 21st century, Milan underwent a series of sweeping redevelopments.
Milan is also home to many public art projects, with a variety of works that range from sculptures to murals to pieces by internationally renowned artists, including Arman, Francesco Barzaghi, Alberto Burri, Pietro Cascella, Maurizio Cattelan, Leonardo Da Vinci, Giorgio de Chirico, Fausto Melotti, Claes Oldenburg, Igor Mitoraj, Michelangelo Pistoletto, Arnaldo Pomodoro, Aldo Rossi, Giuseppe Spagnulo and Domenico Trentacoste.
During this period, Milan was largely reconstructed, with the building of several innovative and modernist skyscrapers, such as the Torre Velasca and the Pirelli Tower.
Milan Metro is the rapid transit system serving the city, that with 4 lines and a total length of more than  is one of the largest in Europe.
Numerous international fashion labels also operate shops in Milan.
In addition, the old exhibition area is being completely reshaped according to the Citylife regeneration project, featuring residencial areas, museums, an urban park and three skyscrapers designed by international architects, and after whom they are named: the 202m Isozaki Tower – when completed, the tallest building in Italy, the twisted Hadid Tower, and the curved Libeskind Tower.
Milan's museums, theatres and landmarks (including the Milan Cathedral, Sforza Castle and Leonardo da Vinci paintings such as The Last Supper, a UNESCO World Heritage Site) attract over 9 million visitors annually.
The late 1700s Palazzo Belgioioso by Giuseppe Piermarini and Royal Villa of Milan by Leopoldo Pollack, later the official residence of Austrian vice-roys, are often regarded among the best examples of Neoclassical architecture in Lombardy.
The Anglican Episcopal Church of All Saints Milan was built in 1896.
Besides public transport, ATM manages the interchange parking lots and other transportation services including bike sharing and car sharing systems.
As Eurostat, the commuting area has 4,252,000 inhabitants but its buil-up-urban area (that stretches beyond the boundaries of the Metropolitan City of Milan), has a population estimated to be about 5,270,000 in 1,891 km2 , the 4th in European Union.
, Milan has 157 Michelin-selected places, including three 2-Michelin-starred restaurants; these include Cracco, Sadler and il Luogo di Aimo e Nadia.
Other prominent universities in Milan include: the ''Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore'', a private institute founded in 1921 and located in the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio, famous for its law and economics teaching, currently the largest Catholic university in the world with 42,000 enrolled students; the Bocconi University, a private management and finance school established in 1902, ranking as the seventh best business school in Europe; the University of Milan Bicocca, a multidisciplinary public university with more than 30,000 enrolled students; the IULM University of Milan, specializing in marketing, information and communications technology, tourism and fashion; the Università Vita Salute San Raffaele, linked to the San Raffaele hospital, is home to research laboratories in neurology, neurosurgery, diabetology, molecular biology, AIDS studies and cognitive science.
It contains one of the foremost collections of Italian painting, including masterpieces such as the ''Brera Madonna'' by Piero della Francesca.
The city is also the birthplace of many modern ensembles and bands, including Camaleonti, Camerata Mediolanense, Gli Spioni, Dynamis Ensemble, Elio e le Storie Tese, Krisma, Premiata Forneria Marconi, Quartetto Cetra, Stormy Six and Le Vibrazioni.
The war of conquest by Frederick I Barbarossa brought the destruction of much of Milan in 1162.
Linate, the oldest and the only airport lying within the city limits, is mainly used for domestic and short-haul international flights, and served 9 million passengers in 2014.
Furthermore, the city hosts the Milan Fashion Week twice a year, one of the most important events in the international fashion system.
As a result of the independence that the Lombard cities gained in the Peace of Constance in 1183, Milan became a duchy.
It varies slightly from the typical Catholic rite (the ''Roman'', used in all other western regions), with some differences in the liturgy and mass celebrations, in the Canons are Easter and Lent, in the colour of liturgical vestments, peculiar use of incense, marriage form, office for the dead, baptism by immersion, and in the calendar (for example, the date for the beginning of lent is celebrated some days after the common date, so the carnival has different date).
The concentric layout of the city centre reflects the ''Navigli'', an ancient system of navigable and interconnected canals, now mostly covered.
However, the mean number of days with precipitation per year is one of the lowest in Europe.
The city can boast one of Europe's largest trade fair systems of over  and about 4.5 million visitors flock to the around 75 major events every year from all over the world as well as to the high-tech conference centres.
The current mayor of Milan is Giuseppe Sala, a left-wing independent leading a progressive alliance composed by Democratic Party and Italian Left.
