It can be thought of as "combatant activity", "the fighter frame of mind", "the militant mode", "the soldierly status", or "the warrior way".
During the Napoleonic occupation, organizations such as the Lutzow Freikorps fought against the occupiers and later joined the allied forces as regular soldiers.
The Anbar Salvation Council is a Sunni armed group in Iraq formed by members of baathist and nationalist elements to fight Al-Qaeda in Iraq.
In 1995, the number of soldiers was reduced to 400,000 (including reservists, amounting to some 5.6% of the population) and again in 2004, to 200,000 (including 80,000 reservists, or 2.5% of the population).
As of 2012, the Swedish Home Guard consists of 22,000 organized into 40 light infantry battalions of 300–700 Guardsmen.
These are at the time of writing eight reconnaissance/intelligence companies, four CBRN-platoons, a movcon platoon, an engineer platoon, and a military police unit.
Upon mobilisation, the special reserve units would be formed at the depot and continue training while guarding vulnerable points in Britain.
This implies that they are fitted to serve in the militia, which was intended to serve as a counterweight to the standing army and preserve civil liberties against the use of the army by a tyrannical monarch or government.
One of the best known and ancient militias is the Swiss Armed Forces.
In contrast to the KKK, these paramilitary organizations were open; members were often well known in their communities.
On April 21, 1836, led by Sam Houston, the Militia attacked the Mexican Army at their camp, in the Battle of San Jacinto near the present city of Houston.
The Court's opinion made explicit, in its ''obiter dicta'', that the term "militia," as used in colonial times in this originalist decision, included both the federally organized militia and the citizen-organized militias of the several States: "... the 'militia' in colonial America consisted of a subset of 'the people'—those who were male, able-bodied, and within a certain age range" (7) ...
Unlike the Syrian Army, NDF soldiers are allowed to take loot from battlefields, which can then be sold on for extra money.
Consequently, the English Bill of Rights (1689) declared, amongst other things: "that the raising or keeping a standing army within the kingdom in time of peace, unless it be with consent of Parliament, is against law..." and "that the subjects which are Protestants may have arms for their defense suitable to their conditions and as allowed by law."
As regular military forces were insufficient to counter the British attackers, Santiago de Liniers drafted all males in the city capable of bearing arms into the military.
The special reserve units remained in Britain throughout the First World War, but their rank and file did not, since the object of the special reserve was to supply drafts of replacements for the overseas units of the regiment.
* An official reserve army, composed of citizen soldiers.
After 80 years of foreign domination (1580–1640), the ''Ordenanças'' were reorganized for the Portuguese Restoration War.
Many of its members went on to join the Nazi Party.
The British Empire then ousted the Dutch from the coastal areas of the country, and sought to conquer the independent Kandyan Kingdom.
Centuries later, Joan of Arc organized and led a militia until her capture and execution in 1431.
The Omakaitse (Home Guard) was an organisation formed by the local population of Estonia on the basis of the Estonian Defence League and the forest brothers resistance movement active on the Eastern Front between 3July 1941 and 17September 1944.
Most Canadian cities have one or more militia units.
The Mehdi Army is a sectarian armed force created by the Iraqi Shi'a cleric Muqtada al-Sadr in June 2003.
The revolutionaries also created a full-time regular army—the Continental Army—but because of manpower shortages the militia provided short-term support to the regulars in the field throughout the war.
In free states, Republican militias—called "Wide Awakes"—sided with abolitionists in sometimes violent confrontations with Federal authorities.
Service in each organisation involved different levels of preparedness.
A citizens' militia modeled on the British Home Guard called the Volunteer Defence Corps (VDC) was founded by the Returned and Services League of Australia (RSL) in 1940 in response to the possibility of a Japanese invasion of Australia.
In Canada the title "Militia" historically referred to the land component of the armed forces, both regular (full-time) and reserve.
A Spanish attack in 1614 was repulsed by two shots fired from the incomplete Castle Islands Fortifications manned by Bermudian Militiamen.
The government supported the organization and equipped them with anti-aircraft artillery; however, they were disbanded by the end of World War II due to the fact that there was no longer a significant threat to national security.
In the 2008 decision of the Supreme Court, in District of Columbia v. Heller, the ''de jure'' definition of "militia" as used in United States jurisprudence was discussed.
With the  emergence of professional forces in the Renaissance, Western European militias wilted, to be revived as part of Florentine civic humanism, which held that professional militaries were a result of corruption, and admired the Roman model.
However, after 1918, the term was used for nationalist paramilitary organizations that sprang up around Germany as soldiers returned in defeat from World War I.
In some of these states militia was renamed back to police (Bulgaria, Poland, Georgia) while in the other states it remains (Ukraine, Belarus).
During the nineteenth century, each of the states maintained its militia differently, some more than others.
Except for the London trained bands, both sides in the Civil War made little use of the militia, preferring to recruit their armies by other means.
From the World War II, the Portuguese Legion assumed the responsibility for the civil defense, this becoming its main role during the Cold War, until its extinction in 1974.
Three units still maintain their militia designation in the British Army, two in the Territorial Army and one in the Army Cadet Force.
The main task of the battalions is to guard vital military and civilian installations throughout the country.
During the First Republic, similar to the development in Germany, increasing radicalization of politics led to certain paramilitary militias associating with certain political parties.
The former feared that it would be used as an instrument of royal tyranny.
The most important previous activity of the Texas Militia was the Texas Revolution in 1836.
See citizen's arrest and hue and cry.
On only one occasion, during the military history of the Soviet Union, the Narodnoe Opolcheniye was incorporated into the regular forces of the Red Army, notably in Leningrad and Moscow.
Under German occupation during World War II, a militia usually called the French Resistance emerged to conduct a guerrilla war of attrition against German forces and prepare the way for the D-Day Allied Invasion of France.
It was thought that calling the conscripts 'militiamen' would make this more acceptable, as it would render them distinct from the rest of the army.
The history of militia in the United States dates from the colonial era, such as in the American Revolutionary War.
In the beginning members didn't have uniforms and often paraded in business attire.
In the 17th Century, however, Bermuda's defence was left entirely in the hands of the Militia.
The militia was widely embodied at various times during the French and Napoleonic Wars.
This system had declined by the 1870s, mainly due to the establishment of the modern Argentine Army, drafted for the Paraguayan War by President Bartolome Mitre.
This standing body was created by recruiting volunteers, and by sentencing criminals to serve as punishment.
Due to the physical state of members, almost non-existent training and shortage of weapons, there was not much the Volkssturm could do except act like shields for regular army units.
In the Virginia Company's other outpost, Bermuda, fortification began immediately in 1612.
Neither the Russian Empire, nor the Soviet Union ever had an organised force that could be equated to a militia.
Although the militia consists of all able-bodied men, the federally-organized militia may consist of a subset of them"(23).
The 2nd line was made of the auxiliary troops, also militia units with the role of regional defense.
(This is the origin of the song "Brighton Camp".)
In 1793, during the Napoleonic Wars, the Irish militia were reorganized to form thirty-seven county and city regiments.
They were officially "disbanded" in 1920, resulting in the ill-fated Kapp Putsch in March 1920.
These battalions are then organised into companies, usually one for every municipality.
In 1861 Texas joined the other Confederate States in seceding from the Union, and Texas militias played a role in the American Civil War, until it ended in 1865.
They were one of the many Weimar paramilitary groups active during that time.
Many localized militia saw service, together with British Imperial troops, during the New Zealand land wars.
However, the National Guard revealed itself an ineffective and undisciplined force.
Freikorps (German for "Free Corps") was originally applied to voluntary armies.
Additionally, the Atholl Highlanders are a ceremonial infantry militia maintained by the Duke of Atholl—they are the only legal private army in Europe.
It served at several vulnerable locations, and was particularly stationed on the South Coast and in Ireland.
A military volunteer movement attracted wide interest during the Crimean War.
In the late 17th century came calls for the resurrection of militia in Scotland that had the understated aim of protecting the rights of Scots from English oppression.
The Bermudian militiamen were called out on numerous occasions of war, and, on one notable occasion, to quell rioting privateers.
Article XVI, Section 4 of the Philippines Constitution states: "The Armed Forces of the Philippines shall be composed of a citizen armed force which shall undergo military training and serve as may be provided by law."
The militia thus appealed to agricultural labourers, colliers and the like, men in casual occupations, who could leave their civilian job and pick it up again.
In California, the militia carried out campaigns against bandits and against the Indians at the direction of its Governor between 1850 and 1866.
Provincial militias were outlawed and decimated by the new army throughout the presidential terms of Mitre, Sarmiento, Avellaneda and Roca.
The militia in Jamestown saw constant action against the Powhatan Federation and other native polities.
From 1867 to 1880s, the departure of British forces in Canada meant militia units were the only army available on Canadian soil.
Likewise, each household was assessed for the purpose of finding weapons, armour, horses, or their financial equivalent, according to their status.
The paramilitary groups were described as "the military arm of the Democratic Party" and were instrumental in helping secure Democratic victories in the South in the elections of 1876.
The obligation to serve in the militia in England derives from a common law tradition, and dates back to Anglo-Saxon times.
The trained bands performed an important role in the English Civil War on the side of parliament, in marching to raise the siege of Gloucester (5 September 1643).
Like many other American states, Texas maintains a recognized State Militia, the Texas State Guard.
Some of the training of the Rough Riders took place in San Pedro Park, in the north central part of San Antonio near the present site of San Antonio College.
The name was briefly revived in 1939, in the aftermath of the Munich Crisis.
Leslie Hore-Belisha, the then Minister of War, wished to introduce a limited form of conscription, an unheard of thing in peacetime.
59, where it is referred to as "military service" (; ; ; ).
Better records were kept, and the men were selected by ballot to serve for longer periods.
The term of service in the core militia is 4 years.
In 1707, the Acts of Union united the Kingdom of England with the Kingdom of Scotland.
The Militia Clauses gave Congress authority for "organizing, arming, and disciplining" the militia, and "governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the United States", with the States retaining authority to appoint officers and to impose the training specified by Congress.
* An irregular armed force enabling its leader to exercise military, economic, and political control over a subnational territory within a sovereign state (See: Warlord).
This threat led to a change of the meeting site.
In addition to requiring all male civilians to train and serve in the militia of their Parish, the Bermudian Militia included a standing body of trained artillerymen to garrison the numerous fortifications which ringed ''New London'' (St. George's).
The Heimwehr (German: ''Home Defense'') became affiliated with the Christian Social Party and the Republikanischer Schutzbund (German: ''Republican Defense League'') became affiliated with the Social Democratic Workers' Party of Austria.
These are the Royal Monmouthshire Royal Engineers (formed in 1539), the Jersey Field Squadron (The Royal Militia Island of Jersey) (formed in 1337), and the Royal Alderney Militia (created in the 13th century and reformed in 1984).
The Forces are organized in communes, wards and townships and are put under commune-level military commands.
In the end of the 18th century, the auxiliary troops were renamed "Militias".
The militias became a strong factor in the politics of the city afterwards, as a springboard from which the ''criollos'' could manifest their political ambitions.
The SA also took part in street battles against the forces of rival political parties and violent actions against Jews.
If it lapses, the legal basis for enforcing discipline disappears, and soldiers lose their legal indemnity for acts committed under orders.
Because there were usually few British regulars garrisoned in North America, colonial militia served a vital role in local conflicts, particularly in the French and Indian Wars.
The first notable militia in French history was the resistance of the Gauls to invasion by the Romans until they were defeated by Julius Caesar.
Their deployment to maintain order in the former Confederate states caused increased resentment among many Southern whites.
In early 2009 it ceased to exist with the military defeat of the LTTE at the hands of the Sri Lanka Armed Forces.
For instance, the members of some U.S. Army National Guard units are considered professional soldiers, as they are trained to maintain the same standards as their "full-time" (active duty) counterparts.
The Kurdish militia, the peshmerga, is estimated to number upwards of 500,000.
''See also: Republikanischer Schutzbund, Heimwehr, Bundesheer''
Their units became highly politicized, being involved in a number of conspiracies and coups.
Based on the British system, colonial militias were drawn from the body of adult male citizens of a community, town, or local region.
Instead a form of organisation that predated the Russian state was used during national emergencies called Narodnoe Opolcheniye (People's Regimentation).
It was organized on the basis of the shire county, and was one of the responsibilities of the Lord Lieutenant, a royal official (usually a trusted nobleman).
Violence increasingly escalated, breaking out during the July Revolt of 1927 and finally the Austrian Civil War, when the Schutzbund was defeated by the Heimwehr, police, Gendarmerie and Austrian Armed Forces.
Currently Pakistani citizens forming militias from the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province are participating in the 'war on terror'.
Article 58.1 of the April18, 1999, Federal Constitution of the Swiss Confederation (official, French version) provides that "Switzerland has an army.
The Parliament of Ireland passed an act in 1715 raising regiments of militia in each county and county corporate.
The earliest historical record of militia is found in the Old Testament and particularly the Book of Judges.
The ''Ordenanças'' became the 3rd line and acted both as a territorial draft organization for the 1st and 2nd line troops and as a kind of home guard for local defense.
In colonial era Anglo-American usage, militia service was distinguished from military service in that the latter was normally a commitment for a fixed period of time of at least a year, for a salary, whereas militia was only to meet a threat, or prepare to meet a threat, for periods of time expected to be short.
Besides the regular militias, a number of volunteer militia units were formed to fight on both sides of the war.
** A subset of these who may be legally penalized for failing to respond to a call-up.
The Syrian National Defense Force was formed out of pro-government militias.
Beginning in the late 20th century, some militias (particularly officially recognized and sanctioned militias of a government) act as professional forces, while still being "part-time" or "on-call" organizations.
* A private, non-government force, not necessarily directly supported or sanctioned by its government.
As a result of defence cuts it was eventually reduced to 7 battalions before being amalgamated with the Royal Irish Rangers in 1992 to form the "Home Service Battalions" of the Royal Irish Regiment.
Created as a non-partisan force to defend Northern Ireland "against armed attack or sabotage" it eventually peaked at 11 battalions with 7,559 men and women.
The Argentine Civil War was waged by militias again, as both federalists and unitarians drafted common people into their ranks as part of ongoing conflicts.
Formerly, there existed the National Revolutionary Militias (''Milicias Nacionales Revolucionarias''), which was formed after the Cuban Revolution and initially consisted of 200,000 men who helped the 25,000 strong standing army defeat counter-revolutionary guerillas.
Historically, militias of varying levels of ability have existed in China, organized on a village and clan level, especially during periods of instability and in areas subject to pirate and bandit attack.
Texas militiamen joined Theodore Roosevelt's Rough Riders, a volunteer militia, and fought with him during the Spanish–American War in 1898.
In 2004, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam claimed have establish a voluntary "Tamil Eelam auxiliary force".
Although ultimately defeated, the militias' dogged resistance convinced the British to make concessions to the indigenous inhabitants allowing them to preserve inheritance, property and marriage rights and customs throughout most of the period of the British rule.
These recruits included the criollo peoples, who ranked low down in the social hierarchy, as well as some slaves.
They received considerable support from Gustav Noske, the German Defence Minister who used them to crush the Spartakist League with enormous violence, including the murders of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg on January15, 1919.
* The entire able-bodied population of a community, town, county, or state, available to be called to arms.
In 1940 the Permanent Active Militia and Non-Permanent Active Militia were renamed to become the Canadian Army.
Of course, many saw the annual camp as the equivalent of a paid holiday.
How this affected militias either side of the border is unclear.
In this latter usage, a militia is a body of private persons who respond to an emergency threat to public safety, usually one that requires an armed response, but which can also include ordinary law enforcement or disaster responses.
As successful English settlement of North America began to take place in 1607 in the face of the hostile intentions of the powerful Spanish, and of the native populations, it became immediately necessary to raise militia amongst the settlers.
During the nineteenth century, American militia saw action in the various Indian Wars, the War of 1812, the American Civil War, and the Spanish–American War.
in order to become proficient with them."
The latter developed into the militia, and was usually embodied by a royal warrant.
'''Salwa Judum''' (meaning "Peace March" or "Purification Hunt" in Gondi language) is a militia active in the Chhattisgarh state of India.
Prior to the Civil War, militia units were sometimes used by southern states for slave control.
This took the form of the Frontier Corps, which consisted of locally recruited full-time auxiliaries under British officers.
Rapid response units have more combat tasks compared to the rest of the Home Guard, including escort duties.
However, under the country's militia system, professional soldiers constitute about 5 percent of military personnel.
The Danish Home Guard () (HJV) is the fourth service of the Danish military.
The MIS urges all competent, law-abiding adults to "obtain a military type rifle and pistol like those commonly used by soldiers in their nation's armed forces and use them regularly (target shooting, hunting, etc.)
These units are motorized and are ready to be mobilized more often, than other Home Guard units.
During the French Revolution the term levée en masse came into use.
The militia regiments were consequently ill-prepared for an emergency, and could not be relied upon to serve outside their own counties.
The Waffen-SS, the military branch of the SS, became a de facto fourth branch of the Wehrmacht.
Switzerland has long maintained, proportionally, the second largest military force in the world, with about half the proportional amount of reserve forces of the Israeli Defense Forces, a militia of some 33% of the total population.
12 and 13, Discourses on Livy, and The Art of War.)
Cuba has three militia organizations: The Territorial Troops Militia (''Milicias de Tropas Territoriales'') of about one million people (half women), the Youth Labor Army (''Ejército Juvenil del Trabajo'') devoted to agricultural production, and a naval militia.
Membership was restricted to Protestants between the ages of 16 and 60.
Numbered Territorial Force battalions, ranking after the Special Reserve, were formed from the volunteer units at the same time.
It fought alongside British troops in the Kandyan wars.
In modern times, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) is often described as a heavily armed militia, not a full-fledged army, since it is legally and publicly viewed as a defensive force only, and since it relies heavily on the reserve duty of Israeli citizens who are annually called to service for set periods of time, rather than on professional, full-time soldiers.
The militia was supposed to be mustered for training purposes from time to time, but this was rarely done.
Although the first intake were called up, the war broke out soon after, and the militiamen lost their identity in the rapidly expanding army.
Privately organized citizen militia-related groups blossomed in the mid-1990s, which collectively became known as the constitutional militia movement.
The militia must not be confused with the volunteer units created in a wave of enthusiasm in the second half of the nineteenth century.
Beside the federal Yugoslav People's Army, each constituent republic of the former SFR Yugoslavia had its own ''Territorial Defense Forces''.
The Portuguese Army was then organized in three lines, with the 2nd and 3rd being militia forces.
The Awakening Councils or "concerned citizens" are emerging to defend their neighborhoods against insurgents of every kind, functioning as a form of vigilante "militia" similar to the model of militia in the US.
The force acts in an infantry role, directly fighting against rebels on the ground and running counter-insurgency operations in coordination with the army which provides them with logistical and artillery support.
Every parish furnished a quota of eligible men, whose names were recorded on muster rolls.
Although muster rolls were prepared as late as 1820, the element of compulsion was abandoned, and the militia was transformed into a volunteer force.
The Dutch continued to employ these militias but due to their unreliability tended to favor employing Swiss and Malay mercenaries in their campaigns in the island.
Israeli settlements in frontier ares such as the Galilee, Negev, Judea and Samaria rely on armed militia teams for their security .
According to the Sri Lankan Military these militias were formed after "massacres done by the LTTE" and in the early 1990s they were reformed as the Sri Lankan Home Guard.
The term Militsiya in Russia and former Communist Bloc nations was specifically used to refer to the civilian police force, and should not be confused with the conventional western definition of militia.
Sometimes militia units were found to be unprepared, ill-supplied, and unwilling.
The Janjaweed militia consists of armed Arab Muslims fighting for the government in Khartoum against non-Arab Muslim "rebels".
Their role combined the functions of tribal police and border guards deployed along the North-West Frontier.
Consequently, an elite force was created, composed of members of the militia who were prepared to meet regularly for military training and exercise.
The Badr Organization is based in and around Karbala.
The conscript soldiers of the milita have to store their military equipment at home, to be mobilized quite fast within a few days in case of emergency.
The first freikorps were recruited by Frederick II of Prussia during the Seven Years' War.
Texans declared independence from Mexico while they were defeated during the Battle of the Alamo, in March 1836.
Altogether, 101 infantry battalions, 33 artillery regiments and two engineer regiments of special reservists were formed.
A decree by Mariano Moreno derogated the system of promotions involving ''criollos'', allowing instead their promotion on military merit.
Until 1861, the militia were an entirely infantry force, but in that year a number of county regiments were converted to artillery.
The decrease in number of troops comes with an equal increase in quality and modern equipment.
** A subset of these who actually respond to a call-up, regardless of legal obligation.
The National Guard having less and less confidence on the part of the authorities, ended to be extinct in 1847, terminating a long tradition of national militias in Portugal.
More comparable to the English Fyrd, it was a popular voluntary joining of the local полк polk, or a regiment, though it had no regular established strength or officers, these usually elected from prominent local citizens.
This changed as a result of the Flagstaff War, with the colonial government passing a Militia Act on 25 March 1845.
They were a key element in the success of the May Revolution, which deposed the Spanish viceroy and began the Argentine War of Independence.
The English Civil War left a rather unusual military legacy.
* The national police forces in several former communist states such as the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact countries, but also in the non-aligned SFR Yugoslavia.
With these reinforcements, the British armies were twice defeated.
When a muster of the Militia proposed to train there on April 19, 1994, they were threatened with arrest, even though the charter of San Pedro Park forbids exclusion of activities of that kind.
The Free-Colored Militia, interracial militias of New Spain, Colonial Mexico.
Typically, an English, Welsh or Scottish regiment would have two militia battalions (the 3rd and 4th) and Irish regiments three (numbered 3rd–5th).
The Special Reserve reverted to its militia designation in 1921, then to Supplementary Reserve in 1924, though the units were effectively placed in "suspended animation" until disbanded in 1953.
The term Militia continued from then to the present day to refer to the part-time army reserve component of the Canadian Forces.
