Such personnel do not hold military police authority, and do not wear the MP insignia.
Furthermore, the military police provides protection of Swiss representatives abroad and is in part responsible for the guarding of embassies and foreign VIPs in Switzerland, as well as maintaining personal security for members of the Swiss Federal Council.
The fifth of November has been announced the Military Police Service Celebration Day with Order of the Minister of Defense No.
They were also empowered to implement specific tasks – crime investigation, protection of civilians against despoiling and abusing, fight against marauders, supervision and control over the civilians following the army and especially the unreliable and/ or espionage suspected individuals.
They are normally located in the Guardroom.
They are headquartered at PNS Qasim in Karachi.
* Army Criminal Investigation Command (CID)—Army (general felony crimes)
On 1 April 2008, as a result of reformation of the national security system, the Military Counterintelligence passed to the newly founded State Agency National Security.
Sailors assigned to the Shore Patrol Party or Beach Guard Detachment do not include Sailors assigned to the ship's Security Force, both performing different duties while visiting that country, because of the Status of Force Agreement (SOFA) and/or Rules of Engagement (ROE).
* Interventions (Special weapons and tactics - SWAT)
Naval police members are sometimes called "masters-at-arms".
Ex-police officers were conscripted for police officer duty in the armed forces; usually only the officers had police training.
In 1915 a military police sector of six squadrons was founded under the Staff of the acting army.
OX-0082/ 29 January 1998 the Military Police Administration – GS was transferred from its immediate subordination to the Chief of the General Staff of the Bulgarian Army to subordination to the Minister of Defense.
Professional MP units drive patrol cars similar to those of the civilian police, but also use Piranha and Duro APCs.
In January 1945 this Military Securing Group was disbanded and a special group for implementation of specific tasks in the army was formed.
The Ukrainian Military Police (VSP) is the military police for the Ukrainian Armed Forces
A second organisation called the Traffic Regulators existed within the Rear Services.
MPs in the Army are assigned to the Military Police Battalion, located at Bardufoss, Troms county.
* Searches/investigations/support in interventions
MPs have no other powers over civilians than ordinary members of the public, except inside, or in the immediate vicinity of military installations.
The only military forces exempt from the act are the United States Coast Guard, as its mission includes maritime law enforcement duties; and Army and Air National Guard troops while under state authority.
* Traffic regulation: Includes traffic monitoring and regulation to ensure the flow of military movements in accordance with plans.
OX-708/ 10 October 2008.
The Security Service – Military Police and Military Counterintelligence was transformed into the Military Police Service under the Minister of Defense.
They were at the forefront of committing Japanese war crime against Asian neighbors.
The military police officers serve within contingents of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic on foreign operations on the territory of Iraq and on the Balkans, and as of March 2007 its Special Operation Group (SOG) also in southern Afghanistan in the Helmand Province.
MP tasks include investigation of serious disciplinary cases and some armed service-related crimes, supervision of military discipline within the Forces, military traffic control and various security tasks.
The  MILITARY POLICE Corps (Czech ''vojenská policie'') was set up on 21 January 1991.
Thus personnel had to be recruited without regard to quality; conscripts found unfit for field duty for e.g.
The term ''Feldjäger'' ("field rifleman" or "field hunter") has a long tradition and dates back to the mid-17th century.
Within conflict/crises areas (Afghanistan) the MP may provide close protection of the Estonian national representative and other visiting VIPs.
This also involves controlling stragglers and refugees in times of war and guarding and escorting prisoners of war.
In 1951, Law 1746/51 established the framework of the Hellenic Army's Greek Military Police (, ''Ellinikí Stratiotikí Astynomía'').
Usually each District (regiment) has one or two platoons, consisting exclusively of former regular or conscript military police personnel.
The intention of the military minister was to be set up a cavalry unit authorized to carry out police duties as well.
These police fall under each directorate they work for within the United States Department of Defense, for example: DoD Army or DoD Navy Police.
regarding the Military Police, they are responsible for police protection of armed forces, military facilities, military material and other state property controlled by the Ministry of Defence of the Czech Republic.
The U.S. Coast Guard, which in itself is a law enforcement agency, uses a mixture of enlisted rates and ranks qualified as law enforcement officers to patrol, investigate crimes, and enforce laws and regulations on large bases and training centers through the Coast Guard Police Department.
The Military Police force carries out the following missions:
The paramilitary Greek Gendarmerie fulfilled most security and order duties in Greece until World War II.
It is important to note though that the purpose of the CFMP is not to replace the job of a civilian police officer, but rather to support the Canadian Forces through security and policing services.
The command also collaborates closely with the Singapore Police Force in terms of policing work duties, investigations, etc.
Civil Guard (in Spanish Guardia Civil) is the equivalent to the gendarmerie in Spain.
* Personnel protection
In Austria the Military Police is only tasked with internal Armed Forces matters.
In the Act on the Armed Forces Regulation in the Bulgarian Principality, adopted by the Sixth Regular National Assembly on 3 December 1891, was envisaged establishment of six semi-companies in stages.
The duties of the Air Military Police Department (''กรมทหารสารวัตรทหารอากาศ'') are peacekeeping, security, regulating traffic discipline within Air Force installations and housing areas, apprehending deserters, escorting VIPs and investigating crimes under the authority of the Military Court.
In Portugal, each branch of the Armed Forces has its own military police force.
217 which proclaimed the establishment of the Military Police – based on regional principle, part of the Bulgarian Army, and to meet the needs of the Armed Forces, troops, ministries, administrations, and Civil Defense of the Republic of Bulgaria.
Moreover, the MP is equipped uniquely, armed with SIG Pro side arms and SIG 552 assault rifles (compared to the standard issue SIG P220 pistol and SIG 550 assault rifle).
Indonesian Military Police are identifiable with their blue berets and also wear white helmet printed '''PM''' and dark blue brassard worn on their upper left sleeve printed '''PM'''.
The criteria for personnel selection were too high for that time and met the high standards and specific requirements for performing military police duties.
CFMP are classified as Peace Officers in the Criminal Code, which gives them the same powers as civilian law enforcement personnel to enforce Acts of Parliament on or in relation to DND property or assets anywhere in the world.
In the army military police are almost without exception NCOs or officers, whereas the navy and air force relies mainly of Danish ranks OR-1 to OR-3.
The term ''Marechaussee'' was also used for the Continental Army's military police during the American Revolution.
The new structure was based on French and Austrian experience.
In compliance with the Decree of His Highness No.
They are the police of the military/armed forces organization in charge of enforcing discipline and the maintenance of law and order in the military environment and for military purposes.
NSF personnel are led by Naval commissioned officers from the Limited Duty Officer (LDO) and Chief Warrant Officer (CWO) communities, who are also designated as NSF.
In Vietnam, the 144th Brigade of Military Guard (Cảnh vệ Quân sự) is under the command of the General Staff of the Vietnam People's Army.
Military police in Cambodia play an important role in Cambodia society, keeping law and order in cities along with the National Police.
The Pakistan Air Force established its own military police, known as the "Pakistan Air Force Police" commonly refereed to as Provost.
In the same year was issued Instruction on the Officer Qualities and Posts in the Military Police Troops.
This unit will be known as the Serious Investigations Branch (SIB).
The Military Police Group was transformed into the Securing Group in compliance of the Order of the Military Ministry, dated 2 September 1944.
A Military Police infantry platoon of 60 with an officer in charge and a mounted platoon of 50 were added to any division.
Foreign Deployments:
On some occasions MP personnel can support civilian police in certain tasks, but will only have slightly more legal authority than civilians—similar to the police home guard.
Norwegian MPs do not have authority over civilians, except on or in the vicinity of military installations, vehicles or other property or under martial law.
* Taking down traffic accidents
In addition, there are two militia MP battalions with a head count of roughly 2000 men.
The structure is based on the territorial principle.
They are also in charge of the security of military installations, play a role as bodyguards of generals, admirals and other relevant military personnel, provide security services to military transports and police military personnel abroad.
For example, during the 2005 Helsinki World Athletic Championship Games, military police conscripts and career personnel were placed along the marathon route to prevent the large numbers of spectators from obstructing the runners.
Although MP jurisdiction is only on DND property across Canada and throughout the world, any civilian accessing these areas falls under MP jurisdiction and are dealt with in the same manner as any civilian policing agency.
* Crowd and riot control
* Operation of detention facilities
Vietnam Military Surveillance (Kiểm soát Quân sự) is also underthe  command of the General Staff and responsible for supervising military laws on soldiers and officers
The Military Gendarmerie (''Żandarmeria Wojskowa'', ŻW) are the MPs for the entire Polish military.
* Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS)—Navy and Marine Corps
Shortly after the formation of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2005, an intentional strategy was made to limit in law and multi-ethnic, crime violation in the armed forces, so to speak, the Military Police, which was formed later on and approved by the Ministry of Defense of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In 1940 the Ministry of War issued Recommendations on the Military Police Service.
Within the provisions of the Czech Law No.
They also performed intelligence and secret police functions and were active in Japan and its occupied territories.
They can be identified by their white peaked caps, white lanyards and belts (with a pistol holster).
Prince Alexander I tasked Prime Minister Dragan Tsankov with the establishment of a new police structure in Bulgaria.
International tasks include:
The Coast Guard also uses the Coast Guard Investigative Service, a mixture of civilian, enlisted, reservists, and officers who are qualified and duly sworn federal law enforcement officers separate from the normal Coast Guard chain of command.
PT stands for "Polis Tentera", the Malay words for "Military Police".
The ''Kor Polis Tentera'' is also tasked with crime prevention and investigating criminal activities on Army property or by military personnel.
Abroad, they are tasked with extensive assignments.
While Bulgaria was getting ready for the war, the Strategic Command assessed the need of military police presence in the army.
Today's Japan Self-Defense Forces maintain military police units called the Keimutai.
As with some other Finnish Defence Forces units, the military police can be used to provide assistance to the civilian police when they are undermanned or lack special resources.
Here is a list of military police forces:
The Belgian Military Police has also taken part in multinational peacekeeping missions such as Afghanistan, Kosovo and Congo.
It was previously worn on the right shoulder, but is now worn on the left shoulder, following NATO practice.
Its activity was to be legally based upon the Regulations on Police Guards, adopted in 1883.
The Portuguese Navy has the ''Polícia Naval'' (Naval Police), the Portuguese Army has the ''Polícia do Exército'' (Army Police), and the Portuguese Air Force has the ''Polícia Aérea'' (Air Police).
Military police officers are assigned directly to military units, and they form also part of military contingents of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic in foreign deployments.
The current chief of the Bulgarian Military Police Service is Brigadier General Borislav Sertov.
Former military police organisations were the Commandant's Service (Военная комендатура) and Military Automobile Inspection (Военная автомобильная инспекция (ВАИ)).
* Military Police Corps/Office of the Provost Marshal General—United States Army
MPs convoyed, secured refugees, prisoners-of-war, military posts and mail, collected and stored weapons left behind by its own or enemy troops, horses and other objects, checked on the regularity of troops at the railway stations.
They have jurisdiction in all Spanish territory and over the civilian population.
At times of emergency enemy detainees are held and sorted by the military police.
The Finnish MPs wear a black brassard on the left shoulder with the letters 'SP' in white.
However, improvement to this came eventually: the military police school was founded in 1963, and civilian police background was no longer required.
Felony level criminal investigations in the United States Armed Forces are carried out by separate agencies:
The  Pakistan Army's military police is known as the Pakistan Army Corps of Military Police.
* Provost Marshal's Office (base law enforcement) and Law Enforcement Battalions (combat support or "field MPs") —United States Marine Corps
In time of peace, GNR is under operacional command of the Minister of Internal Affairs, but in time of war it can be put under the command of the Armed Forces.
Norwegian MPs wear a red beret and a red lanyard around the left shoulder extending to the left front pocket.
During World War II, the ''Kempeitai'' were the military police of the Imperial Japanese Army and the ''Tokkeitai'' were the military police of the Imperial Japanese Navy.
In the National Army of Colombia they are assigned to the 37 Military Police Battalions, wearing green uniforms with the military police helmet.
Norwegian MPs first go through a six-month selection/educational period, before being assigned to the battalion or to regimental duties with other units for the remainder of their twelve-month service.
Other units included the Army Patrol Service (''Heeres-Streifendienst''), the Train Station Guards (''Bahnhofswache''), and the ''Feldjägerkorps''.
They can be identified by their red armbands, white cross belts and white combat helmets with the letters "MP", written in white.
Additionally if a military police unit is near to a serious crime taking place, such as a robbery or an assault, and the civilian police are delayed, a military police unit that is near to the scene can offer to handle the situation until the civilian police arrive.
Army canine units are also assigned to the MP battalion, but the personnel in such units are not necessarily MPs.
Shore Patrol personnel are Sailors from U.S. naval vessels visiting foreign ports (and some domestic ports) assigned to the Shore Patrol Party or Beach Guard, responsible for the good order and discipline of Sailors from the visiting ship(s) on liberty.
In the past they had a role in training armed elements of the Garda Síochána but in recent times this has decreased.
Included in the Portuguese Navy organization also exist two special police forces.
* The Royal Air Force is policed by the Royal Air Force Police (RAFP).
The Military Police are a professional force.
With Order of the Minister of Defense No.
The Military Police have three locations in Austria.
All New Zealand Defence Force Military Police are identifieable by the blue and white "MP" patch they wear on their uniform and the blue beret as head dress, the wearing of the Blue beret differs from many commonwealth military police units as traditionally a red beret is worn.
Furthermore, the home guard has a police branch, which supports both the civilian Danish police and the military police.
They are only recognized as constabularies with jurisdiction over military installations and military personnel.
Provosts or ''Provos'' in Indonesia, shortened ("'''PROV'''"), secures, supervises and maintains discipline in a battalion or a regimental headquarter of the military, which is specifically different from the military police.
The Romanian military police is organized in four battalions (two of them are headquartered in Bucharest, one in Iaşi and one in Târgu Mureş).
Until 1995, the Belgian Rijkswacht/Gendarmerie was, besides its civilian policing tasks, responsible for the nation's Military Police duties.
Military Police in Afghanistan and Iraq have been widely employed for such duties as convoy security, mounted and dismounted patrols, maritime expeditionary warfare, Military Working Dog operations, security details for senior officers, and detainee handling.
*  Office of Don Muang RTAF Base Commander:  สำนักงานผู้บังคับทหารอากาศดอนเมือง
* Air Force Office of Special Investigations (OSI)—Air Force
Each service also maintains uniformed civilian police departments.
The American-established (now defunct) Philippine Constabulary (PC) was also known as the ''Military Police Command''.
The Estonian MP organization was created in 1994 and is today divided into tactical (patrol) and investigative units.
In addition, the Swiss Explosive Ordnance Disposal Center is a branch of the MP for the disposal of unexploded ordnance and also participates in various demining operations around the world.
When on official duty, they also wear the MP armband, which is black with "MP" in red letters.
*  Air Military Police Department:  กรมทหารสารวัตรทหารอากาศ
Nowadays they are also in charge of counterterrorism, road traffic control out of the cities, coast guard and customs, search and rescue at sea and in the mountains and the security of the Spanish Prime Minister and the government.
CGIS primarily investigates and charges those in its own population with serious crimes, such as rape, assault or forgery, that fall under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
All members of the Corps are NCOs, with Officers being transferred in for temporary assignments.
National tasks include:
The Indian Air Force is policed by the Indian Air Force Police.
They do have authority over military personnel, including in certain circumstances reservists, anywhere, including when such personnel are off duty.
This force is composed of the most qualified State Military Police personnel from all the states, only to be used when the governor of a state asks for help to control a significant security crisis.
The other one is the ''Polícia dos Estabelecimentos da Marinha'' (Navy's Establishments Police), a small gendarmerie type agency responsible for guarding the Lisbon Naval Base and some other naval facilities.
It is under supervision of the Commander of the Air Military Police Department.
In Singapore, the Singapore Armed Forces Military Police Command serves as the law enforcement agency of the Singapore Armed Forces.
73/ 3 July 1882, the Gendarmerie Corps was converted into the Dragoon Corps.
In Denmark the military police (Danish: ''militærpoliti'') services are carried out as independent units under each branch.
In the Swiss Armed Forces, the Military Police is responsible for law enforcement on military property and for all incidents where military personnel or equipment is involved.
Each branch of the military of the United States maintains its own police force.
MP also have the power to enforce the Provincial Highway Traffic Acts on all military bases in Canada pursuant to the Government Property Traffic Regulations (GPTR).
* Check routines and security checks
* Coast Guard Investigative Service (CGIS)—Coast Guard
In 1923 the Act on Military Police Replenishment was adopted due to the necessity of organizational and structural building of the Military Police.
The crimes committed by military personnel are, as a rule, investigated by the military.
Later, the Pakistan Navy established the "naval police" with its centre commissioned at "PNS Nighaban", and the Pakistan Air Force later established the PAF Police to maintain order.
Additionally, a host installation's Security Force (both overseas and in the Continental United States) are augmented by Sailors on Temporary Assignment of Duty (TEMADD) from their parent units, as part of the Auxiliary Security Force (ASF).
Most of the personnel are draftee soldiers undergoing their regular military service.
The Military Police gradually turns into a modern NATO-modelled formation.
The Federal Police’s Military Crime Division (DJMM) performs all investigations involving the armed forces.
There are two MP companies, the 14th and the 15th companies.
They also wear a black brassard with the letters "IAFP" imprinted in red.
In the air force the MP-shoulder markings is typically replaced with markings saying either ''VAGT'' or ''GUARD'', but for international missions they also use the ''MP''-markings.
They are essentially used to regulate traffic, and can be identified by a black brassard with the letters "RP" embossed in gold or white.
In addition they provide a military detachment to the Oireachtas (Houses of Parliament) and have a large ceremonial role.
There is one active Air MP Battalion called the Battalion of Military Air Police (''กองพันทหารสารวัตรทหารอากาศ'').
The Military Police force protects, for example, the Palace of the Nation and the Parliaments and Councils of the Regions and the Communities, headquarters and classified conferences.
Their main and historical role is as rural police in rural areas.
Criminal investigations were conducted by the Geheime Feldpolizei or Secret Field Police.
They can be seen guarding closed roads, museums, embassies, government buildings and airports.
The corps has very little civilian jurisdiction and for that reason works in conjunction with the Israeli Police when civilians are involved.
The Military Police patrolled in the troops areas and in the rear, maintaining the order and discipline.
The Corps of Military Police (CMP) is the military police of the Indian Army.
* Security missions: Prevents and deters any threat to or attack against the personnel and property of the armed forces.
If in fact a crime is committed on or in relation to DND property or assets, MP have the power to arrest and charge the offender, military or civilian, under the Criminal Code.
Its sub-units included the Military Police Enforcement Unit (including Special Investigations Branch and ceremonial and drill components), the Detention Barracks (DB), The 1st Provost Bn, MP Training School and the Security Support Forces (including Military working Dog Wing, Close Protection and Security Ops Unit).
In 1991 the Ministry of Defense tasked the General Staff with planning of the Military Police organization and structure in order to re-establish the service.
In addition, the CMP is trained to handle prisoners of war and to regulate traffic, as well as to handle basic telecommunication equipment such as telephone exchanges.
MPs also provide VIP motorcycle escorts and honour guards, perform close protection missions, and escort classified documents and money transports.
Army MPs, Navy MAs, Navy Sailors who possess the Navy Enlisted Classification (NEC) Code 2008 and 9575, Navy Sailors who have completed the Individual Augmentee (IA) training for Detention Operations, and Air Force Security Forces have been widely utilized as prison guards in detainee facilities, whereas Marine Corps MPs focus on securing and processing detainees before passing them on to Army holding facilities.
Of interest is Ministerial Order No.
Its area of responsibility for enforcing discipline and order is only limited to inside the military complex which it is given authority, and not beyond.
'''Military Police''' ('''MP''') are law enforcement agencies connected with, or part of, the military of a state.
The companies are part of and subordinate to the brigade.
The word ''Marechaussee'' seems to derive from the old French name ''Marecheaux'' given to an ancient court of justice in Paris called the "Tribunal of Constables and Marshals of France".
The Royal Gendarmerie of Cambodia is deployed in every province and cities to keep the law and order.
The ''Askeri İnzibat'', or As.Iz., are part of the Turkish Gendarmerie, one of the five branches of the Turkish Armed Forces, and constitute a very small dedicated force that handles military security and military crimes.
523 of 8 April the Regiment was disbanded under the Paris Peace Treaty clauses.
For a long time, ''sotapoliisi'' existed only in wartime.
During World War II, Germany had numerous military police units.
The military police of Indonesia also perform duties in the area of law enforcement (including investigation of crime) involving members of the military (even in certain cases that may also involve the regular civilian police, especially if the case involves a civilian), installation of security, escort protection of senior military officers and/or important government officials, setting and supervising prisoners of war, controlling custody of military prisoners, managing military traffic control and marking and managing routes and resupply routes for military and civilian purposes.
The Defense Criminal Investigative Service (DCIS) is a civilian agency that answers directly to the DOD as well as the Pentagon Force Protection Agency (PFPA).
Minor infractions are usually investigated by the career personnel of the unit, while more serious crimes are investigated by the investigative section of the General Staff of the Finnish Defence Forces.
