Individual soldiers were referred to as soldiers (''milites'') or legionaries (''legionarii'').
Armies are numbered by spelled-out numerals or functional titles, using their nationality in "combined" forces (e.g., Eighth US Army, Third ROK Army, British Army of the Rhine).
The first colonels were captains granted command of their regiments by commission of the king.
Each rank gives the individual an indication of how long and how well they have served in combat and training.
An infantry platoon can number from 42 to 55 individuals, depending on the service.
Students at these programs are called officer candidates.
His headquarters can include a first sergeant and as many as seven others.
From 501 BC the Athenians annually elected ten individuals to the rank of ''strategos'', one for each of the ten "tribes" that had been created with the founding of the democracy.
Army commissions were reserved for the best—the aristocracy of mainland Europe and the aristocracy and gentry of Great Britain.
* Commander of a frontier March: ''marzpawn'' (Parthian) or ''marzban'' (Sassanian)
Once Athens became a naval power, the top generals of the land armies had authority over the naval fleets as well.
Enlisted personnel are personnel below commissioned rank and make up the vast majority of military personnel.
In the Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force, these pay grades correspond to the ranks of major (O-4), lieutenant colonel (O-5), and colonel (O-6), and in the Navy, lieutenant commander, commander, and captain.
The commissioned officer assisting the captain with command of the company was the lieutenant.
The British Army refers to its trainee officers as officer cadets, who rank as private soldiers at the start of their training, with no authority over other ranks (except when appointed to carry out a role as part of training).
Officer cadets are addressed to as "Mister" or "Miss" until the completion of the early stages of their training at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst (at which point cadets "pass out" and formally gain their commissions), thereafter other ranks (non-officers) will address them as "Sir" or "Ma'am".
They did not command a formation of their own.
Above that, the 1st Marine Regiment (also known as "First Marines") consists of four such battalions and one headquarters company.
In some countries warrant officers come under the non-commissioned officer branch (senior non-commissioned officiers).
In others lieutenant-commanders, as equivalents to army and marine majors, are considered senior officers.
The older position became known as sergeant major general to distinguish it.
The 1st Marine Division is part of the  I Marine Expeditionary Force, which also includes the 3rd Marine Air Wing, 1st Marine Logistics Group, 1st Marine Expeditionary Brigade (as required), three marine expeditionary units (featuring helicopter groups), and a battalion-sized marine air ground task force.
This tradition was continued by the US Navy after its original adoption of the rank, but now US Navy midshipmen are limited in the same manner as cadets in the other US services.
"The U.S. commissioned officer corps is divided into 10 pay grades (O-1 through O-10).
These were among the first troops ever to be drilled, and they fought packed in a close rectangular formation, typically eight men deep, with a leader at the head of each column (or file) and a secondary leader in the middle so that the back rows could move off to the sides if more frontage was needed.
Army groups received Arabic numeral designations and national designations when combined.
Even the most senior NCO officially ranks beneath the most junior commissioned officer or warrant officer.
These ranks have often been discontinued, such as in Germany and Canada, or limited to wartime and/or honorific promotion, such as in the United Kingdom and the United States.
For instance, commodore used to be an appointment of captain in the Royal Navy and lance corporal used to be an appointment of private in the British Army.
An equivalent elsewhere within the same marine expeditionary force (MEF) might be a MEF logistics group (MLG), which is not a regimental-sized unit (as the word "group" implies), but rather a large support unit consisting of several battalions of support personnel.
Considering such a variety of units, the command sizes for any given rank will vary widely.
In the Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force, these pay grades correspond to the ranks of second lieutenant (O-1), first lieutenant (O-2), and captain (O-3), and in the Navy, ensign, lieutenant junior grade, and lieutenant.
In the U.S. Marines, brigades are only formed for certain missions.
Officers are appointed by a royal commission in most monarchies or a presidential commission in many other countries.
In size and nature they are larger and more varied collections of battalions than is common for a regiment, fitting them for their traditional role as the smallest formation able to operate independently on a battlefield without external logistical tactical support.
This gave rise to the modern ranks of major and major general.
Corps (and similar organizations) are normally designated with Roman numerals and their nationality when operating in a combined (international) force—e.g., V (US) Corps, VIII (ROK) Corps, II MEF, I Canadian Corps.
The first lancepesades were simply experienced privates; who either assisted their corporal or performed the duties of a corporal themselves.
Captain was derived from the Late Latin word ''capitaneus'' (meaning "head man" or chief).
A unit of 100 men was a ''satabam'' led by a ''satapatis''.
There also exists the specialty ranks of General of the Armies of the United States and Admiral of the Navy which at their inception were considered senior four star officers but came to be considered six-star rank after the creation of five star officers.
A lieutenant colonel or equivalent rank commands a battalion or a squadron, often consisting of four companies, plus the various members of his headquarters.
In various countries, particularly the United States, these may be referred to as "star ranks" for the number of stars worn on some rank insignia: typically one-star for brigadier general or equivalent with the addition of a star for each subsequent rank.
The latter is called laticlavian tribune (''tribunus laticlavius'') and was second in command.
Battalions and regiments are usually numbered, either as a separate battalion or as part of a regimental structure (e.g., 1-501st Infantry in the US Army).
Typical army company officer ranks include captain and various grades of lieutenant.
The ten generals were equal to one another; there was no hierarchy among them, however a basic form of democracy was in effect: For example, at the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC, the generals determined the battle plan by majority vote.
This is the reason a major outranks a lieutenant, but a lieutenant general outranks a major general.
In some forces, there may be one or more superior ranks to the common examples, above, that are given distinguishing titles, such as Field Marshal (most armies of the world, notably excluding the United States) or General of the Army (mainly the United States because "Marshal" is used as a peace officer's designation), Admiral of the Fleet (U.S. Navy),  Marshal of the Royal Air Force, or other national air force.
If in modern divisions the deputy commander is a brigadier general, the laticlavian tribune can perhaps be translated with this rank, though he commanded no formation of his own.
Under this system, starting from the bottom and working up, a corporal leads a fireteam consisting of three other individuals.
Corporals were assisted by lancepesades.
Communist states have sometimes abolished rank (e.g., the Soviet Red Army 1918–1935, the Chinese People's Liberation Army 1965–1988, and the Albanian Army 1966–1991), only to re-establish them after encountering operational difficulties of command and control.
Each of these professionals began their careers as a private.
For example, in U.S. Marine infantry units, rifle platoons usually consist of three rifle squads of 13 men each, with a Navy corpsman, the platoon leader, and a platoon sergeant (i.e., a staff sergeant who serves as second-in-command).
* Castellan: ''argbadh'' or ''argbod''
Numbers also differ for non-combat units such as quartermasters, cooks, and hospital staff.
Appointment refers to the instrument by virtue of which the person exercises his or her authority.
The so-called "brigada" was a mixed unit, comprising infantry, cavalry and normally artillery too, designated for a special task.
Around the end of the 16th century, companies were grouped into regiments.
In the U.S. Marine Corps there are three marine expeditionary forces.
Usually, uniforms denote the bearer's rank by particular insignia affixed to the uniforms.
In French history, ''lieutenant du roi'' was a title born by the officer sent with military powers to represent the king in certain provinces.
NCOs are appointed by an instrument of appointment, a written document, often a certificate, usually from the service head.
The real commanders and the legates together were, in modern terms, the general officers.
Divisions are normally numbered, but can be named after a function or personage.
In some armies "brigadier general" has been shortened to "brigadier".
In most Commonwealth armies a company is commanded by a major, assisted by a captain.
The rank that was subordinate to a top general was a ''taxiarchos'' or ''taxiarhos'', something akin to the modern brigadier.
In English speaking countries, a company (or troop in the cavalry, and battery in the artillery) is usually designated by a letter (e.g., "A Company").
In English usage, these ranks were merged into the single rank of second lieutenant in the 19th Century.
In the U.S. Army, the level above division is called a corps instead of an expeditionary force.
The ranks of junior officers are the three or four lowest ranks of officers.
Foot soldiers were organized into heavy infantry phalanxes called ''phalangites''.
Some titles are not genuine ranks, but either functions assumed by generals or honorific titles.
They were first appointed in Spain by King Ferdinand II of Aragon where they were also known as coronellos (crown officers) since they were appointed by the Crown.
Commonwealth air force senior officer ranks include group captain, wing commander, and squadron leader, where such ranks are still used.
Squad derived from the Italian word for a "square" or "block" of soldiers.
Typically, the king and high-ranking lords would call out for all lords to gather their troops for a campaign.
The cavalry, for which Alexander became most famous (in a military sense), grew more varied.
Company grade officers also fill staff roles in some units.
The troops' lord retained at least nominal control over them—many medieval military planning sessions involved negotiating each lord's role in the coming battle—and each lord was allowed to leave after a predetermined amount of time had passed.
As the Middle Ages came to an end, kings increasingly relied on professional soldiers to fill the bottom ranks of their armies instead of militiamen.
These were in their turn formed into army groups, these being the largest field organization handled by a single commander in modern warfare.
He too would have colonel rank in modern armies, yet he differed much from the tribunes in that his office was not part of the rather administrative ''cursus'', but normally filled by former centurions.
The ranking and command system used by U.S. Marine ground forces or U.S. Army infantry units can serve as a template for this purpose.
A Greek cavalry company was led by a ''tetrarchès'' or tetrarch.
The first NCOs were the armed servants (men-at-arms) of the aristocracy, assigned to command, organize and train the militia units raised for battle.
In the United States Marine Corps individuals of all ranks regardless of command status may be referred to as "Marine".
Moreover, as in modern navies, the different tasks associated with running a ship were delegated to different subordinates.
Sometimes personnel serve in an appointment which is higher than their actual rank.
As armies grew bigger, heraldry and unit identification remained primarily a matter of the regiment.
These examples illustrate a standard that holds true all over the world and throughout military history, namely that higher rank generally implies command of larger units in a nested system of ranks and commands.
The fighting men in the legion were formed into ''ranks'', rows of men who fought as a unit.
In cavalry companies the equivalent rank was cornet.
Thus the English pronunciation of the word colonel.
In the United States Navy, a commodore currently is a senior captain commanding a squadron that is too small for a rear admiral to command, although that name has historically been used as a rank.
As a result, a full squad numbers 13 individuals.
In fact, corporal was derived from the Italian caporal de squadra (head of the squad).
Certain specialists were granted a warrant, certifying their expertise as craftsmen.
Additionally, US Marine officers in training are also midshipmen, trained and educated alongside their naval counterparts, and wear distinctive insignia to indicate their branch of service.
This money was handed to the company commanders from the royal treasury, the company commanders using the money to recruit the troops.
The title (not rank) of commodore can also indicate an officer who is senior to a ship's captain (since only the ship's commander is addressed as captain while underway).
In the United States, warrant officers are appointed by warrant then commissioned by the President of the United States at the rank of chief warrant officer.
The organization of the army was based on the decimal system, employed by Oghuz Khagan.
There were no ranks in the modern sense of a hierarchy of titles, although the army was organized into a hierarchical command.
The lieutenants of the colonel were the lieutenant colonels.
These may have a variety of grades, such as private first class, but these usually only reflect variations in pay, not increased authority.
There were heavy cavalry and wing cavalry (''ilè'') units, the latter commanded by an ''ilarchos''.
When he was not assisting the captain, the lieutenant commanded a unit called a platoon, particularly a more specialized platoon.
In the US and several other western forces, officers in training are referred to as student officers, and carry the rank of cadet (army and air force) or midshipman (navy, and in some countries, marines).
These were field officers, third in command of their regiments (after their colonels and lieutenant colonels), with a role similar to the older, army-level sergeants major (although obviously on a smaller scale).
In some organizations, senior NCOs may have formal responsibility and informal respect beyond that of junior officers, but less than that of warrant officers.
The term "rank" comes from Persian رنگ ''rang'' meaning "colour", as the Sassanid army was ranked and dressed by colour.
Over time, sergeants were differentiated into many ranks as various levels of sergeants were used by the commanders of various levels of units.
The specific size of a command for any given rank will, however, depend on the task the unit performs, the nature of weapons used, and the strategies of warfare.
Each service has at least one, and usually several, officer candidate school facilities.
The commissioned officer carrying the (infantry) company's flag was the ensign.
Naval and coast guard senior officer ranks include captain and commander.
Platoons are usually numbered (e.g., 1st Platoon) or named after their primary function (e.g., service platoon).
Proconsuls, after the establishment of the office, would also be used.
While commissioned staff officers assisted their commander with personnel, intelligence, operations and logistics, the sergeant was a jack of all trades, concerning himself with all aspects of administration to maintain the enlisted men serving under his commander.
Originally these generals worked together with the old ''polemarchos'' ("warlord") but over time the latter figure was absorbed into the generalship: each of the ten generals would rotate as polemarch for one day, and during this day his vote would serve as tie-breaker if necessary.
In the 17th century, the sergeant of the colonel was the sergeant major.
While a sergeant might have commanded a squad upon promotion, he usually became a staff officer.
The ranks associated with each pay grade are as follows: in the Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force, brigadier general (O-7), major general (O-8), lieutenant general (O-9), and general (O-10); in the Navy, rear admiral-lower half, rear admiral-upper half, vice admiral, and admiral."
Starting at the bottom, a unit of 10 was called a ''dathabam'' and was led by a ''dathapatis''.
In non-English speaking countries, they are usually numbered.
These warrant officers assisted the commissioned officers but ranked above the non-commissioned officers.
The manipula were commanded by one of their two centurions, the cohorts by one of their three manipulum's centurions; the most senior cohort-commanding centurions was called ''primus pilus''.
In the Commonwealth, warrant officers hold a royal or presidential warrant.
In some militaries, however, a captain may act as the permanent commanding officer of an independent company-sized army unit, for example a signal or field engineer squadron, or a field artillery battery.
Roman discipline was severe, with all ranks subject to corporal and capital punishment at the commander's discretion.
With the rise of Macedonia under Philip II of Macedon and Alexander the Great, the Greek military became professional, tactics became more sophisticated and additional levels of ranking developed.
The army was built upon a squad of ten (''aravt'') led by an appointed chief.
To get a sense of the practical meaning of these ranks—and thus to be able to compare them across the different armed services, different nations, and the variations of titles and insignia—an understanding of the relative levels and sizes of each command is helpful.
(Within the headquarters battalion are one headquarters company, one service company, one military police company, one communications company, and one truck company.)
In Imperial times, each legion was commanded by the emperor, who was technically either consul or proconsul.
Commonwealth (excluding Canada) air force junior officer ranks usually include flight lieutenant, flying officer, and pilot officer.
For instance, in the French Army ''général de corps d'armée'' is a function assumed by some ''généraux de division'', and ''maréchal de France'', which is a distinction denoting the most superior military office, but one that has often neutered the practical command powers of those on whom it is conferred.
* Marzban of Central Asian Marches was called ''kenarang''.
The term ''military tribune'' is even sometimes translated into English as "colonel"—most notably by the late classicist Robert Graves in his "Claudius" novels and his translation of Suetonius' ''Twelve Caesars''—to avoid confusion with the political "tribunes of the people"; in addition, they must not either be confused with the "military tribunes with consular authority", who in early Republican times could replace the consuls.
The highest four pay grades are reserved for general officers in the Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force, and flag officers in the Navy.
However, most senior NCOs have more experience, possibly including combat, than junior officers.
The largest organic unit was a ten thousand man unit (''tumen'') also led by an appointed ''noyan''.
A captain or equivalent rank commands a company, usually consisting of four platoons (three line platoons and one heavy weapons platoon).
Tank and artillery crews, for example, involve far fewer personnel.
For example, if a cohort broke in battle, the typical punishment was ''decimation'', in which every tenth soldier, selected by lot, was killed.
In the United States, five stars has been the highest rank regularly attainable (excluding the Marines and Coast Guard, which have traditionally served as branches of the Navy in times of war and thus under the command of an Admiral of the Fleet).
These officers may be serving at a military academy, or, as common in the United States, as members of a military training unit attached to a civilian college or university, such as an ROTC unit.
Different types of units, however, were divided differently and therefore their leaders had different titles.
As armies grew larger, composed of multiple companies, one captain was granted general (overall) authority over the field armies by the king.
Heavily armed foot soldiers were called ''hoplitès'' or hoplites and a ''hoplomachos'' was a drill or weapons instructor.
It should be remembered that different countries will often use their own systems that do not match the presentation here.
The level above regiment and brigade is the division, commanded by a major general and consisting of from 10,000 to 20,000 persons.
A corporal commanded a squad.
The next unit was a regiment of a thousand (''myangat'') led by an appointed ''noyan''.
(Modern armies have a similar distinction on a lower scale—i.e., between commissioned and non-commissioned officers.)
While cadet has always been a rank of limited authority and prestige (cadets and US Navy midshipmen have no authority over commissioned personnel, warrants, or officers, only subordinate cadets), midshipman has historically been a rank with limited leadership responsibility, particularly in the Royal Navy (where cadets are commissioned at the start of their training, unlike their Army counterparts).
They would appoint a renowned noble to organize the assembling forces, the marshal.
This was eventually shortened to major general, while captain general was shortened to simply general.
It was introduced to overcome the normal army structure, consisting of regiments.
The ranks of centurions in the individual cohorts were, in descending order, ''pilus prior'', ''pilus posterior'', ''princeps prior'', ''princeps posterior'', ''hastatus prior'', and ''hastatus posterior''.
Field armies were armies raised by the king to enter the battle field in preparation for major battles.)
Legates were typically drawn from the Roman Senate for a three-year term.
* Commander-in-Chief: ''Eran spahbod'' (to be replaced with four ''spahbods'', one for each frontier of the Empire during the reign of Khosrau I).
The command structure of armies was generally loose and varied considerably.
In the Republic, commanding was confined to consuls or (seldom) to praetors, or in cases of necessity a dictator.
Squads usually have numbered designations (e.g., 1st Squad).
Beyond this, in any real situation, not all units will be at full strength and there will be various attachments and detachments of assorted specialists woven throughout the system.
Equivalent units also commanded by captains are batteries (for field artillery units) and detachments.
The Greeks called such masses of troops a ''myrias'' or ''myriad''.
Following further specialization, the naval strategos was replaced by a ''nauarchos'', a sea officer equating to an admiral.
In many armies, because junior officers have a great amount of responsibility and authority but little operational experience, they are paired with senior NCO advisers.
In the United States Air Force individuals of all ranks regardless of command status may be referred to as "airman".
A unit of 1,000 was a ''hazarabam'' and was commanded by a ''hazarapatis''.
Brigades headed by brigadier generals were the units invented as a tactical unit by the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus II ("Gustav II Adolf," who was killed at the battle of Lützen 1632).
For example, under a numbering system by tens, a ''dekas'' or ''dekania'' was a unit of ten led by a ''dekarchos'', a ''hekatontarchia'' was a unit of hundred led by a ''hekatontarchos'' and a ''khiliostys'' or ''khiliarchia'' was a unit of a thousand led by a ''khiliarchos''.
Particular assignments, however, might have been given to individual generals; inevitably there was a regular division of responsibilities.
The king of course possessed it (the ''rex sacrorum'' was strictly forbidden to have it to avoid a return to the monarchy).
The other tribunes are called ''tribuni angusticlavii'' and are equivalent to staff officers in both senses of the term: of ranks major, lieutenant colonel, colonel, and with administrative duties.
The basic unit of the medieval army was the company, a band of soldiers assigned (or raised) by a vassal lord on behalf of ''his lord'' (in later times the king himself).
As a result, the rank of lance corporal was derived from combining lancepesade and corporal.
In some countries warrant ranks replace senior enlisted ranks.
Decimation was not commonplace as lack of men would reduce combat effectiveness, which would eventually overcome the psychological "benefit" of keeping the troops in line.
A warrant officer is not a chief warrant officer until they reach W2.
The top officers were known as commissioned officers because their rank came from a royal commission.
During World War II, due to the large scale of combat, multiple corps were combined into armies commanded in theory by a general (four stars), but often by a lieutenant general (three stars), and comprising as many as 240,000 troops.
Warrant officers range from WO1-CW5.
The High Constable might have authority in the army due to his role of head of the regular cavalry.
Among mounted troops, an ''asabam'' was a cavalry unit led by an ''asapatis''.
In some countries and services, personnel in different branches have different titles.
Strength typically ranges from 1,500 to 3,500 personnel.
Medieval militaries did not have a unified rank structure; while the feudal lords were in some ways equivalent to modern officers, they didn't have a strict hierarchy—a king was conceived of as first among equals, not a monarch as later or ancient societies understood the concept, and all nobles were theoretically equals (hence "peers").
Lieutenant was derived from the French language; the ''lieu'' meaning "place" as in a position; and ''tenant'' meaning "holding" as in "holding a position"; thus a "lieutenant" is somebody who holds a position in the absence of his superior.
The rank was roughly equivalent to the ''legatus'' of a Roman legion.
For some air forces, however, such as those of Canada, United States and many other air forces, general officer rank titles are used.
The 1st Marine Division, for example, is made up of four marine regiments (of the type described above), one assault amphibian battalion, one reconnaissance battalion, two light armored reconnaissance battalions, one combat engineer battalion, one tank battalion, and one headquarters battalion—totalling more than 19,000 marines.
Many warrant officers come from the ranks of mid-career NCOs.
The size of such "brigada" was a reinforced company up to two regiments.
