However, by 1914, drab colours were increasingly being adopted for active service and ordinary duty wear.
The feudal system of Western Europe provided instances of distinguishing features denoting allegiance to one or another lord.
Existing state units and quickly raised volunteer regiments on both sides wore a wide variety of styles and colours in the early stages of the war.
Placed on the outermost tunic, the Airman may pin their ribbons and career badge as optional with their name plate as the only mandatory item.
The practical advantages of this innovation led the British and German armies to adopt their own helmets by 1916.
Bavarians however continued to wear light blue and Saxon regiments retained a number of distinctions after the establishment of the German Empire (1871).
While by no means extinct, bright colours are now usually reserved for wear by units having ceremonial functions, some bands and officers attending formal occasions.
By choice or convenience the majority of the corps out of which the New Model Army was formed had come to be dressed in red, with facings according to the colonel's taste, and it is a curious fact that in Austria sixty years afterwards events took the same course.
In these days, the officers would designate certain afternoons to "make and mend" (clothing).
The German Army has retained a form of field grey for dress wear though of modern cut and worn with berets, although some senior officers still prefer peaked caps.
For wet weather, old sail cloth was made into a coat (with hat or attached hood) that was waterproofed with tallow or fat.
The unique combat uniforms of the US Marines has also led to nicknames given by the enemy; "Black boots," "Yellow Legs" and "White sleeves" to name a few.
The British Household Cavalry and Foot Guards wear uniforms largely unchanged from 1914 for "public duties" i.e.
Retained however were the extremely large number of colours appearing on collars, cuffs and shoulder straps to distinguish the various regiments.
Embroidered chest panels and coloured buttons on headdresses were used to distinguish rank and sometimes unit.
The new service dress would be introduced in 2007 and become obligatory for all ranks by 2011.
The infantry and cavalry of the Republican Guard retain their late 19th-century dress uniforms, as do the military cadets of Saint-Cyr and the École Polytechnique.
Orders of military monks such as the Knights Templar or Hospitaler wore mantles respectively of white (with red crosses on the shoulder) or black (with white crosses) over the usual pattern of armour for their periods.
The Italians, Soviets, Japanese, Swiss, Spanish and Portuguese were amongst these.
This and other features of the historic Prussian Army uniform were generally adopted by the other German States as they fell under Prussian influence before and after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870.
Officers of all branches have a dark blue dress uniform of modern cut while the Corazzieri (Cuirassiers of the Presidential Guard), Mounted Carabinieri and cadets of the Military Academy of Modena wear ceremonial uniforms which date back to the 19th century.
The flared "bell bottom" trousers disappeared after the Second World War.
These weapons used a new smokeless powder that generated far less smoke leaving the battlefield un-obscured by smoke and making brightly coloured troops into highly visible targets.
This may reflect the considerable difference in roles and conditions of service between sailors and soldiers.
Now most armies have some form of camouflaged uniform, such as the British DPM.
In the later part of the Medieval period instances of standardised clothing being issued for particular campaigns began to occur.
The Russian Army has retained a number of features, such as officers' epaulettes, high boots and long greatcoats with collar patches for all ranks, which can be traced back to Tsarist days.
This was worn in conjunction with a smart olive drab "Class A" dress uniform—which in many cases varied to a rich "chocolate" brown tunic worn with khaki trousers.
Similarly the US Air Force has begun fielding digital pattern uniforms to their service members, with those uniforms featuring a blue/grey/tan pattern).
The Canadian government supplied information and manufacturers to help the Marines with the computer-generated Digital Pattern pixelated uniform the Canadians had been developing since 1988.
The drab uniforms of 1914-18 remained in general use until the Second World War.
Throughout this period sailors supplied or made their own clothing.
During the late 17th century they were often dressed in individual styles and colours according to their own taste and means.
The Imperial Russian armies following their adoption of khaki-grey field uniforms in 1908, took the opportunity to upgrade their parade uniforms to much more elaborate and colorful styles, and were experimenting with a mix of khaki and bright colours when war broke out in 1914.
The terracotta army discovered in the tomb of the first Emperor of China (c. 200 BC) have a superficial similarity but closer examination shows up to seven different styles of armour, which do not appear to have been standardised within separate units.
This was partly for political reasons since the Republican, Fascist, Nazi and Communist regimes that replaced many of the old monarchies and empires had little interest in preserving the splendours of their predecessors.
Cavalrymen of the Guard had no less than 10 different uniforms.
The dress uniform for officers is of the same distinctive blue/green colour as the "Tsar's green" worn until 1914.
The French grey was probably decided upon, like the Austrian grey, as being a good "service" colour, which could be cheaply manufactured.
The Imperial German field grey of 1910 retained a number of traditional features such as spiked helmets, shakos, busbies and coloured piping from the older uniforms.
The US Marine Corps also issues similar uniforms with their MARPAT pattern,
The tall, mitre-shaped caps worn by grenadiers in the 18th century made their wearers appear bigger and more impressive.
The styles and decoration of military uniforms varied immensely with the status, image and resources of the military throughout the ages.
As noted above, traditional coloured uniforms have long since given way to clothing more suited for actual combat in modern conditions.
Camouflage clothing, being cheap, comfortable and practical, has increasingly become the usual dress for daily wear in most armies, superseding the various "service" uniforms which were often the field dress of previous wars.
Soldiers of the French Armed Forces do however still wear their kepis and a modified form of parade dress off duty, which can be seen every 14 July, during the Bastille Day Military Parade, in Paris.
Officers of all branches wear dark blue or white gala uniforms for social and ceremonial occasions.
All of the above armies wear some form of camouflage uniforms for training and active service.
The British infantry retained their scarlet tunics for parade and "walking out" wear while the bulk of French regiments wore red trousers with dark or light blue tunics.
For service in Ireland the New Model Army's red coat was exchanged for one of russet colour, just as scarlet gave way to khaki for Indian service in the 19th century.
These however seldom went beyond colours and patterns painted on shields or embroidered on surcoats.
However the lack of unified production for the Roman army meant that there were still considerable differences in detail.
Soon afterwards the helmet disappeared, and its place was taken by a grey broad-brimmed hat.
Many modern military forces now use a system of combat uniforms that not only break up the outline of the soldier for use on the battlefield during the daytime, but also employ a distinctive appearance that makes them difficult to detect with light amplification devices, such as night-vision goggles (NVGs).
Shields were painted in unique patterns to indicate which cohort a soldier was from.
As an alternative parade dress, camouflage uniforms can be worn with the dress items noted above.
As an example of modern practice, the US Marine Corps has a distinct blue dress uniform, but other uniforms include khaki button-up shirts, forest-green coats, and combat camouflage.
While the commutation system was in place, many states were not able to provide an ample supply of uniforms and captured federal uniforms were common.
As such it was sufficiently varied not to rank as "uniform" in the later sense.
The Operational dress of the Canadian Forces is basic uniform worn by members during operations and all other occasions beyond ceremonial duties.
But in 1645 the Long Parliament raised an army "all its own" for permanent service, and the colonels became officials rather than proprietors.
It was not until the reorganisation of the Ottoman Army by Sultan Mahmud II during the 1820s that completely standardised dress was issued.
Because of the global dominance of the Royal Navy from Trafalgar to the Second World War RN uniforms became the model for virtually all other navies.
The cavalry (Iron Sides), however, wore buff leather coats and armour long after the infantry had abandoned them.
For example, most U.S. servicemen now wear camouflage utilities for daily duty and all but the most formal occasions-whereas in the past the service uniform would be worn unless a soldier was engaged in a dirty or physical task.
However the basic costume was usually that of the tribal group or social class from which a particular class of warrior was drawn.
Confederate soldiers used a variety of vegetable and imported dyes which would fade to a "butternut" colour.
Elsewhere full or coloured dress of traditional cut was generally restricted to formal uniforms for officers and long service regulars, ceremonial guards and a few other limited categories.
However, in the main the levies of the 15th and 16th centuries wore civilian dress and regiments were dressed at the expense of their colonels in whatever style and colours the colonel preferred.
("The U.S. Marines considered adopting CADPAT for their new pattern, however the Canadian government owns the copyright for the pattern.
Later in the war the Confederate national government provided uniforms from a central depot system, including the famous Richmond and Columbus depots.
However uniform dress was not a feature of navies (officers and marines excepted) until comparatively recent times.
In the 20th and 21st centuries, the "high and tight" haircut often distinguished low-ranking soldiers, particularly infantrymen, or, in the United States, Marines and Soldiers of all ranks.
However, the proposed Future Army Dress (FAD), which is currently being developed by the British Army, includes a return to Barrack Dress for all arms, including 'non-iron' shirts and trousers in a similar pattern to that of the current No.2 Dress uniform.
It is generally supposed that Union soldiers wore blue uniforms and Confederate soldiers wore grey ones.
Centurions — the century commanders who made up the long serving backbone of the legions — were distinguished by transverse crests on their helmets, various chest ornaments (phaleræ)  corresponding to modern medals, and torques (a symbol borrowed from the Gauls and also used as a military award), and the vine stick (Vitis) that they carried as a mark of their office.
In the early 19th century Royal Navy officers developed a more distinctive form of uniform comprising (in full dress) a cocked hat, dark blue coatee with white collar and cuffs, dark blue or white trousers, or breeches.
There is a popular myth that the historic red coat of the English soldier was adopted for the same reason (in fact, blood does show as a dark stain on red clothing and the British red coat originated as a historical accident, possibly as a result of the relative cheapness of madder red dyes at the time of the English Civil War in the mid-17th century).
Thus the four Rifle regiments in their sombre dark green had a higher public profile than the great mass of line infantry in scarlet.
The Mountain infantry troops retain a more traditional dress uniform.
Even the appearance of the Janissaries was likely to reflect individual means and taste, although red was a favoured colour and the white felt zarcola headdresses were similar.
Attractive or distinctive uniforms could make a military career desirable to young men (the "peacock" factor).
The Kremlin Guard has in recent years been issued with a special ceremonial uniform which closely resembles that of the infantry regiments of the Imperial Guard immediately prior to the First World War.
Two regiments of the Prussian Guard and one of the Russian were still issued with the brass mitre caps of the 18th-century grenadier.
The highly organised armies of the Ottoman Empire employed distinctive features of dress to distinguish one corps or class of soldier from another.
These "dress blues" are worn for formal occasions such as the Marine Corps Birthday Ball in November.
Uniform dress became the norm with the adoption of regimental systems, initially by the French army in the mid-17th century.
In other services where camouflage is normally a non-issue, such as navies, coloured uniforms are still issued, e.g.
To help armies distinguish friend from foe scarves, pieces of foliage or other makeshift identification known as "field signs" would be worn, (A practice still recognised under international humanitarian law and the laws of war as a "distinctive sign".
The US Army discarded its First World War style field uniforms in 1941 in favour of a very plain and practical combat dress in a thin light brown wool shirt (sometimes with an olive green cast) and slightly darker trousers.
It should, however, be remembered that a soldier had to march, parade, fight and sometimes sleep in the same garment and that such extras as greatcoats or working clothes were seldom issued until the end of the century.
The American industrial revolution began in the Blackstone Valley, of Massachusetts and Rhode Island, with early textiles, from 1791.
British soldiers were known for their striking red clothing (hence the name "Redcoats").
The Imperial Guard Division had a light grey uniform with the same branch colours as the line.
By contrast, British soldiers, other than officers, had their 1938 battledress for all occasions.
These modern "digital" print uniforms present a somewhat splotched appearance, generally of somewhat muted colours, that provide visual concealment in a variety of surroundings.
However even in those societies where there was social and political continuity the trend was away from the traditional uniforms worn prior to 1914.
The beginnings of uniform are therefore to be found in truly national armies, in the Indelta of Gustavus Adolphus, and the English armies of the English Civil War.
Most Russian troops for example wore the very dark green introduced by Peter The Great in 1700.
In particular, some French uniforms - notably those of the cavalry regiments of the Imperial Guard - are considered as being amongst the most striking and distinctive of the time.
USMC developed new digital MARPAT pattern, while the Army developed Universal Pattern (ACU) for its standard combat uniforms, though a special camouflage pattern (multicam) more appropriate for use in Afghanistan was fielded in 2010.
One example is the Spanish infantry of Hannibal who wore white tunics with crimson edgings.
Until 1945 ''Waffenrock'' () – was the generic term to military uniform.
The British first introduced drab/khaki uniform in 1848 in India
From the coat was eventually evolved the tunic of the mid-19th century, and the hat became the cocked hat of a later generation, which generally disappeared during the decade of 1800-1810 to reappear in the late 19th and early 20th century, by which time it had its original form of a "slouch-hat."
Another is the Spartan hoplite in his red garment.
Later in the war, severe leather shortages led to the replacement of marching boots with ankle height shoes worn with gaiters (Gemäsch).
There was a khaki version of the Class A dress uniform for summer wear (See United States Army Uniform in World War II).
There was however strong attachment to the colourful uniforms as previously worn on all occasions and the process was not an inexorable one.
Mess dress in traditional scarlet, blue or green is worn by officers and senior NCOs of all regiments for formal evening dress.
Military uniforms in the form of standardised and distinctive dress, intended for identification and display, are typically a sign of organised military forces equipped by a central authority.
Amongst the frontline troops of the combatant powers in August 1914 only the Belgian and French armies saw active service in bright colours and old fashioned headgear (although the Austro-Hungarian cavalry retained their blue and red uniforms for field wear after the remainder of the army had gone into pike grey in 1909).
The warriors of ancient Sparta, normally known for their austere lifestyle, wore expensive red cloaks.
Individual regiments with a long history, such as the ''Lancieri di Montebello'' and the ''Granatieri di Sardegna'' occasionally parade honour guards or other detachments in their pre-1915 dark blue uniforms.
With the exception of Western influenced units such as the "Ever-Triumphant Army" of the Taiping Rebellion (1851–66) Chinese armies of the 19th century wore dress that was broadly variegated.
To a certain extent the functions required of a given group of soldiers were reflected in their dress.
The US Army now issues, for all theatres of operations, the Army Combat Uniform (ACU), which replaces the Battle Dress Uniform (BDU) and the Desert Combat Uniform (DCU).
The United States Armed Forces allows every branch to develop and use their own uniforms.
But uniformity of clothing was not to be expected so long as the "enlistment" system prevailed and soldiers were taken in and dismissed at the beginning and end of every campaign.
In the British army officers were ordered to adopt epaulettes by a clothing warrant dated 1768.
The military of many countries have adopted the economical expedient of smartening up combat uniforms for parade by adding medals, neck scarves and coloured berets to the terrain coloured camouflage uniforms intended for combat.
In addition, this idea was followed with uniforms suitable for particular climates and seasons such as white for snowy regions and tan for sandy ones.
Blues, though the second most used uniform, receive far less service than ABUs.
Fragments of surviving clothing and wall paintings indicate that the basic tunic of the Roman soldier was of un-dyed (off-white) or red-dyed wool.
The purpose of the colors and patterns in this uniform serve to help one blend into the concrete-like color of the flight line on which the uniform is most often worn outside.
The Nationale Volksarmee of the former German Democratic Republic also maintained a stone grey uniform, following the Imperial German tradition.
Tradition is however still strong in British military culture and there are many regimental distinctions added to some uniforms.
There were for example ten shades of red, ranging from cherry red to pink.
The New Model Army was clothed in the civilian costume of the date&mdash;ample coat, waistcoat, breeches, stockings and shoes (in the case of cavalry, boots)&mdash;but with the distinctive colour throughout the army of red and with regimental facings of various colours and breeches of grey.
In the late 19th century, the ornate beards and moustaches worn by the officers of the day, which complemented their rank and age, were also worn by socially equivalent civilians.
In reaction, the various militaries, beginning with the British Army, changed the colours, predominantly to such ones that blended in more with the terrain, such as khaki, grey or olive drab for the purposes of camouflage.
A distinction should be made between uniforms and ethnic dress.
The Japanese Army probably went further than most in adopting khaki for all occasions after 1905, although even here officers of all branches and the cavalry of the Imperial Guard retained traditional coloured uniforms for formal and ceremonial occasions.
New uniforms were issued with surprising frequency in some 18th-century armies (once a year in the British service).
However, this was only a generalisation.
Infantry drummers and cavalry trumpeters often had "reverse" colours with coats the colour of the regimental facings and facings the colour of the regimental coats.
The new Navy Working Uniform (NWU) is now worn by naval sailors and officers.
In Germany the Nazi regime retained uniforms with many traditional features from Imperial Germany for its army uniforms, such as field grey cloth, marching boots (a taller version for officers), collar litzen (braiding) and breeches (for officers and NCOs); German Panzer (tank) troops had a special combat uniform made of black wool and German troops serving in tropical climates had uniforms in a shade of khaki.
Popular disdain among US troops for the beret headgear as part of the "default" headgear for wear with the ACU uniform led to a regulation revision in 2011, with the standard "default" headgear for wear with ACUs now being the ACU patrol cap, which provides a much better degree of sun protection for the eyes).
The first fifteen years of this century influenced the appearance of military uniforms until the 1850s.
Even the armour produced in state factories varied according to the province of origin.
British, American, Japanese and French uniforms still retained some distinctive features, even as they became more and more utilitarian in the course of the War.
The legions of the Roman Republic and Empire had a fairly standardised dress and armour, particularly from approximately the early to mid 1st century onward, when Lorica Segmentata (segmented armour) was introduced.
'''Military uniform''' is the standardised dress worn by members of the armed forces and paramilitaries of various nations.
The Spanish Army (which had not been involved in the First World War) exceptionally continued to issue coloured uniforms to all its conscript rank and file until 1926 and thereafter to the garrisons of Seville, Barcelona and Madrid for special ceremonials until 1931.
If the commander raised and equipped the troops out of his own pocket, the appearance of the soldiers was also designed to impress his superiors.
There was infinite variety, even within smaller armies, between regiments, branches or ranks and the subject is a very complex one.
A khaki summer uniform was worn by the entire army.
Large flags were another aid to co-ordination and location for commanders.
In an early instance of camouflage awareness, the sailors of Imperial Rome are reported to have worn blue/green tunics.
Sometimes the Napoleonic Wars are identified as being the acme of colourful and ornate uniforms, but actually the several decades of relative peace that followed were a time of even more decorative styles and embellishments.
The appearance of the troops was often enhanced in some way to intimidate the enemy.
This tradition continues into the present day with nose art and fin flash on combat aircraft.
Rank insignia as such was unknown until well into the 18th century.
While some auxiliary cohorts in the late Roman period had carried shields with distinctive colours or designs, there is no evidence that any one Roman legion was distinguished from another by features other than the numbers on the leather covers protecting their shields.
An elaborate system of colourful standards largely provided unit identification.
The traditional headdresses of the Bersaglieri, Horse Artillery and Alpini are still worn by the Italian Army, the Bersaglieri even wearing their flowing feathers on steel helmets as part of their combat dress.
The Danish Army adopted grey-green uniforms for all occasions in 1903, reverted to a combination of dark and light blue in 1910, took up light grey in 1915 and finally settled for khaki in 1923.
Steel helmets, originally simply items of utilitarian protective clothing, were adopted as parade headdress by the French, German, Italian and Soviet armies, amongst others, between the Wars.
The "trews" or tartan trousers of Lowland regiments have been retained for certain orders of dress in the  amalgamated Royal Regiment of Scotland, although the kilt of the Highland regiments is the parade dress.
These included red trousers for the line infantry, following the French practice in an example of cross-border influence.
The issue is further complicated by the distinctive features (weapons, armour, fighting style and native dress) of particularly effective warrior classes often being copied.
Thus the principle ever since followed&mdash;uniform coat and variegated facings&mdash;was established.
These include a variety of parade uniforms worn by various units of the recreated Royal Guard as well as the traditional dark blue and white uniforms of the Guardia Civil and the blue tunics and red trousers of the 1st Infantry Regiment.
2 dress with No 1 Dress coloured peaked caps, berets or Glengarry bonnets.
Imperial Japan used a light brown or khaki colour for most Imperial army uniforms—though there was also a green service dress tunic for officers.
The cost of the French uniforms varied widely, going from 200-250 francs for a line infantryman's outfit to 2000 francs for a cuirassier's uniform.
The Chasseurs alpins wear a large beret, known as the "tarte" (the ''pie''), and mountain outfits.
Epaulettes and braiding were gold and varied according to rank.
The reintroduction in 1943 was, presumably, a relatively inexpensive means of boosting low Soviet troop morale (it worked).
There are a few recorded attempts at uniform dress in antiquity, going beyond the similarity to be expected of ethnic or tribal dress.
Through the 18th century to the Napoleonic Wars navy officers had a form of dress broadly resembling that of army officers, though in dark blue with white facings.
The colonels there uniformed their men as they saw fit had, by tacit consent, probably to obtain "wholesale " prices, agreed upon a serviceable colour (pearl grey), and when in 1707 Prince Eugene procured the issue of uniform regulations, few line regiments had to be re-clothed.
In recent decades, many militaries around the world have gradually simplified the range of uniforms issued.
The Union eventually got most of its men into regulation Federal blue but this often faded until it appeared grey.
During the Boxer Rebellion, the Muslim Gansu Braves under General Dong Fuxiang used traditional Chinese clothing instead of western style uniforms, reflecting the opposition of the movement to foreign influences.
A darker version, known as "service drab", was adopted for home service field wear in 1902, the same year that the US Army also adopted khaki for non-dress occasions.
The distinct bluish grey colour for tankers was eliminated in 1943, from which point on all units of the Soviet Army wore brown.
The demands of modern warfare as well as financial economy soon saw these survivals vanish and by 1916 all involved armies were in either khaki (Russia, Turkish, Serbia, Montenegro, Japan, Greek, French colonial and Britain), various shades of grey (German, Italian, Bulgarian, Portuguese, and Austro-Hungarian) or sky blue (French and Romanian).
The sappers of the French Foreign Legion wear the basic legionnaire uniform but with leather aprons and gloves.
Special units such as Zouaves developed non-standard uniforms to distinguish them from troops of the line.
The battle dress of the French Armed Forces is the FÉLIN system combined with SPECTRA helmets.
The footwear worn with ABUs are sage green suede boots and head covering is the ABU pattern Patrol Cap, or the beret of the relevant career field (Security Forces, Special Operations Weather Team, SERE Instructor, Para-Rescue, and Combat Controller).
France has adopted a light beige dress uniform which is worn with coloured kepis, sashes, fringed epaulettes, fourragères and other traditional items on appropriate occasions.
The legionnaires of the French Foreign Legion wear white kepis, blue sashes and green and red epaulettes as dress uniform, while the French Marines wear blue and red kepis and yellow epaulettes.
The Marquis of Louvois, in creating a standing army, had introduced an infantry uniform as a necessary consequence.
King Frederick William I of Prussia had a guard unit of especially tall men with tall mitre hats, the Potsdam Giants.
This included features which can still be recognised in the Class I uniform of ratings in the modern Royal Navy - notably the wide blue collar with white tapes, a black neckerchief, white lanyard and blue or white jumper.
As an interesting example of the combining of old and new features of uniform the French Spahis and the Spanish Regulares still wear the flowing cloaks, fezzes, turbans and sashes of the North African colonial regiments from which they are descended with modern khaki or camouflage clothing, on appropriate occasions.
Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, the typical colour scheme included bright and highly contrasting colour arrangements which made it easier to distinguish units in battle.
Sailors of the French Navy and Fusiliers Marins wear a dress uniform dating from the 19th century with a distinctive red pom-pom on the round cap.
As Sherman's men marched across Georgia and up the Carolinas, they were cut off from supply by the Union and began wearing clothing of Confederate origin.
Green as worn by Jäger and Rifle regiments proved particularly prone to fading until suitable chemical dyes were devised in the 1890s.
Those performing duties not suited for the formal dress uniform may wear ABUs instead.
and this khaki drill became more generally worn from the Indian Mutiny of 1857 both in India and Africa.
A Soviet soldier would, for example be distinguishable from his German opponent by his general outline, even in the fog of battle.
Originally the Confederate government relied on the "commutation" system which required the states to provide their own uniforms.
Little or nothing of sentiment led to this.
Officers (who paid for their own clothing) were relatively slow to accept uniforms.
The collar braid stripes (''Litzen''), that distinguished regiments of the Prussian Guard prior to 1918, have become a general feature of modern German uniforms.
