Recruits accepted at a university may also choose to train under a program similar to the American ROTC, and satisfy their military requirement this way.
Saddam Hussein's large Iraqi army was largely composed of conscripts, except for the elite Republican Guard.
* Workers of businesses that serve the military, e.g.
The ones who get a white ball serve Saturdays in a Batallón del Servicio Militar Nacional (National Military Service Battalion) composed entirely of one-year SMN conscripts.
The law requires employers, landlords etc.
The actual draft time is six months for the home guard, and twelve months for the regular army, air force and navy.
Undergraduate and graduate students who decide to volunteer are allowed by their institution to put their studies on suspension until the end of term of service.
Hungary abolished mandatory military service by November 2004, after the parliament had modified the constitution, ending a long-standing political dispute.
''See also: Refusal to serve in the Israeli military.''
A "liberated" military ID is a requirement to join the Mexican local, state, and federal police forces, also to apply for some government jobs,
ROC nationals with Overseas Chinese status are exempt from service.
The last conscript troops were inducted in 1995 and demobilized in 1996.
In 2011, civil servants, students, those serving prison terms, and those caring for an elderly parent were excluded from the draft, but they could be later called to serve.
Service was usually performed after university studies had been completed.
The United Kingdom enforced conscription during both world wars and the early cold war.
President of Montenegro Filip Vujanović has, as of 30 August 2006, abolished conscription for the military.
The duration of the basic military service varies.
* Candidates who do not qualify on grounds of mental or physical health.
In Russia, all males are liable for one year of compulsory military service up to the age of 27.
Those who do not have a tertiary education will have a three-month training when reaching military age, whereas those who are receiving tertiary education will have to complete the training in summer vacations.
Each selection station will have a quota for recruitment.
Men who refuse to serve at all are sent to prison for six months or half the time of their remaining non-military service at the time of refusal.
There was also an alternative for conscientious objectors which lasted 9 months.
The United Arab Emirates started its national service requirement in September 2014.
Conscription of men into the Armed Forces continued ''ad hoc'' from 1945 until the National Service Act 1948 established a system from 1 January 1949 of calling up men in Britain reaching the age of 18 for eighteen months full-time service followed by four years reserve service.
To restore drafting, a two-thirds vote in parliament is needed, which is unlikely in the short term.
Those who fail to report for military service could be imprisoned for three years, and face fines.
The men of other non-Jewish communities in Israel, notably the Druze and Circassians, are conscripted; women are not though may volunteer.
Norway has mandatory military service of nineteen months for men and women between the ages of 19 (18 in war time) and 44 (55 in case of officers and NCOs).
With insufficient volunteers coming in by 1863, the Lincoln Administration was forced to begin drafting despite widespread complaints that it was unconstitutional and undermined states' rights (some states had conscripted men up to this point, but not the federal government).
As of 2013, Myanmar citizens are not required to serve in military.
The government has begun implementing tougher sanctions to those who attempt to avoid their military duty.
Conscription of men into the armed forces of New Zealand came into effect in two periods, from 1912 to 1930 and from 1940 until it was abolished in 1972.
All males must register for compulsory military service after graduating high school.
The fitness for service and the actual induction to the service then takes place at the time and place decided individually for each conscript during the drafting event.
Persons who are deemed partly fit for service will however be placed lower than those who are deemed fit for service, and therefore have a very low chance of being drafted.
The maximum number of military personnel abroad is limited to 2,000 (out of the 900,000 available reserve).
The length of alternative civilian service for conscientious objectors to military service is 15 months.
For this reason, Korea has banned Yoo from the country and actually deported him.
Although women in principle are not obliged to serve in the military, they are allowed to become military officers.
Japan's Self Defense Forces have been a volunteer force since their establishment in the 1950s, following the end of the Allied occupation.
, all males reaching eighteen years of age must register for military service (Servicio Militar Nacional, or SMN) for one year, though selection is made by a lottery system using the following color scheme: whoever draws a black ball must serve as a "disponibility reservist", that is, he must not follow any activities whatsoever and get his discharge card at the end of the year.
Women can also choose under special conditions (e.g.
South Korea has mandatory military service of 21 (army, auxiliary police), 23(navy) and 24 (air force, special civil service) months.
The local government, as of 2013, has committed to ending conscription, although it is likely to be phased out gradually in order to prevent the manpower of the battalion (which had already seen its numbers fall below strength, from four to three companies, as a delayed result of birth rates decreasing following the Baby boom generation) plummeting.
By 10 February 2007 it did.
Belgium suspended conscription on 31 December 1992 by amending the 1962 Law on Conscription, which became applicable only to conscripts drafted in 1993 and earlier.
Military service has been mandatory for men throughout the history of independent Finland since 1917.
Therefore, no "expeditionary wars" argument can be made against conscription.
In December 2011, the National Assembly re-established the possibility of mandatory military service for every male citizen - with Hungarian address - between the age of 18 and the age of 40.
The option to military service is civilian service (available to females after completing 45 days of military service), where an individual subject to conscript finds a job at some public institution, where they serve for 11 and half months, the same as the longest rank-and-file service (drivers).
The minimum wage for an unskilled worker stands at around €650 per month in Greece, while professional soldiers are paid upwards of €800.
After that, ex-soldiers are considered reservists and participate in military exercises for a few days every year.
military equipment factories (exempt at time of war).
But the conscription has never been activated under the military junta which ruled the country from 1988-2010.
Qualified draftees with graduate degrees in the sciences or engineering who pass officer candidate exams may also apply to fulfil their obligations in a national defense service option which involves three months of military training, followed by an officer commission in the reserves and four years working in technical jobs in the defense industry or government research institutions.
Those who are engaged in higher education or vocational training programs prior to their military drafting are allowed to delay service until they have completed the programs, or reach a certain age, depending on the program (e.g.
, an average of 27% of conscripts actually complete military service each year.
In the last month of his service the cadet takes the rank of second lieutenant.
The right to Conscientious Objection was legally recognised in 1920.
It was quickly reinstated with the Korean War and retained for the next 20 years, especially in the Vietnam War.
As of 2008, the Russian Federation has a mandatory 12 months draft.
Persons who continue full-time postgraduate education, or have an academic degree (Candidate of Science, PhD, Doctor of Science) are not drafted.
A form of "industrial conscription" was also used to increase output in coal mining (see the "Bevin Boys") and other dimensions of the war effort.
The basic doctrine is that the great majority of each age cohort serve, and the size of the active army can be adjusted by changing the maximum age of reservists to be called up, instead of using selective service.
Officers and other soldiers in certain voluntary units such as Nahal and Hesder are required to sign on for additional service.
Conscientious objectors can join the civilian service (called Zivildienst) for nine months.
Contributions to the UN troops comprise only professional soldiers and trained, paid reservists who have specifically applied to such operations.
In 2013, the socialists wanted to replace the mandatory conscription for men, by a voluntary based service.
Women do not register for Selective Service in the United States, but they can enlist for voluntary service.
When World War II ended, so did the draft.
All males are required to participate in the drafting event () in their municipality of domicile in the year that they turn 18.
This right is very rarely exercised by Danish authorities.
Azerbaijan has mandatory military service for all fit men, who are at least at the age of 18.
This was done in order to generate funds to recover from the aftermath of the 1999 İzmit earthquake, which took place in the highly industrialized Marmara region of the country, and had a considerable negative impact on the Turkish economy due to the severe damage it caused to a significant number of residential and industrial structures.
Every male is labeled into one of four different grades:
Mauritius does not have a standing army but operates a paramilitary service manned by volunteering Police officers known as the Special Mobile Force.
Most often, the service is performed in military bases as close as possible to the person's home.
In certain cities, such as Mexico City and Veracruz, there is a third option: a red ball (Mexico City) and a Blue ball (Veracruz), which entails serving a full year as a recruit in a Paratrooper Battalion in the case of Mexico City residents, or an Infantería de Marina unit (Navy Marines) in Veracruz.
religion), to do 2–3 years of service and volunteer work instead of military service.
Those who complete the 3-year program will be exempted from conscription and receive the rank of Acting Sergeant (E-6) upon graduation from high school.
There are no general exemptions for the conscription.
Medical deferments and dismissals from basic training (often on somewhat dubious grounds) have increased significantly in the last years.
Military rank, either as NCO or reserve officer, is highly valued as a merit in Finland by employers when recruiting a male employee.
Panama officially abolished the entire military in 1992, and transformed it into National Police.
Draftees may also request alternative service, usually in community service areas, although the required service period would be longer than military service.
Citizens of the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau, as of 1997 and 1999, respectively, are not permitted to join the Chinese military; however, the defence of these two regions are protected by the Chinese military.
Since 2006, the period of service has been six months.
Males serve for a period ranging from fourteen months to thirty-six months, depending on their education; high school drop-outs serve for thirty-six months.
Exemptions are granted to Korean male citizens with physical disabilities or whose mental status is unstable or questionable.
India has never had mandatory military service, either under British rule or since independence in 1947.
In practice, all conscripts undergo basic military training before being deployed to the various military units of the SAF, the Police Force (SPF), or Civil Defence (SCDF).
The Burmese junta requires able-bodied persons aged 18 and over to register with local authorities.
Since 1 March 1995 the Belgian armed forces consist of professional volunteers only.
Younger recruits may be conscripted with parental consent.
Normal service is four months, and is normally served by men in the age of eighteen to twenty-seven.
The duration of cadet training is roughly 4 months and 9 more months are dedicated for the actual service.
Totally exempt are members of religious orders, disabled persons, and married or divorced women with children.
Additionally, from 2008 onwards, all men belonging to the religious groups of Armenians, Latins and Maronites, also serve their military service.
As a result of this decreased funding and greater reliance on high technology, the Armed Forces are aiming towards drafting only 10,000 conscripts a year.
In practice, men over 27 were seldom called up.
Service for women is voluntary, but identical in all respects.
North Korea in 1993 had a mandatory military service, for all men, of 120 months as normal troops and 156 months as special forces.
Some celebrities are given exemptions to their mandatory military service, even though they clearly have no physical disabilities.
Serbia abolished compulsory military service on 1 January 2011.
During the first 45 days, women have an option to quit at will.
Conscientious objectors were formally recognised under the Military Service Act, with the possibilities of absolute exemption from military service, exemption conditional upon performing civilian "work of national importance", or non-combatant service within the Army; some of those who refused the latter alternatives, or engaged in anti-war protest, went to jail.
Bosnia and Herzegovina abolished compulsory military service as of 1 January 2007.
In Jamaica the military service is voluntary from 18 years of age up.
France suspended peacetime military conscription in 1996, while those born before 1979 had to complete their service; since the Algerian War (1954–62), conscripts had not been deployed abroad or in war zones, except those volunteering for such deployments.
Tanzania officially never had conscription since it became independent.
Egypt has a mandatory military service program for males between the ages of eighteen and thirty.
The United States first introduced conscription during the American Civil War.
Those who deliberately inflict injury upon themselves to avoid conscription could be imprisoned for up to five years, as well as fined.
Some, such as those who choose vocational course paths during high school (for example, carpenters and electricians) opt to complete their required apprenticeships within the military.
As the Japanese constitution expressly prohibits Japan from maintaining any offensive military force, conscription will most likely not be an issue in the near future.
Service obligation also varies by educational qualification.
However, anyone could get out by paying a $300 fee or hiring a substitute.
According to the Russian federal law, the Armed Forces, the National Guard, the Federal Protective Service (FSO), the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR), and civil defence of the Ministry of Emergency Situations (EMERCOM) are considered as military service.
Even though drafting is still banned in peace time, the listing of citizens fit for military service starts in January 2012.
* Studying in a university or similar place.
The Romanian Parliament voted to abolish conscription in October 2005, with the vote formalising one of many military modernisation and reform programmes that Romania agreed to when it joined NATO.
Therefore, only about 55% to 60% of Swiss men actually complete basic training.
In the intervening years, Iraq's military suffered from decay and poor leadership, but there was still compulsory service.
Proof of military or civil service is generally required to obtain a 5-year passport (some exceptions can apply).
No one has been prosecuted for violating the conscription law in the USA since 1986, but registration is required for certain benefits such as federal college aid, or in certain states, state college aid, or even driver's license.
If the reservist experiences a crisis of conscience that prevemts him or her from further execution of military service, the reservist can apply for civilian service.
The duration of service was two years in 1992, and was dropping steadily, until it was finally abolished.
Disobeying the induction order also causes the arrest warrant to be issued and is prosecuted as absence without leave, or after five days of absence, as desertion.
This was abolished in 1994.
Since 1 January 1998, females can join the military service voluntarily.
By the age of thirty, a male is considered unfit to join the army and pays a fine.
It has been stated that the draft is to be reduced to six months in future.
Likewise, those with an associate degree (or equivalent) or higher would be required to serve for one year if drafted, but the requirement would be reduced to only six months if they volunteered.
Reservists may be called for mandatory refresher exercises.
The whole island of Ireland was exempted from UK First World War conscription in 1916, but in April 1918 new legislation empowered the government to extend it to Ireland.
Armenia has compulsory military service for two years for males from 18 to 27 years old.
It is optional for females to register for military service.
* Homosexuals and transsexuals
However, lack of sufficient volunteers caused the two components to be merged in 1819 into a "cadre-militia" army, in which the bulk of troops were conscripts, led by professional officers and NCOs.
Conscientious objection of military service is illegal in Turkey and punishable with imprisonment by law.
In Canada, conscription has never taken place in peacetime.
Since 1995, women have been able to volunteer for military service.
The Ukrainian army had similar problems with dedovshchina as the Russian army did until very recently, but in Ukraine the problem is getting less severe compared to Russia, due to cuts in the conscript terms (from 24 months to 18 months in the early 2000s and then to 12 months in 2004) and cuts in total conscription numbers (due to the switching of the army into a full-time professional army) since the last conscripts are being drafted at the end of 2013.
Active conscription ("the draft") ended in 1973.
The Republic of China has had mandatory military service for all males since 1949.
All conscripts, regardless of educational qualification, undergo the same training and receive the same grade and rank upon completion of basic training: Private, Seaman, or Airman (E-1).
The Act exempted the whole of Ireland from conscription, and although an amending Act in 1918 empowered the government to extend conscription to Ireland, the extension was never implemented.
The remainder, for the most part, either are formally dismissed after medical tests or obtain deferral from the service because of studies or stays abroad.
Thus Napoleon Bonaparte could create afterward the ''Grande Armée'' with which he set out on the first large intra-European war.
Even if a person is deemed fit, or partially fit for service, he may avoid having to serve if he draws a high enough number randomly.
The last conscripts were drafted on 1 January 2011.
Men reaching 19 years old who are not granted exemption from the military service are not able to apply for a driving license, passport, or leave the country without special permission.
The Military Service Act of 1954 states that all male citizens of Thailand are obliged to serve in the military upon reaching 21 years of age.
In other cities which have a Navy HQ (such as Ciudad Madero), it is the Navy which takes charge of the conscripts, instead of the Army.
Duration of military service is normally 24 months but it can be also varying according to some conditions and circumstances.
NSmen represent the collective will of Singapore to stand up for itself and to ensure the security of the nation.
At first instance, military service is voluntary and then mandatory if quotas necessary for the armed forces are not completed.The general direction of national mobilization (In Spanish Dirección general de Movilización Nacional DGMN) is responsible for the recruitment of volunteers and conscripts.
Luxembourg has a military ground force (army) composed of career officers and volunteers.
Males in Brazil are required to serve 12 months of military service upon their 18th birthday.
At the beginning of the service, all men go through same basic training of eight weeks.
In 2016, however, the Cypriot parliament had voted to reduce it's mandatory service to 14 months and make up for lost man power by hiring professinal soldiers.
, Greece (Hellenic Republic) has mandatory military service of nine months for men in the Army and 12 months for the Navy and Air Force.
The conscription system was introduced into Imperial Russia by Dmitry Milyutin on 1 January 1874.
See End Conscription Campaign.
It maintains an all volunteer military.
Prisoners may be excused of their sentence to serve in the military at a time of war or to complete military service in exchange for a reduced sentence dependent on the nature of the crime committed.
In 1957 phasing-out of the system was announced, the last men being called up in 1960, and the last conscript being discharged in May 1963, after allowance for deferment of service.
As of 1 January 2008, obligatory military (or civil) service is replaced with voluntary military service.
Men deemed fit can be called upon for service until their 50th birthday in case of national crisis, regardless of whether normal conscription has been served.
This results in reservist corporals and sergeants receiving a wage that is 1/70th that of a professional soldier, whom they outrank.
Such an offense, legally considered an offense of "bad moral character", prevents the "unpatriotic" citizen from ever holding public office.
Currently, three-quarters of the strength of the Bermuda Regiment is made up of conscripts, although many soldiers, whether they initially volunteered or were conscripted, elect to re-engage annually after their initial three years and two months term of service has been completed, with some serving for decades.
As of July 2003, the reduced durations are as follows: twelve months for privates (previously fifteen months), twelve months for reserve officers (previously sixteen months) and six months for short-term privates, which denotes those who have earned a university degree and have not been enlisted as reserve officers (previously eight months).
The postponement is not always granted.
More common is refusal by reserve soldiers to serve in the West Bank and Gaza.
Those who volunteer for military service are free to choose from the three branches of the armed forces (Royal Thai Army, Royal Thai Navy and Royal Thai Air Force).
Adding the 1 month spent in rookie training, a cadet's conscription will last a total of 14 months.
(It is also possible to serve the whole requirement at one piece, meaning no refresher courses are required.)
Military service is also (voluntarily) open to women.
Having completed the initial part of the service as a conscript, the soldier is placed in the reserve.
Should this policy remain unchanged, although Taiwan will have a purely volunteer professional force, every male will still be conscripted to receive a three- to four-month military training.
Between 1991 and 1996, the Dutch armed forces phased out their conscript personnel and converted to an all-volunteer force.
After a year their period of regular army service, men are liable for up to 30 days (much less on average) per year of reserve duty ("''miluim''") until they are in their early forties.
An additional program (called ''"Atuda'i"'') for qualified applicants allows post-secondary academic studies prior to induction.
In July 1863, New York City erupted in the draft riots over the draft.
Having served for 45 days, they fall under the same obligation to serve as men except for medical reasons.
In Norway, certain voluntary specialist training programs and courses entail extended conscription of one to eight years.
(According to the Section 16 of the Defense Act of the Defence Ordinance of 1977.)
In Ukraine, a person could not be conscripted after he turned 27 years of age.
The salary depends slightly on the military rank: officers receive €56, NCOs €53 and rank-and file €51 per day.
The commitment is only on a part-time basis, however.
This was supported by President Stjepan Mesić, and after a vote in the parliament on 5 October 2007, the decision became official.
Thus, after 2014, compulsory military service will still remain in practice in Taiwan.
However, some may be deemed unfit for service and not be required to show up.
In general, serving as an NCO or, especially, as a reserve officer, has a clear positive impact on future earnings and achievement of a high career position of the individual.
''See also: Exemption from military service in Israel''
In 2013, the country cuts its mandatory military service period further to 20 months.
Formally, the Netherlands has not abolished conscription; that is to say, the laws and systems which provide for the conscription of armed forces personnel remain in place, and Dutch citizens can still, theoretically, be mobilized in the event of a national emergency.
Austria has mandatory military service for all able bodied male citizens up to 35 years of age.
