On May 7, he was made prisoner of the Viet Minh and sent to a re-education camp, deep in the jungle.
File:USAF Imam gives a service for Muslim troopers in Guantanamo.jpg|Muslim Air Force Chaplain Capt.
German military chaplains did not get into the ordinary military rank system, they had ranks of their own.
The Secularism Act (1905), which establishes a strict separation of church and state in the French government, does not however apply to the military.
Many have been decorated for bravery in action (five have been awarded Britain's highest award for gallantry, the Victoria Cross, and nine have received the Medal of Honor).
*Offer a ministry of presence in a multitude of environments (at home and abroad)
In this form of counselling, the personal views and beliefs of the person asking for help are central.
Saint Louis was the king who gave legal status to the military chaplains, since chaplains serving under their lord in the Crusades were the first to be militarized.
Among the training materials, there included an insurgent sniper training manual that was posted on the Internet.
While the Nazi ideology was at its core pagan (the elite SS units never allowed chaplains), 95% of Germans were baptized Christians.
During the Middle Ages, the cloak of Saint Martin of Tours, (''cappa Sancti Martini''), one of the most sacred relics of the Frankish kings, would be carried everywhere the king went, even into battle, as a holy relic upon which oaths were sworn.
Christian chaplains are generally referred to and addressed as Padre.
Over the years however, it has developed into one of the major counselling departments of the armed forces, now with 38 humanist counsellors (out of about 150 total).
They are however served by part-time workers through the Chaplains Service of the SANDF and are addressed according to their religious customs as imams.
Additionally, in cases where an endorsing agency is not yet established for an individual's religion, it is possible for him or her to be endorsed by the endorsing agency of another group, a process which was followed for the first Muslim chaplains in the military.
Division 4 Australian Navy chaplains are accorded the rank and status of Captain (equiv.
The vision of the Chaplaincy is to "be an operationally relevant Chaplaincy that supports and cares for all CF personnel and their families, wherever they live and serve, empowering them spiritually and morally to meet the demands of military service."
File:SANDF Qualification Chaplain Jewish badge embossed.png|Chaplain Jewish badge
Until recent times, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) has employed only Christian chaplains, with the Jewish community providing an honorary chaplain under long-standing arrangements, although Jewish chaplains have served in the Territorial Army.
This is the symbolic representation of enlightenment, the life objective of all Hindus.
Following this ruling, non-believers are now permitted to retain their headdress just like Jews and Sikhs do in accordance with their faith.
Field rabbi Dr. Leo Baeck wrote the “Israelite Field Prayer Book”.
One appellate case, ''Katcoff v. Marsh'' (1985) upheld the system as a permissible attempt to support service members in the "free exercise" of their religious beliefs, though others have described the details of the chaplaincy system as violations of the legal principles that the federal government maintain neutrality and avoid becoming entangled in religious affairs.
The defense minister appoints three command-level military chaplains—one per faith—in charge of all chaplains.
The Reverend Leslie Hardman, the British Second Army's senior Jewish chaplain, who became well known for his work amongst the liberated prisoners after the capture of Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, was another who insisted on being armed while on active service.
Rather they wear the same cross and anchor emblem worn by RN chaplains on their shoulder rank slides and do not have gold braided rings or executive loops on their winter sleeve coat or summer shoulder boards.
The Christian military chaplains served between strange poles.
They carry the military rank of chaplain and the rank insignia, which is unique to the Chaplains Service, comprises a Chi Rho monogramme surrounded by a triangle.
Although the Jewish presence in Germany is older than Christianity, the first "field rabbinat" was introduced during World War I.
“Being a chaplain in the German army had always been a prestigious position and the Nazis wanted people who represented that old military tradition (..) and not sow discord or division.
Individuals volunteer, and if they are accepted, they are ''commissioned'' as military staff officers in the Chaplain Corps.
The rank insignia is a deepa (lamp) with flame.
Humanist counsellors also try to contribute to the humanization of the armed forces by fostering a more dignified and humane atmosphere.
It originates from the days of Constantine, the first Emperor of Rome to grant religious freedom to Christians.
Chaplains in the armed forces were previously all Christian or Jewish.
The rank is Cpln (Vipra) and the mode of address Vipra.
The position of rank and chaplain faith group insignia varies in each military department and may vary significantly from one type of uniform to another within a military department.
Each of the various Protestant Christian denominations may set its own requirements for certification as a minister.
In 1998, after working as chaplain general in exile for the ANC, the African National Congress, during the fight against apartheid, Fumanekile Gqiba was appointed as the first black chaplain general for SANDF, the South African National Defense Force.
Crosby describes an incident where a US chaplain became a trained tank gunner and was removed from the military for this "entirely illegal, not to mention imprudent" action.
This is the motto of the Chaplains Service and forms part of the Corps Badge.
Chaplains serving in the US Armed Forces wear the uniform of their respective branch of service, and normally wear clerical attire only during the performance of a religious service.
The monogramme represents the first three letters of Christ in Greek.
They meet on as representatives to the Armed Forces Chaplains Board, to discuss issues that cross service lines, but each reports as a staff officer of his or her service, to the Chief of Staff of the Army or Air Force, or the Chief of Naval Operations of the Navy.
In the era before call signs the radio "appointment title" for the Padre was "Sky pilot".
Since 1984, French military chaplains are involved in every military operation—including the Gulf War—from Rapid Reaction Force (''Force d'Action Rapide'') units to navy ships.
In recent years, both the UK and US have required chaplains, but not medical personnel, to be unarmed in combat, although the US does not prohibit chaplains from earning marksmanship awards or participating in marksmanship competitions.
It is generally assumed that during World War II, chaplains were unarmed.
Some countries, like the Netherlands and Belgium, also employ ''humanist'' chaplains who offer a non-religious approach to chaplain support.
When offering prayers during parades and ceremonies, it is customary that the order to remove headdress be given to those on parade.
In addition to badges and insignias for individual chaplains, certain nations, including the United States, fly a Church or Worship Pennant during the time a chaplain leads a religious worship service, especially on ships at sea.
While serving as a chaplain, the priest or deacon remains incardinated in his home diocese, but is temporarily under the direction of the prelate of the ordinariate for the duration of his service.
Roman Catholic chaplains are generally organized into military ordinariates, such as the Archdiocese for the Military Services, USA.
A priest attached to a feudal noble household would follow his liege lord into battle.
The Civil Air Patrol, the volunteer Auxiliary of the USAF, also has chaplains, who must meet the same standards for appointment as active-duty Air Force, Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard chaplains.
*Contribution to military ceremonies
As the application process proceeds, and the military determines whether the applicant will meet standards in areas such as health, physical fitness, age, education, citizenship, past criminal history, and ''suitability'' for service, which includes supporting the ''free exercise of religion'' for men and women of all faiths, an ''endorsement'' from an ''endorsing agency'' that is recognized by the Department of Defense, representing one or more faith groups in the United States, will be required, in part to ensure that the separation of church and state is honored.
*Provide directed care after critical incidents
The Humanist Counselling Department in the armed forces was introduced on 1 September 1964 in order to serve secular and non-religious soldiers such as humanists.
This was continued in the army of the Third Reich, the Wehrmacht, for the Christian confessions only, not for Jews.
In some countries, like Israel, Canada, and South Africa, one chief of chaplains/chaplain general serves in that position for all chaplains of all religions, in all branches of the military.
Land based chaplains appeared during the reign of King Edward I, although their duties included jobs that today would come under the jurisdiction of military engineers and medical officers.
Military chaplains normally represent a religion or faith group but work with military personnel of all faiths and none.
File:SANDF Qualification Chaplain Hindu badge embossed.png|Chaplain Hindu badge
Other nations, notably Norway, Denmark and Sweden, and also Australia, make it an issue of individual conscience.
*Liaise with civilian religious faith groups
Besides the international ''Jewish question'', the international character of the Catholic church was another challenge.
There are five levels or "divisions" for the seniority of chaplains in the Australian Army and Air Force with each division corresponding to a worn rank.
Royal Air Force chaplains must complete 12 weeks Specialist Entrant course at the RAF College Cranwell followed by a Chaplains' Induction Course at Armed Forces Chaplaincy Centre Amport House of a further 2 weeks.
In France, the existence of military chaplains has come under debate because of the separation of Church and State; however, their position has been maintained .
File:SANDF Rank Insignia Chaplain Jewish embossed badge.png|Chaplain Jewish Rank Insignia
*Individual guidance to (current and former) military personnel and those related to them
While the Protestant strand does not have a website, one of their chaplains has a representative blog site.
In 2006, training materials obtained by U.S. intelligence showed that insurgent snipers fighting in Iraq were urged to single out and attack engineers, medics, and chaplains on the theory that those casualties would demoralize entire enemy units.
Although the term ''chaplain'' originally had Christian roots, it is generally used today in military organizations to describe all professionals specially trained to serve any spiritual need, regardless of religious affiliation.
In the 1950s, military chaplains where sent in the French Union's territories, including Indochina and Algeria.
Initially only Christian chaplains worked in German armies.
The Jews were divided into six classes, and only the privileged first class had ''de facto'' equal rights as citizens.
The English translation of these Latin words is: "In this sign, you will conquer".
In the Royal Navy chaplains are traditionally addressed by their Christian name, or with one of many nicknames (Bish; Sin-Bosun; Devil Dodger; Sky-Pilot etc.).
The first Muslim chaplain-general, Abdelkader Arbi, was commissioned in 2006.
Norway has yet no humanist chaplains
In 2004, Major General Gqiba left the military to accept his appointment as South African Ambassador to Israel.
The chaplains had a plain uniform with flashes and badges, and the Catholic military chaplains additionally had a crucifix necklace.
So, for example, in the United States, there is an Army, Navy, and Air Force chief of chaplains.
Since 1968, however, all chaplains have been senior officers and accorded the protocol status of colonel / captain (navy).
Like other chaplains in the ADF, Navy chaplains have five divisions of seniority.
This eventually gave ''chapelain'' in Old French and was borrowed into English.
Despite this proportion of Christians the totalitarian national socialistic government of the German Reich tried to weaken the authority and influence of the churches over their German adherents.
The Chaplain's Medal for Heroism is a special US military decoration given to military chaplains who have been killed in the line of duty, although it has to date only been awarded to the famous Four Chaplains, all of whom died in the  sinking in 1943 after giving up their lifejackets to others.
Division 5 Australian Navy chaplains are "principal chaplains," and these three chaplains, representing the three major Christian denominations: Catholic, Anglican and Protestant, are accorded the rank and status of commodore.
In many other countries, such as France, there is a separate chaplain general/chief of chaplains for each faith group represented by chaplains.
Australian Army chaplains, whatever their rank, are mostly referred to as "Padre" by officers and soldiers alike.
In the United States, military chaplains have an officer's rank based on their years of service and promotion selection from among their peers.
File:SANDF Qualification Chaplain Muslim badge embossed.png|Chaplain Muslim badge
As a result of 18th and 19th centuries` emancipation, ''military field rabbis'' served on all fronts and in all combating nations; one of the more prominent amongst those was German Reform Rabbi Leo Baeck, who later survived The Holocausts.
In addition to offering pastoral care to individuals, and supporting their religious rights and needs, military chaplains may also advise the executive on issues of religion, and ethics, morale and morals as affected by religion.
The clergyman who served as custodian for the cloak in its reliquary was called a ''capellānus'', and, by extension, all clergymen who officiated in reliquaries, sanctuaries, or chapels were eventually called ''cappellāni''.
Franz Justus Rarkowski, S.M., became ordained the Catholic military "Field Bishop" of Nazi Germany in 1938 until 1945.
An integration of Jewish soldiers within the army gave the German Reich the opportunity to recognize the Jewish urge to fight for the German “Fatherland”.
The Museum of Army Chaplaincy holds information and archive material relating to the history of the Army Chaplains' Department.
The title is also widely used in the RAAF for their chaplains.
The US Army and Marines lost 100 chaplains killed in action during World War II: the third highest casualty rate behind the infantry and the Army Air Forces.
Eventually the names were cleared by the military’s chaplaincy office and the Gestapo ("Secret State Police").
However, perhaps on this occasion it was felt that an unarmed uniformed man would draw unwelcome attention.
The International Military Chiefs of Chaplains Conference grew out of a conference NATO chiefs of chaplains organized by the United States European Command (USEUCOM) in 1990.
At least some British chaplains serving in the Far East, however, were armed: George MacDonald Fraser recalls "the tall figure of the battalion chaplain, swinging along good style with his .38 on his hip" immediately behind the lead platoon during a battalion attack.
In the Royal Navy chaplains have no rank other than "chaplain" while in the British Army they hold commissioned relative rank but are universally referred to as Padre.
In the SANDF Chaplain Service, the Hindu faith is represented by a Regular Force chaplain.
File:3ChaplainSymbols.jpg|Insignia for Christian, Muslim, and Jewish chaplains on three U.S. Navy chaplains' uniforms
*Informal training for groups
They may also liaise with local religious leaders in an effort to understand the role of religion as both a factor in hostility and war and as a force for reconciliation and peace.
The Military Rabbinate constitutes the body responsible for religious institutions in the military.
Actively serving military personnel can request Military Rabbinate representatives to perform marriage ceremonies and ''brit mila'', circumcision ceremonies, for babies.
A chaplain provides spiritual and pastoral support for service personnel, including the conduct of religious services at sea or in the field.
The triangle surrounding the monogramme is the symbolic representation of the Holy Trinity.
Therefore, the military chaplains could more freely operate out of the Catholic hierarchy.
File:SANDF Rank Insignia Chaplain Christian embossed badge.png|Chaplain Christian Rank Insignia
Waters, Catholic Chaplain from Oswego, New York, conducts Divine Services on a pier for members of the first assault troops thrown against Hitler's forces on the continent HD-SN-99-02698.jpg|Military Catholic chaplain Father (Major) Waters conducts Divine Services, June 1944
A few Catholics who devoutly resisted the Nazis, suffered imprisonment and hardship.
More than 400 chaplains have died while serving in the U.S. military.
The US Army, Air Force, and Navy ''(as a component of the Department of the Navy the Marine Corps is supplied by USN chaplains)'' require an 'ecclesiastical endorsement' from the candidate's faith group (which in the case of the Navy must be one registered with the DoD).
Navy chaplains also assigned to the Merchant Marine Academy, for Merchant Marine personnel.)
In 1796 the Parliament of Great Britain passed a Royal Warrant that established the Army Chaplains' Department in the British Army.
His own conversion to the Christian faith was initiated by a dream in which the Chi-Rho monogramme appeared to him.
Complaints have been made against chaplains for mandatory prayers, coercion, and using government money to promote Evangelical Christianity.
The first Jewish chaplain was appointed in 1892 and some 20 to 30 were commissioned during World War II.
The times of common Christian suppression and supremachy status changed and more and more German Jews served in the liberal French Armies of the German territories under French influence, e.g.
(The requirement for such an endorsement has been in force since 1901, and today many of the various religious endorsing agencies work together under such non-governmental voluntary umbrella groups as the National Conference on Ministry to the Armed Forces.)
Among its tips for shooting U.S. troops, there read: "Killing doctors and chaplains is suggested as a means of psychological warfare."
In practice chaplains of all three services work in similar ways using what influence and authority they have on behalf of those who consult them or seek their advice.
*Philosophical/spiritual meetings
Neither the government as a whole nor the military in particular will be put into the position of determining whether an individual is a ''bona fide'' priest, minister, rabbi, imam, etc.
Since 1909 US chaplains on operations have been accompanied by an armed chaplain assistant.
In the United States, the term, ''nomination'', is not generally applied to the process of becoming a military chaplain.
In 1954, pastor Tissot was one of the last paratrooper volunteers to jump over the besieged Dien Bien Phu fortified camp in northern Vietnam.
*Foster the religious, spiritual and moral well-being of members and their families
There are anecdotal accounts that even US and UK chaplains have at least occasionally unofficially borne weapons: Chaplain (then Captain) James D. Johnson, of the 9th Infantry Division, Mobile Riverine Force in Vietnam describes (''Combat Chaplain: A Thirty-Year Vietnam Battle'') carrying the M-16 rifle while embedded with a combat patrol.
Very few Jewish soldiers in the Prussian army of the 18th century left histrorical traces, e.g.
A total of 95% of all Germans being Christian, German soldiers during Nazi times continued to belong to the churches and had the words "Gott mit uns" (''God with us'') on their belt buckles.
Along with chaplains from many other nations in the southern region of the continent of Africa, South African chaplains participate in SARMCA, the ''South Africa Regional Military Chaplains Association'', which is a component organization of SADC, the ''Southern African Development Community''.
In the British Army and Royal Air Force, chaplains are traditionally referred to (and addressed) as ''padre'' or as Sir/Ma'am (although not the latter in the RAF).
Inevitably, serving chaplains have died in action.
The Military Rabbinate also coordinates the burial of enemy soldiers and the exhuming of bodies in conjunction with prisoner exchanges.
Although ordination is normally required for chaplain service, some "equivalent" status is accepted for individuals from religious groups which do not have ordination, such as the Church of Christ.
During the Second World War or to Finland the Winter War, Continuation War, and Lapland War Finland was unique among German allied Axis powers in including Jewish soldiers in its military as well as having field chaplaincy services available for them.
The unit also oversees the legal and religious certification of marriages and divorces of individuals during their military service.
U.S. military chaplains, both individuals and in groups, have been involved in a number of controversies.
In the United Kingdom, the Ministry of Defence employs chaplains, but their authority comes from their sending church.
In 1531, during the Battle of Cappel, the Swiss reformist Huldrych Zwingli became the very first Protestant military chaplain to be killed on the battlefield.
*Presence at the workplaces, training locations and during deployments
In every unit or military base there are Military Rabbinate military personnel assigned responsibility for conducting or coordinating religious services, overseeing the kosher operation of the kitchen, and the maintenance of the synagogue and religious supplies.
The modern French ''Aumônerie militaire'' (military chaplaincy) was created and instituted by a July 8, 1880 Act of Parliament, which sets forth how the chaplaincy functions with regard to the Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish faiths.
First, names were put on the desks of the local civilian bishops, and then the names had to be approved by the according ministry for church affairs.
The title "Padre" for chaplains is less common and not officially encouraged in the Royal Australian Navy, although it is known to be used by some sailors and Navy chaplains in preference to the more formal title of "chaplain" or form of address towards an officer such as "sir."
Captured chaplains are not considered prisoners of war and must be returned to their home nation unless retained to minister to prisoners of war.
In October 2005 the Ministry of Defence appointed four chaplains to the military; one each from the Buddhist, Hindu, Muslim and Sikh faith communities.
Germany had a tradition of appointing Catholic and Evangelical military chaplains and Jewish military field rabbis.
During World War II the head of chaplaincy in the British Army was an (Anglican) chaplain-general, (a major-general), who was formally under the control of the Permanent Under-Secretary of State.
File:Massagraf nabij Solingen-Ohligs, aan voorzijde stadshuis.jpg|Liberated foreign Protestant, Catholic and Jewish chaplains conduct funeral services for the reburial of 71 political prisoners, exhumed from a mass grave near Solingen, Germany, in front of the city hall, May 1945
On United States Navy ships it is the only pennant that flies above the United States flag.
The German Kaiserreich appointed c. 30 military rabbis.
British Army chaplains undertake seven-weeks training at The Armed Forces Chaplaincy Centre Amport House and the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst.
The work of humanist counsellors in the Dutch armed forces consists of the following:
“The motives of the chaplains were not unusual, (..) their noble, personal and professional motives turned them into a legitimating force in a war of annihilation.” Military chaplains in Nazi Germany were rigorously screened.
Royal Navy chaplains undertake a 16-week bespoke induction and training course, including a short course at Britannia Royal Naval College, and specialist fleet time at sea alongside a more experienced chaplain.
The first English military-oriented chaplains were priests on board proto-naval vessels during the eighth century AD.
The Military Rabbinate is responsible for treating the bodies of soldiers in accordance with religious law, including the identifications and post-mortem treatment of bodies, and conducting military funerals.
The principal chaplains of the Army wear the rank of brigadier and in the RAAF, air commodore.
The mission of this Branch is to "support and enhance the effectiveness of the CF as a whole – its leadership, the individual men and women who serve and their families – through the provision of comprehensive religious and spiritual support, advice, and care."
Konstantin Nathanel of Salomon, who was promoted to general in 1760.
After the war, military chaplains were sent to occupation zones in Germany and Austria.
*Participation in Social Medical Teams (SMTs), together with other aid and care workers.
Since the rise of the Christian religion in Europe and worldwide, as a matter of course Christians fought against Christians over and over again.
In Germany, military chaplains of the Bundeswehr have no rank but have a special civilian status as part of the armed forces.
In other countries, like the United States, there is one chaplain general/chief of chaplains for each branch of the military.
Chaplains in the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Air Force begin their commission as a Captain (Army) or Flight Lieutenant (RAAF) respectively.
The Canadian Armed Forces Chaplaincy has approximately 192 Regular Force chaplains and 145 Reserve Force chaplains representing the Protestant, Roman Catholic, Muslim and Jewish faiths.
The counsellors adopt the humanist philosophy in their work while not imposing those ideas onto others.
Members of the clergy who meet the qualifications for service as an officer in the military are free to apply for service with any of the three United States Chaplain Corps: the Army, Navy, and Air Force each has a Chaplain Corps, with Navy chaplains also assigned to serve with Marine Corps units, Coast Guard units, and the Merchant Marine Academy.
British Army and Royal Air Force chaplains bear ranks and wear rank insignia, but Royal Navy chaplains do not, wearing a cross and a special version of the officers' cap badge as their only insignia.
File:Father (Major) Edward J.
*Collaborate with other care providers
The constitutionality of the U.S. chaplaincy has been the subject of legal challenges and scholarly dispute.
*Advise the Commanding Officer regarding the spiritual and ethical well-being and morale of their unit
The Military Rabbinate was founded in 1948 by Rabbi Shlomo Goren, who headed it until 1968.
During World War I, for the first time a substantial number of Jews served on all sides of the war, and so did military rabbis.
All chaplains are commissioned officers and wear uniform.
Fraser asks, "if the padre shot an enemy, what would the harvest be ... apart from three ringing cheers from the whole battalion?"
The current form of military chaplain dates from the era of the First World War.
On the foundation of the Royal Air Force Chaplains' Branch an attempt was made to amalgamate these differing systems creating "Relative Rank", where rank is worn but without executive authority.
File:SANDF Rank Insignia Chaplain Hindu embossed badge.png|Chaplain Hindu Rank Insignia
They wanted people who were not troublemakers.2 The German military chaplains mostly wanted to bring the word of the Christian God to men in the field and to deliver the sacraments, make their families proud and serve their Nazi country.
It welcomes any chief of chaplains (or ''chaplain general'', an equivalent term used by many nations).
Individual cases include that of Air Force Lt. Col. Garland Robertson, discharged in 1993 after expressing political opinions in a letter to the ''Abilene Reporter-News'' and Navy Chaplain Lt. Gordon Klingenschmitt who, against direct orders to him personally, as well as military law and tradition, protested openly and publicly ''while in uniform'' against military policies which he believed restricted the free exercise of his religion.
In Prussia, king Frederick the Great also showed religious tolerance, but in case of the Jews he exerted intolerance.
They wear the same insignia as USAF chaplains and can be called upon to assist Air Force chaplains.
Chaplains in the Australian Defence Force (ADF) have almost the same status as chaplains in the British armed services.
An assistant chaplain-general was a chaplain 1st class (full colonel) and a senior chaplain was a chaplain 2nd class (lieutenant colonel).
In the Netherlands, rather than having prayer services when all troops must be present, moments of silence are held instead so that inclusivity is maximized.
