The Magellanic Stream is a stream of neutral hydrogen gas extending from these two small galaxies across 100° of the sky.
The "Milky Way" can be seen as a hazy band of white light some 30 degrees wide arcing across the sky.
Their suspicions were confirmed by the Spitzer Space Telescope observations in 2005 that showed the Milky Way's central bar to be larger than previously thought.
These yield values of about  for CS 31082-001 and  for BD +17° 3248.
On the other hand, there are 64 known stars (of any magnitude, not counting 4 brown dwarfs) within  of the Sun, giving a density of about one star per 8.2 cubic parsec, or one per 284 cubic light-year (from List of nearest stars).
However, several members of the scientific community recently restated their position affirming the Monoceros structure is nothing more than an over-density produced by the flared and warped thick disk of the Milky Way.
The first attempt to describe the shape of the Milky Way and the position of the Sun within it was carried out by William Herschel in 1785 by carefully counting the number of stars in different regions of the visible sky.
In 1917, Heber Curtis had observed the nova S Andromedae within the Great Andromeda Nebula (Messier object 31).
The term "Milky Way" is a translation of the Latin '''', from the Greek  ('''', "milky circle").
The Sun is  from the Galactic Center.
Direct accretion of gas is observed in high-velocity clouds like the Smith Cloud.
Estimates of the pitch angle of the arms range from about 7° to 25°.
Actual proof of the Milky Way consisting of many stars came in 1610 when Galileo Galilei used a telescope to study the Milky Way and discovered that it is composed of a huge number of faint stars.
A simulation published in 2011 suggested that the Milky Way may have obtained its spiral arm structure as a result of repeated collisions with the Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy.
Similarly, with the discovery of the Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy, it was found that a ring of galactic debris from its interaction with the Milky Way encircles the Galactic disk.
The integrated absolute visual magnitude of the Milky Way is estimated to be around −20.9.
Individual galaxies, including the Milky Way, have peculiar velocities relative to the average flow.
Pavel Kroupa, and his doctoral student Pawlowski at the University of Bonn, studying the alignment of globular clusters and the whispy tails of the breakup of dwarf galaxies found they too formed part of such rings of matter.
File:ESO - The Milky Way panorama (by).jpg|360-degree panorama view of the Milky Way (an assembled mosaic of photographs) by ESO.
Until the early 1920s, most astronomers thought that the Milky Way contained all the stars in the Universe.
However, RR Lyr variables do not trace a prominent Galactic bar.
The Sun's orbit about the Milky Way is expected to be roughly elliptical with the addition of perturbations due to the Galactic spiral arms and non-uniform mass distributions.
Astronomers believe the Milky Way is moving at approximately 630&nbsp;km per second with respect to this local co-moving frame of reference.
The halo extends for hundreds of thousand of light years, much further than the stellar halo and close to the distance of the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds.
Because of this, it was likened to milk in color."
This is very similar to how a simple harmonic oscillator works with no drag force (damping) term.
In 3 to 4 billion years, there may be an Andromeda–Milky Way collision, depending on the importance of unknown lateral components to the galaxies' relative motion.
As in most spiral galaxies, each spiral arm can be described as a logarithmic spiral.
However, the observed curve is relatively flat, indicating that there is additional mass that cannot be detected directly with electromagnetic radiation.
Some of these overdensities were the seeds of globular clusters in which the oldest remaining stars in what is now the Milky Way formed.
According to a study published in 2014, the mass of the entire Milky Way is estimated to be 8.5&nbsp;, which is about half the mass of the Andromeda Galaxy.
The Near 3 kpc Arm (also called Expanding 3 kpc Arm or simply 3 kpc Arm) was discovered in the 1950s by astronomer van Woerden and collaborators through 21-centimeter radio measurements of HI (atomic hydrogen).
From Sagittarius, the hazy band of white light appears to pass around to the Galactic anticenter in Auriga.
Globular clusters are among the oldest objects in the Milky Way, which thus set a lower limit on the age of the Milky Way.
The stars in the inner ≈10,000 light-years form a bulge and one or more bars that radiate from the bulge.
He became a proponent of the "island universes" hypothesis, which held that the spiral nebulae were actually independent galaxies.
The Sun, and thus the Solar System, is located in the Milky Way's galactic habitable zone.
Stars and gases at a wide range of distances from the Galactic Center orbit at approximately 220 kilometers per second.
Thus, the Milky Way appears to have two spiral arms as traced by old stars and four spiral arms as traced by gas and young stars.
About 40% of the Milky Way's clusters are on retrograde orbits, which means they move in the opposite direction from the Milky Way rotation.
In January 2006, researchers reported that the heretofore unexplained warp in the disk of the Milky Way has now been mapped and found to be a ripple or vibration set up by the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds as they orbit the Milky Way, causing vibrations when they pass through its edges.
The temperature of this halo gas is between 1 million and 2.5 million kelvin.
The exact figure depends on the number of very-low-mass stars, which are hard to detect, especially at distances of more than  from the Sun.
It takes the Solar System about 240 million years to complete one orbit of the Milky Way (a galactic year), so the Sun is thought to have completed 18–20 orbits during its lifetime and 1/1250 of a revolution since the origin of humans.
As the oldest known object in the Milky Way at that time, this measurement placed a lower limit on the age of the Milky Way.
The Milky Way has several satellite galaxies and is part of the Local Group of galaxies, which is a component of the Virgo Supercluster, which is itself a component of the Laniakea Supercluster.
Two smaller galaxies and a number of dwarf galaxies in the Local Group orbit the Milky Way.
In a treatise in 1755, Immanuel Kant, drawing on earlier work by Thomas Wright, speculated (correctly) that the Milky Way might be a rotating body of a huge number of stars, held together by gravitational forces akin to the Solar System but on much larger scales.
Later, on January 5, 2015, NASA reported observing an X-ray flare 400 times brighter than usual, a record-breaker, from Sagittarius A*, a black hole in the center of the Milky Way.
Although all the individual naked-eye stars in the entire sky are part of the Milky Way, the light in this band originates from the accumulation of unresolved stars and other material located in the direction of the galactic plane.
This is unlike the situation within the Solar System, where two-body gravitational dynamics dominate and different orbits have significantly different velocities associated with them.
He found that the Andromeda Nebula is 275,000 parsecs from the Sun, far too distant to be part of the Milky Way.
If the finding that the mass of the halo is comparable to the mass of the Milky Way is confirmed, it could be the identity of the missing baryons around the Milky Way.
It has a close companion, the Small Magellanic Cloud.
The Galactic plane is inclined by about 60 degrees to the ecliptic (the plane of Earth's orbit).
A different January 2013 analysis of Kepler data estimated that at least 17 billion Earth-sized exoplanets reside in the Milky Way.
These stars and clusters now comprise the stellar halo of the Milky Way.
The mass of this hot halo is nearly equivalent to the mass of the Milky Way itself.
It should be visible when the limiting magnitude is approximately +5.1 or better and shows a great deal of detail at +6.1.
It was found to be expanding away from the central bulge at more than 50 km/s.
''There are at least two smaller arms or spurs, including:''
Scutum–Centaurus Arm
The largest of these is the Large Magellanic Cloud with a diameter of 14,000 light-years.
Star-formation activity in green valley galaxies is slowing as they run out of star-forming gas in the interstellar medium.
With this technique, the age of the globular cluster M4 was estimated as .
The Milky Way is estimated to contain 100–400 billion stars.
More-recent studies indicate a mass as large as 4.5&nbsp;  and as small as 0.8&nbsp;.
The ages of individual stars in the Milky Way can be estimated by measuring the abundance of long-lived radioactive elements such as thorium-232 and uranium-238, then comparing the results to estimates of their original abundance, a technique called nucleocosmochronology.
As a guide to the relative physical scale of the Milky Way, if the Solar System out to Neptune were the size of a US quarter (25mm), the Milky Way would be approximately the size of the continental United States.
Since the first stars began to form, the Milky Way has grown through both galaxy mergers (particularly early in the Milky Way's growth) and accretion of gas directly from the Galactic halo.
The gas, dust and stars are organized in roughly logarithmic spiral arm structures (see Spiral arms below).
They suggest that this seems to have occurred at the time of disk formation, suggesting that the disc and barred structure by stirring up the gas made it too hot to form new stars at the same rate as before.
Astronomers first began to suspect that the Milky Way is a barred spiral galaxy, rather than an ordinary spiral galaxy, in the 1990s.
The sky needs to be darker than about 20.2 magnitude per square arcsecond in order for the Milky Way to be seen.
Hence, such objects would probably be ejected from the vicinity of the Milky Way.
Measurements using the Very Long Baseline Array in 2009 found velocities as large as 254&nbsp;km/s for stars at the outer edge of the Milky Way.
Carina–Sagittarius Arm
In Greek mythology it was supposedly made from the forceful suckling of Heracles, when Hera acted as a wetnurse for the hero.
Kant referred to both the Milky Way and the "extragalactic nebulae" as "island universes", a term still current up to the 1930s.
Observations indicate that there are SMBH located near the center of most normal galaxies.
The constant rotation speed contradicts the laws of Keplerian dynamics and suggests that much of the mass of the Milky Way does not emit or absorb electromagnetic radiation.
In this scenario, suggested by numerical simulations of the dynamics of the different spiral arms, the outer pattern would form an outer pseudoring and the two patterns would be connected by the Cygnus arm.
The proposed likely interpretation is that a dwarf galaxy is merging with the Milky Way.
The bar may be surrounded by a ring called the "5-kpc ring" that contains a large fraction of the molecular hydrogen present in the Milky Way, as well as most of the Milky Way's star-formation activity.
This value is estimated using geometric-based methods or by measuring selected astronomical objects that serve as standard candles, with different techniques yielding various values within this approximate range.
The '''Milky Way''' is the galaxy that contains our Solar System.
The diameter of each of the bubbles is about ; they stretch up to Grus and to Virgo on the night-sky of the southern hemisphere.
The Sun moves through the heliosphere at .
These oscillations were until recently thought to coincide with mass lifeform extinction periods on Earth.
Its visibility can be greatly reduced by background light such as light pollution or stray light from the Moon.
With the discovery that the disk of the Andromeda Galaxy (M31) extends much further than previously thought, the possibility of the disk of the Milky Way extending further is apparent, and this is supported by evidence from the discovery of the Outer Arm extension of the Cygnus Arm and of a similar extension of the Scutum-Centaurus Arm.
Interstellar dust accounts for an additional 1% of the total mass of the gas.
The nature of the Milky Way's bar is actively debated, with estimates for its half-length and orientation spanning from  and 10–50 degrees relative to the line of sight from Earth to the Galactic Center.
If the Milky Way contained only the mass observed in stars, gas, and other baryonic (ordinary) matter, the rotation speed would decrease with distance from the center.
Filling the space between the stars is a disk of gas and dust called the interstellar medium.
This illustrates the fact that there are far more faint stars than bright stars: in the entire sky, there are about 500 stars brighter than apparent magnitude 4 but 15.5 million stars brighter than apparent magnitude 14.
In 2010, a measurement of the radial velocity of halo stars finds that the mass enclosed within 80 kiloparsecs is 7&nbsp;.
The rate of accretion of the SMBH is consistent with an inactive galactic nucleus, being estimated at around &nbsp;&nbsp;y−1.
The controversy was conclusively settled by Edwin Hubble in the early 1920s using the Mount Wilson observatory 2.5 m Hooker telescope.
It is located in the first galactic quadrant at a distance of 3 kpc (about 10,000 ly) from the Galactic Center.
Another reference frame is provided by the cosmic microwave background (CMB).
In addition, the Sun oscillates up and down relative to the Galactic plane approximately 2.7 times per orbit.
Both gravitational microlensing and planetary transit observations indicate that there may be at least as many planets bound to stars as there are stars in the Milky Way, and microlensing measurements indicate that there are more rogue planets not bound to host stars than there are stars.
The Local Group (a cluster of gravitationally bound galaxies containing, among others, the Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy) is part of a supercluster called the Local Supercluster, centered near the Virgo Cluster: although they are moving away from each other at 967&nbsp;km/s as part of the Hubble flow, this velocity is less than would be expected given the 16.8&nbsp;million pc distance due to the gravitational attraction between the Local Group and the Virgo Cluster.
The globular clusters can follow rosette orbits about the Milky Way, in contrast to the elliptical orbit of a planet around a star.
Measurements of thin disk stars yield an estimate that the thin disk formed 8.8 ± 1.7 billion years ago.
Most younger stars, including the Sun, are observed to be in the disk.
Alternatively, a minority of astronomers propose that a modification of the law of gravity may explain the observed rotation curve.
Within a few billion years of the birth of the first stars, the mass of the Milky Way was large enough so that it was spinning relatively quickly.
On January 9, 2006, Mario Jurić and others of Princeton University announced that the Sloan Digital Sky Survey of the northern sky found a huge and diffuse structure (spread out across an area around 5,000 times the size of a full moon) within the Milky Way that does not seem to fit within current models.
But this is impossible even if we take account of the hidden dark matter haloes.
The Milky Way is currently accreting material from two of its nearest satellite galaxies, the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds, through the Magellanic Stream.
"The Milky Way, i.e.
This motion is observed by satellites such as the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) and the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) as a dipole contribution to the CMB, as photons in equilibrium in the CMB frame get blue-shifted in the direction of the motion and red-shifted in the opposite direction.
Surrounding the galactic disk is a spherical Galactic Halo of stars and globular clusters that extends further outward but is limited in size by the orbits of two Milky Way satellites, the Large and  Small Magellanic Clouds, whose closest approach to the Galactic Center is about .
Mathematical models of the Milky Way suggest that its total mass is 1–1.5&nbsp;.
However, in a computer model, the movement of these two galaxies creates a dark matter wake that amplifies their influence on the larger Milky Way.
In the inner few kpc (around 10,000 light-years radius) is a dense concentration of mostly old stars in a roughly spheroidal shape called the bulge.
The collection of stars rises close to perpendicular to the plane of the spiral arms of the Milky Way.
11 billion of these estimated planets may be orbiting Sun-like stars.
The smallest dwarf galaxies of the Milky Way are only 500 light-years in diameter.
3-kpc Arm (Near 3 kpc Arm and Far 3 kpc Arm) and Perseus Arm
The north Galactic pole is situated at right ascension 12h 49m, declination +27.4° (B1950) near β Comae Berenices, and the south Galactic pole is near α Sculptoris.
The explanation for this apparent discrepancy is unclear.
The general direction of the Sun's Galactic motion is towards the star Vega near the constellation of Hercules, at an angle of roughly 60 sky degrees to the direction of the Galactic Center.
This makes the Milky Way difficult to see from any brightly lit urban or suburban location, but very prominent when viewed from a rural area when the Moon is below the horizon.
According to Jamil Ragep, the Persian astronomer Naṣīr al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī (1201–1274) in his ''Tadhkira'' writes:
Viewed from the Andromeda Galaxy, it would be the brightest feature of the Milky Way.
For observers from approximately 65 degrees north to 65 degrees south on Earth's surface, the Milky Way passes directly overhead twice a day.
Active star formation takes place in the disk (especially in the spiral arms, which represent areas of high density), but does not take place in the halo, as there is little gas cool enough to collapse into stars.
The Milky Way began as one or several small overdensities in the mass distribution in the Universe shortly after the Big Bang.
The Ancient Greek  ('''') – from root -,  ("milk") +  (forming adjectives) – is also the root of "galaxy", the name for our, and later all such, collections of stars.
In addition to the stars, there is also interstellar gas, comprising 90% hydrogen and 10% helium by mass, with two thirds of the hydrogen found in the form of atomic form and the remaining one third as molecular hydrogen.
The Milky Way is moving at  with respect to the photons of the CMB, toward 10.5 right ascension, −24° declination (J2000 epoch, near the center of Hydra).
According to recent studies, the Milky Way as well as Andromeda lie in what in the galaxy color–magnitude diagram is known as the ''green valley'', a region populated by galaxies in transition from the ''blue cloud'' (galaxies actively forming new stars) to the ''red sequence'' (galaxies that lack star formation).
The resulting disk of stars would be seen as a band on the sky from our perspective inside the disk.
Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya (1292–1350) proposed that the Milky Way is "a myriad of tiny stars packed together in the sphere of the fixed stars" and that these stars are larger than planets.
Several individual stars have been found in the Milky Way's halo with measured ages very close to the 13.80-billion-year age of the Universe.
At this distance or beyond, the orbits of most halo objects would be disrupted by the Magellanic Clouds.
The rest of the arms contain excess gas but not excess old stars.
Subsequently, observations with the Parkes Telescope at radio frequencies identified polarized emission that is associated with the Fermi bubbles.
In 2013 Rodrigo Ibata of the University of Strasbourg in France, has shown a similar ring structure exists around Andromeda Galaxy, as a part of a coherent rotating structure, suggesting the Milky Way and Andromeda had interacted in the past.
This concentration of mass is best explained as a supermassive black hole (SMBH) with an estimated mass of 4.1–4.5 million times the mass of the Sun.
The Galactic Center is marked by an intense radio source named Sagittarius A* (pronounced Sagittarius A-star).
Therefore, later generations of stars formed in this spiral disk.
the Galaxy, is made up of a very large number of small, tightly clustered stars, which, on account of their concentration and smallness, seem to be cloudy patches.
The rotation curve of the Milky Way agrees with the universal rotation curve of spiral galaxies, the best evidence for the existence of dark matter in galaxies.
The mass distribution within the Milky Way closely resembles the type Sbc in the Hubble classification, which represents spiral galaxies with relatively loosely wound arms.
The satellite Gaia is mapping the Milky Way with five planned releases of the maps to the year 2022.
The new world atlas of artificial night sky brightness shows that more than one third of Earth population cannot see the Milky Way from their homes due to light pollution.
These are named as follows, with the positions of the arms shown in the image at right:
There are also some dwarf galaxies that have already been absorbed by the Milky Way, such as Omega Centauri.
These measurements suggest there was a hiatus of almost 5 billion years between the formation of the galactic halo and the thin disk.
The Milky Way contains at least one planet per star, resulting in 100–400 billion planets, according to a January 2013 study of the five-planet star system Kepler-32 with the Kepler space observatory.
The age of stars in the galactic thin disk has also been estimated using nucleocosmochronology.
The Andalusian astronomer Avempace ( 1138) proposed the Milky Way to be made up of many stars but appears to be a continuous image due to the effect of refraction in Earth's atmosphere, citing his observation of a conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in 1106 or 1107 as evidence.
Hence the orbital period of the typical star is directly proportional only to the length of the path traveled.
The Neoplatonist philosopher Olympiodorus the Younger (–570 A.D.) criticized this view, arguing that if the Milky Way were sublunary, it should appear different at different times and places on Earth, and that it should have parallax, which it does not.
As a comparison, the neighboring Andromeda Galaxy contains an estimated one trillion (1012) stars.
The Sun is near the inner rim of the Orion Arm, within the Local Fluff of the Local Bubble, and in the Gould Belt, at a distance of  from the Galactic Center.
The Milky Way is moving in the general direction of the Great Attractor and other galaxy clusters, including the Shapley supercluster, behind it.
The possible scenario of the Sun within a spur / Local arm emphasizes that point and indicates that such features are probably not unique, and exist elsewhere in the Milky Way.
This disk has at least a comparable extent in radius to the stars, whereas the thickness of the gas layer ranges from hundreds of light years for the colder gas to thousands of light years for warmer gas.
This discrepancy is still not fully explained.
The Milky Way's spiral structure is uncertain and there is currently no consensus on the nature of the Milky Way's spiral arms.
The motion of material around the center indicates that Sagittarius A* harbors a massive, compact object.
However, only about half of those baryons are accounted for in the modern Universe based on observations of nearby galaxies like the Milky Way.
This galaxy is tentatively named the Virgo Stellar Stream and is found in the direction of Virgo about  away.
In simulated galaxies with similar properties, star formation will typically have been extinguished within about five billion years from now, even accounting for the expected, short-term increase in the rate of star formation due to the collision between both the Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy.
Galileo Galilei first resolved the band of light into individual stars with his telescope in 1610.
This mass has been termed "dark matter".
Current measurements suggest the Andromeda Galaxy is approaching us at 100 to 140 kilometers per second.
If so, that would mean a diameter of .
Such Earth-sized planets may be more numerous than gas giants.
For reasons that are not understood, beyond a radius of roughly 40,000 ly (13 kpc) from the center, the number of stars per cubic parsec drops much faster with radius.
The center of the Galaxy lies in the direction of the constellation Sagittarius; it is here that the Milky Way is brightest.
Donald Lynden-Bell at Cambridge University in 1976 showed that the satellite galaxies surrounding the Milky way are not randomly distributed, but seemed to be the result of a break-up of some larger system producing a ring structure 500,000 light years in diameter and 50,000 light years wide.
However, Aristotle himself believed the Milky Way to be caused by "the ignition of the fiery exhalation of some stars which were large, numerous and close together" and that the "ignition takes place in the upper part of the atmosphere, in the region of the world which is continuous with the heavenly motions."
It has been proposed that the Milky Way lacks a bulge formed due to a collision and merger between previous galaxies and that instead has a ''pseudobulge'' formed by its central bar.
The band divides the night sky into two roughly equal hemispheres.
Besides exoplanets, "exocomets", comets beyond the Solar System, have also been detected and may be common in the Milky Way.
A dark matter halo is spread out relatively uniformly to a distance beyond one hundred kiloparsecs from the Galactic Center.
The apex of the Sun's way, or the solar apex, is the direction that the Sun travels through space in the Milky Way.
The total mass of all the stars in the Milky Way is estimated to be between 4.6&nbsp;  and 6.43&nbsp;.
These include Carina Dwarf, Draco Dwarf, and Leo II Dwarf.
Two spiral arms, the Scutum–Centaurus arm and the Carina–Sagittarius arm, have tangent points inside the Sun's orbit about the center of the Milky Way.
Age estimates of the oldest of these clusters gives a best fit estimate of 12.6&nbsp;billion years, and a 95% confidence upper limit of 16&nbsp;billion years.
He was also able to identify some Cepheid variables that he could use as a benchmark to estimate the distance to the nebulae.
With the light-gathering power of this new telescope he was able to produce astronomical photographs that resolved the outer parts of some spiral nebulae as collections of individual stars.
The rotation curve (shown in the figure) describes this rotation.
The Milky Way consists of a bar-shaped core region surrounded by a disk of gas, dust and stars.
In fact, measurements of other galaxies similar to the Milky Way suggest it is among the reddest and brightest spiral galaxies that are still forming new stars and it is just slightly bluer than the bluest red sequence galaxies.
The unusual event may have been caused by the breaking apart of an asteroid falling into the black hole or by the entanglement of magnetic field lines within gas flowing into Sagittarius A*, according to astronomers.
In 2008, Robert Benjamin of the University of Wisconsin–Whitewater used this observation to suggest that the Milky Way possesses only two major stellar arms: the Perseus arm and the Scutum–Centaurus arm.
A subtle change such as that suggested by the MOND model allows for an interaction between the two galaxies 7–11 billion years ago.
As a result, he was able to come up with a distance estimate of 150,000 parsecs.
Once a white dwarf is formed, it begins to undergo radiative cooling and the surface temperature steadily drops.
X-ray emission from the core is aligned with the massive stars surrounding the central bar and the Galactic ridge.
In his view, the Milky Way is celestial.
The band then continues the rest of the way around the sky, back to Sagittarius.
