The whey then is recombined with the pasteurized cream to reconstitute the original milk composition.
(Though some flavored milk products use artificial sweeteners instead.)
The mother can also acquire infection from ingesting food that contains other animal products such as, hot dogs, delicatessen meats, and cheese.
Milk often is homogenized, a treatment that prevents a cream layer from separating out of the milk.
However, the industry eventually settled on a design similar to that used in the United States.
These other proteins are more water-soluble than the caseins and do not form larger structures.
Russia and China became self-sufficient and stopped importing milk.
: UHT milk (''trajno mlijeko/trajno mleko/''трајно млеко) is sold in 500&nbsp;mL and 1&nbsp;L (sometimes also 200 ml) aseptic cartons.
It can change the taste by destruction of milk-fat globule membranes, releasing oxidized flavors.
This is the result of fermentation, where lactic acid bacteria ferment the lactose in the milk into lactic acid.
In some cultures it is common to breastfeed children for three to five years, and the period may be longer.
In 2001, Valio launched a lactose-free milk drink that is not sweet like HYLA milk but has the fresh taste of ordinary milk.
The fat globules contain some yellow-orange carotene, enough in some breeds (such as Guernsey and Jersey cattle) to impart a golden or "creamy" hue to a glass of milk.
Lactose of low-lactose level cow's milk products, ranging from ice cream to cheese, is enzymatically hydrolysed into glucose and galactose.
The loss of vitamin C is not nutritionally significant, as milk is not an important dietary source of vitamin C.
Individual railway firms began transporting milk from rural areas to London from the 1840s and 1850s.
Initially milk fat is secreted in the form of a fat globule surrounded by a membrane.
From Southwest Asia domestic dairy animals spread to Europe (beginning around 7000 BC but not reaching Britain and Scandinavia until after 4000 BC), and South Asia (7000–5500 BC).
The principal requirements are energy (lipids, lactose, and protein), biosynthesis of non-essential amino acids supplied by proteins (essential amino acids and amino groups), essential fatty acids, vitamins and inorganic elements, and water.
Research has found no link between metabolic acidosis and consumption of milk.
A dairy farm had an average of 19 cows per herd in Norway, and 337 in New Zealand.
The first farmers in central Europe and Britain milked their animals.
Whole milk, butter and cream have high levels of saturated fat.
The fat globules rise to the top of a container of milk because fat is less dense than water.
Possible mechanisms proposed included inhibition of the conversion of vitamin D to its active metabolite, 1,25- dihydroxy vitamin D3 by calcium (which some evidence suggests increases cell proliferation in the prostate), and elevation of levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1).
The Express Dairy Company in England began glass bottle production in 1880.
The original adaptive significance of milk secretions may have been nutrition or immunological protection.
Although 97–98% of lipids are triacylglycrols, small amounts of di- and monoacylglycerols, free cholesterol and cholesterol esters, free fatty acids, and phospholipids are also present.
A quarter of the largest school districts in the US offer rice or soy milk and almost 17% of all US school districts offer lactose-free milk.
Milk preserved by the UHT process does not need to be refrigerated before opening and has a longer shelf life than milk in ordinary packaging.
Most people purchase milk in bags, plastic bottles, or plastic-coated paper cartons.
Milk from any mammal contains amino acids and microRNA which influence the drinker's metabolism and growth; this "programming" is beneficial for milk's natural consumers, namely infants of the same species as the milk producer, but post-infancy and trans-species milk consumption affects the mTORC1 metabolic pathway and may promote diseases of civilization such as obesity and diabetes.
Fat-free skimmed milk has only the casein micelles to scatter light, and they tend to scatter shorter-wavelength blue light more than they do red, giving skimmed milk a bluish tint.
: Sweetened milk is a drink popular with students of all ages and is often sold in small plastic bags complete with straw.
The most common flavors, besides the natural presentation, are chocolate, strawberry and vanilla.
Since November 1993, recombinant bovine somatotropin (rbST), also called rBGH, has been sold to dairy farmers with FDA approval.
Homogenized milk tastes blander but feels creamier in the mouth than unhomogenized.
Continued improvements in the efficiency for the production of milk led to a worldwide glut of milk by 2016.
By 1900, the company was transporting over 25 million gallons annually.
: Non-UHT milk is most commonly sold in 1 liter waxed cardboard boxes and 1 liter plastic bags.
Nevertheless, in many countries production remains on a small scale and presents significant opportunities for diversification of income sources by small farms.
: Commonly sold in 0.3&nbsp;L, 1&nbsp;L or 1.5&nbsp;L cartons and sometimes as plastic or glass milk bottles.
Aside from cattle, many kinds of livestock provide milk used by humans for dairy products.
Unlike protein and carbohydrates, fat composition in milk varies widely in the composition due to genetic, lactational, and nutritional factor difference between different species.
Pasteurization is used to kill harmful microorganisms by heating the milk for a short time and then immediately cooling it.
The standard high temperature short time (HTST) process produces a 99.999% reduction in the number of bacteria in milk, rendering it safe to drink for up to three weeks if continually refrigerated.
Annual milk production in the same period increased from  per cow in these developed countries.
Milk and dairy products have the potential for causing serious infection in newborn infants.
The early milk from mammals is called colostrum.
In 2011, ''The Journal of Bone and Mineral Research'' published a meta-analysis examining whether milk consumption might protect against hip fracture in middle-aged and older adults.
Each casein micelle is roughly spherical and about a tenth of a micrometer across.
The smaller the globules, the more other molecular-level forces prevent this from happening.
A significant addition to the marketplace has been "long-life" milk (UHT), generally available in 1 and 2 liter rectangular cardboard cartons.
The riboflavin in the whey portion of milk has a greenish color, which sometimes can be discerned in skimmed milk or whey products.
The pH of milk ranges from 6.4 to 6.8 and it changes over time.
: Milk is supplied in 1000 mL Plastic bottles and delivered from factories to cities and sell
The US single-serving size is usually the half-pint (about 240 mL).
Particularly notable was the rapid increase of consumption of milk in China and the rise of the price of milk in the United States above the government subsidized price.
Possibly the first such instance was in 1846, when St Thomas's Hospital in Southwark contracted with milk suppliers outside London to provide milk by rail.
It is whiter and more resistant to developing off flavors.
Each fat globule is composed almost entirely of triacylglycerols and is surrounded by a membrane consisting of complex lipids such as phospholipids, along with proteins.
Bottles made of opaque PET are also becoming commonplace for smaller, particularly metric, sizes such as one liter.
In addition to calcium, milk is a good source of many other vitamins.
Diameter may also vary between animals within a species and at different times within a milking of a single animal.
Milk that has undergone high-pressure homogenization, sometimes labeled as "ultra-homogenized", has a longer shelf life than milk that has undergone ordinary homogenization at lower pressures.
UHT milk is more popular.
Other common packaging sizes are 2 liter, 1 liter, 500 mL, and 250 mL cartons, as well as 4 liter, 1 liter, 250&nbsp;mL aseptic cartons and 500&nbsp;mL plastic jugs.
Most milk is pasteurized by heating briefly and then refrigerated to allow transport from factory farms to local markets.
Dairy relates to milk and milk production, e.g.
Some nutritionists have criticized flavored milk for adding sugar, usually in the form of high-fructose corn syrup, to the diets of children who are already commonly obese in the US.
The first four respectively produced about 11%, 2%, 1.4% and 0.2% of all milk worldwide in 2011.
Overall, the WCRF/AICR panel concluded that "The evidence is inconsistent from both cohort and case-control studies.
Several sources suggest a correlation between high calcium intake from milk, in particular, and prostate cancer, consistent with a calcium/vitamin D based mechanism.
Direct subsidies were replaced by "environmental incentives" which results in the government buying milk when the price falls to €200 per .
Another milk with ''Lactococcus lactis'' bacteria cultures ("cultured buttermilk") often is used in cooking to replace the traditional use of naturally soured milk, which has become rare due to the ubiquity of pasteurization, which also kills the naturally occurring Lactococcus bacteria.
Forms are available with reduced amounts of lactose (typically 30% of normal), and alternatively with nearly 0%.
In the US, these dairies usually are local companies, while in the Southern Hemisphere facilities may be run by very large nationwide or trans-national corporations such as Fonterra.
Increasing affluence in developing countries, as well as increased promotion of milk and milk products, has led to a rise in milk consumption in developing countries in recent years.
Milk contains dozens of other types of proteins beside the caseins including enzymes.
The production of the enzyme lactase declines significantly after weaning in all mammals.
The spoilage of milk can be forestalled by using ultra-high temperature (UHT) treatment.
Milk production is also resource intensive.
: Commonly sold in 1 liter bags.
The U.S. federal government document ''Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2010'' recommends consumption of three glasses of fat-free or low-fat milk for adults and children 9 and older (less for younger children) per day.
A greater number of smaller particles possess more total surface area than a smaller number of larger ones, and the original fat globule membranes cannot completely cover them.
The differences between the two grades are defined in the Wisconsin administrative code for Agriculture, Trade, and Consumer Protection, chapter 60.
Other components found in raw cow's milk are living white blood cells, mammary gland cells, various bacteria, and a large number of active enzymes.
Because the proteins remain suspended in the whey left behind when the caseins coagulate into curds, they are collectively known as ''whey proteins''.
Throughout the world, there are more than six billion consumers of milk and milk products.
Later, in 1932, plastic-coated paper milk cartons were introduced commercially.
Usually offerings such as milk, yogurt, ghee, honey may be poured among other offerings depending on the type of abhishekam being performed.
Supermarkets have also now begun to introduce milk in bags, to be poured from a proprietary jug and nozzle.
In the mid-1930s, the word was used in Australia meaning to siphon gas from a car.
The largest structures in the fluid portion of the milk are "casein micelles": aggregates of several thousand protein molecules with superficial resemblance to a surfactant micelle, bonded with the help of nanometer-scale particles of calcium phosphate.
The "half pint"  milk carton is the traditional unit as a component of school lunches, though some companies have replaced that unit size with a plastic bottle, which is also available at retail in 6- and 12-pack size.
Two of the main reasons for the decline of UK home deliveries by milkmen are household refrigerators (which lessen the need for daily milk deliveries) and private car usage (which has increased supermarket shopping).
Sherratt's model is not supported by recent findings, based on the analysis of lipid residue in prehistoric pottery, that shows that dairying was practiced in the early phases of agriculture in Southwest Asia, by at least the seventh millennium BC.
He developed this method while on summer vacation in Arbois, to remedy the frequent acidity of the local wines.
Milk is sold at supermarkets in either aseptic cartons or HDPE bottles.
Abhisheka is conducted by Hindu and Jain priests, by pouring libations on the image of a deity being worshipped, amidst the chanting of mantras.
The classic milkman, who travels his local milk round (route) using a milk float (often battery powered) during the early hours and delivers milk in 1 pint glass bottles with aluminium foil tops directly to households, has almost disappeared.
Their main concern is the financial interest that the American government has taken in the dairy industry, promoting milk as the best source of calcium.
Tritylodontid cynodonts seem to have displayed lactation, based on their dental replacement patterns.
New Zealand, the European Union's 28 member states, Australia, and the United States are the world's largest exporters of milk and milk products.
This secretion gradually became more copious and accrued nutritional complexity over evolutionary time.
Prolonged fermentation may render the milk unpleasant to consume.
When raw milk is left standing for a while, it turns "sour".
Camels, domesticated in central Arabia in the fourth millennium BC, have also been used as dairy animals in North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula.
In the 19th century, milk was used to describe a cheap alcoholic drink made from methylated spirits mixed with water.
In the UK, where an estimated 15% of the population are affected by lactose intolerance, Lactofree produces milk, cheese, and yogurt products that contain only 0.03% lactose.
Humans first learned to regularly consume the milk of other mammals following the domestication of animals during the Neolithic Revolution or the development of agriculture.
The first glass bottle packaging for milk was used in the 1870s.
The largest producer and consumer of cattle and buffalo milk in the world is India.
The infection has the potential of seriously harming or even causing the death of a preterm infant, an infant of low or very low birth weight, or an infant with an immune system defect or a congenital defect of the immune system.
These clusters rise faster than individual globules can.
Levels of lactose are dependent upon the type of milk as other carbohydrates can be present at higher concentrations that lactose in milks.
The exposed fat globules are vulnerable to certain enzymes present in milk, which could break down the fats and produce rancid flavors.
Glass milk bottles are now rare.
A newer process, ultrapasteurization or ultra-high temperature treatment (UHT), heats the milk to a higher temperature for a shorter amount of time.
Consequently, many humans become unable to digest lactose properly as they mature.
In Russia and Sweden, small moose dairies also exist.
In most Western countries, centralized dairy facilities process milk and products obtained from milk, such as cream, butter, and cheese.
Milk that advertises that it comes from cows not treated with rBST, is required to state this finding on its label.
'(16-The Honeybee, 66).
It was also associated with an increased risk of death in both sexes.
Most UHT-milk is packed in 1 or 2 liter paper containers with a sealed plastic spout.
The Office of Dietary Supplements recommends that healthy adults between ages 19 and 50 get about 1,000&nbsp;mg of calcium per day.
Calcium from dairy products has a greater bioavailability than calcium from certain vegetables, such as spinach, that contain high levels of calcium-chelating agents, but a similar or lesser bioavailability than calcium from low-oxalate vegetables such as kale, broccoli, or other vegetables in the ''Brassica'' genus.
Valio also markets these products in Sweden, Estonia, Belgium, and the United States, where the company says ultrafiltration is used.
In the rest of the world (i.e., East and Southeast Asia, the Americas and Australia) milk and dairy products were historically not a large part of the diet, either because they remained populated by hunter-gatherers who did not keep animals or the local agricultural economies did not include domesticated dairy species.
It is typically sold unrefrigerated in the UK, US, Europe, Latin America, and Australia.
The study found that due to lack of hygiene and sanitation in milk handling and packaging, detergents (used during cleaning operations) were not washed properly and found their way into the milk.
With time, due to the steadily increasing cost of collecting, transporting, storing and cleaning glass bottles, they were replaced by cardboard cartons.
To aid digestion in those with lactose intolerance, milk with added bacterial cultures such as ''Lactobacillus acidophilus'' ("acidophilus milk") and bifidobacteria ("a/B milk") is available in some areas.
The United States has a voluntary insurance program that pays farmers depending upon the price of milk and the cost of feed.
The first company to do so may have been the New York Dairy Company in 1877.
In Australia and Ireland there was a government funded "free milk for school children" program, and milk was distributed at morning recess in 1/3 pint bottles.
''Listeria monocytogenes'' can also cause  serious infection in an infant  and pregnant woman and can be transmitted to her infant in utero or after birth.
:Sells milk in 1 liter plastic bags.
Creamline (or cream-top) milk is unhomogenized.
These kappa-casein molecules all have a negative electrical charge and therefore repel each other, keeping the micelles separated under normal conditions and in a stable colloidal suspension in the water-based surrounding fluid.
Today the separation of the cream from the milk usually is accomplished rapidly in centrifugal cream separators.
In the early 1990s it was hypothesized that casomorphin can cause or aggravate autism spectrum disorders, and casein-free diets are widely promoted.
Initially animals were kept for meat, and archaeologist Andrew Sherratt has suggested that dairying, along with the exploitation of domestic animals for hair and labor, began much later in a separate secondary products revolution in the fourth millennium BC.
Studies supporting these claims have had significant flaws, and the data are inadequate to guide autism treatment recommendations.
It is present in excess and often, much greater excess of solubility of solid calcium phosphate.
Those groups who do continue to tolerate milk, however, often have exercised great creativity in using the milk of domesticated ungulates, not only of cattle, but also sheep, goats, yaks, water buffalo, horses, reindeer and camels.
There is limited evidence suggesting that milk and dairy products are a cause of prostate cancer."
: Commonly sold in gallon (3.78&nbsp;L), half-gallon (1.89&nbsp;L) and quart (0.94&nbsp;L) containers of natural-colored HDPE resin, or, for sizes less than one gallon, cartons of waxed paperboard.
It is still customary to serve the milk boiled, despite pasteurization.
;Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro
He found out experimentally that it is sufficient to heat a young wine to only about  for a brief time to kill the microbes, and that the wine could be nevertheless properly aged without sacrificing the final quality.
The bag is then placed in a plastic jug and the corner cut off before the milk is poured.
Diluted milk solutions have been demonstrated to provide an effective method of preventing powdery mildew on grape vines, while showing it is unlikely to harm the plant.
Almost 95% of all milk in the UK is thus sold in shops today, most of it in plastic bottles of various sizes, but some also in milk cartons.
Milk is an emulsion or colloid of butterfat globules within a water-based fluid that contains dissolved carbohydrates and protein aggregates with minerals.
Cows produce bovine growth hormone naturally, but some producers administer an additional recombinant version of BGH which is produced through genetically engineered E. coli to increase milk production.
Valio patented the chromatographic separation method to remove lactose.
The survey found that the average herd size in these developed countries increased from 74 to 99 cows per herd between 2001 to 2007.
During pasteurization, however, these lactic acid bacteria are mostly destroyed.
In the Qur'an, there is a request to wonder on milk as follows: 'And surely in the livestock there is a lesson for you, We give you to drink of that which is in their bellies from the midst of digested food and blood, pure milk palatable for the drinkers.
: Distributed in a variety of sizes, most commonly in aseptic cartons for up to 1.5 liters, and plastic screw-top bottles beyond that with the following volumes; 1.1&nbsp;L, 2&nbsp;L, and 3&nbsp;L. 1 liter milk bags are starting to appear in supermarkets, but have not yet proved popular.
New Zealand cows with the lowest yield per year grazed all year, in contrast to Israel with the highest yield where the cows ate in barns with an energy-rich mixed diet.
Because losses are small in comparison to the large amount of the two B-vitamins present, milk continues to provide significant amounts of thiamin and vitamin B12.
In 1996, more than 2.5 billion liters of milk were still being delivered by milkmen, but by 2006 only 637 million liters (13% of milk consumed) was delivered by some 9,500 milkmen.
The increasing acidity in turn prevents the growth of other organisms, or slows their growth significantly.
Problems with mastitis have led to Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan banning milk from rBST treated cows.
Depending on its age, milk contains 8&nbsp;grams of protein, and a number of other nutrients (either naturally or through fortification) including:
Nearly one-third of the micelles in the milk end up participating in this new membrane structure.
Sheep and goats were introduced to Africa from Southwest Asia, but African cattle may have been independently domesticated around 7000–6000 BC.
Grade B generally refers to milk that is cooled in milk cans, which are immersed in a bath of cold flowing water that typically is drawn up from an underground water well rather than using mechanical refrigeration.
Lactoglobulin is the most common whey protein by a large margin.
Other genetic groups that have a lower prevalence of lactose intolerance are the Tuareg of the Sahara, the Fulani of the West African Sahel, and the Beja and Kabbabish of Sudan, as well as possibly the Tutsi population of the Uganda–Rwanda area.
Milk can be synthesized in a laboratory, from water, fatty acids and proteins.
Canada has tried to restrict milk production by forcing new farmers/increased capacity to "buy in" at CN$24,000 per cow.
The enzyme needed to digest lactose, lactase, reaches its highest levels in the small intestine after birth and then begins a slow decline unless milk is consumed regularly.
Higher grades of pasteurized milk can be found in cartons or plastic bottles.
It has been suggested that the original function of lactation (milk production) was keeping eggs moist.
This extends its shelf life and allows the milk to be stored unrefrigerated because of the longer lasting sterilization effect.
: Usually sold in 1 liter cartons, but smaller, snack-sized cartons are available.
: Commonly sold in 500 mL or 1L cartons or special plastic bottles.
Whey proteins make up approximately 20% of the protein in milk, by weight.
The growth in urban population coupled with the expansion of the railway network in the mid-19th century, brought about a revolution in milk production and supply.
Initially, the ability to digest milk was limited to children as adults did not produce lactase, an enzyme necessary for digesting the lactose in milk.
The cream often is sold as a separate product with its own uses.
: Distributed most commonly in aseptic cartons for up to 1 liter, but smaller, snack-sized cartons are also popular.
A study published in ''The BMJ'' that followed more than 45,000 men and 61,000 women in Sweden age 39 and older had similar results.
On June 9, 2006, the largest milk processor in the world and the two largest supermarkets in the United States – Dean Foods, Wal-Mart, and Kroger – announced that they are "on a nationwide search for rBGH-free milk."
A 2011 survey by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India found that nearly 70 per cent of samples had not conformed to the standards set for milk.
Upon standing for 12 to 24 hours, fresh milk has a tendency to separate into a high-fat cream layer on top of a larger, low-fat milk layer.
Milk, UHT is commonly boiled, despite being pasteurized.
The milk yield per cow in the United States, the world's largest cow milk producer, was  per year in 2010.
The term ''milk'' is also used for white colored, non-animal beverages resembling milk in color and texture (milk substitutes) such as soy milk, rice milk, almond milk, and coconut milk.
''Lactobacilli sp., Streptococcus sp., Leuconostoc sp.
In order to prevent spoilage, milk can be kept refrigerated and stored between  in bulk tanks.
There are several competing theories regarding the precise structure of the micelles, but they share one important feature: the outermost layer consists of strands of one type of protein, k-casein, reaching out from the body of the micelle into the surrounding fluid.
It was reported in 2007 that with increased worldwide prosperity and the competition of bio-fuel production for feed stocks, both the demand for and the price of milk had substantially increased worldwide.
In contrast, the milk yields per cow in India and China – the second and third largest producers – were respectively  and  per year.
Freezing of milk can cause fat globule aggregation upon thawing, resulting in milky layers and butterfat lumps.
Cows receiving rBGH supplements may more frequently contract an udder infection known as mastitis.
