As the measure had support among some Democrats, he maneuvered the law into place by taking a nonpartisan approach and allowing the Democrats to take credit for the bill.
Robert J. Rayback argues that the appearance of a truce, at first, seemed very real as the country entered a period of prosperity that included the South.
Fillmore was the only Whig president who did not die in office or get expelled from the party, and Fillmore appointed the only Whig Supreme Court Justice.
Streets in many United States cities were also named for Fillmore.
It would become one of western New York's most prestigious firms, and exists to this day as Hodgson Russ LLP.
He served as chair of the House Ways and Means Committee from 1841 to 1843 and was an author of the Tariff of 1842, as well as two other bills that President John Tyler vetoed.
Northern Whigs were heard to say "God save us from Whig Vice Presidents."
(In an era where the President, Vice President and cabinet were expected to reflect geographic balance, Fillmore would "represent" New York, meaning another New Yorker – Seward – could not be in the cabinet.)
Fillmore's solution was to enforce the Fugitive Slave Law, but also enforce the Neutrality Act of 1818 against filibustering Southerners who were trying to make Cuba a slave state.
Fillmore appointed Brigham Young as the first governor of the Utah Territory in 1850.
In foreign affairs, Fillmore was particularly active in the Asia and the Pacific, especially with regard to Japan, which at this time still prohibited nearly all foreign contact.
Although some have praised Fillmore's restrained foreign policy, he is criticized for having further aggravated tensions between abolitionists and slaveholders.
Only a few extremists on both sides denounced the Compromise.
James Buchanan and John C. Breckinridge were the Democratic candidates, and won 1,836,072 votes (45.3%) and 174 electoral votes (19 states carried).
The recently admitted state of Texas claimed a large part of New Mexico, and wanted the U.S. to assume the "national debt" of the former Republic of Texas.
Fillmore turned down the honor, explaining that he had neither the "literary nor scientific attainment" to justify the degree.
In 1846, he helped found the private University of Buffalo, which today is the public State University of New York at Buffalo, the largest school in the State University of New York system.
A popular story claims, incorrectly, that Fillmore installed the White House's first bathtub.
Fillmore's constant attention to Mexico avoided a resumption of the hostilities that had only broken off in 1848 and laid the groundwork for the Gadsden Treaty during Pierce's administration.
They were also concerned that American sailors cast away on the Japanese coast were imprisoned as criminals.
After Scott's defeat, the Whigs' decline continued, until the party broke up over the Kansas–Nebraska Act, and the Know Nothings appeared.
She developed pneumonia and died just 26 days after leaving the White House, on March 30, 1853, at the Willard Hotel in Washington, D.C., the shortest post-Presidential life of any former first lady.
When the Whig Party broke up in 1854–56, Fillmore refused to join the Republican Party.
Fillmore was a candidate for vice president at the 1844 Whig National Convention, but lost the nomination to Theodore Frelinghuysen.
He declined re-nomination in 1842.
Curtis served from September 22, 1851, to September 30, 1857.
Love declined renomination in 1836, and Fillmore was elected as a Whig (having followed his mentor Thurlow Weed into the party).
While out of the country, he was nevertheless nominated by the American Party as their candidate for President in 1856.
His parents were Phoebe (Millard) and Nathaniel Fillmore.
Fillmore was the first of a long line of late nineteenth century chief executives, mostly lawyers, who acquired only modest wealth during their lives, were "distinctly middle class", and who spent most of their careers in public service.
Nathan K. Hall was appointed to the United States District Court for the Northern District of New York and served from August 31, 1852 to March 3, 1874.
This was one of the best showings ever by a third-party presidential candidate.
Soon the nation was roiled by the "Crisis of 1850".
The vacancy was finally filled after Fillmore's term, when President Pierce nominated John Archibald Campbell, who was confirmed by the Senate.
After the war, Fillmore maintained his conservative position.
A group of Whig pragmatists sought to balance the ticket, and the convention nominated Fillmore for Vice President.
His explanation satisfied the crowd, which soon departed.
Though Perry did not reach Japan until after the end of Fillmore's term, Fillmore ordered the Perry Expedition, and its success is to his credit.
Nonetheless, the Compromise disrupted the Whig party, which did badly in the fall 1850 elections in the north.
France and Britain dispatched warships to the region in response.
Fillmore presided over the Senate during the months of nerve-wracking debates over these issues.
Kossuth wanted the U.S. to recognize Hungary's independence.
He thus sought a nonconsecutive second term as president (a feat accomplished only once, by Grover Cleveland).
'''Millard Fillmore''' (January 7, 1800 – March 8, 1874) was an American statesman who served as the 13th President of the United States from 1850 to 1853.
Pro-slavery Southerners demanded that all the new territories should be open to slavery.
Fillmore and his State Department were able to resolve these crises without the United States going to war or losing face.
They continued operations after the war, and Fillmore remained active with them almost until his death.
Lewis Cass and William Orlando Butler, the Democrats, took 1,223,460 votes (42.5%) and 127 electoral votes (15 states carried).
He commanded the Union Continentals, a corps of home guards of males over the age of 45 from the upstate New York area.
Fillmore's reputation as a Lincoln critic caused a crowd to gather outside his house after Lincoln's assassination.
Each measure obtained a majority, and, by September 20, President Fillmore had signed them into law.
He was a follower and associate of Thurlow Weed, who had been a leading Anti-Mason.
The third-party Free Soil candidates Martin Van Buren and Charles Francis Adams, Sr. took only 291,501 votes (10.1%) and 0 electoral votes.
Venezuelan adventurer Narciso López recruited Americans for three "filibustering" expeditions to Cuba, in the hope of overthrowing Spanish rule there.
The Continentals trained to defend the Buffalo area in the event of a Confederate attack, as happened in the St. Albans Raid, and was planned for Johnson's Island.
Fillmore was one of the founders of the University at Buffalo.
Clay constructed a compromise bill which included provisions desired by both sides.
In 1834, he formed a law partnership, Fillmore and Hall (which became Fillmore, Hall and Haven in 1836), with close friend Nathan K. Hall who would later serve in his cabinet as Postmaster General.
Abigail Fillmore caught a cold at the outdoor inaugural ceremonies for Franklin Pierce.
His running mate was Andrew Jackson Donelson, nephew of former president Andrew Jackson.
American merchants and shipowners wanted Japan "opened up" for trade, so that American ships could call there for food and water on voyages to Asia and could put in there in emergencies without being punished.
Their combined wealth allowed them to purchase a big house in Buffalo, New York.
There were also disputes about slavery and the slave trade in the District of Columbia, about the apprehension of slaves who escaped to the free states, and about the territorial status of Utah, newly settled by the Mormons.
During one debate, enraged Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri stalked toward Senator Henry S. Foote of Mississippi, who brandished a pistol at Benton.
In gratitude for creating the Utah Territory in 1850 and appointing Young as governor, Young named the territorial capital "Fillmore" and the surrounding county "Millard".
Daniel Webster wrote, "I can now sleep of nights."
Later that year, Fillmore bought out his cloth-making apprenticeship, and began to study law under Judge Walter Wood of Montville.
The 1848 Whig National Convention nominated General Zachary Taylor, a slaveholder from Virginia, for President.
Senator-elect Judah P. Benjamin declined to serve.
On August 6, 1850, he sent a message to Congress recommending that Texas's debts be paid provided Texas abandoned its claims in New Mexico.
He is also quoted as having explained that he "lacked the benefit of a classical education" and could not, therefore, understand the Latin text of the diploma, adding that he believed "no man should accept a degree he cannot read."
Fillmore's greatest difficulty was the Fugitive Slave Law: southerners complained bitterly about any slackness, but enforcement was highly offensive to northerners.
He was admitted to the bar in 1823 and began his law practice in East Aurora, New York.
He also helped found the Buffalo Historical Society and the Buffalo General Hospital.
Ogden Hoffman, Jr. was appointed to the United States District Court for the Northern District of California and the United States District Court for the Southern District of California.
George Edmund Badger withdrew his nomination.
Fillmore also maintained a correspondence with Franklin Pierce, in which they agreed with each other that Lincoln had overstepped his authority and encouraged each other to find ways to thwart Lincoln's war policy.
After the war, he supported the Reconstruction policies of President Andrew Johnson.
Fillmore was a member of the New York Militia in the 1820s and 1830s, and served as Inspector of New York's 47th Brigade with the rank of Major.
His first attempt in 1849 was suppressed by U.S. officials by orders of President Taylor.
The situation became tense enough that Fillmore ordered several warships to guard American merchants in an attempt to prevent British interference.
Fillmore appointed Benjamin Robbins Curtis to seat two of the Supreme Court of the United States.
They helped deprive him of the Presidential nomination in 1852.
Most former northern Whigs, including Fillmore's old mentor Weed, joined the new Republican Party.
American merchants saw in the British opening of China to trade an example of the "benefits of new trade markets."
Fillmore ultimately refused to change American policy, and remained neutral.
He served until July 23, 1866.
Cuba was a colony of Spain where slavery was practiced.
John C. Fremont and William L. Dayton were the Republican candidates and won 1,342,345 votes (33.1%) and 114 electoral votes (11 states carried).
The American Party chose Fillmore as its presidential nominee for the election of 1856.
Then, on July 26, 1854, Fillmore's daughter Mary died suddenly of cholera.
As the election of 1852 approached, Fillmore had been long undecided whether to run for a full term as President.
He is placed near the bottom 10 of historical rankings of Presidents of the United States by various scholarly surveys.
Because the Whig party was so deeply divided, and the two leading national figures in the Whig party (Fillmore and his own Secretary of State, Daniel Webster) refused to combine to secure the nomination, Winfield Scott received it.
James McHall Jones was appointed to the United States District Court for the Southern District of California and served from December 26, 1850 to December 15, 1851.
He finished third in the election, surpassed by the Republican Party candidate.
Fillmore had difficulties regarding Cuba.
A slave-state convention called to discuss secession drew only a few delegates.
This, and his deployment of 750 Federal troops to New Mexico, helped shift a critical number of northern Whigs in Congress away from their insistence upon the Wilmot Proviso, the stipulation that all the Mexican lands must be closed to slavery.
He sought national unity and felt the American Party was the "only hope of forming a truly national party, which shall ignore this constant and distracting agitation of slavery."
In Congress, he opposed admitting Texas as a slave territory, he advocated internal improvements and a protective tariff, he supported John Quincy Adams by voting to receive anti-slavery petitions, he advocated the prohibition by Congress of the slave trade between the states, and he favored the exclusion of slavery from the District of Columbia.
Fillmore was a lawyer from western New York state, and an early member of the Whig Party.
This kind of inconspicuousness and avoiding the limelight would later characterize Fillmore's approach to politics on the national stage.
While Fillmore's letters and papers are dispersed among multiple institutions.
When Weed left the Anti-Masons in 1832, Fillmore did too; when Weed became the leading Whig organizer in New York, Fillmore also joined the Whigs.
The largest surviving collection is in the Research Library at the Buffalo History Museum.
On January 7 each year, a ceremony is held at his grave site in the Forest Lawn Cemetery in Buffalo.
Another issue that came up during Fillmore's presidency was the arrival of Lajos Kossuth, the exiled leader of a failed Hungarian revolution.
In foreign policy, Fillmore supported U.S. Navy expeditions to open trade in Japan, opposed French designs on Hawaii, and was embarrassed by Narciso López's filibuster expeditions to Cuba.
from Geneva College in 1850; he accepted, even though its text was in Latin.
They were noted for lavish hospitality in their home, until Mrs. Fillmore's health began to decline in the 1860s.
In 1825, he built a house there for himself and Abigail.
Within a few years it was apparent that although the Compromise had been intended to settle the slavery controversy, it served rather as an uneasy sectional truce.
On the 52nd ballot, Daniel Webster's delegates switched to General Winfield Scott, winning him the nomination on the 53rd ballot.
When Fillmore returned to the U.S., the Whig Party had broken up over slavery issues and especially the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854.
He sought election to a full term in 1852, but was passed over for the nomination by the Whigs.
A few days before President Taylor's death, Fillmore suggested to the President that if the vote on Clay's bill was tied, he as President of the Senate would cast his tie-breaking vote in favor.
Unlike many other conservative Whigs, Fillmore did not join the American Party, the political arm of the anti-immigrant, anti-Catholic "Know-Nothing" movement.
In 1847 he won election as the first New York State Comptroller chosen by popular vote, defeating Orville Hungerford 174,756 to 136,027.
Many Americans were sympathetic to the Hungarian rebels, especially recent German immigrants, who were now coming to the U.S. in large numbers and had become a major political force.
On February 10, 1858, Fillmore married Caroline McIntosh, a wealthy widow.
López tried a third time in 1851.
He left after four months, but subsequently took another apprenticeship in the same trade at New Hope, New York.
Many southerners felt Fillmore should have supported the invasion, while some northern Democrats were upset at his apology to Spain.
Fillmore and Donelson finished third, winning 873,053 votes (21.6%) and carrying the state of Maryland and its 8 electoral votes.
Fillmore helped found the Buffalo Historical Society (now the Buffalo History Museum) in 1862 and served as its first president.
Fillmore instead followed conservative and southern Whigs by accepting the nomination of the American Party, the political organ of the anti-immigrant, anti-Catholic Know-Nothing movement.
This would require the U.S. to abandon its policy of nonintervention in European affairs.
At the height of this crisis, the Royal Navy had fired on an American ship while at the same time 160 Americans were being held captive in Spain.
The nomination of William C. Micou, another New Orleans lawyer recommended by Benjamin, was not acted on by the Senate.
Millard Fillmore was born in a log cabin in Moravia, Cayuga County, in the Finger Lakes region of New York State, on January 7, 1800.
He held the office from 1848 to 1849, and received credit for revising New York's banking system and making it a model for the future National Banking System.
He struggled to obtain an education living on the frontier and attended New Hope Academy for six months in 1819.
In the history of the U.S. Presidency, Fillmore inaugurated a new era.
He was re-elected twice, serving from 1837 to 1843, in the 25th, 26th, and 27th Congresses.
He died at 11:10&nbsp;pm on March 8, 1874, of the aftereffects of a stroke.
His father apprenticed him to cloth maker Benjamin Hungerford in Sparta, New York, at age fourteen to learn the cloth-making trade.
Fillmore founded the University at Buffalo and was the university's first chancellor.
Fillmore also appointed four other federal judges, all to United States district courts.
He supported President Andrew Johnson's conservative Reconstruction policies, and opposed the policies of the Radical Republicans.
Hoffman was reassigned several times, beginning on January 18, 1854, as the California federal courts were redistricted.
Anti-slavery Northerners demanded complete exclusion.
Benson Lee Grayson suggests that the Fillmore administration's ability to avoid potential problems is too often overlooked.
Therefore, some of these southerners tried to get Cuba annexed to the U.S. as a slave state.
Fillmore became a Unitarian in later life.
He denounced secession, and, once the American Civil War began, supported the Union war effort, but also became a constant critic of the war policies of President Abraham Lincoln, such as the Emancipation Proclamation.
As Zachary Taylor's vice president, he assumed the presidency after Taylor's death.
A total of 74,480,000 coins were produced.
He was succeeded in 1834 by "Anti-Jacksonian" Thomas C. Love.
Fillmore was then unpopular with northern Whigs for signing and enforcing the Fugitive Slave Act.
The Taylor-Fillmore ticket won, taking 1,361,393 votes (47.3%) and 163 electoral votes (16 states carried).
While touring Europe in 1855, Fillmore was offered an honorary Doctor of Civil Law (D.C.L.)
Taylor stunned his fellow Southerners by urging the immediate admission of California and New Mexico as free states.
Northerners were happy with the admission of California.
John Glenn was appointed to the United States District Court for the District of Maryland and served from March 19, 1852 to July 8, 1853.
While in Europe, he also met with Pope Pius IX in Rome.
He came in second place in the vote for Speaker of the House in 1841.
After leaving politics, Fillmore returned to Buffalo and continued to serve as chancellor of the school.
Many southerners wanted to expand slave territory in the U.S., but the Missouri Compromise and other laws prevented that.
Fillmore was also selected in part to prevent the nomination of the anti-slavery William H. Seward, and prevent Seward from receiving a position in Taylor's cabinet.
Fillmore was the first Chancellor, a position he held as Vice President and as President.
These bills were: admission of California as a free state (which happened on September 9, 1850); settlement of the Texas boundary and debts; creation of New Mexico Territory, which would be open to slavery; the Fugitive Slave Act; and abolition of the slave trade (but not slavery), in the District of Columbia.
Spattering his house with ink, they demanded to know why Fillmore hadn't draped his house in black bunting as a sign of mourning for Lincoln.
Fillmore did not comment publicly on the merits of the compromise proposals.
He attempted four times to fill the vacancy caused by Justice John McKinley's death.
Fillmore sent a stern warning saying that under certain conditions control of Cuba "might be almost essential to our America's safety."
López tried again a year later; he reached Cuba but was chased away by Spanish troops and disbanded his force in Key West.
He was out of the country when the nomination came and had not been consulted about running.
Fillmore was also a staunch opponent of European meddling in Hawaii.
López and several of his followers were indicted for breach of the Neutrality Act, but were quickly acquitted by friendly Southern juries.
He and many of his American followers were executed, provoking outrage among American sympathizers and causing further embarrassment for Fillmore.
Upon deciding that Judge Wood was not providing him the training he required, Fillmore bought out his agreement with Wood and moved to Buffalo, where he continued his studies in the law office of Asa Rice and Joseph Clary.
The Union Continentals guarded Lincoln's funeral train in Buffalo.
Later that year, Fillmore went abroad.
Although Fillmore, in retirement, continued to feel that conciliation with the South was necessary and considered that the Republican Party was at least partly responsible for the subsequent disunion, he was an outspoken critic of secession and was also critical of President James Buchanan for not immediately taking military action when South Carolina seceded.
Fillmore completed his term and was succeeded by Pierce on March 4, 1853.
France under Napoleon III attempted to annex Hawaii, but backed down after Fillmore issued a strongly worded message suggesting that "the United States would not stand for any such action."
In 1828, Fillmore was elected to the New York State Assembly on the Anti-Masonic ticket, serving three one-year terms, from 1829 to 1831.
He wrote: "God knows that I detest slavery, but it is an existing evil ... and we must endure it and give it such protection as is guaranteed by the Constitution."
They performed military drill and ceremonial functions at parades, funerals, and other events.
The school was chartered by an act of the New York State Legislature on May 11, 1846, and at first was only a medical school.
His last words were alleged to be, upon being fed some soup, "the nourishment is palatable."
They had two children, Millard Powers Fillmore and Mary Abigail Fillmore.
He was the second of nine children and the eldest son.
In fact, Fillmore had been awarded an honorary LL.D.
All previous Presidents had substantial personal fortunes, acquired either by inheritance, marriage, or (in Martin van Buren's case) by work as an attorney.
In his final term he chaired a special legislative committee to enact a new bankruptcy law that eliminated debtors' prison.
In 1832, he was elected U.S. Representative from New York's 32nd congressional district a "National Republican", serving in the 23rd Congress from 1833 to 1835.
Because both the north and the south refused to unite behind Scott, he won only four of 31 states, and lost the election to Franklin Pierce.
Furthermore, "By no spoken or written word had he indicated a subscription to American tenets."
There he fell in love with his future wife Abigail Powers.
Douglas modified Clay's bill accordingly, and then split it into five separate Senate bills.
On February 18, 2010, the United States Mint released the thirteenth coin in the Presidential $1 Coin Program, bearing Fillmore's likeness.
This time most of his force was captured by the Spanish.
As an anti-slavery moderate, he opposed abolitionist demands to exclude slavery from all the territory gained in the Mexican War.
Later that year, Fillmore was the unsuccessful Whig Party candidate for Governor of New York.
Democrat Franklin Pierce defeated Scott in the November election.
He led narrowly on the early ballots, but was short of a majority and could gain no votes.
Fillmore was not himself anti-Catholic – his daughter Mary had attended a girls' Catholic boarding school for a year and he contributed to the construction of  St. Joseph Cathedral in Buffalo – but at this time, the American Party was the only alternative for non-Democrats who were not militantly anti-slavery.
He was the last Whig president, and the last president not to be affiliated with either the Democratic or Republican parties.
