The county seat of Milwaukee County, it is on Lake Michigan's western shore.
Through its Milwaukee Wireless Initiative, the city has contracted with Midwest Fiber Networks to invest US$20 million in setting up a municipal wireless network city-wide.
* Mitchell Gallery of Flight, at General Mitchell International Airport, Milwaukee's aviation and historical enthusiasts experience the history of General Mitchell International Airport with a visit to the Gallery of Flight.
The Lake Express travels across Lake Michigan from late spring to the fall of each year.
In 1892, Whitefish Bay, South Milwaukee, and Wauwatosa were incorporated.
All but four state legislators representing the city are Democrats; the four Republicans—two in the State Assembly and two in the State Senate—represent outer portions of the city that are part of districts dominated by heavily Republican suburban counties.
Nationally recognized as a house museum.
After 1848, hopes for a united Germany had failed, and revolutionary and radical Germans, known as the "Forty-Eighters," turned their attention to the United States.
Service and managerial jobs are the fastest-growing segments of the Milwaukee economy, and health care alone makes up 27% the jobs in the city.
Milwaukee has over  of bicycle lanes and trails, most of which run alongside or near its rivers and Lake Michigan.
Milwaukee boasts a number of German restaurants, as well as a traditional German beer hall.
The population density is 2,399.5/km2 (6,214.3 per square mile).
In 2007, three Milwaukee-area companies were among nine firms honored for manufacturing excellence in the Wisconsin Manufacturer of the Year competition.
Summerfest claims to be the world's largest music festival and was founded in Milwaukee in 1968.
In the early 20th century guitar legend Les Paul, and pianist Liberace were some of the area's most famous musicians.
Males have a median income of $32,244 versus $26,013 for females.
In 2009, five Milwaukee-area companies were selected as leaders in their industries as Fortune magazine recognized "The World's Most-Admired Companies."
By 1850, there were seventy-five Poles in Milwaukee County and the US Census shows they had a variety of occupations: grocers, blacksmiths, tavernkeepers, coopers, butchers, broommakers, shoemakers, draymen, laborers, and farmers.
In competition with Juneau, Byron Kilbourn established Kilbourntown west of the Milwaukee River, and made sure the streets running toward the river did not join with those on the east side.
Held generally on the lakefront Summerfest grounds, these festivals span several days (typically Friday plus the weekend) and celebrate Milwaukee's history and diversity.
Milwaukee, where Father Josef Kentenich was exiled for 14 years from 1952 to 1965, is also the center for the Schoenstatt Movement in the United States.
Of all those who left the German lands between 1835 and 1910, 90 percent went to the United States, most of them traveling to the Mid-Atlantic states and the Midwest.
A view of Milwaukee's South Side skyline is replete with the steeples of the many churches these immigrants built that are still vital centers of the community.
The Hmong American Peace Academy/International Peace Academy, a K-12 school system in Milwaukee centered on the Hmong community, opened in 2004.
St. Joan of Arc Chapel, the oldest church in Milwaukee, is on the Marquette University campus.
They arrived for jobs, filling positions in the manufacturing and agricultural sectors.
Milwaukee has the fifth-largest Polish population in the U.S. at 45,467, ranking behind New York City (211,203), Chicago (165,784), Los Angeles (60,316) and Philadelphia (52,648).
The most prominent alternative weekly is ''Shepherd Express'', a free publication.
The largest number of German immigrants to Milwaukee came from Prussia, followed by Bavaria, Saxony, Hanover, and Hesse-Darmstadt.
The largest Italian American festival, Festa Italiana is held in the city.
On February 10, 2015, a streetcar connecting the Milwaukee Intermodal Station with the city's lower east side was approved by the Common Council, bringing if not to a halt then at least to a pause, decades of sometimes acrimonious debate.
Largely through its efforts to preserve its history, in 2006 Milwaukee was named one of the "Dozen Distinctive Destinations" by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
Construction began in November 2015.
Additionally, strikes contributed to the labor shortages.
With demographic changes in the wake of white flight, segregation in metropolitan Milwaukee is primarily in the suburbs rather than the city as in the era of Father Groppi.
MillerCoors is a joint venture formed in 2008 by Milwaukee-based Miller Brewing Co. and Golden, Colorado-based Molson Coors Brewing Company.
Milwaukee avoided the severe declines of its fellow "rust belt" cities due to its large immigrant population and historic neighborhoods.
Milwaukee was once the home to four of the world's largest beer breweries (Schlitz, Blatz, Pabst, and Miller), and was the number one beer producing city in the world for many years.
By 1862 Milwaukee was the largest shipper of wheat on the planet, and related industry developed.
According to the 2006–2008 American Community Survey, 38.3% of Milwaukee's residents reported having African American ancestry and 20.8% reported German ancestry.
The district is currently represented by Democrat Gwen Moore.
The African, Arab, Irish (Irish Fest), Mexican, and American Indian events wrap it up from August through September.
* Harley-Davidson Museum, opened in 2008, pays tribute to Harley-Davidson motorcycles and is the only museum of its type in the world.
There are numerous radio stations throughout Milwaukee and the surrounding area.
Museums and cultural events, such as Jazz in the Park, occur weekly in downtown parks.
Abraham Lincoln watched cricket in Milwaukee in 1849 when he attended a game between Chicago and Milwaukee.
The group's proud ethnicity maintained a high profile here for decades and it was not until the 1950s and 1960s that the families began to disperse to the southern suburbs.
As of September 2016, the system operates 39 stations throughout downtown, the East Side, and the UW-Milwaukee campus area and near downtown neighborhoods.
By 1900 34 percent of Milwaukee's population was of German background.
* America's Black Holocaust Museum, founded by lynching survivor James Cameron, features exhibits which chronicle the injustices suffered throughout history by African Americans in the United States.
Other local newspapers, city guides and magazines with large distributions include ''M Magazine'', ''Milwaukee Magazine'', ''The Bay View Compass,'' and ''Riverwest Currents''.
French missionaries and traders first passed through the area in the late 17th and 18th centuries.
The city's black population experiences disproportionately high levels of incarceration and a severe educational achievement gap.
Many of the new immigrants who were pouring into the new state of Wisconsin during the middle of the 19th century were wheat farmers.
Milwaukee is served by the Hiawatha Amtrak express service up to seven times daily between downtown Milwaukee and downtown Chicago, including a stop at the Milwaukee Airport Railroad Station, Sturtevant, WI near Racine, WI, Glenview, IL.
Milwaukee became synonymous with Germans and beer beginning in the 1850s.
This created additional brewery jobs in Milwaukee, but the company's world headquarters moved from Milwaukee to Chicago.
Even the German language is not lost, as a German language immersion school is offered for children in grades K-5.
Milwaukee Public Schools operate as magnet schools, with individualized specialty areas for interests in academics or the arts.
Still pending are the creation of bicycle lanes along major commuting routes, such as the Hoan Bridge connector between downtown and the suburbs to the south.
The median age is 31 years.
Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare includes St. Joseph's Hospital, St. Francis Hospital, The Wisconsin Heart Hospital, Elmbrook Memorial (Brookfield), and other outpatient clinics in the Milwaukee area.
Along with the processing industries, bulk commodity storage and machining and manufacturing entered the scene.
The St. Sava Serbian Orthodox Cathedral is a landmark of the Serbian community in Milwaukee, located by the American Serb hall.
21.3% of the population and 17.4% of families are below the poverty line.
Its population peaked at 741,324.
There are 249,225 housing units at an average density of 1,001.7/km2 (2,594.4 per square mile).
There were perhaps 100 new settlers in this year, mostly from New England and other Eastern States.
* Milwaukee County Historical Society features Milwaukee during the late 19th century through the mid-20th century.
The first Europeans to pass through the area were French Catholic missionaries and fur traders.
By 1960, Milwaukee had grown to become one of the largest cities in the United States.
The School Sisters of the Third Order of St Francis have their mother house in Milwaukee, and several other religious orders have a significant presence in the area, including the Jesuits and Franciscans.
Milwaukee's public broadcasting stations are WMVS 10 and WMVT 36.
As a result, it has been criticized for having a near-monopoly in local news coverage.
A 0.5% sales tax was proposed for the counties of Milwaukee, Racine, and Kenosha by the Southeast Wisconsin Regional Transit Authority to fund the KRM (Kenosha-Racine-Milwaukee) Commuter Rail project serving those cities as well as several other stops on the route.
Nominated companies were evaluated in areas such as financial growth or consistency, technological advances, product development, environmental solutions, operational excellence/continuous improvement, commitment to employees, and effective research and development.
In July 2015, General Mitchell International Airport served 610,271 passengers.
Following the Bridge War, it was decided the best course of action was to officially unite the towns.
Though the city currently has no NFL team (it supported the Milwaukee Badgers in the 1920s), Milwaukee is considered a home market for the Green Bay Packers.
Other television stations in the Milwaukee market include WMKE-CD 7 (Soul of the South Network), WVCY 30 (FN), WBME-CD 41 (Me-TV), WMLW-TV 49 (Independent), WWRS 52 (TBN), Sportsman Channel, and WPXE 55 (ION)
During this time there were labor shortages due to the immigration laws that restricted Europeans from immigrating to the United States.
The Poles had many reasons for leaving their homeland, mainly poverty and political oppression.
A Republican has not represented a significant portion of Milwaukee in Congress since Charles J. Kersten lost his seat in the 5th district in 1954 to Democrat Henry S. Reuss.
OnMilwaukee.com is an online magazine providing news and events.
The city had previously established free wireless networks in two downtown city parks: Cathedral Square; and Pere Marquette Park.
The city is split between four state Senate districts, each of which is composed of three Assembly districts.
This accounts for the large number of angled bridges that still exist in Milwaukee today.
As Mitchell Street grew denser, the Polish population started moving south to the Lincoln Village neighborhood, home to the Basilica of St. Josaphat and Kosciuszko Park.
Johnson Controls Inc., Glendale, placed fourth among motor-vehicle parts firms.
Milwaukee has a mayor-council form of government.
The third prominent builder was George H. Walker.
Often referred to as the City of Festivals, Milwaukee has various cultural events which take place throughout the summer at Henry Maier Festival Park, on the lake.
St. Stanislaus Catholic Church and the surrounding neighborhood was the center of Polish life in Milwaukee.
In the second half of the 18th century, the Indians at Milwaukee played a role in all the major wars on the American continent.
Early explorers called the Milwaukee River and surrounding lands various names: Melleorki, Milwacky, Mahn-a-waukie, Milwarck, and Milwaucki.
This area grew and became known as Walker's Point.
In determining his ranking, Greenberg cited—among other things—the city's number of "standout historical structures," such as the Pabst Mansion and the Milwaukee Public Museum.
North-south streets are numbered, and east-west streets are named.
Milwaukee has two auxiliary Interstate Highways, I-894 and I-794.
The lake breeze is most common between the months of March and July.
Solomon Juneau was the first of the three to come to the area, in 1818.
Full wireless coverage was expected by March 2008, but delays have been reported.
Southwest, Frontier Airlines, American Airlines, United Airlines, Air Canada and Delta Air Lines are among the carriers using Milwaukee's General Mitchell International Airport gates.
Milwaukee also has a large Serbian population with Serbian restaurants, a Serbian K-8 School, Serbian churches along with an American Serb Hall.
Milwaukee's most famous music venue is Summerfest.
Out of the total population, 31.6% of those under the age of 18 and 11.0% of those 65 and older are living below the poverty line.
Live musical acts are offered on 11 stages, for 11 days beginning in late June.
For every 100 females age 18 and over, there are 87.2 males.
Milwaukee is crossed by Interstate 43 and Interstate 94, which come together downtown at the Marquette Interchange.
Milwaukee tends to experience highs that are  on or above 7 days per year, and lows at or below  on 6–7 nights.
Milwaukee Public Schools (MPS) is the largest school district in Wisconsin and thirty third in the nation.
''Happy Days'' and ''Laverne and Shirley'', two sitcoms that aired on ABC in the 1970s and 1980s, were set in Milwaukee, and often used the Milwaukee breweries as a backdrop for the storyline.
According to the 2010 Census, 44.8% of the population was White (37.0% non-Hispanic white), 40.0% was Black or African American, 0.8% American Indian and Alaska Native, 3.5% Asian, 3.4% from two or more races.
Milwaukee's European history is evident today.
The area is part of the Wisconsin Milwaukee Mission.
Astronautics Corporation of America and Brady Corporation, both of which have headquarters in Milwaukee, and Wisconsin Plating Works Inc., Racine, each received special awards.
In 2008, Barack Obama won Milwaukee with 77% of the vote.
Milwaukee did solidify its place as the commercial capital of Wisconsin and an important market in the Midwest.
Milwaukee elected three mayors who ran on the ticket of the Socialist Party: Emil Seidel (1910–1912), Daniel Hoan (1916–1940), and Frank Zeidler (1948–1960).
The part in Washington County is bordered by the southeast corner of Germantown, while the part in Waukesha County is bordered by the southeast corner of Menomonee Falls, north of the village of Butler.
According to Bucks officials it should open for the 2017-2018 season.
Europeans had arrived in the Milwaukee area prior to the 1833 Treaty of Chicago.
One of the distinctive traits of Milwaukee's residential areas are the neighborhoods full of so-called Polish flats.
The lake moderates cold air outbreaks along the lakeshore during winter months.
Because of Miller's position as the second-largest beer-maker in the U.S., the city remains known as a beer town.
The Packers' longtime flagship station is Milwaukee-based WTMJ AM 620.
In the 1920s Chicago gangster activity came north to Milwaukee during the Prohibition era.
The warmest month of the year is July, when the 24-hour average is , while January is the coldest month, with a 24-hour average of .
The airport terminal is open 24 hours a day.
A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Milwaukee 15th most walkable of fifty largest U.S. cities.
However, immigration began to change in character and size in the late 1840s and early 1850s, due to the 1848 revolutionary movements in Europe.
The event, held in May each year, has frequently featured a commuter race between a car, a bus, and a bike; and also a morning ride into work with the mayor.
The renovated Milwaukee Intermodal Station provides Jefferson Lines intercity bus riders access to Amtrak and Greyhound Lines.
Paramount Records, primarily a jazz and blues record label, was founded in Grafton, a northern suburb of Milwaukee, in the 1920s and 1930s.
The tallest building in the city is the U.S. Bank Center.
A connection to Metra commuter rail in Kenosha was planned with some trains continuing to Chicago.
Other health care non-profit organizations in Milwaukee include national headquarters of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology and the Endometriosis Association.
The Milwaukee area is known for producing national talents such as Steve Miller (rock), Wladziu Valentino Liberace (piano), Al Jarreau (jazz), Eric Benet (neo-soul), Speech (hip hop), Daryl Stuermer (rock), BoDeans (rock), Les Paul (jazz), the Violent Femmes (alternative), Coo Coo Cal (rap), Die Kreuzen (punk), Andy Hurley of Fall Out Boy (punk), Eyes To The Sky (hardcore), Rico Love (R&B), Andrew 'The Butcher' Mrotek of The Academy Is... (alt-rock), The Promise Ring (indie), Lights Out Asia (post-rock), the Gufs (alt rock), Brief Candles (rock) and Decibully (indie).
Extremes range from  set on July 24, 1934 down to  on both January 17, 1982 and February 4, 1996.
Often referred to as "Sewer Socialists", the Milwaukee Socialists were characterized by their practical approach to government and labor.
The Milwaukee metropolitan area was cited as being the most segregated in the U.S. in a ''Jet Magazine'' article in 2002.
By 1925, around 9,000 Mexican Americans lived in Milwaukee, but the Great Depression forced many of them to move back home.
599,164 people live in Milwaukee, according to the most recent U.S. Census estimate in 2013.
The north-south numbering line is along the Menomonee River (east of Hawley Road) and Fairview Avenue/Golfview Parkway (west of Hawley Road), with the east-west numbering line defined along 1st Street (north of Oklahoma Avenue) and Chase/Howell Avenue (south of Oklahoma Avenue).
The city holds Polish Fest, an annual celebration of Polish culture and cuisine.
The Medical College of Wisconsin is one of two medical schools in Wisconsin and the only one in Milwaukee.
Its combined statistical area population makes it the 29th most populous Combined Statistical Area of the United States.
Al Capone, noted Chicago mobster, owned a home in the Milwaukee suburb Brookfield, where moonshine was made.
Tim Carpenter (D), Lena Taylor (D), Leah Vukmir (R), Nikiya Harris (D), Chris Larson (D), Alberta Darling (R), and Mary Lazich (R) represent Milwaukee in the Wisconsin State Senate, and Daniel Riemer (D), JoCasta Zamarripa (D), Josh Zepnick (D), David Bowen (D), Mandela Barnes (D), Frederick P. Kessler (D), Rob Hutton (R), Dale P. Kooyenga (R), Leon Young (D), La Tonya Johnson (D), Evan Goyke (D), Jonathan Brostoff (D), Christine Sinicki (D), Janel Brandtjen (R), and Mike Kuglitsch (R) represent Milwaukee in the Wisconsin State Assembly.
The Milwaukee County Transit System provides bus services within Milwaukee County.
Scholars classify German immigration to the United States in three major waves, and Wisconsin received a significant number of immigrants from all three.
In 2014, 59 people were killed, one of the lowest tallies in Milwaukee's history.
Interstate 94 (I-94) comes north from Chicago to enter Milwaukee and continues west to Madison.
In 2013 Mark Pfeifer, the editor of the ''Hmong Studies Journal'', stated Hmong in Milwaukee had recently been moving to the northwest side of Milwaukee; they historically lived in the north and south areas of Milwaukee.
The Common Council consists of 15 members, one from each district in the city.
Milwaukee County is known for its well-developed Parks of Milwaukee park system.
'Jazz in the Park', a weekly jazz show held at downtown Cathedral Square Park, has become a summer tradition; free, public performances with a picnic environment.
Despite the high poverty rates, in 2010, home renters of Milwaukee faced an increasing rate for rent, up 3%.
Milwaukee has over 140 parks with over  of parks and parkways.
The pattern of German immigrants to settle near each other encouraged the continuation of German lifestyle and customs.
Of the 50 largest cities in the United States, Milwaukee has the second-coldest average annual temperature, after Minneapolis-St. Paul.
By 1881 the Burnham brickyard, which employed 200 men and peaked at 15 million bricks a year, was the largest in the world.
Hal Leonard Corporation, founded in 1947 is one of the world's largest music print publishers, and is headquartered in Milwaukee.
They were followed by Cudahy (1895), North Milwaukee (1897) and East Milwaukee, later known as Shorewood, in 1900.
When 28-year incumbent Henry Maier retired in 1988, he held the record for longest term of service for a city of Milwaukee's size.
By the late 1960s, Milwaukee's population had started to decline due to white flight  Milwaukee had a population of 636,212 by 1980, while the population of the metropolitan area increased.
Its objectives were to "better understand the processes related to freshwater systems dynamics" and to develop "a policy and management program aimed at balancing the protection and utilization of freshwater".
Milwaukee is also served by three US Highways.
Schurz was referring to the various clubs and societies Germans developed in Milwaukee.
Milwaukee County hosts the Zoo-A La Carte at the Milwaukee County Zoo, and various ethnic festivals like Summerfest, German Fest, and Festa Italiana to celebrate various types of cuisine in summer months.
There was intense competition for markets with Chicago, and to a lesser degree, with Racine and Kenosha.
Early that year it became known Juneau and Kilbourn intended to lay out competing town-sites and by the years' end both had purchased their lands from the government and made their first sales.
This holistic water treatment helped Milwaukee win the US Water Alliance's 2012 US Water Prize.
In 2007, 17 MPS high schools appeared on a national list of "dropout factories" - schools where fewer than 60% of freshmen graduate on time.
Besides making beer for the rest of the nation, Milwaukeeans enjoyed consuming the various beers produced in the city's breweries.
Summerfest spans 11 days at the end of June and beginning of July.
Since the 1980s, the city has begun to make strides in improving its economy, neighborhoods, and image, resulting in the revitalization of neighborhoods such as the Historic Third Ward, Lincoln Village, the East Side, and more recently Walker's Point and Bay View, along with attracting new businesses to its downtown area.
The current County Executive is Chris Abele.
Responding to this problem, in 2009 the city became an "Innovating City" in the Global Compact Cities Program.
Milwaukee County Farmers Markets, held in season, sell fresh produce, meats, cheeses, jams, jellies, preserves and syrups, and plants.
As early as 1843, pioneer historian James Buck recorded 138 taverns in Milwaukee, an average of one per forty residents.
* Pabst Mansion Built in 1892 by beer tycoon Frederick Pabst, this Flemish Renaissance Mansion was once considered the jewel of Milwaukee's famous avenue of mansions called the "Grand Avenue".
In the 1950s, the Hispanic community was beginning to emerge.
Milwaukee gained its reputation for the most German of American cities not just from the large number of German immigrants it received, but the sense of community which the immigrants established there.
Making the latest big-breweries list from Wisconsin is MillerCoors at No.
Other Polish communities started on the east side of Milwaukee and Jones Island, a major commercial fishing center settled mostly by Poles from the Baltic Sea.
In 2009, the Milwaukee County Transit System began installing bicycle racks to the front of county buses.
Both Paul, born in Waukesha, and Liberace, born in West Allis, launched their internationally recognized careers in Milwaukee music venues.
11 on ''Newsmax'' magazine's list of the "Top 25 Most Uniquely American Cities and Towns," a piece written by current CBS News travel editor Peter Greenberg.
In the early 20th century West Allis (1902), and West Milwaukee (1906) were added, which completed the first generation of "inner-ring" suburbs.
In July 2008, it was announced Coors beer would be added to the list of beers brewed in Miller Valley.
In June 2011, authorizing legislation for regional transit authorities in Wisconsin was repealed, leading to the dissolution of the Southeastern Regional Transit Authority, which was leading the commuter rail planning.
Milwaukee's daily newspaper is the ''Milwaukee Journal Sentinel'' which was formed when the morning paper the ''Milwaukee Sentinel'' merged with the afternoon paper ''Milwaukee Journal''.
By 1840, the three towns had grown quite a bit, along with their rivalries.
He was not the first European settler (Alexis Laframboise settled a trading post in 1785) but founded a town called Juneau's Side, or Juneautown, that began attracting more settlers.
The city celebrates its German culture by annually hosting a German Fest in July and an Oktoberfest in October.
The spelling "Milwaukie" lives on in Milwaukie, Oregon, named after the Wisconsin city in 1847, before the current spelling was universally accepted.
In August 2014, Milwaukee debuted a bicycle sharing system called Bublr Bikes, which is a partnership between the City of Milwaukee and a local non-profit Midwest Bike Share (dba Bublr Bikes).
Railroads were needed to transport all this grain from the wheat fields of Wisconsin to Milwaukee's harbor.
Mitchell is served by nine airlines, which offer roughly 240 daily departures and 245 daily arrivals.
