In this case, other organisms could benefit from this programming, and Batesian or Müllerian mimics of it could potentially evolve.
This is much like the aggressive mimicry in fireflies described previously, but with a  more benign outcome for the pollinator.
The Batesian mimicry in ''Papilio polytes'' is controlled by the ''doublesex'' gene.
For example, the tails of some snakes resemble their heads and they show behavior such as moving backwards when threatened and presenting the predator with the tail, thereby improving their chances of escape without fatal harm.
''Consul fabius'' and ''Eresia eunice'' imitate unpalatable ''Heliconius'' butterflies such as ''H.
Other forms of mimicry have a reproductive component, such as Vavilovian mimicry involving seeds, and brood parasitism, which can also involve aggressive mimicry.
These combine to create a "false head".
The fourth case, Vavilovian mimicry, where weeds resemble crops, is important for several reasons, and in this case humans are the agent of selection.
It also changes the behaviour of the ant so that the gaster (rear part) is held raised.
Most known mimics are insects, though many other animal mimics are known.
Scientists had falsely believed that ''D.
For example, when predators avoid a mimic that imperfectly resembles a coral snake, the mimic is sufficiently protected.
Parasites can also be aggressive mimics, though the situation is somewhat different from those outlined previously.
Gamma males are the smallest males and mimic juveniles.
Spectacular examples occur in the hairstreak butterflies; when perching on a twig or flower, they commonly do so upside down and shift their rear wings repeatedly, causing antenna-like movements of the "tails" on their wings.
In its broadest definition, mimicry can include non-living models.
The viceroy has subspecies with somewhat different coloration, each closely matching the local ''Danaus'' species.
Host-parasite mimicry is a two species system where a parasite mimics its own host.
''Leucochloridium'', a genus of flatworm, matures in the digestive system of songbirds, their eggs then passing out of the bird via the feces.
This wrasse resides in coral reefs in the Indian and the Pacific Oceans, and is recognized by other fishes that then let it clean them.
Since the host birds do not eat snails, the sporocyst has another strategy to reach its host's intestine.
The nature of learning is weighted in favor of the mimics, for a predator that has a bad first experience with a model tends to avoid anything that looks like it for a long time, and does not re-sample soon to see whether the initial experience was a false negative.
The genus ''Morpho'' is palatable, but some species (such as ''M.
Other colors were also learned and avoided, but bees seemed least able to effectively associate yellow pigmented webs with danger.
The adaptation to different hosts is inherited through the female line in so-called gentes.
In fact, the crop's only "protection" relevant here is its usefulness to humans.
Bees are able to associate a certain pattern with a spatial location, meaning the spider must spin a new pattern regularly or suffer diminishing prey capture.
Over time, palatable insects may evolve to resemble noxious ones, making them mimics and the noxious ones models.
Vavilovian mimicry can be classified as defensive mimicry, in that the weed mimics a protected species.
Species such as the silver argiope (''Argiope argentata'') employ prominent patterns in the middle of their webs, such as zigzags.
This mimicry may have evolved from non-mating signals that have become modified for predation.
The model is usually another species, except in automimicry, where members of the species mimic other members, or other parts of their own bodies, and in inter-sexual mimicry, where members of one sex mimic members of the other.
The eggs develop in this intermediate host, and then must find a suitable bird to mature in.
Batesian mimicry can only be maintained if the harm caused to the predator by eating a model outweighs the benefit of eating a mimic.
Also, the two species may exist on a continuum from harmless to highly noxious, so Batesian mimicry grades smoothly into Müllerian convergence.
In other words, there is no advantage in being aposematic for an organism that is likely to kill any predator it succeeds in poisoning; such an animal is better off being camouflaged, to avoid attacks altogether.
Less palatable organisms, therefore, mimic more dangerous individuals, with their likeness already perfected.
The name refers to Calaway H. Dodson.
Mimics are less likely to be found out (for example by predators) when in low proportion to their model.
However, if mimics become more abundant than models, then the probability of a young predator having a first experience with a mimic increases.
In an unusual case, planidium larvae of some beetles of the genus ''Meloe'' form a group and produce a pheromone that mimics the sex attractant of its host bee species.
Browerian mimicry, named after Lincoln P. Brower and Jane Van Zandt Brower, is a form of ''automimicry''; where the model belongs to the same species as the mimic.
Spiders change their web day to day, which can be explained by bee's ability to remember web patterns.
Like Bakerian mimics, no nectar is provided.
Its imposter, a species of blenny, lives in the Indian Ocean—and not only looks like it in terms of size and coloration, but even mimics the cleaner's "dance".
Visual mimicry is the most obvious sign of this deception for humans, but the visual aspect may be minor or non-existent.
It is most common in orchids, which mimic females of the order Hymenoptera (generally bees and wasps), and may account for around 60% of pollinations.
One form of such mimicry is where one part of an organism's body resembles another part.
This scenario is a little more difficult to understand, since in other types of mimicry it is usually the most harmful species that is the model.
Inter-sexual mimicry occurs when individuals of one sex in a species mimic members of the opposite sex.
Beta males mimic females and manage to enter the harem of females without being detected by the alpha males allowing them to mate.
Such insects frequently are aposematically coloured and patterned.
Some mimicry is imperfect.
In this unusual case, a fungal plant pathogen infects leaves of blueberries, causing them to secrete sugars, in effect mimicking the nectar of flowers.
They are brightly colored and move in a pulsating fashion.
They may resemble a mutualistic symbiont or a species of little relevance to the prey.
Similar cases are seen in some other species of the same family.
It is named after Russian botanist and geneticist Nikolai Vavilov.
Bakerian mimicry, named after Herbert G. Baker, is a form of automimicry where female flowers mimic male flowers of their own species, cheating pollinators out of a reward.
Reproductive mimicry occurs when the actions of the dupe directly aid in the mimic's reproduction.
Similarly, among common side-blotched lizards, some males mimic the yellow throat coloration and even mating rejection behavior of the other sex to sneak matings with guarded females.
The mimic may have a particular significance for duped prey.
Mimicry occurs when a group of organisms, the mimics, evolve to share perceived characteristics with another group, the '''models'''.
This is common in plants with deceptive flowers that do not provide the reward they seem to offer.
Nonethless, eyespots are the subject of a rich contemporary literature.
A nematode (''Myrmeconema neotropicum'') changes the colour of the abdomen of workers of the canopy ant ''Cephalotes atratus'' to make it appear like the ripe fruits of ''Hyeronima alchorneoides''.
Unlike the previously mentioned forms of mimicry, Gilbertian mimicry involves only two species.
At first, Bates could not explain why this should be so—if both were harmful why did one need to mimic another?
Parasitic (cuckoo) bumblebees (formerly ''Psithyrus'', now included in ''Bombus'') resemble their hosts more closely than would be expected by chance, at least in areas like Europe where parasite-host co-speciation is common.
For example, a lamellicorn beetle, which usually pollinates correspondingly colored ''Cistus'' flowers, is also known to aid in pollination of ''Ophrys'' species that are normally pollinated by bees.
Often, mimicry evolves to protect a species from predators, making it an antipredator adaptation.
Female signals are based on that received from the male, each female having a repertoire of signals matching the delay and duration of the female of the corresponding species.
In any case, the mimetic signal always functions because it resembles that of another organism.
Some carnivorous plants may also be able to increase their rate of capture through mimicry.
These species store toxins from its host plant, which are maintained even in the adult (imago) form.
Some regulatory elements collaborate to form a supergene for the development of butterfly color patterns.
For example, animals such as flower mantises, planthoppers and geometer moth caterpillars that resemble twigs, bark, leaves or flowers practice masquerade.
By providing similar sensory signals as the model flower, it can lure its pollinators.
It has also been suggested that this system could be an instance of pseudomimicry, the similar colour patterns having evolved independently in similar habitats.
Müllerian mimicry, named for the German naturalist Fritz Müller, describes a situation where two or more species have similar warning or aposematic signals and both share genuine anti-predation attributes (e.g.
Yellow is the color of many nectar bearing flowers, however, so perhaps avoiding yellow is not worthwhile.
Studies of rear-wing damage support the hypothesis that this strategy is effective in deflecting attacks from the insect's head.
Many insects have filamentous "tails" at the ends of their wings and patterns of markings on the wings themselves.
This has created further selection pressure on the host plants, which have evolved stipules that mimic mature ''Heliconius'' eggs near the point of hatching.
Examples are found in some species of birds, fishes, and lizards.
Finally, this type of mimicry does not occur in ecosystems unaltered by humans.
One case is the golden orb weaver (''Nephila clavipes''), which spins a conspicuous golden colored web in well-lit areas.
Vavilovian mimicry describes weeds that come to share characteristics with a domesticated plant through artificial selection.
It was coined by Pasteur as a phrase for such rare mimicry systems, and is named after the American ecologist Lawrence E. Gilbert.
Here the hawk's presence is of no evident significance to the vultures, affecting them neither negatively or positively.
One such case is spiders, amongst which aggressive mimicry is quite common both in luring prey and disguising stealthily approaching predators.
Models tend to be relatively closely related organisms, but mimicry of vastly different species is also known.
Some harmless milk snake (''Lampropeltis triangulum'') subspecies, the moderately toxic false coral snakes (genus ''Erythrolamprus''), and the deadly coral snakes (genus ''Micrurus'') all have a red background color with black and white / yellow rings.
The only motivation for killing the weed is its effect on crop yields.
Several species of pygmy owl bear "false eyes" on the back of the head, misleading predators into reacting as though they were the subject of an aggressive stare.
This case is unusual, in that the fungus benefits from the deception but it is the leaves that act as mimics, being harmed in the process.
Some writers use the term "automimicry" when the mimic imitates other morphs within the same species.
Such systems are therefore most likely to be stable where both the model and the mimic occur, and where the model is more abundant than the mimic.
In fact, it has been shown that some species do have an innate recognition of certain aposematic warnings.
Many animals bear eyespots, which are hypothesized to resemble the eyes of larger animals.
It derives from the Greek term ''mimetikos'', "imitative", in turn from ''mimetos'', the verbal adjective of ''mimeisthai'', "to imitate".
Mimicry may involve morphology, behaviour, and other properties.
Where one species is scarce and another abundant, the rare species can be said to be the mimic.
This misdirects predators such as birds and jumping spiders (Salticidae).
Beginning in the 1960s, James E. Lloyd's investigation of female fireflies of the genus ''Photuris'' revealed they emit the same light signals that females of the genus ''Photinus'' use as a mating signal.
The plant looks similar to rice; its seeds are often mixed in rice and have become difficult to separate through Vavilovian mimicry.
Some allow the cleaner to venture inside their body to hunt these parasites.
There are some key differences, though; in Batesian mimicry, the model and signal receiver are enemies (the predator would eat the protected species if it could), whereas here the crop and its human growers are in a mutualistic relationship: the crop benefits from being dispersed and protected by people, despite being eaten by them.
In this class of mimicry, the model may be affected negatively, positively or not at all.
A deadly species could then profit by mimicking the less dangerous aposematic organism if this reduces the number of attacks.
being unpalatable).
This is then transferred to the stigma of the next flower the male tries to inseminate, resulting in pollination.
In other words, a Batesian mimic is a sheep in wolf's clothing.
This form of mimicry has been called ''Pouyannian mimicry'', after Maurice-Alexandre Pouyanne, who first described the phenomenon.
But if a predator dies, it cannot learn to recognize a warning signal, e.g., bright colors in a certain pattern.
''Epidendrum ibaguense'' (Orchidaceae) resembles flowers of ''Lantana camara'' and ''Asclepias curassavica'', and is pollinated by monarch butterflies and perhaps hummingbirds.
Mimicry may be to the advantage of both organisms that share a resemblance, in which case it is a mutualism, or mimicry can be to the detriment of one, making it parasitic or competitive.
This is not always the case, however.
However, this is explainable as Müllerian mimicry, rather than requiring the parasite's coloration to deceive the host and thus constitute aggressive mimicry.
The term "masquerade" is sometimes used when the model is inanimate but it is differentiated from "crypsis" in its strict sense by the potential response of the signal receiver.
This example was long believed to be Batesian, with the viceroy mimicking the monarch, but the viceroy is actually the ''more'' unpalatable species.
Due to victims' ability to discriminate between foe and helper, the blennies have evolved close similarity, right down to the regional level.
In this system, both the milk snakes and the deadly coral snakes are mimics, whereas the false coral snakes are the model.
When a male bee arrives and attempts to mate with the mass of larvae, they climb onto his abdomen.
Birds, for example, use sight to identify palatable insects, whilst avoiding the noxious ones.
Selection against the weed may occur either by manually killing the weed, or by separating its seeds from those of the crop.
When feeding on innocuous plants however, they are harmless and nutritious, but a bird that once has sampled a toxic specimen is unlikely to eat harmless specimens that have the same aposematic coloration.
Emsleyan or Mertensian mimicry describes unusual cases where deadly prey mimic a less dangerous species.
While some cases of artificial selection go in the direction desired, such as selective breeding, this case presents the opposite characteristics.
It is named after Henry Walter Bates, an English naturalist whose work on butterflies in the Amazon rainforest (described in ''The Naturalist on the River Amazons'') was pioneering in this field of study.
This example of acoustic aggressive mimicry is similar to the ''Photuris'' firefly case in that the predator's mimicry is remarkably versatile – playback experiments show that ''C.
Other colors with the same pattern, and even red and yellow ''stripes'' with the same width as rings, were tolerated.
For example, in Florida, the pairing is of the viceroy and the queen butterfly, whereas in Mexico the viceroy resembles the soldier butterfly.
They may not resemble any specific organism's eyes, and whether or not animals respond to them as eyes is also unclear.
The conspicuous blue coloration shared by most ''Morpho'' species may be Müllerian, or may be "pursuit aposematism".
Pseudocopulation occurs when a flower mimics a female of a certain insect species, inducing the males to try to copulate with the flower.
When regarded as mimicry of toxic members of the same species, this too may be seen as automimicry.
This strategy is effective against "usurper" males with orange throats, but ineffective against blue throated "guarder" males, which chase them away.
It was first proposed by Emsley as a possible answer for the theoretical difficulties a predator species faces when associating an aposematic phenotype of potentially dangerous animals, such as the coral snake, with unprofitability when the predator has an increased risk of death, negating any learned behaviour.
The model is supported by computational simulations of population genetics.
Like Bakerian mimicry, Dodsonian mimicry is a form of reproductive floral mimicry, but the model belongs to a different species than the mimic.
Quite elaborate strategies along these lines are known, such as the well-known "scissors, paper, rock" mimicry in ''Uta stansburiana'', but there are qualitatively different examples in many other species, such as some ''Platysaurus''.
This reproductive mimicry may not be readily apparent as members of the same species may still exhibit some degree of sexual dimorphism.
Fish grazed on in this fashion soon learn to distinguish mimic from model, but because the similarity is close between the two they become much more cautious of the model as well, so both are affected.
This also allows them to mate with the females without the alpha males detecting them.
Some species of caterpillar, such as many hawkmoths (Sphingidae), have eyespots on their anterior abdominal segments.
The listrosceline katydid ''Chlorobalius leucoviridis'' of inland Australia is capable of attracting male cicadas of the tribe Cicadettini by imitating the species-specific reply clicks of sexually receptive female cicadas.
Another interesting example that does not involve any luring is the zone-tailed hawk, which resembles the turkey vulture.
It has a little in common with automimicry, but the plant does not benefit from the mimicry, and the action of the pathogen is required to produce it.
It can involve an evolutionary arms race if mimicry negatively affects the model, and the model can evolve a different appearance from the mimic.p161 Mimicry should not be confused with other forms of convergent evolution, which occurs when species come to resemble each other by adapting to similar lifestyles that have nothing to do with a common signal receiver.
When both are present in similar numbers, however, it is more realistic to speak of each as a ''co-mimic'' than of distinct 'mimic' and 'model' species, as their warning signals tend to converge.
The usually clear distinction between mimic and model is also blurred.
Luring is not a necessary condition however, as the predator still has a significant advantage simply by not being identified as such.
Hand-reared turquoise-browed motmots (''Eumomota superciliosa''), avian predators, instinctively avoid snakes with red and yellow rings.
In evolutionary biology, '''mimicry''' is a similarity of one organism, usually an animal, to another that has evolved because the resemblance is selectively favoured by the behaviour of a shared signal receiver that can respond to both.
The ability to lay eggs that mimic the host eggs is the key adaptation.
Another form of mimicry is based not on color but pattern.
For example, in a species where males mimic females or vice versa, this may be an instance of sexual mimicry in evolutionary game theory.
Aggressive mimicry describes predators (or parasites) that share the same characteristics as a harmless species, allowing them to avoid detection by their prey (or host).
The latter process, known as winnowing, can be done manually or by a machine.
This is not the case in Müllerian mimicry, which is described next.
Another example is that of chemical mimicry, in which the parasitic butterfly ''Phengaris rebeli'', which parasitizes the ant species ''Myrmica schencki'' by releasing chemicals that fool the worker ants to believe that the caterpillar larvae are ant larvae, and enable the ''P.
This mimicry reduces attacks on ''Dryocopus galeatus'' from other animals.
A case of the latter situation is a species of cleaner fish and its mimic, though in this example the model is greatly disadvantaged by the presence of the mimic.
Most ''Heliconius'' larvae are cannibalistic, meaning that on leaves older eggs hatch first and eat the new arrivals.
Cleaner fish are the allies of many other species, which allow them to eat their parasites and dead skin.
Examples include the monarch and the queen from the Danainae subfamily, which feed on milkweed species of varying toxicity.
Cases of ''intraspecific'' brood parasitism, where a female lays in conspecific's nest, as illustrated by the goldeneye duck (''Bucephala clangula''), do not represent a case of mimicry.
leucoviridis'' is able to attract males of many cicada species, including cicadettine cicadas from other continents, even though cicada mating signals are species-specific.
In evolutionary terms, this phenomenon is a form of co-evolution.
Having fooled its prey into letting its guard down, it then bites it, tearing off a piece of its fin before fleeing.
Cuckoos are a canonical example of brood parasitism, a form of kleptoparasitism where the mother has its offspring raised by another unwitting organism, cutting down the biological mother's parental investment in the process.
Many types of mimicry have been described.
When alarmed, they retract the head and the thoracic segments into the body, leaving the apparently threatening large eyes at the front of the visible part of the body.
However, one species of cleaner, the bluestreak cleaner wrasse (''Labroides dimidiatus''), is the unknowing model of a mimetic species, the sabre-toothed blenny (''Aspidontus taeniatus'').
The monarch butterfly (''Danaus plexippus'') is a member of a Müllerian complex with the viceroy butterfly (''Limenitis archippus''), sharing coloration patterns and display behavior.
Mimicry may evolve between different species, or between individuals of the same species.
To the naked eye the leaves do not look like flowers, yet they still attract pollinating insects like bees using an ultraviolet signal.
Gilbertian mimicry occurs in the genus ''Passiflora''.
The terminology used is not without debate and attempts to clarify have led to new terms being included.
This type of mimicry is unique in several respects.
It is similar to host-parasite mimicry, but the host does not receive the signal.
Further research showed male fireflies from several different genera are attracted to these "femmes fatales", and are subsequently captured and eaten.
They are then taken up by ''Succinea'', a terrestrial snail.
These may reflect ultraviolet light, and mimic the pattern seen in many flowers known as nectar guides.
amathonte'') are strong fliers; birds – even species that specialize in catching butterflies on the wing – find it hard to catch them.
There are many Batesian mimics in the order Lepidoptera.
These butterflies tend to avoid laying eggs near existing ones, which helps avoid exploitative intraspecific competition between caterpillars — those that lay on vacant leaves provide their offspring with a greater chance of survival.
Floral mimicry is induced by the discomycete fungus ''Monilinia vaccinii-corymbosi''.
Some predators have a feature that draws prey; parasites can also mimic their host's natural prey, but are eaten themselves, a pathway into their host.
for a discussion of observational learning and mimicry), is the possibility of not having to learn that it is harmful in the first place: instinctive genetic programming to be wary of certain signals.
In addition, the decoy eggs are also nectaries, attracting predators of the caterpillars such as ants and wasps as a further defence.
In this way, it can bridge the gap between hosts, allowing it to complete its life cycle.
The exception here, ignoring any chance of animals learning by watching a conspecific die (see Jouventin ''et al.''
In crypsis the receiver is assumed to not respond while a masquerader confuses the recognition system of the receiver that would otherwise seek the signaller.
An overview of each follows, highlighting the similarities and differences between the various forms.
Müller put forward the first explanation for this phenomenon: if a common predator confuses two species, individuals in both those species are more likely to survive.
Just as parasites can be treated as a form of predator, host-parasite mimicry is treated here as a subclass of aggressive mimicry.
Sheppard points out that Hecht and Marien put forward a similar hypothesis ten years earlier.
Firstly, both the mimic and the model benefit from the interaction, which could thus be classified as mutualism in this respect.
