The assassination of Foreign Minister Walther Rathenau on 24 June 1922 resulted in serious rioting in Minden.
The town expanded within the fortress walls to the north on the lower terrace.
The Bessel-Ruder-Club e.V.
The town administration counts 4,700 businesses within the town limits.
Minden could finally develop beyond the old boundaries once its status as a fortress was abolished in 1873.
The first permanent bridge over the Weser was built in the 13th Century.
The development of the Mittellandkanal required a crossing of the Weser.
The area around the cathedral was sovereign territory until 1806.
The rebuilt town hall from the 13th Century with its picturesque arcade is 150m to the west.
The TV transmission became digital in 2006 and has its regional antenna on the Jakobsberg near Minden.
The town is close to the Autobahn A 2 from Berlin to the Ruhr and the A 30 to Amsterdam.
Although it was founded in 1955 it had its origins with the 1883 founded Brücker und Zschetzsche, a producer of fuses for explosives.
President Friedrich Ebert and Chancellor Bauer confirmed the authority of the Minden Workers' Council in a telegramme on 16 March: "The highest executive authority will be transferred to the Workers' Council of Minden.
It lies on the River Weser, north of the Porta Westfalica gap between the ridges of the Weser Hills and Wiehen Hills.
Minden contains many middle-sized companies, the best known by consumers is Melitta for its coffee products.
It acted as the historic and political focus for the surrounding countryside.
The town supports the regular symphony concerts of the Nordwestdeutsche Philharmonie.
Many of its players have been on the national team.
File:EarlyMindenHarpsichordImage Teuling.jpg|Detail of the altarpiece (1425) of the Minden cathedral: angels play a harpsichord and a psaltery.
The over 100 year old Altendorf GmbH firm produces machine tools including the word leading circular trim saws.
He was worked toward the unification of Westphalia as well as Prussian administrative reforms.
It won the German title twice.
The economic development of Minden was influenced by two factors.
The newspapers ''Mindener Tagesblat'' and ''Mindener Zeitung'' were placed under pre-censorship and then closed because they had released press releases from the putschists.
It is the local organizer of dragon boat races.
This marked change in terrain divides the upper town from the lower town, and marks the boundary between two ecological zones.
It is the crossing of the navigable Weser and the Mittellandkanal (middle land canal).
The early settlement was on the lower town terrace surrounding the cathedral.
The yearly Mindener Hafen-Sprint is one of the largest student regattas in Germany.
The "Alte Münze" (old mint) is the oldest stone building in Westphalia.
The Dolls' Museum (''Puppenmuseum'') is a private initiative.
The representatives of the SPD, DDP and USDP parties on the Minden Town Council declared themselves loyal to President Friedrich Ebert and the Bauer government, and only the Centre Party remained non-committal.
The central bus depot is called "ZOB" and is located in the town centre.
The town council of Minden approved these new rules for all citizens in 1530.
The 40-man unit (''Vierziger'') was dissolved by the king and the town council was replaced by a town authority consisting of 16 businessmen, 16 tradesmen and eight representatives of the community who were elected for life.
After WWII the Jewish community was reconstituted with 40 members.
Other honorary citizens are the Presidents of the Minden District Karl Gottlieb Richter (1777–1847) und Franz von Borries (1785–1858).
Two semicircle ring roads go around the town itself, the inner route 61 provides a town by-pass.
On 1 January 1973, the previously separate communities of Aminghausen, Bölhorst, Dankersen, Dützen, Haddenhausen, Hahlen, Häverstädt, Kutenhausen, Leteln, Meißen, Päpinghausen, Stemmer, Todtenhausen as well as parts of Barkhausen, Hartum and Holzhausen II were incorporated into the town of Minden.
The ''Stolpersteine'' (stumbling stones) were built on Minden's pavements as a memorial to them.
Franz Boas, frequently referred to as "The Father of American Anthropology", was born in Minden on July 9, 1858.
This club has played in the Handballbundesliga (national handball league) with only two interruptions since the league's founding in 1966.
There is a multitude of manufacturing besides the agriculture of the outlying town areas.
The Mittelland Canal traverses the town from east to west, while the Weser flows from south to north.
The ''Glacis'', a park-like open space in front of the old fortifications, which was important as a green belt, was altered and made more accessible.
A larger lock is under construction.
The dissolution of the fortification allowed the slow development of prestigious residential houses in the areas outside the old walls.
A lock connects the River with the canal to overcome a difference in height of 13 m. It will be replaced by a larger new lock that is presently under construction.
Across the street is the "Windloch" (wind-hole) a trapezoidal half-timbered house that is one of the smallest in Minden.
The new town hall extension blocked the scenic view of the cathedral from the arches of the old town hall.
The second is the Minden Museum of History, Cultural Studies and Folklore ('Mindener Museum für Geschichte, Landes- und Volkskunde'').
The last and most devastating air raid was conducted by US Army Air Force B17s on 28 March 1945.
The raid on 26 October 1944 on the canal aqueduct resulted in the breaching of the Mittelland Canal and the drowning of numerous workers in a nearby air raid shelter.
The monument to the Battle of Minden is in the Todtenhausen quarter of the town.
The town covers an area of .
People not born in Minden but who had a strong association to the town through their work include Nikolas Krage, the evangelical reformer of Minden; Friedrich Hoffman who practiced in Minden as garrison physician; and Friedrich Hoffman who developed the Hooffman drops a patent medicine.
The old town wall fronting the Fischerstadt was restored to its former height.
The ''Preußenmuseum Minden'' is one of two Prussian museums in Westphalia.
On 1 July, the ''Mindener Zeitung'' described these disturbances as "Russian conditions".
The edge of the plateau marks the transition from the Middle Weser Valley to the Lübbecke Loessland.
They give the oath: "diese Burg soll nun min und din sein" (this fort shall now be mine and thine), thus naming Minden.
Bus connection with the railway station occurs every half-hour though the "Verkehrsbetriebe Minden-Ravensberg GmbH (VMR)" bus line.
The increased self-confidence of the citizens of Minden was demonstrated by the construction of the town hall, probably adjoining the separately governed cathedral precinct.
The second largest water crossing in Germany is located north of the town centre.
The town centre lies  to the north, on a plateau on the western side of the river.
This is apparent from the imperial age burial fields at Minden-Römerring and Porta Westfalica-Costedt.
This includes the chemical, metalworking, electronic, paper, ceramic and woodworking spheres.
Endler and Kumpf is involved with automation technology.
A demonstration of 15,000 people in support of the government was held in the market square on 27 June.
A Jewish community has existed in Minden since the 13th century.
The divided highway south of the town travels through a tunnel to Porta Wesfalica and on to Bad Oeynhausen.
The red sandstone "Proviant-Magazin" (Granary) and adjacent bakery originally supported the Prussion fortress garrison.
Charlemagne founded a bishopric in Minden around the year 800.
A new container port is being planned to the east of the present Mittellandkanal harbour.
The first recorded mention of Minden is a record in the Franconian Imperial Annals (''Reichsannalen'') of Charlemagne holding an imperial assembly in 798.
The present wooded parklike green belt was started after the demolition of the fortress walls.
GWD now plays in the Kampa_Halle.
Feldschlösschen Brauerei was the local brewer of the Weser Pils beer brand, but ceased operation in the early 1980s.
The Fernuniversität Hagen (Distance Learning University Hagen) has a study centre in the „Lehramt für die Primarstufe“ (primary grade teaching profession).
The population and political parties became even more polarized after the failure of the putsch than before.
TV Jahn Sportclub has a canoe and kayak group below the main Weser bridge.
The rule of Frederick I of Prussia (in office 1688-1713) ended the 400-year self-determination or independence of the citizens of Minden.
Small disturbances occurred in a few barracks of the Minden Garrison on 7 and 8 November 1918.
The climb to the upper terrace of the old-town is aided by the "Martinitreppe" (St. Martin's steps).
has its clubhouse upstream.
Further on are the Weserrenaissance style row of buildings housing the historical museum of the town.
The orchestra, conductor has been Frank Beermann, GMD of the Chemnitz Opera, has played in operas by Richard Wagner, staged at the theatre on an initiative of the Richard-Wagner-Verband Minden: ''Der fliegende Holländer'' (2002), ''Tannhäuser'' (2005), ''Lohengrin'' (2009), and ''Tristan und Isolde''.
In recent times noted people include the politicians Edelgard Bulmahn and Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger, the TV moderator and author Peter Hahne, the long serving leader of Adolf-Grimme-Institut, Lutz Hachmeister, and the rapper Curse.
Minden was a founding member of the Hanse.
The citizens of Minden and their Council obtained independence from the rule of the bishop around the year 1230 and received a town charter.
The town is on the bicycle routes "Mühlenroute" (mill route) and "Weserradweg" (water bicycle path).
Minden was a member of the Hanseatic League during the Middle Ages.
Many pictures and statues of the former emperor, as well as black-white-red flags and other such objects were smashed or burned.
It commemorates the decisive victory of the allied forces of Great Britain, Hanover, Hesse-Kassel, Brunswick-Wolfenbuettel and Schaumburg-Lippe led by Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick over a French and Electorate of Saxony army led by the marquis de Contades.
Minden Town Theatre (''Stadttheater Minden'') celebrated its 100-year anniversary in 2008 and now has a fixed venue.
It is the home venue for "Grün-Weiß Dankersen Minden" a handball club that is a member of the national league (Handballbundesliga).
The town administration resumed its work on 9 April 1945 on a provisional basis.
The post Napoleonic fortifications had replaced older walls stemming from the Middle Ages.
The "Glacis" stems from the Fortress Minden.
The town developed a master plan for the development of the town centre in 2009 which was passed by the town council in June.
Its previous venue the Weserstadion is now used for track and field and football (soccer).
Harting Technologiegruppe is an electronics company with headquarters on the Portastraße (road to Porta Westfalica) but whose main location is the nearby town of Espelkamp.
Ornamin Kunststoffwerke is a designer and producer of innovative plastic utensils.
The creation of the state of North Rhine-Westphalia led to Minden losing its position as a regional (''Bezirk'') capital to Detmold.
'''Minden''' is a town of about 83,000 inhabitants in the north-east of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.
Remnants of the old town fortification wall still exist here.
The Deutsche Bahn (German National Railway) moved its headquarters from Dresden to Minden after WWII.
The office is responsible for a large area from the North Sea to the Eastern German border.
Its boathouse is at the confluence of the Bastau stream into the Weser.
The site for burials was transferred in 1904 to a new site on the Weser north of the town centre.
Many buildings stem from the economically active 16th century.
The handball club "Handballverein Grün-Weiß Dankersen Minden" is the most famous sport club in Minden.
There were up to 400 members in the 19th century.
The Workers' Council directly intervened in the town's administration for the first time on 15 March 1920.
The departure of British troops in 1994 allowed the integration of the old engineer troop training site on the Weser into the Glacis.
The town supports three high or grammar schools, the Herdergymnasium, Besselgymnasium and Ratsgymnasium; two secondary schools, the Freiherr-von-Vincke-Realschule and Käthe-Kollwitz-Realschule; three main schools, the Hauptschule Minden-Süd, Hauptschule Todtenhausen and Hauptschule Dankersen as well as a comprehensive school, the Kurt-Tucholsky-Gesamtschule.
A small street in Minden, Franz-Boas Strasse, has been named in his memory.
The Prussian era was very influential for Minden.
The economic development of Minden was retarded by the strangling of the fortress walls, beyond which no development could take place in order to preserve fields of fire.
The opposite shore area (''Kanzlers Weide'') has been made accessible by a footbridge.
The Reformation was carried out in Minden between 1521 and 1529.
The removal of timbered houses as part of this renewal was later regretted.
However, in a referendum, a 57% majority opposed this plan.
Minden contains significant buildings in the Weser Renaissance style, such as the Administration Building of the old Minden Region, the "Haus Hill" on the Bäckerstraße and "Haus Hagemeyer"  on the "Scharn".
Most of the Jewish citizens of Minden were deported and dispossessed.
Agriculture continues to occupy 50% of the total area of Minden.
The "Schloss Haddenhausen" is a 17th Century Weserrenaissance style manor house on the outskirts of the town.
Some of these bus lines operate only on an hourly basis and only until 8 PM.
It is widely known as the intersection of the Mittelland Canal and the River Weser.
The "Fischerstadt" (fishermens town) lies along the Weser to the north of the old town core.
A controversial 2006 resolution by the town council proposed the demolition of the town hall extensions, a new shopping mall and restoration of the view toward the cathedral.
The railway bridge was the second one built and carries the Minener Kreisbahnen tracks over the Weser toward the main rail yard.
Imperial troops occupied Minden from 1625 to 1634, during the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648).
Its foundation in 1896 makes it the oldest active cabaret in Germany.
The building served the old Minden Fortress which influenced the town until its demolition in 1873.
Nicholas Krage authored the new evangelical church rules for the town in 1530.
Minden is a site of the Fachhochschule Bielefeld (University of Applied Sciences Bielefeld) specializing in teaching, architecture, construction engineering, technology, engineering and mathematics, social studies, business and health.
This inner ring is almost completely four-lane.
for harking back to traditional Prussia.
There are four Roman Catholic parishes in Minden: the papal parish of the cathedral, St. Peter and Gorgonius; as well as the parishes of St. Mauritius, St. Paul and St. Ansgar which are all bound together into a pastoral combination of the Mindener Land.
Minden's football team, Union Minden plays in the Landesliga of Westphalia.
Two systems of locks allow passage of ships from one level to the other.
All other fortification walls were demolished and replaced by the green belt of the "Glacis".
The market square possesses more historic buildings with impressive façades, including the ''Schmiedingsche Haus''.
The ''Landeszentralbank'' (central state bank) of North Rhine-Westphalia has had a branch in Minden since 2005.
They utilised these new rights to begin trading independently from the church.
The town centre has pay car parks and an automated guide to empty spaces.
The November Revolution of 1918 passed relatively quietly in Minden.
The attached Coffee Museum (''Kaffee-Museum'') focuses on the 100-year-old coffee producer, Melitta.
The federal roads 61 and 65 cross in the town.
Beyond this there are various elementary schools, special schools and occupational training schools.
This improves access to a large parking area and festival site.
This demonstrates its functioning and explains the need for a new lock to accommodate the increasing size of inland ships.
The local buses are coordinated with the regional buses to places such as Bad Oeynhausen, Lübbecke, Espelkamp and Petershagen.
The well known Strothmann brand of rye distilled liquor is produced here by the Wilhelm Strothmann Brennereien that is now part of the Lucas Bols group.
The canoe club KSG Minden e.V.
The town awards a prize to support literary-political cabarets.
Until the beginning of the 13th century, the bishop appointed the leader and administrator of the town, with the title of ''Wichgraf''.
Plans for the southern bridge to accommodate the A 30 Autobahan were not realized.
Such measures were unprecedented for Minden and were not even experienced during the November Revolution of 1918.
A council of workers and soldiers took control in the afternoon of 18 November.
However, it was never able to regain its former political and economic importance.
The Minden area shows continuing settlement activity from the 1st to the 4th century.
The town then became part of the Kingdom of Westphalia and, later, an actual part of France until 1810.
It is part of the business area that extends along the A 2 Autobahn from Minden through Herford, Bielefeld, Gütersloh and on to the Ruhr area.
The allies of Great Britain, led by Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick, defeated the French and their allies in a decisive battle.
The town is over 1,200 years old and has many buildings in the Weser Renaissance style, in addition to its architecturally symbolic 1,000-year-old cathedral.
It is quartered in old barracks on ''Simeonsplatz'' (Simeon Square).
The Mindener Tageblatt is the local daily newspaper.
The German retail food company Edeka has a regional office (Edeka Minden-Hanover) situated in Minden.
There is also a school for music in Minden.
The Mittelland Canal passes over the Weser on a double aqueduct.
St. Mary's parish encompasses the former villages of Todtenhausen and Kutenhausen; St. Martin's parish includes the former villages Dützen, Bölhorst and Häverstädt.
Most of these relics of the 19th century have been restored.
Minden has a reputation as a water sports centre aided by its location on the Weser.
The traffic volume for containers in the industrial harbour should be noted.
Slave labourers from a nearby concentration camp were forced to produce weapons and other war materiel.
Minden is the location of the administration of the fire brigade for the district of Minden-Lübbecke.
Luftwaffe General Heinrich Trettner (19 September 1907 – 18 September 2006) Knights Cross & Oak Leaves, awarded for extreme battle field bravery, the last living General of the Third Reich
Queen Christina of Sweden (reigned 1632–1654) granted full sovereignty in internal and external affairs to Minden.
These attacks were minor during the early phase of the war.
Signed Ebert Reichspräsident, Signed Bauer Reichskanzler".
It is named for the wind that church-goers encountered in the adjacent alleyway.
The situation in Minden was more critical during the ''Kapp Putsch'' of March 1920.
The Federal road 482 runs east of the town and connects the A 2 to the south, and goes toward Nienburg to the north.
The first Fortress Commander was Ernst Michael von Schwichow.
After the defeat of Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig, French troops abandoned Minden and it returned to Prussia.
Further theatre and cultural events occur with private sponsorship and are held in such locations as the ''Bürgerzentrum'' (civic centre) and the ''Theater am Weingarten''.
An information centre is located at the ''Wasserstraßenkreuz Minden''.
It replaces the former town hospital and the former Kreis hospital that had a total of 10730 beds.
The botanical garden is centrally located on the site of the old cemetery and features old tree specimens and thematic gardens.
Some are built in the regional Weser Renaissance style while other hark back to the time when Minden was a fortified town.
The "Gustav-Heineman" bridge to the north and the "Theodor-Heuss" bridge to the south are four lane and are intended to lead traffic away from town centre.
The Johannes-Wesling-Klinikum is the new 864 bed teaching hospital located in Minden; one of the "Mühlenkreiskliniken" four geneneral hospitals serving the Kreis Minden-Lübbecke.
A completely new replacement is in progress of being built.
Secondly was its success in grain trading since the Middle Ages.
This has turned into the DB Systemtechnik (system technology) and DB Fahrzeuginstandhaltung (vehicle maintenance) GmbH.
The goal is to increase bicycle traffic to over 20 percent of the total.
But Minden has one of the seven administrative courts for NRW, the district court and the labour court.
The Weser-Kolleg provides the opportunity to complete education by the so-called alternative route up to the abitur (university entrance exam).
