Many mineral groups and species are composed of a solid solution; pure substances are not usually found because of contamination or chemical substitution.
These families can be described by the relative lengths of the three crystallographic axes, and the angles between them; these relationships correspond to the symmetry operations that define the narrower point groups.
:Al2Si4O10(OH)2 → Al2SiO5 + 3 SiO2 + H2O
In the case of silicate materials, the substitution of Si4+ by Al3+ allows for a variety of minerals because of the need to balance charges.
These two groups of minerals are subgrouped by octahedral occupation; specifically, kaolinite and pyrophyllite are dioctahedral whereas serpentine and talc trioctahedral.
A variation in chemistry (and consequently, mineral class) correlates to a change in specific gravity.
Carbonates tend to be brittle, many have rhombohedral cleavage, and all react with acid.
The abundance and diversity of minerals is controlled directly by their chemistry, in turn dependent on elemental abundances in the Earth.
In contrast, micas, which have perfect basal cleavage, consist of sheets of silica tetrahedra which are very weakly held together.
Framework silicates tend to be particularly chemically stable as a result of strong covalent bonds.
The majority of minerals observed are derived from the Earth's crust.
Chemistry and crystal structure together define a mineral.
In a limestone, calcite or aragonite (both CaCO3) form because the rock is rich in calcium and carbonate.
This difference is accounted by differences in bonding.
An example of such a mineral is muscovite (potassium mica); some varieties are sufficiently clear to have been used for windows.
Parting, sometimes called "false cleavage", is similar in appearance to cleavage but is instead produced by structural defects in the mineral as opposed to systematic weakness.
Disilicates (or sorosilicates) have two tetrahedra sharing one oxygen atom.
It is characterized by its high chemical and physical resistivity.
Other cyclosilicates include beryl, Al2Be3Si6O18, whose varieties include the gemstones emerald (green) and aquamarine (bluish).
Skinner expanded the previous definition of a mineral to classify "element or compound, amorphous or crystalline, formed through ''biogeochemical '' processes," as a mineral.
As a result, feldsapthoids cannot be associated with quartz.
The basic level of definition is that of mineral species, which is distinguished from other species by specific and unique chemical and physical properties.
The gold group, with a cubic close-packed structure, includes metals such as gold, silver, and copper.
All silicate minerals have a base unit of a SiO44− silica tetrahedron—that is, a silicon cation coordinated by four oxygen anions, which gives the shape of a tetrahedron.
Two-directional cleavage is described as prismatic, and occurs in minerals such as the amphiboles and pyroxenes.
Eight elements account for most of the key components of minerals, due to their abundance in the crust.
By definition, minerals have a characteristic atomic arrangement.
Chatoyancy ("cat's eye") is the wavy banding of colour that is observed as the sample is rotated; asterism, a variety of chatoyancy, gives the appearance of a star on the mineral grain.
Streak is more often distinctive for metallic minerals, in contrast to non-metallic minerals whose body colour is created by allochromatic elements.
and are not regarded as minerals.
A common example of a feldsapthoid is nepheline ((Na, K)AlSiO4); compared to alkali feldspar, nepheline has an Al2O3:SiO2 ratio of 1:2, as opposed to 1:6 in the feldspar.
As a result, it is possible for one element to be substituted for another.
The chlorite group is related to mica group, but a brucite-like (Mg(OH)2) layer between the T-O-T stacks.
The pyroxene group has a common  formula of XY(Si,Al)2O6, where X and Y are both cations, with X typically bigger than Y; the pyroxenes are single-chain silicates that crystallize in either the orthorhombic or monoclinic crystal systems.
As cleavage is a function of crystallography, there are a variety of cleavage types.
Overall, around 150 minerals are considered particularly important, whether in terms of their abundance or aesthetic value in terms of collecting.
A 2011 article defined icosahedrite, an aluminium-iron-copper alloy as mineral; named for its unique natural icosahedral symmetry, it is a quasicrystal.
They have always existed, their marketing is growing very rapidly.
The silicate class of minerals is subdivided into six subclasses by the degree of polymerization in the chemical structure.
Framework silicates, or tectosilicates, have tetrahedra that share all four corners.
For example, quartz will change into a variety of its SiO2 polymorphs, such as tridymite and cristobalite at high temperatures, and coesite at high pressures.
In hydroxides, the dominant anion is the hydroxyl ion, OH−.
In rocks, some mineral species and groups are much more abundant than others; these are termed the rock-forming minerals.
Within an octahedral sheet, there are three octahedral sites in a unit structure; however, not all of the sites may be occupied.
Inosilicates are chain silicates; single-chain silicates have two shared corners, whereas double-chain silicates have two or three shared corners.
They can also catalyze the dissolution of minerals.
Crystals are restricted to 32 point groups, which differ by their symmetry.
For example, muscovite, a white mica, can be used for windows (sometimes referred to as isinglass), as a filler, or as an insulator.
Examples of such minerals are malachite (green) and azurite (blue).
Because of the variable chemistry, there are over 80 species of amphibole, although variations, as in the pyroxenes, most commonly involve mixtures of Ca2+, Fe2+ and Mg2+.
Mineral species themselves could have a variable compositions, such as the sulfide mackinawite, (Fe, Ni)9S8, which is mostly a ferrous sulfide, but has a very significant nickel impurity that is reflected in its formula.
Minerals that often display parting include the pyroxenes, hematite, magnetite, and corundum.
In all minerals, one aluminium ion is always in six-fold coordination by oxygen; the silicon, as a general rule is in four-fold coordination in all minerals; an exception is a case like stishovite (SiO2, an ultra-high pressure quartz polymorph with rutile structure).
The 2:1 clay minerals (pyrophyllite-talc) consist of T-O-T stacks, but they are softer (hardness from 1 to 2), as they are instead held together by van der Waals forces.
The diversity and abundance of mineral species is controlled by the Earth's chemistry.
The minerals that form are directly controlled by the bulk chemistry of the parent body.
The presence of iron as Fe3+ and Fe2+ helps understand oxygen fugacity, which in turn is a significant factor in petrogenesis.
The diaphaneity of a mineral depends on thickness of the sample.
The pyralspite garnets have Al3+ in the Y position: pyrope (Mg3Al2(SiO4)3), almandine (Fe3Al2(SiO4)3), and spessartine (Mn3Al2(SiO4)3).
For example, a magma rich in iron and magnesium will form mafic minerals, such as olivine and the pyroxenes; in contrast, a more silica-rich magma will crystallize to form minerals that incorporate more SiO2, such as the feldspars and quartz.
Both iron and magnesium are in octahedral by oxygen.
In contrast, allochromatic elements in minerals are present in trace amounts as impurities.
These difference arise correspond to how aluminium is coordinated within the crystal structure.
Finally, the amphiboles are usually hydrated, that is, they have a hydroxyl group (OH−), although it can be replaced by a fluoride, a chloride, or an oxide ion.
Common habits include acicular, which described needlelike crystals like in natrolite, bladed, dendritic (tree-pattern, common in native copper), equant, which is typical of garnet, prismatic (elongated in one direction), and tabular, which differs from bladed habit in that the former is platy whereas the latter has a defined elongation.
The first criterion means that a mineral has to form by a natural process, which excludes anthropogenic compounds.
An alternate way of describing the coordination of the silicate is by a number: in the case of the silica tetrahedron, the silicon is said to have a coordination number of 4.
Like the sulfides, sulfosalts are typically soft, heavy, and brittle minerals.
When a mineral is sufficiently thin (e.g., in a thin section for petrography), it may become transparent even if that property is not seen in hand sample.
There have been several recent proposals to amend the definition to consider biogenic or amorphous substances as minerals.
The iron-nickel group is characterized by several iron-nickel alloy species.
There are two major structural styles observed in non-silicates: close-packing and silicate-like linked tetrahedra.
Translucent minerals allow some light to pass, but less than those that are transparent.
Staurolite is a common metamorphic intermediate-grade index mineral.
Exsolution can be on a scale from microscopic to readily observable in hand-sample; perthitic texture forms when Na-rich feldspar exsolve in a K-rich host.
Several of these properties involve variability in colour.
Micas are also T-O-T-stacked phyllosilicates, but differ from the other T-O-T and T-O-stacked subclass members in that they incorporate aluminium into the tetrahedral sheets (clay minerals have Al3+ in octahedral sites).
These asbestos minerals form long, thin, flexible, and strong fibres, which are electrical insulators, chemically inert and heat-resistant; as such, they have several applications, especially in construction materials.
The platinum group is similar in structure to the gold group.
In other silicate structures, different combinations of elements are required to balance out the resultant negative charge.
The latter mineral can only be formed on Earth by meteorite impacts, and its structure has been composed so much that it had changed from a silicate structure to that of rutile (TiO2).
Examples include labradorite and bornite.
The Skinner (2005) definition of a mineral takes this matter into account by stating that a mineral can be crystalline or amorphous, the latter group including liquid crystals.
The phosphate minerals are characterized by the tetrahedral PO43− unit, although the structure can be generalized, and phosphorus is replaced by antimony, arsenic, or vanadium.
Halite, NaCl, is table salt; its potassium-bearing counterpart, sylvite, has a pronounced bitter taste.
For example, quartz is defined by its formula, SiO2, and a specific crystalline structure that distinguishes it from other minerals with the same chemical formula (termed polymorphs).
The Strunz classification includes a class for organic minerals.
There are about 20 mineral species that qualify as gem minerals, which constitute about 35 of the most common gemstones.
A common example of this property is illustrated with hematite, which is coloured black, silver, or red in hand sample, but has a cherry-red to reddish-brown streak.
Minerals are classified by variety, species, series and group, in order of increasing generality.
In addition, biogenic substances were explicitly excluded:
Native carbon occurs in two allotropes, graphite and diamond; the latter forms at very high pressure in the mantle, which gives it a much stronger structure than graphite.
Tourmalines have a very complex chemistry that can be described by a general formula XY3Z6(BO3)3T6O18V3W.
Zeolite minerals will not effervesce in acid; instead, they become frosted after 5–10 minutes, and if left in acid for a day, they dissolve or become a silica gel.
Fake samples are sold for real deception, but when the infringement is announced or found, it may have a financial interest, decorative or teaching for the buyer.
Cyclosilicates, or ring silicates, have a ratio of silicon to oxygen of 1:3.
Crystal habit refers to the overall shape of crystal.
Euhedral crystals have a defined external shape, while anhedral crystals do not; those intermediate forms are termed subhedral.
Sulfides have a characteristic smell, especially as samples are fractured, reacting, or powdered.
Feldspars are the most abundant group in the Earth's crust, at about 50%.
Classical examples of exceptions to this rule include native mercury, which crystallizes at −39&nbsp;°C, and water ice, which is solid only below 0&nbsp;°C; as these two minerals were described prior to 1959, they were grandfathered by the International Mineralogical Association (IMA).
More specific tests for describing minerals include magnetism, taste or smell, radioactivity and reaction to acid.
The resultant common structural element is the Si2O76− group.
These minerals (a sub-set tabulated in Lowenstam (1981)) are considered minerals proper according to the Skinner (2005) definition.
Common examples of micas are muscovite, and the biotite series.
Quartz has several polymorphs, including tridymite and cristobalite at high temperatures, high-pressure coesite, and ultra-high pressure stishovite.
Changes in the temperature, pressure, or bulk composition of a rock mass cause changes in its minerals.
Another example are the aluminosilicates kyanite, andalusite, and sillimanite (polymorphs, as they share the formula Al2SiO5), which differ by the coordination number of the Al3+; these minerals transition from one another as a response to changes in pressure and temperature.
A major group within this class are the spinels, with a general formula of X2+Y3+2O4.
Bauxites are the chief aluminium ore, and are a heterogeneous mixture of the hydroxide minerals diaspore, gibbsite, and bohmite; they form in areas with a very high rate of chemical weathering (mainly tropical conditions).
If the latter subgroup cools slowly from a melt, it forms exsolution lamellae because the two components—orthoclase and albite—are unstable in solid solution.
An ordered atomic arrangement gives rise to a variety of macroscopic physical properties, such as crystal form, hardness, and cleavage.
This mineral group includes native metals, semi-metals, and non-metals, and various alloys and solid solutions.
With a restriction to 32 point groups, minerals of different chemistry may have identical crystal structure.
the angle between the b and c axes):
Non-silicate minerals are subdivided into several other classes by their dominant chemistry, which included native elements, sulfides, halides, oxides and hydroxides, carbonates and nitrates, borates, sulfates, phosphates, and organic compounds.
High specific gravity is a diagnostic property of a mineral.
The sulfate minerals all contain the sulfate anion, SO42−.
As metamorphic grade increases, the pyrophyllite reacts to form kyanite and quartz:
Secondary dolomitization of limestone is common, where calcite or aragonite are converted to dolomite; this reaction increases pore space (the unit cell volume of dolomite is 88% that of calcite), which can create a reservoir for oil and gas.
Oxides with a 2:1 ratio include cuprite (Cu2O) and water ice.
The second substitution occurs between Na+ and Ca2+; however, the difference in charge has to accounted for by making a second substitution of Si4+ by Al3+.
Prior to the International Mineralogical Association's listing, over 60 biominerals had been discovered, named, and published.
It occurs around three, four, five, six, or eight-fold axes, and the corresponding patterns are called threelings, fourlings, fivelings, sixlings, and eightlings.
The periclase group consists of minerals with a 1:1 ratio.
Simple oxides are characterized by O2− as the main anion and primarily ionic bonding.
Due to the last characteristic, field geologists often carry dilute hydrochloric acid to distinguish carbonates from non-carbonates.
Clinopyroxenes, orthoclase, gypsum
There are six ideal endmembers of garnet, split into two group.
Minerals with many cleavages might not break equally well in all of the directions; for example, calcite has good cleavage in three direction, but gypsum has perfect cleavage in one direction, and poor cleavage in two other directions.
This type of fracture occurs only in very homogeneous minerals.
Sulfate minerals commonly form as evaporites, where they precipitate out of evaporating saline waters; alternative, sulfates can also be found in hydrothermal vein systems associated with sulfides, or as oxidation products of sulfides.
Important examples include the mica, chlorite, and the kaolinite-serpentine groups.
This crystal structure is based on regular internal atomic or ionic arrangement that is often expressed in the geometric form that the crystal takes.
The latter describes a break along a rough, jagged surface; an example of this property is found in native copper.
Among common minerals, magnetite exhibits this property strongly, and it is also present, albeit not as strongly, in pyrrhotite and ilmenite.
The latter is readily distinguishable by its strong magnetism, which occurs as it has iron in two oxidation states (Fe2+Fe3+2O4), which makes it a multiple oxide instead of a single oxide.
An example of this test is done when distinguish calcite from dolomite, especially within rocks (limestone and dolostone respectively).
They form in the presence of water at low temperatures and pressures, and have channels and voids in their structure.
Feldspathoids are structurally similar to feldspar, but differ in that they form in Si-deficient conditions which allows for further substitution by Al3+.
The metals are held together by metallic bonding, which confers distinctive physical properties such as their shiny metallic lustre, ductility and malleability, and electrical conductivity.
On January 24, 2014, NASA reported that current studies by the ''Curiosity'' and ''Opportunity'' rovers on Mars will now be searching for evidence of ancient life, including a biosphere based on autotrophic, chemotrophic and/or chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms, as well as ancient water, including fluvio-lacustrine environments (plains related to ancient rivers or lakes) that may have been habitable.
For example, the IMA commissioned "Environmental Mineralogy and Geochemistry Working Group" deals with minerals in the hydrosphere, atmosphere, and biosphere.
Forming 12% of the Earth's crust, quartz (SiO2) is the most abundant mineral species.
The carbonate group is structurally a triangle, where a central C4+ cation is surrounded by three O2− anions; different groups of minerals form from different arrangements of these triangles.
Polymorphism can extend beyond pure symmetry content.
Many sulfide minerals are economically important as metal ores; examples include sphalerite (ZnS), an ore of zinc, galena (PbS), an ore of lead, cinnabar (HgS), an ore of mercury, and molybdenite (MoS2, an ore of molybdenum.
While hydrated calcium oxalate can be found in coal seams and other sedimentary deposits involving organic matter, the hydrothermal occurrence is not considered to be related to biological activity.
Minerals are not equivalent to rocks.
The streak of a mineral is independent of trace elements or any weathering surface.
Native elements are subdivided into groups by their structure or chemical attributes.
The sources of the stresses include deformation (e.g.
Even when the mineral grains are too small to see or are irregularly shaped, the underlying crystal structure is always periodic and can be determined by X-ray diffraction.
The organic class includes a very rare group of minerals with hydrocarbons.
Si2O64−), whereas the double-chain variety has a ratio of 4:11, e.g.
They are bound at three oxygen sites, which gives a characteristic silicon:oxygen ratio of 2:5.
Other common elements in silicate minerals correspond to other common elements in the Earth's crust, such aluminium, magnesium, iron, calcium, sodium, and potassium.
Microorganisms can precipitate metals from solution, contributing to the formation of ore deposits.
In addition to simple body colour, minerals can have various other distinctive optical properties, such as play of colours, asterism, chatoyancy, iridescence, tarnish, and pleochroism.
Tectosilicates, also known as framework silicates, have the highest degree of polymerization.
Rock forming minerals — typically silicates or occasionally carbonates — have a specific gravity of 2.5–3.5.
It is not, however, an ore of iron, but can be instead oxidized to produce sulfuric acid.
Colour is the most obvious property of a mineral, but it is often non-diagnostic.
Oxygen and silicon are by far the two most important — oxygen composes 46.6% of the crust by weight, and silicon accounts for 27.7%.
Basal cleavage in one direction is a distinctive property of the micas.
Examples include barite (BaSO4), celestine (SrSO4), and anglesite (PbSO4); anhydrite is not part of the barite group, as the smaller Ca2+ is only in eight-fold coordination.
Corundum group minerals have a 2:3 ratio, and includes minerals such as corundum (Al2O3), and hematite (Fe2O3).
Radioactivity is a rare property; minerals may be composed of radioactive elements.
Minerals can also be tested for taste or smell.
An example of such a mineral would be the ruby and sapphire varieties of the mineral corundum.
Two broad classes of elements are defined with regards to their contribution to a mineral's colour.
For example, kyanite, Al2SiO5 forms from the metamorphism of aluminium-rich shales; it would not likely occur in aluminium-poor rock, such quartzite.
Biogeochemical cycles have contributed to the formation of minerals for billions of years.
Other important mineral groups include the native elements, sulfides, oxides, halides, carbonates, sulfates, and phosphates.
Transparent minerals do not diminish the intensity of light passing through it.
The reaction of acid with carbonates, most commonly found as the polymorph calcite and aragonite (CaCO3), relates to the dissolution and precipitation of the mineral, which is a key in the formation of limestone caves, features within them such as stalactite and stalagmites, and karst landforms.
It is common for the Si4+ to be substituted by  Al3+ because of similarity in ionic radius and charge; in those case, the AlO45− tetrahedra form the same structures as do the unsubstituted tetrahedra, but their charge-balancing requirements are different.
In the example of plagioclase, there are three cases of substitution.
While there are two subgroups of garnet, solid solutions exist between all six end-members.
It forms as an evaporite, and is associated with other evaporites such as calcite and halite; if it incorporates sand grains as it crystallizes, gypsum can form desert roses.
Zircon (ZrSiO4) is useful in geochronology as the Zr4+ can be substituted by U6+; furthermore, because of its very resistant structure, it is difficult to reset it as a chronometer.
Analogues to linked silica tetrahedra include SO4 (sulfate), PO4 (phosphate), AsO4 (arsenate), and VO4 (vanadate).
The silica polymorph that is most stable at the Earth's surface is α-quartz.
Minerals are distinguished by various chemical and physical properties.
Cyclic twins are caused by repeated twinning around a rotation axis.
The majority of non-silicate mineral species are extremely rare (constituting in total 8% of the Earth's crust), although some are relative common, such as calcite, pyrite, magnetite, and hematite.
Examples are cinnabar (HgS), an ore of mercury, sphalerite (ZnS), an ore of zinc, or cassiterite (SnO2), an ore of tin.
To date over 80,000 liquid crystalline compounds have been identified.
The latter property is particularly common in gem-quality corundum.
The colours of pseudochromatic minerals are the result of interference of light waves.
The aluminosilicates—kyanite, andalusite, and sillimanite, all Al2SiO5—are structurally composed of one SiO44− tetrahedron, and one Al3+ in octahedral coordination.
Bigger cations have a bigger coordination number because of the increase in relative size as compared to oxygen (the last orbital subshell of heavier atoms is different too).
An example is amethyst, which is a purple variety of quartz.
A generalization is that minerals with metallic or adamantine lustre tend to have higher specific gravities than those having a non-metallic to dull lustre.
The alkali feldspars are most commonly in a series between potassium-rich orthoclase and sodium-rich albite; in the case of plagioclase, the most common series ranges from albite to calcium-rich anorthite.
These two minerals species are members of eponymous mineral groups: the calcite group includes carbonates with the general formula XCO3, and the dolomite group constitutes minerals with general formula XY(CO3)2.
An example of a series of mineral reactions is illustrated as follows.
Crystal twinning is common in feldspars, especially polysynthetic twins in plagioclase and Carlsbad twins in alkali feldspars.
α is the angle opposite the a-axis, viz.
Related to crystal form, the quality of crystal faces is diagnostic of some minerals, especially with a petrographic microscope.
