Instead, minimum wage standards in different sectors are set by collective bargaining.
Customs and extra-legal pressures from governments or labor unions can produce a ''de facto'' minimum wage.
This is because while the upward sloping aggregate labor supply would remain unchanged, instead of using the upward labor supply curve shown in a supply and demand diagram, monopsonistic employers would use a steeper upward sloping curve corresponding to marginal expenditures to yield the intersection with the supply curve resulting in a wage rate lower than would be the case under competition.
Stanley showed that Card and Krueger's results could signify either publication bias or the absence of a minimum wage effect.
So can international public opinion, by pressuring multinational companies to pay Third World workers wages usually found in more industrialized countries.
The Adam Smith Institute prefers cutting taxes on the poor and middle class instead of raising wages as an alternative to the minimum wage.
* The impact of the minimum wage on family income distribution may be negative unless the fewer but better jobs are allocated to members of needy families rather than to, for example, teenagers from families not in poverty;
Some argue that by increasing the federal minimum wage, however, the economy will be adversely affected due to small businesses not being able to keep up with the need to subsequently increase all workers wages.
Hourly minimum wages in select developed economies in 2013.
With regard to the economic effects of introducing minimum wage legislation in Germany in January 2015, recent developments have shown that the feared increase in unemployment has not materialized, however, in some economic sectors and regions of the country, it came to a decline in job opportunities particularly for temporary and part-time workers, and some low-wage jobs have disappeared entirely.
A 2013 study by labor economists Tony Fang and Carl Lin which studied minimum wages and employment in China, found that "minimum wage changes have significant adverse effects on employment in the Eastern and Central regions of China, and result in disemployment for females, young adults, and low-skilled workers".
* Hurts small business more than large business.
In 1996 and 1997, the federal minimum wage was increased from $4.25 to $5.15, thereby increasing the minimum wage by $0.90 in Pennsylvania but by just $0.10 in New Jersey; this allowed for an examination of the effects of minimum wage increases in the same area, subsequent to the 1992 change studied by Card and Krueger.
However, this paper's conclusions were rebutted in a 2000 paper by Card and Krueger.
Equivalently, it is the price floor below which workers may not sell their labor.
It is assumed that the higher the wage, the fewer hours an employer will demand of an employee.
Several researchers have conducted statistical meta-analyses of the employment effects of the minimum wage.
Stanley conducted a similar meta-analysis of 64 U.S. studies on disemployment effects and concluded that Card and Krueger's initial claim of publication bias is still correct.
A refundable tax credit is a mechanism whereby the tax system can reduce the tax owed by a household to below zero, and result in a net payment to the taxpayer beyond their own payments into the tax system.
* As uncovered sectors of the economy absorb workers released from the covered sectors, the decrease in wages in the uncovered sectors may exceed the increase in wages in the covered ones;
* Removes financial stress and encourages education, resulting in better paying jobs.
In the United States, the minimum wage promulgated by the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 was intentionally set at a high, national level to render low-technology, low-wage factories in the South obsolete.
In other words, the simplest and most basic economics says this about commodities like labor (and wheat, for example): Artificially raising the price of the commodity tends to cause the supply of it to increase and the demand for it to lessen.
young workers) by keeping them from accumulating work experience and qualifications, hence potentially graduating to higher wages later.
Although strongly opposed by both the business community and the Conservative Party when introduced in 1999, the Conservatives reversed their opposition in 2000.
This study by Meer and West was later critiqued for its trends of assumption in the context of narrowly defined low-wage groups.
This monopsony could be a result of intentional collusion between employers, or naturalistic factors such as segmented markets, search costs, information costs, imperfect mobility and the personal element of labor markets.
In the diagram it is assumed that workers are willing to labor for more hours if paid a higher wage.
Costly technology that increases business efficiency is more appealing as the price of labor increases.
* Increases the standard of living for the poorest and most vulnerable class in society and raises average.
In subsequent research, David Neumark and William Wascher attempted to verify Card and Krueger's results by using administrative payroll records from a sample of large fast food restaurant chains in order to verify employment.
They analyzed employment trends for several categories of low-wage workers from 1990 to 2006 and found that increases in minimum wages had no negative effects on low-wage employment and successfully increased the income of workers in food services and retail employment, as well as the narrower category of workers in restaurants.
India was one of the first developing countries to introduce minimum wage policy.
Card and Krueger surveyed employers before the April 1992 New Jersey increase, and again in November–December 1992, asking managers for data on the full-time equivalent staff level of their restaurants both times.
Another reason minimum wage may not affect employment in certain industries is that the demand for the product the employees produce is highly inelastic.
In ''Principles of Political Economy'' in 1848, John Stuart Mill argued that because of the collective action problems that workers faced in organisation, it was a justified departure from ''laissez-faire'' policies (or freedom of contract) to regulate people's wages and hours by law.
* Employment may fall more than in proportion to the wage increase, thereby reducing overall earnings;
Combining the demand and supply curves for labor allows us to examine the effect of the minimum wage.
* Benefits some workers at the expense of the poorest and least productive.
Basic economic theory would have implied that relative employment should have decreased in New Jersey.
As time passed, the Justice of the Peace, who was charged with setting the maximum wage, also began to set formal minimum wages.
However, the studies found wider variation, from 0 to over 3 percent, in their estimates for the effect on teenage unemployment (teenagers without a job and looking for one).
While the laws governing wages initially set a ceiling on compensation, they were eventually used to set a living wage.
This view emphasizes the role of minimum wages as a market regulation policy akin to antitrust policies, as opposed to an illusory "free lunch" for low-wage workers.
* Results in jobs moving to other areas or countries which allow lower-cost labor.
One study concluded that 'Employers are disinclined to hire workers because the US federal minimum wage is very high relative to the local average'.
* Results in higher prices for consumers, where products and services are produced by minimum-wage workers (though non-labor costs represent a greater proportion of costs to consumers in industries like fast food and discount retail)
By the early 19th century, the Statutes of Labourers was repealed as increasingly capitalistic England embraced ''laissez-faire'' policies which disfavored regulations of wages (whether upper or lower limits).
One possible explanation that the current minimum wage laws may not affect unemployment in the United States is that the minimum wage is set close to the equilibrium point for low and unskilled workers.
Card and Krueger expanded on this initial article in their 1995 book ''Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum Wage''.
Modern minimum wage laws trace their origin to the Ordinance of Labourers (1349), which was a decree by King Edward III that set a'' maximum wage'' for laborers in medieval England.
Minimum wage laws affect workers in most low-paid fields of employment and have usually been judged against the criterion of reducing poverty.
The ripple effect shows that when you increase the minimum wage the wages of all others will consequently increase due the need for relativity.
Since demand for the product is highly inelastic, consumers continue to buy the product at the higher price and so the manager is not forced to lay off workers.
When there is a wheat surplus, the government buys it.
The severe shortage of labor caused wages to soar and encouraged King Edward III to set a wage ceiling.
The ability of the earned income tax credit to deliver larger monetary benefits to the poor workers than an increase in the minimum wage and at a lower cost to society was documented in a 2007 report by the Congressional Budget Office.
Proponents argue that a basic income that is based on a broad tax base would be more economically efficient, as the minimum wage effectively imposes a high marginal tax on employers, causing losses in efficiency.
In the United States, earned income tax credit rates, also known as EITC or EIC, vary by state—some are refundable while other states do not allow a refundable tax credit.
Others, particularly those with the lowest prelegislation wage rates, will be unable to find work.
In the European Union, 22 member states out of 28 currently have national minimum wages.
France has the rich world’s highest wage floor, at more than 60% of the median for adults and a far bigger fraction of the typical wage for the young.
They point out that later studies, which had more data and lower standard errors, did not show the expected increase in t-statistic (almost all the studies had a t-statistic of about two, just above the level of statistical significance at the .05 level).
Moreover, they concluded, "Once this publication selection is corrected, little or no evidence of a negative association between minimum wages and employment remains."
Supporters of the minimum wage say it increases the standard of living of workers, reduces poverty, reduces inequality, boosts morale and forces businesses to be more efficient.
Because of this overall positive development, the Deutsche Bundesbank revised its opinion, and ascertained that “the impact of the introduction of the minimum wage on the total volume of work appears to be very limited in the present business cycle”.
In April 2010, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) released a report arguing that countries could alleviate teen unemployment by "lowering the cost of employing low-skilled youth" through a sub-minimum training wage.
In addition to the basic supply-demand intuition, there were a number of empirical studies that supported this view.
* Removes low paying jobs, forcing workers to train for, and move to, higher paying jobs.
* Decreases the cost of government social welfare programs by increasing incomes for the lowest-paid.
Consistent with the results from Doucouliagos and Stanley, and Card and Krueger, Baskaya and Rubinstein's 2011 study, which analyzed 24 papers on the minimum wage, found "mild positive, yet statistically insignificant association between the change in the employment of teenagers" at state minimum wage levels.
Opponents of the minimum wage claim it has these effects:
However, this meant that a uniform minimum wage was not possible.
A number of economists (for example Pierangelo Garegnani, Robert L. Vienneau, and Arrigo Opocher & Ian Steedman), building on the work of Piero Sraffa, argue that that model, even given all its assumptions, is logically incoherent.
This is because a greater number of people are willing to work at the higher wage while a smaller number of jobs will be available at the higher wage.
Another survey in 2007 conducted by the University of New Hampshire Survey Center found that 73% of labor economists surveyed in the United States believed 150% of the then-current minimum wage would result in employment losses and 68% believed a mandated minimum wage would cause an increase in hiring of workers with greater skills.
Experiments on Basic Income and NIT in Canada and the USA show that people spent more time studying while the program was running.
In 1995, Card and Krueger analyzed 14 earlier time-series studies on minimum wages and concluded that there was clear evidence of publication bias (in favor of studies that found a statistically significant negative employment effect).
Accounts differ as to the effects of the minimum wage.
Thus it is at least theoretically possible that the minimum wage may boost employment.
The study also found a small, but statistically significant, increase in unemployment for adults aged 20–24.
In 2012, Michael Reich published an economic analysis that suggested that a proposed minimum wage hike in San Diego might stimulate the city's economy by about $190 million.
Companies can be more selective in those whom they employ thus the least skilled and least experienced will typically be excluded.
An alternate view of the labor market has low-wage labor markets characterized as monopsonistic competition wherein buyers (employers) have significantly more market power than do sellers (workers).
As a result, the jobseeker could spend more time looking for a more appropriate or satisfying job, or they could wait until a higher-paying job appeared.
* Stimulates consumption, by putting more money in the hands of low-income people who spend their entire paychecks.
For a complete list of global wages see: List of minimum wages by country.
Some empirical studies have tried to ascertain the benefits of a minimum wage beyond employment effects.
The Institute for the Study of Labor found prices in the minimum wage sector rose significantly faster than prices in non-minimum wage sectors, in the four years following the implementation of the minimum wage.
David Card and Alan Krueger gathered information on fast food restaurants in New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania in an attempt to see what effect this increase had on employment within New Jersey.
A 2010 study by three economists (Arindrajit Dube of the University of Massachusetts Amherst, William Lester of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and Michael Reich of the University of California, Berkeley), compared adjacent counties in different states where the minimum wage had been raised in one of the states.
The sweatshops employed large numbers of women and young workers, paying them what were considered to be substandard wages.
Thus, according to this explanation, in the absence of the minimum wage law unskilled workers would be paid approximately the same amount and an increase above this equilibrium point could likely bring about increased unemployment for the low and unskilled workers.
(1998) polled labor economists at the top 40 research universities in the United States on a variety of questions in the summer of 1996.
According to the supply and demand model shown in many textbooks on economics, increasing the minimum wage decreases the employment of minimum-wage workers.
Senator Bernie Sanders introduced a bill in 2015 that would raise the minimum wage to $15, and in his 2016 campaign for president ran on a platform of increasing it.
Some research suggests that the unemployment effects of small minimum wage increases are dominated by other factors.
In 1992, the minimum wage in New Jersey increased from $4.25 to $5.05 per hour (an 18.8% increase) while the adjacent state of Pennsylvania remained at $4.25.
Another 2011 study by Sen, Rybczynski, and Van De Waal found that "a 10% increase in the minimum wage is significantly correlated with a 3−5% drop in teen employment."
The presence of these powerful groups and factors means that the debate on the issue is not always based on dispassionate analysis.
They argued that the negative employment effects of minimum wage laws are minimal if not non-existent.
The federal EITC program has been expanded by a number of presidents including Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George H.W.
Such nations, particularly the Nordics, have very high union participation rates.
Standard theory says that, if set above the equilibrium price, more labor will be willing to be provided by workers than will be demanded by employers, creating a surplus of labor, i.e.
They found that the minimum wage increases were followed by decreases in employment.
However, subsequently at least two of the business owners quoted did expand.
* Small firms with limited payroll budgets cannot offer their most valuable employees fair and attractive wages above unskilled workers paid the artificially high minimum, and see a rising hurdle-cost of adding workers.
Wellington (1991) updated Brown et al.
The Centre for Economic Performance found no discernible impact on employment levels from the wage increases, while the Low Pay Commission found that employers had reduced their rate of hiring and employee hours employed, and found ways to cause current workers to be more productive (especially service companies).
The dollar value of the minimum wage loses purchasing power over time due to inflation.
Fields says a two-sector market, where "the self-employed, service workers, and farm workers are typically excluded from minimum-wage coverage... and with one sector with minimum-wage coverage and the other without it and possible mobility between the two," is the basis for better analysis.
(1983) noted that time series studies to that point had found that for a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage, there was a decrease in teenage employment of 1–3 percent.
They will be pushed into the ranks of the unemployed or out of the labor force.
The demand of labor curve is therefore shown as a line moving down and to the right.
The textbook illustrates the point with a supply and demand diagram similar to the one above.
On the other side of the issue, low-wage employers such as restaurants finance the Employment Policies Institute, which has released numerous studies opposing the minimum wage.
As trade unions were decriminalized during the century, attempts to control wages through collective agreement were made.
Other states operate below the federal minimum wage such as Georgia and Wyoming.
A widely circulated argument that the minimum wage was ineffective at reducing poverty was provided by George Stigler in 1949:
In the autumn of 1348, the Black Plague reached England and decimated the population.
According to the Economic Policy Institute, the minimum wage in the United States would have been $18.28 in 2013 if the minimum wage had kept pace with labor productivity.
In contrast to the simple supply and demand diagram, it was commonly found that teenagers withdrew from the labor force in response to the minimum wage, which produced the possibility of equal reductions in the supply as well as the demand for labor at a higher minimum wage and hence no impact on the unemployment rate.
One such textbook says:
In 1986, President Reagan described the EITC as "the best anti poverty, the best pro-family, the best job creation measure to come out of Congress."
A guaranteed minimum income is another proposed system of social welfare provision.
If a higher minimum wage increases the wage rates of unskilled workers above the level that would be established by market forces, the quantity of unskilled workers employed will fall.
''The Economist'' wrote in December 2013: "A minimum wage, providing it is not set too high, could thus boost pay with no ill effects on jobs....America's federal minimum wage, at 38% of median income, is one of the rich world's lowest.
When it comes to on-the-job training, some believe the increase in wages is taken out of training expenses.
In the business sector, concerns include the expected increased cost of doing business, threats to profitability, rising levels of unemployment (and subsequent higher government expenditure on welfare benefits raising tax rates), and the possible knock-on effects to the wages of more experienced workers who might already be earning the new statutory minimum wage, or slightly more.
An analysis of supply and demand of the type shown in many mainstream economics textbooks implies that by mandating a price floor above the equilibrium wage, minimum wage laws should cause unemployment.
Under the monopsonistic assumption, an appropriately set minimum wage could increase both wages and employment, with the optimal level being equal to the marginal product of labor.
We will start by assuming that the supply and demand curves for labor will not change as a result of raising the minimum wage.
He admits that he does not know if these are correct, but argues that "the list demonstrates that one can accept the new empirical findings and still be a card-carrying economist."
Other concerns include purchasing power, inflation indexing and standardized working hours.
A study by Hoffman and Trace found the result anticipated by traditional theory: a detrimental effect on employment.
* Slows growth in the creation of low-skilled jobs
Minimum wage laws, for instance proposals to index the minimum wage to average wages, have the potential to keep the dollar value of the minimum wage relevant and predictable.
The minimum wage will price the services of the least productive (and therefore lowest-wage) workers out of the market.
Such a case is a type of market failure and results in workers being paid less than their marginal value.
Some studies find no harm to employment from federal or state minimum wages, others see a small one, but none finds any serious damage.
* Is less effective than other methods (e.g.
But proponents of the minimum wage hold that the situation is much more complicated than the basic theory can account for.
The sweatshop owners were thought to have unfair bargaining power over their employees, and a minimum wage was proposed as a means to make them pay fairly.
King Edward III, who was a wealthy landowner, was dependent, like his lords, on serfs to work the land.
Although minimum wage laws are in effect in many jurisdictions, differences of opinion exist about the benefits and drawbacks of a minimum wage.
Bush, and Bill Clinton.
Another 2013 study by Suzana Laporšek of the University of Primorska, on youth unemployment in Europe claimed there was "a negative, statistically significant impact of minimum wage on youth employment."
In the United States, statutory minimum wages were first introduced nationally in 1938, and they were reintroduced and expanded in the United Kingdom in 1998.
Minimum wage behaves as a classical price floor on labor.
95 of the 605 signatories responded.
This is because, as the wage rate rises, it becomes more expensive for firms to hire workers and so firms hire fewer workers (or hire them for fewer hours).
A firm's cost is a function of the wage rate.
Whaples found that 46.8% respondents wanted the minimum wage eliminated, 37.7% supported an increase, 14.3% wanted it kept at the current level, and 1.3% wanted it decreased.
Supporters of the minimum wage claim it has these effects:
Economists graph this relationship with the wage on the vertical axis and the quantity (hours) of labor supplied on the horizontal axis.
The argument that a minimum wage decreases employment is based on a simple supply and demand model of the labor market.
* Forbidding employers to pay less than a legal minimum is equivalent to forbidding workers to sell their labor for less than the minimum wage.
Although Sanders did not become the nominee, the Democratic National Committee adopted his $15 minimum wage push in their 2016 party platform.
* As a labor market analogue of political-economic protectionism, it excludes low cost competitors from labor markets and hampers firms in reducing wage costs during trade downturns.
Some jurisdictions even allow employers to count tips given to their workers as credit towards the minimum wage levels.
The legal restriction that employers cannot pay less than a legislated wage is equivalent to the legal restriction that workers cannot work at all in the protected sector unless they can find employers willing to hire them at that wage.
Arguments in favor of minimum wage laws
It was not until the 1890s that the first modern legislative attempts to regulate minimum wages were seen in New Zealand and Australia.
A 2012 study by Sabia, Hansen, and Burkhauser found that "minimum wage increases can have substantial adverse labor demand effects for low-skilled individuals", with the largest effects on those aged 16 to 24.
They state that the reduction on consensus on this question is "likely" due to the Card and Krueger research and subsequent debate.
In January 2014, seven Nobel economists—Kenneth Arrow, Peter Diamond, Eric Maskin, Thomas Schelling, Robert Solow, Michael Spence, and Joseph Stiglitz—and 600 other economists wrote a  letter to the US Congress and the US President urging that, by 2016, the US government should raise the minimum wage to $10.10.
* Encourages efficiency and automation of industry.
Also, the amount of labor sold would also be lower than the competitive optimal allocation.
So the basic theory says that raising the minimum wage helps workers whose wages are raised, and hurts people who are not hired (or lose their jobs) because companies cut back on employment.
This helps explain why France also has shockingly high rates of youth unemployment: 26% for 15- to 24-year-olds."
For example, agencies that administer the laws have a vested interest in showing that "their" laws do not create unemployment, as do labor unions whose members' finances are protected by minimum wage laws.
If no minimum wage is in place, workers and employers will continue to adjust the quantity of labor supplied according to price until the quantity of labor demanded is equal to the quantity of labor supplied, reaching equilibrium price, where the supply and demand curves intersect.
In contrast, the relatively high minimum wage in Puerto Rico has been blamed by various politicians and commentators as a highly significant factor in the Puerto Rican government-debt crisis.
* Increases technological development.
Surveys of labor economists have found a sharp split on the minimum wage.
In addition to their own findings, they reanalyzed earlier studies with updated data, generally finding that the older results of a negative employment effect did not hold up in the larger datasets.
They argued that the different policy views were not related to views on whether raising the minimum wage would reduce teen employment (the median economist said there would be a reduction of 1%), but on value differences such as income redistribution.
32% disagreed and the remaining respondents were uncertain or had no opinion on the question.
A '''minimum wage''' is the lowest remuneration that employers may legally pay to workers.
In 2006, the International Labour Organization (ILO) argued that the minimum wage could not be directly linked to unemployment in countries that have suffered job losses.
* Can result in the exclusion of certain groups (ethnic, gender etc.)
*Minimum wage alone is not effective at alleviating poverty, and in fact produces a net increase in poverty due to disemployment effects.
They endorsed the Minimum Wage Fairness Act which was introduced by US Senator Tom Harkin in 2013.
This is known as the "ripple effect".
In Florida, where voters approved an increase in 2004, a follow-up comprehensive study after the increase confirmed a strong economy with increased employment above previous years in Florida and better than in the US as a whole.
The subsequent 19th century saw significant labor unrest affect many industrial nations.
Among workers and their representatives, political consideration weigh in as labor leaders seek to win support by demanding the highest possible rate.
According to a 1978 article in the ''American Economic Review'', 90% of the economists surveyed agreed that the minimum wage increases unemployment among low-skilled workers.
* Reduces quantity demanded of workers, either through a reduction in the number of hours worked by individuals, or through a reduction in the number of jobs.
For example, Gramlich (1976) found that many of the benefits went to higher income families, and that teenagers were made worse off by the unemployment associated with the minimum wage.
Though a serious methodological indictment, opponents of the minimum wage largely ignored this issue; as Thomas Leonard noted, "The silence is fairly deafening."
In 2013, a diverse group of 37 economics professors was surveyed on their view of the minimum wage's impact on employment.
* Positive impact on small business owners and industry.
On the other hand, an assessment of data collected and analyzed by Neumark and Wascher did not initially contradict the Card and Krueger results, but in a later edited version they found a four percent decrease in employment, and reported that "the estimated disemployment effects in the payroll data are often statistically significant at the 5- or 10-percent level although there are some estimators and subsamples that yield insignificant—although almost always negative" employment effects.
* Increased job growth and creation.
Since the government does not hire surplus labor, the labor surplus takes the form of unemployment, which tends to be higher with minimum wage laws than without them.
Minimum wage laws receive less support from economists than from the general public.
A similar survey in 2006 by Robert Whaples polled PhD members of the American Economic Association (AEA).
In 2014, in Seattle, Washington, liberal and progressive business owners who had supported the city's new $15 minimum wage said they might hold off on expanding their businesses and thus creating new jobs, due to the uncertain timescale of the wage increase implementation.
The paper shows that both datasets evidence conditional employment effects that are positive for small restaurants, but are negative for large fast-food restaurants.
