Philanthropy and charitable giving are part of the community.
Julia Moskin wrote about New Nordic cuisine, chef Paul Berglund and the Bachelor Farmer, and the restaurants La Loma, Tilia, the Red Stag Supper Club, Fika and Haute Dish in ''The New York Times'' in 2012.
About 44% of students in the Minneapolis Public School system graduate, which ranks the 6th worst out of the nation's 50 largest cities.
WCCO-TV, FOX affiliate KMSP-TV and MyNetworkTV affiliate WFTC operate as owned-and-operated stations of their affiliated networks.
Twelve lakes, three large ponds, and five unnamed wetlands are within Minneapolis.
The Public Works Department expanded the bicycle trail system from the Grand Rounds to 56&nbsp;miles (90&nbsp;km) of off-street commuter trails including the Midtown Greenway, the Light Rail Trail, Kenilworth Trail, Cedar Lake Trail and the West River Parkway Trail along the Mississippi.
Jim Bakker and Tammy Faye met while attending the Pentecostal North Central University and began a television ministry that by the 1980s reached 13.5 million households.
Construction began in November 2010 and the line began service on June 14, 2014.
Atheists For Human Rights has its headquarters in the Shingle Creek neighborhood in a geodesic dome.
A parkway for cars, a bikeway for riders, and a walkway for pedestrians runs parallel along the  route of the Grand Rounds National Scenic Byway.
In 2010, Nice Ride Minnesota launched with 65 kiosks for bicycle sharing, and 19 pedicabs were operating downtown.
Asians came from China, the Philippines, Japan, and Korea.
From 1970 onward, Asians arrived from Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and Thailand.
The city is home to Minnesota Fringe Festival, the largest nonjuried performing arts festival in the U.S.
Minneapolis has seven hospitals, four ranked among America's best by ''U.S.
The name Minneapolis is attributed to Charles Hoag, the city's first schoolteacher, who combined '''', a Dakota Sioux word for water, and '''', the Greek word for city.
Other significant European groups in the city include those of Irish (11.3%), English (7.0%), Polish (3.9%), French (3.5%) and Italian (2.3%) descent.
Forests in northern Minnesota were exploited by the lumber industry, which operated seventeen sawmills on power from the waterfall.
In 1972, Dainin Katagiri was invited from California to Minneapolis—by one account, a place he thought nobody else would want to go—where he founded a lineage which today includes three Sōtō Zen centers among the city's nearly 20 Buddhist and meditation centers.
Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport (MSP) sits on  on the southeast border of the city between Minnesota State Highway 5, Interstate 494, Minnesota State Highway 77, and Minnesota State Highway 62.
White Americans make up about three-fifths of Minneapolis's population.
The Minnesota Territorial Legislature authorized present-day Minneapolis as a town in 1856 on the Mississippi's west bank.
With fellow local musicians, many of whom recorded at Twin/Tone Records, he helped make First Avenue and the 7th Street Entry prominent venues for both artists and audiences.
The first to broadcast in color was WCCO-TV, the CBS affiliate which is located in downtown Minneapolis.
A spot at  in or near Waite Park in Northeast Minneapolis, however, is corroborated by Google Earth as the highest ground.
Major sporting events hosted by the city include the 1985 and 2014 Major League Baseball All-Star Games, the 1987 and 1991 World Series, Super Bowl XXVI in 1992, the 1992 NCAA Men's Division I Final Four, the 2001 NCAA Men's Division 1 Final Four and the 1998 World Figure Skating Championships.
The population grew until 1950 when the census peaked at 521,718, and then declined as people moved to the suburbs until about 1990.
Minneapolis' second light rail line, the METRO Green Line shares stations with the Blue Line in downtown Minneapolis, and then at the Downtown East station, travels east through the University of Minnesota, and then along University Avenue into downtown Saint Paul.
A hate group known as the Silver Legion of America, or Silver Shirts, recruited members in the city and held meetings there around 1936 to 1938.
The Museum of Russian Art opened in a restored church in 2005 and exhibits a collection of 20th-century Russian art as well as lecture series, seminars, social functions and other special events.
Called "Minnesota's biggest-ever public works project," the stadium opened in 2016 with 66,000 seats, expandable to 70,000 for the 2018 Super Bowl.
Ice blocks deposited in valleys by retreating glaciers created the lakes of Minneapolis.
Millers cultivated relationships with academic scientists especially at the University of Minnesota.
The son of a jazz musician and a singer, Prince was born in Minneapolis, lived in the area most of his life, and became ''Rolling Stone'''s 27th greatest artist of the rock era.
Racial and ethnic minorities lag behind white counterparts in education, with 15.0% of blacks and 13.0% of Hispanics holding bachelor's degrees compared to 42.0% of the white population.
More than 40% of adults in the Minneapolis–Saint Paul area give time to volunteer work, the highest such percentage of any large metropolitan area in the United States.
Hazardous waste is handled by Hennepin County drop off sites.
Today, Mount Olivet Lutheran Church in southwest Minneapolis with about 6,000 attendees is the nation's second-largest Lutheran congregation.
Ordinances govern parking on the plowing routes during these emergencies as well as snow shoveling throughout the city.
The Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota is a 75-minute drive away.
Tom Waits released two songs about the city, "Christmas Card from a Hooker in Minneapolis" (''Blue Valentine'' (1978)) and "9th & Hennepin" (''Rain Dogs'' (1985)), while Lucinda Williams recorded "Minneapolis" (''World Without Tears'' (2003)).
Minneapolis Public Schools enroll 36,370 students in public primary and secondary schools.
Minneapolis is home to award-winning restaurants and chefs.
The Minneapolis Public Library, founded by T. B. Walker in 1885, faced a severe budget shortfall for 2007, and was forced to temporarily close three of its neighborhood libraries.
Minneapolis is the third-most literate city in the U.S. A center for printing and publishing, Minneapolis was the city in which Open Book, the largest literary and book arts center in the U.S., was founded.
A Big Ten school and home of the Golden Gophers, the University of Minnesota is the fourth largest campus among U.S. public 4-year universities in terms of enrollment.
Beginning in the 1990s, a large Latino population arrived, along with immigrants from the Horn of Africa, especially Somalia.
As of 2015 the city's largest employers downtown are Target, Wells Fargo, HCMC, Hennepin County, Ameriprise, U.S. Bancorp, Xcel Energy, City of Minneapolis, RBC Wealth Management, the ''Star Tribune'', Capella Education Company,  Thrivent, CenturyLink, ABM Industries, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Danish Americans are not nearly as numerous; there are 4,434 Danish Americans, making up only 1.3% of the population.
Industry produces metal and automotive products, chemical and agricultural products, electronics, computers, precision medical instruments and devices, plastics, and machinery.
Half of Minneapolis–Saint Paul residents work in the city where they live.
Utility providers are regulated monopolies: Xcel Energy supplies electricity, CenterPoint Energy supplies gas, CenturyLink provides landline telephone service, and Comcast provides cable service.
Locally and internationally recognized Minneapolis electronic dance music artists include Woody McBride, Freddy Fresh (who walks a line with hip hop) and DVS1.
The Minneapolis park system has been called the best-designed, best-financed, and best-maintained in America.
In 2007 citywide wireless internet coverage began, provided for 10 years by US Internet of Minnetonka to residents for about $20 per month and to businesses for $30.
Minneapolis ranks 27th in the nation for the highest percentage of commuters by bicycle, and was editorialized as the top bicycling city in "Bicycling's Top 50" ranking in 2010.
It uses existing railroad tracks and serves 2,600 daily commuters.
The metropolitan area gives 13% of its total charitable donations to the arts and culture.
She said Minneapolis chefs served trendy Nordic ingredients like root vegetables, fish roe, wild greens, venison, dried mushrooms, seaweed and cow's milk.
Migrant workers from Mexico and Latin America also interspersed.
The Minnesota Orchestra plays classical and popular music at Orchestra Hall under music director Osmo Vänskä—a critic writing for ''The New Yorker'' in 2010 described it as "the greatest orchestra in the world."
Minneapolis has a mix of radio stations and healthy listener support for public radio.
The oldest continuously used church in the city, Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic Church in the Nicollet Island/East Bank neighborhood, was built in 1856 by Universalists and soon afterward was acquired by a French Catholic congregation.
The third line, the Southwest Line (Green Line extension), will connect downtown Minneapolis with the southwestern suburb of Eden Prairie.
The Twin Cities Marathon run in Minneapolis and Saint Paul every October draws 250,000 spectators.
Minneapolis' cultural organizations draw creative people and audiences to the city for theater, visual art, writing and music.
Two groups came for a short while during U.S. government relocations: Japanese during the 1940s, and Native Americans during the 1950s.
The graduate school programs ranked highest in 2007 were counseling and personnel services, chemical engineering, psychology, macroeconomics, applied mathematics and non-profit management.
In May 2014, the NFL announced that Minneapolis will host Super Bowl LII in 2018.
There are 10,711 individuals who identify as multiracial in Minneapolis.
Gradually more European-American settlers arrived, competing for game and other resources with the Dakota.
After years of discrimination towards Jewish doctors, the Jewish community raised funds to create the Mount Sinai Hospital, which opened in 1951.
The economy of Minneapolis today is based in commerce, finance, rail and trucking services, health care, and industry.
The new downtown Central Library designed by César Pelli opened in 2006.
People of black and white ancestry number at 3,551, and make up 1.0% of the population.
Five major newspapers are published in Minneapolis: ''Star Tribune'', ''Finance and Commerce'', ''Minnesota Spokesman-Recorder'', the university's ''The Minnesota Daily'' and ''MinnPost.com''.
At peak production, a single mill at Washburn-Crosby made enough flour for 12 million loaves of bread each day, and by 1900, 14.1 percent of America's grain was milled in Minneapolis.
Parks are interlinked in many places and the Mississippi National River and Recreation Area connects regional parks and visitor centers.
Efforts to save the building failed but are credited with sparking interest in (but not always succeeding in) historic preservation in the state.
It was the first private non-sectarian hospital in the community to accept members of minority races on its medical staff.
Water supply is managed by four watershed districts that correspond to the Mississippi and the city's three creeks.
In 2016, Nice Ride expanded to 171 stations and 1,833 bikes supplied by PBSC Urban Solutions, a Canadian company.
The city and surrounding region is the primary business center between Chicago and Seattle, with Minneapolis proper containing America's fifth-highest concentration of Fortune 500 companies.
The snowiest winter of record was 1983–84, when 8.2 feet or  of snow fell, and the least snowy winter was 1890-91, when only  fell.
Dakota Sioux had long been the region's sole residents when French explorers arrived around 1680.
The company was founded in 1963 as a prototype alternative to Broadway, and it produces a wide variety of shows throughout the year.
Later, immigrants came from Germany, Italy, Greece, Poland, and Southern and Eastern Europe.
Home to the MN Spoken Word Association and independent hip hop label Rhymesayers Entertainment, the city has garnered attention for rap, hip hop and its spoken word community.
The professional soccer team Minnesota United FC of the NASL play in Blaine at the National Sports Center through 2016, but the team will enter the MLS and play the 2017 season in the university's TCF Bank Stadium, and then relocate to St. Paul when their stadium has been built there.
In 2015, ''Bon Appétit'' named Spoon and Stable, along with Hola Arepa and Heyday, three of the 50 best places in the U.S. for a meal.
After a 15-month lockout, a contract settlement resulted in the return of the performers, including Vänskä, to Orchestra Hall in January 2014.
plans to expand in 2013 to 170 stations in Minneapolis and Saint Paul, and expects to add 17 more in 2014.
Working with surgeon C. Walton Lillehei, Medtronic began to build portable and implantable cardiac pacemakers about this time.
Not until later did consumers discover the value in the bran (which contains wheat's vitamins, minerals and fiber) that "Minneapolis... millers routinely dumped" into the Mississippi.
In other sports, five golf courses are located within the city, with the nationally ranked Hazeltine National Golf Club and Interlachen Country Club in nearby suburbs.
The organizers sponsor three more races: a Kids Marathon, a , and a .
2 & 5" and it won a Grammy Award in 2014 for "Sibelius: Symphonies Nos 1 & 4".
The Dakota people, the original inhabitants of the area where Minneapolis now stands, believed in the Great Spirit and were surprised that not all European settlers were religious.
The hard red spring wheat that grows in Minnesota became valuable ($.50 profit per barrel in 1871 increased to $4.50 in 1874,) and Minnesota "patent" flour was recognized at the time as the best in the world.
These immigrants tended to settle in the Northeast neighborhood, which still retains an ethnic flavor and is particularly known for its Polish community.
The Minneapolis Wi-Fi network earns $1.2 million annual profit and as of 2010 has about 20,000 customers.
Hennepin County has the second-highest number of horses per capita in the U.S.
Due to the occupational hazards of milling, six local sources of artificial limbs were competing in the prosthetics business by the 1890s.
Minneapolis VA Medical Center, Shriners Hospitals for Children and Allina's Phillips Eye Institute also serve the city.
Both basketball teams play in the Target Center, but the Lynx will play the 2017 season at the Xcel Energy Center in St. Paul during remodeling at Target Center.
Foresight, donations and effort by community leaders enabled Horace Cleveland to create his finest landscape architecture, preserving geographical landmarks and linking them with boulevards and parkways.
During the mid-to-late 1950s, members of the Nation of Islam created a temple in north Minneapolis, and the first mosque was built in 1967.
As of 2016, four Minneapolis-based chefs have won James Beard Foundation Awards: Alexander Roberts, Restaurant Alma; Isaac Becker, 112 Eatery; Paul Bergland, Bachelor Farmer; and Tim McKee, La Belle Vie.
The farmers of the Great Plains grew grain that was shipped by rail to the city's thirty-four flour mills.
In television, two episodes of ''Route 66'' were shot in Minneapolis in 1963 (and broadcast in 1963 and 1964).
The Billy Graham Evangelistic Association, ''Decision'' magazine, and World Wide Pictures film and television distribution were headquartered in Minneapolis between the late 1940s into the 2000s.
Completion is expected sometime in the late 2010s.
During the 1950s and 1960s, as part of urban renewal, the city razed about 200 buildings across 25 city blocks (roughly 40% of downtown), destroying the Gateway District and many buildings with notable architecture, including the Metropolitan Building.
The state of Minnesota has the nation's highest number of bicyclists, sport fishermen, and snow skiers per capita.
The American Refugee Committee helps one million refugees and displaced persons in ten countries in Africa, the Balkans and Asia each year.
The first basilica in the United States, and Co-Cathedral of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis, the Basilica of Saint Mary near Loring Park was named by Pope Pius XI in 1926.
Pillsbury Company across the river were barely a step behind, hiring Washburn employees to immediately use the new methods.
The first Jewish congregation in Minneapolis was formed in 1878 as Shaarai Tov (though it has been known since 1920 as Temple Israel); in 1928, it built the synagogue in East Isles.
Minneapolis was a "particularly virulent" site of anti-semitism until 1950.
The city returned to peak employment during the fourth quarter of that year.
Most residents drive cars but 60% of the 160,000 people working downtown commute by means other than a single person per auto.
The majority of the estimated $1 billion recent expansion of arts facilities was contributed privately.
In its 2013 ParkScore ranking, The Trust for Public Land reported that Minneapolis had the best park system among the 50 most populous U.S. cities.
The Vikings were an NFL expansion team, and the Twins were formed when the Washington Senators relocated to Minnesota.
This community is predominantly of German and Scandinavian descent.
Other professional teams have played in Minneapolis in the past.
Among U.S. cities as of 2006, Minneapolis has the fourth-highest percentage of gay, lesbian, or bisexual people in the adult population, with 12.5% (behind San Francisco, and slightly behind both Seattle and Atlanta).
By 2004, between 20,000 and 30,000 Somali Muslims made the city their home.
U.S. Census Bureau estimates in the year 2015 show the population of Minneapolis to be 410,939, a 7.4% increase since the 2010 census.
On January 1, 2011, the city's limit of 343 taxis was lifted.
Some ideas were developed by William Dixon Gray and some acquired through industrial espionage from the Hungarians by William de la Barre.
The city center is located at 45°&nbsp;N latitude.
The Twin Cities was ranked as the country's second best city in a 2006 Kiplinger's poll of ''Smart Places to Live'' and Minneapolis was one of the ''Seven Cool Cities'' for young professionals.
Jews from Russia and Eastern Europe began arriving in the 1880s and settled primarily on the north side of the city before moving in large numbers to the western suburbs in the 1950s and 1960s.
In 2014, seven chefs and restaurants in the area were named as semifinalists.
HCMC opened in 1887 as City Hospital and was also known as General Hospital.
St. Mary's University of Minnesota has a Twin Cities campus for its graduate and professional programs.
''Runner's World'' ranks the Twin Cities as America's sixth best city for runners.
Minneapolis Community and Technical College, the private Dunwoody College of Technology, Globe University/Minnesota School of Business, and Art Institutes International Minnesota provide career training.
Minneapolis also has 34&nbsp;miles (54&nbsp;km) of dedicated bike lanes on city streets and encourages cycling by equipping transit buses with bike racks and by providing online bicycle maps.
It was once the world's flour milling capital and a hub for timber.
The city made dramatic changes to rectify discrimination as early as 1886 when Martha Ripley founded Maternity Hospital for both married and unmarried mothers.
The Twin Cities contribute 63.8% of the gross state product of Minnesota.
The Gophers women's ice hockey team is a six-time NCAA champion and seven-time national champion.
In 2007 citing the city's bicycle lanes, buses and LRT, ''Forbes'' identified Minneapolis the world's fifth cleanest city.
Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish Americans together make up 20.7% of the population.
Students speak 90 different languages at home and most school communications are printed in English, Hmong, Spanish, and Somali.
Vänskä departed in 2013 when a labor dispute remained unresolved and forced the cancellation of concerts scheduled for Carnegie Hall.
People of white and Native American ancestry number at 2,319, and make up 0.6% of the population.
Minneapolis currently has two light rail lines and one commuter rail line.
Minneapolis developed around Saint Anthony Falls, the highest waterfall on the Mississippi River and a source of power for its early industry.
In 2015, profiling chef Gavin Kaysen and Spoon and Stable, ''Saveur'' named Minneapolis "the next great American food city."
The Minnesota Timberwolves brought NBA basketball back to Minneapolis in 1989, followed by the Lynx in 1999.
The city treats and distributes water and requires payment of a monthly solid waste fee for trash removal, recycling, and drop off for large items.
Season tickets sold out before the football season began.
Lastly, people of black and Native American ancestry number at 885, and make up 0.2% of Minneapolis's population.
During the 1940s and 1950s the Minneapolis Lakers basketball team, the city's first in the major leagues in any sport, won six basketball championships in three leagues to become the NBA's first dynasty before moving to Los Angeles.
The city experiences a full range of precipitation and related weather events, including snow, sleet, ice, rain, thunderstorms, and fog.
In 2000, the poverty rate for whites was 4.2%; for blacks it was 26.2%; for Asians, 19.1%; Native Americans, 23.2%; and Hispanics, 18.1%.
After each significant snowfall, called a ''snow emergency'', the Minneapolis Public Works Street Division plows over 1,000 miles (1,609&nbsp;km) of streets and 400 miles (643.7&nbsp;km) of alleys—counting both sides, the distance between Minneapolis and Seattle and back.
As an integral link to the global economy, Minneapolis is categorized as a global city.
There are 82,870 German Americans in the city, making up over one-fifth (23.1%) of the population.
Millers have used hydropower elsewhere since the 1st century B.C., but the results in Minneapolis between 1880 and 1930 were so remarkable the city has been described as "the greatest direct-drive waterpower center the world has ever seen."
An addition which doubled the size of the galleries, also designed by Gehry, opened in 2011.
The congregation later added an education building designed by his son Eero Saarinen.
Other prominent artists from Minneapolis include Hüsker Dü and The Replacements—who were pivotal in the U.S. alternative rock boom during the 1990s.
Fort Snelling was built in 1819 by the United States Army, and it attracted traders, settlers and merchants, spurring growth in the area.
In 2012 ''Food & Wine'' magazine named Minneapolis the nation's best and best-priced new food city.
Since the 1930s, the Golden Gophers have won national championships in baseball, boxing, football, golf, gymnastics, ice hockey, indoor and outdoor track, swimming, and wrestling.
Minneapolis has had a chartered local body of Ordo Templi Orientis since 1994.
There are 39,103 Norwegian Americans, making up 10.9% of the population; there are 30,349 Swedish Americans, making up 8.5% of the city's population.
Reflecting the region's status as an epicenter of folk, funk, and alternative rock music, the city served as the launching pad for several of the 20th century's most influential musicians, including Bob Dylan and Prince.
The downtown Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome, demolished beginning in January 2014, was the largest sports stadium in Minnesota from 1982 to 2013.
At recent count 1,696,453 items in the system are used annually and the library answers over 500,000 research and fact-finding questions each year.
The city's lowest elevation of  is near where Minnehaha Creek meets the Mississippi River.
The Minnesota Wild of the NHL play in St. Paul at the Xcel Energy Center.
Further, by 1895 through the efforts of silent partner William Hood Dunwoody, Washburn-Crosby exported four million barrels of flour a year to the United Kingdom, and when exports reached their peak in 1900, about one third of all flour milled in Minneapolis was shipped overseas.
''USA Today'''s reader's choice 10 Best decided that Minneapolis–Saint Paul was the Best Local Food Scene in 2015.
In 2013, the city was among 25 U.S. cities to receive the highest possible score from the Human Rights Campaign, signifying its support for LGBT residents.
The community's diverse population also continues to manage a long tradition of charitable support through progressive public social programs, VOLAGs and volunteering, as well as through private and corporate philanthropy.
During the 1920s, Minneapolis was home to the NFL team the Minneapolis Marines, later known as the Minneapolis Red Jackets.
Christ Church Lutheran in the Longfellow neighborhood is among the finest work by architect Eliel Saarinen.
While living in Minneapolis, Scott and Brennan Olson founded (and later sold) Rollerblade, the company that popularized the sport of inline skating.
The Twins have won 8 division titles (1987, 1991, 2002–04, 2006, 2009, and 2010), 3 American League Pennants (1965, 1987 and 1991) and the World Series in 1987 and 1991.
Catholic Charities is one of the largest providers of social services locally.
Minneapolis and Saint Paul anchor the second-largest economic center in the Midwest, after Chicago.
Funded in part by assessments on commercial properties, in 2009 Ambassadors of the Minneapolis Downtown Improvement District (DID) began working on 120 blocks of downtown to improve its cleanliness, friendliness and acceptability of behavior.
The METRO Blue Line LRT (formerly the Hiawatha Line) serves 34,000 riders daily and connects the Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport and Mall of America in Bloomington to downtown.
Measured by gross metropolitan product per resident (62,054), Minneapolis is the fifteenth richest city in the U.S.
Many of these trails and bridges, such as the Stone Arch Bridge, were former railroad lines that have now been converted for bicycles and pedestrians.
The country's oldest public wildflower garden, the Eloise Butler Wildflower Garden and Bird Sanctuary, is located within Theodore Wirth Park.
Lying on an artesian aquifer and flat terrain, Minneapolis has a total area of  and of this 6% is water.
The  U.S. Bank Stadium was built for the Vikings for about $1.122 billion, over half financed by Vikings owner Zygi Wilf and private investment.
The Minnesota Vikings and the Minnesota Twins have played in the state since 1961.
The smallest of the 12 regional banks in the Federal Reserve System, it operates a nationwide payments system, oversees member banks and bank holding companies, and serves as a banker for the U.S. Treasury.
Some students attend public schools in other school districts chosen by their families under Minnesota's open enrollment statute.
The city's first television was broadcast in 1948 by the Saint Paul station and ABC affiliate KSTP-TV, an NBC affiliate at the time.
Ten thousand cyclists use the bike lanes in the city each day, and many ride in the winter.
The Guthrie Theater, the area's largest theater company, occupies a three-stage complex overlooking the Mississippi, designed by French architect Jean Nouvel.
Noted for its strong music and performing arts scenes, Minneapolis is home to both the award-winning Guthrie Theater and the historic First Avenue nightclub.
