The Hazeltine National Golf Club has hosted the U.S. Open, U.S. Women's Open, U.S. Senior Open and PGA Championship.
Although less than one percent of the population is now employed in the agricultural sector, it remains a major part of the state's economy, ranking sixth in the nation in the value of products sold.
PRI weekly provides more than 400 hours of programming to almost 800 affiliates.
A cult scifi cable t.v.
Minnesota's population continues to grow, primarily in the urban centers.
Minnesota's court system has three levels.
In the 1980s, influential hit radio groups and musicians included Prince, The Original 7ven, Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis, The Jets, Lipps Inc., and Information Society.
Its soldiers built a grist mill and a sawmill at Saint Anthony Falls, the first of the water-powered industries around which the city of Minneapolis later grew.
This area is known as the Driftless Zone for its absence of glacial drift.
Two major drainage divides meet in the northeastern part of Minnesota in rural Hibbing, forming a triple watershed.
Winter Olympic Games medallists from the state include twelve of the twenty members of the gold medal 1980 ice hockey team (coached by Minnesota native Herb Brooks) and the bronze medallist U.S. men's curling team in the 2006 Winter Olympics.
As many as 800 white settlers died during the war.
The outcome of the 2008 U.S. Senate election in Minnesota was contested until June 30 the next year; when the Minnesota Supreme Court ruled in favor of Franken, Republican Norm Coleman conceded defeat, and the vacant seat was filled by Franken.
The Independence Party has received enough support to keep major party status.
Joel and Ethan Coen, Terry Gilliam, Bill Pohlad, and Mike Todd contributed to the art of filmmaking as writers, directors, and producers.
Major movies that were shot on location in Minnesota include ''That Was Then...
In the warmer months, these activities often involve water.
The rigors and rewards of pioneer life on the prairie are the subject of ''Giants in the Earth'' by Ole Rolvaag and the ''Little House'' series of children's books by Laura Ingalls Wilder.
From fewer than 6,120 people in 1850, Minnesota's population grew to over 1.7&nbsp;million by 1900.
Minnesota is known for a politically active citizenry, and populism has been a longstanding force among the state's political parties.
Medical care in the state is provided by a comprehensive network of hospitals and clinics headed by two institutions with international reputations.
The DFL also posted double-digit gains in both houses of the legislature, elected Amy Klobuchar to the U.S. Senate, and increased the party's U.S. House caucus by one.
The result of the six-week war was the execution of 38 Dakota and the exile of most of the rest of the Dakota to the Crow Creek Reservation in Dakota Territory.
Paul metropolitan area, and I-90 traveling east-west along the southern edge of the state.
The Mississippi River begins its journey from its headwaters at Lake Itasca and crosses the Iowa border  downstream.
The economy of Minnesota had a gross domestic product of $262 billion in 2008.
A two percent biodiesel blend has been required in diesel fuel since 2005.
On October 1, 2007, Minnesota became the 17th state to enact the Freedom to Breathe Act, a statewide smoking ban in restaurants and bars.
Most cases start in the district courts, which are courts of general jurisdiction.
There are  in the Chippewa and Superior national forests.
Planting became more specialized with hybridization of corn and wheat, and the use of farm machinery such as tractors and combines became the norm.
Minnesota's commitment to education has contributed to a literate and well-educated populace.
Appeals from the trial courts and challenges to certain governmental decisions are heard by the Minnesota Court of Appeals, consisting of nineteen judges who typically sit in three-judge panels.
Official "Major party" status in Minnesota (which grants state funding for elections) is reserved to parties whose candidates receive five percent or more of the vote in any statewide election (e.g., Governor, Secretary of State, U.S. President).
Fishing does not cease when the lakes freeze; ice fishing has been around since the arrival of early Scandinavian immigrants.
In more recent times, massive ice sheets at least one kilometer thick ravaged the landscape of the state and sculpted its current terrain.
Owing to its large number of lakes, the state is informally known as the "Land of 10,000 Lakes".
Paul metropolitan area and Duluth.
Increased mobility, in turn, enabled more specialized jobs.
The mining boom created the port of Duluth which continues to be important for shipping ore, coal, and agricultural products.
Minnesota has a very active program of organized amateur and professional sports.
A small segment of the Scandinavian population attend a traditional lutefisk dinner to celebrate Christmas.
This Is Now'', ''Purple Rain'', ''Airport'', ''Beautiful Girls'', ''North Country'', Untamed Heart'', ''Feeling Minnesota'',  ''Jingle All The Way'',  ''A Simple Plan'' and ''The Mighty Ducks films''.
The Minnesota Timberwolves of the National Basketball Association play in the Target Center.
Weekend and longer trips to family cabins on Minnesota's numerous lakes are a way of life for many residents.
The city of Minneapolis grew around the flour mills powered by St. Anthony Falls.
Following a period of volcanism 1.1 billion years ago, Minnesota's geological activity has been more subdued, with no volcanism or mountain formation, but with repeated incursions of the sea, which left behind multiple strata of sedimentary rock.
The governor has a cabinet consisting of the leaders of various state government agencies, called commissioners.
The state is the U.S.'s largest producer of sugar beets, sweet corn, and green peas for processing, and farm-raised turkeys.
The name comes from the Dakota word for "clear blue water".
There are almost  of snowmobile trails statewide.
The three-year median household income from 2002 to 2004 was $55,914, ranking fifth in the U.S. and first among the 36 states not on the Atlantic coast.
Senators serve for four years and representatives for two years.
There is water transportation along the Mississippi River system and from the ports of Lake Superior.
It is also home to more than 20 private colleges and universities, six of which rank among the nation's top 100 liberal arts colleges, according to U.S. News & World Report.
Minnesota's economy was hard-hit by the Great Depression, resulting in lower prices for farmers, layoffs among iron miners, and labor unrest.
Land west of the Mississippi River was acquired with the Louisiana Purchase, although a portion of the Red River Valley was disputed until the Treaty of 1818.
Perhaps the most significant characteristic of the economy is its diversity; the relative outputs of its business sectors closely match the United States as a whole.
With , or approximately 2.25 percent of the United States, Minnesota is the 12th-largest state.
Broadcast television in Minnesota and the Upper Midwest started on April 27, 1948, when KSTP-TV began broadcasting.
After World War II, industrial development quickened.
The Wisconsin glaciation left 12,000 years ago.
In 1805, Zebulon Pike bargained with Native Americans to acquire land at the confluence of the Minnesota and Mississippi rivers.
It shares a Lake Superior water border with Michigan and a land and water border with Wisconsin to the east.
Minnesota is the 12th largest in area and the 21st most populous of the U.S. states; nearly 60 percent of its residents live in the Minneapolis–Saint Paul metropolitan area (known as the "Twin Cities"), the center of transportation, business, industry, education, and government and home to an internationally known arts community.
Principal transportation corridors radiate from the Minneapolis–St.
Hubbard Broadcasting, which owns KSTP, is now the only locally owned television company in Minnesota.
New technology increased farm productivity through automation of feedlots for hogs and cattle, machine milking at dairy farms, and raising chickens in large buildings.
Transportation in Minnesota is overseen by the Minnesota Department of Transportation (MnDOT for short and used in the local news media).
Cray Research was formed when Seymour Cray left CDC to form his own company.
'''Minnesota''' (; locally ) is a state in the Midwestern United States.
Swimmer Tom Malchow won an Olympic gold medal in the 2000 Summer games and a silver medal in 1996.
Each of the next six decades saw a 15 percent increase in population, reaching 3.4&nbsp;million in 1960.
In 2013, nationwide in per-student public education spending, Minnesota ranked 21st.
Forestry remains strong, including logging, pulpwood processing and paper production, and forest products manufacturing.
Nearly all of Minnesota's prairies and oak savannas have been fragmented by farming, grazing, logging, and suburban development.
The University of Minnesota-owned station is still on the air, and since 1993 broadcasts a college rock format.
Until European settlement, Minnesota was inhabited by the Dakota and Ojibwe/Anishinaabe.
''The Minnesota Daily'' is the largest student-run newspaper in the U.S. Sites offering daily news on the Web include ''The UpTake'', ''MinnPost'', the Twin Cities ''Daily Planet'', business news site ''Finance and Commerce'' and Washington D.C.-based ''Minnesota Independent''.
The first Europeans in the area were French fur traders who arrived in the 17th century.
It is known for its displays of seed art, butter sculptures of dairy princesses, the birthing barn, and the "fattest pig" competition.
The National Hockey League's Minnesota Wild play in St. Paul's Xcel Energy Center and reached 300 consecutive sold-out games on January 16, 2008.
NASL Minnesota United FC replaced the Minnesota Thunder in 2010 and plays at the National Sports Center in Blaine.
There are nearly two dozen rail corridors in Minnesota, most of which go through Minneapolis–St.
Potlucks, usually with a variety of hotdishes, are popular small-town church activities.
Located on the Mississippi Flyway, Minnesota hosts migratory waterfowl such as geese and ducks, and game birds such as grouse, pheasants, and turkeys.
The University of Minnesota Medical School is a high-rated teaching institution that has made a number of breakthroughs in treatment, and its research activities contribute significantly to the state's growing biotechnology industry.
To its west is Voyageurs National Park.
Ashkenazi Jewish pioneers set up Saint Paul's first synagogue in 1856.
In 1762 the region became part of Spanish Louisiana until 1802.
Another popular comedy staple developed in the 1990s, The Daily Show, was originated through Lizz Winstead and Madeleine Smithberg.
Federal court cases are heard in the United States District Court for the District of Minnesota, which holds court in Minneapolis, St. Paul, Duluth, and Fergus Falls.
Two years later, the Republicans regained control of the Minnesota House in the 2014 election.
Minnesotans have also made significant contributions to comedy, theater, media, and film.
News and World Report'' 2014–2015 survey ranked 4,743 hospitals in the United States in 16 specialized fields of care, and placed the Mayo Clinic in the top four in all fields except psychiatry, where it ranked seventh.
Minnesota became a center of technology after World War II.
Precipitation can follow the Mississippi River south to the Gulf of Mexico, the Saint Lawrence Seaway east to the Atlantic Ocean, or the Hudson Bay watershed to the Arctic Ocean.
Hubert Humphrey brought national attention to the state with his address at the 1948 Democratic National Convention.
In addition to the city and county levels of government found in the United States, Minnesota has other entities that provide governmental oversight and planning.
Most other domestic carriers serve the airport.
Minnesota is also a large producer of corn and soybeans.
Previously unregistered voters can register on election day at their polls with evidence of residency.
Today Minnesota has 72 state parks and recreation areas, 58 state forests covering about four million acres (16,000&nbsp;km²), and numerous state wildlife preserves, all managed by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
Actors from Minnesota include Loni Anderson, Richard Dean Anderson, James Arness, Jessica Biel, Rachael Leigh Cook, Julia Duffy, Mike Farrell, Judy Garland, Peter Graves, Josh Hartnett, Garrett Hedlund, Tippi Hedren, Jessica Lange, Kelly Lynch, E.G.
Popular interest in the environment and environmentalism, added to traditional interests in hunting and fishing, has attracted a large urban audience within driving range.
Later, Saint Anthony Falls was tapped to provide power for flour mills.
The executive branch is headed by the governor.
Cloud State University and Bemidji State University.
The Minnesota portion of Lake Superior is the largest at  and deepest (at ) body of water in the state.
The Temple of ECK, the spiritual home of Eckankar, is based in Minnesota, and there are tens of thousands of Eckists in the state.
Minnesotans have consistently cast their Electoral College votes for Democratic presidential candidates since 1976, longer than any other state.
In 2008 DFLer and former comedian and radio talk show host Al Franken beat incumbent Republican Norm Coleman in the United States Senate race by 312 votes out of 3 million cast.
Keith Ellison (DFL) was elected as the first African American U.S. Representative from Minnesota as well as the first Muslim elected to Congress nationwide.
The rate of population change, and age and gender distributions, approximate the national average.
MPR has the largest audience of any regional public radio network in the nation, broadcasting on 37 radio stations.
A 2010 survey by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life showed that 32 percent of Minnesotans were affiliated with Mainline Protestant traditions, 21 percent were Evangelical Protestants, 28 percent were Roman Catholic, 1 percent each were Jewish, Muslim, Buddhist, and Black Protestant, and smaller amounts were of other faiths, with 13 percent unaffiliated.
Minnesota's principal airport is Minneapolis–St.
The Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome was home to the Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League through the 2013 season; it has been torn down and U.S. Bank Stadium now stands in its place.
As with the federal government of the United States, power in Minnesota is divided into three branches: executive, legislative, and judicial.
The Mississippi National River and Recreation Area (MNRRA), is a  corridor along the Mississippi River through the Minneapolis–St.
''Mnisota'' can be translated as ''clear blue water'' or ''clouded blue water'' depending on pronunciation.
Minnesota is the second northernmost U.S. state (after Alaska).
Gigantic Lake Agassiz formed in the northwest 13,000 years ago.
Excise taxes are levied on alcohol, tobacco, and motor fuel.
Many places in the state have similar names, such as Minnehaha Falls ("laughing water" (waterfall)), Minneiska ("white water"), Minneota ("much water"), Minnetonka ("big water"), Minnetrista ("crooked water"), and Minneapolis, a combination of ''mni'' and ''polis'', the Greek word for "city".
The Mayo Clinic and the University of Minnesota are partners in the Minnesota Partnership for Biotechnology and Medical Genomics, a state-funded program that conducts research into cancer, Alzheimer's disease, heart health, obesity, and other areas.
Iowa is to the south, North Dakota and South Dakota are to the west, and the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Manitoba are to the north.
The state imposes a use tax on items purchased elsewhere but used within Minnesota.
Four additional schools in the state compete in NCAA Division I ice hockey: the University of Minnesota Duluth; Minnesota State University, Mankato; St.
The state has eight congressional districts; they are represented by Tim Walz (1st district; DFL), John Kline (2nd; R), Erik Paulsen (3rd; R), Betty McCollum (4th; DFL), Keith Ellison (5th; DFL), Tom Emmer (6th; R), Collin Peterson (7th; DFL), and Rick Nolan (8th; DFL).
New Deal programs provided some economic turnaround.
One can also find dozens of varieties of food on a stick, such as Pronto Pups, cheese curds, and deep-fried candy bars.
Minnesota has the most food cooperatives per capita in the United States.
The state's oldest radio station, KUOM-AM, was launched in 1922 and is among the 10 –oldest radio stations in the United States.
Professional women's sports include the Minnesota Lynx of the Women's National Basketball Association, winners of the 2011, 2013, and 2015 WNBA Championships, the Minnesota Lightning of the United Soccer Leagues W-League, the Minnesota Vixen of the Independent Women's Football League, the Minnesota Valkyrie of the Legends Football League, and the Minnesota Whitecaps of the National Women's Hockey League.
Minnesota is known for its progressive political orientation and its high rate of civic participation and voter turnout.
Amtrak's daily ''Empire Builder'' (Chicago–Seattle/Portland) train runs through Minnesota, calling at the Saint Paul Union Depot and five other stations.
Paul International Airport (MSP), a major passenger and freight hub for Delta Air Lines and Sun Country Airlines.
Some actions in the Twin Cities metropolitan area are coordinated by the Metropolitan Council, and many lakes and rivers are overseen by watershed districts and soil and water conservation districts.
Before European settlement of North America, Minnesota was populated by a subculture of Sioux called the Dakota people.
Other large annual festivals include the Saint Paul Winter Carnival, the Minnesota Renaissance Festival, Minneapolis' Aquatennial and Mill City Music Festival, Moondance Jam in Walker, Sonshine Christian music festival in Willmar, the Judy Garland Festival in Grand Rapids, the Eelpout Festival on Leech Lake, and the WE Fest in Detroit Lakes.
The populations of metropolitan Sherburne and Scott counties doubled between 1980 and 2000, while 40 of the state's 87 counties lost residents over the same period.
The seven-justice Minnesota Supreme Court hears all appeals from the tax court, the workers' compensation court of appeals, first-degree murder convictions, and discretionary appeals from the court of appeals; it also has original jurisdiction over election disputes.
In the November 2010 election, the Minnesota Republican Party gained twenty-five house seats, giving them control of the House of Representatives by a 72-62 margin.
Minnesota is one of 42 U.S. states with its own lottery; its games include Powerball, Mega Millions, Hot Lotto (all three multi-state), Northstar Cash and Gopher 5.
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's epic poem ''The Song of Hiawatha'' was inspired by Minnesota and names many of the state's places and bodies of water.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Minnesota was 5,489,594 on July 1, 2015, a 3.5 percent increase since the 2010 United States Census.
The Dome also hosted the Minnesota Twins of Major League Baseball, winners of the 1987 and 1991 World Series, until 2010, when they began playing at Target Field.
Minnesota is home to over 30 mosques, mostly in the Twin Cities metro area.
Life in Minnesota is depicted in movies such as ''Fargo'', ''Grumpy Old Men'', ''Grumpier Old Men'', ''Juno'', ''Drop Dead Gorgeous'', ''Young Adult'', ''A Serious Man'', ''New in Town'', and in famous television series like ''Little House on the Prairie'', ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show'', ''The Golden Girls'', ''Coach'', ''The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show'', and ''Fargo''.
Once primarily a producer of raw materials, Minnesota's economy has transformed to emphasize finished products and services.
In the election of 2010, Republicans took control of both chambers of the Minnesota legislature for the first time in 38 years, and with Mark Dayton's election the Democratic-Farmer-Labor party took the governor's office for the first time in 20 years.
Explorers such as Daniel Greysolon, Sieur du Lhut, Father Louis Hennepin, Jonathan Carver, Henry Schoolcraft, and Joseph Nicollet mapped out the state.
The state's U.S. Senate seats have generally been split since the early 1990s, and in the 108th and 109th Congresses, Minnesota's congressional delegation was split, with four representatives and one senator from each party.
In the 2006 midterm election, Democrats were elected to all state offices except for governor and lieutenant governor, where Republicans Tim Pawlenty and Carol Molnau narrowly won reelection.
Compounding the adversity, western Minnesota and the Dakotas were hit by drought from 1931 to 1935.
Minnesota's first state park, Itasca State Park, was established in 1891, and is the source of the Mississippi River.
Minnesota is geologically quiet today; it experiences earthquakes infrequently, and most of them are minor.
Governor Mark Dayton, DFL  (Democratic Farmer Labor), took office on January 3, 2011, to become the first DFL  governor to hold the seat in two decades.
In 2004, the state produced 75 percent of the country's usable iron ore.
In 2014, Minnesota students earned the tenth-highest average composite score in the nation on the ACT exam.
University of Minnesota professor Norman Borlaug contributed to these developments as part of the Green Revolution.
Logging and farming were mainstays of Minnesota's early economy.
Minnesota has America's largest Somali population.
The root ''mni'' (also spelled ''mini'' or ''minne'') means "water" and "tō" ("ta") means "blue".
Approximately  of wetlands are contained within Minnesota's borders, the most of any state except Alaska.
The summer festival consists of over 800 performances over 11&nbsp;days in Minneapolis, and is the largest non-juried performing arts festival in the United States.
Stereotypical traits of Minnesotans include "Minnesota nice", Lutheranism, a strong sense of community and shared culture, and a distinctive brand of North Central American English sprinkled with Scandinavian expressions.
This is broadly consistent with the results of the 2001 American Religious Identification Survey, which also gives detailed percentages for many individual denominations.
Roman Catholics (of largely German, Irish, and Slavic descent) make up the largest single Christian denomination.
Minnesota has a consistently high voter turnout (due in part to its liberal voter registration laws) with virtually no evidence of unlawful voting.
In 2015, Minneapolis was named the nation's "Most Literate City", while St. Paul placed fourth, according to a major annual survey.
The construction of Fort Snelling followed between 1819 and 1825.
One of the Minnesota Legislature's first acts when it opened in 1858 was the creation of a normal school in Winona.
The state's iron-mining industry was established with the discovery of iron in the Vermilion Range and the Mesabi Range in the 1880s, and in the Cuyuna Range in the early 20th century.
St. Paul native F. Scott Fitzgerald writes of the social insecurities and aspirations of the young city in stories such as ''Winter Dreams'' and ''The Ice Palace'' (published in ''Flappers and Philosophers'').
The major Interstate highways are Interstate&nbsp;35 (I-35), I-90, and I-94, with I-35 and I-94 passing through the Minneapolis–St.
Minnesotans helped shape the history of music through popular American culture: the Andrews Sisters' "Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy" was an iconic tune of World War II, while the Trashmen's "Surfin' Bird" and Bob Dylan epitomize two sides of the 1960s.
Minnesota has professional men's teams in all major sports.
During the 19th and early 20th Centuries, the large majority of the European settlers emigrated from Scandinavia and Germany, and the state remains a center of Scandinavian American and German American culture.
The Civilian Conservation Corps and other programs around the state established some jobs for Indians on their reservations, and the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 provided the tribes with a mechanism of self-government.
In descending order of population, they are Minneapolis, Saint Paul, Rochester, Duluth, Bloomington, Brooklyn Park, Plymouth, Saint Cloud, Woodbury, Eagan, Maple Grove, Coon Rapids, Eden Prairie, Minnetonka, Burnsville, Apple Valley, Blaine and Lakeville.
Interlachen Country Club has hosted the U.S. Open, U.S. Women's Open, and Solheim Cup.
The per capita personal income in 2008 was $42,772, the tenth-highest in the nation.
Minnesotans have learned to embrace their long, harsh winters in ice sports such as skating, hockey, curling, and broomball, and snow sports such as cross-country skiing, alpine skiing, snowshoeing, and snowmobiling.
Garrison Keillor resurrected old-style radio comedy with ''A Prairie Home Companion'', which has aired since 1974.
William Norris left Sperry in 1957 to form Control Data Corporation (CDC).
Treaties between European settlers and the Dakota and Ojibwe gradually forced the natives off their lands and on to smaller reservations.
In 1839, the army forced them to move downriver and they settled in the area that became St. Paul.
By 1900, Minnesota mills, led by Pillsbury, Northwestern and the Washburn-Crosby Company (a forerunner of General Mills), were grinding 14.1 percent of the nation's grain.
Owners of real property in Minnesota pay property tax to their county, municipality, school district, and special taxing districts.
In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, 78.2 percent of eligible Minnesotans voted—the highest percentage of any U.S. state—versus the national average of 61.2 percent.
Minnesota musicians include Bob Dylan, Eddie Cochran, The Andrews Sisters, The Castaways, The Trashmen, Prince, Soul Asylum, David Ellefson, Hüsker Dü, Owl City, and The Replacements.
Minnesota Territory was formed on March 3, 1849.
Minnesota's United States senators are Democrat Amy Klobuchar and Democrat Al Franken.
As of January 2015, the state's unemployment rate was 3.7 percent.
The state is part of the U.S. region known as the Upper Midwest and part of North America's Great Lakes Region.
Minnesota's center of population is in Hennepin County.
Minnesota also has minor-league professional sports.
As of 2008, Minnesota was ranked 12th in the nation in per capita total state and local taxes.
