Minoan sacred symbols include the bull and its horns of consecration, the labrys (double-headed axe), the pillar, the serpent, the sun-disk, and the tree.
*Akrotiri – settlement on the island of Santorini (Thera), near the site of the Thera Eruption
Minos was associated in Greek myth with the labyrinth and the Minotaur, which Evans identified with the site at Knossos, the largest Minoan site.
Artistic depictions often show scenes of lily gathering and performances within 'green' spaces.
Along with the familiar example of Thera, Minoan "colonies" can be found first at Kastri on Cythera, an island close to the Greek mainland that came under Minoan influence in the mid-third millennium (EMII) and remained Minoan in culture for a thousand years, until Mycenaean occupation in the 13th century.
Juktas, interpreted as a temple, (2) an EMII sanctuary complex at Fournou Korifi in south central Crete, and (3) Knossos, in an LMIB building known as the "North House."
It is not known whether this language is Minoan or not and its origin is still a topic of debate.
Archaeologist Paul Rehak maintains that Minoan figure-eight shields could not have been used for fighting or hunting, since they were too cumbersome (Rehak, 1999).
Minoan cultural influence indicates an orbit that extended not only throughout the Cyclades (so-called ''Minoanisation''), but in locations such as Egypt and Cyprus.
The eruption often is identified as a natural event catastrophic for the culture, leading to its rapid collapse.
The robes were open to the navel, allowing their breasts to be left exposed.
The hieroglyphs disappeared at some point during the 17th century BCE (MM III).
This enabled the upper classes to continuously practice leadership activities and to expand their influence.
The oldest evidence of modern human inhabitants on Crete are preceramic Neolithic farming community remains that date to approximately 7000 BC.
More thorough field examinations have determined that no more than  of ash fell anywhere on Crete.
A number of compounds interpreted as 'Villas' have been excavated in Crete.
Others are inscriptions on religious objects associated with a cult.
Such activities are elaborated in artistic representations of the sea, including the 'Flotilla' fresco from room 5, in the west house at Akrotiri.
The Minoans developed oval- shaped holes in their tools to fit oval-shaped handles.
Another dating system, proposed by the Greek archaeologist Nicolas Platon, is based on the development of the architectural complexes known as "palaces" at Knossos, Phaistos, Malia and Kato Zakros.
There was a Minoan colony at Ialysos on Rhodes.
Scholars suggest the alignment was related to the sacred or ritual significance of the mountain, where a number of Peak Sanctuaries (spaces for public ritual) have been excavated (e.g., Petsophas).
Most of them were abandoned in LMI, but Minoan Karpathos recovered and continued with a Minoan culture until the end of the Bronze Age.
The Cretan diet included wild game.
Haralampos V. Harissis and Anastasios V. Harissis have suggested a completely different interpretation of these symbols.
This jug on the left is dated from the Late Minoan IB, or sixteenth century B.C.E.
Early theories proposed that ashfall from Thera on the eastern half of Crete choked off plant life, causing starvation of the local population.
This eruption was among the largest volcanic explosions in the history of civilization, ejecting approximately 60&nbsp;km3 of material and rating a 7 on the Volcanic Explosivity Index.
The north is thought to have been governed from Knossos, the south from Phaistos, the central eastern part from Malia, the eastern tip from Kato Zakros, and the west from Chania.
He divides the Minoan period into Pre-palatial, Proto-palatial, Neo-palatial and Post-palatial subperiods.
They are often represented by serpents, birds, poppies, and a somewhat vague shape of an animal upon the head.
They would have seen the usefulness of preserving a palace center like Knossos for their own use.
Crops including lettuce, celery, asparagus and carrots grow wild in Crete.
Each of the palaces excavated to date has its own unique features, but they also share features that set them apart from other structures.
The discovery of storage magazines within the palace compounds has prompted much debate.
The Thera eruption occurred during a mature phase of the LM IA period.
*Agia Triada – an administrative centre close to Phaistos
Connections between Egypt and Crete are prominent.
Smaller palaces have been found in other places.
Finally, archaeologist Cheryl Floyd concludes that Minoan "weapons" were tools used for mundane tasks such as meat-processing (Floyd, 1999).
Some scholars have suggested that these depictions represent the performance of 'harvest festivals' or ceremonies, as a means to honour the continued fertility of the soil.
In the Early Minoan period ceramics were characterised by linear patterns of spirals, triangles, curved lines, crosses, fish bone motifs, and such.
*Zominthos – a mountainous city in the northern foothills of Mount Ida
To judge from the palace sites, the island was probably divided into at least eight political units during the height of the Minoan period.
Two clay cups from Knossos have been found to have remnants of ink, and inkwells similar to the animal-shaped inkstands from Mesopotamia have also been found.
The eruption is believed to have severely affected the Minoan culture on Crete, although the extent of the effects has been debated.
The hieroglyphs came into use from MMI; they were used at the same time as the emerging Linear A from the 18th century BCE (MM II).
Though the vision created by Arthur Evans of a '''Pax Minoica''', a "Minoan peace", has been criticised in recent years, it is generally assumed there was little internal armed conflict in Minoan Crete itself, until the following Mycenaean period.
However, Karl Hoeck used the name ''Das Minoische Kreta'' already in 1825 for Volume II of his major work, ''Kreta'', which would appear to be the first known use of the term Minoan to mean ancient Cretan.
Evans' 1931 claim that the term was "unminted" before his use of it has been tagged a "brazen suggestion" by Karadimas and Momigliano.
Keith Branigan claimed that 95% of so-called Minoan weapons possessed hafting (hilts, handles) that would have prevented their use as weapons (Branigan, 1999).
Unless Eteocretan truly is its descendant, the Minoan language may have become extinct during the Greek Dark Ages, a time of economic and socio-political collapse.
Marine resources were also important in the Cretan diet.
Archaeological evidence suggests that the destruction of the island was due to fire damage.
At sites such as Knossos, where the town had developed to a considerable size, there is evidence of craft specialisation, indicating workshops.
Another eruption of the Thera volcano has been linked to this downfall, but its dating and implications remain controversial.
They argue that they were based on apiculture rather than religion.
Despite having found ruined watchtowers and fortification walls, Evans argued that there was little evidence for ancient Minoan fortifications.
The people imported date palm trees, and cats (used for hunting purposes) from Egypt.
The poet Homer recorded a tradition that Crete once had 90 cities.
On Crete, the Minoans led an apparently peaceful and prosperous existence that thrived on their sea-girt island.
The columns were also made of wood as opposed to stone, and were generally painted red.
Most older palaces had only one story and no representative facades.
The main older palaces are Knossos, Malia, and Phaistos.
Throughout this period the trend was towards individual burials, with some distinguished exceptions.
The Mycenaeans were a military civilization.
Sinclair Hood writes that the destruction of the Minoans was most likely due to an invading force.
On the other hand, Stella Chryssoulaki's work on the small outposts or 'guard-houses' in the east of the island represent possible elements of a defensive system.
During LMIIIA:1, Amenhotep III at Kom el-Hatan took note of ''k-f-t-w'' (Kaftor) as one of the "Secret Lands of the North of Asia".
Within these storage areas, numerous jars, jugs and vessels have been recovered, indicating the role of the complex as a potential re-distribution centre of agricultural produce.
Evans claims to have applied it, but not to have invented it.
The prevalence of edible molluscs in site material, and artistic representations of marine fish and animals, including the distinctive "Octopus" stirrup jar (LM IIIC), indicate an appreciation and occasional use of fish within the economy.
Some of the elements recorded in the Middle Minoan 'palaces' (Knossos, Phaistos and Mallia, for example) have precedents in earlier styles of construction in the Early Minoan period.
This oft used example shows the Minoan skill included intense but precise temperature, such that one could bond the gold to itself without it burning.
They continued to operate the economic system and bureaucracy of the Minoans.
Vasiliki ware and Kamares ware are notable examples of Minoan pottery.
As traders and artists, their cultural influence reached far beyond the island of Crete—throughout the Cyclades, to Egypt's Old Kingdom, to copper-bearing Cyprus, Canaan and the Levantine coasts beyond, and to Anatolia.
Overall, inhumation was the most popular form of burial; cremation does not seem to have been as popular.
Wild game can no longer be found on Crete.
The palaces fulfilled a plethora of functions: they served as centres of government, administrative offices, shrines, workshops, and storage spaces (e.g., for grain).
The palaces at Knossos, Phaistos, Malia, and Kato Zakros were destroyed.
Rather than associate absolute calendar dates for the Minoan period, archaeologists use two systems of relative chronology.
This is also referred to as "Zakro" in archaeological literature.
An example of this is seen at the "House on the Hill" at Vasiliki, dated to the Early Minoan II period.
(''explanation of abbreviations'')
The influence of the Minoan civilization outside Crete has been seen in the evidence of valuable Minoan handicraft items on the Greek mainland.
Since wood and textiles have vanished through decomposition, the best preserved, and so most easily learned from, surviving examples of Minoan art are its pottery, the palace architecture with frescos that include landscapes, stone carvings, and intricately carved seal stones.
Because most of these inscriptions are concise economic records rather than dedicatory inscriptions, the translation of Minoan remains a challenge.
In the Mycenean period, Linear A was replaced by Linear B, recording a very archaic version of the Greek language.
The Palace of Kato Zakro, for instance, indicates workshops that were integrated into the structure of the palace.
The Minoan eruption on the island of Thera (present-day Santorini about 100&nbsp;km distant from Crete) occurred during the LM&nbsp;IA period.
Based on archaeological evidence found on Crete, 21st century studies indicate that a massive tsunami, generated by the Theran eruption, devastated the coastal areas of Crete and destroyed many Minoan settlements.
The Minoan religion focused on female deities, with females officiating.
Such evidence contributes to the theory that the Minoan palatial system developed through economic intensification, where greater agricultural surplus could support a population of administrators, craftsmen and religious practitioners.
Using their functional navy and a well-equipped army they were capable of an invasion.
**Phaistos – the second largest palatial building on the island, excavated by the Italian school shortly after Knossos
Palaces (''anaktora'') are the best-known Minoan building types excavated on Crete.
Many trends and patterns within Minoan mortuary practice do not conform to this simple breakdown.
Architectural features such as ashlar masonry, orthostats, columns, open courts, staircases (implying upper stories), and the presence of diverse basins have been used to define palatial architecture.
*Fournu Korfi – a site on the south of the island
These hieroglyphs are often associated with the Egyptians, but they also show relation to several other writings from the region of Mesopotamia.
As Lucia Nixon said, "...we may have been over-influenced by the lack of what we might think of as solid fortifications to assess the archaeological evidence properly.
While some of these depictions of women may be images of worshippers and priestesses officiating at religious ceremonies, as opposed to deities, several goddesses appear to be portrayed.
Many archaeologists speculate that the eruption caused a crisis in Minoan civilization, making them vulnerable to conquest by the Mycenaeans.
Likely, Arthur Evans read the book, continuing the use of the term in his own writings and findings.
Significant Minoan remains have been found above the Late Minoan I era Thera ash layer, implying that the Thera eruption did not cause the immediate downfall of the Minoans.
Some of the major Minoan archaeological sites are:
They were U-shaped, with a big central court, and generally were smaller than later palaces.
The Neopalatial site of Kato Zakros, for instance, is located within 100 metres of the modern shore-line, situated within a bay.
Historian Will Durant dubbed the Minoans "the first link in the European chain," and their civilization has been referred to as the earliest of its kind in Europe.
Not all plants and flora would have a purely functional or economic utility.
The 'palace style' of the region around Knossos is characterised by a strong geometric simplification of naturalistic shapes and monochromatic paintings.
Ceiling timbers held up the roofs.
Pear, quince, and olive trees were also native.
Notable are the similarities between Late Minoan and Mycenaean art.
The use of bead necklaces, bracelets and hair ornaments is shown in the frescoes; and museums are filled with labrys pins.
They were mounted on a simple stone base and were topped with a pillow-like, round piece as a capital.
The Minoan trade in saffron, the stigma of a mutated crocus which originated in the Aegean basin as a natural chromosome mutation, has left fewer material remains: a fresco of saffron-gatherers at Santorini is well known.
This period (the 17th and 16th centuries BC, MM III / Neopalatial) represents the apex of the Minoan civilization.
A comparative study of DNA haplogroups of modern Cretan men showed that a male founder group, from Anatolia or the Levant, is shared with the Greeks.
*Gournia – a town site excavated in the first quarter of the 20th century by the American School
The overwhelming majority of tablets are written in the Linear B script, apparently being inventories of goods or resources.
*Mount Juktas – the greatest of the Minoan peak sanctuaries because of its association with the palace of Knossos
Archaeologist Jan Driessen, for example, said the Minoans frequently show 'weapons' in their art, but only in ritual contexts.
Although the demise of the flourishing civilization was aided by the erupting volcano on Thera, the ultimate end came from outside conquerors.
Philosopher of history Oswald Spengler felt all culture was a people's attempt to overcome the fear of death, and held the provocative thesis that the palaces were temples for a cult of the dead, with corpses sitting in its chairs.
This is located in the centre of Mallia's burial area and may have been the focus for burial rituals, or the 'crypt' for a notable family.
Certain locations within Crete emphasize it as an "outward looking" society.
Further building conventions could include storage magazines, a north-south orientation, a pillar room, a Minoan Hall system, a western court, and pier-and-door entrance ways.
The Minoans seem to have worshipped primarily goddesses, and their culture has been described as being based on a "matriarchal religion."
These are oriented along a north-south axis.
Due to its circular hole, the tool head would spin around on the handle.
The Minoan horn-topped altars, conventionally called "Horns of Consecration" ever since Evans coined the term, are represented in seal impressions, and survive in examples as far afield as Cyprus.
The palace in Knossos seems to have remained largely intact.
"We now know that the founders of the first advanced European civilization were European," said study co-author George Stamatoyannopoulos, a human geneticist at the University of Washington.
The relationship between these two systems is given in the accompanying table, with approximate calendar dates drawn from Warren and Hankey (1989).
These structures share many features with the central Palaces (i.e., a conspicuous western facade, storage facilities, and a 'Minoan Hall') of the Neopalatial era.
Minoan ceramics are found in Egyptian cities and the Minoans imported several items from Egypt, especially papyrus, as well as architectural and artistic ideas.
At the end of the MMII period (1700 BCE), there was a large disturbance in Crete, probably an earthquake, or possibly an invasion from Anatolia.
Although there is some evidence of male gods, depictions of Minoan goddesses vastly outnumber depictions of anything that could be considered a Minoan god.
The Bronze Age began in Crete around 2700 BCE.
The Minoan language and writing system (Linear A) remain undeciphered and a matter of academic dispute, but seemingly convey a language entirely different from the Greek dialects in later periods.
But scholars believe these resources were not as significant in relation to grain, olives and animal produce.
But, recent experimental testing of accurate replicas has shown this to be incorrect; these weapons were capable of cutting flesh down to the bone (and scoring the bone's surface) without any damage to the weapons themselves.
The Mycenaeans generally tended to adapt, rather than destroy, Minoan culture, religion and art.
The four large creatures on this spouted pitcher are argonauts which jauntily wave their tentacles in a rhythmic if unrealistic fashion.
Minoan buildings often had flat tiled roofs; plaster, wood, or flagstone floors, and stood two to three stories high.
However, Evans' statement applies to an archaeological context.
Minoans were traders, and their cultural contacts reached far beyond the island of Crete—to Egypt's Old Kingdom, to copper-bearing Cyprus, Canaan, and the Levantine coasts beyond, and to Anatolia.
Late palaces are characterised by multi-story buildings.
Mycenaean weaponry has been found in burials on Crete.
Minoan men wore loincloths and kilts.
This inherited trade pre-dated Minoan civilization: a sense of its rewards may be gained by comparing its value to frankincense, or later, to pepper.
These eras are further subdivided, for instance into Early Minoan I, II, III (EMI, EMII, EMIII).
See the article on dating the Thera eruption for more discussion.
Objects of Minoan manufacture suggest there was a network of trade with mainland Greece (notably Mycenae), Cyprus, Syria, Anatolia, Egypt, Mesopotamia, and westward as far as the coast of Spain.
By the end of the Second Palace Period, Minoan burial practice was dominated by two broad forms: 'Circular Tombs', or ''Tholoi'', (located in South Crete) and 'House Tombs', (located in the north and the east).
She denies earlier descriptions of Minoan religion as primitive, saying that it "was the religion of a sophisticated and urbanized palatial culture with a complex social hierarchy.
Its large number of workshops and the richness of its site materials indicate a potential 'entrepôt' for import and export.
Hood notes that the palace at Knossos appears to have experienced less damage than other sites along the island of Crete.
The MM palatial structure of Phaistos appears to align with Mount Ida, whilst Knossos is aligned with Juktas.
About Minoan warfare, Branigan concludes that "The quantity of weaponry, the impressive fortifications, and the aggressive looking long-boats all suggested an era of intensified hostilities.
Other supposed Minoan colonies, such as that hypothesised by Adolf Furtwängler for Aegina, were later dismissed by scholars.
Their more varied and healthy diet resulted in the growth of population.
Warfare such as there was in the southern Aegean early Bronze Age was either personalized and perhaps ritualized (in Crete) or small-scale, intermittent and essentially an economic activity (in the Cyclades and the Argolid/Attica) " (1999, p.&nbsp;92).
Minos was associated in Greek myth with the labyrinth, which Evans identified with the site at Knossos.
**Malia – the subject of French excavations, a palatial centre which affords a look into the development of the palaces in the protopalatial period
Clay tablets dating to around 3000 BCE were found with the various Cretan scripts.
The materials used in constructing the villas and palaces varied, and could include sandstone, gypsum, or limestone.
The Mycenaean conquest of the Minoans occurred in Late Minoan II period.
**Galatas – the most recently (in the early 1990s) confirmed palatial site
Radiocarbon dating has indicated a date in the late 17th century BCE; those radiocarbon dates, however, conflict with the estimates of archaeologists, who synchronize the eruption with the conventional Egyptian chronology and obtain a date of around 1525–1500 BCE.
Cretans hunted and ate wild deer and boar along with the meats made available to them by their livestock.
Linear B was successfully deciphered by Michael Ventris in 1952, but the earlier scripts remain a mystery.
(The famous citadels post-date the destruction of almost all Neopalatial Cretan sites.)
The process of fermenting wine from grapes is likely to have been a concern of the "Palace" economies, whereby such prestige goods would have been both important trade commodities as well as culturally meaningful items of consumption.
Hoeck had in mind the Crete of mythology.
On the Mainland of Greece at the time of the Shaft Graves at Mycenae, there is little evidence for major fortifications among the Mycenaeans there.
In late 2009, Minoan-style frescoes and other Minoan-style artifacts were discovered during excavations of the Canaanite palace at Tel Kabri, Israel, leading archaeologists to conclude that the Minoan influence was the strongest foreign influence on that Canaanite city state.
The Egyptian hieroglyphs served as a model for the Minoan pictographic writing, from which the famous Linear A and Linear B writing systems later developed.
They adopted pomegranates from the Near East, although not lemons and oranges, as is often thought.
After about a century of partial recovery, most Cretan cities and palaces went into decline in the 13th century BCE (LHIIIB/LMIIIB).
In the late 3rd millennium BCE, several localities on the island developed into centers of commerce and handwork.
**Kato Zakros – a palatial site excavated by Greek archaeologists in the far east of the island.
The frescos include many depictions of people, with the genders distinguished by colour: the men's skin is reddish-brown, the women's white.
Few signs of warfare appear in Minoan art.
A common architectural standard among the Middle Minoan 'palaces' was that they are aligned with their surrounding topography.
Evans's scheme divides the Minoan period into three main eras: Early Minoan (EM), Middle Minoan (MM), and Late Minoan (LM).
The term "Minoan" refers to the mythic "king" Minos of Knossos.
"The construction of fortified sites is often assumed to reflect a threat of warfare, but such fortified centres were multifunctional; they were also often the embodiment or material expression of the central places of the territories at the same time as being monuments glorifying and merging leading power" (Driessen 1999, p.&nbsp;16).
The neolithic population dwelt in open villages.
Equally, building techniques could also vary between different constructions; some palaces used ashlar masonry while others used roughly hewn megalithic blocks.
Equally, it is likely that the consumption of exotic or expensive products would have played a role in the presentation and articulation of political and economic power.
*Pseira – island town with ritual sites
Chester Starr points out in "Minoan Flower Lovers" (Hagg-Marinatos eds.
This suggests the importance of farming as an artistic motif.
The last Linear A archives date to LMIIIA (contemporary with LHIIIA).
The first such archive anywhere is in the LMII-era "Room of the Chariot Tablets".
The Minoan palace sites were occupied by the Mycenaeans around 1420 BCE (1375 BCE according to other sources), who adapted the Linear A Minoan script to the needs of their own Mycenaean language.
The west facades had sandstone ashlar masonry.
