There are plans to move all suburban rail traffic from Minsk-''Passazhyrski'' to the smaller stations, Minsk-
In January 1919 Minsk was proclaimed the capital of the Belorussian SSR, though later in 1919 (see Operation Minsk) and again in 1920, the city was controlled by the Second Polish Republic during the course of the Polish-Bolshevik war between 8 August 1919 and 11 July 1920 and again between 14 October 1920 and 19 March 1921.
GRP of Minsk measured in rubles was nearly 120×1012 (trillions or millions of millions; BYR 120 trillion ≈ USD 12.76 billion), or 23.7% of Gross domestic product of Belarus.
Some layout plans speculate on a possible fourth line running from Vyasnyanka to Serabranka micro-rayons.
The Old East Slavic name of the town was Мѣньскъ (i.e.
The government discourages official unemployment registration with tiny unemployment benefits (70 000 BYR ≈ $7 per month) and obligatory public works.
In 1871, a railway link between Moscow and Warsaw ran via Minsk, and in 1873, a new railway from Romny in Ukraine to the Baltic Sea port of Libava (Liepāja) was also constructed.
Minsk is in the area of mixed forests typical of most of Belarus.
In 1413, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland entered into a union.
They began migrating to Minsk in the 1970s, and more immigrants have joined them since.
According to the 1999 census, Belarusians make up 79.3% of the city's residents.
During peak hours trains run each 2–2.5 minutes.
Factories, municipal buildings, power stations, bridges, most roads and 80% of the houses were reduced to rubble.
In 1242, Minsk became a part of the expanding Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
Construction of the metro began in 1977, soon after the city reached over a million people, and the first line with 8 stations was opened in 1984.
The Svislach River, which flows across the city from the northwest to the southeast, is in the ''urstromtal'', an ancient river valley formed by water flowing from melting ice sheets at the end of the last Ice Age.
Its industrial development started in the 1860s and was facilitated by the railways built in the 1870s.
A small but prominent Arab community has developed in Minsk, primarily represented by recent economic immigrants from Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Algeria, etc.
Alexander Lukashenko's rivals in the 2010 presidential election were imprisoned in the KGB jail and other prominent politicians and civil activists.
1067 is now widely accepted as the founding year of Minsk.
The land of the airport is planned to be redeveloped for residential and commercial real estate, currently branded as Minsk-City.
Among them are the refurbishment of some streets and main avenues, the construction of more up-to-date hotels (one near the Palace of the Republic and Independence Palace on the shore of Lake Komsomolskoye), the demolition of the out-of-date Belarus hotel and the erection in the same premises of a complex consisting of sport facilities, swimming pool, 2 hotel towers and one business centre building with the help of potential foreign investors and the construction of a modern aquatic park in the outskirts of the city.
Working through local populations, Germans instituted deportation of Jewish citizens to concentration camps, murdering most of them there.
City authorities consider the date of 2 September 1067, to be the exact founding date of the city, though the town (by then fortified by wooden walls) had certainly existed for some time by then.
Other ethnic groups included Russians (22.8%), Jews (7.8%), Ukrainians (3.6%), Poles (1.1%) and Tatars (0.4%).
The earliest historical references to Minsk date to the 11th century (1067), when it was noted as a provincial city within the principality of Polotsk.
In 1655, Minsk was conquered by troops of Tsar Alexei of Russia.
Trams were the first public transport used in Minsk (since 1892&nbsp;– the horse-tram, and since 1929&nbsp;– the electric tram).
The latter figure may be not accurate as some local Belarusians were likely counted as Russians.
It has developed industrial and services sectors which serve the needs not only of the city, but of the entire nation.
Established in 1959 in north-west of the city.
Public transport fares are controlled by ''city's executive committee'' (city council).
Minsk-1 was expected to be closed in 2008 because of the noise pollution in the surrounding residential areas, but in the mid-2010 it is still functioning.
It was also one of the major centres of the Belarusian national revival, alongside Vilnia.
Metro lines have been extended, and the road system (including the Minsk BeltWay) has been improved.
Minsk was first mentioned in the name form ''Měneskъ'' (Мѣнескъ) in the Primary Chronicle for the year 1067 in association with the Battle on the River Nemiga.
According to the 1989 census, 82% percent of Minsk residents have been born in Belarus.
About 40% of the work force is still employed in the manufacturing sector.
When Belarus was under Polish rule, the names '''Mińsk Litewski''' 'Minsk of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania' and '''Mińsk Białoruski''' 'Minsk in Belarus' were used to differentiate this place name from Mińsk Mazowiecki 'Minsk in Masovia'.
Communists and sympathisers were killed or imprisoned, both locally and after being transported to Germany.
It received town privileges in 1499.
There are six smaller rivers within the city limits, all part of the Black Sea basin.
During the Soviet period, development of the industries was linked to suppliers and markets within the USSR, and the break-up of the union in 1991 led to a serious economic meltdown in 1991–1994.
The city was initially built on the hills, which allowed for defensive fortifications, and the western parts of the city are the most hilly.
In 1944, Minsk's population was reduced to a mere 50,000.
Trains use 243 standard Russian metro-cars.
The traditional minorities of Poles and Tatars have remained at much the same size (17,000 and 3,000 respectively).
Sometimes the maximum normative concentration of formaldehyde and ammonia in air is exceeded in Zavodski District.
Minsk is the major educational centre of Belarus.
It was also an important centre for the Eastern Orthodox Church.
From more than half the population of the city, the percentage of Jews dropped to less than 10% more than ten years after the war.
In 1441, the Polish-Lithuanian prince and future king Casimir IV included Minsk in a list of cities enjoying certain privileges, and in 1499, during the reign of his son, Alexander I Jagiellon, Minsk received town privileges under Magdeburg law.
The average altitude above sea level is .
For instance, all metro stations built since 2001 have passenger lifts from platform to street level, thus enabling the use of the newer stations by disabled passengers.
The initial wooden building was demolished in 1890 and rebuilt in stone.
The lowest temperature was recorded on 17 January 1940, at  and the warmest on 29 July 1936 at 35&nbsp;°C, and on 3 August 2014 at .
Numerous skilled Russians and other migrants from other parts of the Soviet Union migrated for jobs in the growing manufacturing sector.
Its surrounding villages were absorbed and rebuilt as ''mikroraions'', districts of high-density apartment housing.
The city also boasted theatres, cinemas, newspapers, schools and colleges, as well as numerous monasteries, churches, synagogues, and a mosque.
Other substantial ethnic groups were Russians (25.5%), Poles (11.4%) and Belarusians (9%).
After Germany invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, as part of Operation Barbarossa, Minsk immediately came under attack.
making it the 5th busiest metro network in the former USSR (behind Moscow, St. Petersburg, Kiev and Kharkiv).
Pinewood and mixed forests border the edge of the city, especially in the north and east.
Now it has 11 theatres and 16 museums.
Established in 1944 in south-eastern Minsk, is among major vehicle manufacturers in the CIS.
Established in 1946 in eastern Minsk, is among major manufacturers of wheeled tractors in the CIS.
Zavodski, Partyzanski and Leninski districts, which are situated in the southeastern part of Minsk, are the most polluted areas in the city.
All public transport is operated by Minsktrans, a government-owned and -funded transport not-for-profit company.
The Germans designated Minsk the administrative centre of ''Reichskomissariat Ostland''.
Its first theatres and libraries were established in the middle of the 19th century.
Over 70% of produced goods are exported from Belarus, especially to Russia and other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
*Horizont&nbsp;– specialised in producing TV-sets, audio and video electronics.
The last decades of the Polish rule involved decline or very slow development, since Minsk had become a small provincial town of little economic or military significance.
By the middle of the 16th century, Minsk was an important economic and cultural centre in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
The Russian and Ukrainian populations of Minsk peaked in the late 1980s (at 325,000 and 55,000 respectively).
''Uskhodni'' (East), Minsk-''Paudnyovy'' (South) and Minsk-''Paunochny'' (North), by 2020.
After the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, German forces occupied Minsk on 21 February 1918.
'''Minsk''' ( ; , , ) is the capital and largest city of the Republic of Belarus, situated on the Svislach and Nyamiha rivers.
*Minsk Tractor Plant&nbsp;– specialised in manufacturing tractors.
Belarusian traffic police ''DAI'' every year hold operation "Clean Air" to prevent the use of cars with extremely polluting engines.
There are 20 cinemas and 139 libraries.
Throughout its history Minsk has been a city of many languages.
A Workers' Soviet was established in Minsk in October 1917, drawing much of its support from disaffected soldiers and workers.
The settlement developed on the rivers.
A minor planet 3012 Minsk discovered by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh in 1979 is named after the city.
Continued migration from rural Belarus in the 1960s and 1970s changed the ethnic composition further.
It is an international airport with flights to Europe and the Middle East.
Throughout the year, most winds are westerly and northwesterly, bringing cool and moist air from the Atlantic.
Currently the number of vehicles in use by Minsktrans is 2.2 times higher than the minimum level.
During World War II the Minsk railway station was completely destroyed.
Minsk is located at the junction of the Warsaw-Moscow railway (built in 1871) running from the southwest to the northeast of the city and the Liepaja-Romny railway (built in 1873) running from the northwest to the south.
From 1982 it mainly served domestic routes in Belarus and short-haul routes to Moscow, Kiev and Kaliningrad.
However, the majority of overall air pollution is produced by cars.
The most prominent are immigrants from the Caucasus countries &ndash; Armenians, Azerbaijanis and Georgians each numbering about 2,000 to 5,000.
From 1919 to 1991, after the Russian Revolution, Minsk was the capital of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic within the Soviet Union.
The most commonly used and understood foreign language in Minsk, especially among the younger generation, is English.
In 1129, the Principality of Minsk was annexed by Kiev, the dominant principality of Kievan Rus; however in 1146 the Polotsk dynasty regained control of the principality.
According to 2010 results, Minsk paid 15 trillion BYR to state budget while the whole income from all other regions was 19.9 trillion BYR.
Minsk has a warm summer hemiboreal humid continental climate (Koppen ''Dfb''), owing to its location between the strong influence of the moist air of the Atlantic Ocean and the dry air of the Eurasian landmass.
Another factor in the shifting demographics of the city was the changing self-identification of Minsk residents of mixed ancestry&nbsp;– in independent Belarus they identify as Belarusians.
The rapid population growth was primarily driven by mass migration of young, unskilled workers from rural areas of Belarus, as well as by migration of skilled workers from other parts of the Soviet Union.
Minsk escaped the Mongol invasion of Rus in 1237–1239.
After the 1569 Polish–Lithuanian union, the city became a destination for migrating Poles (who worked as administrators, clergy, teachers and soldiers) and Jews (predominantly Ashkenazim, who worked in the retail trade and as craftsmen, as other opportunities were prohibited by discrimination laws).
Minsk receives annual precipitation of , of which one third falls during the cold period (as snow and rain) and two thirds in the warm period.
However, some Belarusian-speakers continue to use ''Miensk'' (spelled Менск) as their preferred name for the city.
Crime rate grew significantly in 2009 and 2010: for example, number of corruption crimes grew by 36% in 2009 alone.
In 2007 ridership of Minsk metro was 262.1&nbsp;million passengers,
By 1924, there were 29 factories in operation; schools, museums, theatres and libraries were also established.
During this period, Minsk was also a centre for the development of Belarusian language and culture.
In 1242, Minsk became a part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
The princes of Minsk and Polotsk were engaged in years of struggle trying to unite all lands previously under the rule of Polotsk.
(In many cases, they are graduates of Minsk universities who decide to settle in Belarus and bring over their families).
Minsk is the only city in Belarus with an underground metro system.
However, the recent industrial revival did not lead to updating technologies and equipment (as FDI was discouraged), therefore much of the local industry is not highly competitive by international standards.
Most residents of Minsk now use Russian exclusively in their everyday lives at home and at work, although Belarusian is understood as well.
Throughout the 1920s and the 1930s, Minsk saw rapid development with dozens of new factories being built and new schools, colleges, higher education establishments, hospitals, theatres and cinemas being opened.
The second wave of devastation occurred during the Great Northern War, when Minsk was occupied in 1708 and 1709 by the army of Charles XII of Sweden and then by the army of Peter the Great.
During its first centuries, Minsk was a city with a predominantly Early East Slavic population (the forefathers of modern-day Belarusians).
Crime detection level varies from 13% in burglary to 92% in homicide with an average 40.1%.
However, after 1569 the official language was Polish.
There are plans for a network with three lines totalling (based on present expansion plans)  of track with 45 stations and three train depots.
Russians governed the city until 1660 when it was regained by John II Casimir, King of Poland.
''Měnsk'' &lt; Early Proto-Slavic or Late Indo-European ''Mēnĭskŭ''), derived from a river name ''Měn'' (&lt;&nbsp;''Mēnŭ'').
Other major contaminants are Chromium-VI and nitrogen dioxide.
21.4% of residents came from central Belarus (Minsk Region).
As the capital of a newly independent country, Minsk quickly acquired the attributes of a major city.
The majority of Christians belong to the Belarusian Orthodox Church, which is the exarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church in Belarus.
Thus Minsk became an important rail junction and a manufacturing hub.
As of January 2008, Minsktrans used 1,420 buses, 1,010 trolleybuses and 153 tramway cars in Minsk.
By the end of the 19th century, residents in Minsk accepted increasing Russification.
*Minsk Automobile Plant&nbsp;– specialising in producing trucks, buses and mini-vans.
During the last centuries of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, many Minsk residents became polonised, adopting the language of the dominant Poles and assimilating to its culture.
Major industrial employers include:
Minsk is the largest transport hub in Belarus.
After the last war the development of the city was linked to the development of industry, especially of R&D-intensive sectors (heavy emphasis of R&D intensive industries in urban development in the USSR is known in Western geography as 'Minsk phenomenon').
Since the late 1990s, there have been improvements in transport and infrastructure, and a housing boom has been underway since 2002.
In 1569, after the Union of Lublin, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland merged into a single state, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
However, since the late 1930s Russian again began gaining dominance.
The Jewish community of Minsk suffered catastrophic losses in the Holocaust.
They cross at the Minsk-''Passazhyrski'' railway station, the main railway station of Minsk.
In the 1830s, major streets and squares of Minsk were cobbled and paved.
Commercial marshrutka's prices varies from 10000 to 12000 BYR.
The historical centre was replaced in the 1940s and 1950s by Stalinist architecture, which favoured grand buildings, broad avenues and wide squares.
By 1860, Minsk was an important trading city with a population of 27,000.
Some anti-Soviet residents of Minsk, who hoped that Belarus could regain independence, did support the Germans, especially at the beginning of the occupation, but by 1942, Minsk had become a major centre of the Soviet partisan resistance movement against the invasion, in what is known as the ''German-Soviet War''.
Minsk is the major cultural centre of Belarus.
Currently, there are 24 churches of various denominations in Minsk, with another 10 under either construction or renovation.
In modern Polish, ''Mińsk'' without an attribute usually refers to the city in Belarus, which is about 50 times bigger than Mińsk Mazowiecki; (cf.
Minsk hosted 2014 IIHF World Championship.
Single trip ticket for bus, trolleybus or tramway costs 5000 BYR (≈&nbsp;USD 0.25), 5500 BYR for metro and 6500 BYR for express buses.
Initially most of its residents spoke Ruthenian (which later developed into modern Belarusian).
Owing to the small size of the private sector in Belarus, most development has so far been financed by the government.
The Svislach River valley was the settlement boundary between two Early East Slav tribes&nbsp;– the Krivichs and Dregovichs.
Today only about 10,000 Jews live in Minsk.
The origin of the name is unknown but there are several theories.
The Jewish population of Minsk peaked in the early 1970s at 50,000 according to official figures; independent estimates put the figure at between 100,000 and 120,000.
The city was the centre of German resistance to the Soviet advance and saw heavy fighting during the first half of 1944.
It was part of a region annexed by the Russian Empire in 1793, as a consequence of the Second Partition of Poland.
At the time of the 1897 census under the Russian Empire, Jews were the largest ethnic group in Minsk, at 52% of the population, with 47,500 of the 91,000 residents.
Under the terms of the Peace of Riga, Minsk was handed back to the Russian SFSR and became the capital of the Belorussian SSR, one of the founding republics of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Minsk was, however, the site of one of the largest Nazi-run ghettos in the Second World War, temporarily housing over 100,000 Jews (see Minsk Ghetto).
Its weather is unstable and tends to change often.
The republic was short-lived; in December 1918, Minsk was taken over by the Red Army.
However, the First World War affected the development of Minsk tremendously.
By 1900, Minsk had 58 factories employing 3,000 workers.
Outside machine-building and electronics, Minsk also had textiles, construction materials, food processing, and printing industries.
Minsk became the headquarters of the Western Front of the Russian army and also housed military hospitals and military supply bases.
Among the top 10 taxpayers were five oil and gas companies (including two Gazprom's and one Lukoil's subsidiaries), two mobile network operators (MTS and Velcom), two companies producing alcoholic beverages (Minsk-Kristall and Minsk grape wines factory) and one producer of tobacco goods.
In January 2008, the city government announced several projects on its official website.
Currently most of the urban transport is being actively renovated and upgraded to modern standards.
Public buses have been used in Minsk since 1924, and trolleybuses since 1952.
In the period January 2013 to October 2013, 70.6% of taxes in the budget of Minsk were paid by non-state enterprises, 26.3% by state enterprises, and 1.8% by individual entrepreneurs.
Many dwellers are concerned for their safety at night and the strongest concern was expressed by residents of Chizhovka and Shabany microdistricts (both in Zavodski District).
The Principality of Minsk was established by one of the Polotsk dynasty princes.
Substantial numbers of recent migrants from the rural areas use Trasyanka (a Russo-Belarusian mixed language) in their everyday lives.
A small community of Romani, numbering about 2,000, are settled in suburbs of north-western and southern Minsk.
Construction of Minsk Metro began on 16 June 1977, and the system was opened to the public on 30 June 1984, becoming the ninth metro system in the Soviet Union.
*Minsk Refrigerator Plant (also known as Atlant)&nbsp;– specialised in manufacturing household goods, such as refrigerators, freezers, and recently also of washing machines.
In addition, a number of residential neighbourhoods are recognised in Minsk, called microdistricts, with no separate administration.
There was a construction boom that led to the building of 2 and 3-story brick and stone houses in ''Upper Town''.
Minsk metro had 28 stations and  of tracks.
Minsk is the economic capital of Belarus.
A programme of reconstruction and development was begun in 1922.
The average January temperature is , while the average July temperature is .
The metro network employs 3,200 staff.
Ales Michalevic, who was kept in this jail, accused the KGB of using torture.
The first railway connects Russia with Poland and Germany; the second connects Ukraine with Lithuania and Latvia.
It was rebuilt in 1945 and 1946 and served until 1991.
In the early years of the 20th century, Minsk was a major centre for the worker's movement in Belarus.
In the first three decades of the post-war years, the most numerous new residents in Minsk were rural migrants from other parts of Belarus; the proportion of ethnic Belarusians increased markedly.
As the national capital, Minsk has a special administrative status in Belarus and is the administrative centre of Minsk Region (voblast) and Minsk raion (district).
After the second partition of Poland-Lithuania in 1793, Minsk and its larger region became part of the Russian Empire.
Passengers are served by 8 tramway lines, over 70 trolleybus lines, and over 100 bus lines.
Many work in the retail trade in open-air markets.
There are no reliable statistics on the religious affiliations of those living in Minsk, or among the population of Belarus generally.
The Minsk city government in 2003 decreed that local transport provision should be set at a minimum level of 1 vehicle (bus, trolleybus or tram) per 1,500 residents.
Minsk became the centre of Minsk Voivodship (province).
Since the 1960s Minsk's population has also grown apace, reaching 1&nbsp;million in 1972 and 1.5&nbsp;million in 1986.
The Russians dominated the city's culture as had the Poles in earlier centuries.
Its construction was delayed due to financial difficulties; now, however, Minsk boasts one of the most modern and up-to-date railway stations in the CIS.
