Its success was rivalled by other touring variety troupes, such as ''"Silas Green from New Orleans".''
Minstrel instruments were also a mélange: African banjo and tambourine with European fiddle and bones In short, early minstrel music and dance was not true black culture; it was a white reaction to it.
He was a northern urban black man trying to live above his station by mimicking white, upper-class speech and dress—usually to no good effect.
The message was clear: do not worry about the slaves; they are happy with their lot in life.
Uncle Tom himself was frequently portrayed as a harmless bootlicker to be ridiculed.
Nevertheless, antislavery viewpoints sometimes surfaced in the guise of family members separated by slavery, runaways, or even slave uprisings.
Scenery grew lavish and expensive, and specialty acts like Japanese acrobats or circus freaks sometimes appeared.
Life on the road entailed "endless series of one-nighters, travel on accident-prone railroads, in poor housing subject to fires, in empty rooms that they had to convert into theaters, arrest on trumped up charges, exposed to deadly diseases, and managers and agents who skipped out with all the troupe's money."
Material from ''Uncle Tom's Cabin'' dominated beginning in 1853.
Alternatively, the master could die, leaving the old darky to mourn.
Depictions of East Asians began during the California Gold Rush when minstrels encountered Chinese out West.
When one character joked, "Jim, I tink de ladies oughter vote", another replied, "No, Mr. Johnson, ladies am supposed to care berry little about polytick, and yet de majority ob em am strongly tached to parties."
The University of Vermont banned the minstrel-like Kake Walk as part of the winter Carnival in 1969.)
When George Primrose and Billy West broke with Haverly's Mastodons in 1877, they did away with blackface for all but the endmen and dressed themselves in lavish finery and powdered wigs.
One sketch began with white men and American Indians enjoying a communal meal in a frontier setting.
Others complained that the minstrels had foregone their black roots.
All-black troupes followed as early as 1855.
Various stock characters always took the same positions: the genteel interlocutor in the middle, flanked by ''Tambo'' and ''Bones'', who served as the ''endmen'' or ''cornermen''.
When this company went to Europe, Gustave and Charles Frohman took the opportunity to promote their Callender's Consolidated Colored Minstrels.
Women's rights was another serious subject that appeared with some regularity in antebellum minstrelsy, almost always to ridicule the notion.
By the turn of the 20th century, the minstrel show enjoyed but a shadow of its former popularity, having been replaced for the most part by vaudeville.
Stephen Foster's "Old Uncle Ned" was the most popular song on this subject.
The instruments of the minstrel show were largely kept on, especially in the South.
One minstrel, usually a tenor, came to specialize in this part; such singers often became celebrities, especially with women.
Pat H. Chappelle (1869-1911) capitalized on this and created the first totally Black-owned Black Vaudeville Show, The Rabbit's Foot Comedy Company, with an all-black cast of great performers that elevated the level from minstrel to sophisticated, fun comedy, and successfully toured mainly the southwest and southeast, and performed also in New Jersey and New York City.
The Christy Minstrels established the basic structure of the minstrel show in the 1840s.
On the other hand, the fact that the minstrel show broached the subjects of slavery and race at all is perhaps more significant than the racist manner in which it did so.
Actress Olive Logan commented that some actors were "marvelously well fitted by nature for it, having well-defined soprano voices, plump shoulders, beardless faces, and tiny hands and feet."
The minstrel show as a complete evening's entertainment was born.
Eventually, several stock characters emerged.
Performers criticized Northern society and those they felt responsible for the breakup of the country, who opposed reunification, or who profited from a nation at war.
"My Old Kentucky Home" remains the state song of Kentucky.
Other jokes form part of the repertoire of modern comedians: "Who was that lady I saw you with last night?
They threw things at actors or orchestras who performed unpopular material, and rowdy audiences eventually prevented the Bowery Theatre from staging high drama at all.
As public opinion toward blacks changed, however, so did the minstrel stereotypes.
In the 1870s, white entrepreneurs bought most of the successful black companies.
The final act consisted of a slapstick musical plantation skit or a send-up of a popular play.
It also appeared on more respectable stages, most often as an ''entr'acte''.
Most troupes added jubilees, or spirituals, to their repertoire in the 1870s.
The most famous of these performers is probably Al Jolson, who took blackface to the big screen in the 1920s in films such as ''The Jazz Singer'' (1927).
It had more of a variety show structure.
Mammy was lovable to both blacks and whites, matronly, but hearkening to European peasant woman sensibilities.
Perhaps they felt in on the joke, laughing at the over-the-top characters from a sense of "in-group recognition".
The counterpart to the slave was the ''dandy'', a common character in the afterpiece.
In the early days of the minstrel show, this was often a skit set on a Southern plantation that usually included song-and-dance numbers and featured Sambo- and Mammy-type characters in slapstick situations.
As early as the 1820s, blackface performers called themselves "Ethiopian delineators"; from then into the early 1840s, unlike the later heyday of minstrelsy, they performed either solo or in small teams.
Germans, on the other hand, were portrayed favorably from their introduction to minstrelsy in the 1860s.
One commentator described a mostly uncorked black troupe as "mulattoes of a medium shade except two, who were light.
These black troupes were one of minstrelsy's last bastions, as more white actors moved into vaudeville.
This character, although usually in blackface, spoke in aristocratic English and used a much larger vocabulary.
These were further divided into sub-archetypes such as the mammy, her counterpart the old darky, the provocative mulatto wench, and the black soldier.
This new minstrelsy maintained an emphasis on refined music.
Their brand of minstrelsy differed from other entertainments only in name.
As the American Indians became intoxicated, they grew more and more antagonistic, and the army ultimately had to intervene to prevent the massacre of the whites.
However, as the war reached Northern soil, troupes turned their loyalties to the Union.
This change to respectability prompted theater owners to enforce new rules to make playhouses calmer and quieter.
:'''Interlocutor:''' I'm astonished at you, Why, the idea of a man of your mental caliber talking about such sordid matters, right after listening to such a beautiful song!
During the first, the entire troupe danced onto stage singing a popular song.
Most have been expunged of the exaggerated black dialect and the overt references to blacks.
His death and the pain it caused his master was a common theme in sentimental songs.
Eventually, similar performers appeared in entr'actes in New York theaters and other venues such as taverns and circuses.
Many minstrel tunes are now popular folk songs.
(Community amateur blackface minstrel shows persisted in northern New York State into the 1960s.
They decorated the stage with elaborate backdrops and performed no slapstick whatsoever.
The more popular groups stuck to the main circuit that ran through the Northeast; some even went to Europe, which allowed their competitors to establish themselves in their absence.
In 1843, four blackface performers led by Dan Emmett combined to stage just such a concert at the New York Bowery Amphitheatre, calling themselves the Virginia Minstrels.
They became the most popular black troupe in America, and the words ''Callender'' and ''Georgia'' came to be synonymous with the institution of black minstrelsy.
Although black minstrelsy lent credence to racist ideals of blackness, many African-American minstrels worked to subtly alter these stereotypes and to poke fun at white society.
However, in the 1850s minstrelsy became decidedly mean-spirited and pro-slavery as race replaced class as its main focus.
Minstrelsy's reaction to ''Uncle Tom's Cabin'' is indicative of plantation content at the time.
Shortly thereafter, Edwin Pearce Christy founded Christy's Minstrels, combining the refined singing of the Ethiopian Serenaders (epitomized by the work of Christy's composer Stephen Foster) with the Virginia Minstrels' bawdy schtick.
Individual black performers like Billy Kersands, James A.
The ''old darky'' or ''old uncle'' formed the head of the idyllic black family.
Beginning in the mid-1850s, performers did burlesque renditions of other plays; both Shakespeare and contemporary playwrights were common targets.
In 1845, the Ethiopian Serenaders purged their show of low humor and surpassed the Virginia Minstrels in popularity.
Chief among these were the slave, who often maintained the earlier name Jim Crow, and the dandy, known frequently as  Zip Coon, from the song Zip Coon.
The very structure of American entertainment bears minstrelsy's imprint.
This was the first large-scale appropriation and commercial exploitation of black culture by American whites.
To this end, he had to be able to gauge the mood of the audience and know when it was time to move on.
The blackface makeup and illustrations on programs and sheet music depicted them with huge eyeballs, very wide noses, and thick-lipped mouths that hung open or grinned foolishly; one character expressed his love for a woman with "lips so large a lover could not kiss them all at once".
He was acknowledged for playing some role in the war, but he was more frequently lampooned for bumbling through his drills or for thinking his uniform made him the equal of his white counterparts.
In short, the Virginia Minstrels and their imitators wanted to please a new audience of predominantly white, middle-class Northerners, by playing music the spectators would find familiar and pleasant.
And by introducing America to black dance and musical style, minstrels opened the nation to black cultural forms for the first time on a large scale.
Radio shows got into the act, a fact perhaps best exemplified by the popular radio shows ''Two Black Crows'', ''Sam 'n' Henry'', and ''Amos 'n' Andy'', A transcription survives from 1931 of ''The Blue Coal Minstrels'', which uses many of the standard forms of the minstrel show, including Tambo, Bones and the interlocutor.
With the advent of the American Civil War, minstrels remained mostly neutral and satirized both sides.
Around the time of the 1830s there was a lot of national conflict as to how people viewed African Americans.
Compounding the problem is the difficulty in ascertaining how much minstrel music was written by black composers, as the custom at the time was to sell all rights to a song to publishers or other performers.
Racial integrationists decried them as falsely showing happy slaves while at the same time making fun of them; segregationists thought such shows were "disrespectful" of social norms, portrayed runaway slaves with sympathy and would undermine the southerners' "peculiar institution".
Other minstrel troupes tried to satisfy outlying tastes.
Meanwhile, African-American actors were limited to the same old minstrel-defined roles for years to come and by playing them, made them more believable to white audiences.
Her main role was to be the devoted mother figure in scenarios about the perfect plantation family.
An arrogant, ostentatious figure, he dressed in high style and spoke in a series of malaprops and puns that undermined his attempts to appear dignified."
They happily shared their stupidity; one slave character said that to get to China, one had only to go up in a balloon and wait for the world to rotate below.
These songs remained relatively authentic in nature, antiphonal with a repetitive structure that relied heavily on call and response.
Formally educated African Americans, on the other hand, either disregarded black minstrelsy or openly disdained it.
Christy's company established the three-act template into which minstrel shows would fall for the next few decades.
He frequently cried about the loss of his home during the war, only to meet up with someone from the past such as the child of his former master.
Blackface soon found a home in the taverns of New York's less respectable precincts of Lower Broadway, the Bowery, and Chatham Street.
Troupes ballooned; as many as 19 performers could be on stage at once, and J. H. Haverly's United Mastodon Minstrels had over 100 members.
Upon the instruction of the ''interlocutor'', a sort of host, they sat in a semicircle.
The main target of criticism was the moral decay of the urbanized North.
All the while, the speaker moved about like a clown, standing on his head and almost always falling off his stump at some point.
By the late 1840s, a southern tour had opened from Baltimore to New Orleans.
By the 1890s, minstrelsy formed only a small part of American entertainment, and by 1919 a mere three troupes dominated the scene.
Many Northerners were concerned for the oppressed blacks of the South, but most had no idea how these slaves lived day-to-day.
The second part featured a variety of entertainments, including the pun-filled stump speech.
The four sat in a semicircle, played songs, and traded wisecracks.
African-American members of Congress were one example, pictured as pawns of the Radical Republicans.
The Rabbit's Foot Company was a variety troupe, originally founded in 1900 by an African American, Pat Chappelle, which drew on and developed the minstrel tradition while updating it and helping to develop and spread black musical styles.
"First performed by George Dixon in 1834, Zip Coon made a mockery of free blacks.
The afterpiece allowed the minstrels to introduce new characters, some of whom became quite popular and spread from troupe to troupe.
His 1930 film ''Mammy'' uses the setting of a traveling minstrel show, giving an on-screen presentation of a performance.
Likewise, when the sound era of cartoons began in the late 1920s, early animators such as Walt Disney gave characters such as Mickey Mouse (who already resembled blackface performers) a minstrel-show personality; the early Mickey is constantly singing and dancing and smiling.
One performance by Lane in 1842 was described as consisting of "sliding steps, like a shuffle, and not the high steps of an Irish jig."
He was usually better at retreating than fighting, and, like the dandy, he preferred partying to serious pursuits.
The emphasis lay on an idealized plantation life and the happy slaves who lived there.
White, working-class Northerners could identify with the characters portrayed in early blackface performances.
After the Civil War, the wench emerged as the most important specialist role in the minstrel troupe; men could alternately be titillated and disgusted, while women could admire the illusion and high fashion.
Slapstick humor pervaded the afterpiece, including cream pies to the face, inflated bladders, and on-stage fireworks.
Of course, Northern black characters carried these vices even further.
The second portion of the show, called the ''olio'', was historically the last to evolve, as its real purpose was to allow for the setting of the stage for act three behind the curtain.
The ''New Orleans Picayune'' wrote that a singing New Orleans street vendor called Old Corn Meal would bring "a fortune to any man who would start on a professional tour with him".
Over time, the first act came to include maudlin numbers not always in dialect.
Many amateur troupes performed only a few local shows before disbanding.
Troupes took advantage of this interest and marketed sheet music of the songs they featured so that viewers could enjoy them at home and other minstrels could adopt them for their act.
The ''wench'', ''yaller gal'' or ''prima donna'' was a mulatto who combined the light skin and facial features of a white woman with the perceived sexual promiscuity and exoticism of a black woman.
The songs were called "plantation melodies" or "Ethiopian choruses", among other names.
Other early minstrel performers quickly adopted Rice's character.
They were responsible and sensible, though still portrayed as humorous for their large size, hearty appetites, and heavy "Dutch" accents.
Women's rights, disrespectful children, low church attendance, and sexual promiscuity became symptoms of decline in family values and of moral decay.
Minstrel humor was simple and relied heavily on slapstick and wordplay.
Part of this positive portrayal no doubt came about because some of the actors portraying German characters were German themselves.
The term ''minstrel'' had previously been reserved for traveling white singing groups, but Emmett and company made it synonymous with blackface performance, and by using it, signalled that they were reaching out to a new, middle-class audience.
Blackface minstrelsy was the first theatrical form that was distinctly American.
A rival theater company paid people to "riot" and cause disturbances at the theater, and it was shut down by the police when neighbors complained of the commotion.
''Tom acts'' largely came to replace other plantation narratives, particularly in the third act.
In this pre-Emmett minstrelsy, the music "jangled the nerves of those who believed in music that was proper, respectable, polished, and harmonic, with recognizable melodies."
By using the black caricatures and so-called black music, the minstrels added a touch of the unknown to the evening's entertainment, which was enough to fool audiences into accepting the whole performance as authentic.
Charles Callender obtained Sam Hague's troupe in 1872 and renamed it Callender's Georgia Minstrels.
Even these were no haven, as whites sometimes used the cars for target practice.
These ''endmen'' (for their position in the minstrel semicircle) were ignorant and poorly spoken, being conned, electrocuted, or run over in various sketches.
The stump speech is an important precursor to modern stand-up comedy.
Typical blackface acts of the period were short burlesques, often with mock Shakespearean titles like "Hamlet the Dainty", "Bad Breath, the Crane of Chowder", "Julius Sneezer" or "Dars-de-Money".
In plantation material, aged black characters were rarely reunited with long-lost masters like they were in white minstrelsy.
These roles were almost always played by men in drag (most famously George Christy, Francis Leon and Barney Williams), even though American theater outside minstrelsy was filled with actresses at this time.
Blackface troupes responded by traveling farther and farther afield, with their primary base now in the South and Midwest.
Songs like the Virginia Minstrels' hit "Old Dan Tucker" have a catchy tune and energetic rhythm, melody and harmony; minstrel music was now for singing as well as dancing.
Similar to American people who come from all over the world creating one big ‘melting pot,’ it is only fitting that some of the first forms of truly American music and drama are composed of elements from many different places.
Circuits through the Midwest and as far as California followed by the 1860s.
''Mammy'' or the ''old auntie'' was the old darky's counterpart.
Another important legacy of minstrelsy is its music.
White curiosity proved a powerful motivator, and the shows were patronized by people who wanted to see blacks acting "spontaneously" and "naturally."
Following a pattern that had been pioneered by Rice, minstrelsy united workers and "class superiors" against a common black enemy, symbolized especially by the character of the black dandy.
With the Panic of 1837, theater attendance suffered, and concerts were one of the few attractions that could still make money.
Promoters seized on this, one billing his troupe as "THE DARKY AS HE IS AT HOME, DARKY LIFE IN THE CORNFIELD, CANEBRAKE, BARNYARD, AND ON THE LEVEE AND FLATBOAT."
Social commentary grew increasingly important to the show.
Dances like the Turkey Trot, the Buzzard Lope, and the Juba dance all had their origins in the plantations of the South, and some were popularized by black performers such as William Henry Lane, Signor Cornmeali ("Old Corn Meal"), and John "Picayune" Butler.
Author Constance Rourke even claimed that Forrest's impression was so good he could fool blacks when he mingled with them in the streets.
Jokes once delivered by endmen are still told today: "Why did the chicken cross the road?"
Minstrels stressed traditional family life; stories told of reunification between mothers and sons thought dead in the war.
Many of these actors were teen-aged boys.
Despite the elements of ridicule contained in blackface performance, mid-19th century white audiences, by and large, believed the songs and dances to be authentically black.
One gave a stump speech in dialect, and they ended with a lively plantation song.
To balance the somber mood, minstrels put on patriotic numbers like "The Star Spangled Banner", accompanied by depictions of scenes from American history that lionized figures like George Washington and Andrew Jackson.
Like other slave characters, he was highly musical and none-too-bright, but he had favorable aspects like his loving nature and the sentiments he raised regarding love for the aged, ideas of old friendships, and the cohesiveness of the family.
The white actors who portrayed these characters spoke an exaggerated form of Black Vernacular English.
There was an element of laughing with them for the audience, as they frequently made light of the interlocutor's grandiose ways.
Troupes performed skits about dying soldiers and their weeping widows, and about mourning white mothers.
On the other hand, these parts opened the entertainment industry to African-American performers and gave them their first opportunity to alter those stereotypes.
The inauthenticity of the music and the Irish and Scottish elements in it are explained by the fact that slaves were rarely allowed to play native African music and therefore had to adopt and adapt elements of European folk music.
The troupe first danced onto stage then exchanged wisecracks and sang songs.
Their clothing was a ludicrous parody of upper-class dress: coats with tails and padded shoulders, white gloves, monocles, fake mustaches, and gaudy watch chains.
There were many variants on the slave archetype.
At the height of Rice's success, ''The Boston Post'' wrote, "The two most popular characters in the world at the present are Queen Victoria and Jim Crow."
Her beauty and flirtatiousness made her a common target for male characters, although she usually proved capricious and elusive.
He had a somewhat aristocratic demeanor, a "codfish aristocrat", while the endmen exchanged jokes and performed a variety of humorous songs.
They certainly got many jokes that flew over whites' heads or registered as only quaint distractions.
Rice responded by adding a "Corn Meal" skit to his act.
Popular entertainment perpetuated the racist stereotype of the uneducated, ever-cheerful, and highly musical black well into the 1950s.
"Minstrelsy evolved from several different American entertainment traditions; the traveling circus, medicine shows, shivaree, Irish dance and music with African syncopated rhythms, musical halls and traveling theatre."
It survived as professional entertainment until about 1910; amateur performances continued until the 1960s in high schools and local theaters.
There were comic songs in which blacks were "roasted, fished for, smoked like tobacco, peeled like potatoes, planted in the soil, or dried up and hung as advertisements", and there were multiple songs in which a black man accidentally put out a black woman's eyes.
Female acts had made a stir in variety shows, and Madame Rentz's Female Minstrels ran with the idea, first performing in 1870 in skimpy costumes and tights.
Nevertheless, many troupes claimed to have carried out more serious "fieldwork".
They spent their time primping and preening, going to parties, dancing and strutting, and wooing women.
These allowed—by proxy, and without full identification—childish fun and other low pleasures in an industrializing world where workers were increasingly expected to abandon such things.
The interlocutor was responsible for beginning and ending each segment of the show.
Although white theatrical portrayals of black characters date back to as early as 1604, the minstrel show as such has later origins.
The show had little structure.
The humor of these exchanges came from the misunderstandings on the part of the endmen when talking to the interlocutor:
In contrast was the ''funny old gal'', a slapstick role played by a large man in motley clothing and large, flapping shoes.
The minstrel show texts sometimes even mixed black lore, such as stories about talking animals or slave tricksters, with humor from the region southwest of the Appalachians, itself a mixture of traditions from different races and cultures.
Performers danced, played instruments, did acrobatics, and demonstrated other amusing talents.
Tambo and Bones's simple-mindedness and lack of sophistication were highlighted by pairing them with a straight man master of ceremonies called the ''interlocutor''.
The ''Herald'' wrote that the production was "entirely exempt from the vulgarities and other objectionable features, which have hitherto characterized negro extravaganzas."
How much influence black music had on minstrel performance remains a debated topic.
By 1848, blackface minstrel shows were the national artform, translating formal art such as opera into popular terms for a general audience.
A few stories highlighted black trickster figures who managed to get the better of their masters.
Bland, Sam Lucas, Martin Francis and Wallace King grew as famous as any featured white performer.
These black companies often featured female minstrels.
