These unions between Chinese men and Portuguese women resulted in children of mixed Chinese Portuguese parentage, called Chinese-Portuguese.
The martial artist Bruce Lee had a Cantonese father and a Eurasian mother.
A 2006 study by Ismail Thanseem et al.
When native Peruvian women (cholas and natives, Indias, indígenas) and Chinese men had mixed children, the children were called injerto and once these injertos emerged, Chinese men then sought out girls of injertas origins as marriage partners, children born to black mothers were not called injertos.
Miscegenation was still common in Africa until the independence of the former Portuguese colonies in the mid-1970s.
The most notable American of mixed race is the current President of the United States, Barack Obama, who is the product of a mixed marriage between a black father and white mother.
Though still a racially stratified society there were no significant barriers to gene flow between the three populations.
This is an example of how modern migrations have begun to reduce the genetic divergence of the human species.
A considerable number of the population in the town of Cainta, Rizal, are descended from Indian soldiers who mutinied against the British Indian Army when the British briefly occupied the Philippines in 1762–63.
One example of an interracial liaison during colonial times involved Hyderabadi noblewoman Khair-un-Nissa and her relationship to Scottish resident James Achilles Kirkpatrick.
Later these laws also spread to colonies and states where slavery did not exist.
In addition, many ''Muladi'' were also descended from ''Saqaliba'' (Slavic) slaves taken from Eastern Europe via the Arab slave trade.
As for persons with patrilineal Jewish descent (i.e.
The 600,000-strong Anglo-Indian community was formed by British and Indian relationships.
There are even cases of Korean kings marrying princesses from abroad.
Eventually children who were enrolled in a Jewish congregation were also subject to discrimination as Geltungsjuden.
However, interracial marriage has become more common over the past decades due to increasing racial diversity, and liberalizing attitudes toward the practice.
From the tenth to twelfth century, Persian women were to be found in Guangzhou (Canton), some of them in the tenth century like Mei Zhu in the harem of the Emperor Liu Chang, and in the twelfth century large numbers of Persian women lived there, noted for wearing multiple earrings and "quarrelsome dispositions".
Gates speculated that the intermarriage/relations between migrant Chinese workers during the 19th century and black, or African-American slaves or ex-slaves may have contributed to her ethnic genetic make-up.
For example, the CIA lists Argentina's native population at 0.9%, Brazil's at 0.4%, and Uruguay's at 0%.
"A record 14.6% of all new marriages in the United States in 2008 were between spouses of a different race or ethnicity from one another.
The term's historical use in contexts that typically implied disapproval is also a reason why more unambiguously neutral terms such as ''interracial'', ''interethnic'' or ''cross-cultural'' are more common in contemporary usage.
One estimate for Chinese-Peruvian mixture is about 1.3–1.6 millions.
The idea of protecting British female chastity from the "lustful Indian male" had a significant influence on the policies of the British Raj in order to prevent racial miscegenation between the British females and the native Indian male population.
These words, much older than the term miscegenation, are derived from the Late Latin ''mixticius'' for "mixed", which is also the root of the Spanish word ''mestizo''.
These ideas are pursued in greater depth in Ashley Montagu's books on the subject.
An ambassador was sent to this miniature Chinese Court with a suggestion that the men should, in return for monies, present themselves before me with a view to their measurements being recorded.
Since there is no direct link between genetic makeup and religious affiliation, however, it is difficult to draw direct conclusions between their findings and forced or voluntary conversion.
The pamphlet was a hoax, concocted by Democrats, to discredit the Republicans by imputing to them what were then radical views that offended against the attitudes of the vast majority of whites, including those who opposed slavery.
According to official statistics —as reported by the National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples or CDI— Amerindians make up 10-14% of the population of Mexico.
Unlike the Macanese of Macao who are strictly of Chinese and Portuguese heritage, many Macanese living abroad are not entirely of Portuguese and Chinese ancestry.
The same study revealed that this population "was founded approximately 32–40 generations ago, with secondary and tertiary founder events occurring approximately 16–25 generations ago".
The reference to ''genus'' was made to emphasize the supposedly distinct biological differences between whites and non-whites, though all humans belong to the same genus, ''Homo'', and the same species, ''Homo sapiens''.
It is estimated that among Filipinos, 10%–20% have some Chinese ancestry and 1.5% are "full-blooded" Chinese.
Literature in Macao was written about love affairs and marriage between the Tanka women and Portuguese men, like "A-Chan, A Tancareira", by Henrique de Senna Fernandes.
After the Reconquista, which was completed in 1492, most of the Moors were forced to either flee to Islamic territories or convert to Christianity.
This view held sway in New Zealand until the late 1960s and 70s, when a revival and re-establishment of Māori culture and tradition coincided with a rejection of the majority opinion.
Many children of these unions formed enclaves under names such as Colored and Gens de couleur, etc.
But, like the Tan-ka people themselves, they are happily under the influence of a process of continuous re-absorption into the mass of the Chinese residents of the Colony.
In the event that a mixed marriage ended by the death of the so-called Aryan spouse or the divorce of the Jewish-classified spouse, the Jewish-classified spouse residing within Germany was usually deported soon after unless the couple still had minor children not counted as Geltungsjuden.
However, despite being told by the Japanese military that they would suffer rape, torture and murder at the hands of the Americans, Japanese civilians "were often surprised at the comparatively humane treatment they received from the American enemy."
Eventually children—whenever born—within a mixed marriage, as well as children from extramarital mixed relationships born until 31 July 1936, were discriminated against as Mischlinge or crossbreed.
Black female slaves also did not gain any freedom from such unions.
The children of such unions were often taken from their mothers and confined to "concentration camps" at Moore River and Carrolup, as a part of the policy known as Stolen Generations.
The number of interracial marriages in the U.S. increased by 65% between 1990 and 2000, and by 20% between 2000 and 2010.
Carl Smith's study in late 1960s on the protected women seems, to some degree, to support Ernest John Eitel's theory.
Foreign workers brought to Nazi Germany were treated as a danger to German blood.
Vikings explored and eventually settled in territories in Slavic-dominated areas of Eastern Europe.
Western men were refused by high class Chinese women, who did not marry foreigners.
''Miscegenation'' comes from the Latin ''miscere'', "to mix" and ''genus'', "kind".
From 1913 until 1948, 30 out of the then 48 states enforced such laws.
This is because the term was mainly used during the time period of al-Andalus to refer to local Iberians (Christians and pagans) who converted to Islam or whose ancestors had converted.
Intermarriage between Chinese men and native Malagasy women was not uncommon.
A 2004 study by Morar et al.
Paraiyan is also anglicized as "pariah".
Macanese men and women also married with the Portuguese and Chinese; as a result some Macanese became indistinguishable from the Chinese or Portuguese population.
These Chinese were mostly traders.
One important strategy intended to discourage the marriage of white Americans and Americans of partly African descent was the promulgation of the one-drop theory, which held that any person with any known African ancestry, however remote, must be regarded as "black."
But black men frequently married Mayan women in informal unions, which resulted in a significant population of mestizaje here and throughout the coastal region.
The only other option in Israel for the marriage of a halakhic Jew (Orthodox or not) to a non-Jew, or for that matter, a Christian to a non-Christian or Muslim to a non-Muslim, is for one partner to formally convert to the other's religion, be it to Orthodox Judaism, a Christian denomination or a denomination of Islam.
Unknown to European sellers, the women freed and married the men into their tribe.
As the majority of these intermarriages usually involve an Indian groom and Chinese bride, the majority of Chindians in Malaysia are usually classified as "Indian" by the Malaysian government.
Major Arab migration to the Philippines coincided with the spread of Islam in the region.
Therefore, there are no restrictions on interracial marriages between Jews of different Jewish ethnic divisions, or between other co-religionists of different races, although social stigma may still exist.
Also the study pointed out that "genetic drift and different levels and sources of admixture, appear to have played a role in the subsequent differentiation of populations".
It has also been argued that the first laws banning interracial marriage were a response by the planter elite to the problems they were facing due to the socio-economic dynamics of the plantation system in the Southern colonies.
Many new rules were set after the protests ended, including one where black men could only have one Chinese girlfriend at a time whose visits were limited to the lounge area.
A Han married a Uyghur woman in 1966 and had three daughters with her, and other cases of intermarriage also continued.
According to the American anthropologist Dr. H. Otley Beyer, the ancestry of Filipinos is 2% Arab.
Such intermarriages were particularly common in the Emirate of Sicily, where one writer visiting the place in the 970s expressed shock at how common it was in rural areas.
Moreover, a form of the inherited disorder congenital myasthenia is found in Romani subjects.
The majority of Hawaiian Chinese were Cantonese migrants from Guangdong with a minority from Hakka.
Filipino-Muslim royal families from the Sultanate of Sulu and the Sultanate of Maguindanao claim Arab descent even going as far as claiming direct lineage from Muhammad.
The All India Digest said that when a Chinese man married a Burmese woman, it must be proved that he adopted and followed the Burmese form of Buddhism before assuming that he followed Burmese Buddhism and that since many Chinese in Burma adopted Burmese names, adoption of a Burmese name was not proof enough for his adopting Burmese Buddhism, therefore, Chinese Buddhist customary law must be followed in cases involving.
See also this table:
Thomas Jefferson's policy proposal for dealing with Native Americans was "to let our settlements and theirs meet and blend together, to intermix, and become one people."
Anyone whose ancestors had miscegenated with the Moors or Jews were suspected of secretly practicing Islam or Judaism, so were often particularly monitored by the Inquisition.
After the war began, the race defilement law was extended to include all foreigners.
In Cameron County, 38% of black people were interracially married (7/18 families) while in Hidalgo County the number was 72% (18/25 families).
Throughout American history, there has been frequent mixing between Native Americans and black Africans.
This began with the arrival of Portuguese ships to Japan in the 16th century.
From the tenth to twelfth century, Persian women were to be found in Guangzhou (Canton), some of them in the tenth century like Mei Zhu in the harem of the Emperor Liu Chang, and in the twelfth century large numbers of Persian women lived there, noted for wearing multiple earrings and "quarrelsome dispositions".
Sex tourism has emerged in the late 20th century as a controversial aspect of Western tourism and globalization.
In the aftermath of the 1919 Amritsar Massacre, the long-held stereotype of Indian males as dark-skinned rapists lusting after white British females was challenged by several novels such as ''A Passage to India'' (1924) and ''The Jewel in the Crown'' (1966), both of which involve an Indian male being wrongly accused of raping a British female.
In the 1920s an additional 30000 Cantonese and small groups of Japanese arrived; both immigrations were exclusively male, and there was rapid mingling with white, black, and mulato populations.
Prior to the European conquest of the Americas the demographics of Latin America was naturally 100% American Indian.
A study conducted by the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology in 2009 (in collaboration with Harvard Medical School, Harvard School of Public Health and the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT) analyzed half a million genetic markers across the genomes of 132 individuals from 25 ethnic groups from 13 states in India across multiple caste groups.
6,423 Korean women married US military personnel as war brides during and immediately after the Korean War.
''Non-Aryans'' comprised mostly Jewish Germans and Gentile Germans of Jewish descent.
In the frontier districts of Sichuan, numerous half Chinese-Tibetans were found.
As of 2005, it is estimated that nearly half of British-born African-Caribbean males, a third of British-born African-Caribbean females, and a fifth of Indian and African males, have white partners.
15.7% of blacks, 24.4% of whites and 27.6% of ''Pardos'' (mixed-race/brown) married someone whose race was different from their own.
The cosmopolitan exchange was facilitated by the marriage of Vietnamese women to Portuguese merchants.
A Tican is also a white person with small amount of non-white blood, like Castizo.
''The Times'' has also reported on a vigilante parents’ group policing the Jerusalem neighborhood of Pisgat Ze'ev to intimidate and discourage local Arab-Jewish couples.
In addition, Burma has an estimated 52,000 Anglo-Burmese people, descended from British and Burmese people.
The Portuguese encouraged Chinese migration to Macao, and most Macanese in Macao were formed from intermarriages between Portuguese and Chinese.
In Escuintla (called Escuintepeque at the time), the Pipil-speaking natives who lived at higher elevations tended to live away from the lowland coastal hot lands where black and mulatto men were concentrated.
98% of the Chinese traced their origin from Guangdong—more specifically, the Cantonese district of Shunde.
In South Africa there are big mulatto communities like the Coloureds and Griqua formed by White colonists taking native African wives.
The Nanjing protests lasted from Christmas Eve of 1988 to January 1989.
A Chinese was spotted with a "young" and "good looking" Uyghur wife and another Chinese left behind his Uyghur wife and child in Khotan.
Miscegenation was a deliberate policy of the Western Australian Protector of Aborigines, A. O. Neville, who hoped to "breed out" Aboriginal characteristics from the growing "half caste" population of Aborigines in Western Australia.
The 1921 census in Mauritius counted that Indian women there had a total of 148 children fathered by Chinese men.
Due to Islamic marital law allowing a Muslim male to marry Christian and Jewish females, it was common in the Ottoman Empire for Turkish males to intermarry with European females.
Around half of them belong to 'local boy' families, Muslims of mixed Chinese and South Asian ancestry, descended from early Indian/Pakistani Muslim immigrants who took local Chinese wives and brought their children up as Muslims.
After successive generations of European gene flow, non-white admixture levels would drop below levels at which skin color or physical appearance is not affected thus allowing individuals to identify as white.
In countries such as Chile and Colombia almost the entire white population was shown to have some non-white admixture
This means that the majority of the intermixing were between black African males and Austronesian females.
As a result, many countries in the Americas have significant and complex multiracial populations.
In 1906 the ''New York Times'' (6 August) reported that 300 white women (Irish American) were married to Chinese men in New York, with many more cohabited.
Many Chinese men, even those who had left wives and children behind in China, married local women in the 1920s, especially those women who had been widowed during the wars and upheavals of the previous decade.
The small population of mixed descendants of Indian males and local Burmese females are called "Zerbadees", often in a pejorative sense implying mixed race.
Their descendants are today known as the Hui people.
Private companies were forbidden to employ more than 12% Jews.
Price quoted this from a history by H.H.
250,000 Hungarian Jews lost their income.
When Native Americans invaded the European colony of Jamestown, Virginia in 1622, they killed the Europeans but took the African slaves as captives, gradually integrating them.
Interracial relationships were also despised after the events of India's First War of Independence, where Indian sepoys rebelled against the British East India Company.
The Philippines were originally settled by Australoid peoples called Negritos (different from other australoid groups) which now form the country's aboriginal community.
In addition many Africans were shipped to regions all over the Americas and were present in many of the early voyages of the conquistadors.
King made publicly available on the Education Resources Information Center, White female-Black male and White female-Asian male marriages are more prone to divorce than White-White pairings.
The small population of mixed descendants of Indian males and local Burmese females are called "Zerbadees", often in a pejorative sense implying mixed race.
The Romani in Britain intermarried with the local population and became known to the Romani as the Romanichal.
To be spared from those, one had to prove one's affiliation with the group of the ''Aryan race'', as conceived by the Nazis.
By 950 AD these settlements were largely Slavicized through intermarriage with the local population.
During World War II, Japanese soldiers engaged in war rape during their invasions across East Asia and Southeast Asia.
A similar preservation of a highly resolved male lineage has been reported elsewhere only for Jewish priests".
A 2002 study conducted in Puerto Rico suggests that over 61% of the population possess Amerindian mtDNA.
According to the American anthropologist Dr. H. Otley Beyer, the ancestry of Filipinos is 2% Arab.
''Lakmé'', an opera by the Frenchman Léo Delibes, deals with the romantic relationship between the British officer Gérald and the daughter of a Hindu high priest Lakmé (Laxmi in Sanskrit).
There are efforts to open an African-Chinese school but it would first require government authorization.
There has been a Chinese presence in the Philippines since the 9th century.
Only one Chinese man was recorded marrying an American woman.
However, 2,600 from all over the Reich were deported to Theresienstadt, of whom most survived the last months until their liberation.
More than 20,000 Indonesian women and nearly 300 Dutch women were so treated.
In both cases, they often intermarried with the local population in Goa.
Kwan was of Eurasian origin, born in 1939 in Hong Kong to a father who was a Cantonese architect and mother who is a model of British and Scottish descent.
Thus the Comte de Montlosier, in exile during the French Revolution, equated class difference in 18th-century France with racial difference.
In the Ottoman Empire, in addition to the Ottoman elites often taking large numbers of European wives and concubines (see Southeastern and Eastern Europe section), there were also opportunities for the reverse, when the empire recruited young Christian boys (Europeans and Christian Arabs) to become the elite troops of the Turkish Empire, the Janissaries.
This phenomenon has resulted in a potpourri of cultures in both states where many people claiming to be of native descent have some Chinese blood in them, and many Chinese have native blood in them.
Japanese society, with its ideology of homogeneity, has traditionally been intolerant of ethnic and other differences.
Chinese men also married Turkic Uyghur women in Xinjiang from 1880 to 1949.
Many Chinese became Macanese simply by converting to Catholicism, and had no ancestry from Portuguese, having assimilated into the Macanese people.
The offspring of these mixed marriages are called 'Sino-(name of tribe)', e.g.
A philosophy of whitening emerged in which Amerindian and African culture was stigmatized in favor of European values.
Due to the majority of these immigrants being male, some decided to intermarry with local Chinese females.
In the CIA World Factbook: Cuba (15 May 2008) the authors estimated 114,240 people with Chinese-Cuban ancestry and only 300 pure Chinese.
The Crusaders originated from European kingdoms, mostly France, England and the Holy Roman Empire.
The second anti-Jewish law (May 5, 1939), for the first time, defined Jews racially: people with 2, 3 or 4 Jewish-born grandparents were declared Jewish.
The reply which came back was in its way racially characteristic as between Hindus and Chinese.
For example, the Deoksu Jang clan, claiming some 30,000 Korean members, views Jang Sunnyong, a Central Asian who married a Korean female, as their ancestor.
British Chinese women (30%) were twice as likely as their male counterparts (15%) to marry someone from a different ethnic group.
With this ruling, these laws were no longer in effect in the remaining 16 states that still had them.
The pamphlet was entitled ''Miscegenation: The Theory of the Blending of the Races, Applied to the American White Man and Negro''.
Violation of this was condemned as ''Rassenschande'' (lit.
Today mixed-race marriages have a mixed perception in the Philippines.
Chinese men were sought out as husbands and considered a "catch" by the "dusky damsels" (Peruvian women) because they were viewed as a "model husband, hard-working, affectionate, faithful and obedient" and "handy to have in the house", the Peruvian women became the "better half" instead of the "weaker vessel" and would command their Chinese husbands "around in fine style" instead of treating them equally, while the labor contract of the Chinese coolie would be nullified by the marriage, the Peruvian wife viewed the nullification merely as the previous "master" handing over authority over the Chinese man to her as she became his "mistress", keeping him in "servitude" to her, speedily ending any complaints and suppositions by the Chinese men that they would have any power in the marriage.
One survey revealed that 19% of black males had engaged in sexual activity with white women.
One of the earliest foreign groups to arrive in the region were the Indo-European Celts who intermarried with the pre-Indo-European Iberians in prehistoric Iberia.
Inter-ethnic sexual slavery still continues today in a smaller form in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, where women and children are trafficked from the post-Soviet states, Eastern Europe, Far East, Africa, South Asia and other parts of the Middle East.
The term ''miscegenation'' has been used since the 19th century to refer to interracial marriage and interracial sexual relations, and more generally to the process of genetic admixture.
Inter-faith relationships were opposed by 95 percent of Haredi Jews, 88 percent of traditional and religious Jews and 64 percent of secular Jews.
During the revival of Māori culture and tradition this belief began to be challenged by redefining "Māori" as an ethnic identity as opposed to a racial category.
Arabs played a big role in the African slave trade and unlike the trans-atlantic slave trade most of the black African slaves in the Arab slave trade were women.
Very rarely did Chinese women of higher status agree to marry a Westerner.
Since ethnic Mexicans were considered white by Texas officials and the U.S. government, such marriages were a violation of the state's anti-miscegenation laws.
Some Chinese officials from the Song Dynasty era also married women from Dashi (Arabia).
The relationship between Africans and Native-Americans was seen as a threat to Europeans and European-Americans, who actively tried to divide Native-Americans and Africans and put them against each other.
Their Ottoman Turkish descendants went on to annex the Balkans and much of Eastern Europe in the 15th and 16th centuries.
This led to a sexual imbalance between African men and women in Argentine.
From the 15th century, Chinese, Korean and other Far Eastern visitors frequented brothels in Japan.
The Barbary pirates also captured 1,250,000 slaves from Western Europe and North America between the 16th and 19th centuries.
Some Chinese soldiers had Uyghur women as temporary wives, and after the man's military service was up, the wife was left behind or sold, and if it was possible, sons were taken, and daughters were sold.
There is a small but growing population of mixed marriages between male African (mostly Nigerian) traders and local Chinese women in the city of Guangzhou where it is estimated that in 2013 there are 400 African-Chinese families.
The first, promulgated on May 29, 1938, restricted the number of Jews in each commercial enterprise, in the press, among physicians, engineers and lawyers to twenty percent.
In the 6th century, the region was reconquered by the Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire), when Byzantine Greeks also settled there, before the region was lost again to the Visigothic Kingdom less than a century later.
From the mid 19th to 20th centuries, many black people and ethnic Mexicans intermarried with each other in the Lower Rio Grande Valley in South Texas (mostly in Cameron County and Hidalgo County).
Most of them lost their right to vote as well: before the second Jewish law, about 31% of the Jewish population of Borsod county (Miskolc excluded), 2496 people had this right.
After the war, similar charges were used by white segregationists against advocates of equal rights for African Americans.
In fact, in those days, the matrimonial context of production was usually constituted by Chinese women of low socio-economic status who were married to or concubines of Portuguese or Macanese men.
Although reluctant at first, the Spanish government eventually legalized interracial marriage (which applied to all unions).
All the samples were white and black Cubans.
Unlike in the United States, there were no anti-miscegenation policies in Latin America.
Sir Richard Francis Burton writes during his expedition to Africa about relationships between black women and white men.
The state, fearing fraud marriages, has strictly regulated matters.
Africa has a long history of interracial mixing with male Arab and European explorers, traders and soldiers having sexual relations with black African women as well as taking them as wives.
Japanese girls would be purchased in Japan by Portuguese men.
Interracial marriage is still relatively uncommon, despite the increasing rate.
According to the research, invading European populations were predominantly male who intermarried with local females and formed the upper castes, i.e., the local females had upward mobility in caste which was denied to local males.
Intermarriage with Spanish people later became more prevalent after the Philippines was colonized by the Spanish Empire.
The Iranian Jassic people came to Hungary together with the Cumans after they were defeated by the Mongols.
The occupation set new relationship models for Japanese men and women: the practice of modern "dating" spread, and activities such as dancing, movies, and coffee were not limited to "pan pan girls" and American troops anymore, and became popular among young Japanese couples.
A genetic anthropological study known as The Genographic Project has found what is believed to be faint genetic traces left by medieval Crusaders in the Middle East.
The plaintiffs in ''Loving v. Virginia'', Mildred Jeter and Richard Loving became the historically most prominent interracial couple in the US through their legal struggle against this act.
Opinions in the U.S on the desirability of such intermixing, including that between white Protestants and Irish Catholic immigrants, were divided.
In 1684 some of these Dutch wives were still captives of the Chinese.
When Burma was ruled by the British India administration, millions of Indians, mostly Muslim, migrated there.
During the Siege of Fort Zeelandia in which Chinese Ming loyalist forces commanded by Koxinga besieged and defeated the Dutch East India Company and conquered Taiwan, the Chinese took Dutch women and children prisoner.
All these laws primarily banned marriage between persons of different racially or ethnically defined groups, which was termed "amalgamation" or "miscegenation" in the U.S.
