River development was stimulated by a variety of factors, first by growing demand for electricity in the rural northwestern parts of the basin, and also by floods and droughts that plagued rapidly growing agricultural and urban areas along the lower Missouri River.
The Missouri then passes through Canyon Ferry Lake, a reservoir west of the Big Belt Mountains.
Many of the run-of-the-river dams on the Missouri (marked in yellow) form very small impoundments which may or may not have been given names; those unnamed are left blank.
Left without their primary source of sustenance, many of the remaining indigenous people were forced onto  resettlement areas and reservations, often at gunpoint.
Along with nearly 100 smaller dams on tributaries, namely the Bighorn, Platte, Kansas, and Osage Rivers, the system provides irrigation water to nearly  of land.
All dams are on the upper half of the river above Sioux City; the lower river is uninterrupted due to its longstanding use as a shipping channel.
Safer paths were blazed to the Great Salt Lake near Corinne, Utah during the gold rush period, which led to the large-scale settlement of the Rocky Mountains region and eastern Great Basin.
Although some freight was hauled overland, most transport to and from the gold fields was done through the Missouri and Kansas Rivers, as well as the Snake River in western Wyoming and the Bear River in Utah, Idaho and Wyoming.
However, the basin does support about 300 species of birds and 150 species of fish, some of which are endangered such as the pallid sturgeon.
The Missouri's nickname, the "Big Muddy", was inspired by its enormous loads of sediment or silt – some of the largest of any North American river.
The construction of dams and levees has drastically reduced this to  in the present day.
The trail, which spans through eleven U.S. states, is maintained by various federal and state government agencies; it passes through some 100 historic sites, notably archaeological locations including the Knife River Indian Villages National Historic Site.
In the early decades before the river's flow was controlled by man, its sketchy rises and falls and its massive amounts of sediment, which prevented a clear view of the bottom, wrecked some 300 vessels.
The Continental Divide, running along the spine of the Rocky Mountains, forms most of the western border of the Missouri watershed.
For most, the route took them up the Missouri to Omaha, Nebraska, where they would set out along the Platte River, which flows from the Rocky Mountains in Wyoming and Colorado eastwards through the Great Plains.
A 2010 National Research Council report assessed the roles of sediment in the Missouri River, evaluating current habitat restoration strategies and alternative ways to manage sediment.
However, a large endorheic drainage called the Great Divide Basin exists between the Missouri and Green watersheds in western Wyoming.
In 1940, as part of the Great Depression-era New Deal, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) completed Fort Peck Dam in Montana.
As with many other treaties between the U.S. and Native Americans, they were soon broken, leading to huge wars.
In the 1950s, construction commenced on the five mainstem dams – Garrison, Oahe, Big Bend, Fort Randall and Gavins Point – proposed under the Pick-Sloan Plan.
Historically, the thousands of square miles that comprised the floodplain of the Missouri River supported a wide range of plant and animal species.
The United States Geological Survey operates fifty-one stream gauges along the Missouri River.
"The Missouri's temperament was uncertain as the actions of a jury or the state of a woman's mind."
Many U.S. national parks, such as Glacier National Park, Rocky Mountain National Park, Yellowstone National Park and Badlands National Park are, at least partially, in the watershed.
"Missouri River shipping never achieved its expectations.
Foreign diseases brought by settlers, such as smallpox, raged across the land, decimating Native American populations.
It slows into the Lake Oahe reservoir just before the Cannonball River confluence.
Farther on, the river passes through the Fort Peck Dam, and immediately downstream, the Milk River joins from the north.
Low oxygen levels in rivers and the vast Gulf of Mexico dead zone at the end of the Mississippi Delta are both results of high nutrient concentrations in the Missouri and other tributaries of the Mississippi.
The Missouri swings east at Kansas City, where the Kansas River enters from the west, and so on into north-central Missouri.
Although they became the first Europeans to travel the entire length of the Missouri and reach the Pacific Ocean via the Columbia, they found no trace of the Northwest Passage.
However, high and low water cycles of the Missouri – notably the protracted early-21st-century drought in the Missouri River basin and historic floods in 1993 and 2011 – are difficult for even the massive Mainstem System reservoirs to control.
The use of the horse allowed them to travel greater distances, and thus facilitated hunting, communications and trade.
During the 20th century, the Missouri River basin was extensively developed for irrigation, flood control and the generation of hydroelectric power.
Holter Dam, about  downstream of Helena, was the third hydroelectric dam built on this stretch of the Missouri River.
and middle and lower sections that flowed eastward down the regional slope.
"I never saw anything more terrific," Jolliet wrote, "a tangle of entire trees from the mouth of the Pekistanoui Missouri with such impetuosity that one could not attempt to cross it without great danger.
Flowing eastwards through the plains of eastern Montana, the Missouri receives the Poplar River from the north before crossing into North Dakota where the Yellowstone River, its greatest tributary by volume, joins from the southwest.
Meriwether Lewis and William Clark began their famed expedition in 1804 with a party of thirty-three people in three boats.
Channelization of the lower Missouri waters has made the river narrower, deeper and less accessible to riparian flora and fauna.
This event was particularly destructive as it submerged manufacturing plants in Omaha and Kansas City, greatly delaying shipments of military supplies in World War II.
"~Richard Opper, former Missouri River Basin Association executive director
From the Rocky Mountains of Montana and Wyoming, three streams rise to form the headwaters of the Missouri River.
In 1803, Jefferson instructed Meriwether Lewis to explore the Missouri and search for a water route to the Pacific Ocean.
When combined with the lower Mississippi River, it forms the world's fourth longest river system.
the Missouri River's catchment encompasses nearly one-sixth of the area of the United States or just over five percent of the continent of North America.
Lisa and his crew traveled up the Missouri and Yellowstone Rivers, trading manufactured items in return for furs from local Native American tribes, and established a fort at the confluence of the Yellowstone and a tributary, the Bighorn, in southern Montana.
In addition, they later learned that the Mississippi drained into the Gulf of Mexico and not the Pacific as they had originally presumed; the expedition turned back about  short of the Gulf at the confluence of the Arkansas River with the Mississippi.
The river then rounds the northern side of St. Louis to join the Mississippi River on the border between Missouri and Illinois.
Fur trapping activities in the early 19th century encompassed nearly all of the Rocky Mountains on both the eastern and western slopes.
Many of the earlier vessels were built on the Ohio River before being transferred to the Missouri.
During the 1860s, gold strikes in Montana, Colorado, Wyoming and northern Utah attracted another wave of hopefuls to the region.
Immediately before the Quaternary Ice Age, the Missouri River was likely split into three segments: an upper portion that drained northwards into Hudson Bay,
Drought conditions lifted in 2010, in which about  were barged on the Missouri, representing the first significant increase in shipments since 2000.
The two set out along the Missouri, and established Fort Charles about  south of present-day Sioux City as a winter camp in 1795.
This resulted in frequent raids, massacres and armed conflicts, leading to the federal government creating multiple treaties with the Plains tribes, which generally involved establishing borders and reserving lands for the indigenous.
The Sloan plan, which stressed the development of local irrigation, included provisions for roughly 85 smaller dams on tributaries.
Fifteen dams impound the main stem of the river, with hundreds more on tributaries.
Little Missouri River
The deal was signed in 1803, doubling the size of the United States with the acquisition of the Louisiana Territory.
The Lower Missouri River is the  of river below Gavins Point until it meets the Mississippi just above St. Louis.
Most did not stay in the area for long, as they failed to find significant resources.
Levees have been constructed along more than a third of the river in order to keep floodwater within the channel, but with the consequences of faster stream velocity and a resulting increase of peak flows in downstream areas.
Covered wagons, popularly referred to as ''prairie schooners'', provided the primary means of transport until the beginning of regular boat service on the river in the 1850s.
Development of visitor facilities was spurred by the Federal Water Project Recreation Act of 1965, which required the USACE to build and maintain boat ramps, campgrounds and other public facilities along major reservoirs.
Forested areas of the watershed, mostly second-growth, total about .
Trappers of the Hudson's Bay Company, St. Louis Missouri Fur Company, American Fur Company, Rocky Mountain Fur Company, North West Company and other outfits worked thousands of streams in the Missouri watershed as well as the neighboring Columbia, Colorado, Arkansas, and Saskatchewan river systems.
Their journals described lands rich with thousands of buffalo, beaver, and river otter; and also an abundant population of sea otters on the Pacific Northwest coast.
In time, the species came to benefit from the indigenous peoples' periodic controlled burnings of the grasslands surrounding the Missouri to clear out old and dead growth.
In the same period, several private establishments – most notably the Montana Power Company – began to develop the Missouri River above Great Falls and below Helena for power generation.
In 1718, Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne, Sieur de Bienville requested that the French government bestow upon Bourgmont the Cross of St. Louis because of his "outstanding service to France".
The lowest, a mere  – caused by the formation of an ice dam – was measured on December 23, 1963.
They came from many different places – some from the Canadian fur corporations at Hudson Bay, some from the Pacific Northwest (''see also'': Maritime fur trade), and some from the midwestern United States.
In 1807, explorer Manuel Lisa organized an expedition which would lead to the explosive growth of the fur trade in the upper Missouri River country.
The river itself drops a total of  from Brower's Spring, the farthest source.
Replaced in 1926 with a more modern structure, the dam was little more than a small weir atop Black Eagle Falls, diverting part of the Missouri's flow into the Black Eagle power plant.
Below the dam the Missouri receives the Knife River from the west and flows south to Bismarck, the capital of North Dakota, where the Heart River joins from the west.
For over 12,000 years, people have depended on the Missouri River and its tributaries as a source of sustenance and transportation.
Drought conditions in the early 21st century and competition from other modes of transport – mainly railroads – are the primary reason for decreasing river traffic on the Missouri.
Winter temperatures in Montana, Wyoming and Colorado may drop as low as , while summer highs in Kansas and Missouri have reached  at times.
The development of the Transcontinental and Northern Pacific Railroads marked the beginning of the end of steamboat commerce on the Missouri.
Former Native American lands in the watershed were taken over by settlers, leading to some of the most longstanding and violent wars against indigenous peoples in American history.
At Great Falls, a section of the Black Eagle Dam was dynamited to save nearby factories from inundation.
As the 1830s drew to a close, the fur industry slowly began to die as silk replaced beaver fur as a desirable clothing item.
About forty-five steamboat wrecks are scattered along these reaches of the river.
Over centuries, the Missouri River formed one of these main migration paths.
On the other end of the scale is the tiny Roe River in Montana, which at  long is one the world's shortest rivers.
Bourgmont had in fact been in trouble with the French colonial authorities since 1706, when he deserted his post as commandant of Fort Detroit after poorly handling an attack by the Ottawa that resulted in thirty-one deaths.
Channel sandstones and finer-grained overbank deposits of the fluvial Arikaree Group were deposited between 29 and 19&nbsp;million years ago.
U.S. troops were sent to the area to protect the miners, and drive out the natives from the new settlements.
It then proceeds to form the boundary of South Dakota and Nebraska, then after being joined by the James River from the north, forms the Iowa–Nebraska boundary.
It then winds east through a scenic region of canyons and badlands known as the Missouri Breaks, receiving the Marias River from the west then widening into the Fort Peck Lake reservoir a few miles above the confluence with the Musselshell River.
Flooding damages on the Mississippi&ndash;Missouri river system were one of the primary reasons for which Congress passed the Flood Control Act of 1944, opening the way for the USACE to develop the Missouri on a massive scale.
A small run-of-the river structure completed in 1898 near the present site of Canyon Ferry Dam became the second dam to be built on the Missouri.
The World Wide Fund For Nature divides the Missouri River watershed into three freshwater ecoregions: the Upper Missouri, Lower Missouri and Central Prairie.
Comparable to the size of the Canadian province of Quebec, the watershed encompasses most of the central Great Plains, stretching from the Rocky Mountains in the west to the Mississippi River Valley in the east and from the southern extreme of western Canada to the border of the Arkansas River watershed.
In 1828, the American Fur Company founded Fort Union at the confluence of the Missouri and Yellowstone Rivers.
To the north, the much lower Laurentian Divide separates the Missouri River watershed from those of the Oldman River, a tributary of the South Saskatchewan River, as well as the Souris, Sheyenne, and smaller tributaries of the Red River of the North.
The river here drains about , representing about 91% of the entire basin.
Average discharge atselected cities
The river's average discharge at Bismarck,  from the mouth, is .
Other major population centers – mostly located in the southeastern portion of the watershed – include Omaha, Nebraska, situated north of the confluence of the Missouri and Platte Rivers; Kansas City, Missouri – Kansas City, Kansas, located at the confluence of the Missouri with the Kansas River; and the St. Louis metropolitan area, situated south of the Missouri River just below the latter's mouth, on the Mississippi.
Between 1890 and 1940, five dams were built in the vicinity of Great Falls to generate power from the Great Falls of the Missouri, a chain of giant waterfalls formed by the river in its path through western Montana.
This rock-filled timber crib dam generated seven and a half megawatts of electricity for Helena and the surrounding countryside.
By providing flood control, the reservoirs dramatically reduce peak flows and increase low flows.
However, including the longest headwaters tributaries, the  Republican River and the  Arikaree River, brings the total length to .
Dams on the Missouri River
Parts of the river itself are designated for recreational or preservational use.
Flowing west then north, it runs first in Hell Roaring Creek, then west into the Red Rock; swings northeast to become the Beaverhead, it finally joins with the Big Hole to form the Jefferson.
As settlers expanded their holdings into the Great Plains, they ran into land conflicts with Native American tribes.
In 1945, the USACE began the Missouri River Bank Stabilization and Navigation Project, which would permanently increase the river's navigation channel to a width of  and a depth of nine feet (2.7 m).
The Lower Missouri River has no hydroelectric dams or locks but it has a plethora of wing dams that enable barge traffic by directing the flow of the river into a ,  channel.
The Missouri River was also a significant landmark as it divides northeastern Kansas from western Missouri; pro-slavery forces from Missouri would cross the river into Kansas and spark mayhem during Bleeding Kansas, leading to continued tension and hostility even today between Kansas and Missouri.
This was accomplished by constructing levees and wing dams to direct the river's flow into a straight, narrow channel and prevent sedimentation.
The Missouri accounts for 45&nbsp;percent of the annual flow of the Mississippi past St. Louis, and as much as 70&nbsp;percent in certain droughts.
Holding up to  in total, the six reservoirs can store more than three years' worth of the river's flow as measured below Gavins Point, the lowermost dam.
Native Americans of that region were relocated to reservations in Wyoming and southeastern Montana.
In 1949, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) began construction on the modern Canyon Ferry Dam to provide flood control to the Great Falls area.
The amount of goods plunged from  in 1977 to just  in 2000.
–''Sioux City Register'', March 28, 1868
Although the plains of the watershed have extremely little local vertical relief, the land rises about 10 feet per mile (1.9 m/km) from east to west.
In some regions, the industry continued well into the 1840s, but in others such as the Platte River valley, declines of the beaver population contributed to an earlier demise.
Although MacKay and Evans failed to accomplish their original goal of reaching the Pacific, they did create the first accurate map of the upper Missouri River.
Three years later, Spain revoked the treaty and in 1800 secretly returned Louisiana to Napoleonic France in the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso.
The lowest major Cenozoic unit, the White River Formation, was deposited between roughly 35 and 29&nbsp;million years ago and consists of claystone, sandstone, limestone, and conglomerate.
The Missouri's discharge is affected by over 17,000 reservoirs with an aggregate capacity of some .
There are no known endemic species within the region.
There are no lock and dams on the lower Missouri River, but there are plenty of wing dams that jettie out into the river and make it harder for barges to navigate.
Since the beginning of the 20th century, the Missouri River has been extensively engineered for water transport purposes, and about 32&nbsp;percent of the river now flows through artificially straightened channels.
Mainstem power plants generate about 9.3 billion KWh annually – equal to a constant output of almost 1,100 megawatts.
In 1925, the USACE began a project to widen the river's navigation channel to ; two years later, they began dredging a deep-water channel from Kansas City to Sioux City.
The Missouri and many of its tributaries cross the Great Plains, flowing over or cutting into the Ogallala Group and older mid-Cenozoic sedimentary rocks.
The wildlife refuge consists of a native northern Great Plains ecosystem that has not been heavily affected by human development, except for the construction of Fort Peck Dam.
This included the entire population of the U.S. state of Nebraska, parts of the U.S. states of Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wyoming, and small southern portions of the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan.
The Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail, some  long, follows nearly the entire Missouri River from its mouth to its source, retracing the route of the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
Both the Colorado and Columbia Rivers flow to the Pacific Ocean.
Urban areas, on the other hand, comprise less than  of land.
By discharge, the Missouri is the ninth largest river of the United States, after the Mississippi, St. Lawrence, Ohio, Columbia, Niagara, Yukon, Detroit, and St. Clair.
Evaporation from reservoirs significantly reduces the river's runoff, causing an annual loss of over  from mainstem reservoirs alone.
Fort Raymond was later replaced by Fort Lisa at the confluence of the Missouri and Yellowstone in North Dakota; a second fort also called Fort Lisa was built downstream on the Missouri River in Nebraska.
The Firehole River originates at Madison Lake in Wyoming's Yellowstone National Park and joins with the Gibbon to form the Madison, while the Gallatin River rises out of Gallatin Lake, also in the national park.
The Missouri's drainage basin has highly variable weather and rainfall patterns, Overall, the watershed is defined by a Continental climate with warm, wet summers and harsh, cold winters.
Despite the demise of the once-prosperous trade, however, its legacy led to the opening of the American West and a flood of settlers, farmers, ranchers, adventurers, hopefuls, financially bereft, and entrepreneurs took their place.
Steamboat navigation peaked in 1858 with over 130 boats operating full-time on the Missouri, with many more smaller vessels.
It passes south of Columbia and receives the Osage and Gasconade Rivers from the south downstream of Jefferson City.
To the east of the Kansas City, Missouri receives, on the left side, the Grand River.
This capacity makes it the largest reservoir system in the United States and one of the largest in North America.
The fur trade finally disappeared in the Great Plains around 1850, with the primary center of industry shifting to the Mississippi Valley and central Canada.
The Missouri River was one of the main routes for the westward expansion of the United States during the 19th century.
Restoration projects have re-mobilized some of the sediments that had been trapped behind bank stabilization structures, prompting concerns of exacerbated nutrient and sediment pollution locally and downstream in the northern Gulf of Mexico.
The Missouri's headwaters above Three Forks extend much farther upstream than the main stem.
Indigenous peoples of North America who have lived along the Missouri have historically had access to ample food, water, and shelter.
The war eventually ended in an American victory, and the Black Hills were opened to settlement.
An early expedition led by Robert Stuart from 1812 to 1813 proved the Platte impossible to navigate by the dugout canoes they used, let alone the large sidewheelers and sternwheelers that would later ply the Missouri in increasing numbers.
This part of the river, designated a U.S. National Wild and Scenic River in 1976, flows within the Upper Missouri Breaks National Monument, a  preserve comprising steep cliffs, deep gorges, arid plains, badlands, archaeological sites, and whitewater rapids on the Missouri itself.
The 1944 act authorized the Pick–Sloan Missouri Basin Program (Pick–Sloan Plan), which was a composite of two widely varying proposals.
The large bison population of the region gave rise to the term ''great bison belt'', an area of rich annual grasslands that extended from Alaska to Mexico along the eastern flank of the Continental Divide.
Plant life is more diverse in the Middle Missouri, which is also home to about twice as many animal species.
In its pre-development state, the river transported some  per year.
Elevations in the watershed vary widely, ranging from just over  at the Missouri's mouth to the  summit of Mount Lincoln in central Colorado.
Construction of this massive public works project provided jobs for more than 50,000 laborers during the Depression and was a major step in providing flood control to the lower half of the Missouri River.
However, after the arrival of Europeans in North America, both the bison and the Native Americans saw a rapid decline in population.
True to the then-ideal of Manifest Destiny, over 500,000 people set out from the river town of Independence, Missouri to their various destinations in the American West from the 1830s to the 1860s.
At the Mandan villages in North Dakota, they expelled several British traders, and while talking to the populace they pinpointed the location of the Yellowstone River, which was called ''Roche Jaune'' ("Yellow Rock") by the French.
In this pre-colonial and early-colonial era, the Missouri river was used as a path of trade and transport, and the river and its tributaries often formed territorial boundaries.
Except for the headwaters in the Rockies, there is little precipitation in this part of the watershed.
Along with Fort Peck, which was integrated as a unit of the Pick-Sloan Plan in the 1940s, these dams now form what is known as the Missouri River Mainstem System.
Visitation has increased from 10&nbsp;million visitor-hours in the mid-1960s to over 60&nbsp;million visitor-hours in 1990.
The Great Sioux War of 1876&ndash;77 was sparked when American miners discovered gold in the Black Hills of western South Dakota and eastern Wyoming.
By the 1830s, large mail and freight-carrying vessels were running regularly between Kansas City and St. Louis, and many traveled even farther upstream.
South of there, the Missouri basin is bordered on the west by the drainage of the Green River, a tributary of the Colorado, then on the south by the mainstem of the Colorado.
Although there are few designated trails, the whole preserve is open to hiking and camping.
Thus measured to its highest headwaters, the Missouri River stretches for .
Transport of agricultural and mining products by barge, however, saw a revival in the early twentieth century.
The Missouri was long believed to be part of the Northwest Passage – a water route from the Atlantic to the Pacific – but when Lewis and Clark became the first to travel the river's entire length, they confirmed the mythical pathway to be no more than a legend.
The first Europeans encountered the river in the late seventeenth century, and the region passed through Spanish and French hands before finally becoming part of the United States through the Louisiana Purchase.
Because of the low use of the shipping channel in the lower Missouri maintained by the USACE, it is now considered feasible to remove some of the levees, dikes, and wing dams that constrict the river's flow, thus allowing it to naturally restore its banks.
By then, it had been discovered that the Columbia River system, which drains into the Pacific, had a similar latitude as the headwaters of the Missouri River, and it was widely believed that a connection or short portage existed between the two.
The Middle Missouri ecoregion, extending through Colorado, southwestern Minnesota, northern Kansas, Nebraska, and parts of Wyoming and Iowa, has greater rainfall and is characterized by temperate forests and grasslands.
Downstream, it begins to define the Nebraska–Missouri border, then flows between Missouri and Kansas.
A handful, such as the ''Western Engineer'' and the ''Yellowstone'', were able to make it up the river as far as eastern Montana.
Measured to the farthest source at Brower's Spring, the Jefferson River is  long.
In 1725 Bourgmont brought the chiefs of several Missouri River tribes to visit France.
When completed in 1918 by the Montana Power Company and the United Missouri River Power Company, its reservoir flooded the Gates of the Mountains, a limestone canyon which Meriwether Lewis described as "the most remarkable clifts that we have yet seen… the towering and projecting rocks in many places seem ready to tumble on us."
Boat travel on the Missouri started with the wood-framed canoes and bull boats of the Native Americans, which were used for thousands of years before the introduction of larger craft to the river upon colonization of the Great Plains.
These modifications have reduced the river's length from some  in the late 19th century to  in the present day.
However, damming and channeling the river has kept it from reaching its natural sediment sources along most of its course.
Average tree height generally increases farther from the riverbanks for a limited distance, as land adjacent to the river is vulnerable to soil erosion during floods.
The Missouri's aquatic and riparian habitats also support several species of mammals, such as minks, river otters, beavers, muskrats, and raccoons.
In western Montana, the Missouri River is thought to have once flowed north then east around the Bear Paw Mountains.
As one of the continent's most significant river systems, the Missouri's drainage basin borders on many other major watersheds of the United States and Canada.
Fort Union gradually became the main headquarters for the fur trade in the upper Missouri basin.
The Missouri National Recreational River consists of portions of the Missouri downstream from Fort Randall and Gavins Point Dams that total .
It is estimated that of the passengers and freight hauled from the Midwest to Montana, over 80&nbsp;percent were transported by boat, a journey that took 150 days in the upstream direction.
Most migratory groups that passed through the area eventually settled in the Ohio Valley and the lower Mississippi River Valley, but many, including the Mound builders, stayed along the Missouri, becoming the ancestors of the later Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains.
Similarly, most emigrants arrived at the eastern terminus of the First Transcontinental Railroad via a ferry ride across the Missouri between Council Bluffs, Iowa and Omaha.
In 1795 the Spanish chartered the Company of Discoverers and Explorers of the Missouri, popularly referred to as the "Missouri Company", and offered a reward for the first person to reach the Pacific Ocean via the Missouri.
Currently, efforts are being made to revive the shipping industry on the Missouri River, because of the efficiency and cheapness of river transport to haul agricultural products, and the overcrowding of alternative transportation routes.
Most of the watershed receives an average of  of precipitation each year.
Since these boats could only travel downriver, they were dismantled and sold for lumber upon their arrival at St. Louis.
