Steamers worked the entire route from the trickles of Montana, to the Ohio River; down the Missouri and Tennessee, to the main channel of the Mississippi.
They dated to the late 19th to early 20th centuries.
It spanned the river between the Rock Island Arsenal in Illinois and Davenport, Iowa.
Failure of the Old River Control Structure, the Morganza Spillway, or nearby levees would likely re-route the main channel of the Mississippi through Louisiana's Atchafalaya Basin and down the Atchafalaya River to reach the Gulf of Mexico south of Morgan City in southern Louisiana.
During the last two decades, this number was only 145&nbsp;million metric tons per year.
Marquette proposed calling it the ''River of the Immaculate Conception''.
* Julien Dubuque BridgeJoins the cities of Dubuque, Iowa, and East Dubuque, Illinois; listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
The assessment noted the aging navigation and flood control infrastructure along with multiple environmental problems.
The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources has designated much of the Mississippi River in the state as infested waters by the exotic species zebra mussels and Eurasian watermilfoil.
Only with the arrival of the railroads in the 1880s did steamboat traffic diminish.
At the confluence of the Ohio and the Middle Mississippi, the long-term mean discharge of the Ohio at Cairo, Illinois is , while the long-term mean discharge of the Mississippi at Thebes, Illinois (just upriver from Cairo) is .
The French built the small fort of La Balise there to control passage.
Twenty-three new locks and dams were built on the upper Mississippi in the 1930s in addition to the three already in existence.
A series of 29 locks and dams on the upper Mississippi, most of which were built in the 1930s, is designed primarily to maintain a  channel for commercial barge traffic.
Timeline of outflow course changes
To improve navigation between St. Paul, Minnesota, and Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin, the Corps constructed several dams on lakes in the headwaters area, including Lake Winnibigoshish and Lake Pokegama.
The abandoned distributaries diminish in volume and form what are known as bayous.
The total catchment of the Mississippi River covers nearly 40% of the landmass of the continental United States.
1, it has dropped more than half its original elevation and is  above sea level.
At its confluence with the Ohio River, the Middle Mississippi is  above sea level.
The second canal, in addition to shipping, also allowed Chicago to address specific health issues (typhoid fever, cholera and other waterborne diseases) by sending its waste down the Illinois and Mississippi river systems rather than polluting its water source of Lake Michigan.
Control of the river was a strategic objective of both sides in the American Civil War.
The Mississippi River can be divided into three sections: the Upper Mississippi, the river from its headwaters to the confluence with the Missouri River; the Middle Mississippi, which is downriver from the Missouri to the Ohio River; and the Lower Mississippi, which flows from the Ohio to the Gulf of Mexico.
The other six National Park Service sites along the river are (listed from north to south):
The lakes formed are also used for recreational boating and fishing.
The 1927 flood proved this to be so wrong that communities threatened by the flood began to create their own levee breaks to relieve the force of the rising river.
Fresh river water flowing from the Mississippi into the Gulf of Mexico does not mix into the salt water immediately.
The structure was nearly lost during the 1973 flood, but repairs and improvements were made after engineers studied the forces at play.
The reduction in sediment transported down the Mississippi River is the result of engineering modification of the Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio rivers and their tributaries by dams, meander cutoffs, river-training structures, and bank revetments and soil erosion control programs in the areas drained by them.
The '''Mississippi River''' is the chief river of the largest drainage system on the North American continent.
The first railroad bridge across the Mississippi was built in 1856.
In all of these cases, the middle of the riverbed at the time the borders were established was used as the line to define the borders between adjacent states.
The Atchafalaya started to capture the Mississippi and to become its new main lower course.
Fourteen of these dams are located above Minneapolis in the headwaters region and serve multiple purposes, including power generation and recreation.
The Cheyenne, one of the earliest inhabitants of the upper Mississippi River, called it the ''Máʼxe-éʼometaaʼe'' (Big Greasy River) in the Cheyenne language.
On average, the Mississippi has only 8% the flow of the Amazon River.
The Mississippi River Band of Chippewa Indians, known as the ''Gichi-ziibiwininiwag'', are named after the stretch of the Mississippi River known as the ''Gichi-ziibi''.
The Mississippi River discharges at an annual average rate of between 200 and 700 thousand cubic feet per second (7,000–20,000&nbsp;m3/s).
The highest point within the watershed is also the highest point of the Rocky Mountains, Mount Elbert at .
Eventually the Atchafalaya River would capture the Mississippi River and become its main channel to the Gulf of Mexico, leaving New Orleans on a side channel.
A period of more isolated communities followed, and agriculture introduced from Mesoamerica based on the Three Sisters (maize, beans and squash) gradually came to dominate.
The Upper Mississippi is largely a multi-thread stream with many bars and islands.
When it opened on May 12, 1892, it was the first crossing of the Lower Mississippi and the longest span in the U.S.
Through a natural process known as avulsion or delta switching, the lower Mississippi River has shifted its final course to the mouth of the Gulf of Mexico every thousand years or so.
Deliberate water diversion at the Old River Control Structure in Louisiana allows the Atchafalaya River in Louisiana to be a major distributary of the Mississippi River, with 30% of the Mississippi flowing to the Gulf of Mexico by this route, rather than continuing down the Mississippi's current channel past Baton Rouge and New Orleans on a longer route to the Gulf.
* Horace Wilkinson BridgeA cantilevered through truss bridge, carrying six lanes of Interstate 10 between Baton Rouge and Port Allen in Louisiana.
After the completion of the St. Anthony Falls Lock and Dam in 1963, the river's head of navigation moved upstream, to the Coon Rapids Dam.
The height of these bluffs decreases to the south of Dubuque, though they are still significant through Savanna, Illinois.
According to either school of thought, the Upper Mississippi from Lake Itasca, Minnesota to St. Louis, despite its name, would only be a secondary tributary of the final river flowing from Cairo, Illinois to the Gulf of Mexico.
* Fred Schwengel Memorial BridgeA 4-lane steel girder bridge that carries Interstate 80 and connects LeClaire, Iowa, and Rapids City, Illinois.
The retention time from Lake Itasca to the Gulf is typically about 90 days.
* Dubuque-Wisconsin BridgeConnects Dubuque, Iowa, and Grant County, Wisconsin.
Replaced for road traffic in 1966 by a nearby pair of new bridges; now a pedestrian bridge.
The fieldwork received national media attention as good news in the middle of a drought.
Another possible course change for the Mississippi River is a diversion into Lake Pontchartrain near New Orleans.
Marquette traveled with a Sioux Indian who named it ''Ne Tongo'' ("Big river" in Sioux language) in 1673.
The bridge carries U.S. Highway 52 over the river, and is the terminus of both Iowa Highway 64 and Illinois Route 64.
* Natchez-Vidalia Bridge
Steamboats remained a feature until the 1920s.
In the 18th century, the river was the primary western boundary of the young United States, and since the country's expansion westward, the Mississippi River has been widely considered a convenient if approximate dividing line between the Eastern, Southern, and Midwestern United States, and the Western United States.
The task of maintaining a navigation channel is the responsibility of the United States Army Corps of Engineers, which was established in 1802.
Most were hunter-gatherers, but some, such as the Mound Builders, formed prolific agricultural societies.
* I-35W Saint Anthony Falls BridgeIn Minneapolis, opened in September 2008, replacing the I-35W Mississippi River bridge which had collapsed catastrophically on August 1, 2007, killing 13 and injuring over 100.
The main structures are the Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway in Missouri; the Old River Control Structure and the Morganza Spillway in Louisiana, which direct excess water down the west and east sides (respectively) of the Atchafalaya River; and the Bonnet Carré Spillway, also in Louisiana, which directs floodwaters to Lake Pontchartrain (see diagram).
They are sequenced from the Upper Mississippi's source to the Lower Mississippi's mouth.
* Memphis & Arkansas BridgeA cantilevered through truss bridge bridge, carrying Interstate 55 between Memphis and West Memphis; listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
The Middle Mississippi is relatively free-flowing.
Diversion of the Mississippi's main channel through Lake Pontchartrain would have consequences similar to an Atchafalaya diversion, but to a lesser extent, since the present river channel would remain in use past Baton Rouge and into the New Orleans area.
A network of trade routes referred to as the Hopewell interaction sphere was active along the waterways between about 200 and 500 CE, spreading common cultural practices over the entire area between the Gulf of Mexico and the Great Lakes.
Earlier projects began as early as 1829 to remove snags, close off secondary channels and excavate rocks and sandbars.
In effect, the U.S. ceded the northwestern extremity of the Mississippi basin to the British in exchange for the southern portion of the Red River basin.
The Rivers and Harbors Act of 1930 authorized the  channel project, which called for a navigation channel  feet deep and  wide to accommodate multiple-barge tows.
*  Cahokia's rise and fall linked to river flooding (article in Popular Archaeology periodical)
Although it is the 5th largest river in the world by volume, this flow is a small fraction of the output of the Amazon, which moves nearly 7 million cubic feet per second (200,000&nbsp;m3/s) during wet seasons.
Since this event was an avulsion, rather than the effect of incremental erosion and deposition, the state line still follows the old channel.
This route provides a more direct path to the Gulf of Mexico than the present Mississippi River channel through Baton Rouge and New Orleans.
It also serves to protect the St. Louis city water intakes during times of low water.
South of Hennepin, to Alton, Illinois, the current Illinois River follows the ancient channel used by the Mississippi River before the Illinoian Stage.
* c.2500 BC: Bayou Teche became the main course of the Mississippi.
So many settlers traveled westward through the Mississippi river basin, as well as settled in it, that Zadok Cramer wrote a guide book called ''The Navigator'', detailing the features and dangers and navigable waterways of the area.
The remaining major Confederate stronghold was on the heights overlooking the river at Vicksburg, Mississippi, and the Union's Vicksburg Campaign (December 1862 to July 1863), and the fall of Port Hudson, completed control of the lower Mississippi River.
* Government BridgeConnects Rock Island, Illinois and Davenport, Iowa, adjacent to Lock and Dam No.
With its many tributaries, the Mississippi's watershed drains all or parts of 31 U.S. states and 2 Canadian provinces between the Rocky and Appalachian Mountains.
In 1913, construction was complete on Lock and Dam No.
Legal proceedings ensued, with Abraham Lincoln defending the railroad.
In 2005, the Source to Sea Expedition paddled the Mississippi and Atchafalaya Rivers to benefit the Audubon Society's Upper Mississippi River Campaign.
There are seven National Park Service sites along the Mississippi River.
The original Lock and Dam 26 was demolished.
Taken as a whole, these 43 dams significantly shape the geography and influence the ecology of the upper river.
It is common to qualify a regionally superlative landmark in relation to it, such as "the highest peak east of the Mississippi" or "the oldest city west of the Mississippi".
A clear channel is needed for the barges and other vessels that make the main stem Mississippi one of the great commercial waterways of the world.
The big one lies out there somewhere—when the structures can't release all the floodwaters and the levee is going to have to give way.
As there were few roads or rails in the lands of the Louisiana Purchase, river traffic was an ideal solution.
The dam also eliminated the Des Moines Rapids.
* Chester BridgeA truss bridge connecting Route 51 in Missouri with Illinois Route 150, between Perryville, Missouri, and Chester, Illinois.
The Ojibwe called Lake Itasca ''Omashkoozo-zaaga'igan'' (Elk Lake) and the river flowing out of it ''Omashkoozo-ziibi'' (Elk River).
* Huey P. Long BridgeA truss cantilever bridge carrying US 190 (Airline Highway) and one rail line between East Baton Rouge and West Baton Rouge Parishes in Louisiana.
The United States then secured effective control of the river when it bought the Louisiana Territory from France in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803.
The New Madrid Seismic Zone, along the Mississippi River near New Madrid, Missouri, between Memphis and St. Louis, is related to an aulacogen (failed rift) that formed at the same time as the Gulf of Mexico.
In 1829, there were surveys of the two major obstacles on the upper Mississippi, the Des Moines Rapids and the Rock Island Rapids, where the river was shallow and the riverbed was rock.
When the ice sheet began to recede, hundreds of feet of rich sediment were deposited, creating the flat and fertile landscape of the Mississippi Valley.
The currently active delta lobe is called the Birdfoot Delta, after its shape, or the Balize Delta, after La Balize, Louisiana, the first French settlement at the mouth of the Mississippi.
With this treaty, which ended the American Revolutionary War, Britain also ceded West Florida back to Spain to regain the Bahamas, which Spain had occupied during the war.
* Chain of Rocks BridgeLocated on the northern edge of St. Louis, notable for a 22-degree bend occurring at the middle of the crossing, necessary for navigation on the river;  formerly used by U.S. Route 66 to cross the Mississippi.
During the 2011 floods, the Corps of Engineers decided to open the Morganza Spillway to 1/4 of its capacity to allow 150,000&nbsp;ft3/sec of water to flood the Morganza and Atchafalaya floodways and continue directly to the Gulf of Mexico, bypassing Baton Rouge and New Orleans.
7, near La Crosse, Wisconsin, is more than  wide.
In addition to historical traditions shown by names, there are at least two other measures of a river's identity, one being the largest branch (by water volume), and the other being the longest branch.
The port of New Orleans boomed as it was the trans-shipment point to deep sea ocean vessels.
Because of substantial growth of cities and the larger ships and barges that supplanted riverboats, the first decades of the 20th century saw the construction of massive engineering works such as levees, locks and dams, often built in combination.
This $300&nbsp;million project was completed in 1986 by the Corps of Engineers.
1973 was a forty-year flood.
Before it was built in 1913, steamboats could occasionally go upstream as far as Saint Cloud, Minnesota, depending on river conditions.
In the 1940s, the main span was destroyed by a tornado.
On March 2, 1699, Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville rediscovered the mouth of the Mississippi, following the death of La Salle.
Among the several Mississippi River system steamboat companies was the noted Anchor Line, which, from 1859 to 1898, operated a luxurious fleet of steamers between St. Louis and New Orleans.
* 1831: Captain Henry M. Shreve dug a new short course for the Mississippi through the neck of Turnbull's Bend.
While the risk of such a diversion is present during any major flood event, such a change has so far been prevented by active human intervention involving the construction, maintenance, and operation of various levees, spillways, and other control structures by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Saint Anthony Falls is the only true waterfall on the entire Mississippi River.
* Frisco BridgeA cantilevered through truss bridge, carrying a rail line across the river between West Memphis, Arkansas, and Memphis, Tennessee, previously known as the ''Memphis Bridge''.
The area of the Mississippi River basin was first settled by hunting and gathering Native American peoples and is considered one of the few independent centers of plant domestication in human history.
The word ''Mississippi'' itself comes from ''Messipi'', the French rendering of the Anishinaabe (Ojibwe or Algonquin) name for the river, ''Misi-ziibi'' (Great River).
15;  the fourth crossing in this vicinity, built in 1896.
It is the highest bridge over the Mississippi River.
These earthquakes created Reelfoot Lake in Tennessee from the altered landscape near the river.
In 1878, Congress authorized the Corps to establish a  channel to be obtained by building wing dams which direct the river to a narrow channel causing it to cut a deeper channel, by closing secondary channels and by dredging.
From St. Louis to the Ohio River confluence, the Middle Mississippi falls  over  for an average rate of .
This is exemplified by the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, and the phrase "Trans-Mississippi" as used in the name of the Trans-Mississippi Exposition.
The Mississippi National River and Recreation Area is the National Park Service site dedicated to protecting and interpreting the Mississippi River itself.
Below is a general overview of selected Mississippi bridges which have notable engineering or landmark significance, with their cities or locations.
* 1833 to Nov 1873: The Great Raft (a huge logjam in the Atchafalaya River) was cleared.
The first bridge across the Mississippi River was built in 1855.
Most have been superseded by pusher tugs.
Added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1999.
The source of the Upper Mississippi branch is traditionally accepted as Lake Itasca,  above sea level in Itasca State Park in Clearwater County, Minnesota.
The canal opened in 1877, but the Rock Island Rapids remained an obstacle.
The basin covers more than , including all or parts of 31 U.S. states and two Canadian provinces.
In addition to reducing the Mississippi River crest downstream, this diversion reduced the chances of a channel change by reducing stress on the other elements of the control system.
It spanned the river in Minneapolis, Minnesota where the current Hennepin Avenue Bridge is located.
Modern American Indian nations inhabiting the Mississippi basin include Cheyenne, Sioux, Ojibwe, Potawatomi, Ho-Chunk, Fox, Kickapoo, Tamaroa, Moingwena, Quapaw and Chickasaw.
In the United States, the Mississippi River drains the majority of the area between crest of the Rocky Mountains and the crest of the Appalachian Mountains, except for various regions drained to Hudson Bay by the Red River of the North; to the Atlantic Ocean by the Great Lakes and the Saint Lawrence River; and to the Gulf of Mexico by the Rio Grande, the Alabama and Tombigbee rivers, the Chattahoochee and Appalachicola rivers, and various smaller coastal waterways along the Gulf.
This both accelerated the development, and forever changed the ecology of the Mississippi Valley and the Great Lakes.
* Black Hawk BridgeConnects Lansing in Allamakee County, Iowa and rural Crawford County, Wisconsin; locally referred to as the Lansing Bridge and documented in the Historic American Engineering Record.
Both rapids were considered virtually impassable.
Two portions of the Mississippi were designated as American Heritage Rivers in 1997: the lower portion around Louisiana and Tennessee, and the upper portion around Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota and Missouri.
* Effigy Mounds National Monument
He referred to his voyage as a promenade that was once a journey on the Mississippi.The steamboat era changed the economic and political life of the Mississippi, as well as the nature of travel itself.
Some geologists have noted that the possibility for course change into the Atchafalaya also exists in the area immediately north of the Old River Control Structure.
That is when the river's going to jump its banks and try to break through."
Because the large scale of high-energy water flow threatened to damage the structure, an auxiliary flow control station was built adjacent to the standing control station.
The Des Moines Rapids were about  long and just above the mouth of the Des Moines River at Keokuk, Iowa.
The lifestyle gradually became more settled after around 1000 BCE during what is now called the Woodland period, with increasing evidence of shelter construction, pottery, weaving and other practices.
The southernmost extent of this enormous glaciation extended well into the present-day United States and Mississippi basin.
No highway or railroad tunnels cross under the Mississippi River.
From its confluence with the St. Croix River downstream to Dubuque, Iowa, the river is entrenched, with high bedrock bluffs lying on either side.
* Clark BridgeA cable-stayed bridge connecting West Alton, Missouri, and Alton, Illinois, also known as the ''Super Bridge'' as the result of an appearance on the PBS program, ''Nova'';  built in 1994, carrying U.S. Route 67 across the river.
The Rock Island Rapids were between Rock Island and Moline, Illinois.
* Before c.1400 AD: The Red River of the South flowed parallel to the lower Mississippi to the sea
Using the largest-branch criterion, the Ohio (not the Middle and Upper Mississippi) would be the main branch of the Lower Mississippi.
* Norbert F. Beckey BridgeConnects Muscatine, Iowa, and Rock Island County, Illinois; became first U.S. bridge to be illuminated with light-emitting diode (LED) lights decoratively illuminating the facade of the bridge.
On the lower Mississippi, from Baton Rouge to the mouth of the Mississippi, the navigation depth is , allowing container ships and cruise ships to dock at the Port of New Orleans and bulk cargo ships shorter than  air draft that fit under the Huey P. Long Bridge to traverse the Mississippi to Baton Rouge.
Steamboats entered trade in the 1820s, so the period 1830–1850 became the golden age of steamboats.
Also, due to a meander in the river, a small part of western Kentucky is contiguous with Tennessee, but isolated from the rest of its state.
Following Britain's victory in the Seven Years War the Mississippi became the border between the British and Spanish Empires.
27), which consists of a low-water dam and an  canal, was added in 1953, just below the confluence with the Missouri River, primarily to bypass a series of rock ledges at St. Louis.
In March 1876, the Mississippi suddenly changed course near the settlement of Reverie, Tennessee, leaving a small part of Tipton County, Tennessee, attached to Arkansas and separated from the rest of Tennessee by the new river channel.
The Pawnee name is ''Kickaátit''.
The Old River Control Structure, between the present Mississippi River channel and the Atchafalaya Basin, sits at the normal water elevation and is ordinarily used to divert 30% of the Mississippi's flow to the Atchafalaya River.
Apart from the Missouri and Meramec rivers of Missouri and the Kaskaskia River of Illinois, no major tributaries enter the Middle Mississippi River.
* Old Vicksburg Bridge
Native Americans long lived along the Mississippi River and its tributaries.
In addition to the Ohio River, the major tributaries of the Lower Mississippi River are the White River, flowing in at the White River National Wildlife Refuge in east central Arkansas; the Arkansas River, joining the Mississippi at Arkansas Post; the Big Black River in Mississippi; the Yazoo River, meeting the Mississippi at Vicksburg, Mississippi; and the Red River in Louisiana.
In 1862 Union forces coming down the river successfully cleared Confederate defenses at Island Number 10 and Memphis, Tennessee, while Naval forces coming upriver from the Gulf of Mexico captured New Orleans, Louisiana.
After flowing into Cass Lake, the name of the river changes to ''Gaa-miskwaawaakokaag-ziibi'' (Red Cedar River) and then out of Lake Winnibigoshish as ''Wiinibiigoonzhish-ziibi'' (Miserable Wretched Dirty Water River), ''Gichi-ziibi'' (Big River) after the confluence with the Leech Lake River, then finally as ''Misi-ziibi'' (Great River) after the confluence with the Crow Wing River.
Chain of Rocks Lock (Lock and Dam No.
* Hernando de Soto BridgeA through arch bridge carrying Interstate 40 across the Mississippi between West Memphis, Arkansas, and Memphis, Tennessee.
The channel project was complete when the Moline Lock, which bypassed the Rock Island Rapids, opened in 1907.
Beginning in the 1970s, the Corps applied hydrological transport models to analyze flood flow and water quality of the Mississippi.
* Eisenhower Bridge (Mississippi River)In Red Wing, Minnesota, opened by Dwight D. Eisenhower in November 1960.
* Greenville Bridge
Northern pike, bluegill and crappie also reside in the Upper Mississippi River.
Evidence of early cultivation of sunflower, a goosefoot, a marsh elder and an indigenous squash dates to the 4th millennium BCE.
* New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park
* Savanna-Sabula BridgeA truss bridge and causeway connecting the city of Savanna, Illinois, and the island city of Sabula, Iowa.
Lake Pepin, a natural lake formed behind the delta of the Chippewa River of Wisconsin as it enters the Upper Mississippi, it is more than  wide.
During the American Civil War, the Mississippi's capture by Union forces marked a turning point towards victory because of the river's importance as a route of trade and travel, not least to the Confederacy.
* c.200 AD: Bayou Lafourche became the main course of the Mississippi.
By the time the Upper Mississippi reaches Saint Paul, Minnesota, below Lock and Dam No.
Flowing entirely in the United States (although its drainage basin reaches into Canada), it rises in northern Minnesota and meanders slowly southwards for  to the Mississippi River Delta at the Gulf of Mexico.
After the expeditions by Giacomo Beltrami and Henry Schoolcraft, the longest stream above the juncture of the Crow Wing River and ''Gichi-ziibi'' was named "Mississippi River".
Before 1900, the Mississippi River transported an estimated 400&nbsp;million metric tons of sediment per year from the interior of the United States to coastal Louisiana and the Gulf of Mexico.
* c.5000 BC: The last Ice Age ended; world sea level became what it is now.
This  drop is the largest of all the Mississippi River locks and dams.
The Arapaho name for the river is Beesniicíe.
Since modern development of the basin began, the Mississippi has also seen its share of pollution and environmental problems – most notably large volumes of agricultural runoff, which has led to the Gulf of Mexico dead zone off the Delta.
Using the longest-branch criterion, the Middle Mississippi-Missouri-Jefferson-Beaverhead-Red Rock-Hellroaring Creek River would be the main branch.
The lawsuit went to the Supreme Court of the United States, which ruled in favor of the railroad.
In 1988, the water level of the Mississippi fell to  below zero on the Memphis gauge.
When the ice sheet completely retreated, many of these "temporary" rivers found paths to Hudson Bay or the Arctic Ocean, leaving the Mississippi Basin with many features "oversized" for the existing rivers to have carved in the same time period.
The canal allowed shipping between these important waterways.
Its length of at least   is exceeded only by the Nile, the Amazon, and perhaps the Yangtze River among the longest rivers in the world.
