In 1999, sociologist Frédéric Lenoir estimated there are 10,000 converts and up to 5 million "sympathizers", although other researchers have questioned these numbers.
An account of this is given in ''Gangōji Garan Engi''.
In doing so they have retained, to a high degree, their distinctive cultural and religious identity.
There has been a singular, isolated movement to convert Catholics to Judaism in Peru.
The largest Zen group at this moment is the Kanzeon Sangha, led by Nico Tydeman under the supervision of the American Zen master Dennis Genpo Merzel, Roshi, a former student of Maezumi Roshi in Los Angeles.
In 1732, while on a visit in 1732 to Copenhagen for the coronation of his cousin King Christian VI, the Moravian Church's patron Nicolas Ludwig, Count von Zinzendorf, was very struck by its effects, and particularly by two visiting Inuit children converted by Hans Egede.
In their turn, Christians from Ireland (the Hiberno-Scottish mission) and from Britain (Saint Boniface (ca 675-754), and the Anglo-Saxon mission, for example)  became prominent in converting the inhabitants of central Europe.
The word was used in light of its biblical usage; in the Latin translation of the Bible, Christ uses the word when sending the disciples to preach in his name.
In 1390, the Minangkabau's Prince Rajah Baguinda and his followers preached Islam on the islands.
During the Ottoman presence in the Balkans, missionary movements were taken up by people from aristocratic families hailing from the region, who had been educated in Constantinople or other major city within the Empire such as the famed madrassahs and kulliyes.
Sikhs have emigrated to many countries of the world since Indian independence in 1947.
* Make available all Sikh artifacts, posters, literature, music, educational videos, DVDs, and multimedia CD-ROMs
Emperor Samprati is regarded as the "Jain Ashoka" for his patronage and efforts to spreading Jainism in east India.
They are famous for their selfless work, living as slaves among the slaves and together with the Native Americans, the Delaware (i.e., Lenni Lenape) and Cherokee Indian tribes.
''Ain al-Yaqeen'', a Saudi newspaper, reported in 2002 that Saudi funds may have contributed to building as many as 1,500 mosques and 2,000 other Islamic centers.
Missionaries stay with their careers as appointed by the Caliph for the rest of their lives, as per their commitment to the Community.
But many other groups are also represented in the Netherlands, like the Order of Buddhist Contemplatives in Apeldoorn, the Thich Nhat Hanh Order of Interbeing and the International Zen Institute Noorderpoort monastery/retreat centre in Drenthe, led by Jiun Hogen Roshi.
Missionaries can be found in many countries around the world.
Hinduism was introduced into Java by travelers from India in ancient times.
Bill Bright's leadership with Campus Crusade, the Southern Baptist International Mission Board, The Joshua Project, and others brought about the need to know who these "unreached people groups" are and how those wanting to tell about the Christian God and share a Christian Bible could reach them.
Since the 1960s, many westerners attracted by the world view presented in Asian religious systems including Hinduism have converted to Hinduism's.
In 1380, Karim ul' Makhdum the first Arabian Islamic missionary reached the Sulu Archipelago and Jolo in the Philippines and established Islam in the country.
Missionaries typically spend two weeks in a Missionary Training Center (or two to three months for those learning a new language) where they study the scriptures, learn new languages when applicable, prepare themselves to teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and learn more about the culture and the people among whom they will be living.
They say that these efforts make Judaism seem an easy religion to join and observe when in reality being Jewish involves many difficulties and sacrifices.
Even in the pre-Islamic era, Arab traders used to visit the Malabar region, which linked them with the ports of Southeast Asia.
The Dalai Lama maintains a North American headquarters at Namgyal Monastery in Ithaca, New York.
In the 3rd century BCE, Dharmaraksita—among others—was sent out by emperor Ashoka to proselytize the Buddhist tradition through the Indian Maurya Empire, but also into the Mediterranean as far as Greece.
Winning converts also among the rulers and scholars, by the end of the T'ang Dynasty Buddhism was found everywhere in China.
Thereafter, the Jainas in the South and Central regions lost ground in face of rising Hindu devotional movements.
, seven of every ten Moravians live in a former mission field and belong to a race other than Caucasian.
Jainism retreated to the West and Northwest, which have remained its stronghold to the present.
On June 29, 1911, Pope Pius X gave his blessings for the formation of The Catholic Foreign Mission Society of America, now better known as the  Maryknoll Fathers and Brothers.
Mande speakers (who in Ghana are known as Wangara) traders and clerics carried the religion into the area.
''missio''), meaning "act of sending" or ''mittere'', meaning "to send".
Buddhism was spread among the Turkic people during the 2nd and 3rd centuries BCE into modern-day Pakistan, Kashmir, Afghanistan, eastern and coastal Iran, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Tajikistan.
Islam in Bulgaria can be traced back to the mid-ninth century when there were Islamic missionaries in Bulgaria, evidenced by a letter from Pope Nicholas to Boris of Bulgaria calling for the extirpation of Saracens.
Education and women's welfare The service activities of this section founded in 1963 are focused on:
It may be noted that all the Jain monuments of Rajasthan and Gujarat, with unknown builders are also attributed to Emperor Samprati.
"Outreach" is done worldwide, by organizations such as Chabad Lubavitch, Aish Hatorah, Ohr Somayach, and Partners In Torah.
Dang Hyang Nirartha was responsible for facilitating a refashioning of Balinese Hinduism.
Plum Village, a monastery and retreat center in the Dordogne in southern France, is his residence and the headquarters of his international sangha.
During the 19th and 20th centuries, Western intellectuals such as Schopenhauer, Henry David Thoreau, Max Müller, and esoteric societies such as the Theosophical Society of H.P.
With the approval of the American hierarchy, the two priests traveled to Rome in June 1911, to receive final approval from Pope Pius X for their project.
The Eastern Orthodox Church, under the Orthodox Church of Constantinople undertook vigorous missionary outreach under the Roman Empire and the continuing Byzantine Empire, and its missionary outreach had lasting effect, founding, influencing, or establishing formal relations with some sixteen Orthodox national churches including the Romanian Orthodox Church, the Georgian Orthodox and Apostolic Church, and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (both traditionally said to have been founded by the missionary Apostle Andrew), the Bulgarian Orthodox Church (said to have been founded by the missionary Apostle Paul).
Gandhi represented Jains in Chicago because the Great Jain Saint Param Pujya Acharya Vijayanandsuri, also known as Acharya Atmaram, was invited to represent the Jain religion at the first World Parliament of Religions.
Modern missionary work in the United States has increased greatly in the last one hundred years, with much of the recent demographic growth driven by conversion.
Many of the network of churches they established became the Anglican Communion.
It bent its efforts to the Coptic Church, the Ethiopian Church, and India, especially Kerala; it continues to this day.
In addition, Judaism espouses a concept of "quality" not "quantity".
The spread, although at first introduced through Arab Muslim traders, continued to saturate through the Indonesian people as local rulers and royalty began to adopt the religion subsequently leading their subjects to mirror their conversion.
Quaker "publishers of truth" visited Boston and other mid-17th century colonies, but were not always well received.
The Arab merchants and traders became the carriers of the new religion, and they propagated it wherever they went.
This funded and directed Lutheran missionaries such as Bartholomaeus Ziegenbalg in Tranquebar, India, and Hans Egede in Greenland.
The period of the Mauryan Dynasty to the 12th century was the period of Jainism's greatest growth and influence.
Swami Vivekananda, the founder of the Ramakrishna Mission is one of the greatest Hindu missionaries to the West.
Today, the work in the former mission provinces of the worldwide Moravian Church is carried on by native workers.
This has traditionally been considered the official introduction of Buddhism to Japan.
* Relief: creating and managing children's and students' homes for destitute children and for poor students, cheap hostels, retiring homes, academies of light for deaf dumb and crippled, invalid homes, refugee rehabilitation etc.
The Danish government began the first organized Protestant mission work through its College of Missions, established in 1714.
Many native-born Canadians of various ethnicities have converted during the last 50 years through the actions of the Ramakrishna Mission, ISKCON, Arya Samaj and other missionary organizations as well as due to the visits and guidance of Indian Gurus such as Guru Maharaj, Sai Baba, Rajneesh, and others.
A subsequent mission was sent in 549, only to find the Liang capital in the hands of the rebel Hou Jing, who threw them in prison for lamenting the fall of the capital.
Outstanding among them was Maalim Mtondo Islam in Kenya, a Tanganyikan credited with being the first Muslim missionary to Nairobi.
* Jathedar Sadhu Singh Bhaura (1905–1984), who was a Sikh missionary who rose to be the Jathedar or high priest of Sri Akal Takhat, Amritsar
Missionaries belonging to the Ahmadiyya thought of Islam often study at International Islamic seminaries and educational institutions, known as Jamia Ahmadiyya.
Tibetan Buddhism has been significantly active and successful in the West since the Chinese takeover of Tibet in 1959.
The reason for this is that Gentiles already have a complete relationship with God via the Noahidic covenant (See Noahide Laws); there is therefore no need for them to become Jewish, which requires more work of them.
He made four distinct major journeys, in the four different directions, which are called Udasis, spanning many thousands of kilometres, preaching the message of God.
It was with the advent of Islam that the Arabs became a prominent cultural force in the world.
During the Middle Ages the Christian monasteries and missionaries such as Saint Patrick (5th century), and Adalbert of Prague (ca 956-997) propagated learning and religion beyond the European boundaries of the old Roman Empire.
In 1809, the London Society for Promoting Christianity Amongst the Jews was founded, which pioneered mission amongst the Jewish people; it continues today as the Church's Ministry Among Jewish People.
One of the first large-scale missionary endeavors of the British colonial age was the Baptist Missionary Society, founded in 1792 as the Particular Baptist Society for the Propagation of the Gospel Amongst the Heathen.
The International Society for Krishna Consciousness has a presence in New Zealand, running temples in Auckland, Hamilton, Wellington and Christchurch.
Indonesia's early people were animists, Hindus, and Buddhists.
Samprati, according to Jain historians, is considered more powerful and famous than Ashoka himself.
The use of missions, formation of councils and monastic institutions influenced the emergence of Christian missions and organizations which had similar structures formed in places which were formerly Buddhist missions.
Paramahansa Yogananda an Indian yogi and guru introduced many westerners to the teachings of meditation and Kriya Yoga through his book, ''Autobiography of a Yogi''.
This is mentioned in the Sunni Hadith
Countering arguments that the Church needed workers here, Fathers Walsh and Price insisted the Church would not flourish until it sent  missioners overseas.
Brazil, Nigeria, and other countries have had large numbers of their Christian adherents go to other countries and start churches.
Retired couples also have the option of serving a mission.
The fastest-growing area of the work is in Tanzania in Eastern Africa.
Seong of Baekje, known as a great patron of Buddhism in Korea, built many temples and welcomed priests bringing Buddhist texts directly from India.
With the European colonization of Africa, missionaries were almost in competition with the European Christian missionaries operating in the colonies.
Much contemporary Catholic missionary work has undergone profound change since the Second Vatican Council of 1962-1965, and has become explicitly conscious of social justice issues and the dangers of cultural imperialism or economic exploitation disguised as religious conversion.
An estimated US$45 billion has been spent by the Saudi Arabian government financing mosques and Islamic schools in foreign countries.
When two American Catholic priests from distinctly different backgrounds met in Montreal in 1910, they discovered they had one thing in common.
Father Price in his magazine ''Truth'', and Father Walsh in the pages of ''A Field Afar'', an early incarnation of  Maryknoll Magazine.
His first words after his re-emergence were: "there is no Hindu, there is no Muslim".
Jamia students may be appointed by the Caliph either as Missionaries of the Community (often called Murrabi, Imam, or Mawlana) or as Qadis or Muftis of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community with a specialisation in matters of fiqh (Islamic Jurisprudence).
Samprati built thousands of Jain Temples in India, many of which are still in use, such as the Jain temples at Viramgam and Palitana (Gujarat), Agar Malwa (Ujjain).
The Aim of the Sikh Missionary Society is the "Advancement of the Sikh faith in the U.K and abroad" which is brought about by various activities:
Thich Nhat Hanh, a Nobel Peace Prize-nominated, Vietnamese-born Zen Buddhist, founded the Unified Buddhist Church (Eglise Bouddhique Unifiée) in France in 1969.
Jesus instructed the apostles to make disciples of all nations (, ).
In his time he was a world-famous personality.
It was also taken into China brought by Kasyapa Matanga in the 2nd century CE, Lokaksema and An Shigao translated Buddhist sutras into Chinese.
The Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia continued missionary work outside Russia after the 1917 Russian Revolution, resulting in the establishment of many new dioceses in the diaspora, from which numerous converts have been made in Eastern Europe, North America, and Oceania.
Its first missionary was a woman named, Kokan, who worked on the streets of Osaka.
Their rationale is that so many Jews were lost during the Holocaust that newcomers must be sought out and welcomed.
Korean and African missionaries can now be found all over the world.
With this secular principle he began his missionary work.
Today there are 100,000 Jains in the United States.
Trade relations have existed between Arabia and the Indian subcontinent from ancient times.
A Christian missionary can be defined as "one who is to witness across cultures".
The Lausanne Congress of 1974, defined the term, related to Christian mission as, "to form a viable indigenous church-planting movement".
Sikhs have emigrated to countries all over the world, especially to English-speaking and East Asian nations.
People who become more observant are known as ''baalei teshuva''.
The gateways prominently expanded to include the aforementioned trade routes through the Eastern shores of the African continent.
Historically, Hinduism has only recently had a large influence in western countries such as the United Kingdom, New Zealand, and Canada.
The guidance of the group was taken over by  Erik Bruijn who is still in charge of a flourishing community.
Perhaps the most widely visible Buddhist leader in the world is Tenzin Gyatso, the current Dalai Lama, who first visited the United States in 1979.
Over time, the Vatican gradually established a normalized church structure in the mission areas, often starting with special jurisdictions known as apostolic prefectures and apostolic vicariates.
Many traditional values of the Akha have been lost as a result of these conversions.
Under the Russian Empire of the 19th century, missionaries such as Nicholas Ilminsky (1822–1891) moved into the subject lands and propagated Orthodoxy, including through Belarus, Latvia, Moldova, Finland, Estonia, Ukraine, and China.
In 1865, the China Inland Mission was founded, going well beyond British controlled areas; it continues as the OMF, working throughout East Asia.
The Portuguese sent missions into Africa.
Ānanda Mārga, organizationally known as '''Ānanda Mārga Pracaraka Samgha''' (AMPS), meaning the ''samgha'' (organization) for the propagation of the ''marga'' (path) of ''ananda'' (bliss), is a social and spiritual movement founded in Jamalpur, Bihar, India, in 1955 by Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar (1921–1990), also known by his spiritual name, Shrii Shrii Ánandamúrti.
Together, they formulated plans to establish a seminary for foreign missionaries.
The New Testament-era missionary outreach of the Christian church from the time of St Paul expanded throughout the Roman Empire and beyond to Persia (Church of the East) and to India (Saint Thomas Christians).
All of the major cities in the country have mosques and there are several Islamic schools.
A small mosque was built to serve as a starting point and he began preaching Islam in earnest.
But in the 4th century BCE, they gained strength and spread from Bihar to Orissa, then so South India and westwards to Gujarat and the Punjab, where Jain communities became firmly established, particularly among the mercantile classes.
Certain issues have brought criticism to missionary activity.
The Serbian Orthodox Church had its origins in the conversion by Byzantine missionaries of the Serb tribes when they arrived in the Balkans in the 7th century.
Sikhs are not ubiquitous worldwide in the way that adherents of larger world religions are, and they remain primarily an ethnic religion.
This verse is referred to by Christian missionaries as the Great Commission and inspires missionary work.
Up to one-third of American Muslims are African Americans who have converted to Islam during the last seventy years.
During the Expedition of Khalid ibn al-Walid (Banu Jadhimah) in January 630, Muhammad sent Khalid ibn Walid to invite the Banu Jadhimah tribe to Islam.
Both of these merged in 1966, and the resultant organisation is now known as the Council for World Mission.
Young women who desire to serve as missionaries can serve starting at the age of nineteen, for one and a half years.
The word "mission" originates from 1598 when the Jesuits sent members abroad, derived from the Latin ''missionem'' (nom.
The Emperor Ashoka was a significant early Buddhist missioner.
Pioneer Muslim missionaries to the Kenyan interior were largely Tanganyikans, who coupled their missionary work with trade, along the centres began along the railway line such as Kibwezi, Makindu, and Nairobi.
Ananda Marga counts hundreds of missions around the world through which its members carry out various forms of selfless service on Relief.
Recently, Muslim groups have engaged in missionary work in Malawi.
When the early Javanese princes accepted Hinduism, they did not give up all of their early animistic beliefs—they simply combined the new ideas with them.
Also, with the increased study and awareness of different people groups, western mission efforts have become far more sensitive to the cultural nuances of those they are going to and those they are working with in the effort.
Within thirty years, Moravian missionaries had become active on every continent, and this at a time when there were fewer than three hundred people in Herrnhut.
His proselytizing is said to have converted many to Buddhism in China, and made Chang'an, present-day Xi'an, a major center of Buddhism.
This fact is corroborated, by J. Sturrock in his ''South Kanara and Madras Districts Manuals'', and  also by Haridas Bhattacharya in ''Cultural Heritage of India Vol.
(The social welfare and development organization under AMPS is ''Ananda Marga Universal Relief Team'', or AMURT.)
There are also tens of thousands of Jains located in the UK and Canada.
* Bhai Gurdas (1551 – 25 August 1636) who was a Punjabi Sikh writer, historian, missionary, and religious figure.
In the earlier stages of the Ottoman Empire, a Turkic form of Shamanism was still widely practiced in Anatolia which soon lost ground to Sufism.
Tenrikyo conducts missionary work in approximately forty countries.
When in 710 Emperor Shomu established a new capital at Nara modeled after the capital of China, Buddhism received official support and began to flourish.
Gradually, all India and the neighboring island of Ceylon were converted.
When he returned to Herrnhut in Saxony, he inspired the inhabitants of the villageit had fewer than thirty houses thento send out "messengers" to the slaves in the West Indies and to the Moravian missions in Greenland.
Upon completion of their degrees, they are sent to various parts of the world including South America, Africa, North America, Europe, and the Far East as appointed by Mirza Masroor Ahmad, present head and Caliph of the worldwide Ahmadiyya Muslim Community.
But there are other factors that determine or are associated with ethnicity.)
Marananta brought Buddhism to the Korean Peninsula in the 4th century.
First supported by the Soga clan, Buddhism rose over the objections of the pro-Shinto Mononobe and Buddhism entrenched itself in Japan with the conversion of Prince Shotoku Taishi.
The Mali Empire, consisting predominantly of African and Berber tribes, stands as a strong example of the early Islamic conversion of the Sub-Saharan region.
With the coming about of the tradition of Sufism, Islamic missionary activities increased considerably.
The northeastern sector of the country was also influenced by an influx of Hausa Muslim traders from the 16th century onwards
Contemporary Christian missionaries argue that working for justice forms a constitutive part of preaching the Gospel, and observe the principles of inculturation in their missionary work.
He founded the Shaivite priesthood that is now ubiquitous in Bali, and is now regarded as the ancestor of all Shaivite pandits
* Advise and support young students in schools, colleges, and universities on Sikh issues and Sikh traditions.
The Church Mission Society, first known as the Society for Missions to Africa and the East, was founded in 1799 by evangelical Anglicans centred around the anti-slavery activist William Wilberforce.
The developing churches eventually intended "graduating" to regular diocesan status with a local episcopacy appointed, especially after decolonization, as the church structures often reflect the political-administrative actuality.
Language is a primary and dominant identifying factor of a people group.
The spread of Islam into West Africa, beginning with ancient Ghana in the 9th century, was mainly the result of the commercial activities of North African Muslims.
In 2003, it operated approximately twenty thousand mission stations worldwide.
Several centuries ago, many Hindus left Java for Bali rather than convert to Islam.
While some missions accompanied imperialism and oppression (the Baltic Crusades of the 12th and 13th centuries, for example), others (notably Matteo Ricci's Jesuit mission to China from 1582) were relatively peaceful and focused on integration rather than on cultural imperialism.
Dharmaraksa came to the Chinese capital of Luoyang in 266 CE, where he made the first known translations of the Lotus Sutra and the Dasabhumika Sutra, which were to become some of the classic texts of Chinese Mahayana Buddhism.
This approach has been repudiated by Orthodox and Conservative Jews as unrealistic and posing a danger.
These missionaries represent a major shift in church history.
There are two parts to that word: ethno and linguistic.
Father James Anthony Walsh, a priest from the heart of Boston, and Father Thomas Frederick Price, the first native North Carolinian to be ordained into the priesthood, recognized that through their differences, they were touched by the triumph of the human spirit and enriched by encountering the faith experience of others.
These are some of the most well-known missions in history.
Several South African, Kuwaiti, and other Muslim agencies are active in Mozambique, with one important one being the African Muslim Agency.
* Women's welfare: women welfare units, women's homes, nursing homes etc.
The term is most commonly used for Christian missions, but can be used for any creed or ideology.
As Jain monks do not travel overseas, he recommended the bright young scholar Virchand Gandhi to be the emissary for the religion.
The basis of their achievement and interest in the field of Sikh Faith and Panjabi language.
Conversion to Islam in prisons, and in large urban areas has also contributed to Islam's growth over the years.
Blavatsky and the Buddhist Society, London spread interest in Buddhism.
Later, with the conquest of Anatolia by the Seljuk Turks, missionaries would find easier passage to the lands then formerly belonging to the Byzantine Empire.
Shaykh Zainuddin Makhdum's "Tuhfat al-Mujahidin"  also is a reliable work.
He soon attracted several Kikuyus and Wakambas, who became his disciples.
The Islamic conquest of Persia put an end to the Sassanid Empire and spread the reach of Islam to as far East as Khorasan, which would later become the cradle of Islamic civilization during the Islamic Golden Age (622-1258 C.E.)
Independently, the men had written extensively about the concept.
The Akha people of South East Asia are an example of those who believe that missionaries are only converting others for personal gain.
He also got to know a slave from the Danish colony in the West Indies.
As of January 2014, the LDS Church has over 80,000 missionaries worldwide and over 10,000 Welfare Services Missionaries.
Internationally, the focus for many years in the later 20th century was on reaching every "people group" with Christianity by the year 2000.
During the Age of Discovery, the Roman Catholic Church established a number of missions in the Americas and in other colonies through the Augustinians, Franciscans, and Dominicans to spread Christianity in the New World and to convert the Native Americans and other indigenous people.
In 1968 Leo Boer and wener van de Wetering founded a Zen group, and through two books made Zen popular in the Netherlands.
The missionary movement peaked during the Islamic Golden Age, with the expansion of foreign trade routes, primarily into the Indo-Pacific and as far South as the isle of Zanzibar as well as the South-Eastern shores of Africa.
Young men between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five are encouraged to prepare themselves to serve a two-year, self-funded (often subsidized by the LDS Church), full-time proselytizing mission.
But they can be found in many international cities and have become an especially strong religious presence in the United Kingdom and Canada.
Islam made its entry into the northern territories of modern Ghana around the 15th century.
* Education: creating and managing primary, post-primary, and higher schools, research institutes etc.
Altogether, Dharmaraksa translated around 154 Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna ''sutras'', representing most of the important texts of Buddhism available in the Western Regions.
In 596, Pope Gregory the Great (in office 590-604) sent the Gregorian Mission (including Augustine of Canterbury) into England.
He has attracted celebrity religious followers such as Richard Gere and Adam Yauch.
In Canada, the immense popularity and goodwill ushered in by Tibet's Dalai Lama (who has been made honorary Canadian citizen) put Buddhism in a favourable light in the country.
He founded Jain monasteries even in non-Aryan territory, and almost all ancient Jain temples or monuments of unknown origin are popularly attributed to him.
Gandhi was most likely the first Jain and the first Gujarati to travel to the United States, and his statue still stands at the Jain temple in Chicago.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) has an active missionary program.
