St. Louis was a major supply point for decades, for parties of settlers heading west.
** Orthodox Christian – <1%
Another gifted school is the Missouri Academy of Science, Mathematics and Computing, which is located at the Northwest Missouri State University.
Most Missouri farmers practiced subsistence farming before the American Civil War.
In the Combined Statistical Area in 2015, it ranked 24th with 2.43 million.
Fighting ensued between Union forces and a combined army of General Price's Missouri State Guard and Confederate troops from Arkansas and Texas under General Ben McCulloch.
Another one states that it is a reference to Missouri miners who were taken to Leadville, Colorado to replace striking workers.
In 2005, Missouri received 16,695,000 visitors to its national parks and other recreational areas totaling , giving it $7.41 million in annual revenues, 26.6% of its operating expenditures.
The growth of the Texas cattle industry along with this increased rail infrastructure and the invention of the refrigerated boxcar also made Kansas City a major meatpacking center, as large cattle drives from Texas brought herds of cattle to Dodge City and other Kansas towns.
Worth County is the smallest (266 sq.
The southeastern part of the state is known as the '''Bootheel region''', which is part of the Mississippi Alluvial Plain or Mississippi embayment.
Between the Civil War and the end of World War II, Missouri transitioned from a rural economy to a hybrid industrial-service-agricultural economy as the Midwest rapidly industrialized.
Most of the newcomers were American-born, but many Irish and German immigrants arrived in the late 1840s and 1850s.
Mexico and Colombia, Africa (i.e.
The Spanish language is spoken in small Latino communities in the St. Louis and Kansas City Metro areas.
Other resources mined are lead, coal, and crushed stone.
Famed authors Kate Chopin, T. S. Eliot and Tennessee Williams were all from St. Louis.
Missouri has no statewide open container law or prohibition on drinking in public, no alcohol-related blue laws, no local option, no precise locations for selling liquor by the package (allowing even drug stores and gas stations to sell any kind of liquor), and no differentiation of laws based on alcohol percentage.
Most of the lead mines are in the central eastern portion of the state.
From 1764 to 1803, European control of the area west of the Mississippi to the northernmost part of the Missouri River basin, called Louisiana, was assumed by the Spanish as part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, due to Treaty of Fontainebleau (in order to have Spain join with France in the war against England).
The only urban light rail/subway system operating in Missouri is MetroLink, which connects the city of St. Louis with suburbs in Illinois and St. Louis County.
In 2011, 28.1% of Missouri's population younger than age 1 were minorities.
The rivalry is chiefly expressed through football and basketball games between the two universities.
The Mormon War erupted in 1838.
As of 2012, it was the 26th largest metropolitan area in the nation, with 2.38 million people.
However, according to researchers, the phrase "show me" was already in use before the 1890s.
** Other Christian – <1%
Alcohol regulation did not begin in Missouri until 1934.
Kansas City is a major railroad hub for BNSF Railway, Norfolk Southern Railway, Kansas City Southern Railway, and Union Pacific Railroad.
Missouri state law permits restaurants seating less than 50 people, bars, bowling alleys, and billiard parlors to decide their own smoking policies, without limitation.
There, the cattle were loaded onto trains destined for Kansas City, where they were butchered and distributed to the eastern markets.
* 1.9% Multiracial American
Any combination of these phonetic realizations may be observed coming from speakers of American English.
In 2010, there were 2,349,955 households in Missouri, with 2.45 people per household.
The arrival of the Spanish in St. Louis was in September 1767.
This region also hosts karst topography characterized by high limestone content with the formation of sinkholes and caves.
It is one of the largest systems (by track mileage) in the United States.
Other nicknames for Missouri include "The Lead State", "The Bullion State", "The Ozark State", "The Mother of the West", "The Iron Mountain State", and "Pennsylvania of the West".
Napoleon Bonaparte had gained Louisiana for French ownership from Spain in 1800 under the Treaty of San Ildefonso, after it had been a Spanish colony since 1762.
An exchange occurs following the game where the winner gets to take a historic Indian War Drum, which has been passed back and forth for decades.
In 2011, 3.7% of the total population was of Hispanic or Latino origin (they may be of any race).
5% was generated by natural gas.
Louisiana remained nominally under Spanish control until a transfer of power to France on November 30, 1803, just three weeks before the cession to the United States.
Missouri has been known for its population's generally "stalwart, conservative, noncredulous" attitude toward regulatory regimes, which is one of the origins of the state's unofficial nickname, the "Show-Me State."
The state's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate in May 2016 was 4.3 percent, the 21st lowest in the nation.
Per capita personal income in 2006 was $32,705, ranking 26th in the nation.
After winning victories at the battle of Wilson's Creek and the siege of Lexington, Missouri and suffering losses elsewhere, the Confederate forces retreated to Arkansas and later Marshall, Texas, in the face of a largely reinforced Union Army.
* 84.0% White American (81.0% non-Hispanic white, 3.0% White Hispanic)
The home ownership rate was 70.0 percent, and the median value of an owner-occupied housing unit was $137,700.
A proposed high-speed rail route in Missouri as part of the Chicago Hub Network has received $31 million in funding.
Perry County is the county with the largest number of caves and the single longest cave.
It is the 21st most extensive, and the 18th most populous of the fifty states.
Lyon directed his soldiers, largely non-English-speaking German immigrants, to march the prisoners through the streets, and they opened fire on the largely hostile crowds of civilians who gathered around them.
Planters, defined by some historians as those holding twenty slaves or more, were concentrated in the counties known as "Little Dixie", in the central part of the state along the Missouri River.
Such highway construction made it easy for middle-class residents to leave the city for newer housing developed in the suburbs, often former farmland where land was available at lower prices.
Missouri has a small but growing amount of wind and solar power—wind capacity increased from 309 MW in 2009 to 459 MW in 2011, while photovoltaics have increased from 0.2 MW to 1.3 MW over the same period.
Located in the interior United States, Missouri often experiences extremes in temperatures.
As of 2012 St. Louis was the 21st largest metropolitan area in the nation with 2.90 million people.
The Missouri State Board of Education has general authority over all public education in the state of Missouri.
Hannibal–LaGrange University in Hannibal, Missouri, was one of the first colleges west of the Mississippi (founded 1858 in LaGrange, Missouri, and moved to Hannibal in 1928).
It is made up of eight citizens appointed by the governor and confirmed by the Missouri Senate.
The land that is now Missouri was acquired from France as part of the Louisiana Purchase and became known as the '''Missouri Territory'''.
A notable Cherokee Indian population exists in Missouri.
The program is based on the premise that Missouri's gifted youth must be provided with special opportunities for learning and personal development in order for them to realize their full potential."
There are no oil refineries in Missouri.
Missouri also has a growing science and biotechnology field.
In 2004, the population included 194,000 foreign-born (3.4 percent of the state population).
Missouri is bounded by Iowa on the north; by Illinois,  Kentucky, and Tennessee across the Mississippi River on the east; on the south by Arkansas; and by Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska (the last across the Missouri River) on the west.
Missouri is the only state in the Union to have two Federal Reserve Banks: one in Kansas City (serving western Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, Colorado, northern New Mexico, and Wyoming) and one in St. Louis (serving eastern Missouri, southern Illinois, southern Indiana, western Kentucky, western Tennessee, northern Mississippi, and all of Arkansas).
Kansas City-born writer William Least Heat-Moon currently resides in Rocheport.
Residents of Mid-Missouri use Columbia Regional Airport (COU) to fly to either Chicago (ORD) or Dallas (DFW).
These bodies comprise the Missouri General Assembly.
Harry S Truman (1884–1972), the 33rd President of the United States (Democrat, 1945–1953), was born in Lamar.
St. Louis became the center of a regional fur trade with Native American tribes that extended up the Missouri and Mississippi rivers, which dominated the regional economy for decades.
One of the worst tornadoes in American history struck St. Louis on May 27, 1896, killing at least 255 and causing $10 mil.
The largest county by population (2012 estimate) is St. Louis County (1,000,438 residents), with Jackson County second (677,377 residents), St. Charles third (368,666), and St. Louis fourth (318,172).
*Unaffiliated (No religion) – 20%
This line is known as the Osage Boundary.
It is located in downtown St. Louis, next to the historic Union Station complex.
North of, and in some cases just south of, the Missouri River lie the Northern Plains that stretch into Iowa, Nebraska, and Kansas.
The expansion of railroads to the West transformed Kansas City into a major transportation hub within the nation.
Kansas City is the second largest freight rail center in the US (but is first in the amount of tonnage handled).
No statewide smoking ban ever has been seriously entertained before the Missouri General Assembly, and in October 2008, a statewide survey by the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services found that only 27.5% of Missourians support a statewide ban on smoking in all bars and restaurants.
Exempt real estate includes property owned by governments and property used as nonprofit cemeteries, exclusively for religious worship, for schools and colleges and for purely charitable purposes.
The book was on the New York Times Bestseller list for nearly a year in 1982-1983.
There are numerous junior colleges, trade schools, church universities and other private universities in the state.
The official state motto is , which means "Let the welfare of the people be the supreme law."
Approximately 5.1% of the population reported speaking a language other than English at home.
Southern Missouri rises to the Ozark Mountains, a dissected plateau surrounding the Precambrian igneous St. Francois Mountains.
Homeschooling is legal in Missouri and is an option to meet the compulsory education requirement.
Missouri law makes it "an improper employment practice" for an employer to refuse to hire, to fire, or otherwise to disadvantage any person because that person lawfully uses alcohol and/or tobacco products when he or she is not at work.
** Nothing in particular – 15%
Kansas City is home to large and growing immigrant communities from Latin America esp.
The executive branch is headed by the Governor of Missouri and includes five other statewide elected offices.
District territories are often complex in structure.
The official MSA website describes the goals of the Academy to be as such: "The academy reflects Missouri's desire to strive for excellence in education at all levels.
The fur trade and associated businesses made St. Louis an early financial center and provided the wealth for some to build fine houses and import luxury items.
Missouri is home to an endangered dialect of the French language known as Missouri French.
In 1821 the former Missouri Territory was admitted as a slave state, in accordance with the Missouri Compromise, and with a temporary state capital in St. Charles.
miles) and Shannon County is second (1,004 sq.
The first half of the twentieth century was the height of Kansas City's prominence and its downtown became a showcase for stylish Art Deco skyscrapers as construction boomed.
Missouri's sales tax rate for most items is 4.225% with some additional local levies.
The agriculture products of the state are beef, soybeans, pork, dairy products, hay, corn, poultry, sorghum, cotton, rice, and eggs.
No state in the U.S. touches more than eight.
One example of this is the wasp ''Polistes exclamans''.
Louis and Kansas City.
Most personal property is exempt, except for motorized vehicles.
Their large cities included thousands of individual residences, but they are known for their surviving massive earthwork mounds, built for religious, political and social reasons, in platform, ridgetop and conical shapes.
St. Charles, just west of St. Louis, was the starting point and the return destination of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, which ascended the Missouri River in 1804, in order to explore the western lands to the Pacific Ocean.
The river has moved since this designation.
Like Kansas City, St. Louis is a major destination for train freight.
81.3 percent of Missouri residents were high school graduates (more than the national average), and 21.6 percent had a bachelor's degree or higher.
Some of the major cities making up the St. Louis Metro area in Missouri are St. Charles, St. Peters, Florissant, Chesterfield, Creve Coeur, Wildwood, Maryland Heights, O'Fallon, Clayton, Ballwin, and University City.
They were called the ''ouemessourita'' (''wimihsoorita''), meaning "those who have dugout canoes", by the Miami-Illinois language speakers.
Further pronunciations also exist in Missouri or elsewhere in the United States, involving the realization of the first syllable as either  or ; the medial consonant as either  or ; the stressed second syllable as either  or ; and the third syllable as  ,  ,  centralized  (Near-close central unrounded vowel|ɪ̈), or even ∅ (in other words, a non-existent third syllable).
Historians have portrayed stories of the James brothers' outlaw years as an American "Robin Hood" myth.
Cahokia was the center of a regional trading network that reached from the Great Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico.
However, if ranked using Combined Statistical Area, it is 19th largest with 2.92 million people in 2015.
Speakers of the dialect, who call themselves ''Créoles'', are descendants of the French pioneers who settled the area then known as the Illinois Country beginning in the late 17th century.
Archaeological excavations along the rivers have shown continuous habitation for more than 7,000 years.
Located in Tornado Alley, Missouri also receives extreme weather in the form of severe thunderstorms and tornadoes.
77% affiliate with Christianity and its various denominations, and the other 3% are adherents of non-Christian religions.
Having fled famine and oppression in Ireland, and revolutionary upheaval in Germany, the immigrants were not sympathetic to slavery.
Since the new men were unfamiliar with the mining methods, they required frequent instruction.
It is also the most fertile, with cotton and rice crops predominant.
Amtrak passenger trains serve Kansas City, La Plata, Jefferson City, St. Louis, Lee's Summit, Independence, Warrensburg, Hermann, Washington, Kirkwood, Sedalia, and Poplar Bluff.
It is the oldest college rivalry west of the Mississippi River and the second oldest in the nation.
During the mid-1950s and 1960s, St. Louis and Kansas City suffered deindustrialization and loss of jobs in railroads and manufacturing, as did other Midwestern industrial cities.
A supplemental education program, the Missouri Scholars Academy, provides an extracurricular learning experience for gifted high school students in the state of Missouri.
Two of the nation's three busiest rail centers are located in Missouri.
The public schools system includes kindergarten to 12th grade.
In 2012, Missouri had roughly 22,000 MW of installed electricity generation capacity.
Alarmed at this action, Union General Nathaniel Lyon struck first, encircling the camp and forcing the state troops to surrender.
The state comprises 114 counties and the independent city of St. Louis.
The state's population density 86.9 in 2009, is also closer to the national average (86.8 in 2009) than any other state.
Greyhound and Trailways provide inter-city bus service in Missouri.
Worth County is the least populous with 2,171 (2010 census) residents.
Following the death of Tom Schweich in 2015, all but one of Missouri's statewide elected offices are held by Democrats.
Missouri is ranked in the top five states in the nation for production of soy beans, and it is ranked fourth in the nation for the production of rice.
The Missouri was channelized through dredging and jettys and the Mississippi was given a series of locks and dams to avoid rocks and deepen the river.
Often, informal respellings of the state's name, such as "Missour-''ee''" or "Missour-''uh''", are used informally to phonetically distinguish pronunciations.
The vigilante activities of the Bald Knobbers of the Ozarks in the 1880s were an unofficial continuation of insurgent mentality long after the official end of the war, and they are a favorite theme in Branson's self-image.
The starting points for the Pony Express, Santa Fe Trail, and Oregon Trail were all located in Missouri as well.
* 0.5% American Indian and Alaska Native
The federal government's decision enabled raising pro-Union militia forces for service within the state as well as volunteer regiments for the Union Army.
With the elected governor absent from the capital and the legislators largely dispersed, the state convention was reassembled with most of its members present, save 20 that fled south with Jackson's forces.
Within historic times, the passenger pigeon, the carolina parakeet, and the ivory-billed woodpecker were all found in Missouri, but they have since been eliminated.
There is no inheritance tax and limited Missouri estate tax related to federal estate tax collection.
Springfield is the headquarters of the Assemblies of God USA and the Baptist Bible Fellowship International.
Missouri is ranked 6th in the nation for the production of hogs and 7th for cattle.
Missouri's highest recorded temperature is  at Warsaw and Union on July 14, 1954 while the lowest recorded temperature is  also at Warsaw on February 13, 1905.
They enacted a secession ordinance.
The mean commute time to work was 23.8 minutes.
These facilities have made Branson one of America's most popular tourist destinations..
Among the other denominations there are approximately 93,000 Mormons in 253 congregations, 25,000 Jewish adherents in 21 temples, 12,000 Muslims in 39 masjids, 7,000 Buddhists in 34 temples, 7,000 Hindus in 17 temples, 2,500 Unitarians in 9 congregations, 2,000 Baha'i in 17 temples, 5 Sikh temples, a Zorastrian temple, a Jain temple and an uncounted number of neopagans.
It never enacted statewide prohibition.
+ '''Missouri racial breakdown of population'''
Soldiers killed unarmed prisoners as well as men, women and children of St. Louis in the incident that became known as the "St. Louis Massacre".
With a large German immigrant population and the development of a brewing industry, Missouri always has had among the most permissive alcohol laws in the United States.
In 1956 St. Charles claims to be the site of the first interstate highway project.
After the secession of Southern states began in 1861, the Missouri legislature called for the election of a special convention on secession.
Conflicts over religion and slavery arose between the 'old settlers' (mainly from the South) and the Mormons (mainly from the North).
Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 50,450 people, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 37,638 people.
3.4 percent of Missourians were foreign-born, and 5.1 percent reported speaking a language other than English at home.
Casualties were few due to the sparse population.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that Missouri's total state product in 2006 was $225.9 billion.
From 2000 to 2007, this includes a natural increase of 137,564 people since the last census (480,763 births less 343,199 deaths), and an increase of 88,088 people due to net migration into the state.
St. Louis and its suburbs also have a history of experiencing particularly severe tornadoes, the most recent memorable one being an EF4 tornado that damaged Lambert-St. Louis International Airport on April 22, 2011.
This phrase has several origins.
Pro-Southern Governor Claiborne F. Jackson ordered the mobilization of several hundred members of the state militia who had gathered in a camp in St. Louis for training.
Conflicts over slavery exacerbated border tensions among the states and territories.
St. Louis was at one time known as Mound City by the European Americans, because of the numerous surviving prehistoric mounds, since lost to urban development.
The mean center of the United States population at the 2010 census was in the town of Plato in Texas County.
The vast majority of people in Missouri speak English.
As defined by the 2010 US census, the four largest urban areas in order of population are St. Louis, Kansas City, Springfield, and Columbia.
The tensions over slavery chiefly had to do with the future of the state and nation.
The judicial department comprises the Supreme Court of Missouri, which has seven judges, the Missouri Court of Appeals (an intermediate appellate court divided into three districts), sitting in Kansas City, St. Louis, and Springfield, and 45 Circuit Courts which function as local trial courts.
The tornado caused an estimated $1–3 billion in damages, killed 159 (+1 non-tornadic), and injured over 1,000 people.
The largest denominations by number of adherents in 2010 were the Southern Baptist Convention with 749,685; the Roman Catholic Church with 724,315; and the United Methodist Church with 226,409.
See entire collection at List of people from Missouri.
Missouri has many large river bluffs along the Mississippi, Missouri, and Meramec Rivers.
The Mississippian culture left mounds throughout the middle Mississippi and Ohio river valleys, extending into the southeast as well as the upper river.
Missouri voters rejected prohibition in three separate referenda in 1910, 1912, and 1918.
With increasing migration, from the 1830s to the 1860s Missouri's population almost doubled with every decade.
North of the Missouri River, the state is primarily rolling hills of the Great Plains, whereas south of the Missouri River, the state is dominated by the Oak-Hickory Central U.S. hardwood forest.
Monthly Normal High and Low Temperatures For Various Missouri Cities in °F (°C).
St. Louis is a major destination for barge traffic on the Mississippi.
German Americans are an ancestry group present throughout Missouri.
Though regular Confederate troops staged some large-scale raids into Missouri, the fighting in the state for the next three years consisted chiefly of guerrilla warfare.
It developed in isolation from French speakers in Canada and Louisiana, becoming quite distinct from the varieties of Canadian French and Louisiana Creole French.
The state is named for the Missouri River, which was named after the indigenous Missouri Indians, a Siouan-language tribe.
Tourism, services and wholesale/retail trade follow manufacturing in importance.
In 2001, there were 108,000 farms, the second-largest number in any state after Texas.
Several religious organizations have headquarters in Missouri, including the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, which has its headquarters in Kirkwood, as well as the United Pentecostal Church International in Hazelwood, both outside St. Louis.
The five largest ancestry groups in Missouri are: German (27.4 percent), Irish (14.8 percent), English (10.2 percent), American (8.5 percent) and French (3.7 percent).
High school athletics and competitions are governed by the Missouri State High School Activities Association (MSHSAA).
* 0.1% Some other race
This is in keeping with the saying "I'm from Missouri" which means "I'm skeptical of the matter and not easily convinced."
Missouri had a population of 5,988,927, according to the 2010 Census; an increase of 392,369 (7.0 percent) since the year 2000.
Here, rolling hills remain from the glaciation that once extended from the Canadian Shield to the Missouri River.
