33% contained at least one child, giving Mississippi the distinction of leading the nation in the percentage of same-sex couples raising children.
Blacks cleared land, selling timber and developing bottomland to achieve ownership.
The committee found severe destitution among the laboring classes.
In more diverse communities, such as Hattiesburg, some churches have multiracial congregations.
They created independent black Baptist congregations.
He continued as the only African American in the state legislature until 1976 and was repeatedly elected into the 21st century, including three terms as Speaker of the House.
Other tribes who inhabited the territory of Mississippi (and whose names were honored by colonists in local towns) include the Natchez, the Yazoo, and the Biloxi.
It established a one-party state dominated by white Democrats.
Both white and black transient workers were hired to build the levees in the late 19th century.
In these roles, the ethnic Chinese carved out a niche in the state between black and white, where they were concentrated in the Delta.
In 1960 they made up 42% of the state's population.
With the Depression coming so soon after the flood, the state suffered badly during those years.
State officials believed they needed to maintain public education to attract new businesses.
They wanted to express their own traditions of worship and practice.
White Citizens Councils had been formed in many cities and towns to resist integration of schools following the unanimous 1954 United States Supreme Court ruling (''Brown v. Board of Education'') that segregation of public schools was unconstitutional.
In 1879, the United States Congress created the Mississippi River Commission, whose responsibilities included aiding state levee boards in the construction of levees.
Many strongly supported Prohibition, believing it would help alleviate and prevent many sins.
The state capital, Jackson, ranks tenth in the nation in concentration of African-American same-sex couples.
He and Chester Arthur Burnett were friends and admirers of each other's music.
For more information, visit the  Mississippi Department of Transportation website.
Regional losses and the Mississippi River Levee Association's lobbying for a flood control bill helped gain passage of national bills in 1917 and 1923 to provide federal matching funds for local levee districts, on a scale of 2:1.
In the early 20th century, there were still few schools in rural areas, particularly for black children.
Matthew Snipp, also a demographer, commented on the increase in the 21st century in the number of people identifying as being of more than one race: "In a sense, they're rendering a more accurate portrait of their racial heritage that in the past would have been suppressed."
In 2004, voters in Mississippi approved Amendment 1, amending the state's constitution to prohibit same-sex marriage; the measure passed with 86% of the vote, the highest margin of victory in the nation.
After the Civil War, most African Americans left white churches to establish their own independent congregations, particularly Baptist churches, establishing state associations and a national association by the end of the century.
The state was thinly settled, with population concentrated in the riverfront areas and towns.
Slaves were counted as property and the rise in the cotton markets since the 1840s had increased their value.
The Mississippi Territory was organized on April 7, 1798, from territory ceded by Georgia and South Carolina to the United States.
African Americans are still a majority in many counties of the Mississippi-Yazoo Delta, an area of historic settlement during the plantation era.
They also ceded their areas to the north that were east of the Mississippi River, including the Illinois Country and Quebec.
Plantations were developed primarily along the major rivers, where the waterfront provided access to the major transportation routes.
Today approximately 9,500 Choctaw live in Neshoba, Newton, Leake, and Jones counties.
The Mississippi School of the Arts (MSA) is an upper high school of literary, visual, and performing arts on the historic Whitworth College Campus in Brookhaven, Mississippi, about sixty miles (100&nbsp;km) south of Jackson, Mississippi.1 MSA teaches 11th and 12th grade students.
Mississippi is one of five states that elects its state officials in odd-numbered years (the others are Kentucky, Louisiana, New Jersey and Virginia).
The state had a median household income of $34,473.
From 2000 to 2010, the United States Census Bureau reported that Mississippi had the highest rate of increase in people identifying as mixed-race, up 70 percent in the decade; it amounts to a total of 1.1 percent of the population.
Most of Mississippi is part of the East Gulf Coastal Plain.
Nationwide during the first half of the 20th century, African Americans became rapidly urbanized and many worked in industrial jobs.
Since gaining enforcement of their franchise in the late 1960s, most African Americans support Democratic candidates in local, state and national elections.
The bill has become the subject of worldwide controversy.
Ethnically, 2.7% of the total population, among all racial groups, was of Hispanic or Latino origin (they may be of any race).
Registration of African-American voters increased and black candidates ran in the 1967 elections for state and local offices.
Same-sex marriage became legal in Mississippi on June 26, 2015, when the United States Supreme Court invalidated all state-level bans on same-sex marriage as unconstitutional in the landmark case Obergefell v. Hodges.
In the 1980 census 656,371 Mississippians of a total of 1,946,775 identified as being of English ancestry, making them 38% of the state at the time.
Flooding has been an integral part of Mississippi history, but clearing of the land for cultivation and to supply wood fuel for steamboats took away the absorption of trees and undergrowth.
The river's flooding created natural levees, which planters had built higher to try to prevent flooding of land cultivated for cotton crops.
The name of the state is derived from the Mississippi River, which flows along its western boundary.
Ninety percent of the Delta bottomlands were frontier and undeveloped.
Mississippi has the largest percentage of African-American same-sex couples among total households.
Some non-arts courses (some math, science, etc.)
Descendant Native American tribes of the Mississippian culture in the Southeast include the Chickasaw and Choctaw.
After the Civil War, major floods swept down the valley in 1865, 1867, 1874 and 1882.
African-American Baptist churches grew to include more than twice the number of members as their white Baptist counterparts.
Democrats regained control of the state legislature in 1875, after a year of expanded violence against blacks and intimidation of whites in what was called the "white line" campaign, based on asserting white supremacy.
By 1895 they had established numerous black Baptist state associations and the National Baptist Convention of black churches.
Blacks and whites attended segregated and separate public schools in Mississippi until the late 1960s, although such segregation had been declared unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court in its 1954 ruling in ''Brown v. Board of Education''.
This was a catalyst for Congressional passage the following year of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
Mississippi, like the rest of its southern neighbors, is a right-to-work state.
The campus has six buildings designated as Mississippi Landmarks, and is itself an historic district listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places.1
The Second Great Migration included destinations in the West, especially California, where the buildup of the defense industry offered higher paying jobs to both African Americans and whites.
The region was severely damaged due to the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, which broke through the levees.
In the post-Civil War years, religion became more influential as the South became known as the "Bible Belt".
There were fewer than 1000 free people of color.
Some also have Native American ancestry.
In the migration of 1910–1940, they left a society that had been steadily closing off opportunity.
Under French and Spanish rule, there developed a class of free people of color (''gens de couleur libres''), mostly multiracial descendants of European men and enslaved women, and their children.
More than 80,000 Mississippians fought in the Civil War, and casualties were extremely heavy.
In 1954 the state had created the Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission, a tax-supported agency, chaired by the Governor, that claimed to work for the state's image but effectively spied on activists and passed information to the local White Citizens' Councils to suppress black activism.
In the postwar period, freedmen withdrew from white-run churches to set up independent congregations.
The state depended on agriculture, but mechanization put many farm laborers out of work.
Section 265 of the Constitution of the State of Mississippi declares that "No person who denies the existence of a Supreme Being shall hold any office in this state."
In rural areas, deaths of blacks could be covered up.
As an explanation, the Report noted that 92% of Mississippi high school graduates took the ACT, but only 3% of graduates took the SAT, apparently a self-selection of higher achievers.
Mississippi holds elections for these offices every four years, always in the year preceding Presidential elections.
English is largely Southern American English, with some South Midland speech in northern and eastern Mississippi.
By 1860, a majority – 55 percent – of the population of Mississippi was enslaved.
The total population has not increased significantly, but is young.
Many Mississippians of such ancestry identify simply as American on questionnaires, because their families have been in North America for centuries.
Their large earthworks, which expressed their cosmology of political and religious concepts, still stand throughout the Mississippi and Ohio River valleys.
In contrast, Mississippi had the 17th-highest average SAT scores in the nation.
The state's dependence on agriculture and resistance to taxation limited the funds it had available to spend on any schools.
Mississippi musicians created new forms by combining and creating variations on musical traditions from Africa with the musical traditions of white Southerners, a tradition largely rooted in Scots–Irish music.
In 1964, Republican Barry M. Goldwater carried the state with 87% of votes, reflecting the shift among conservative white voters to supporting Republican candidates.
''(See: Lists of cities, towns and villages, census-designated places, metropolitan areas, micropolitan areas, and counties in Mississippi)''
After the 1882 flood, the levee system was expanded.
In the early days the French and Spanish colonists were chiefly men.
As another agricultural depression lowered cotton prices into the 1890s, however, numerous African-American farmers finally had to sell their land to pay off debts, thus losing the land which they had developed by personal labor.
On August 30, 2007, a report by the United States Census Bureau indicated that Mississippi was the poorest state in the country.
The Second Great Migration from the South started in the 1940s, lasting until 1970.
After thousands of years, succeeding cultures of the Woodland and Mississippian culture eras developed rich and complex agricultural societies, in which surplus supported the development of specialized trades.
The plain is narrow in the south and widens north of Vicksburg.
Contractors hired gangs of Irish immigrant laborers to build levees and sometimes clear land.
During the Civil War, 30,000 Mississippi soldiers, mostly white, died from wounds and disease, and many more were left crippled and wounded.
While most first worked as sharecroppers, the Chinese worked as families to improve their lives.
Located in the center of the state, Jackson is the state capital and largest city, with a population of around 175,000 people.
The majority entering the state immigrated directly from China to Mississippi between 1910–1930, when they were recruited by planters as laborers.
Under French and Spanish rule beginning in the 17th century, European colonists were mostly Roman Catholics.
In a 2009 Gallup poll, 63% of Mississippians said that they attended church weekly or almost weekly - the highest percentage of all states (U.S. average was 42%, and the lowest percentage was in Vermont at 23%).
Momentum Mississippi, a statewide, public–private partnership dedicated to the development of economic and employment opportunities in Mississippi, was adopted in 2005.
Mississippi was a center of activity, based in black churches, to educate and register black voters, and to work for integration.
Of $1.2 billion from 2002–2005 in federal subsidies to farmers in the Bolivar County area of the Delta, only 5% went to small farmers.
Clearing altered the ecology of the Delta, increasing the severity of flooding along the Mississippi.
The Riverside Hotel is just one of many historical blues sites in Clarksdale.
David Holmes was elected the first governor of the state.
Many such slaves were mixed race, with European ancestors, as there were many children born into slavery with white fathers.
Even in this environment, black Mississippians continued to be elected into local office.
The end of legal segregation and Jim Crow led to the integration of some churches, but most today remain divided along racial and cultural lines, having developed different traditions.
The northeast is a region of fertile black earth that extends into the Alabama Black Belt.
The Native Americans developed extensive fields near their permanent villages.
The new farmers included many freedmen, who achieved unusually high rates of land ownership in the Mississippi bottomlands by the late 19th century.
The state of Mississippi is entirely composed of lowlands, the highest point being Woodall Mountain, in the foothills of the Cumberland Mountains, 807 feet (246&nbsp;m) above sea level.
The lowest point is sea level at the Gulf coast.
Mississippi led the South in developing a disfranchising constitution, passing it in 1890.
The low prices of cotton into the 1890s meant that more than a generation of African Americans lost the result of their labor when they had to sell their farms to pay off accumulated debts.
Mississippi is the 32nd most extensive and the 32nd most populous of the 50 United States.
The Civil Rights Movement had many roots in religion, and the strong community of churches helped supply volunteers and moral purpose for their activism.
So many African Americans left in the Great Migration that after the 1930s, they became a minority in Mississippi.
The Mississippi School for the Deaf was established by the state legislature in 1854 before the civil war.
Often funding declined for the public schools.
The planter aristocracy, the elite of antebellum Mississippi, kept the tax structure low for their own benefit, making only private improvements.
In 1877 the last of federal troops were withdrawn from the region.
In addition, Mississippi led the nation for most of the last decade in the growth of mixed marriages among its population.
They used intimidation and economic blackmail against activists and suspected activists, including teachers and other professionals.
In the Great Migration, hundreds of thousands of African Americans migrated North and West for jobs and chances to live as full citizens.
In both years, the voting reflected essentially only white voters in the state, as most African Americans were overwhelmingly still disenfranchised under the state's 1890 constitution and discriminatory practices.
Some of the above change in identification as mixed race is due to new births.
Rising tenth-grade students from across the state apply and are selected on a competitive basis.
Most migrants from Mississippi took trains directly north to Chicago and often settled near former neighbors.
From the early 19th century to the 1930s, its residents were mostly black, a population that before the American Civil War was composed largely of African slaves.
Mississippi is one of 32 states which have capital punishment as a legal sentence (see Capital punishment in Mississippi).
Though ratified in 1995, the state never officially notified the U.S. archivist, which kept the ratification unofficial until 2013, when Ken Sullivan contacted the office of Secretary of State of Mississippi, Delbert Hosemann, who agreed to file the paperwork and make it official.
Such work removed the natural protection and absorption of wetlands and forest cover, strengthening the river's current.
Democratic whites became well armed and formed paramilitary organizations such as the Red Shirts to suppress black voting.
On September 27, 1830, the Treaty of Dancing Rabbit Creek was signed between the U.S. Government and the Choctaw.
Before Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast, Mississippi was the second-largest gambling state in the Union, after Nevada and ahead of New Jersey.
English, Scottish and Scots-Irish are generally the most under-reported ancestry groups in both the South Atlantic States and the East South Central States.
According to the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA), in 2010 the Southern Baptist Convention had 907,384 adherents and was the largest religious denomination in the state, followed by the United Methodist Church with 204,165, and the Roman Catholic Church with 112,488.
More than 100,000 people have left the region in search of work elsewhere.
When cotton was king during the 1850s, Mississippi plantation owners—especially those of the Delta and Black Belt central regions—became wealthy due to the high fertility of the soil, the high price of cotton on the international market, and their assets in slaves.
By raising barriers to voter registration, the state legislature disenfranchised most blacks and many poor whites, excluding them from politics until the late 1960s.
In addition, when Democrats regained control of the state legislature, they passed the 1890 constitution that discouraged corporate industrial development in favor of rural agriculture, a legacy that would slow the state's progress for years.
Evangelical Protestant
Before that, Mississippi had taxed the illegal alcohol brought in by bootleggers.
Seeing the success of this deliberate "Mississippi Plan", South Carolina and other states followed it and also achieved white dominance.
Southern slave codes made the willful killing of a slave illegal in most cases.
The coastline includes large bays at Bay St. Louis, Biloxi, and Pascagoula.
During the war, Union and Confederate forces struggled for dominance on the Mississippi River, critical to supply routes and commerce.
Blacks also faced violence in the form of lynching, shooting, and the burning of churches.
While the state has had a reputation for being the most racist in the United States, individual musicians created an integrated music community.
Most have ancestors who were enslaved, with many forcibly transported from the Upper South in the 19th century to work on the area's new plantations.
+ '''Top 10 Non-English Languages Spoken in Mississippi'''
Because of the destruction from this hurricane, on October 17, 2005, Governor Haley Barbour signed a bill into law that allows casinos in Hancock and Harrison counties to rebuild on land (but within  of the water).
In those years, planters considered their slaves too valuable to hire out for such dangerous work.
In 2009, the legislature passed a bill to repeal other discriminatory civil rights laws, which had been enacted in 1964, the same year as the federal Civil Rights Act, but ruled unconstitutional in 1967 by federal courts.
Together with other practices, they created some localized deforestation but did not alter the ecology of the Mississippi Delta as a whole.
By 1860, the enslaved African-American population numbered 436,631 or 55% of the state's total of 791,305.
After having comprised a majority of the state's population since well before the Civil War and through the 1930s, today African Americans comprise approximately 37 percent of the state's population.
Before the Civil War, Mississippi was the fifth-wealthiest state in the nation, its wealth generated by the labor of slaves in cotton plantations along the rivers.
Much land is now held by agribusinesses.
The Lieutenant Governor, currently Tate Reeves (R), is elected on a separate ballot.
Some 45,700 students attended private schools.
Mississippi had the highest rate of obesity of any U.S. state from 2005 to 2008, and also ranks first in the nation for high blood pressure, diabetes, and adult inactivity.
In 1877, the state created the Mississippi Levee District for southern counties.
According to the 2010 census, approximately 33% of households led by same-sex couples in Mississippi included at least one child, the highest such percentage in the nation.
After the Civil War, tens of thousands of migrants were attracted to the area by higher wages offered by planters trying to develop land.
Southern congregations brought their own influences to those denominations as well.
Previous intervention strategies may have been largely ineffective due to not being culturally sensitive or practical.
This figure is based on federal spending after large portions of the state were devastated by Hurricane Katrina, requiring large amounts of federal aid from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
From 1800 to about 1830, the United States purchased some lands (Treaty of Doak's Stand) from Native American tribes for new settlements of European Americans; they were mostly migrants from other Southern states, particularly Virginia and North Carolina, where soils were exhausted.
They quickly attracted hundreds of thousands of converts and founded new churches across the South.
In 1716, the French founded Natchez on the Mississippi River (as ''Fort Rosalie''); it became the dominant town and trading post of the area.
The state is heavily forested outside of the Mississippi Delta area, between the Mississippi and Yazoo rivers.
The state has the highest adherence rate of the PCA in 2010, with 121 congregations and 18,500 members.
Mississippi is heavily forested, with over half of the state's area covered by wild trees, including mostly pine, as well as cottonwood, elm, hickory, oak, pecan, sweetgum and tupelo.
Before the American Civil War, most development in the state was along riverfronts, where cotton plantations were cleared and worked by Slaves.
In a 2006 study, 22.8 percent of the state's children were classified as such.
The state's sizable poultry industry has faced similar challenges in its transition from family-run farms to large mechanized operations.
In addition, independent black denominations, such as the African Methodist Episcopal Church (established in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania) and the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church (established in New York City), sent missionaries to the South in the postwar years.
Around the start of the 20th century, two-thirds of the Mississippi farmers who owned land in the Delta were African American.
The state is creating a Mississippi Blues Trail, with dedicated markers explaining historic sites significant to the history of blues music, such as Clarksdale's Riverside Hotel, where Bessie Smith died after her auto accident on Highway 61.
Temporary workers built levees along the Mississippi River on top of the natural levees that formed from dirt deposited after the river flooded.
In the 1870s and 1880s, many black farmers succeeded in gaining land ownership.
In the civil rights era, people of African descent banded together in an inclusive community to achieve political power and gain restoration of their civil rights.
The only exception is in Harrison County, where the new law states that casinos can be built to the southern boundary of U.S. Route 90.
Another 2008 Gallup poll found that 85% of Mississippians considered religion an important part of their daily lives, the highest figure among all states (U.S. average 65%).
The planters' dependence on hundreds of thousands of slaves for labor and the severe wealth imbalances among whites, played strong roles both in state politics and in planters' support for secession.
Nothing in particular
Although by the end of the 19th century, two-thirds of the farm owners were black, continued low prices for cotton and national financial pressures resulted in most of them losing their land.
As with all other U.S. states and the federal government, Mississippi's government is based on the separation of legislative, executive and judicial power.
In 2007, Mississippi students scored the lowest of any state on the National Assessments of Educational Progress in both math and science.
In addition, the reliance on agriculture grew increasingly costly as the state suffered loss of cotton crops due to the devastation of the boll weevil in the early 20th century, devastating floods in 1912–1913 and 1927, collapse of cotton prices after 1920, and drought in 1930.
Areas under the management of the National Park Service include:
*Vicksburg National Military Park and Cemetery in Vicksburg
The region has rich soil, partly made up of silt which had been regularly deposited by the flood waters of the Mississippi River.
But in the state as a whole, only a small minority of white children were withdrawn from public schools.
Industrialization did not reach many areas until the late 20th century.
In 1995, the state symbolically ratified the Thirteenth Amendment, which had abolished slavery in 1865.
Together with imposition of Jim Crow and racial segregation laws, whites committed an increased rate of lynchings of blacks, mostly men, beginning in the 1890s and extending to 1930.
But, it appears mostly to reflect those residents who have chosen to identify as more than one race, who in earlier years may have identified by just one ethnicity.
With the passing of HB 1523 in April 2016, from July it will be legal in Mississippi to refuse service to same-sex couples, based on one's religious beliefs.
