The Virunum ''album'', in the form of an inscribed bronze plaque, records a Mithraic festival of commemoration as taking place on 26&nbsp;June 184.
According to Walter Burkert, the secret character of Mithriac rituals meant that Mithraism could only be practiced within a Mithraeum.
According to Clauss mysteries of Mithras were not practiced until the 1st&nbsp;century&nbsp;CE.
TM = Betelgeuse (Alpha Orionis) setting, his knife = Triangulum setting, his mantle = Capella (Alpha Aurigae) setting.
His case is that far from representing what Mithraists believed, they are merely representations by the Neoplatonists of what it suited them in the late 4th century to read into the mysteries.
There is also speculation that the figure is the Gnostic demiurge, (Ariel) Ialdabaoth.
However, the size of the Mithraeum is not necessarily an indication of the size of the congregation.
Other early archaeology includes the Greek inscription from Venosia by Sagaris ''actor'' probably from 100&ndash;150&nbsp;AD; the Sidon ''cippus'' dedicated by Theodotus priest of Mithras to Asclepius, 140&ndash;141&nbsp;CE; and the earliest military inscription, by C.&nbsp;Sacidius Barbarus, centurion of XV Apollinaris, from the bank of the Danube at Carnuntum, probably before 114&nbsp;CE.
liberator-saviour, hierarchy of adepts (bishops, deacons, presbyters), communal meal and a hard struggle of Good and Evil (bull-killing/crucifixion).
He reminds us that the Platonic writer Porphyry wrote in the 3rd century AD that the cave-like temple Mithraea depicted "an image of the world" and that Zoroaster consecrated a cave resembling the world fabricated by Mithras.
The historian Dio Cassius (2nd to 3rd&nbsp;century&nbsp;AD) tells how the name of Mithras was spoken during the state visit to Rome of Tiridates I of Armenia, during the reign of Nero.
At some of the mithraeums which have been found below churches, for example the Santa Prisca mithraeum and the San Clemente mithraeum, the ground plan of the church above was made in a way to symbolize Christianity's domination of Mithraism.
He will say: 'Where is
Beck has criticized Speidel and Ulansey of adherence to a literal cartographic logic, describing their theories as a "will-o'-the-wisp" which "lured them down a false trail."
A passage in the ''Caesares'' of Julian the Apostate refers to "commandments of Mithras".
It cannot be shown that any Mithraeum continued in use in the 5th century.
A ray of light often reaches down to touch Mithras.
The earliest monument showing Mithras slaying the bull is thought to be CIMRM 593, found in Rome.
The Romans regarded the mysteries as having Persian or Zoroastrian sources.
Another paper by R.L.&nbsp;Gordon argued that Cumont severely distorted the available evidence by forcing the material to conform to his predetermined model of Zoroastrian origins.
Dio Cassius writes that Tiridates, as he was about to receive his crown, told the Roman emperor that he revered him "as Mithras".
David Ulansey finds astronomical evidence from the mithraeum itself.
R. D. Barnett has argued that the royal seal of King Saussatar of Mitanni from ''c''.&nbsp;1450&nbsp;BCE.
Other than the images at Dura of the two ‘magi’ with scrolls, there is no direct and explicit evidence for the carriers of such doctrines.
He too says that Mithraism may have been a rival of Christianity.
The exact form of a Latin or classical Greek word varies due to the grammatical process of declension.
However, similar contemporary artefacts have been identified, and at the Mithraeum of Felicissimus at Ostia Antica, a 2nd-century mosaic does depict several Mithraic implements and symbols.
In the standard pattern of Roman religious precincts, the temple building functioned as a house for the god, who was intended to be able to view through the opened doors and columnar portico, sacrificial worship being offered on an altar set in an open courtyard; potentially accessible not only to initiates of the cult, but also to ''colitores'' or non-initiated worshippers.
Although the exact identity of the lion-headed figure is debated by scholars, it is largely agreed that the god is associated with time and seasonal change.
A raven is flying around or is sitting on the bull.
Above all, it is a theoretical reconstruction which does not accord with the actual Roman iconography."
Temples of Mithras are sunk below ground, windowless, and very distinctive.
He is entwined by a serpent (or two serpents, like a caduceus), with the snake's head often resting on the lion’s head.
Mithraea were the antithesis of this.
According to M. J. Vermaseren, the Mithraic New Year and the birthday of Mithras was on December 25.
There is archeological evidence that in Latin worshippers wrote the nominative form of the god’s name as "Mithras".
Modern historians have different conceptions about whether these names refer to the same god or not.
The Mithraeum represented the cave to which Mithras carried and then killed the bull; and where stone vaulting could not be afforded, the effect would be imitated with lath and plaster.
According to Antonia Tripolitis, Roman Mithraism originated in Vedic India and picked up many features of the cultures which it encountered in its westward journey.
Firstly, because it looks again at Anatolia and Anatolians, and more importantly, because it hews back to the methodology first used by Cumont.
While proposing the theory, Beck says that his scenario may be regarded as Cumontian in two ways.
Some scholars maintain that practice may have differed over time, or from one Mithraeum to another.
Beck holds that classical scholars have neglected Porphyry’s evidence and have taken an unnecessarily skeptical view of Porphyry.
Mithraism reached the apogee of its popularity during the 2nd and 3rd centuries, spreading at an "astonishing" rate at the same period when the worship of Sol Invictus was incorporated into the state-sponsored cults.
Some Mithraic sanctuaries were destroyed and religion was no longer a matter of personal choice.
bull-killing = heliacal setting of Taurus
For their feasts, Mithraic initiates reclined on stone benches arranged along the longer sides of the Mithraeum&nbsp;– typically there might be room for 15 to 30 diners, but very rarely many more than 40 men.
Renan wrote: "if the growth of Christianity had been arrested by some mortal malady, the world would have been Mithraic…" However, this theory has since been contested: Leonard Boyle wrote in 1987 that "too much ... has been made of the 'threat' of Mithraism to Christianity," pointing out that there are only fifty known mithraea in the entire city of Rome.
He described these rites as a diabolical counterfeit of the baptism and chrismation of Christians.
Outside the cavern, top left, is Sol the sun, with his flaming crown, often driving a quadriga.
He will say: 'Will you gird?'
Scholarship on Mithras begins with Franz Cumont, who published a two volume collection of source texts and images of monuments in French in 1894&nbsp;1900, ''Textes et monuments figurés relatifs aux mystères de Mithra'' French: ''Texts and Illustrated Monuments Relating to the Mysteries of Mithra''.
Beck argues that religious celebrations on this date are indicative of special significance being given to the Summer solstice; but this time of the year coincides with ancient recognition of the solar maximum at midsummer, whilst iconographically identical holidays such as Litha, St John's Eve, and Jāņi are observed also.
In later antiquity, the Greek name of Mithras (''Μίθρας''&nbsp;) occurs in the text known as the "Mithras Liturgy", a part of the ''Paris Great Magical Papyrus'' (Paris Bibliothèque Nationale Suppl.
... he is/(you are?)
Iranian "''Mithra''" and Sanskrit "''Mitra''" are believed to come from an Indo-Iranian word ''mitra'' meaning ''contract'' / ''agreement'' / ''covenant''.
He also says that "the old Cumontian model of formation in, and diffusion from, Anatolia ... is by no means dead &ndash; nor should it be."
An 'ordeal pit', dating to the early 3rd century, has been identified in the Mithraeum at Carrawburgh.
Admission into the community was completed with a handshake with the ''pater'', just as Mithras and Sol shook hands.
Sometimes Victoria, Luna, Sol and Saturn also seem to play a role.
The grades also have an inscription beside them commending each grade into the protection of the different planetary gods.
These tend to include both animal bones and also very large quantities of fruit residues.
Arimanius is known from inscriptions to have been a god in the Mithraic cult (CIMRM 222 from Ostia, 369 from Rome, 1773 and 1775 from Pannonia).
He will say: 'Where ... ?
''Corax, Corux or Corvex'' (raven or crow)
On the back side was another, more elaborate feasting scene.
In ascending order of importance, the initiatory grades were:
Reporting on the Second International Congress of Mithraic Studies, 1975, Ugo Bianchi says that although he welcomes "the tendency to question in historical terms the relations between Eastern and Western Mithraism", it "should not mean obliterating what was clear to the Romans themselves, that Mithras was a ‘Persian’ (in wider perspective: an Indo-Iranian) god."
It has recently been suggested by David Jonathan that "Women were involved with Mithraic groups in at least some locations of the empire."
The term is used in an inscription by Proficentius and derided by Firmicus Maternus in ''De errore profanarum religionum'', a 4th&nbsp;Century Christian work attacking paganism.
Consequently, it has been argued that most Mithraic rituals involved a re-enactment by the initiates of episodes in the Mithras narrative, a narrative whose main elements were: birth from the rock, striking water from stone with an arrow shot, the killing of the bull, Sol's submission to Mithras, Mithras and Sol feasting on the bull, the ascent of Mithras to heaven in a chariot.
No written narratives or theology from the religion survive, with limited information to be derived from the inscriptions, and only brief or passing references in Greek and Latin literature.
Accompanying the initiate is a mystagogue, who explains the symbolism and theology to the initiate.
An example of such a catechism, apparently pertaining to the Leo grade, was discovered in a fragmentary Egyptian papyrus (P.Berolinensis 21196), and reads:
The god is sitting on the bull in an unnatural way with his right leg constraining the bull's hoof and the left leg is bent and resting on the bull's back or flank.
'... red border; the linen, however, ...'
In this text the evil spirit Ahriman (not Mithra) slays the primordial creature Gavaevodata which is represented as a bovine.
'''Mithraism''', also known as the '''Mithraic mysteries''', was a mystery religion centred around the god '''Mithras''' that was practised in the Roman Empire from about the 1st to the 4th century.
will say): '('How ?
However, A. D. H. Bivar, L. A. Campbell and G. Widengren have variously argued that Roman Mithraism represents a continuation of some form of Iranian Mithra worship.
Franz Cumont argued that it isn’t; Marvin Meyer thinks it is; while Hans Dieter Betz sees it as a synthesis of Greek, Egyptian, and Mithraic traditions.
The image may be a relief, or free-standing, and side details may be present or omitted.
Later in the same work, Porphyry links Mithras and the bull with planets and star-signs: Mithras himself is associated with the sign of Aries and the planet Mars, while the bull is associated with Venus.
Porphyry is writing close to the demise of the cult, and Robert Turcan has challenged the idea that Porphyry's statements about Mithraism are accurate.
In some Mithraea, such as that at Dura Europos, wall paintings depict prophets carrying scrolls, but no named Mithraic sages are known, nor does any reference give the title of any Mithraic scripture or teaching.
Elsewhere, as at Dura-Europos, Mithraic graffiti survive giving membership lists, in which initiates of a Mithraeum are named with their Mithraic grades.
Several celestial identities for the Tauroctonous Mithras (TM) himself have been proposed.
Merkelbach suggests that its mysteries were essentially created by a particular person or persons and created in a specific place, the city of Rome, by someone from an eastern province or border state who knew the Iranian myths in detail, which he wove into his new grades of initiation; but that he must have been Greek and Greek-speaking because he incorporated elements of Greek Platonism into it.
According to Franz Cumont, the imagery of the tauroctony was a Graeco-Roman representation of an event in Zoroastrian cosmogony described in a 9th-century AD Zoroastrian text, the Bundahishn.
Roger Beck, ''Mithraism since Franz Cumont'', ''Aufsteig und Niedergang der romischen Welt'', II&nbsp;17.4 (1984), p.&nbsp;2019  The bull-slaying figure wears a Phrygian cap, but is described by Beck and Beskow as otherwise unlike standard depictions of the tauroctony.
Modern sources sometimes refer to the Greco-Roman religion as "Roman Mithraism" or "Western Mithraism" to distinguish it from Persian worship of Mithra.
Clauss argues that the grades represented a distinct class of priests, ''sacerdotes''.
The cult disappeared earlier than that of Isis.
It had no predominant sanctuary or cultic centre; and, although each Mithraeum had its own officers and functionaries, there was no central supervisory authority.
Beck summarizes them in the table below.
Saturn in particular is often seen handing over the dagger to Mithras so that he can perform his mighty deeds.
They met in underground temples (called mithraea), which survive in large numbers.
A scorpion seizes the bull's genitals.
Each Mithraeum had several altars at the further end, underneath the representation of the tauroctony, and also commonly contained considerable numbers of subsidiary altars, both in the main Mithraeum chamber and in the ante-chamber or narthex.
Clauss states: "the Mithraic Mysteries had no public ceremonies of its own.
However, Merkelbach and Beck believe that Porphyry’s work "is in fact thoroughly coloured with the doctrines of the Mysteries".
(Say: '... because of/through?)
He is shown as emerging from a rock, already in his youth,  with a dagger in one hand and a torch in the other.
The initiates were thus referred to as ''syndexioi'' &ndash; "''those united by the handshake''".
While some scholars identify the lion-man as Aion (or Zurvan, or Cronus) others assert that it is Ahriman.
(Say): '... red ... linen'.
At the top right is Luna, with her crescent moon, who may be depicted driving a biga.
everything ...' (He
The religion was inspired by Persian worship of the god Mithra (proto-Indo-Iranian Mitra), though the Greek ''Mithras'' was linked to a new and distinctive imagery, and the level of continuity between Persian and Greco-Roman practice is debated.
Almost all Mithraea contain statues dedicated to gods of other cults, and it is common to find inscriptions dedicated to Mithras in other sanctuaries, especially those of Jupiter Dolichenus.
Vermaseren also reports about a Mithras cult in 3rd&nbsp;century&nbsp;BCE.
The cult of Mithras was part of the syncretic nature of ancient Roman religion.
bull-killing = heliacal setting of Taurus
Mithraic feasts probably performed a very similar function for Mithraists as the collegia did for those entitled to join them; indeed, since qualification for Roman collegia tended to be restricted to particular families, localities or traditional trades, Mithraism may have functioned in part as providing clubs for the unclubbed.
One of the most characteristic features of the Mysteries is the naked lion-headed figure often found in Mithraic temples, named by the modern scholars with descriptive terms such as ''leontocephaline'' (lion-headed) or ''leontocephalus'' (lion-head).
An occultist, D.&nbsp;J.Cooper, speculates to the contrary that the lion-headed figure is not a god, but rather represents the spiritual state achieved in Mithraism's "adept" level, the Leo (lion) degree.
In the figure shown here, the four wings carry the symbols of the four seasons, and a thunderbolt is engraved on the breast.
The John, the Lord Chamberlain series of historical mystery novels depicts a secret Mithraist community still active in Justinian's court, but there is no historical evidence for such a late survival of the religion.
The iconic scenes of Mithras show him being born from a rock, slaughtering a bull, and sharing a banquet with the god Sol (the Sun).
However, she also says that although recent studies have minimized the Iranizing aspects of the self-consciously Persian religion "at least in the form which it attained under the Roman Empire", the name ''Mithras'' is enough to show "that this aspect is of some importance".
About 420&nbsp;sites have yielded materials related to the cult.
did you become a Leo?'
There are also depictions in which flames are shooting from the rock and also from Mithras' cap.
Beck calls this "the most likely scenario" and states "Until now, Mithraism has generally been treated as if it somehow evolved Topsy-like from its Iranian precursor &ndash; a most implausible scenario once it is stated explicitly."
It has been suggested that some Mithraea may have awarded honorary ''pater'' status to sympathetic dignitaries.
More problematic &ndash; and never properly addressed by Cumont or his successors &ndash; is how real-life Roman Mithraists subsequently maintained a quite complex and sophisticated Iranian theology behind an occidental facade.
Cumont’s hypothesis, as the author summarizes it in the first 32&nbsp;pages of his book, was that the Roman religion was "the Roman form of Mazdaism", the Persian state religion, disseminated from the East.
Another reason for not connecting these artifacts with the Mithraic Mysteries is that the first of these plaques was found in a woman's tomb.
Say: 'By the ... of the father'.
According to Beck, Porphyry's ''De antro'' is the only clear text from antiquity which tells us about the intent of the Mithriac Mysteries and how that intent was realized.
However, Mithraea do not commonly appear to have been provided with facilities for ritual slaughter of sacrificial animals (a highly specialised function in Roman religion), and it may be presumed that a Mithraeum would have made arrangements for this service to be provided for them in co-operation with the professional ''victimarius'' of the civic cult.
John Hinnells was unwilling to reject entirely the idea of Iranian origin, but wrote: "we must now conclude that his reconstruction simply will not stand.
Besides the main cult icon, a number of mithraea had several secondary tauroctonies, and some small portable versions, probably meant for private devotion, have also been found.
Robert Turcan has argued that since the caduceus is an attribute of Mercury, and in mythology Mercury is depicted as a psychopomp, the eliciting of flames in this scene is referring to the dispatch of human souls and expressing the Mithraic doctrine on this matter.
Justin Martyr contrasted Mithraic initiation communion with the Eucharist:
The term "Mithraism" is a modern convention.
Worshippers of Mithras had a complex system of seven grades of initiation, with ritual meals.
Related deity-names in other languages include
The coin series in all Mithraea end at the end of the 4th century at the latest.
However, Beck disagrees strongly.
-like exposure of the god's genitals).
David Ulansey thinks Renan's statement "somewhat exaggerated", but does consider Mithraism "one of Christianity's major competitors in the Roman Empire".
In cities, the basement of an apartment block might be converted; elsewhere they might be excavated and vaulted over, or converted from a natural cave.
Clauss tends to agree.
(He will say): '... has been wrapped?'
Isis was still remembered in the middle ages as a pagan deity, but Mithras was already forgotten in late antiquity.
The cult appears to have had its centre in Rome.
An altar or block from near SS.
Boyce states that "no satisfactory evidence has yet been adduced to show that, before Zoroaster, the concept of a supreme god existed among the Iranians, or that among them Mithra &ndash; or any other divinity &ndash; ever enjoyed a separate cult of his or her own outside either their ancient or their Zoroastrian pantheons."
The origins and spread of the Mysteries have been intensely debated among scholars and there are radically differing views on these issues.
He will say: 'Why, having girded yourself, ...?'
On the other hand, David Ulansey considers the bull-slaying Mithras to be a new god who began to be worshipped in the 1st&nbsp;Century&nbsp;BCE, and to whom an old name was applied.
The ancient scholar Porphyry refers to female initiates in Mithraic rites.
However, according to Hopfe, "All theories of the origin of Mithraism acknowledge a connection, however vague, to the Mithra/Mitra figure of ancient Aryan religion."
He observes that "Mithras &ndash; moreover, a Mithras who was identified with the Greek Sun god Helios" was among the gods of the syncretic Greco-Armenian-Iranian royal cult at Nemrut, founded by Antiochus&nbsp;I of Commagene in the mid 1st&nbsp;century&nbsp;BCE.
(He will say): '... you are called ...
According to Luther H. Martin,  Roman Mithraism came to an end with the anti-pagan decrees of the Christian emperor Theodosius during the last decade of the 4th century.
This indeed is the main line of Mithraic scholarship, the Cumontian model which subsequent scholars accept, modify, or reject.
Mithras-worship in the Roman Empire was characterized by images of the god slaughtering a bull.
Clauss suggests that a statement by Porphyry, that people initiated into the Lion grade must keep their hands pure from everything that brings pain and harm and is impure, means that moral demands were made upon members of congregations.
In this context, Mithraism has sometimes been viewed as a rival of early Christianity with similarities such as
These altars, which are of the standard Roman pattern, each carry a named dedicatory inscription from a particular initiate, who dedicated the altar to Mithras "in fulfillment of his vow", in gratitude for favours received.
The two torch-bearers are on either side, dressed like Mithras, Cautes with his torch pointing up and Cautopates with his torch pointing down.
Mithraic temples are common in the empire; although unevenly distributed, with considerable numbers found in Rome, Ostia, Numidia, Dalmatia, Britain and along the Rhine/Danube frontier; while being somewhat less common in Greece, Egypt, and Syria.
He identified the ancient Aryan deity who appears in Persian literature as Mithras with the Hindu god Mitra of the Vedic hymns.
Ulansey holds that "Mithraism declined with the rise to power of Christianity, until the beginning of the fifth century, when Christianity became strong enough to exterminate by force rival religions such as Mithraism."
Cumont held that a version of the myth must have existed in which Mithras, not Ahriman, killed the bovine.
Say: 'All things ...'
Other images of Mithras are found in the Roman temples, for instance Mithras banqueting with Sol, and depictions of the birth of Mithras from a rock.
There have been different views among scholars as to whether this text is an expression of Mithraism as such.
The context is a prayer to the god Phoebus.
Wheat's ear (on bull's tail)
Prayers were addressed to the Sun three times a day, and Sunday was especially sacred.
The Greek biographer Plutarch (46&ndash;127&nbsp;AD) says that "secret mysteries ... of Mithras" were practiced by the pirates of Cilicia, the coastal province in the southeast of Anatolia, who were active in the 1st&nbsp;Century&nbsp;BCE: "They likewise offered strange sacrifices; those of Olympus I mean; and they celebrated certain secret mysteries, among which those of Mithras continue to this day, being originally instituted by them."
The name of the figure has been deciphered from dedicatory inscriptions to be Arimanius (though the archeological evidence is not very strong), which is nominally the equivalent of Ahriman, a demon figure in the Zoroastrian pantheon.
Twins Cautes and Cautopates
However, the iconography is relatively coherent.
It is dedicated to ''Sol Invictus Mithras''.
(Tiridates was the son of Vonones II of Parthia, and his coronation by Nero in 66 AD confirmed the end of a war between Parthia and Rome.)
''Heliodromus'' (sun-runner)
Mithraism was not an alternative to Rome's other traditional religions, but was one of many forms of religious practice; and many Mithraic initiates can also be found participating in the civic religion, and as initiates of other mystery cults.
According to David Ulansey, this is "perhaps the most important example" of evident difference between Iranian and Roman traditions: "...&nbsp;there is no evidence that the Iranian god Mithra ever had anything to do with killing a bull."
Manfred Clauss states that the number of grades, seven, must be connected to the planets.
In Sanskrit, "mitra" means "friend" or "friendship".
Mithraeum is a modern coinage and mithraists referred to their sacred structures as speleum or antrum (cave), crypta (underground hallway or corridor), fanum (sacred or holy place), or even templum (a temple or a sacred space).
Weiss, M. (1994, 1998)
This so-called Procession of the Sun-Runner features the ''Heliodromus'', escorted by two figures representing Cautes and Cautopates (see below) and preceded by an initiate of the grade ''Miles'' leading a ritual enactment of the solar journey around the mithraeum, which was intended to represent the cosmos.
Say: 'The savior's ...'
Gordon maintains the former theory of Merkelbach and others, especially noting such examples as Dura where all names are associated with a Mithraic grade.
Sometimes Mithras also has other weapons such as bows and arrows, and there are also animals such as dogs, serpents, dolphins, eagles, other birds, lion, crocodiles, lobsters and snails around.
Say: 'Because of the summery ...'
He will say: 'Where ...
''akinakes'', Phrygian cap, sickle, sickle moon and stars, sling pouch
In some depictions, the central tauroctony is framed by a series of subsidiary scenes to the left, top and right, illustrating events in the Mithras narrative; Mithras being born from the rock, the water miracle, the hunting and riding of the bull, meeting Sol who kneels to him, shaking hands with Sol and sharing a meal of bull-parts with him, and ascending to the heavens in a chariot.
CIMRM&nbsp;2268 is a broken base or altar from Novae/Steklen in Moesia Inferior, dated 100&nbsp;CE, showing Cautes and Cautopates.
In some instances, as is the case in the stucco icon at Santa Prisca mithraeum, the god is shown heroically nude.
It may have varied from location to location.
He writes: "Archaeology indicates that Roman Mithraism had its epicenter in Rome ... the fully developed religion known as Mithraism seems to have begun in Rome and been carried to Syria by soldiers and merchants."
* Sanskrit Mitra (मित्रः), the name of a god praised in the Rig Veda.
They are commonly located close to springs or streams; fresh water appears to have been required for some Mithraic rituals, and a basin is often incorporated into the structure.
