As a specific movement in the arts it is identified with developments in post–World War II Western art, most strongly with American visual arts in the 1960s and early 1970s.
During the same period, various avant-garde artists created Happenings, mysterious and often spontaneous and unscripted gatherings of artists and their friends and relatives in various specified locations, often incorporating exercises in absurdity, physicality, costuming, spontaneous nudity, and various random or seemingly disconnected acts.
In a narrower sense, what was Modernist was not necessarily also postmodern.
Avant-garde composer David Tudor created a piece, ''Reunion'' (1968), written jointly with Lowell Cross, that features a chess game in which each move triggers a lighting effect or projection.
Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection undermined religious certainty and the idea of human uniqueness.
The first full-length Expressionist play was ''The Son'' by Walter Hasenclever, which was published in 1914 and first performed in 1916.
A major 19th-century engineering achievement was The Crystal Palace, the huge cast-iron and plate glass exhibition hall built for The Great Exhibition of 1851 in London.
Art critics had favorable opinions about the painting; like Gertrude Stein and Christopher Morley, they assumed the painting was meant to be a satire of rural small-town life.
His work on time and consciousness "had a great influence on twentieth-century novelists," especially those Modernists who used the stream of consciousness technique, such as Dorothy Richardson, James Joyce, and Virginia Woolf (1882–1941).
But many modernists saw themselves as apolitical.
Some Modernists saw themselves as part of a revolutionary culture that included political revolution.
He was best known for his semi-abstract monumental bronze sculptures which are located around the world as public works of art.
In painting, during the 1920s and the 1930s and the Great Depression, modernism is defined by Surrealism, late Cubism, Bauhaus, De Stijl, Dada, German Expressionism, and Modernist and masterful color painters like Henri Matisse and Pierre Bonnard as well as the abstractions of artists like Piet Mondrian and Wassily Kandinsky which characterized the European art scene.
The work of Robert Rauschenberg exemplifies this trend.
Basil Bunting, born in 1901, published his most important Modernist poem ''Briggflatts'' in 1965.
38 (begun in 1906, completed in 1939).
He also emigrated to the US because of World War II.
In poetry T. S. Eliot, E. E. Cummings, and Wallace Stevens were writing from the 1920s until the 1950s.
After the rise of Joseph Stalin, the Soviet government rejected modernism on the grounds of alleged elitism, although it had previously endorsed Futurism and Constructivism.
Others focus on modernism as an aesthetic introspection.
Postmodernism in music and literature began to take hold earlier.
This movement rejected abstract expressionism and its focus on the hermeneutic and psychological interior in favor of art that depicted and often celebrated material consumer culture, advertising, and iconography of the mass production age.
He believed he had discovered a wholly new way of organizing sound, based in the use of twelve-note rows.
However, the Industrial Revolution continued.
These technological advances led to the building of later structures like the Brooklyn Bridge (1883) and the Eiffel Tower (1889).
Another pioneer of collage was Joseph Cornell, whose more intimately scaled works were seen as radical because of both his personal iconography and his use of found objects.
By the early 1980s the Postmodern movement in art and architecture began to establish its position through various conceptual and intermedia formats.
For this reason many Modernists of the postwar generation felt that they were the most important bulwark against totalitarianism, the "canary in the coal mine", whose repression by a government or other group with supposed authority represented a warning that individual liberties were being threatened.
Fluxus was named and loosely organized in 1962 by George Maciunas (1931–78), a Lithuanian-born American artist.
The poets Charles Olson (1910–1970) and J. H. Prynne (born 1936) are among the writers in the second half of the 20th century who have been described as late Modernists.
The skyscraper is the archetypal modernist building, and the Wainwright Building, a 10-story office building built 1890-91, in St. Louis, Missouri, United States, is among the first skyscrapers in the world.
Second, it demonstrated that the distinction between elite Modernist and mass consumerist culture had lost its precision.
Intermedia is a term coined by Dick Higgins and meant to convey new art forms along the lines of Fluxus, concrete poetry, found objects, performance art, and computer art.
In 1962 the Sidney Janis Gallery mounted ''The New Realists'', the first major pop art group exhibition in an uptown art gallery in New York City.
Though the term is applied to a wide range of plays, some characteristics coincide in many of the plays: broad comedy, often similar to vaudeville, mixed with horrific or tragic images; characters caught in hopeless situations forced to do repetitive or meaningless actions; dialogue full of clichés, wordplay, and nonsense; plots that are cyclical or absurdly expansive; either a parody or dismissal of realism and the concept of the "well-made play".
It derives from the reductive aspects of modernism and is often interpreted as a reaction against Abstract expressionism and a bridge to Postminimal art practices.
Modernism is an encompassing label for a wide variety of cultural movements.
Whereas most manufacturers try to make products that will be marketable by appealing to preferences and prejudices, high modernists rejected such consumerist attitudes in order to undermine conventional thinking.
There was a concentrated Expressionist movement in early 20th century German theatre, of which Georg Kaiser and Ernst Toller were the most famous playwrights.
In a sense the innovations of Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning, Franz Kline, Mark Rothko, Philip Guston, Hans Hofmann, Clyfford Still, Barnett Newman, Ad Reinhardt, Robert Motherwell, Peter Voulkos and others opened the floodgates to the diversity and scope of all the art that followed them.
In New York City a new generation of young and exciting Modernist painters led by Arshile Gorky, Willem de Kooning, and others were just beginning to come of age.
Le Corbusier thought that buildings should function as "machines for living in", analogous to cars, which he saw as machines for traveling in.
Many aspects of modernist design still persist within the mainstream of contemporary architecture, though previous dogmatism has given way to a more playful use of decoration, historical quotation, and spatial drama.
Duchamp can be seen as a precursor to conceptual art, other famous examples being John Cage's ''4'33"'', which is four minutes and thirty three seconds of silence, and Rauschenberg's ''Erased de Kooning Drawing''.
The show sent shockwaves through the New York School and reverberated worldwide.
A few artists, notably Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, and Pierre Bonnard, remained in France and survived.
Modeled on Marx and Engels' famous "Communist Manifesto" (1848), such manifestoes put forward ideas that were meant to provoke and to gather followers.
Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Henri Le Fauconnier, Robert Delaunay, Fernand Léger and Roger de La Fresnaye were shown together in Room 41, provoking a 'scandal' out of which Cubism emerged and spread throughout Paris and beyond.
The term "minimalist" often colloquially refers to anything that is spare or stripped to its essentials.
Playwrights commonly associated with the Theatre of the Absurd include Samuel Beckett (1906–1989), Eugène Ionesco (1909–94), Jean Genet (1910–86), Harold Pinter (1930–2008), Tom Stoppard (born 1937), Friedrich Dürrenmatt (1921–90), Alejandro Jodorowsky (born 1929), Fernando Arrabal (born 1932), Václav Havel (1936–2011) and Edward Albee (born 1928).
Modern ideas in art also began to appear more frequently in commercials and logos, an early example of which, from 1919, is the famous London Underground logo designed by Edward Johnston.
During his lifetime, Bacon was equally reviled and acclaimed.
6 (his last, 1939).
Postmodern theory asserts that the attempt to canonise Modernism "after the fact" is doomed to undisambiguable contradictions.
American artists benefited from the presence of Piet Mondrian, Fernand Léger, Max Ernst and the André Breton group, Pierre Matisse's gallery, and Peggy Guggenheim's gallery ''The Art of This Century'', as well as other factors.
This portrayal of modern urban life as empty or lonely is a common theme throughout Hopper's work.
However others rejected conventional politics as well as artistic conventions, believing that a revolution of political consciousness had greater importance than a change in political structures.
The failure of the previous status quo seemed self-evident to a generation that had seen millions die fighting over scraps of earth: prior to 1914 it had been argued that no one would fight such a war, since the cost was too high.
Impressionist paintings demonstrated that human beings do not see objects, but instead see light itself.
The sources from which individual artists drew their theoretical arguments were diverse, and reflected the social and intellectual preoccupations in all areas of Western culture at that time.
Though initially mainly a German artistic movement, most predominant in painting, poetry and the theatre between 1910 and 1930, most precursors of the movement were not German.
His art was deeply rooted in the Mexican Revolution.
Creating new conventions of art-making, they made acceptable in serious contemporary art circles the radical inclusion in their works of unlikely materials.
Rereadings into abstract art by art historians such as Linda Nochlin, Griselda Pollock and Catherine de Zegher critically show, however, that pioneering women artists who produced major innovations in modern art had been ignored by official accounts of its history.
The Nazis exhibited Modernist paintings alongside works by the mentally ill in an exhibition entitled "Degenerate Art".
His painterly but abstracted figures typically appear isolated in glass or steel geometrical cages set against flat, nondescript backgrounds.
Historians, and writers in different disciplines, have suggested various dates as starting points for modernism.
Color Field painting, hard-edge painting and lyrical abstraction emerged as radical new directions.
The period from the 1920s to the 1950s is known as the Mexican Renaissance, and Siqueiros was active in the attempt to create an art that was at once Mexican and universal.
For Greenberg, modernism thus formed a reaction against the development of such examples of modern consumer culture as commercial popular music, Hollywood, and advertising.
In literature this often involved the rejection of intelligible plots or characterization in novels, or the creation of poetry that defied clear interpretation.
His breakthrough came with the 1944 triptych ''Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion'' which sealed his reputation as a uniquely bleak chronicler of the human condition.
Along with his friends de Kooning and John D. Graham, Gorky created biomorphically shaped and abstracted figurative compositions that by the 1940s evolved into totally abstract paintings.
Clement Greenberg became the voice of post-painterly abstraction when he curated an influential exhibition of new painting that toured important art museums throughout the United States in 1964.
Another trend in art which has been associated with the term postmodern is the use of a number of different media together.
In Britain, a youth subculture emerged calling itself "Modernist" (usually shortened to Mod), following such representative music groups as the Who and the Kinks.
Yves Klein in France, Carolee Schneemann, Yayoi Kusama, Charlotte Moorman and Yoko Ono in New York City, and Joseph Beuys, Wolf Vostell and Nam June Paik in Germany were pioneers of performance-based works of art.
However, with the coming of the Great War of 1914-18 and the Russian Revolution of 1917, the world was drastically changed and doubt cast on the beliefs and institutions of the past.
Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, Larry Rivers, John Chamberlain, Claes Oldenburg, George Segal, Jim Dine, and Edward Kienholz were among important pioneers of both abstraction and pop art.
Significant Modernist literary works continued to be created in the 1920s and 1930s, including further novels by Marcel Proust, Virginia Woolf, Robert Musil, and Dorothy Richardson.
The young Jackson Pollock attended the workshop and helped build floats for the parade.
The last three decades of Moore's life continued in a similar vein, with several major retrospectives taking place around the world, notably a prominent exhibition in the summer of 1972 in the grounds of the Forte di Belvedere overlooking Florence.
The surrealists and modern artists from every cultural center of Europe had fled the onslaught of the Nazis for safe haven in the United States.
The extreme simplification of characters to mythic types, choral effects, declamatory dialogue and heightened intensity would become characteristic of later Expressionist plays.
Though ''The Oxford Encyclopedia of British Literature'' sees modernism ending by c. 1939, with regard to British and American literature, "When (if) Modernism petered out and postmodernism began has been contested almost as hotly as when the transition from Victorianism to Modernism occurred."
When his patron Nelson Rockefeller discovered that the mural included a portrait of Vladimir Lenin and other communist imagery, he fired Rivera, and the unfinished work was eventually destroyed by Rockefeller's staff.
In fact, modernism flourished mainly in consumer/capitalist societies, despite the fact that its proponents often rejected consumerism itself.
It is not only Hopper's most famous painting, but one of the most recognizable in American art.
But despite continuing technological advances, from the 1870s onward, the idea that history and civilization were inherently progressive, and that progress was always good, came under increasing attack.
Instead he sees Fluxus as a major Neo-Dadaist phenomena within the avant-garde tradition.
This often presented as an early example of a writer using the stream-of-consciousness technique, but Robert Humphrey comments that Proust "is concerned only with the reminiscent aspect of consciousness" and that he "was deliberately recapturing the past for the purpose of communicating; hence he did not write a stream-of-consciousness novel."
Amongst his influences was Alban Berg's (1985–1935) opera ''Wozzeck'' (1925), which "had made a tremendous impression on Shostakovich when it was staged in Leningrad."
Those elements of Modernism which accentuated the benefits of rationality and socio-technological progress were only Modernist.
Some even argue that modernism in literature and art functioned to sustain an elite culture which excluded the majority of the population.
In some fields, the effects of modernism have remained stronger and more persistent than in others.
The human experience of time itself was altered, with the development of the electric telegraph from 1837, and the adoption of standard time by British railway companies from 1845, and in the rest of the world over the next fifty years.
Many have interpreted this transformation as the beginning of the phase that became known as postmodernism.
Park Place Gallery was a center for musical performances by electronic composers Steve Reich, Philip Glass, and other notable performance artists including Joan Jonas.
Meanwhile, in the downtown scene in New York's East Village 10th Street galleries, artists were formulating an American version of pop art.
Everdell also thinks modernism in painting began in 1885–86 with Seurat's Divisionism, the "dots" used to paint ''A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte''.
Richard Murphy also comments: "the search for an all-inclusive definition is problematic to the extent that the most challenging expressionists" such as the novelist Franz Kafka, poet Gottfried Benn, and novelist Alfred Döblin were simultaneously the most vociferous anti-expressionists.
His forms are usually abstractions of the human figure, typically depicting mother-and-child or reclining figures, usually suggestive of the female body, apart from a phase in the 1950s when he sculpted family groups.
The climate became so hostile for artists and art associated with modernism and abstraction that many left for the Americas.
Arshile Gorky's portrait of someone who might be Willem de Kooning is an example of the evolution of abstract expressionism from the context of figure painting, cubism and surrealism.
In literature and visual art some Modernists sought to defy expectations mainly in order to make their art more vivid, or to force the audience to take the trouble to question their own preconceptions.
However, dates are highly debatable, especially as according to Andreas Huyssen: "one critic's postmodernism is another critic's modernism."
In Paris (the former center of European culture and the former capital of the art world) the climate for art was a disaster.
Like Shostakovich, other composers faced difficulties in this period.
The dominant trends of industrial Victorian England were opposed, from about 1850, by the English poets and painters that constituted the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, because of their "opposition to technical skill without inspiration."
Frida Kahlo's (Rivera's wife's) works are often characterized by their stark portrayals of pain.
He argues that minimalism is not a "dead end" of Modernism, but a "paradigm shift toward postmodern practices that continue to be elaborated today."
The philosopher Schopenhauer (1788–1860) (''The World as Will and Representation'', 1819) called into question the previous optimism, and his ideas had an important influence on later thinkers, including Nietzsche.
Futurism is yet another modernist movement.
Freud's description of subjective states involved an unconscious mind full of primal impulses, and counterbalancing self-imposed restrictions derived from social values.
The Pre-Raphaelites actually foreshadowed Manet (1832–83), with whom Modernist painting most definitely begins.
He professed his intent that people look at the urinal as if it were a work of art because he said it was a work of art.
The second French school was Symbolism, which literary historians see beginning with Charles Baudelaire (1821–67), and including the later poets, Arthur Rimbaud (1854–91) ''Une Saison en Enfer'' (''A Season in Hell'', 1873), Paul Verlaine (1844–96), Stéphane Mallarmé (1842–98), and Paul Valéry (1871–1945).
His move away from easel painting and conventionality was a liberating signal to the artists of his era and to all who came after.
Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) was another major precursor of modernism, with a philosophy in which psychological drives, specifically the "will to power" (''Wille zur Macht''), was of central importance: "Nietzsche often identified life itself with 'will to power', that is, with an instinct for growth and durability."
The likes of Bob Dylan, Serge Gainsbourg and the Rolling Stones combined popular musical traditions with Modernist verse, adopting literary devices derived from James Joyce, Samuel Beckett, James Thurber, T. S. Eliot, Guillaume Apollinaire, Allen Ginsberg, and others.
They looked back to Swedish playwright August Strindberg and German actor and dramatist Frank Wedekind as precursors of their dramaturgical experiments.
They acted on a dissatisfaction with painting as practiced in their time, holding that its realism wasn't truthful enough."
Earlier in England in 1958 the term "Pop Art" was used by Lawrence Alloway to describe paintings that celebrated the consumerism of the post World War II era.
With many more public works of art, the scale of Moore's sculptures grew significantly.
In the world of art, in the first decade of the 20th century, young painters such as Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse were causing a shock with their rejection of traditional perspective as the means of structuring paintings, though the impressionist Monet had already been innovative in his use of perspective.
''Fountain'' was a urinal signed with the pseudonym "R. Mutt", the exhibition of which shocked the art world in 1917.
The Modernist movement continued during this period in Soviet Russia.
In Russia after the 1917 Revolution there was indeed initially a burgeoning of avant-garde cultural activity, which included Russian Futurism.
Most major capital cities have museums devoted to modern art as distinct from post-Renaissance art (c. 1400 to c. 1900).
In the 1930s, in addition to further major works by Faulkner, Samuel Beckett published his first major work, the novel ''Murphy'' (1938).
The term "Theatre of the Absurd" is applied to plays, written primarily by Europeans, that express the belief that human existence has no meaning or purpose and therefore all communication breaks down.
The arts of cultures other than the European had become accessible and showed alternative ways of describing visual experience to the artist.
Examples include the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the Tate Modern in London, and the Centre Pompidou in Paris.
Hal Foster, in his essay ''The Crux of Minimalism'', examines the extent to which Donald Judd and Robert Morris both acknowledge and exceed Greenbergian Modernism in their published definitions of minimalism.
In particular, the notion that human beings were driven by the same impulses as "lower animals" proved to be difficult to reconcile with the idea of an ennobling spirituality.
This aspect of modernism has often seemed a reaction to consumer culture, which developed in Europe and North America in the late 19th century.
Fluxus encouraged a do-it-yourself aesthetic and valued simplicity over complexity.
Glass and iron were used in a similar monumental style in the construction of major railway terminals in London, such as Paddington Station (1854) and King's Cross Station (1852).
Surrealism, which originated in the early 1920s, came to be regarded by the public as the most extreme form of modernism, or "the avant-garde of Modernism".
Visual art has made the most complete break with its past.
In 1913—which was the year of philosopher Edmund Husserl's ''Ideas'', physicist Niels Bohr's quantized atom, Ezra Pound's founding of imagism, the Armory Show in New York, and in Saint Petersburg the "first futurist opera", Mikhail Matyushin's ''Victory over the Sun''—another Russian composer, Igor Stravinsky, composed ''The Rite of Spring'', a ballet that depicts human sacrifice, and has a musical score full of dissonance and primitive rhythm.
Cubism was brought to the attention of the general public for the first time in 1911 at the Salon des Indépendants in Paris (held 21 April&nbsp;– 13 June).
Dorothy Richardson was the first English writer to use it, in the early volumes of her novel sequence ''Pilgrimage'' (1915–67).
Political activism was an important piece of David Siqueiros' life, and frequently inspired him to set aside his artistic career.
The birth of a machine age which had made major changes in the conditions of daily life in the 19th century now had radically changed the nature of warfare.
Out of the collision of ideals derived from Romanticism, and an attempt to find a way for knowledge to explain that which was as yet unknown, came the first wave of works in the first decade of the 20th century, which, while their authors considered them extensions of existing trends in art, broke the implicit contract with the general public that artists were the interpreters and representatives of bourgeois culture and ideas.
From this perspective, modernism encouraged the re-examination of every aspect of existence, from commerce to philosophy, with the goal of finding that which was 'holding back' progress, and replacing it with new ways of reaching the same end.
Modernism explicitly rejected the ideology of realism and makes use of the works of the past by the employment of reprise, incorporation, rewriting, recapitulation, revision and parody.
Frida Kahlo's Symbolist works relate strongly to Surrealism and to the Magic Realism movement in literature.
Representations of performance art in other media, whether by image, video, narrative or otherwise, select certain points of view in space or time or otherwise involve the inherent limitations of each medium, and which therefore cannot truly illustrate the medium of performance as art.
In the latter perspective, early minimalism yielded advanced Modernist works, but the movement partially abandoned this direction when some artists like Robert Morris changed direction in favor of the anti-form movement.
During the Great Depression of the 1930s and through the years of World War II, American art was characterized by Social Realism and American Scene Painting, in the work of Grant Wood, Edward Hopper, Ben Shahn, Thomas Hart Benton, and several others.
In the early 20th century Marcel Duchamp submitted for exhibition a urinal as a sculpture.
The "London School" of figurative painters, including Francis Bacon (1909–1992), Lucian Freud (1922–2011), Frank Auerbach (born 1931), Leon Kossoff (born 1926), and Michael Andrews (1928–1995), have received widespread international recognition.
Following this machine aesthetic, modernist designers typically rejected decorative motifs in design, preferring to emphasize the materials used and pure geometrical forms.
The other modernist novelists that are associated with the use of this narrative technique include James Joyce in ''Ulysses'' (1922) and Italo Svevo in ''La coscienza di Zeno'' (1923).
This includes those who are critical of the division between the two and see them as two aspects of the same movement, and believe that late Modernism continues.
His forms are generally pierced or contain hollow spaces.
Influential innovations included steam-powered industrialization, and especially the development of railways, starting in Britain in the 1830s, and the subsequent advancements in physics, engineering, and architecture associated with this.
Art critic Clement Greenberg describes the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood as proto-Modernists: "There the proto-Modernists were, of all people, the pre-Raphaelites (and even before them, as proto-proto-Modernists, the German Nazarenes).
Andreas Huyssen criticises attempts to claim Fluxus for Postmodernism as "either the master-code of postmodernism or the ultimately unrepresentable art movement&nbsp;– as it were, postmodernism's sublime."
Among their members were Kandinsky, Franz Marc, Paul Klee, and August Macke.
Modernism is defined in Latin America by painters Joaquín Torres García from Uruguay and Rufino Tamayo from Mexico, while the muralist movement with Diego Rivera, David Siqueiros, José Clemente Orozco, Pedro Nel Gómez and Santiago Martinez Delgado, and Symbolist paintings by Frida Kahlo, began a renaissance of the arts for the region, characterized by a freer use of color and an emphasis on political messages.
Other minimalists including Donald Judd, Dan Flavin, Carl Andre, Agnes Martin, John McCracken and others continued to produce late Modernist paintings and sculpture for the remainders of their careers.
Soon afterwards a group of painters (Giacomo Balla, Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carrà, Luigi Russolo, and Gino Severini) co-signed the Futurist Manifesto.
Also by 1930 Modernism began to influence mainstream culture, so that, for example,  ''The New Yorker'' magazine began publishing work, influenced by Modernism, by young writers and humorists like Dorothy Parker, Robert Benchley, E. B.
White, S. J. Perelman, and James Thurber, amongst others.
Both used images of ordinary objects, or the objects themselves, in their work, while retaining the abstraction and painterly gestures of high Modernism.
The 1940s in New York City heralded the triumph of American abstract expressionism, a Modernist movement that combined lessons learned from Henri Matisse, Pablo Picasso, surrealism, Joan Miró, cubism, Fauvism, and early modernism via great teachers in America like Hans Hofmann and John D. Graham.
On the campus of the University of Chicago in December 1967, 25 years to the minute after the team of physicists led by Enrico Fermi achieved the first controlled, self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction, Moore's ''Nuclear Energy'' was unveiled.
The word "surrealist" was coined by Guillaume Apollinaire and first appeared in the preface to his play ''Les Mamelles de Tirésias'', which was written in 1903 and first performed in 1917.
On the one hand Schoenberg rejected traditional tonal harmony, the hierarchical system of organizing works of music that had guided music making for at least a century and a half.
Initially rejected from the most important commercial show of the time, the government-sponsored Paris Salon, the Impressionists organized yearly group exhibitions in commercial venues during the 1870s and 1880s, timing them to coincide with the official Salon.
However, the term "Expressionism" did not firmly establish itself until 1913.
In 1905, a group of four German artists, led by Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, formed Die Brücke (the Bridge) in the city of Dresden.
One of the most visible changes of this period was the adoption of new technologies into daily life of ordinary people in Western Europe and North America.
The terms "minimalist" and "post-Modernist" have also been applied to his later works.
However, high modernism began to merge with consumer culture after World War II, especially during the 1960s.
Also in 1913 a less violent event occurred in France with the publication of the first volume of Marcel Proust's important novel sequence ''À la recherche du temps perdu'' (1913–1927) (''In Search of Lost Time'').
The terms have expanded to encompass a movement in music that features such repetition and iteration as those of the compositions of La Monte Young, Terry Riley, Steve Reich, Philip Glass, and John Adams.
In paintings like ''Girl with a White Dog'' (1951-52), Freud put the pictorial language of traditional European painting in the service of an anti-romantic, confrontational style of portraiture that stripped bare the sitter's social facade.
Samuel Beckett, who died in 1989, has been described as a "later Modernist".
was the touchstone of the movement's approach towards what it saw as the now obsolete culture of the past.
What, however, can be said, is that it was a movement that developed in the early 20th century mainly in Germany in reaction to the dehumanizing effect of industrialization and the growth of cities, and that "one of the central means by which expressionism identifies itself as an avant-garde movement, and by which it marks its distance to traditions and the cultural institution as a whole is through its relationship to realism and the dominant conventions of representation."
Many of those who didn't flee perished.
Perelman is highly regarded for his humorous short stories that he published in magazines in the 1930s and 1940s, most often in ''The New Yorker'', which are considered to be the first examples of surrealist humor in America.
Pablo Picasso painted his mural-sized ''Guernica'' to commemorate the horrors of the bombing.
The Beatles developed along similar lines, creating various Modernist musical effects on several albums, while musicians such as Frank Zappa, Syd Barrett and Captain Beefheart proved even more experimental.
Others, such as T. S. Eliot, rejected mass popular culture from a conservative position.
Also in 1911, Kandinsky painted ''Bild mit Kreis'' (''Picture with a Circle''), which he later called the first abstract painting.
Rationalism has also had opponents in the philosophers Søren Kierkegaard (1813–55) and later Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), both of whom had significant influence on existentialism.
Accusations of "formalism" could lead to the end of a career, or worse.
This is written in a largely idiosyncratic language, consisting of a mixture of standard English lexical items and neologistic multilingual puns and portmanteau words, which attempts to recreate the experience of sleep and dreams.
On the other hand, visual art critic Clement Greenberg called Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) "the first real Modernist", though he also wrote, "What can be safely called Modernism emerged in the middle of the last century—and rather locally, in France, with Baudelaire in literature and Manet in painting, and perhaps with Flaubert, too, in prose fiction.
Minimalist compositions are sometimes known as systems music.
In choosing "an ordinary article of life" and creating "a new thought for that object" Duchamp invited onlookers to view ''Fountain'' as a sculpture.
Yet while this was indeed wholly new, its origins can be traced back in the work of earlier composers, such as Franz Liszt, Richard Wagner, Gustav Mahler, Richard Strauss and Max Reger.
It did not represent a major advance in the development of artistic strategies, though it did express a rebellion against "the administered culture of the 1950s, in which a moderate, domesticated modernism served as ideological prop to the Cold War."
For others, such as art critic Robert Hughes, postmodernism represents an extension of modernism.
While Modernist poetry in English is often viewed as an American phenomenon, with leading exponents including Ezra Pound, T. S. Eliot, Marianne Moore, William Carlos Williams, H.D., and Louis Zukofsky, there were important British Modernist poets, including David Jones, Hugh MacDiarmid, Basil Bunting, and W. H. Auden.
