Features of the city include the Hamarwein old town, the Bakaara Market, and Gezira Beach.
Mayor Mohamed Nur recognized the opportunity as critical to stabilizing and rebuilding the city by any means necessary.
The city's many returning expatriates, investors and international community workers are among these establishments' main customers.
On 1 July 1960, the two territories united to form the Somali Republic, with Mogadishu serving as the nation's capital.
The next most frequently used public vehicles in the city are auto rickshaws (''bajaj'').
Consequently, several gun battles took place in Mogadishu between local gunmen and peacekeepers.
In April 2013, the Waayaha Cusub ensemble also organized the Reconciliation Music Festival, the first international music festival to be held in Mogadishu in two decades.
The displacement caused by the onset of the civil war in the 1990s further increased the number of rural minorities migrating to urban areas.
With the passing of a new Constitution in 2012 and the subsequent election of an inaugural President in the new Federal Government, the mayorship continued to oversee Mogadishu's ongoing post-conflict reconstruction.
Overseen by Somali and Turkish engineers, the upgrade was completed in November and included lane demarcation.
The Governor's Palace of Mogadishu was the seat of the governor of Italian Somaliland, and then the administrator of the Trust Territory of Somalia.
A $10 million project, it will increase the airport's existing 15 aircraft capacity to 60.
The Italians subsequently referred to the city as ''Mogadiscio''.
In April 2014, Prime Minister Abdiweli Sheikh Ahmed also laid the foundation stone for the reconstruction of the former meteorological school in Mogadishu.
The pact will see the Chinese authorities reconstruct the National Theatre of Somalia in addition to several other major infrastructural landmarks.
In addition to a nationalization programme of industry and land, the Mogadishu-based new regime's foreign policy placed an emphasis on Somalia's traditional and religious links with the Arab world, eventually joining the Arab League in 1974.
, it had a population of 2,120,000 residents.
City Taxi, the firm's nearest competitor, charges the same flat rate, with plans to add new cabs to its fleet.
In January 2015, the Benadir administration also opened a new Health & Safety Office to supervise health and safety practices in the city, and launched a municipal beautification campaign ahead of various international conferences that are slated to be held there.
The UNFPA assisted the Ministry in the project, which is slated to be finalized ahead of the planned plebiscite and local and national elections in 2016.
The Regional Somali Language Academy is an intergovernmental regulating body for the Somali language in the Horn region.
In 2013, the Somali Football Federation launched a renovation project at the Konis facility, during which artificial football turf contributed by FIFA was installed at the stadium.
The new Transitional Federal Government (TFG), established two years earlier, sought to re-establish its authority.
Tradition and old records assert that southern Somalia, including the Mogadishu area, was historically inhabited by hunter-gatherers.
By the late 1980s, Barre's regime had become increasingly unpopular.
Arba'a Rukun Mosque is one of the oldest Islamic places of worship in the capital, built circa 667 (1268/9 AD).
It was established in 2012 with the aim of providing quality instruction and research.
De Sá and his men bombarded the city before continuing southwards along the seaboard.
They are generally preferred for shorter commutes.
Many of the opposition groups subsequently began competing for influence in the power vacuum that followed the ouster of Barre's regime.
In March 2015, the Benadir administration likewise launched a renovation project on the Hawo Asir-Fagah major road in Mogadishu.
After the ousting of the Siad Barre regime in 1991 and the ensuing civil war, various militias fought for control of the city, later to be replaced by the Islamic Courts Union in the mid-2000s.
The Federal Parliament of Somalia serves as the government's legislative branch.
The revolutionary army established various large-scale public works programmes, including the Mogadishu Stadium.
The Omani Sultans' authority in Mogadishu, however, was largely nominal.
The Turkish Boarding School was also established, with the Mogadishu Polytechnic Institute and Shabelle University campus likewise undergoing renovations.
Most of the people who had allegedly helped plot the putsch were summarily executed.
Additionally, the Historic Central Bank was regenerated, with the Moumin Business Center likewise under construction.
Its original core population consisted of Bushmen aboriginals, and later Cushitic, Arab and Persian migrants.
It offers a range of undergraduate courses in various fields, including economics, statistics, business, accountancy, technology, computer science, health sciences, education, law and public administration.
Other hotels in the city include the Lafweyn Palace Hotel, Amira Castle Hotel, Sahafi Hotel, Hotel Nasa-Hablod, Oriental Hotel, Hotel Guuleed, Hotel Shamo, Peace Hotel, Aran Guest House, Muna Hotel, Hotel Taleex, Hotel Towfiq, Benadir Hotel, Ambassador Hotel, Kuwait Plaza Hotel, Safari Hotel Diplomat, Dayax Hotel, Safari Guesthouse and Bin Ali Hotel.
In June 2013, the Heritage Institute for Policy Studies organized a shipment of 22,000 books from the United States to Somalia as part of an initiative to restock the library.
In addition, the Nabaad Supermarket provides major retail service to local shoppers.
In World War II it was captured by British forces in February 1941.
It later incurred significant damage during the civil war.
In December 2011, the Turkish government unveiled plans to further modernize the airport as part of Turkey's broader engagement in the local post-conflict reconstruction process.
Other radio stations headquartered in the city include Mustaqbal Radio, Radio Shabelle, Radio Bar-Kulan, Radio Kulmiye, Radio Dannan, Radio Dalsan, Radio Banadir, Radio Maanta, Gool FM, Radio Xurmo, and Radio Xamar, also known as Voice of Democracy.
The firm announced plans to renovate the aviation building and construct a new one, as well as upgrade other modern service structures.
Mogadishu has historically served as a media hub.
As of January 2014, these diplomatic missions include the embassies of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Sudan, Libya, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iran, Uganda, Nigeria, the United Kingdom, Japan, China, and Qatar.
However, several officials managed to escape abroad and started to form the first of various dissident groups dedicated to ousting Barre's regime by force.
He described Mogadishu as "an exceedingly large city" with many rich merchants, which was famous for the high quality fabric that it exported to destinations including Egypt.
There are 47 wet days annually, which are associated with a 12% daily probability of rainfall.
The annual percentage of sunny versus cloudy daylight hours is 70 and 30, respectively.
It closed down after the start of the civil war in the early 1990s, but reopened in March 2012 after reconstruction.
SNTV broadcasts 24 hours a day, and can be viewed both within Somalia and abroad via terrestrial and satellite platforms.
It is the 222nd largest city in the world by population size.
A Shi'a influence can still be seen in some areas, as in the southern Somalia veneration of Fatimah, the Prophet Muhammad's daughter.
The Federal Government of Somalia was established on 20 August 2012, concurrent with the end of the TFG's interim mandate.
Mean daylight hours and minutes per day are 8h 24'.
Mogadishu is situated on the Indian Ocean coast of the Horn of Africa, in the Banaadir administrative region (''gobol'') in southeastern Somalia.
With the government managing to secure the city in mid-2011, radios once again play music.
According to Demographia, Mogadishu has a population of around 2,120,000 residents .
Embassies that are scheduled to reopen in the city include those of Egypt, the United Arab Emirates, Italy and South Korea.
Among these was the Battle of Mogadishu of 1993, a US apprehension of two high-ranking lieutenants of faction leader Aidid.
Following his visit to the city, the 12th century Syrian historian Yaqut al-Hamawi wrote that it was inhabited by dark-skinned Berbers, the ancestors of the modern Somalis.
It was one of the largest markets in the city before closing down operations in the early 1990s.
They dominated the southern ivory trade, and also held sway over the Jubba and Shebelle valleys in the hinterland.
The Banadir Stadium and Konis Stadium are two other major sporting facilities in the capital.
Approved by the Cabinet, it establishes a secure legal framework for foreign investment in Mogadishu and elsewhere in the country.
The institution subsequently grew into the SIMAD University, with Mohamud acting as dean until 2010.
By the time of the arrival of peoples from the Cushitic Rahanweyn (Digil and Mirifle) clan confederacy, who would go on to establish a local aristocracy, other Cushitic groups affiliated with the Oromo (Wardai) and Ajuuraan (Ma'adanle) had already formed settlements of their own in the sub-region.
These were later joined by Cushitic agro-pastoralists, who would go on to establish local aristocracies.
Telcom is another telecommunications service provider that is centered in the capital.
Financed by the Islamic Development Bank in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, as well as other donor institutions, the university counts hundreds of graduates from its seven faculties, some of whom continue on to pursue Master's degrees abroad thanks to a scholarship programme.
The mixture of these various groups produced the Benadiri or Reer Xamar (“People of Mogadishu”), a composite population unique to the larger Benadir region.
In September 2013, the Turkish company Favori LLC began operations at the airport.
The Sultan also had a retinue of wazirs (ministers), legal experts, commanders, royal eunuchs, and other officials at his service.
Landing in 1993, the UN peacekeeping coalition started the two-year United Nations Operation in Somalia II (UNOSOM II) primarily in the south.
His assassination was quickly followed by a military coup d'état on 21 October 1969 (the day after his funeral), in which the Somali Army seized power without encountering armed opposition&nbsp;— essentially a bloodless takeover.
Average sun altitude at solar noon on the 21st day of the month is 75.
The sandy beaches of Mogadishu have vibrant coral reefs, and are prime real estate for the first tourist resorts in many years.
The putsch was spearheaded by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre, who at the time commanded the army.
It represents the first permanent central government in the country since the start of the civil war.
Mogadishu Stadium was constructed in 1978 during the Siad Barre administration, with the assistance of Chinese engineers.
In September 2014, the municipal authorities officially reopened the Ansaloti to the public, with officials supervising all parts of the market.
In November 2010, a new technocratic government was elected to office, which enacted numerous reforms, especially in the security sector.
Villa Somalia is the official residential palace and principal workplace of the President of Somalia, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud.
Throughout 2007 and 2008, Al-Shabaab scored military victories, seizing control of key towns and ports in both central and southern Somalia.
When Imam Azzan bin Qais of Oman sought to build a fort in the city, he was thus obligated to request permission from Sultan Ahmed Yusuf of Geledi.
A second consecutive TEDx entrepreneurial conference was held the following year in the capital, highlighting new enterprises and commercial opportunities, including the establishment of the city's first dry cleaning business in several years.
The Geledi Sultans were at the height of their power.
Mean temperature readings per month vary by 3&nbsp;°C (5.4&nbsp;°F), corresponding with a hyperoceanic and subtype truly hyperoceanic continentality type.
With a change in administration in late 2010, government troops and their military partners had succeeded in forcing out Al-Shabaab by August 2011.
Due to their affordability, capacity to negotiate narrow lanes and low fuel consumption, the three-wheeled vehicles are often appealing investment opportunities for small-scale entrepreneurs.
After the start of the civil war, the market was controlled by various militant groups, who used it as a base for their operations.
Part of a fleet of over 100 vehicles, Mogadishu Taxi's trademark yellow cabs offer rides throughout the city at flat rates of $5.
The auto rickshaws represent a lower cost alternative to taxis and minibuses, typically charging half the price for the same distance, with flexible rates.
To meet the growing demand, hotel representatives have also begun participating in international industry conferences, such as the Africa Hotel Investment Forum.
Mohamud concurrently signed an Establishment Agreement with the EU Head of Delegation in Somalia Michele Cervone d’Urso, which facilitates the opening of more embassies in Mogadishu by European Union member states.
After fallout from the unsuccessful Ogaden campaign of the late 1970s, the Barre administration began arresting government and military officials under suspicion of participation in the abortive 1978 coup d'état.
Additionally, a New Islamic University campus is being built.
The project is part of the ongoing modernization and development of the capital.
As of January 2014, it holds many culturally important artefacts, including old coins, bartering tools, traditional artwork, ancient weaponry and pottery items.
Situated within a 300m radius of the Aden Adde International Airport, it has a 70-room capacity with a 70% occupancy rate.
For a city situated so near the equator, Mogadishu has a relatively dry climate.
The EU also announced that it had opened a new EU Delegation office in the city.
The National Library later closed down in the 1990s.
Shops were rehabilitated, selling everything from fruit and garments to building materials.
Villa Somalia is the official residential palace and principal workplace of the President of Somalia, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud.
The airport also offers flights to other cities in Somalia, such as Galkayo, Berbera and Hargeisa, as well as to international destinations like Djibouti, Jeddah, and Istanbul.
It hosts football matches with teams from the Somalia League and the Somalia Cup.
The Hawiye Somali, however, were later successful in defeating the Ajuran State and bringing about the end of Muzaffar rule.
The galvanization of Mogadishu's real estate sector was in part facilitated by the establishment of a local construction yard in November 2012 by the Municipality of Istanbul and the Turkish Red Crescent.
Mogadishu has subsequently experienced a period of intense reconstruction spearheaded by the Somali diaspora, the municipal authorities, and Turkey, a historic ally of Somalia.
UN Security Council Resolution 733 and UN Security Council Resolution 746 led to the creation of UNOSOM I, the first stabilization mission in Somalia after the dissolution of the central government.
In February 2014, the Benadir administration began renovations at the Ansaloti Market in the Hamar Jajab district.
However, in late 2010, the security situation in Mogadishu had significantly improved, with the federal government eventually managing to assume full control of the city by August 2011.
There were projects during the 1980s to reactivate the  railway between Mogadishu and Jowhar, built by the Italians in 1926 but dismantled in World War II by British troops.
As of September 2014, the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation is scheduled to launch the first population census for Somalia in over two decades.
The solar panels have helped to improve night-time visibility and enhance the city's overall aesthetic appeal.
The latter descendants include relict populations such as the Eile, Aweer, the Wa-Ribi, and especially the Wa-Boni.
Usually dry during February and March, the river provides water essential for the cultivation of sugarcane, cotton, and bananas.
Mogadishu International Airport, the capital's main airport, is the hub of the relaunched national carrier Somali Airlines.
Some of the militias that were then competing for power interpreted the UN troops' presence as a threat to their hegemony.
Under the name Mogadishu Port Container Terminal, the firm is slated to handle all of the port's technical and operational functions.
The National Library of Somalia is undergoing a $1 million Somali federal government funded renovation, including a new library complex.
In 2015, the federal authorities completed formal refurbishments on the mosque's infrastructure.
It is the main mosque in the city, and an iconic building in Somali society.
The Somali National University (SNU) was established in the 1950s, and professors from the university later founded the non-governmental Mogadishu University (MU).
The Istanbul Municipality was also scheduled to bring in 100 specialists to accelerate the construction initiative, which ultimately aims to modernize the capital's infrastructure and serve it over the long-term.
Somali popular music enjoys a large audience in Mogadishu, and was widely sold prior to the civil war.
In July 2012, Mohammed Osman Ali (Dhagah-tur), the General Director of the Ministry of Aviation and Transport, also announced that the Somali government had begun preparations to revive the Mogadishu-based national carrier, Somali Airlines.
Alongside Barre, the Supreme Revolutionary Council (SRC) that assumed power after President Sharmarke's assassination was led by Lieutenant Colonel Salaad Gabeyre Kediye and Chief of Police Jama Korshel.
It was built circa 667 (1268/9 AD), concurrently with the Fakr ad-Din Mosque.
As of January 2015, the largest airline services using Aden Adde International Airport include the Somali-owned private carriers Jubba Airways, Daallo Airlines, and African Express Airways, in addition to UN charter planes, Turkish Airlines, and Felix Airways (Al Saeeda Airlines).
Various national sporting bodies  have their headquarters in Mogadishu, including the Somali Football Federation and the Somali Olympic Committee.
The National Library of Somalia was established in 1975, and came under the responsibility of the Ministry of Education, Culture and Higher Education.
With the outbreak of the civil war in the early 1990s, Mogadishu International Airport's flight services experienced routine disruptions and its grounds and equipment were largely destroyed.
By 1969, the airport's many landing grounds could also host small jets and DC 6B-type aircraft.
Another theory is that it is derived from the Arabic root 'mqds', which means "hallowed (place)".
Mogadishu has a number of hotels, most of which were recently constructed.
This fact is also reflected in the etymology of the city's name, which derives from the Persian ''Maq'ad-i-Shah'' (مقعد شاه) and means "the seat of the Shah."
The authorities became ever more totalitarian, and resistance movements, encouraged by Ethiopia's communist Derg administration, sprang up across the country.
As a consequence of these movements, Mogadishu's traditional demographic makeup changed significantly over the years.
It was built in 2010 and officially opened in 2012.
A number of large firms also have their headquarters in Mogadishu.
In 1983, it held approximately 7,000 books, little in the way of historical and cultural archival material, and was open to the general public.
As in the rest of the city, Barkaara Market's real estate values have also risen considerably.
The deal was secured by the Ministry of Ports and Public Works, and also assigns Al-Bayrak responsibility for rebuilding and modernizing the seaport.
Minibuses are the most common type of public transportation in Mogadishu.
By 1892, Mogadishu was under the joint control of the Somali Sultanate of the Geledi and the Omani Sultanate of Zanzibar.
Following a greatly improved security situation in the city in 2012, many Somali expatriates began returning to Mogadishu for investment opportunities and to take part in the ongoing post-conflict reconstruction process.
In addition, the municipal authorities started renovating important local government centers in September 2014, including the capital's former Fisho Guverno compound.
Following the treaty, the Turkish International Cooperation and Development Agency (TIKA) launched a citywide cleaning project in conjunction with the municipal cleaning department.
A number of countries maintain foreign embassies and consulates in Mogadishu.
According to Nur, the initiative also aims to help the authorities firm up on security and resolve housing ownership disputes.
Forming the Unified Task Force (UNITAF), the alliance was tasked with assuring security until humanitarian efforts were transferred to the UN.
In preparation for the relaunch, 60,000 additional books from other Arab League states are expected to arrive.
Mogadishu is a multi-ethnic city.
With 50 construction trucks and machines imported from Turkey, the yard produces concrete, asphalt and paving stones for building projects.
Benadir University (BU) was established in 2002 with the intention of training doctors.
Among the new hotels is the six floor Jazeera Palace Hotel.
In September 2014, the federal government officially delegated management of the Mogadishu Port to Al-Bayrak.
Open daily until 10 pm, the convenience chain imports most of its products from the United Arab Emirates and China.
Between 31 May and 9 June 2008, representatives of Somalia's federal government and the moderate Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) group of Islamist rebels participated in peace talks in Djibouti brokered by the UN.
It subsequently fell under the control of an assortment of local Sultanates and polities, most notably the Geledi Sultanate.
In April 2013, after a visit to the site to inspect its condition, the Diocese of Mogadiscio announced plans to refurbish the building.
By January 2009, Al-Shabaab and other militias had managed to force the Ethiopian troops to retreat, leaving behind an under-equipped African Union peacekeeping force to assist the Transitional Federal Government's troops.
The city later became the capital of Italian Somaliland (1889-1936) in the colonial period.
After incurring some damage during the civil war, the federal government launched the Mogadishu Port Rehabilitation Project, an initiative to rebuild, develop and modernize the port.
Roads leading out of Mogadishu connect the city to other localities in Somalia as well as to neighbouring countries.
According to the ''Periplus'', maritime trade already connected peoples in the Mogadishu area with other communities along the Indian Ocean coast.
Among the scheduled projects was the construction of a new headquarters for the Academy in Mogadishu, in recognition of Somalia's traditional position as the center for the development and promotion of the Somali language.
With Zainab Hassan serving as Director, the $1 million federal government funded initiative will see a new library complex built in the capital within six months.
City University's syllabus features an advanced curriculum and foundation programs in English.
According to Mogadishu Port manager Abdullahi Ali Nur, the delegates along with local Somali officials received reports on the port's functions as part of the rebuilding project's planning stages.
Among the administration's development initiatives are a US$100 million urban renewal project, the creation of garbage disposal and incineration plants, the launch of a citywide cleanup project, the creation of asphalt and cement plants, rehabilitation of the Town Hall and parliament buildings, reconstruction of the former Defence Ministry offices, reconstruction of correctional facilities, rehabilitation and construction of health facilities, establishment of a Police Training Center and a permanent base in Jasiira for the new Somali Armed Forces, rebuilding of the Somali Postal Service headquarters, and rehabilitation of public playgrounds in several districts.
In the mid-1960s, the airport was enlarged to accommodate more international carriers, with the state-owned Somali Airlines providing regular trips to all major cities.
Benadir University (BU) was established in 2002 with the intention of training doctors.
Villa and Mansion Architects, an international architectural firm founded by the Somali-British architect Alexander Yusuf, likewise has its regional offices in Mogadishu.
The urban area occupies , with a population density of around .
In January 2014, the Benadir administration launched the House Numbering and Post Code System.
The university is a member of the Somali Research and Educational Network, and is authorized as a degree granting institution by the national Ministry of Education Directorate of Higher Education and Culture.
In 1905, Italy made Mogadishu the capital of the newly established Italian Somaliland.
Beyle also pledged to reestablish the institute's diplomacy department, its information and broadcasting department, as well as its library.
The National Theatre of Somalia opened in 1967 as an important cultural landmark in the national capital.
It is the brainchild of a number of professors from the Somali National University as well as other Somali intellectuals.
The Somali National University (SNU) was established in the 1950s, during the trusteeship period.
It is mentioned in the ''Periplus of the Erythraean Sea'', a Greek travel document dating from the first century AD, as one of a series of commercial ports on the Somali littoral.
In June 2013, former Prime Minister Abdi Farah Shirdon signed a new foreign investment law.
In 1967, Muhammad Haji Ibrahim Egal became Prime Minister, a position to which he was appointed by Shermarke.
To this end, the municipal authority is refurbishing the historic Central Mosque, situated downtown.
In August 2011, militant group al Shabaab made a strategic withdrawal from Mogadishu to return to hit-and-run tactics.
In the 1930s, new buildings and avenues were built.
In his journal of an expedition to the region in 1497-1499, the explorer João de Sá, who accompanied Vasco da Gama on the voyage, wrote that ''Magadoxo'' (Mogadishu) was controlled by Moors.
'''Mogadishu''' (; ;  ''Maqadīshū''), known locally as '''Hamar''', is the capital and most populous city of Somalia.
The refurbishing initiative cost US$3.6 million, and was completed in August 2014.
Featuring modern passenger facilities and a glass façade, it will enable the airport to double its number of daily commercial flights to 60, with a throughput of around 1,000 passengers per hour.
British Somaliland became independent on 26 June 1960 as the State of Somaliland, and the Trust Territory of Somalia (the former Italian Somaliland) followed suit five days later.
