In the second part of the 20th century, Moldova saw a massive Soviet immigration, which brought with it many elements of Soviet culture.
Following a period of political instability and massive public protests, a new Government led by Pavel Filip was invested in January 2016.
The ex-Romanian President Traian Băsescu stated that Romania will make all efforts for Moldova to join the EU as soon as possible.
The 1994 Constitution of Moldova sets the framework for the government of the country.
In the 1980s, amid political conditions created by the glasnost and perestroika, a Democratic Movement of Moldova was formed, which in 1989 became known as the nationalist Popular Front of Moldova (FPM).
Vineyards/cellars include Cricova, Purcari, Ciumai, Romanești, Cojușna, Mileștii Mici.
The urbanization rate is 45% of the total population living in urban areas ().
The Moldovan armed forces consist of the Ground Forces and Air Force.
Moldavia was invaded repeatedly by Crimean Tatars and, since the 15th century, by the Turks.
Investigations into activities at these three banks uncovered a large-scale theft by means of fraudulent loans to business entities controlled by a Moldovan/Israeli oligarch, Ilan Shor, of funds worth about 1 billion U.S. dollars.
Ethnic Germans left in 1940.
From 1992 to 2001, the country suffered a serious economic crisis, leaving most of the population below the poverty line.
With the nationalist Popular Front now in a parliamentary minority, new measures aiming to moderate the ethnic tensions in the country could be adopted.
Mihai Eminescu, a late Romantic poet, and Ion Creangă, a writer, are the most influential Romanian language artists, considered national writers both in Romania and Moldova.
Monetary policy has been successful in maintaining inflation within the NBM’s target range.
This was followed by French, taken by less than 50% of students.
Greeks, Armenians, Poles, Ukrainians, although not numerous, were present since as early as the 17th century, and had left cultural marks.
The title used in the document of 6 July 1600 was: "The King of the country of Romania, Ardeal and of all of Moldavia".
Since declaring independence in 1991, Moldova has participated in UN peacekeeping missions in Liberia, Côte d'Ivoire, Sudan and Georgia.
In 1989, as opposition to the Communist Party grew, there were major riots in November.
Ialpug flows into one of the Danube limans, while Cogâlnic into the Black Sea chain of limans.
Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, the country has seen a decrease in spending on health care and, as a result, the tuberculosis incidence rate in the country has grown.
Moldova remains highly vulnerable to fluctuations in remittances from workers abroad (24 percent of GDP), exports to the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and European Union (EU) (88 percent of total exports), and donor support (about 10 percent of government spending).
Plans for a union with Romania were abandoned, and the new Constitution gave autonomy to the breakaway Transnistria and Gagauzia.
Corporate governance in the banking sector is a major concern.
Despite a sharp decline in poverty in recent years, Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in Europe and structural reforms are needed to promote sustainable growth.
After the breakup from the USSR in 1991, energy shortages, political uncertainty, trade obstacles and weak administrative capacity contributed to the decline of economy.
The money was to supplement $570 million in International Monetary Fund loans, World Bank and other bilateral support already granted to Moldova.
The union was conditional upon fulfillment of the agrarian reform, autonomy, and respect for universal human rights.
Along with several other Soviet republics, from 1988 onwards, Moldova started to move towards independence.
... You need plenty of bags to move that money around ...
The European orientation "has been the policy of Moldova in recent years and this is the policy that must continue," Nicolae Timofti told lawmakers before his election.
In the 21st century, the primary foreign language taught in the schools is English.
The government's goal of EU integration has resulted in some market-oriented progress.
However, delays in policy implementation prevented completion of the final reviews under the ECF/EFF arrangements.
Moldova is a parliamentary republic with a president as head of state and a prime minister as head of government.
In August 2009, four Moldovan parties – Liberal Democratic Party, Liberal Party, Democratic Party, and Our Moldova Alliance – agreed to create a governing coalition that pushed the Communist party into opposition.
In April 2010, Romania offered Moldova development aid worth of €100 million while the number of scholarships for Moldovan students doubled to 5,000.
Moldova received official recognition on 25 December.
Then Zdob și Zdub again represented Moldova in the 2011 Eurovision Song Contest finishing 12th.
In 2000, the Constitution was amended, transforming Moldova into a parliamentary republic, with the president being chosen through indirect election rather than direct popular vote.
Gagauz, 4.4% of the population, are Christian Turkic people.
In 2005, Moldova and the EU established an action plan that sought to improve collaboration between its two neighbouring countries, Romania and Ukraine.
Three months later, on 2 March 1992, the country gained formal recognition as an independent state at the United Nations.
In 1538, the principality became a tributary to the Ottoman Empire, but it retained internal and partial external autonomy.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the Moldavian SSR received substantial allocations from the budget of the USSR to develop industrial and scientific facilities and housing.
The maternal mortality rate was 41 deaths/100,000 live births (in 2010) and the infant mortality rate was 12.59 deaths/1,000 live births (in 2015).
Likewise, Traian Băsescu declared that the unification of Moldova with Romania is the next national project for Romania, as more than 75% of the population speaks Romanian.
Although estimates point to possible modest overvaluation of the real exchange rate, external competitiveness appears broadly adequate as reflected in strong sustained export performance.
Over the 19th century, the Russian authorities encouraged colonization of the southern part of the region by Romanians, Ukrainians, Lipovans, Cossacks, Bulgarians, Germans, Gagauzes, and allowed the settlement of more Jews, to replace the large Nogai Tatar population expelled in the 1770s and 1780s, during Russo-Turkish Wars; the Moldovan proportion of the population decreased from an estimated 86% in 1816, in the aftermath of the Muslim expulsion, to around 52% in 1905.
Still, growth has been hampered by high prices for Russian natural gas, a Russian import ban on Moldovan wine, increased foreign scrutiny of Moldovan agricultural products, and by Moldova's large external debt.
Another 699 villages are too small to have a separate administration, and are administratively part of either cities (40 of them) or communes (659).
The country is landlocked, even though it is very close to the Black Sea.
The percentage of adults (aged 15–49) living with HIV/AIDS was estimated in 2009 at 0.40%.
He has been fittingly dubbed "Epic Sax Guy".
Infotag is the state news agency.
Similar events occurred in the 1930s in the Moldavian ASSR.
In the postwar period, the Soviet government organized the immigration of working age Russian speakers (mostly Russians, Belarusians, and Ukrainians), into the new Soviet republic, especially into urbanized areas, partly to compensate for the demographic loss caused by the war and the emigration of 1940 and 1944.
With few natural energy resources, Moldova imports almost all of its energy supplies from Russia and Ukraine.
Registered players have doubled, and almost 10,000 spectators turn up at every European Nations Cup match.
Moldova joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation's Partnership for Peace on 16 March 1994.
Moldova has 66 cities (towns), including five with municipality status, and 916 communes.
The largest ethnic group is a speaker of Romanian and shares the Romanian culture.
Amendments to the Constitution affecting the state's sovereignty, independence, or unity can only be made after a majority of voters support the proposal in a referendum.
Its identity with the Romanian language was also established.
In August 2013, work began on a new pipeline between Moldova and Romania that may eventually break Russia's monopoly on Moldova's gas supplies.
According to IMF World Economic Outlook April 2014, the Moldovan GDP (PPP) per capita is 3,927 International Dollars, excluding grey economy and tax evasion.
In the April 2009 parliamentary elections, the Communist Party won 49.48% of the votes, followed by the Liberal Party with 13.14% of the votes, the Liberal Democratic Party with 12.43%, and the Alliance "Moldova Noastră" with 9.77%.
On 2 January 1992, Moldova introduced a market economy, liberalizing prices, which resulted in rapid inflation.
Moldova is a partner country of the EU INOGATE energy programme, which has four key topics: enhancing energy security, convergence of member state energy markets on the basis of EU internal energy market principles, supporting sustainable energy development, and attracting investment for energy projects of common and regional interest.
Popular alcoholic beverages are ''divin'' (Moldovan brandy), beer, and local wine.
After the Alliance for European Integration lost a no confidence vote, the Pro-European Coalition was formed on 30 May 2013.
Following a decline of 0.7 percent in 2012, the economy expanded by 8.9 percent in 2013, led by strong rebound in agriculture and related industries, private consumption and exports.
The life expectancy in 2015 was estimated at 70.42 years (66.55 years male, 74.54 years female).
Among these were many Bessarabians, such as Alexandru Donici, Alexandru Hâjdeu, Bogdan Petriceicu Hasdeu, Constantin Stamati, Constantin Stamati-Ciurea, Costache Negruzzi, Alecu Russo, Constantin Stere.
The Principality of Moldavia, established in 1359, was bounded by the Carpathian Mountains in the west, Dniester river in the east, and Danube River and Black Sea to the south.
Moldova's remarkable recovery from the severe recession of 2009 was largely the result of sound macroeconomic and financial policies and structural reforms.
The president of Moldova has been elected by the parliament since 2001, a change designed to decrease executive authority in favour of the legislature.
According to a 2009 study, Moldova was struggling with one of the highest incidence rates of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in the world.
International reserves increased to US$2.8 billion (5 months of imports or 105 percent of short-term debt).
Moldova has access to the Danube for only about , and Giurgiulești is the only Moldovan port on the Danube.
The political crisis that broke out in early 2013 was resolved with the appointment of a government supported by a pro-European center-right/center coalition in May 2013.
While most of the country is hilly, elevations never exceed  – the highest point being the Bălănești Hill.
In 1993, the government introduced a new national currency, the Moldovan leu, to replace the temporary cupon.
Dan Bălan, another popular artist, released the album ''Chica Bomb'' in 2010.
The Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova managed to stay in power for eight years.
After winning the 1996 presidential elections, on 15 January 1997, Petru Lucinschi, the former First Secretary of the Moldavian Communist Party in 1989–91, became the country's second president (1997–2001), succeeding Mircea Snegur (1991–1996).
Rugby union is popular as well.
Public expenditure on health was 4.2% of the GDP and private expenditure on health 3.2%.
On 23 June 1990, the Parliament adopted the Declaration of Sovereignty of the "Soviet Socialist Republic Moldova", which, among other things, stipulated the supremacy of Moldovan laws over those of the Soviet Union.
The fragmentation of the liberal bloc (aka the democrats) helped consolidate its power.
The highest temperature ever recorded in Moldova was  on 21 July 2007 in Camenca.
The large scale of the theft relative to the size of the Moldovan economy and despair that the money, now believed to be in offshore bank accounts, will be recovered, are thought to be affecting the country's politics to favour the pro-Russian Socialist Party.
In May 1919, the Bessarabian Soviet Socialist Republic was proclaimed as a government in exile.
Economic activity grew cumulatively by about 24 percent; consumer price inflation was brought under control; and real wages increased cumulatively by about 13 percent.
The main means of transportation in Moldova are railroads  and a highway system ( overall, including  of paved surfaces).
Resisting pre-election pressures for selective spending increases and returning to the path of fiscal consolidation would reduce reliance on exceptionally-high donor support.
The assembly pressured the authorities of the Moldavian SSR to adopt a language law on 31 August 1989 that proclaimed the Moldovan language written in the Latin script to be the state language of the MSSR.
The implementation of structural reforms outlined in the National Development Strategy (NDS) Moldova 2020—especially in the business environment, physical infrastructure, and human resources development areas—would help boost potential growth and reduce poverty.
In 2010, Oldowan flint tools were discovered at Bayraki that are 800,000–1.2 million years old.
For the 2004 census, Orthodox Christians, who make up 93.3% of Moldova's population, were not required to declare the particular of the two main churches they belong to.
In accordance with the Constitution, he will be serving as the Acting President of Republic of Moldova.
The culture has been also influenced (through Eastern Orthodoxy) by the Byzantine culture.
Following the regional financial crisis in 1998, Moldova has made significant progress towards achieving and retaining macroeconomic and financial stabilization.
The largest part of the nation lies between two rivers, the Dniester and the Prut.
This makes for a total of 1,681 localities in Moldova, all but two of which are inhabited.
It is a member state of the United Nations, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization (WTO), the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development, the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) and aspires to join the European Union.
A part of the interim Parliament agreed to drop these conditions after Bukovina and Transylvania also joined the Kingdom of Romania, although historians note that they lacked the quorum to do so.
Its subdivisions in Moldova include the Dniester Hills (Northern Moldavian Hills and Dniester Ridge), the Moldavian Plain (Middle Prut Valley and Bălți Steppe), and the Central Moldavian Plateau (Ciuluc-Soloneț Hills, Cornești Hills—Codri Massive, "Codri" meaning "forests"—Lower Dniester Hills, Lower Prut Valley, and Tigheci Hills).
The main transmission channels through which adverse exogenous shocks could impact the Moldovan economy are: remittances (also due to potentially returning migrants), external trade, and capital flows.
Like the present-day republic and Romania's north-eastern region, it was known to the locals as ''Moldova.''
Located geographically at the crossroads of Latin, Slavic and other cultures, Moldova has enriched its own culture adopting and maintaining some of the traditions of its neighbours and of other influence sources.
Based on the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) regional poverty line of US$5/day (PPP), 55 percent of the
Of the latter, approximately 90,000 died.
She took 10th place with 109 points.
Moldova is a unitary parliamentary representative democratic republic.
In 2012, a security zone incident resulted in the death of a civilian, raising tensions with Russia.
Between 2 March and 26 July 1992, the conflict escalated into a military engagement.
Main risks to the near-term outlook relate to serious vulnerabilities and governance issues in the banking sector, policy slippages in the run up to the elections, intensification of geopolitical tensions in the region, and a further slowdown in activity in main trading partners.
The economy of Moldova began to change in 2001; and until 2008 the country saw a steady annual growth between 5% and 10%.
On 29 November 2013, at a summit in Vilnius, Moldova signed an association agreement with the European Union dedicated to the European Union's 'Eastern Partnership' with ex-Soviet countries.
Television in Moldova was introduced in April 1958, within the framework of Soviet television.
, Romania allocates 5,000 scholarships in high schools and universities for Moldovan students.
The 1994 constitution also establishes an independent Constitutional Court, composed of six judges (two appointed by the President, two by Parliament, and two by the Supreme Council of Magistrature), serving six-year terms, during which they are irremovable and not subordinate to any power.
The current Constitution of Moldova was adopted in 1994.
According to a lending agreement signed in February 2010, Poland provided US$15 million as a component of its support for Moldova in its European integration efforts.
visit, Petras Auštrevičius, MEP, commented on the confidence crisis affecting Moldova: "To steal a billion dollars!
According to Amnesty International, "Torture and other ill-treatment in police detention remained widespread; the state failed to carry out prompt and impartial investigations and police officers sometimes evaded penalties.
The country's cultural heritage was marked by numerous churches and monasteries built by the Moldavian ruler Stephen the Great in the 15th century, by the works of the later renaissance Metropolitans Varlaam and Dosoftei, and those of scholars such as Grigore Ureche, Miron Costin, Nicolae Milescu, Dimitrie Cantemir and Ion Neculce.
Moldova is committed to a number of international and regional control of arms regulations such as the UN Firearms Protocol, Stability Pact Regional Implementation Plan, the UN Programme of Action (PoA) and the OSCE Documents on Stockpiles of Conventional Ammunition.
In September 2010, the European Parliament approved a grant of €90 million to Moldova.
Romanian forces, working with the Germans, deported or exterminated about 300,000 Jews, including 147,000 from Bessarabia and Bukovina.
As of the 2004 census, the country has ethnic Russian (6%) and Ukrainian (8.4%) populations.
Since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian Government has frequently used its connections with the Russian Orthodox Church to block and stymie the integration of former Soviet states like Moldova into the West.
The origin of the name of the river remains unclear.
+Average daily maximum and minimum temperatures for the three largest cities in Moldova
At the end of 2005 EUBAM, the European Union Border Assistance Mission to Moldova and Ukraine, was established at the joint request of the presidents of Moldova and Ukraine.
The country acceded to the provisions of the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in October 1994 in Washington, D.C.
Key risks to the near-term outlook relate to financial stability, fiscal policy slippages in the run up to the 2014 parliamentary elections, a further slowdown in activity in main trading partners, and intensification of geopolitical tensions.
In May 1600, Michael the Brave removed Ieremia Movilă from Moldavia's throne, by winning the battle of Bacău, and that way realized the first union of the three Romanian principalities: Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania.
Mark Pester was a student of the famous violin teacher Leopold Auer at the St. Petersburg Conservatory.
The Treaty of Paris (1856) returned three counties of Bessarabia—Cahul, Bolgrad and Ismail—to Moldavia, but in the Treaty of Berlin (1878), the Kingdom of Romania was forced, by the Great Powers (United Kingdom, Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the Ottoman Empire), to cede them to the Russian Empire.
As part of the 1941 Axis invasion of the Soviet Union, Romania seized the territories of Bessarabia, northern Bukovina and Transnistria.
On 26 December 1991 the Soviet Union ceased to exist.
As a part of an ambitious economic liberalization effort, Moldova introduced a convertible currency, liberalized all prices, stopped issuing preferential credits to state enterprises, backed steady land privatization, removed export controls, and liberalized interest rates.
This union was recognized by the principal Allied Powers in the 1920 Treaty of Paris, which however was not ratified by all of its signatories.
Moldova declared independence on 27 August 1991, as part of the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Despite a small contraction in 2012, Moldova’s economic performance was among the strongest in the region during 2010–13.
The country's main cities are the capital Chișinău, in the centre of the country, Tiraspol (in the eastern region of Transnistria), Bălți (in the north) and Bender (in the south-east).
On 28 August 2009, this coalition chose a new parliament speaker (Mihai Ghimpu) in a vote that was boycotted by Communist legislators.
It has a vineyard area of , of which  are used for commercial production.
The economy has strongly recovered from the drought-related contraction in 2012 but will slow down in 2014.
The agreement is part of Moldova's strategy to reform its military and cooperate with its neighbours.
The country has also important minority ethnic communities.
As part of this process, the Tsarist administration in Bessarabia gradually removed the Romanian language from official and religious use.
The western part of Moldavia (which is a part of present-day Romania) remained an autonomous principality, and in 1859, united with Wallachia to form the Kingdom of Romania.
The country's central legislative body is the unicameral Moldovan Parliament (''''), which has 101 seats, and whose members are elected by popular vote on party lists every four years.
The controversial results of this election sparked civil unrest
Moldova has signed the Association Agreement with the European Union in Brussels on 27 June 2014.
Moldova "has made "noteworthy progress" on religious freedom since the era of the Soviet Union, but it can still take further steps to foster diversity," said the UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief Heiner Bielefeldt, in Chișinău, in September 2011.
Shipping on the lower Prut and Nistru rivers plays only a modest role in the country's transportation system.
Moldova has been participating in the Eurovision Song Contest since 2005.
The new Russian province was called "Oblast of Moldavia and Bessarabia", and initially enjoyed a large degree of autonomy.
In November 2013, Moldova initialed an Association Agreement with the EU which includes provisions establishing a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA).
After the failure of the Tatarbunary Uprising in 1924, the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (Moldavian ASSR) was formed by Soviet Russia from territory of the Ukrainian SSR, the present-day Transnistria.
50% of ethnic Ukrainians, 27% of Gagauz, 35% of Bulgarians, and 54% of smaller ethnic groups speak Russian as their first language.
It can be said that religious leaders play a role in shaping foreign policy.
Annual rainfall, which ranges from around  in the north to  in the south, can vary greatly; long dry spells are not unusual.
The country became the first post-Soviet state where a non-reformed Communist Party returned to power.
The newly communist Russia, did not recognize Romanian rule over Bessarabia, the latter considering it an occupation of Russian territory.
After the 1990–1992 War of Transnistria, Moldova sought a peaceful resolution to the conflict in the Transnistria region by working with Romania, Ukraine, and Russia, calling for international mediation, and co-operating with the OSCE and UN fact-finding and observer missions.
A parliamentary majority of at least two-thirds is required to amend the Constitution of Moldova, which cannot be revised in time of war or national emergency.
Inflation remained within the NBM's (National Bank of Moldova) target range of 5 percent ± 1.5 percentage points.
The overall budget deficit narrowed to 1.8 percent of GDP in 2013 from 2.2 percent of GDP in 2012, partly reflecting the under execution of investment projects.
The band SunStroke Project with Olia Tira represented the country in the 2010 Eurovision Song Contest with their hit song "Run Away".
Many families have their own recipes and strands of grapes that have been passed down through the generations.
In the south, the country has a small flatland, the Bugeac Plain.
On , the Sfatul Țării decided with 86 votes for, 3 against and 36 abstaining, to unite with the Kingdom of Romania.
In May 2007, Natalia Barbu represented Moldova in Helsinki for the Eurovision Song Contest 2007 with her entry "Fight".
Likewise, more than half of preschool children in Moldova benefit from Romania funded program to renovate and equip kindergartens.
Ieremia Movilă returned to Moldavia's throne under vassalage of Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
New governments were formed by Vasile Tarlev (19 April 2001 – 31 March 2008), and Zinaida Greceanîi (31 March 2008 – 14 September 2009).
In the region east of the Dniester river, Transnistria, which includes a large proportion of predominantly russophone East Slavs of Ukrainian (28%) and Russian (26%) descent (altogether 54% as of 1989), while Moldovans (40%) have been the largest ethnic group, and where the headquarters and many units of the Soviet 14th Guards Army were stationed, an independent Pridnestrovian Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic was proclaimed on 16 August 1990, with its capital in Tiraspol.
The Moldovan Intelligence and Security Service has estimated that 600,000 to one million Moldovan citizens (almost 25% of the population) are working abroad.
On 23 December 1994, the Parliament of Moldova adopted a "Law on the Special Legal Status of Gagauzia", and in 1995 the latter was constituted.
In agriculture, the economic reform started with the land cadastre reform.
Following the Russian Revolution of 1917, a Bessarabian parliament, Sfatul Țării (a National Council), was elected in October–November 1917 and opened on .
The Moldovan economy has strongly recovered from the drought-related contraction in 2012.
In 1994, Moldova became a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace program, and a member of the Council of Europe on 29 June 1995.
Its territory comprised the present-day territory of the Republic of Moldova, the eastern eight counties of Romania, and the Chernivtsi Oblast and Budjak region of Ukraine.
In 2009, when Moldova experienced its most serious civil unrest in a decade, several civilians, including Valeriu Boboc, were killed by police and many more injured.
Staff's spillover analysis suggests that further strengthening of fiscal and external buffers would be critical for mitigating the impact of external shocks, particularly in light of the Moldova's strong links and synchronized business cycle with trading partners.
Another outstanding pianist is Oleg Maisenberg, the winner of the Schubert International Competition in Vienna.
Human trafficking of Moldovan women and children to other parts of Europe is a serious problem.
As per 2014 census preliminary data, 2,913,281 inhabitants live in Moldova (within the areas controlled by the central government), a decrease from the figure recorded at the 2004 census.
Nevertheless, the Constitutional Court ruled on 4 March 2016, that this constitutional change adopted in 2000 regarding the presidential election was unconstitutional, thus reverting the election method of the President to a two-round system direct election.
These include education, infrastructure, financial sector, business climate, energy consumption, pension system, and judicial framework.
In total, there are 541,000 people (or 16% of the population) in Moldova who declared Russian as their first language, including 130,000 ethnic Moldovans.
Main dishes include beef, pork, potatoes, cabbage, and a variety of cereals.
Gagauz and Ukrainian languages have significant numbers of speakers in regional populations.
