The two main methods are described below.
In analyzing such an object, one treats the object's mass as a function that varies with time: .
The relationship between the stresses and the strain rate depends on the properties of the material (see Types of viscosity).
Because momentum has a direction, it can be used to predict the resulting direction of objects after they collide, as well as their speeds.
Instead, the materials must be approximated by a continuum in which there is a particle or fluid parcel at each point that is assigned the average of the properties of atoms in a small region nearby.
This is called a Galilean transformation.
Thus, momentum is conserved in both reference frames.
A slingshot maneuver of a satellite around a planet can also be viewed as a perfectly elastic collision from a distance.
Rockets also make use of conservation of momentum: propellant is thrust outward,  gaining momentum, and an equal and opposite momentum is imparted to the rocket.
The force from below is greater than the force from above by just the amount needed to balance gravity.
For example, in a collision of two particles, a reference frame can be chosen, where, one particle begins at rest.
He proposed instead that an impetus was imparted to the object in the act of throwing it.
Linear momentum is also a ''conserved'' quantity, meaning that if a closed system is not affected by external forces, its total linear momentum cannot change.
For both massive and massless objects, relativistic momentum is related to the phase constant   by
If the latter scaling is used, an interval of proper time, , defined by
The above results are for the ''microscopic'' Maxwell equations, applicable to electromagnetic forces in a vacuum (or on a very small scale in media).
René Descartes believed that the total "quantity of motion" in the universe is conserved, where the quantity of motion is understood as the product of size and speed.
Suppose a particle has position  in a stationary frame of reference.
So for Descartes if a moving object were to bounce off a surface, changing its direction but not its speed, there would be no change in its quantity of motion.
It can also be generalized to situations where Newton's laws do not hold, for example in the theory of relativity and in electrodynamics.
In Newtonian mechanics, the law of conservation of momentum can be derived from the law of action and reaction, which states that every force has a reciprocating equal and opposite force.
The momentum per unit volume is .
It is more difficult to define momentum density in media because the division into electromagnetic and mechanical is arbitrary.
If the speed in the  direction varies with , the  tangential force in direction  per unit area normal to the  direction is
The normal force per unit area is the pressure .
The first use of "momentum" in its proper mathematical sense is not clear but by the time of Jenning's ''Miscellanea'' in 1721, five years before the final edition of Newton's ''Principia Mathematica'', momentum  or "quantity of motion" was being defined for students as "a rectangle", the product of  and , where  is "quantity of material" and  is "velocity", .
Newton's second law, with mass fixed, is not invariant under a Lorentz transformation.
Under some circumstances, moving charged particles can exert forces on each other in non-opposite directions.
If one body has much greater mass than the other, its velocity will be little affected by a collision while the other body will experience a large change.
momenta; SI unit kg&nbsp;m/s) is the product of the mass and velocity of an object, quantified in kilogram-meters per second.
Each component can be obtained separately and the results combined to produce a vector result.
It is dimensionally equivalent to impulse, the product of force and time, quantified in newton-seconds.
This equation is derived by keeping track of both the momentum of the object as well as the momentum of the ejected/accreted mass (dm).
Each vector equation represents three scalar equations.
In quantum mechanics, position and momentum are conjugate variables.
where  is the gradient operator,  is the reduced Planck constant, and  is the imaginary unit.
In particular, it has a density  and velocity  that depend on time  and position .
In general, when the initial velocities are known, the final velocities are given by
A head-on elastic collision between two bodies can be represented by velocities in one dimension, along a line passing through the bodies.
Another property of the motion, kinetic energy, must be known.
It is ultimately an expression of one of the fundamental symmetries of space and time, that of translational symmetry.
Quantities that have both a magnitude and a direction are known as vector quantities.
Time may be given in its normal units or multiplied by the speed of light so that all the components of the four-vector have dimensions of length.
Regardless of the velocities of the bodies, a switch to the center of mass frame leads us to the same conclusion.
Such a shear stress occurs if the fluid has a velocity gradient because the fluid is moving faster on one side than another.
In the special theory of relativity, Einstein keeps the postulate that the equations of motion do not depend on the reference frame, but assumes that the speed of light  is invariant.
A change of reference frame can often simplify the analysis of a collision.
If neither  nor  depends on position,  is conserved.
Aristotle claimed that everything that is moving must be kept moving by something.
See also Electromagnetism (momentum).
As a result, position and time in two reference frames are related by the Lorentz transformation instead of the Galilean transformation.
For each surface with normal in direction  and force in direction , there is a stress component .
Forces such as Newtonian gravity, which depend only on the scalar distance between objects, satisfy this criterion.
where  is the velocity (see time derivative),  is the electric charge of the particle and  is the Lorentz factor.
If the forces are not balanced, the droplet accelerates.
The relativistic energy–momentum relationship holds even for massless particles such as photons; by setting  it follows that
This is also a flux, or flow per unit area, of x-momentum through the surface.
One might then try to invoke Newton's second law of motion by saying that the external force  on the object is related to its momentum  by , but this is incorrect, as is the related expression found by applying the product rule to :
If the truck were lighter, or moving more slowly, then it would have less momentum and therefore require less impulse to start or stop.
From the point of view of another frame of reference, moving at a uniform speed , the position (represented by a primed coordinate) changes with time as
In a coordinate system with  axes, velocity has components  in the  direction,  in the  direction,  in the  direction.
In a Minkowski space, the scalar product of two four-vectors  and  is defined as
Because of the symmetry, after the collision both must be moving away from the center of mass at the same speed.
and is invariant across all reference frames.
The Galilean transformation gives the coordinates of the moving frame as
A change of reference frame, can, often, simplify calculations of motion.
For example, an explosion is the result of a chain reaction that transforms potential energy stored in chemical, mechanical, or nuclear form into kinetic energy, acoustic energy, and electromagnetic radiation.
Ibn Sīnā (also known by his Latinized name Avicenna) read Philoponus and published his own theory of motion in ''The Book of Healing'' in 1020.
If the particle is moving at speed  in the first frame of reference, in the second, it is moving at speed
It remained only to assign a standard term to the quantity of motion.
where  is the Lorentz factor:
In this mathematical framework, a generalized momentum is associated with the generalized coordinates.
The nine components make up the Cauchy stress tensor , which includes both pressure and shear.
Consider a column of water in hydrostatic equilibrium.
is invariant under Lorentz transformations (in this expression and in what follows the  metric signature has been used, different authors use different conventions).
For example, a thrown ball must be kept moving by motions of the air.
Below, the basic properties of momentum are described in one dimension.
Newton's ''Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica'', when it was first published in 1687, showed a similar casting around for words to use for the mathematical momentum.
An example is found in the section on electromagnetism.
The calculation of the momentum of light within dielectric media is somewhat controversial (see Abraham–Minkowski controversy).
The electromagnetic stress tensor depends on the properties of the media.
In a game of relativistic "billiards", if a stationary particle is hit by a moving particle in an elastic collision, the paths formed by the two afterwards will form an acute angle.
However, nonlinear effects can give rise to a nonzero average.
This is a commonly encountered form of the momentum operator, though the momentum operator in other bases can take other forms.
where the H-field  is related to the B-field and the magnetization  by
This is unlike the non-relativistic case where they travel at right angles.
Using Einstein's mass-energy equivalence, , this can be rewritten as
In quantum mechanics, momentum is defined as a self-adjoint operator on the wave function.
Newtonian physics assumes that absolute time and space exist outside of any observer; this gives rise to the Galilean invariance described earlier.
Some sources represent the kinematic momentum by the symbol .
where  is the three-dimensional vector stating the object's momentum in the three directions of three-dimensional space,  is the three-dimensional velocity vector giving the object's rate of movement in each direction, and  is the object's mass.
Nevertheless, the combined momentum of the particles and the electromagnetic field is conserved.
The correct equation is
Even if the generalized coordinates are just the ordinary spatial coordinates, the conjugate momenta are not necessarily the ordinary momentum coordinates.
''Example'': A model airplane of 1&nbsp;kg accelerates from rest to a velocity of 6&nbsp;m/s due north in 2&nbsp;s. The net force required to produce this acceleration is 3&nbsp;newtons due north.
Observers in different frames would find different values of linear momentum of a system.
Momentum is a measurable quantity, and the measurement depends on the motion of the observer.
The two observers each have a frame of reference, in which, they observe motions, and, if the elevator is descending steadily, they will see behavior that is consistent with those same physical laws.
In fields such as fluid dynamics and solid mechanics, it is not feasible to follow the motion of individual atoms or molecules.
To someone inside the elevator, the apple does not move, so, it has zero momentum.
and the (contravariant) four-momentum is
Newton's laws can be difficult to apply to many kinds of motion because the motion is limited by ''constraints''.
The concept of momentum plays a fundamental role in explaining the behavior of variable-mass objects such as a rocket ejecting fuel or a star accreting gas.
For example, a 1&nbsp;kg model airplane, traveling due north at 1&nbsp;m/s in straight and level flight, has a momentum of 1&nbsp;kg&nbsp;m/s due north measured from the ground.
The equations in the previous sections, work in vector form if the scalars  and  are replaced by vectors  and .
This is equal to the net force on the droplet.
This acceleration is not simply the partial derivative  because the fluid in a given volume changes with time.
Being a vector, momentum has magnitude and direction.
The Heisenberg uncertainty principle defines limits on how accurately the momentum and position of a single observable system can be known at once.
Since  does not change, the accelerations are the same:
The vector equations are almost identical to the scalar equations (see multiple dimensions).
Wallis uses ''momentum'' and ''vis'' for force.
Electromagnetic radiation (including visible light, ultraviolet light, and radio waves) is carried by photons.Even though photons (the particle aspect of light) have no mass, they still carry momentum.
The change in momentum is 6&nbsp;kg&nbsp;m/s.
where the operator  acting on a wave function  yields that wave function multiplied by the value , in an analogous fashion to the way that the position operator acting on a wave function  yields that wave function multiplied by the value ''x''.
This leads to applications such as the solar sail.
The expression for the ''four-momentum'' depends on how the coordinates are expressed.
It is possible for momentum flux to occur even though the wave itself does not have a mean momentum.
with the negative sign indicating that the forces oppose.
The flux, or transport per unit area, of a momentum component  by a velocity  is equal to .
For example: if an apple is sitting in a glass elevator that is descending, an outside observer, looking into the elevator, sees the apple moving, so, to that observer, the apple has a non-zero momentum.
If the particles are numbered 1 and 2, the second law states that  and .
For a single particle described in the position basis the momentum operator can be written as
The first correct statement of the law of conservation of momentum was by English mathematician John Wallis in his 1670 work, ''Mechanica sive De Motu, Tractatus Geometricus'': "the initial state of the body, either of rest or of motion, will persist" and "If the force is greater than the resistance, motion will result".
The vector is represented by a boldface symbol:
Moreover, as long as the force has the same form, in both frames, Newton's second law is unchanged.
The (temporal component) Planck–Einstein relation
Newton's second law of motion states that the change in linear momentum of a body is equal to the net impulse acting on it.
The 4-Momentum is related to the 4-WaveVector in Special Relativity
This is contrary to observation.
In a closed system (one that does not exchange any matter with its surroundings and is not acted on by external forces) the total momentum is constant.
Because of the third law, the forces between them are equal and opposite.
Galileo, later, in his ''Two New Sciences'', used the Italian word ''impeto''.
This law holds no matter how complicated the force is between particles.
The work of Philoponus, and possibly that of Ibn Sīnā, was read and refined by the European philosophers Peter Olivi and Jean Buridan.
: which is the full 4-vector version of:
Mathematically this invariance can be ensured in one of two ways: by treating the four-vectors as Euclidean vectors and multiplying time by ; or by keeping time a real quantity and embedding the vectors in a Minkowski space.
Momentum has a direction as well as magnitude.
Similarly, if there are several particles, the momentum exchanged between each pair of particles adds up to zero, so the total change in momentum is zero.
Linear momentum depends on frame of reference.
This is distinct from , which is the velocity of the object itself as seen in an inertial frame.
Like velocity, linear momentum is a vector quantity, possessing a direction as well as a magnitude:
If it is conserved, the collision is called an ''elastic collision''; if not, it is an ''inelastic collision''.
This is the generalization of the conservation of momentum.
In addition, surface forces can deform the droplet.
An elastic collision is one in which no kinetic energy is lost.
They introduce a ''generalized momentum'', also known as the ''canonical'' or ''conjugate momentum'', that extends the concepts of both linear momentum and angular momentum.
All the forces on the water are in balance and the water is motionless.
Often coordinates can be chosen so that only two components are needed, as in the figure.
This should not be read as a statement of the modern law of momentum, since he had no concept of mass as distinct from weight and size, and more importantly he believed that it is speed rather than velocity that is conserved.
This is known as Euler's first law.
Buridan, who in about 1350 was made rector of the University of Paris, referred to impetus being proportional to the weight times the speed.
In all the coordinate systems, the (contravariant) relativistic four-velocity is defined by
The first is gravity, which acts directly on each atom and molecule inside.
The bodies have exchanged their velocities.
If the velocities are  and  before the collision and  and  after, the equations expressing conservation of momentum and kinetic energy are:
Each vector equation represents three scalar equations.
This fact, known as the ''law of conservation of momentum'', is implied by Newton's laws of motion.
If a coordinate  is not a Cartesian coordinate, the associated generalized momentum component  does not necessarily have the dimensions of linear momentum.
The modified momentum,
These are known as the Navier–Stokes equations.
The kinetic energy equations are exceptions to the above replacement rule.
The units of momentum are the product of the units of mass and velocity.
If  (in Minkowski space), then
But each would observe that the value of linear momentum does not change with time, provided the system is isolated.
This is not necessarily conserved.
By itself, the law of conservation of momentum is not enough to determine the motion of particles after a collision.
A collision between two pool balls is a good example of an ''almost'' totally elastic collision, due to their high rigidity; but when bodies come in contact there is always some dissipation.
For example, suppose there are two bodies of equal mass , one stationary and one approaching the other at a speed  (as in the figure).
where  is the viscosity.
obeys Newton's second law:
Another, commonly used reference frame, is the center of mass frame - one that is moving with the center of mass.
The local conservation of momentum is expressed by the Cauchy momentum equation:
In the theory of special relativity, physical quantities are expressed in terms of four-vectors that include time as a fourth coordinate along with the three space coordinates.
For example, a heavy truck moving rapidly has a large momentum, and it takes a large or prolonged force to get the truck up to this speed, and would take a similarly large or prolonged force to bring it to a stop.
where  is the invariant mass.
If the velocities of the particles are  and  before the interaction, and afterwards they are  and , then
Each component  is said to be the ''conjugate momentum'' for the coordinate .
To distinguish it from generalized momentum, the product of mass and velocity is also referred to as ''mechanical'', ''kinetic'' or ''kinematic momentum''.
Philoponus pointed out the absurdity in Aristotle's claim that motion of an object is promoted by the same air that is resisting its passage.
Applied to any physical quantity, the material derivative includes the rate of change at a point and the changes due to advection as fluid is carried past the point.
On any given drop of water, two forces are balanced.
The rate of change of momentum is 3&nbsp;(kg&thinsp;m/s)/s = 3&nbsp;N.
That is, conservation of momentum is a consequence of the fact that the laws of physics do not depend on position; this is a special case of Noether's theorem.
The average force per unit volume inside the droplet is the gradient of the pressure, so the force balance equation is
Real motion has both direction and velocity and must be represented by a vector.
These Lagrangian and Hamiltonian expressions can derive the Lorentz force.
However, it can be made invariant by making the ''inertial mass''  of an object a function of velocity:
Suppose, for example, that two particles interact.
Even if  is a Cartesian coordinate,  will not be the same as the mechanical momentum if the potential depends on velocity.
Therefore, the final velocities are given by
He agreed that an impetus is imparted to a projectile by the thrower; but unlike Philoponus, who believed that it was a temporary virtue that would decline even in a vacuum, he viewed it as a persistent, requiring external forces such as air resistance to dissipate it.
The magnitude of the momentum four-vector is equal to :
Adding the speed of the center of mass to both, we find that the body that was moving is now stopped and the other is moving away at speed .
The second force is the sum of all the forces exerted on its surface by the surrounding water.
Leibniz, in his "Discourse on Metaphysics", gave an argument against Descartes' construction of the conservation of the "quantity of motion" using an example of dropping blocks of different sizes different distances.
Thus, conservation of four-momentum is Lorentz-invariant and implies conservation of both mass and energy.
It also results in a prediction that the speed of light can vary from one reference frame to another.
His Definition II defines ''quantitas motus'', "quantity of motion", as "arising from the velocity and quantity of matter conjointly", which identifies it as momentum.
Most writers continued to accept Aristotle's theory until the time of Galileo, but a few were skeptical.
