There are also two grant-aided denominational private schools, ''Institution François d'Assise Nicolas Barré'' and ''Ecole des Sœurs Dominicaines'', and one international school, the ''International School of Monaco''.
The Grimaldi family hoped the newly legal industry would help alleviate the difficulties they faced, above all the crushing debt the family had incurred, but Monaco's first casino would not be ready to operate until after Charles III assumed the throne in 1856.
Blum's colleague Raoul Gunsbourg, the director of the Opéra de Monte-Carlo, helped by the French Resistance, escaped arrest and fled to Switzerland.
It is a member of the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie (OIF).
In 2000, the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) stated: "The anti-money laundering system in Monaco is comprehensive.
The employers' contributions are between 28%–40% (averaging 35%) of gross salary including benefits, and employees pay a further 10%–14% (averaging 13%).
Current French women's international goalkeeper Sarah Bouhaddi had a short stint at the club before going to the Clairefontaine academy.
The Grimaldi family was Genoese and the struggle was something of a family feud.
However, since 2003, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has identified Monaco, along with 36 other territories, as a tax haven.
The Crown of Aragon and Republic of Genoa became a part of other countries, as did the Kingdom of Sardinia.
Monaco is a principality governed under a form of constitutional monarchy, with Prince Albert II as head of state.
The state has no income tax, low business taxes, and is well known for being a tax haven.
Monaco has also competed in the Olympic Games, although, , no athlete from Monaco has ever won an Olympic medal.
However, it is very closely linked via a customs union with France and, as such, its currency is the same as that of France, the euro.
It finds its most florid expression in the 1878-9 Casino and Grand Concert Hall created by Charles Garnier and Jules Dutrou.
René Blum, the prominent French Jew who founded the Ballet de l'Opera in Monte Carlo, was arrested in his Paris home and held in the Drancy deportation camp outside the French capital before being transported to the Auschwitz concentration camp, where he was later killed.
There are about another thirty or so consulates.
Driver Nelson Piquet compared driving the circuit to "riding a bicycle around your living room".
* Fontvieille was added as a fourth ward, a newly constructed area claimed from the sea in the 1970s;
Golf's Monte Carlo Open was also held at the Monte Carlo Golf Club at Mont Agel in France between 1984 and 1992.
Under Louis-Philippe's petite-bourgeois regime, however, a dignitary such as the Prince of Monaco was not allowed to operate a gambling house.
The Monaco Marathon is the only marathon in the world to pass through three separate countries, those of Monaco, France and Italy, before the finish at the Stade Louis II.
Economic development was spurred in the late 19th century with the opening of the country's first casino, Monte Carlo, and a railway connection to Paris.
Monaco remained in this position until 1860 when, by the Treaty of Turin, the Sardinian forces pulled out of the principality and the surrounding county of Nice (as well as Savoy) was ceded to France.
The Monaco Ironman 70.3 triathlon race is an annual event with over 1,000 athletes competing and attracts top professional athletes from around the world.
It has also become a major banking center, holding over €100 billion worth of funds.
In 1993, the Principality of Monaco became a member of the United Nations, with full voting rights.
In 1793, Revolutionary forces captured Monaco and it remained under direct French control until 1814, when the Grimaldi family returned to the throne.
In 1419, the Grimaldi family purchased Monaco from the Crown of Aragon and became the official and undisputed rulers of "the Rock of Monaco".
* La Condamine, the southwestern section including the port area, Port Hercules.
The four traditional ''Quartiers'' of Monaco are: Monaco-Ville, La Condamine, Monte Carlo and Fontvieille.
Though successive princes and their families spent most of their lives in Paris, and intermarried with French and Italian nobilities, the House of Grimaldi is Italian.
Like Belgium, Finland, France, the Netherlands, and Spain, Monaco decided to put the minting date on its coins.
Monaco has a land border of , a coastline of , and a width that varies between .
France did not annex it until the French Revolution, but after the defeat of Napoleon it was put under the care of the Kingdom of Sardinia.
Through land reclamation, Monaco's land mass has expanded by twenty percent.
According to the CIA World Factbook, Monaco has the world's lowest poverty rate and the highest number of millionaires and billionaires per capita in the world.
In 2009, the Monaco stage of the Global Champions tour took place between 25–27 June.
The plan for casino gambling was mooted during the reign of Florestan I in 1846.
Monaco also has a rich and valuable collection of collectors' coins, with face value ranging from €5 to €100.
* La Colle, created from part of La Condamine;
In preparation for this date, the minting of the new euro coins started as early as 2001.
Since then, Monaco's mild climate, splendid scenery, and upscale gambling facilities have contributed to the principality's status as a premier tourist destination and recreation center for the rich and famous.
Monaco did not appear in the list of these territories until 2004, when OECD became indignant regarding the Monegasque situation and denounced it in its last report, as well as Andorra, Liechtenstein, Liberia and the Marshall Islands, underlining its lack of co-operation regarding financial information disclosure and availability.
The church site also accommodates an English language library of over 3,000 books.
As a result, it has warm, dry summers and mild, rainy winters.
Two other drivers had lucky escapes after they crashed into the harbour, the most famous being Alberto Ascari in the 1955 Monaco Grand Prix and Paul Hawkins, during the 1965 race.
Association Agreement
In more recent years, Monaco has become a major banking center and has successfully sought to diversify its economy into services and small, high-value-added, non-polluting industries.
Prior to this time there was unrest in Menton and Roquebrune, where the townspeople had become weary of heavy taxation by the Grimaldi family.
"In distress, they came specifically to take shelter with us, thinking they would find neutrality."
The principality has successfully sought to diversify its economic base into services and small, high-value-added, non-polluting industries, such as cosmetics and biothermics.
On the other hand, the nights are very mild, due to the fairly high temperature of the sea in summer.
Monaco actually collects a number of taxes including a 20% VAT and 33% on companies unless they make over 75% of their income inside Monaco.
Two important agreements that support Monaco's independence from France include the Franco-Monegasque Treaty of 1861 and the French Treaty of 1918 (see also Kingdom of Sardinia The United States CIA factbook records 1419 as the year of Monaco's independence).
There is a Muslim mosque in nearby Beausoleil, France, within easy walking distance of Monaco.
From 2009 until 2011, the rally served as the opening round of the Intercontinental Rally Challenge.
Union Monégasque holds three seats while Renaissance holds one seat.
It has long been considered to be one of the toughest and most prestigious events in rallying and from 1973 to 2008 was the opening round of the World Rally Championship (WRC).
In 2015 an immigration rate of about 4 people per 1,000 was noted, which works out to something like 100–150 people a year.
The  Monaco Heliport provides helicopter service to the closest airport, Côte d'Azur Airport in Nice, France.
Christians comprise a total of 83.2% of Monaco's population.
Unlike the National Council, councillors are elected for four-year terms, and are strictly non-partisan, however, oppositions inside the council frequently form.
Subsequently, three additional wards were created:
The Monaco-Monte Carlo station is served by the SNCF, the French national rail system.
In 1943, the Italian Army invaded and occupied Monaco, forming a fascist administration.
Monaco does not allow dual-citizenship, but does have multiple paths to citizenship including by declaration and naturalisation.
From 10–12 July 2014 Monaco inaugurated the Solar1 Monte Carlo Cup, a series of ocean races exclusively for solar powered boats.,
The House of Grimaldi have ruled Monaco, with brief interruptions, since 1297.
Monaco exhibits a wide range of architecture, but the principality's signature style, particularly in Monte-Carlo, is that of the Belle Epoque.
This is located on the far side of the gardens that face the Casino.
The 24 members of the National Council are elected for five-year terms; 16 are chosen through a majority electoral system and 8 by proportional representation.
Citizens of Monaco, whether born in the country or naturalised, are called ''Monegasque''.
Monaco's national rugby team, as of October 2013, is 91st in the International Rugby Board rankings.
Monaco's most populous ''Quartier'' is Monte Carlo and the most populous ''Ward'' is Larvotto/Bas Moulins.
The club reached the 2004 UEFA Champions League Final, with a team that included Dado Pršo, Fernando Morientes, Jérôme Rothen, Akis Zikos and Ludovic Giuly, but lost 3–0 to Portuguese team F.C.
This capriccio of French, Italian and Spanish elements was incorporated into hacienda villas and apartments.
Honoré II, Prince of Monaco secured recognition of his independent sovereignty from Spain in 1633, and then from Louis XIII of France by the Treaty of Péronne (1641).
A municipal sports complex, the Rainier III Nautical Stadium in the Port Hercules district consists of a heated saltwater Olympic-size swimming pool, diving boards and a slide.
Although small, Monaco is very old and quite well known, especially because of its status as a playground for the rich and famous.
The name for the new district is ''Anse du Portier''.
The erection of the Circuit de Monaco takes six weeks to complete and the removal after the race takes another three weeks.
The Monaco national football team represents the nation in association football and is controlled by the Monégasque Football Federation, the governing body for football in Monaco.
The absence of a personal income tax in the principality has attracted to it a considerable number of wealthy "tax refugee" residents from European countries who derive the majority of their income from activity outside Monaco; celebrities such as Formula One drivers attract most of the attention, but the vast majority of them are lesser-known business people.
Through its relationship with France, Monaco uses the euro as its sole currency (prior to this it used the Monégasque franc).
Monaco became a French protectorate once again.
The Principality is no longer blamed in the 2005 FATF report, as well as all other territories.
Before 2002, Monaco minted its own coins, the Monegasque franc.
Monaco was first ruled by a member of the House of Grimaldi in 1297, when Francesco Grimaldi, known as "''Il Malizia''" (translated from Italian either as "The Malicious One" or "The Cunning One"), and his men captured the fortress protecting the Rock of Monaco while dressed as Franciscan monks – a ''monaco'' in Italian, although this is a coincidence as the area was already known by this name.
Monaco has been governed under a constitutional monarchy since 1911, with the Sovereign Prince of Monaco as head of state.
Despite the challenging nature of the course it has only had one fatality, Lorenzo Bandini, who crashed, burned and died three days later from his injuries in 1967.
Monaco's only natural resource is fishing; with almost the entire country being an urban area, Monaco lacks any sort of commercial agriculture industry.
The 2009 Tour de France, the world's premier cycle race, started from Monaco with a  closed-circuit individual time trial starting and finishing there on the first day, and the  second leg starting there on the following day and ending in Brignoles, France.
Although the occupation lasted for just a short time, it meant the deportation of the Jewish population and execution of several resistance members from Monaco.
The grantee of the princely concession (licence) was unable to attract enough business to sustain the operation and, after relocating the casino several times, sold the concession to French casino magnates François and Louis Blanc for 1.7&nbsp;million francs.
In 1869, the principality stopped collecting income tax from its residents—an indulgence the Grimaldi family could afford to entertain thanks solely to the extraordinary success of the casino.
Many international stars have played for the club, such as French World Cup-winners Thierry Henry, Fabien Barthez and David Trezeguet.
In the early 1960s there was some tension between France and Monaco over taxation.
Today, ''Société des bains de mer de Monaco'', which owns Le Grand Casino, still operates in the original building that the Blancs constructed and has since been joined by several other casinos, including the Le Casino Café de Paris, the Monte Carlo Sporting Club & Casino and the Sun Casino.
Monaco is not formally a part of the European Union (EU), but it participates in certain EU policies, including customs and border controls.
They then constructed their casino in the newly dubbed "Monte Carlo" and cleared out the area's less-than-savory elements to make the neighborhood surrounding the establishment more conducive to tourism.
Until 2002, the Minister of State was a French citizen appointed by the prince from among candidates proposed by the French government; since a constitutional amendment in 2002, the Minister of State can be French or Monegasque.
It is widely considered to be one of the most prestigious automobile races in the world.
However, the suburb of Moneghetti, the high-level part of La Condamine, is generally seen today as an effective fifth ''Quartier'' of the Monaco, having a very distinct atmosphere and topography when compared with low-level La Condamine.
Though the Republic of Genoa would last until the 19th century, they allowed the Grimaldi family to keep Monaco, and, likewise, both France and Spain left it alone for hundreds of years.
An IAAF Diamond League meet is annually held at Stade Louis II.
The official language is French, but Monégasque, Italian, and English are widely spoken and understood.
In addition, the FIU of Monaco (SICCFIN) suffers a great lack of adequate resources.
Saint-Jean is the longest flowing body of water, around  in length, and Fontvieille is the largest lake, approximately  in size.
Monaco has the world's highest life expectancy at nearly 90 years.
There is also a small military force.
'''Monaco''' (; ), officially the '''Principality of Monaco''' (), is a sovereign city-state and microstate, located on the French Riviera in Western Europe.
For example, French citizens must still pay taxes to France even if they live full-time in Monaco unless they resided in the country before 1962 for at least 5 years.
There are various Evangelical Protestant communities that gather periodically.
The report states that there are two Protestant churches, including the local Anglican church and a Reformed church.
However, Monaco does maintain two small military units.
The princes of Monaco thus became vassals of the French kings while at the same time remaining sovereign princes.
Twenty-two territories, including Monaco, were thus evaluated between 1998 and 2000 on a first round.
Also, French citizens are exempted from Monaco's lack of personal income tax.
The Council of Europe also decided to issue reports naming tax havens.
The race includes a  swim,  bike ride and  run.
* Saint Michel, created from part of Monte Carlo;
The state's sovereignty was officially recognized by the Franco-Monegasque Treaty of 1861, with Monaco becoming a full United Nations voting member in 1993.
Following a land grant from Emperor Henry VI in 1191, Monaco was refounded in 1215 as a colony of Genoa.
"We committed the irreparable in handing over to the neighbouring authorities women, men and a child who had taken refuge with us to escape the persecutions they had suffered in France," Albert said at a ceremony in which a monument to the victims was unveiled at the Monaco cemetery.
People use Monaco as a "tax haven" from their own country's taxes because Monaco as an independent country is not obligated to pay taxes to other countries.
Monaco has high social insurance taxes payable by both employers and employees.
In 1612 Honoré II began to style himself "Prince" of Monaco.
The flag of Monaco is one of the world's oldest national flag designs.
Monaco's most populated ''Quartier'' is Monte Carlo, and the most populated ''Ward'' is Larvotto/Bas Moulins.
In 2007 this had a formal membership of 135 Anglicans resident in the principality, but was also serving a considerably larger number of Anglicans temporarily in the country, mostly as tourists.
The flag of Monaco is almost identical to the flag of Indonesia, except for the ratio of height to width.
On 19 April 1956, Prince Rainier married the American actress Grace Kelly; the event was widely televised and covered in the popular press, focusing the world's attention on the tiny principality.
There are two "full" embassies in Monaco; France and Italy.
The population of Monaco went from 35,000 in 2008 to 36,000 in 2013, and of that about 20 percent were native Monegasque (see also Nationality law of Monaco).
The towns of Menton and Roquebrune, which had been the main sources of income for the Grimaldi family for centuries, were now accustomed to a much improved standard of living and lenient taxation thanks to Sardinian intervention and clamored for financial and political concession, even for separation.
Monaco had previously considered an expansion in 2008, but called it off.
Monaco has the world's second highest GDP nominal per capita at US$153,177, GDP PPP per capita at $132,571 and GNI per capita at $183,150.
Although Prince Albert II is a constitutional monarch, he wields immense political power.
Monaco has a Hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: Csa), which is influenced by the oceanic climate and the humid subtropical climate.
A 1962 amendment to the constitution abolished capital punishment, provided for women's suffrage, and established a Supreme Court of Monaco to guarantee fundamental liberties.
Despite Monaco's independence and separate foreign policy, its defense is the responsibility of France.
The development will be adjacent to the Larvotto district and also will include a small marina.
* Moneghetti became the fifth ward, created from part of La Condamine;
It once played in the Division 1 Féminine, in the 1994–95 season, but was quickly relegated.
All legislation requires the approval of the National Council, which is currently dominated by the conservative Rally and Issues for Monaco (REM) party which holds twenty seats.
An ousted branch of a Genoese family, the Grimaldi, contested it for a hundred years before actually gaining control.
Monaco has a national museum of contemporary visual art at the New National Museum of Monaco.
The Blancs opened Le Grand Casino de Monte Carlo in 1858 and the casino benefited from the tourist traffic the newly built French railway system created.
The community mainly consists of retired Jews from Britain (40%) and North Africa.
For visitors a souvenir passport stamp is available on request at Monaco's tourist office.
The club currently plays in the local regional league, deep down in the league system.
The pool is converted into an ice rink from December to March.
By the 21st century Monaco maintained embassies in Belgium (Brussels), France (Paris), Germany (Berlin), the Vatican, Italy (Rome), Spain (Madrid), Switzerland (Bern), United Kingdom (London) and the United States (Washington).
In recent years the accelerating demolition of Monaco's architectural heritage, including its single-family villas, has created dismay.
Monaco is not a member of the European Union.
Like the Grand Prix, the rally is organised by Automobile Club de Monaco.
Monaco has no navy or air force, but on both a per-capita and per-area basis, Monaco has one of the largest police forces (515 police officers for about 36,000 people) and police presences in the world.
Living standards are high, roughly comparable to those in prosperous French metropolitan areas.
There is one Anglican church (St. Paul's Church), located in the Avenue de Grande Bretagne in Monte Carlo.
According to MONACO 2012 INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM REPORT Protestants are the second largest group after Roman Catholics.
* Monaco-Ville, the old city on a rocky promontory extending into the Mediterranean, known as the Rock of Monaco, or simply "The Rock";
Due to the combination of the casino and the railroads, Monaco finally recovered from the previous half-century of economic slump and the principality's success attracted other businesses.
The Blancs had already set up a highly successful casino (in fact the largest in Europe) in Bad-Homburg in the Grand Duchy of Hesse-Homburg, a small German principality comparable to Monaco, and quickly petitioned Charles III to rename a depressed seaside area known as "Les Spelegures (Den of Thieves)" to "Monte Carlo (Mount Charles)."
Three different designs were selected for the Monégasque coins.
The club is historically one of the most successful clubs in France, having won Ligue 1 seven times (most recently in 2000) and competed at the top level for all but six seasons since 1953.
*Monaco–Russia relations
Monaco has acquired the right to mint euro coins with Monegasque designs on its national side.
The company numbers exactly 116 officers and men; while the NCOs and soldiers are local, the officers have generally served in the French Army.
All this changed in the dissolute Second French Empire under Napoleon III.
These coins are a legacy of an old national practice of minting silver and gold commemorative coins.
The women's team, OS Monaco, competes in the women's French football league system.
The wider defence of the nation is provided by France.
AS Monaco plays at the Stade Louis II and competes in Ligue 1, the first division of French football.
In the 19th century, when Sardinia became a part of Italy, the region came under French influence again but France allowed it to remain independent.
*France-Monaco relations
Of interest to numismatists, in Monaco the euro was introduced in 2002, having been preceded by the Monégasque franc.
On 27 August 2015, Albert II apologised for Monaco's role in facilitating the deportation of a total of 90 Jews and resistance fighters, of whom only nine survived.
Since 1929, the Monaco Grand Prix has been held annually in the streets of Monaco.
One of Monaco's main sources of income is tourism.
* Larvotto became the sixth ward, created from part of Monte Carlo;
Since then Monaco has been independent but has taken some steps towards integration with the European Union.
Monaco also stage part of the Global Champions Tour (International Show-jumping).
The plan is for about six hectares of apartment buildings, parks, shops and offices for about 1 billion euros for the land.
It also has an unemployment rate of 2%, with over 48,000 workers who commute from France and Italy each day.
In 2015, a new development called Anse du Portier was announced.
The principality continued its existence as a protectorate of France until the French Revolution.
In 2014, it was noted about 30% of the population was made up of millionaires, similar to Zürich or Geneva.
The highest point in the country is at the access to the ''Patio Palace'' residential building (Jardin Exotique district) from the D6007 (''Moyenne Corniche'' street) at  above sea level.
The majority of the Muslim population of Monaco are Arabs, though there are smaller Turkish minorities as well.
Monaco has an area of  and a population of about 37,800; it is the second smallest and the most densely populated country in the world.
In addition to their guard duties as described, the Carabiniers patrol the Principality's beaches and coastal waters.
The Muslim population of Monaco consists of about 280 people, most of whom are exclusively residents, not citizens.
By 1869, the casino was making such a vast sum of money that the principality could afford to end tax collection from the Monegasques — a master stroke that was to attract affluent residents from all over Europe.
This consists of a bodyguard unit for the Prince and the palace in Monaco-Ville called the Compagnie des Carabiniers du Prince (Prince's Company of Carabiniers), which is equipped with modern weapons such as M16A2 rifles and 9&nbsp;mm pistols (Glock 17), and which together with the militarized, armed fire and civil defence Corps (Sapeurs-Pompiers) forms Monaco's total public forces.
Monaco has an opera house, a symphony orchestra and a classical ballet company.
In 1998 the Centre for Tax Policy and Administration, part of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), issued a first report on the consequences of the tax havens' financial systems.
The Monte-Carlo Masters is held annually in neighbouring Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, France, as a professional tournament for men as part of tennis' ATP Masters Series.
However, the Genoese became engaged in other conflicts, and in the late 1300s Genoa became involved in a conflict with the Crown of Aragon over Corsica.
There are two ports in Monaco, Hercules and Port Fontvieille.
