Aceh, Brunei Darussalam, Java, Oman, Malaysia, Sultan is the title of seven (Johor, Kedah, Kelantan, Pahang, Perak, Selangor, and Terengganu) of the nine rulers of the Malay states.
Typically a monarch either personally inherits the lawful right to exercise the state's sovereign rights (often referred to as ''the throne'' or ''the crown'') or is selected by an established process from a family or cohort eligible to provide the nation's monarch.
Historical examples: Khanate of Kazan, Crimean Khanate.
Some scholars maintain that the term ''Dangun'' also refers to a title used by all rulers of Gojoseon, and that ''Wanggeom'' is the proper name of the founder.
Indian royal title most equivalent to Emperor.
Within the Holy Roman Empire, there were numerous titles used by noblemen whose authority within their territory sometimes approached sovereignty, even though they acknowledged the Holy Roman Emperor as suzerain; Elector, Grand Duke, Margrave, Landgrave and Count Palatine, as well as kings, dukes, princes and "princely counts" (''Gefürstete Grafen'').
The monarchy was restored as a constitutional monarchy in 1993 with the king as a largely symbolic figurehead.
Long live the King.|The old King is dead.
Whatever the rules of succession, there have been many cases of a monarch being overthrown and replaced by a usurper who would often install his own family on the throne.
After the Spanish–American War, the country was ceded to the United States of America and made into a territory and eventually a Commonwealth, thus ending monarchism.
The Sultanate of Egypt was a short lived protectorate of the United Kingdom from 1914 until 1922, when it became the Kingdom of Egypt and Sultan Fuad I changed his title to King.
Tonga is the only remaining sovereign kingdom in Oceania.
A '''monarch''' is the sovereign head of state in a monarchy.
Largely equivalent to Viceroy in the Ottoman Empire.
Padishah(Ottoman Empire)
The king of Korea that control over all of Korea.
During the nineteenth century many small monarchies in Europe merged with other territories to form larger entities, and following World War I and World War II, many monarchies were abolished, but of those remaining all except Luxembourg, Liechtenstein, Andorra, Vatican City and Monaco were headed by a king or queen.
Some monarchies are non-hereditary.
The Dalai Lama became absolute temporal monarch until incorporation of Tibet into the People's Republic of China in 1951.
Malaysia, Tengku (also spelled Tunku in Johor), Negeri Sembilan and Kedah is roughly equivalent to Prince or Princess
So-called "sub-national monarchies" of varying sizes can be found all over the rest of the continent, e.g.
Different systems of succession have been used, such as proximity of blood (male preference or absolute), primogeniture, agnatic seniority, Salic law, etc.
''Females cannot hold the office of Pope''
Common in larger sovereign states.
Nepal abolished their monarchy in 2008.
"King" is the usual translation for the term ''wang'' 王, the sovereign before the Qin dynasty and during the Ten Kingdoms period.
the Yoruba city-state of Akure in south-western Nigeria is something of an elective monarchy: its reigning Oba having to be chosen by an electoral college of nobles, from amongst a finite collection of royal princes and princesses of the realm.
Tagavor/Tagouhi or Arqa
Today: Monaco, Liechtenstein, Sovereign Military Order of Malta; Andorra (Co-Princes).
in Europe there are twelve monarchies: seven kingdoms (Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom), one grand duchy (Luxembourg), one papacy (Vatican City), and two principalities (Liechtenstein and Monaco), as well as one diarchy principality (Andorra).
Between 47BC-42BC Anula of Sri Lanka became the country's first female head of state as well as Asia's first head of state.
Historical example: Rus' Khaganate
There are no remaining independent duchies, although there are the sub-national Duchies of Cornwall and Lancaster in England.
Persian/Iranian and Afghanistan King
Normally translated as King, a title used by Hawaiian monarchs since unification in 1810.
"King" in modern Greece
Monarch of Malaysia who is elected every five years by the reigning kings of the Malaysian constituent states, all of whom also serve as the only electoral candidates in each of the elections
Saudi Arabia is the largest Arab state in Western Asia by land area and the second-largest in the Arab world (after Algeria).
County/Earldom/Shire
The power of the absolute monarchy was reduced when it became the French Protectorate of Cambodia from 1863 to 1953.
During the early Han dynasty, China had a number of kingdoms, each about the size of a province and subordinate to the Emperor.
A principal advantage of hereditary monarchy is the immediate continuity of national leadership, as illustrated in the classic phrase ":The King is dead.
The first Druk Gyalpo (''Dragon King'') was elected and thereafter became a hereditary absolute monarchy.
According to protocol any holder of a title indicating sovereignty took precedence over any non-sovereign titleholder.
Historical examples: ''Malik al-'Iraq'' ("King of Iraq"), ''Malik al-Mamlaka al-Mutawakkiliyya al-Yamaniyya'' ("King of the Mutawakkilite Yemeni Kingdom").
most modern constitutional monarchies) real leadership does not depend on the monarch.
Surviving examples include Kendal and Westmorland in England, the Lordship and Barony of Hailes in Scotland and Barony Rosendal in Norway.
Variously translated into English as King or Emperor.
Historical: Spanish Empire (Viceroy of Peru, Viceroy of New Spain, Viceroyalty of Rio de la Plata, Viceroyalty of New Granada), British Empire (Viceroy of India), Russian Empire (Viceroyalty of the Caucasus).
Pre-Imperial China/Russia.
The early monarchs of Silla have used the title of "Geoseogan", "Chachaung", "Isageum", and finally "Maripgan" until 503.
The title ''Viceré'' was used in the Italian Colonial Empire.
The table below lists titles in approximate order of precedence.
One of many ancient titles adopted by the Maharlika caste in pre-colonial Philippines.
Arabic King, (Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Jordan)
Historical examples: Emirate of Crete, Emirate of Córdoba, Emirate of Afghanistan.
The pope is the Bishop of Rome (a celibate office always forbidden to women), in English however, reports of female popes such as (Pope Joan) refer to them as ''pope'' and ''Popess'' is used, among other things, for the second trump in the Tarot deck''; some European languages also have a feminine form of the word pope, such as the Italian ''papessa'', the French ''papesse'', and the German ''Päpstin''.
Examples: Khedivate of Egypt.
The German title Kaiser and the Bulgarian/Serbian title Tsar were both derived from the Latin word ''Caesar'', intended to mean Emperor.
Bulgaria, pre-imperial Russia, very short in medieval Serbia
Currently the African nations of Morocco, Lesotho and Swaziland are sovereign monarchies under dynasties that are native to the continent.
Crimean Tartars King
Central and Southern Africa were largely isolated from other regions until the modern era, but they did later feature kingdoms like the Kingdom of Kongo (1400–1914).
There are no current recognised caliphates.
The system of tanistry was semi-elective and gave weight also to ability and merit.
Current examples: Brunei, Oman, states of Malaysia.
Monarch of the Papal States and later Sovereign of the State of Vatican City.
Used throughout the Muslim world.
In most realms, daughters and sisters were eligible to succeed a ruling kinsman before more distant male relatives (male-preference primogeniture), but sometimes the husband of the heiress became the ruler, and most often also received the title, ''jure uxoris''.
"King" during Mycenaean Greece
After the Egyptian Revolution of 1952 the monarchy was dissolved and Egypt became a republic.
Similarly, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia is considered a monarch despite only holding the position for five years at a time.
It returned to an absolute monarchy from 1953 until the establishment of a republic following the 1970 coup.
Georgian King and Queen
A Prince may be a person of royal blood (some languages uphold this distinction, see Fürst).
"Emperor" in the Byzantine Empire.
Saul, David and Solomon)
West Africa hosted the Kanem Empire (700-1376) and its successor, the Bornu principality which survives to the present day as one of the traditional states of Nigeria.
Medieval Romanian title "Io" derived from the name of the Bulgarian tzars of Asen dynasty Ioan Asen I and Ioan Asen I
Self-proclaimed micronations claiming to be principalities include the Sealand, Seborga and Hutt River.
Historical: Roman Empire, Byzantine Empire, First and Second Bulgarian Empire, Serbian Empire, Holy Roman Empire, Russian Empire, Korean Empire, Mongol Empire, Imperial China, First and Second French Empire, Austrian Empire, First Mexican Empire, Empire of Brazil, German Empire (none left in Europe after 1918), Emperor of India (ceased to be used after 1947 when India was granted independence from the British Empire).
Under the Korean Empire (1897–1910), the rulers of Korea were given the title of "Hwangje", meaning the "Emperor".
The Zulu people formed a powerful Zulu Kingdom in 1816, one that was subsequently absorbed into the Colony of Natal in 1897.
The word literally means "speaker", but may be translated into English as "king"
The German ''Burggraf'' and Dutch ''Burggraaf'' are historical equivalents although they are not translated as "Viscount"; a rank above Baron but below Count.
As part of the Scramble for Africa, Europeans conquered, bought, or established African kingdoms and styled themselves as monarchs due to them.
Places like St. Helena, Ceuta, Melilla and the Canary Islands are ruled by the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland or the King of Spain.
Title of the ruler of Gwalior (India)
Arabic King (Oman and Ottoman Empire)
Imperial rank in the Mongolian and Turkic languages equal to the status of King.
As the prime minister, the Sultan presides over the cabinet.
Principality, Princely state, Princedom
Persian/Iranian "King of Kings" or Emperor
Advocacy of government by a republic is called republicanism, while advocacy of monarchy is called monarchism.
Monarchies take a wide variety of forms, such as the two co-princes of Andorra, positions held simultaneously by the Roman Catholic Bishop of Urgel (Spain) and the elected President of France (although strictly Andorra is a diarchy).
In Malaysia's constitutional monarchy, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (The Supreme Lord of the Federation) is ''de facto'' rotated every five years among the nine Rulers of the Malay states of Malaysia (those nine of the thirteen states of Malaysia that have hereditary royal rulers), elected by ''Majlis Raja-Raja'' (Conference of Rulers).
''Brenhines'' is the title used in Welsh for Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom.
Monarchy is political or sociocultural in nature, and is generally (but not always) associated with hereditary rule.
In Korea, ''Daewang'' (great king), or ''Wang'' (king), was a Chinese royal style used in many states rising from the dissolution of Gojoseon, Buyeo, Goguryeo, Baekje, Silla and Balhae, Goryeo, Joseon.
"King" is the usual translation for the Chinese term ''wang'' 王.
Used throughout the Muslim world.
Mexico again had an emperor, Maximilian I from 1863 to 1867.
In the same time period several kingdoms flourished in the nearby Nubia region, with at least one of them, that of the so-called A-Group culture, apparently influencing the customs of Egypt itself.
Equivalent to King.
Haile Selassie, the last Emperor of Ethiopia, was deposed in a communist coup.
Kunigaikshtis (Kunigaikštis)
Current examples: constituent emirates of the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar.
Oman is led by Monarch Sultan Qaboos bin Said Al Said.
King of Ancient Israel (e.g.
Jordan and many other Middle Eastern monarchies are ruled by a Malik and parts of the United Arab Emirates, such as Dubai, are still ruled by monarchs.
It became a constitutional monarchy in 2008.
A superlative title equivalent to "Great King" or "King of Kings".
Used historically in Ancient Persia to refer to local rulers of provinces under the Persian King.
Slavic title in: Bulgaria, Kievan Rus and Rusia, Great Moravia, Bohemia, Slovakia, Croatia, Serbia, Lithuania(Grand Duchy of Lithuania).
Such titles were granted or recognised by the Emperor or Pope.
Between 1931 and 1983 nine other previous British colonies attained independence as kingdoms.
When the islands were annexed to the Spanish Empire in the late 16th century, the Spanish monarch became the sovereign while local rulers often retained their prestige as part of the Christianised nobility called the ''Principalía''.
Jordan), the monarch chooses who will be his successor within the royal family, who need not necessarily be his eldest son.
''Kaisar-i-Hind'', derived from the German word ''Kaiser'', was the Urdu translation of "Emperor of India".
Byzantine Empire, Second Bulgarian Empire, Danubian Principalities, Serbian Despotate (originating from Byzantium)
Kings in Oceania: Tonga, Wallis and Futuna, Nauru
Armenian King/Queen
Other nations have since adopted this practice: Netherlands in 1983, Norway in 1990, Belgium in 1991, Denmark in 2009, and Luxembourg in 2011.
Cambodia has been a kingdom since the 1st century.
Arabic Prince, (Kuwait, Qatar, United Arab Emirates)
Alternatively, an individual may become monarch by conquest, acclamation or a combination of means.
As the average life span increased, an eldest son was more likely to reach majority age before the death of his father, and primogeniture became increasingly favoured over proximity, tanistry, seniority and election.
Holders of titles in these alternative meanings did not enjoy the same status as monarchs of the same title.
From the Mediterranean sea and Hellespont in the west to the Indus River in the east, Cyrus the Great created the largest empire the world had yet seen.
Today: Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
Uvea, Alo and Sigave in the French territory of Wallis and Futuna have non-sovereign elective monarchs.
It is called 'Im-Geum-nym' or 'Im-Geum'
Vizconde is the equivalent in Spanish.
The Saudi Arabian government has been an absolute monarchy since its inception, and designates itself as Islamic.
If a young child is crowned the monarch, a Regent is often appointed to govern until the monarch reaches the requisite adult age to rule.
Imperial Germany and Austria-Hungary
The monarchs of Goguryeo and some monarchs of Silla used the title "Taewang", meaning the "Great king".
Ancient Indian title sometimes translated into modern English as Emperor.
Medieval Romania (Moldova, Wallachia)
A title given to Kurdish rulers in Kurdistan during medieval centuries.
The Japanese monarchy is now the only monarchy to still use the title of Emperor.
Historical examples: Viscountcy of Béarn, Burgraviate of Nuremberg (''Burggrafschaft Nürnberg'').
The King bears the title "Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques" in reference to the two holiest places in Islam: Masjid al-Haram in Mecca, and Masjid al-Nabawi in Medina.
In more complex medieval cases, the sometimes conflicting principles of proximity and primogeniture battled, and outcomes were often idiosyncratic.
the queen regnant Dayang Kalangitan of Tondo.
Therefore, though today there are legally ten American monarchs, one person occupies each distinct position.
In South America, Brazil had a royal house ruling as emperor between 1822 and 1889, under Emperors Pedro I and Pedro II.
There are no remaining independent counties and the word county is used to denote an administrative district.
Under Brunei's 1959 constitution, the Sultan of Brunei is the head of state with full executive authority, including emergency powers, since 1962.
Generally translated as "prince" or "duke".
Used throughout the Muslim world.
All, including Canada, are in a personal union relationship under a shared monarch.
The word "Arasangam" is used today for the government.
Equivalent to King or Emperor.
Vicomte is the equivalent in modern French.
Modern examples include the Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia, a position rotated among the nation's historically ruling dynasties, and the pope of the Roman Catholic Church, who serves as sovereign of the Vatican City State and is elected to a life term by the College of Cardinals.
In 1980, Sweden became the first monarchy to declare ''equal primogeniture'', ''absolute primogeniture'' or ''full cognatic primogeniture'', meaning that the eldest child of the monarch, whether female or male, ascends to the throne.
In Arab and arabized countries, Malik (absolute King) is absolute word to render a monarch and is superior to all other titles.
Brazil, Mexico, Sapa Inca
The title "Gun" (prince) can refer to the dethroned rulers of Joseon dynasty as well.
A ruler with a title below emperor or king might still be regarded as a monarch, outranking a nobleman of the same ostensible title (e.g., Antoine, Duke of Lorraine, a reigning sovereign, and his younger brother, Claude, Duke of Guise, a nobleman in the peerage of France).
Equivalent titles include ''Barone'' in Italian, ''Boyar'' in Bulgarian, Wallachian, and Moldavian, ''Freiherr'' in German (sometimes used concurrently with ''Baron''), ''Friherre'' is the title in the nobility of Sweden while the spoken address is Baron, ''Vapaaherra'' in the nobility of Finland.
Welsh for king and queen; used in Wales by the petty kinglets during the Early Middle Ages.
Honorific title given throughout the Islamic regions.
A form of government may in fact be hereditary without being considered monarchy, such as a family dictatorship.
A continental rank below that of a Duke but above a Count.
In the Philippines, the pre-Colonial Filipino nobility, variously titled the ''harì'' (today meaning "king"), ''Lakan'', ''Raja'' and ''Datu'' belonged to the caste called ''Uring Maharlika'' (Noble Class).
Croatia, medieval Romania (Wallachia, Oltenia), medieval Bosnia and limited use in medieval Bulgaria
Count is most common term for a continental, middle-ranked noble.
Medieval: Bulgaria, Serbia, Hungaria, Romania, Poland
Title of the ruler of Kalat (Pakistan)
Used historically for semi-autonomous Muslim rulers of princely states in South Asia.
In fact Persian (Iranian) kingdom goes back to about 2,700 BC (see List of Kings of Persia), but reached its ultimate height and glory when King Cyrus the Great (Known as "The Great Kourosh" in Iran) started Achaemenid dynasty, and under his rule, the empire embraced all the previous civilized states of the ancient Near East, expanded vastly and eventually conquered most of Southwest Asia and much of Central Asia and the Caucasus.
In recent centuries, many states have abolished the monarchy and become republics (however see, e.g., United Arab Emirates).
Adoption of a new title to indicate sovereign or semi-sovereign status was not always recognized by other governments or nations, sometimes causing diplomatic problems.
Today, Members of the Korean Imperial Family continue to participate in numerous traditional ceremonies, and groups exist to preserve Korea's lmperial heritage.
It was ruled by the Yuan Dynasty following the Mongol invasion in the 13th century and became an effective diarchy with the Dalai Lama as co-ruler.
Also used for provincial rulers of Alexander the Great's Empire.
The legendary Dangun Wanggeom founded the first kingdom, Gojoseon.
British version is Marquess.
also known as Apu ("divinity"), Inka Qhapaq ("mighty Inca"), or simply Sapa ("the only one") was the ruler of the Kingdom of Cusco and later, the Emperor of the Inca Empire (Tawantinsuyu).
Nepal was a monarchy for most of its history until becoming a federal republic in 2008.
In cases where the monarch serves mostly as a ceremonial figure (e.g.
Etymological equivalent male/female/territory titles include Comte/Comtesse/Comté in French, Conte/Contessa/Contea in Italian, Conde/Condesa/Condado in Spanish, Graf/Gräfin/Grafschaft in German, Graaf/Gravin/Graafschap in Dutch, Greve/Grevinna/Grevskap in Swedish.
In China, before the abolition of the monarchy in 1912, the Emperor of China was traditionally regarded as the ruler of "All under heaven".
Kung (Konung)/Drottning
The Prime Minister of Brunei is a title held by the Sultan.
Used historically in princely states in South Asia and pre-colonial chiefdoms in the Philippines.
An equivalent office called the "Exarch" was used in the Byzantine Empire.
In 2008, King George Tupou V relinquished most of the powers of the monarchy and the position is now largely ceremonial.
A Duke may belong to a peerage and hold a dukedom (title) but no duchy (territory).
A series of Pharaohs ruled Ancient Egypt over the course of three millennia (circa 3150 BC to 31 BC), until it was conquered by the Roman Empire.
Most monarchs, both historically and in the present day, have been born and brought up within a royal family (whose rule over a period of time is referred to as a dynasty) and trained for future duties.
Syed/Sharifah in Perlis if suffixed by the royal clan name, is roughly equivalent to Prince or Princess.
duke as in Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
The equivalent title is still legally borne in Belgium, Denmark, France, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
Various Somali Sultanates also existed, including the Adal Sultanate (led by the Walashma dynasty of the Ifat Sultanate), Sultanate of Mogadishu, Ajuran Sultanate, Warsangali Sultanate, Geledi Sultanate, Majeerteen Sultanate and Sultanate of Hobyo.
Also Ruiri (regional overking), Rí ruirech (provincial king of overkings), and Ard Rí (pre-eminent Rí ruirech)
Historical examples of elective monarchy include the Holy Roman Emperors (chosen by prince-electors, but often coming from the same dynasty) and the free election of kings of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
In an elective monarchy, the monarch is elected but otherwise serves as any other monarch.
