It targeted the clergy of the Mongolian Buddhist Church, which had been tightly intertwined with the previous feudal government structures (e.g.
Each family kept scriptures and Buddha statues on an altar at the north side of their ger (yurt).
It features three sporting events: wrestling, archery and horse racing, amongst other traditional games and exhibits.
Khorloogiin Choibalsan instituted collectivisation of livestock, began the destruction of the Buddhist monasteries, and carried out the Stalinist repressions in Mongolia, which resulted in the murders of numerous monks and other leaders.
Over the course of the 19th century, the feudal lords attached more importance to representation and less importance to the responsibilities towards their subjects.
The first election victories for non-communist parties came in 1993 (presidential elections) and 1996 (parliamentary elections).
Some scholars estimate that about 80% of the 600,000 or more Dzungar were destroyed by a combination of disease and warfare.
The emergence of Pax Mongolica also significantly eased trade and commerce across Asia during its height.
Ethnic Mongols account for about 95% of the population and consist of Khalkha and other groups, all distinguished primarily by dialects of the Mongol language.
, 68.4% of Mongolia's exports went to the PRC, and the PRC supplied 29.8% of Mongolia's imports.
Postal services are provided by state-owned Mongol Post and 54 other licensed operators.
Its members are directly elected, every four years, on parliamentary elections, by popular vote.
Russian is the most frequently spoken foreign language in Mongolia, followed by English, although English has been gradually replacing Russian as the second language.
, English is taught in all secondary schools across Mongolia, beginning in fourth grade.
The end of religious repression in the 1990s also allowed for other religions to spread in the country.
The president must also suspend their party membership.
About 59% of the total population is under age 30, 27% of whom are under 14.
In 1206, Genghis Khan founded the Mongol Empire, which became the largest contiguous land empire in history.
According to Mongolian artist and art critic N. Chultem, the ''ger'' was the basis for development of traditional Mongolian architecture.
The Manchu forbade mass Chinese immigration into the area, which allowed the Mongols to keep their culture.
In 1928, Khorloogiin Choibalsan rose to power.
The symbol in the left bar of the national flag is a Buddhist icon called Soyombo.
His grandson Zanabazar became the first Jebtsundamba Khutughtu in 1640.
Until reforms in the 1990s, the government had strict control of the media and oversaw all publishing, in which no independent media was allowed.
The majority of its population are Buddhists.
In 2009, the government negotiated an "investment agreement" with Rio Tinto and Ivanhoe Mines to develop the Oyu Tolgoi copper and gold deposit, the biggest foreign-investment project in Mongolia, expected to account for one-third of Mongolia's GDP by 2020.
A variety of dialects of Oirat and Buryat are spoken across the country, and there are also some speakers of Mongolic Khamnigan.
It was guarded by up to almost 300,000 soldiers during marshal Meng Tian's tenure, as a means of defense against the destructive Xiongnu raids.
In the 1960s, Soviets recognized the Mongolian People's Party as "real" communists, who took power after the suspicious death of Pan-Mongolist leader Choibalsan.
Mongolia has a number of political parties; the largest are the Mongolian People's Party and the Democratic Party.
The referendum took place on October 20, 1945, with (according to official numbers) 100% of the electorate voting for independence.
Other sports such as basketball, weightlifting, powerlifting, and association football, athletics, gymnastics, table tennis, jujutsu, karate, aikido, kickboxing, mixed martial arts have become popular in Mongolia.
Bogd Khaan said that both Mongolia and China had been administered by the Manchu during the Qing, and after the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911, the contract of Mongolian submission to the Manchu had become invalid.
Due to the severe 2009–2010 winter, Mongolia lost 9.7&nbsp;million animals, or 22% of total livestock.
The traditional music includes a variety of instruments, famously the morin khuur, and also the singing styles like the urtyn duu ("long song"), and throat-singing (khoomei).
Many overland roads in Mongolia are only gravel roads or simple cross-country tracks.
Naidangiin Tüvshinbayar won Mongolia's first ever Olympic gold medal in the men's 100-kilogram class of judo.
Mongolia has the highest rate of liver cancer in the world by a significant margin.
The Khalkha eventually submitted to Qing rule in 1691, thus bringing all of today's Mongolia under Manchu rule.
Serious problems remain, especially in the countryside.
Horse-riding nomadism has been documented by archeological evidence in Mongolia during the Copper and Bronze Age Afanasevo culture (3500–2500 BC); this culture was active to the Khangai Mountains in Central Mongolia.
Lines 3–5 of the memorial inscription of Bilge Khagan (684–737) in central Mongolia summarizes the time of the Khagans:
The first rock band of Mongolia was Soyol Erdene, founded in the 1960s.
Throughout much of the 20th century, the communist government ensured that the religious practices of the Mongolian people were largely repressed.
In the mid-16th century, Altan Khan of the Tümed, a grandson of Dayan Khan – but not a hereditary or legitimate Khan – became powerful.
The transition to market economy has often been rocky; during the early 1990s the country had to deal with high inflation and food shortages.
Their Beatles-like manner was severely criticized by the Communist censorship.
It is the highlight of the Three Manly Games of Naadam.
The Mongolian Stock Exchange, established in 1991 in Ulaanbaatar, is among the world's smallest stock exchanges by market capitalisation.
Turkic peoples (Kazakhs and Tuvans) constitute 4.5% of Mongolia's population, and the rest are Russian, Chinese, Korean and American nationalities.
They gradually gave way to Tibetan Buddhism, but shamanism has left a mark on Mongolian religious culture, and it continues to be practiced.
The behaviour of Mongolia's nobility, together with  usurious practices by Chinese traders and the collection of imperial taxes in silver instead of animals, resulted in poverty among the nomads becoming widespread.
Ulaanbaatar, the capital and largest city, is home to about 45% of the country's population.
In Mongolia during the 1920s, approximately one-third of the male population were monks.
The Mongolic Khitans, descendants of the Xianbei, ruled Mongolia during the Liao Dynasty (907–1125), after which the Khamag Mongol (1125–1206) rose to prominence.
Chultem distinguished three styles in traditional Mongolian architecture: Mongolian, Tibetan and Chinese as well as combinations of the three.
Mongols distinguish Gobi from desert proper, although the distinction is not always apparent to outsiders unfamiliar with the Mongolian landscape.
The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989 strongly influenced Mongolian politics and youth.
Mongolia has 4,800&nbsp;km of paved roads, with 1,800&nbsp;km of that total completed in 2013 alone.
The long-distance races that are showcased during Naadam festivals are one aspect of this, as is the popularity of trick riding.
The number of Buddhist monks dropped from 100,000 in 1924 to 110 in 1990.
More Mongolian table tennis players are competing internationally.
The fall of communism in 1991 restored public religious practice.
In 2011, GDP growth  was expected to reach 16.4%.
Until 1911, the Qing dynasty maintained control of Mongolia with a series of alliances and intermarriages, as well as military and economic measures.
After the collapse of the Qing dynasty in 1911, Mongolia declared independence from the Qing dynasty, and in 1921 established ''de facto'' independence from the Republic of China.
According to Erdenes MGL, the government body in-charge of Tavan Tolgoi, ArcelorMittal, Vale, Xstrata, U.S. coal miner Peabody, a consortium of Chinese energy firm Shenhua and Japan's Mitsui & Co, and a separate consortium of Japanese, South Korean and Russian firms are the preferred bidders.
In the early 15th century, the Oirads under Esen Tayisi gained the upper hand, and raided China in 1449 in a conflict over Esen's right to pay tribute, capturing the Ming emperor in the process.
The artist was purged as his work was censored.
In 2009, sharp drops in commodity prices and the effects of the global financial crisis caused the local currency to drop 40% against the U.S. dollar.
In the late 19th century, painters like "Marzan" Sharav turned to more realistic painting styles.
Further enlargement led to a quadratic shape of the temples.
Among the followers of Haranga was the band Hurd.
Since the end of socialism, Mongolia has experienced a decline of total fertility rate (children per woman) that is steeper than in any other country in the world, according to recent UN estimations: in 1970–1975, fertility was estimated to be 7.33 children per woman, dropping to about 2.1 in 2000–2005.
As was typical in states with established religions, the top religious institutions, the monasteries, wielded significant temporal power in addition to spiritual power.
An example of a temple built in the Chinese tradition is the lamasery Choijing Lamiin Sume (1904), which is a museum today.
The dissolution of the Soviet Union had a significant impact on Mongolia, where the one-party state grew into a multi-party democracy, and with that, media freedoms came to the forefront.
The ''Economist'' predicted this trade deficit of 14% of Mongolia's GDP would transform into a surplus in 2013.
The Mongolian national team began playing national games again during the 1990s; but has not yet qualified for a major international tournament.
2015 will have the 6th marathon that has been organized by Ar Mongol.
Ambans, Manchu "high officials", were installed in Khüree, Uliastai, and Khovd, and the country was subdivided into numerous feudal and ecclesiastical fiefdoms (which also placed people in power with loyalty to the Qing).
Mongolia is high, cold, and windy.
It ruled a massive empire before being defeated by the Göktürks (555–745) whose empire was even bigger.
Modern humans reached Mongolia approximately 40,000 years ago during the Upper Paleolithic.
The Mongolian People's Republic was established.
Mongolian wrestling is the most popular of all Mongol sports.
Since 2006, the media environment has been improving with the government debating a new Freedom of Information Act, and the removal of any affiliation of media outlets with the government.
In the past it was known by the Russian term ''yurt'', but this is changing as the Mongolian term becomes better known among English-speaking countries.
The quadratic temple Tsogchin in lamasery Gandan in Ulaanbaatar is a combination of the Mongolian and Chinese tradition.
Several Mongolian women have excelled in pistol shooting: Otryadyn Gündegmaa is a silver medalist of the 2008 Olympic Games, Munkhbayar Dorjsuren is a double world champion and Olympic bronze medal winner (now representing Germany), while Tsogbadrakhyn Mönkhzul is, as of May 2007, ranked third in the world in the 25-metre pistol event.
During the state socialist period, education was one of the areas of significant achievement in Mongolia.
In May 2013, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) held a cultural program to celebrate 20 years of LDS Church history in Mongolia, with 10,900 members, and 16 church buildings in the country.
About 3,000 mining licences have been issued.
Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj, a two-time former prime minister and member of the Democratic Party was elected as president on May 24, 2009 and inaugurated on June 18 that year.
Shortly thereafter, the country came under the control of the Soviet Union, which had aided its independence from China.
In January 2015, Mönkhbatyn Davaajargal took his 33rd top division championship, giving him the most in the history of sumo.
According to 2014 Asian Development Bank survey, 80% of Mongolians cited TV as their main source of information.
Otgonbayar Ershuu is arguably one of the most well-known Mongolian modern artists in the Western world, he was portrayed in the film "ZURAG" by Tobias Wulff.
Islam is the dominant religion among ethnic Kazakhs.
Direct flight connections exist between Mongolia and South Korea, China, Thailand, Hong Kong, Japan, Russia, Germany, Kyrgyzstan, and Turkey.
A separate railroad link connects the eastern city of Choibalsan with the Trans-Siberian Railway.
Monuments of the pre-Xiongnu Bronze Age include deer stones, keregsur kurgans, square slab tombs, and rock paintings.
Because of a boom in the mining sector, Mongolia had high growth rates in 2007 and 2008 (9.9% and 8.9%, respectively).
Mongolia is a semi-presidential representative democratic republic, where the President is directly elected.
A number of great works are attributed to the first Jebtsundamba Khutuktu, Zanabazar.
Mongolian national universities are all spin-offs from the National University of Mongolia and the Mongolian University of Science and Technology.
It represents the sun, moon, stars, and heavens per standard cosmological symbology abstracted from that seen in traditional thangka paintings.
After the establishment of the People's Republic of China, both countries confirmed their mutual recognition on October 6, 1949.
Outer Mongolia was given relative autonomy, being administered by the hereditary Genghisid khanates of Tusheet Khan, Setsen Khan, Zasagt Khan and Sain Noyon Khan.
After Genghis Khan's death, the empire was subdivided into four kingdoms or Khanates.
The Khangai Mountains play a certain role in forming this microclimate.
Funding to these boarding schools was cut in the 1990s, contributing to slightly increased illiteracy.
A new constitution was introduced in 1992, and the "People's Republic" was dropped from the country's name.
After the collapse of the Yuan, the Mongols retreated to Mongolia and resumed their earlier pattern of factional conflict, except during the era of Dayan Khan and Tumen Zasagt Khan.
The health sector comprises 17 specialized hospitals and centers, 4 regional diagnostic and treatment centers, 9 district and 21 ''aimag'' general hospitals, 323 ''soum'' hospitals, 18 ''feldsher'' posts, 233 family group practices, 536 private hospitals, and 57 drug supply companies/pharmacies.
The eastern part of Mongolia including the Onon, Kherlen rivers and Lake Buir form part of the Amur river basin draining to the Pacific Ocean.
The name "Gobi" is a Mongol term for a desert steppe, which usually refers to a category of arid rangeland with insufficient vegetation to support marmots but with enough to support camels.
By the early 1900s, almost one-third of the adult male population were Buddhist monks.
According to a 2011 study by the World Health Organization, Mongolia's capital city of Ulaanbaatar has the second-most fine particle pollution of any city in the world.
Haranga approached its zenith in the late 1980s and 1990s.
The traditional Mongolian dwelling is known as a ''ger''.
Mongolian nobles donated land, money and herders to the monasteries.
The Ice festival and the Thousand Camel Festival are amongst many other traditional Mongolian festivals.
The next centuries were marked by violent power struggles among various factions, notably the Genghisids and the non-Genghisid Oirats, as well as by several Chinese invasions (such as the five expeditions led by the Yongle Emperor).
Communist government of Mongolia banned boxing during the period 1964–1967 but the government ended ban on boxing soon.
Warfare erupted on the northern border.
The venus figurines of Mal'ta (21,000 years ago) testify to the level of Upper Paleolithic art in northern Mongolia; Mal'ta is now part of Russia.
Since prehistoric times, Mongolia has been inhabited by nomads who, from time to time, formed great confederations that rose to power and prominence.
It is significantly larger than the next-largest country, Peru.
In 1924, after the Bogd Khaan died of laryngeal cancer or, as some sources claim, at the hands of Russian spies, the country's political system was changed.
The Stalinist purges in Mongolia, which began in 1937, killed more than 30,000 people.
At present, there are 27.7 physicians and 75.7 hospital beds per 10,000 inhabitants.
The westernmost part of Mongolia is on roughly the same longitude as Kolkata (India), while the easternmost part is on the same longitude as Qinhuangdao (China) and Hangzhou (China), as well as the western edge of Taiwan.
He came into conflicts with the Manchus over the looting of Chinese cities, and also alienated most Mongol tribes.
The People's Party – known as the People's Revolutionary Party between 1921 and 2010 – formed the government of the country from 1921 to 1996 (in a one-party system until 1990) and from 2000 to 2004.
The main trade route during this period was the Tea Road through Siberia; it had permanent stations located every , each of which was staffed by 5–30 chosen families.
By 1911 there were 700 large and small monasteries in Outer Mongolia; their 115,000 monks made up 21% of the population.
The parliament can override that veto by a two-thirds majority vote.
Apart from the Jebtsundamba Khutuktu, there were 13 other reincarnating high lamas, called 'seal-holding saints' (''tamgatai khutuktu''), in Outer Mongolia.
This immediately affected meat prices, which increased twofold; the GDP dropped 1.6% in 2009.
The people also elect the deputies in the national assembly, the State Great Khural.
Mongolia joined the World Trade Organization in 1997 and seeks to expand its participation in regional economic and trade groups.
In Tsetserleg, the warmest town in this microclimate, nighttime January temperatures rarely go under  while daytime January temperatures often reach  to  .
Mongolian cuisine is rooted in their nomadic history, and thus includes a lot of dairy and meat, but little vegetables.
Some of these attacks were repelled by the Mongols under Ayushridar and his general Köke Temür.
Many of them started as ''ger''-temples.
The sparsely populated far north of Bulgan Province averages  in annual precipitation which means it receives more precipitation than Beijing (571.8mm) or Berlin (571mm).
Pastoral nomadism and metalworking became more developed with the later Okunev culture (2nd millennium BC), Andronovo culture (2300–1000 BC) and Karasuk culture (1500–300 BC), culminating with the Iron Age Xiongnu Empire in 209 BC.
In the early 16th century, Dayan Khan and his khatun Mandukhai reunited the entire Mongol nation under the Genghisids.
Mongolia uses a unicameral legislature, The State Great Khural, with 76 seats, which is chaired by the speaker of the house.
Mongolia was never listed among the emerging market countries until February 2011 when Citigroup analysts determined Mongolia to be one of the "global growth generating" countries, which are countries with the most promising growth prospects for 2010–2050.
Korean has gained popularity as tens of thousands of Mongolians work in South Korea.
In the early 1990s, group Har-Chono put the beginning for Mongolia's folk-rock, merging elements of the Mongolian traditional "long song" into the genre.
The concept of Mongolia as an independent power north of China is expressed in a letter sent by Emperor Wen of Han to Laoshang Chanyu in 162 BC (recorded in the ''Hanshu''):
The President of Mongolia has functions like vetoing the laws made by parliament, appointing judges and justice of courts and appoint ambassadors abroad.
In 2004, under the Bulgarian chairmanship, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) invited Mongolia as its newest Asian Partner.
Tibetan Buddhism, which had been the predominant religion prior to the rise of communism, again rose to become the most widely practised religion in Mongolia.
Most of the country is hot in the summer and extremely cold in the winter, with January averages dropping as low as .
The first census in the 20th century was carried out in 1918 and recorded a population of 647,500.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, lamaseries were built throughout the country.
The traditional alphabet is being slowly reintroduced through schools.
On January 26, 1952, Yumjaagiin Tsedenbal took power in Mongolia.
In the chaos of the late 12th century, a chieftain named Temüjin finally succeeded in uniting the Mongol tribes between Manchuria and the Altai Mountains.
As horse nomadism was introduced into Mongolia, the political center of the Eurasian Steppe also shifted to Mongolia, where it remained until the 18th century CE.
Choibalsan died suspiciously in Russia in 1952.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division estimates Mongolia's total population (mid-2007) as 2,629,000 (11% less than the U.S. Census Bureau figure).
The last Mongol Khan was Ligden Khan in the early 17th century.
The constitution of Mongolia guarantees a number of freedoms, including full freedom of expression and religion.
The non-religious population is the second largest group.
Mongolia's population growth rate is estimated at 1.2% (2007 est.).
When they needed to be enlarged to accommodate the growing number of worshippers, the Mongolian architects used structures with 6 and 12 angles with pyramidal roofs to approximate to the round shape of a ''ger''.
Mongolian land is larger than England, France and Germany".
When Esen was murdered in 1454, the Borjigids regained power.
The Mongolic Rouran Khaganate (330–555), of Xianbei provenance was the first to use "Khagan" as an imperial title.
Mongolia fought against Japan during the Battles of Khalkhin Gol in 1939 and during the Soviet–Japanese War in August 1945 to liberate Southern Mongolia from Japan and China.
The President appoints the Prime Minister, and nominates the Cabinet on the proposal of the prime minister.
Infant mortality is at 1.9%–4% and child mortality is at 4.3%.
Mongolia has a number of domestic airports with some of them having international status.
'''Mongolia'''  (Mongolian:  ''Monggol Ulus'' in Mongolian script;   ''Mongol Uls'' in Mongolian Cyrillic) is a landlocked sovereign state in East Asia.
Minerals represent more than 80% of Mongolia's exports, a proportion expected to eventually rise to 95%.
As the Ming armies pursued the Mongols into their homeland, they successfully sacked and destroyed the Mongol capital Karakorum among a few other cities.
The Eagle festival draws about 400 eagle hunters on horseback, including the traveler Мөнхбаярт Батсайхан (Munkhbayart Batsaikhan), to compete with their birds.
The Mongolia Premier League is the top domestic competition.
The highest annual precipitation of  occurred in the forests of Bulgan Province close to the border with Russia and the lowest of  occurred in the Gobi Desert (period 1961–1990).
from 1911 on, the head of the Church had also been the khan of the country).
There was a six-fold increase in students between 1993 and 2010.
Much of Mongolia consists of steppes, with forested areas comprising 11.2% of the total land area, a higher percentage than the Republic of Ireland (10%).
From 2005 to 2006, about 40 troops were deployed with the Belgian and Luxembourg contingents in Kosovo.
In 1919, after the October Revolution in Russia, Chinese troops led by Xu Shuzheng occupied Mongolia.
The capital Ulaanbaatar is administrated separately as a capital city (municipality) with provincial status.
The temple of Maitreya (disassembled in 1938) is an example of the Tibeto-Mongolian architecture.
A new law on press freedom, drafted with help from international NGOs on August 28, 1998 and enacted on January 1, 1999, paved the way for media reforms.
The trellis walls, roof poles and layers of felt were replaced by stone, brick, beams and planks, and became permanent.
In 1206, he took the title Genghis Khan, and waged a series of military campaigns – renowned for their brutality and ferocity – sweeping through much of Asia, and forming the Mongol Empire, the largest contiguous land empire in world history.
China has supported Mongolia's application for membership in to the Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD), Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and granting it observer status in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
In its 2013 World Press Freedom Index report, Reporters Without Borders classified the media environment as 98th out of 179, with 1st being most free.
Since the 2008–2009 school year, new first-graders are using the 12-year system, and a full transition to the 12-year system will not occur until the 2019–2020 school year, when the current third-graders graduate.
It hosts some unique species like the Eastern brook lamprey, Daurian crayfish (''cambaroides dauricus'') and Daurian pearl oyster (''dahurinaia dahurica'') in the Onon/Kherlen rivers as well as Siberian prawn (''exopalaemon modestus'') in Lake Buir.
Mongolia declared its independence again on July 11, 1921.
The first of these empires, the Xiongnu of undetermined ethnicity, were brought together by Modu Shanyu to form a confederation in 209 BC.
