The paramandyas of the Megaloschemos is larger than that of the Stavrophore, and if he wears the klobuk, it is of a distinctive thimble shape, called a ''koukoulion'', the veil of which is usually embroidered with crosses.
In the Digambara tradition, a junior monk can be a:
After tonsure, Orthodox monks and nuns are never permitted to cut their hair.
Among the Greeks, the mantle is added at this stage.
St. Benedict of Nursia is considered to be the founder of western monasticism.
Orthodox monastics separate themselves from the world in order to pray unceasingly for the world.
It is often intricately embroidered with the instruments of the Passion and the Trisagion (the angelic hymn).
Eastern monasticism is found in three distinct forms: anchoritic (a solitary living in isolation), cenobitic (a community living and worshiping together under the direct rule of an abbot or abbess), and the "middle way" between the two, known as the skete (a community of individuals living separately but in close proximity to one another, who come together only on Sundays and feast days, working and praying the rest of the time in solitude, but under the direction of an elder).
Older grihastha with grown-up children are traditionally expected to accept ''vanaprastha'' (celibate retired) life.
Similar in appearance to Buddhist monks, brahmacari monks from the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON), or Hare Krishnas as they are popularly known, are the best known Vaishnava monks outside India.
Meals are usually taken in common in a sizable dining hall known as a trapeza (refectory), at elongated refectory tables.
The process of becoming a monk is intentionally slow, as the vows taken are considered to entail a lifelong commitment to God, and are not to be entered into lightly.
Although there are no formal vows made at this point, the candidate is normally required to affirm his commitment to persevere in the monastic life.
A few monks were executed, others fled to continental European monasteries where they were able to continue their monastic life.
He is also given a prayer rope and instructed in the use of the Jesus Prayer.
In some communities, the novice also wears the leather belt.
He is also given a wooden hand cross (or "profession cross"), which he should keep in his icon corner, and a beeswax candle, symbolic of monastic vigilance the sacrificing of himself for God.
They do not, in general, have as their primary purpose the running of social services, as is common in Western Christianity, but instead are concerned with attaining theosis, or union with God.
It is permanent and one cannot give it up.
There are also uniquely Anglican monastic orders such as the Society of Saint John the Evangelist.
Following a period as a novice, usually six months to a year, the novice professes temporary vows, which can be renewed for a period of years.
* Acharya: leader of the order
Furthermore, they do not use any devices or machines.
In the Slavic practice, the Stavrophore also wears the monastic mantle.
This distinction arose historically because generally those monks who could read Latin typically became choir monks, while those monks who were illiterate or could not read Latin became lay brothers.
The Svetambar Terapanthi sect has a new rank of junior monks who are called samana.
Fasting (i.e., abstinence from food and sometimes water) is a routine feature of Jain asceticism.
Their rules forbid the use of money, although this rule is nowadays not kept by all monks.
In Theravada Buddhism, ''bhikkhu'' is the term for monk.
The Bhikkhus are only allowed 4 items ''(other than their robes)'': a razor, a needle, an alms bowl and a water strainer.
Madhvaacharya (Madhvacharya), the Dwaita philosopher, established ''ashta matha'' (Eight Monasteries).
Food is usually simple and is eaten in silence while one of the brethren reads aloud from the spiritual writings of the Holy Fathers.
He authored the Rule of St. Benedict, which is the foundation for the Order of St. Benedict and all of its reform groups such as the Cistercians and the Trappists.
They also do not use electricity as it involves violence.
Full Jain monk in either Svetambara or Digambara tradition can belong to one of these ranks:
To become a monk, one first must become a postulant, during which time the man lives at the monastery to evaluate whether he is called to become a monk.
In the early 20th century when the Catholic Movement was at its height, the Anglican Communion had hundreds of orders and communities and thousands of religious followers.
Eastern Orthodox monks are addressed as "Father" even if they are not priests; but when conversing among themselves, monks will often address one another as "Brother".
* Kshullak: they may use two pieces of cloth
The Greek form does not have a hood, the Slavic form has a hood and lappets on the shoulders, so that the garment forms a large cross covering the monk's shoulders, chest, and back.
In general, Orthodox monastics have little or no contact with the outside world, including their own families.
After coming to the monastery and living as a guest for not less than three days, the revered abbot or abbess may bless the candidate to become a novice.
This association is focused around the Shaolin Monastery.
''Novice'' (Church Slavonic: ''Poslushnik''), lit.
The tonsure of a Schemamonk follows the same format as the Stavrophore, and he makes the same vows and is tonsured in the same manner.
Young boys can be ordained as samaneras.
Some orders and communities have already become extinct.
Most of the austerities and ascetic practices can be traced back to Vardhaman Mahavira, the twenty-fourth "fordmaker" or Tirthankara.
Basil the Great and the ''Philokalia'', which was compiled by St. Nikodemos of the Holy Mountain and St. Makarios of Corinth.
* Upadhyaya: a learned monk, who both teaches and studies himself
The local people give food for the monks to eat, though the monks are not permitted to positively ask for anything.
Both bhikkhus and samaneras eat only in the morning, and are not supposed to lead a luxurious life.
There is only one monastic habit in the Eastern Church (with certain slight regional variations), and it is the same for both monks and nuns.
Rather, Eastern monastics study and draw inspiration from the writings of the Desert Fathers as well as other Church Fathers; probably the most influential of which are the ''Greater Asketikon'' and ''Lesser Asketikon'' of St.
There is no formal ceremony for the clothing of a novice, he or she simply receives permission to wear the clothing of a novice.
Some, out of humility, will choose to remain novices all their lives.
At the beginning of 2006, there was 2 permanent professed members and 2 long-term guests.
He will be buried holding the cross, and the candle will be burned at his funeral.
Jain ascetics follow a strict vegetarian diet without root vegetables.
In Vajrayana Buddhism, monkhood is part of the system of 'vows of individual liberation'; these vows are taken in order to develop one's own personal ethical discipline.
Although the term ''monachos'' is of Christian origin, in the English language "monk" tends to be used loosely also for both male and female ascetics from other religious or philosophical backgrounds.
In the Eastern monastic tradition, novices may or may not dress in the black inner cassock (Greek: ''Anterion'', ''Eisorasson''; Church Slavonic: ''Podriasnik'') and wear the soft monastic hat (Greek: ''Skoufos'', Church Slavonic: ''Skufia''), depending on the tradition of the local community, and in accordance to the abbot’s directives.
Many orders take on external works such as service to the poor, giving religious retreats, or other active ministries within their immediate communities.
The monastic lifestyle takes a great deal of serious commitment.
For this same reason, bishops are almost always chosen from the ranks of monks.
These three are mentioned is the three lines of the Namokar Mantra.
The monastic orders include all Benedictines (the Order of Saint Benedict and its later reforms including the Cistercians and the Trappists) and the Carthusians, who live according to their own Statutes, and not according to the Rule of St. Benedict proper.
In Orthodox monasticism after completing the novitiate, there are three ranks of monasticism.
He may also be asked to leave at any time if his behaviour does not conform to the monastic life, or if the superior discerns that he is not called to monasticism.
Most communities are self-supporting, and the monastic’s daily life is usually divided into three parts: (a) communal worship in the catholicon (the monastery's main church); (b) hard manual labour; and (c) private prayer, spiritual study, and rest when necessary.
Some Jains (Shvetambara monks and nuns) own only unstitched white robes (an upper and lower garment) and a bowl used for eating and collecting alms.
Digambara monks have only a single meal a day.
He is also given a brimless hat with a veil, known as a klobuk, and a leather belt is fastened around his waist.
Their disciplinary code is called the ''patimokkha'', which is part of the larger ''Vinaya''.
There are Anglican Benedictines, Franciscans, Cistercians, and in the Episcopal Church in the United States, Dominicans.
The hair of the head and the beard remain uncut as a symbol of the vows they have taken, reminiscent of the Nazarites from the Old Testament.
Those monks who are not ordained into Holy Orders are referred to as lay brothers.
This term 'gelong' (Tib.
If a novice chooses to leave during the period of the novitiate, no penalty is incurred.
A monk may be a person who decided to dedicate his life to serving all other living beings, or to be an ascetic who voluntarily chooses to leave mainstream society and live his life in prayer and contemplation.
While there is no vow of silence, many communities have a period of silence lasting from evening until the next morning and some others restrict talking to only when it is necessary for the monks to perform their work and during weekly recreation.
The various profession rites are normally performed by the Abbot, but if the abbot has not been ordained a priest, or if the monastic community is a convent, a hieromonk will perform the service.
Among most religious orders, monks live in simple, austere rooms called cells and come together daily to celebrate the Conventual Mass and to recite the Liturgy of the Hours.
Within the cenobitic community, all monks conform to a common way of living based on the traditions of that particular monastery.
The next step is to enter the monastic way of life (Tib.
Since the Second Vatican Council, the distinction between choir monks and lay brothers has been deemphasized, as the council allowed the Divine Office to be said in the vernacular language, effectively opening participation to all of the monks.
In some monastic traditions the Great Schema is only given to monks and nuns on their death bed, while in others they may be elevated after as little as 25 years of service.
Fasts last for a day or longer, up to a month.
Within Roman Catholicism, a monk is a member of a religious order who lives a communal life in a monastery, abbey, or priory under a monastic rule of life (such as the Rule of St. Benedict).
This degree is also known as the ''Little Schema'', and is considered to be a "betrothal" to the Great Schema.
Some Anglican religious communities are contemplative, some active, but a distinguishing feature of the monastic life among Anglicans is that most practice the so-called "mixed life".
In Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, and Eastern Catholicism, monasticism holds a very special and important place: "Angels are a light for monks, monks are a light for laymen" (St. John Klimakos).
In the last few decades of the 20th century, novices have for most communities been few and far between.
''Great Schema'' (Greek: ''Megaloschemos'', Church Slavonic: ''Skhimnik'')—Monks whose abbot feels they have reached a high level of spiritual excellence reach the final stage, called the Great Schema.
As they are without possession and attachment, they travel from city to city, often crossing forests and deserts, and always barefoot.
Anglican monks recite the Divine Office in choir daily, either the full eight services of the Breviary or the four offices found in the Book of Common Prayer and celebrate the Eucharist daily.
* Ailak: they use one piece of cloth
Monastic life in England came to an abrupt end when King Henry VIII broke from the Roman Catholic Church and made himself the head of the Church of England.
"one under obedience"—Those wishing to join a monastery begin their lives as novices.
Nuns live identical ascetic lives to their male counterparts and are therefore also called ''monachai'' (the feminine plural of ''monachos''), and their community is likewise called a monastery.
Many once large and international communities have been reduced to a single convent or monastery composed of elderly men or women.
Stability entails that the monk commit himself to the monastery for the remainder of his life, and so, upon death, will be buried at its cemetery.
The work of the choir monks was considered to be prayer, chanting the seven hours of the Divine Office and celebrating the Mass daily whereas the lay brothers provided for the material needs of the community by growing food, preparing meals, maintaining the monastery and the grounds.
Other texts that provide insight into conduct of ascetics include Yogashastra by Acharya Hemachandra and Niyamasara by Acharya Kundakunda.
However, historically, the roles of the two groups of monks within the monastery differed.
There are however, still several thousand Anglican monks working today in approximately 200 communities around the world.
Chastity requires that since they were willing to dedicate their lives to God, they sacrificed the love between men and women and would not marry.
They stand aloof from worldly matters.
Shortly after the beginning of the revival of the Catholic Movement in the Church of England, there was felt to be a need for a restoration of the monastic life.
Jain ascetics are (almost) completely without possessions.
In most monastic communities today, little distinction exists between the lay brothers and the choir monks.
Poverty requires that they renounce any ownership of property or assets, except for items that were allowed to them by their superior (such as a religious habit, shoes, a cloak, etc.
After that, one can become a 'novice' (Pali ''samanera'', Tib.
Obedience calls for the monk to obey Christ, as represented by the superior person of the monastery, which is an abbot or prior.
According to Jains, one's highest goal should be attaining Nirvana or Moksha (i.e., liberation from samsara, the cycle of birth and rebirth).
They are therefore called 'community of the excellent ones' (); however, these in turn need not be monks (i.e., hold such vows).
In most communities, the monks take their meals together in the refectory.
Although the Rassophore does not make formal vows, he is still morally obligated to continue in the monastic estate for the rest of his life.
The nuns are called Aryikas in Digambar tradition and Sadhvi in the Svetambar tradition.
The Acaranga Sutra, or Book of Good Conduct, is a sacred book within Jainism that discusses the ascetic code of conduct.
Within western monasticism, it is important to differentiate between monks and friars.
His habit is usually black, signifying that he is now dead to the world, and he receives a new name.
Another piece added is the ''Polystavrion'' or "Many Crosses", which consists of a cord with a number of small crosses plaited into it.
''Stavrophore'' (Church Slavonic: ''Krestonosets''), lit.
There is also the Order of Lutheran Franciscans, a religious community of friars and sisters within the tradition of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America.
Orthodox hermits, on the other hand, have little or no contact with the outside world.
Since the lay brothers could not recite the Divine Office in Latin, they would instead pray easily memorizable prayers such as the Our Father or the Hail Mary as many as 150 times per day.
''Rassophore'' (Church Slavonic: ''Ryassofor''), lit.
Brahmacari older than fifty years (as per ISKCON rule) can become ''sannyasi''.
The tonsure of monks is the token of a consecrated life, and symbolizes the cutting off of their self-will.
However, since the 1960s there has been a sharp falling off in the numbers of religious in many parts of the Anglican Communion.
In other words, only a hieromonk who has been tonsured into the Great Schema may himself tonsure a Schemamonk.
The role of monastic orders in Indian and now also Western society has to some extent been adapted over the years in accordance with ever-changing social structures.
This social scheme includes both monastic and lay stages meant for various persons in various stages of life as per their characteristics (''guna'') and work (''karma'').
The paramandyas represents the yoke of Christ.
New persons joining ISKCON as full-time members (living in its centers) first undergo a three-month ''Bhakta'' training, which includes learning the basics of brahmacari (monastic) life.
* Muni: an ordinary monk
The purpose of the monastic life is union with God, the means is through leaving the world (i.e., the life of the passions).
In Thailand and Burma, it is common for boys to spend some time living as a monk in a monastery.
These vows were three in number: obedience, conversion of life, and stability.
The polystavrion forms a yoke around the monk and serves to hold the analavos in place, and reminds the monastic that he is bound to Christ and that his arms are no longer fit for worldly activities, but that he must labor only for the Kingdom of Heaven.
''Ahimsa'' is the first and foremost vow of a Jain ascetic.
In struggling to attain this conformity, the monastic comes to realize his own shortcomings and is guided by his spiritual father in how to deal honestly with them.
The Orthodox Church measures its health by the quality of its monks and nuns.
Like Roman Catholic monks, Anglican monks also take the monastic vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience.
Other austerities include meditation in seated or standing posture near river banks in the cold wind, or meditation atop hills and mountains, especially at noon when the sun is at its fiercest.
Although the Canons Regular, such as the Norbertines, live in community, they are neither monks nor friars as they are characterized by their clerical state and not by any monastic vows.
Chinese Buddhist monks have been traditionally and stereotypically linked with the practice of the Chinese martial arts or ''Kung fu'', and monks are frequently important characters in martial arts films.
''Sannyasa'', a life of full dedication to spiritual pursuits, is the highest stage of life in the ''varnasrama'' society.
He appointed a monk (called ''swamiji'' or ''swamigalu'' in local parlance) for each ''matha'' or monastery who has the right to worship Madhvacharya's murti of Lord Krishna by rotation.
One of the most intense forms of Asceticism can be found in Jainism, one of the world's oldest religions.
The rasson (outer robe) worn by the Stavrophore is more ample than that worn by the Rassophore.
Quotes on ascetic practices from the Akaranga Sutra as Hermann Jacobi translated it:
At this stage, the monk makes formal vows of stability, chastity, obedience and poverty.
Many (but not all) Orthodox seminaries are attached to monasteries, combining academic preparation for ordination with participation in the community's life of prayer, and hopefully benefiting from the example and wise counsel of the monks.
Loccum Abbey and Amelungsborn Abbey have the longest traditions as Lutheran monasteries.
Because of this addition he is now called ''Stavrophore'', or ''Cross-bearer''.
A '''monk'''  (, from ,  ''monachos'', "single, solitary" and Latin ''monachus'') is a person who practices religious asceticism, living either alone or with any number of other monks.
During such an encounter, the monk remains standing and eats only a measured amount.
Male Digambara monks do not wear any clothes and carry nothing with them except a soft broom made of shed peacock feathers (pinchi) and eat from their hands.
This ritual is called ''Paryaya'' and has been used also outside his sampradaya, e.g.
Also, they give up any act of sexual conduct.
Novices are always referred to as "Brother".
However, during four months of monsoon (rainy season) known as chaturmaas, they continue to stay in a single place to avoid killing the life forms that thrive during the rains.
Some monks avoid (or limit) medicine and/or hospitalization due to their careful attention to body.
The Buddhist monk Bodhidharma, traditionally credited as the founder of Zen Buddhism in China, is also claimed to have introduced Kalaripayattu (which later evolved into Kung Fu) to the country.
Neither group will beg for food, but a Jain ascetic may accept a meal from a householder, provided that the latter is pure of mind and body and offers the food of his own volition and in the prescribed manner.
Orders of friars include the Franciscans, Dominicans, Carmelites, and Augustinians.
Monks who have been or will be ordained into Holy Orders as priests or deacons are referred to as ''choir monks'', as they have the obligation to recite the entire Divine Office daily in choir.
A Schemamonk who is a priest is called a Hieroschemamonk.
During the 35 years of its existence over 25 men tested their vocations to monastic life by living at the house for some time, from a few months to many years, but at Father Arthur's death in 1989 only one permanent resident remained.
The word nun is typically used for female monastics.
''rabjung'') which includes wearing monk's or nun's robes.
Some Jain monks wear a cloth over the mouth to prevent accidental harm to airborne germs and insects.
Among the Greeks, old monks are often called ''Gheronda'', or "Elder", out of respect for their dedication.
Monks generally live a contemplative life of prayer confined within a monastery while friars usually engage in an active ministry of service to the outside community.
Most monks are not ordained; a community will normally only present as many candidates for ordination to the bishop as the liturgical needs of the community require.
The solemn vows in other religious communities were eventually established as vows of obedience, poverty, and chastity.
There are many present-day Lutherans who practice the monastic teaching of the Roman Catholic Church.
Most stay for only a few years and then leave, but a number continue on in the ascetic life for the rest of their lives.
As per the Jain vows, the monks and nuns renounce all relations and possessions.
Jain ascetics practice complete non-violence.
The community has always remained small; at times the only member was Father Arthur.
For the Orthodox, ''Mother'' is the correct term for nuns who have been tonsured Stavrophore or higher.
The most surprising growth has been in the Melanesian countries of the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and Papua New Guinea.
However, care for the poor and needy has always been an obligation of monasticism, so Orthodox monasteries are not normally "cloistered" like some contemplative Western houses are, though the level of contact will vary from community to community.
This can be achieved only by the monks and nuns who take five great vows: of non-violence, of truth, of non-stealing, of non-possession and of celibacy.
Conversion of life means, generally, that the monk convert himself to the way of a monk, which is death to self and to the world and life to God and to his work.
For this, a soul has to be without attachment or self-indulgence.
A Sannyasi is given the title Swami.
in Gaudiya Vaisnava Radharamana temple in Vrindavan.
Shvetambara monks do not cook food but solicit alms from householders.
The religious vows taken in the West were first developed by St. Benedict.
This is done when death is imminent or when a monk feels that he is unable to adhere to his vows on account of advanced age or terminal disease.
Each successive grade is given a portion of the habit, the full habit being worn only by those in the highest grade, known for that reason as the "Great Schema", or "Great Habit".
For this reason, the analavos itself is sometimes called the "Great Schema".
A Christian monk is to be an instrument of God's work.
In the Slavic tradition, the title of Elder (Church Slavonic: ''Starets'') is normally reserved for those who are of an advanced spiritual life, and who serve as guides to others.
), and to live meekly, sharing whatever they might have with the poor.
Monks who have been ordained to the priesthood are called hieromonks (priest-monks); monks who have been ordained to the diaconate are called hierodeacons (deacon-monks).
