up to medieval times in Egypt and Europe).
In humans, social monogamy equals monogamous marriage.
Such serial monogamy may effectively resemble polygyny in its reproductive consequences because some men are able to utilize more than one woman’s reproductive lifespan through repeated marriages.
Therefore, the evolution of monogamy could be a reflection of this increased need for bi-parental care.
* Social monogamy refers to two partners living together, having sex with each other, and cooperating in acquiring basic resources such as shelter, food and money.
The word ''monogamy'' comes from the Greek μονός, ''monos'' which means to party or stay home, and γάμος, ''gamos'' which means marriage.
Drawing on the work of Ester Boserup, Goody notes that the sexual division of labour varies in intensive plough agriculture and extensive shifting horticulture.
Similarly, monogamy should evolve in areas of ecological stress because male reproductive success should be higher if their resources are focused on ensuring offspring survival rather than searching for other mates.
These birds are known for remaining in monogamous relationships during the course of mating season.
multiple marriages but only one legal spouse at a time.
There may have been some exceptions, e.g.
A study of sexual behavior in Thailand, Tanzania and Côte d'Ivoire suggests about 16–34% of men engage in extramarital sex while a much smaller (unreported) percentage of women engage in extramarital sex.
(Reichard, 2003, page 4)
Modern biological researchers, using the theory of evolution, approach human monogamy as the same in human and non-human animal species.
The Mishnah and the ''baraitot'' clearly reflect a monogamist viewpoint within Judaism (Yevamot 2:10 etc.).
Human monogamy's legal aspects are taught at faculties of law.
Monogamy is one of several mating systems observed in animals.
The male birds behaved like they do every season, establishing territory, finding a mate, and attempting to make baby birds.
The number of married partners who engage in extramarital sex never exceeds 50% in studies using large or nationally representative samples.
Only in the prairie voles are OT and AVP receptors located along the mesolimbic dopamine reward pathway, presumably conditioning the voles to their mates odor while consolidating the social memory of the mating episode.
Paleoanthropological estimates of the time frame for the evolution of monogamy are primarily based on the level of sexual dimorphism seen in the fossil record because, in general, the reduced male-male competition seen in monogamous mating results in reduced sexual dimorphism.
It is becoming clear that even animals that are overtly socially monogamous engage in extra-pair copulations.
This is called the Male Compromise Theory.
These studies focus on relationship satisfaction, duration and attachment.
As divorce has continued to become more accessible, more individuals have availed themselves of it, and many go on to remarry.
According to Old Assyrian texts, he could be obliged to wait for two or three years before he was allowed to take another wife.
(...) it clearly leads the interlocutors to reflect about the way in which, in the mystery of creation, man was formed precisely as "male and female," in order to understand correctly the normative meaning of the words of Genesis.
In plough agriculture farming is largely men's work and is associated with private property; marriage tends to be monogamous to keep the property within the nuclear family.
The highest known frequency of reproductively successful extra-pair copulations are found among fairywrens
Plavcan and van Schaik conclude their examination of this controversy by stating that, overall, sexual dimorphism in australopithecines is not indicative of any behavioral implications or mating systems.
a Nineteenth Dynasty official stated as proof of his love to his deceased wife that he had stayed married to her since their youth, even after he had become very successful (P. Leiden I 371).
According to him, monogamy was a primordial will of the Creator described in Genesis, darkened by the ''hardness of hearts'' of the Israelites.
The Code of Hammurabi states that he loses his right to do so if the wife herself gives him a slave as concubine.
Sexual monogamy is defined as an exclusive sexual relationship between a female and a male based on observations of sexual interactions.
The historical record offers contradictory evidence on the development and extent of monogamy as a social practice.
For example, monogamy is certainly correlated with paternal care, as shown by Marlowe, but not caused by it because humans diminish the need for bi-parental care through the aid of siblings and other family members in rearing the offspring.
Thus, the wealth and power of the family would pass to the “celibate” younger brother of the church.
Finally, the term genetic monogamy is used when DNA analyses can confirm that a female-male pair reproduce exclusively with each other.
The diversity of species with social monogamy suggests that it is not inherited from a common ancestor but instead evolved independently in many different species.
The term is also applied to the social behavior of some animals, referring to the state of having only one mate at any one time.
sapiens'' have solved many problems that generally lead to monogamy, such as those mentioned above.
Social monogamy does not always involve marriage in humans.
The effects of intracerebroventricular administration of oxytocin and vasopressin have been shown to promote affiliative behavior in the prairie vole but not in similar, but non-monogamous montane voles.
During times of major economic / demographic transitions, investing more in a fewer offspring (social monogamy not polygyny) increases reproductive success by ensuring the offspring themselves have enough initial wealth to be successful.
In the patriarchal society of Mesopotamia the nuclear family was called a "house".
Socially monogamous species are scattered throughout the animal kingdom: A few insects, a few fish, about nine-tenths of birds, and a few mammals are socially monogamous.
This is seen in both England and Sweden during the industrial revolution and is currently being seen in the modernization of rural Ethiopia.
Many societies that we consider monogamous in fact allow easy divorce.
When attempts are made to try to study medical afflictions and their genetic components, it becomes very important to understand nonpaternity rates and pedigree errors.
Barry Schwartz, author of ''The Paradox of Choice: Why less is more'', further suggests that Western culture's inundation of choice has devalued relationships based on lifetime commitments and singularity of choice.
Monogamous pairs of animals are not always sexually exclusive.
The United Nations is thus working through the Convention and CEDAW to promote women's equality by making monogamy the only legal form of marriage worldwide.
afarensis'' is more sexually dimorphic than modern humans and chimps with levels closer to those of orangutans and gorillas.
Despite apparent social monogamy, the female birds whose partners were surgically altered still became pregnant, indicating that overt social monogamy did not predict for sexual fidelity.
In all, these account for 16 to 24% of the "monogamous" category.
Under Judges and the monarchy, old restrictions went into disuse, especially among royalty, though the Books of Samuel and Kings, which cover entire period of monarchy, do not record a single case of bigamy among commoners&nbsp;— except for Samuel's father.
Fourth-century Roman law forbade Jews to contract plural marriages.
"Social monogamy refers to a male and female's social living arrangement (e.g., shared use of a territory, behaviour indicative of a social pair, and/or proximity between a male and female) without inferring any sexual interactions or reproductive patterns.
However, a pair of animals may be socially monogamous but that does not necessarily make them sexually or genetically monogamous.
However, the Human Rights Campaign has stated, based on a Rockway Institute report, that "GLBT young people... want to spend their adult life in a long-term relationship raising children."
Sexual monogamy is defined as an exclusive sexual relationship between a female and a male based on observations of sexual interactions.
There is even a parasitic worm, ''Schistosoma mansoni'', that in its female-male pairings in the human body is monogamous.
The genetic evidence for the evolution of monogamy in humans is more complex but much easier to interpret.
The protocol entered into force November 25, 2005.
When cultural or social anthropologists and other social scientists use the term monogamy, the meaning is social or marital monogamy.
afarensis'' “do not imply that monogamy is any less probable than polygyny”.
Furthermore, ''Homo habilis'', living approximately 2.3 mya, is the most sexually dimorphic early hominid.
Convenience samples do not accurately reflect the population of the United States as a whole, which can cause serious biases in survey results.
Divorce and remarriage can thus result in "serial monogamy", i.e.
R. Ammi, an ''amora'' states:
They allowed, even encouraged, poor men to marry and produce offspring which reduced the gap in reproductive success between the rich and poor, thus resulting in the quick spread of monogamous marriage systems in the western world.
Genetic tests frequently show that some of the offspring raised by a monogamous pair come from the female mating with an extra-pair male partner.
Christianity adopted a similar attitude (cf.
1 Tm 3:2,12; Tt 1:6), which conformed with Jesus' approach.
Social monogamy refers to the overtly observed living arrangement whereby a male and female share territory and engage in behaviour indicative of a social pair, but does not imply any particular sexual fidelity or reproductive pattern.
Similarly—according to Betzig—the Christian Church enforced monogamy because wealth passed to the closest living, legitimate male relative, often resulting in the wealthy oldest brother being without a male heir.
The extent to which social monogamy is observed in animals varies across taxa, with over 90 percent of avian species being socially monogamous, compared to only 3 percent of mammalian species and up to 15 percent of primate species.
A survey of other cross-cultural samples has confirmed that the absence of the plough was the only predictor of polygamy, although other factors such as high male mortality in warfare (in non-state societies) and pathogen stress (in state societies) had some impact.
These babies were cared for by their sterile adoptive fathers.
In both of these instances, the rule-making elite used cultural processes to ensure greater reproductive fitness for themselves and their offspring, leading to a larger genetic influence in future generations.
The Government then initiated an extensive campaign of marriage-law education, working jointly with the Communist Party, women’s federations, trade unions, the armed forces, schools and other organizations."
This type of analysis can uncover reproductively successful sexual pairings or physical contact.
Betzig postulated that culture/society can also be a source of social monogamy by enforcing it through rules and laws set by third-party actors, usually in order to protect the wealth or power of the elite.
There are also philosophical aspects in the field of interest of e.g.
The rates of extrapair paternity ranged from 0.03% to 11.8% although most of the locations had low percentages of extrapair paternity.
Genetic monogamy refers to DNA analyses confirming that a female-male pair reproduce exclusively with each other.
Marital monogamy may be further distinguished between:
For example, Augustus Caesar encouraged marriage and reproduction to force the aristocracy to divide their wealth and power among multiple heirs, but the aristocrats kept their socially monogamous, legitimate children to a minimum to ensure their legacy while having many extra-pair copulations.
These studies have found that about 10–15% of women and 20–25% of men engage in extramarital sex.
The incidence of sexual monogamy appears quite rare in other parts of the animal kingdom.
Many surveys asking about extramarital sex in the United States have relied on convenience samples.
Close family (endogamy) are the preferred marriage partners to keep property within the group.
social monogamy, can provide a reproductive advantage over social polygyny, but this still allows for serial monogamy and extra-pair copulations.
Halakha of the Dead Sea Sect saw prohibition of polygamy as coming from the Pentateuch (Damascus Document 4:20–5:5, one of the Dead Sea Scrolls).
The incidence of genetic monogamy may be estimated from rates of extrapair paternity.
Furthermore, human intelligence and material culture allows for better adaptation to different and rougher ecological areas, thus reducing the causation and even correlation of monogamous marriage and extreme climates.
The United Nations joined these efforts in 1979 when the General Assembly adopted the  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, an international bill of rights for women that over 180 nations have agreed to implement.
These findings support the claim that the reported amount of extramarital sex differs across cultures and across genders.
These studies report that about 12–26% of married women and 15–43% of married men engage in extramarital sex.
Laws prohibiting polygyny were adopted in 1880 in Japan, 1953 in China, 1955 in India and 1963 in Nepal.
But couples who choose to cohabit without getting married can also be socially monogamous.
For example, anthropologist Jack Goody's comparative study utilizing the Ethnographic Atlas demonstrated that monogamy is part of a cultural complex found in the broad swath of Eurasian societies from Japan to Ireland that practice social monogamy, sexual monogamy and dowry (i.e.
This pattern of serial monogamy is common among people in Western cultures.
Accordingly, males developed many behavior strategies that allow them to acquire more reproductively capable sexual partners.
Instruction of Ptahhotep or Instruction of Any, support fidelity to monogamous marriage life, calling the wife a ''Lady of the house''.
Book of Wisdom, which provides a picture of the society, Sirach, Proverbs, Qohelet portray a woman in a strictly monogamous family (cf.
A review paper surveying 67 other studies of nonpaternity reporting rates of nonpaternity in different societies ranging from 0.4% to over 50% was recently published by Kermyt G. Anderson.
One theory is that this pattern pacifies the elite men and equalizes reproductive success.
While female effective population size (the number of individuals successfully producing offspring thus contributing to the gene pool), as indicated by mitochondrial-DNA evidence, increased around the time of human (not hominid) expansion out of Africa about 80,000–100,000 years ago, male effective population size, as indicated by Y-chromosome evidence, did not increase until the advent of agriculture 18,000 years ago.
Evolutionary theory predicts that males would be apt to seek more mating partners than females because they obtain higher reproductive benefits from such a strategy.
Although an Egyptian man was free to marry several women at a time, and some wealthy men from Old and Middle Kingdoms did have more than one wife, monogamy was the norm.
Polygamy is interpreted as inconsistent with Article 16 when it extends the right of multiple spouses to men but not to women.
This discordantly low level of genetic monogamy has been a surprise to biologists and zoologists, as social monogamy can no longer be assumed to determine how genes are distributed in a species.
With arranged marriages prohibited, young women could choose their own marriage partners, share the financial cost of setting up a new household, and have equal status in household and family decision-making.
The rates varied from 0.8% to 30% in these studies, with a median rate of 3.7% extrapair paternity.
Paternal care should be particularly important in humans due to the extra nutritional requirement of having larger brains and the lengthier developmental period.
However, some Jews continued to practice bigamy (e.g.
They postulate the following four aspects of monogamy:
According to B. S. Low, culture would appear to have a much larger impact on monogamy in humans than the biological forces that are important for non-human animals.
A separate review of 17 studies by Bellis, Hughes, Hughes, and Ashton found slightly higher rates of extrapair paternity.
Serial monogamy may also refer to sequential sexual relationships, irrespective of marital status.
Goody demonstrates a statistical correlation between this cultural complex and the development of intensive plough agriculture in those areas.
However, the Communist revolution in China changed these ideas as the communist revolutionaries in China viewed monogamy as a means of giving women and men equal rights in marriage.
As against Betzig's contention that monogamy evolved as a result of Christian socio-economic influence in the West, monogamy appeared widespread in the ancient Middle East much earlier.
An example of this was seen when scientists studied red winged blackbirds.
Psychological studies of social monogamy have relied heavily on observations of married couples.
However, scientific analyses can test for paternity, for example by DNA paternity testing or by fluorescent pigment powder tracing of females to track physical contact.
The amount of extramarital sex by men is described as "universal" in 6 cultures, "moderate" in 29 cultures, "occasional" in 6 cultures, and "uncommon" in 10 cultures.
In many western countries divorce rates approach 50%.
Researchers have observed a mixed mating system of monogamy and polygyny in the European pied flycatcher.
Some sages condemned marriage to two wives even for the purpose of procreation (Ketubot 62b).
This difference in neuropeptide effect is attributed to the location, density, and distribution of OT and AVP receptors.
A pair of humans may remain sexually exclusive, or monogamous, until the relationship has ended and then each may go on to form a new exclusive pairing with a different partner.
"His wife X, his beloved" is the standard phrase identifying wives in tomb inscriptions.
Many reports of extrapair paternity are little more than quotes based on hearsay, anecdotes, and unpublished findings.
This means that before 18,000 years ago, many females would be reproducing with the same few males.
Also prophets have in front of their eyes monogamous marriage as an image of the relationship of God and Israel.
It should not be surprising, therefore, that surveys of extramarital sex in the United States have produced widely differing results.
The founders of Communism believed monogamy oppressed women and had no place in communist society.
Some marriage documents explicitly expressed a desire for the marriage to remain monogamous.
Study shows that ancient Middle East societies, though not strictly monogamous, were practically (at least on commoners' level) monogamous.
'''Monogamy''' ( ) is a form of relationship in which an individual has only one partner during his or her lifetime or at any one time (serial monogamy), as compared to polygyny, polyandry, or polyamory.
Roland de Vaux states that "it is clear that the most common form of marriage in Israel was monogamy".
This is called extra-pair copulation.
Furthermore, the laws of the Christian Church, in particular, were important in the evolution of social monogamy in humans.
The issue of extramarital sex has been examined frequently in the United States.
It forbade any 'arbitrary and compulsory' form of marriage that would be based on the superiority of men and would ignore women’s interests.
Serial monogamy has always been closely linked to divorce practices.
By doing so, he clearly refers to the relevant words of Genesis, which his interlocutors also know by heart.
It abolished the begetting of male offspring as the principal purpose of marriage and weakened kinship ties which reduced the pressure on women to bear many children, especially sons.
These cultural processes may have nothing to do with relative reproductive success.
Jesus Christ contended that core problem was faithfulness to the Torah.
In any species, there are three main aspects that combine to promote a monogamous mating system: paternal care, resource access, and mate-choice; however, in humans, the main theoretical sources of monogamy are paternal care and extreme ecological stresses.
Due to the extreme sociality and increased intelligence of humans, ''H.
The wisdom books e.g.
Data from studies using the ''Microtis ochrogaster'' or prairie vole indicate that the neuroendocrine hormones, oxytocin (in female prairie voles) and vasopressin (in male prairie voles) play a central role in the development of affiliative connections during mating.
Monogamous marriage is normative and is legally enforced in most of the world's highly developed countries.
The only way to get scientifically reliable estimates of extramarital sex is to use nationally representative samples.
The instruction texts belonging to wisdom literature, e.g.
This finding highlights the role of genetic evolution in altering the neuroanatomical distribution of receptors, resulting in certain neural circuits becoming sensitive to changes in neuropeptides.
Social monogamy, sexual monogamy, and genetic monogamy can occur in different combinations.
Offspring are far more successful when both the male and the female members of the social pair contribute food resources.
Many animals that form pairs to mate and raise offspring regularly engage in sexual activities with partners other than their primary mate.
While the protocol does not suggest making polygamous marriage illegal, article 6 of the protocol states that "monogamy is encouraged as the preferred form of marriage and that the rights of women in marriage and family, including in polygamous marital relationships are promoted and protected."
A range of 1.8% to 3.7% extrapair paternity implies a range of 96% to 98% genetic monogamy.
Article 16 of the Convention requires nations to give women and men equal rights in marriage.
Ho 2:4f; Jer 2:2; Is 50:1; 54:6-7; 62:4-5; Ez 16).
Whenever procedures for obtaining divorce have been simple and easy, serial monogamy has been found.
The newly formed Communist government established monogamy as the only legal form of marriage.
A synod convened by Gershom ben Judah around 1000 CE banned polygamy among Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jews.
Pedigree errors are a well-known source of error in medical studies.
Birds, which are notable for a high incidence of social monogamy, do not have estrus.
Yet, the incidence of sexual monogamy varies across cultures.
However, Gordon, Green and Richmond claim that in examining postcranial remains, ''A.
In order "to build a house" a man was supposed to marry one woman and if she did not provide him with offspring, he could take a second wife.
Research by Colleen Hoffon of 566 homosexual male couples from the San Francisco Bay Area found that 45% had monogamous relationships.
Hetereosexual pairs of fish belonging to the genus Elacatinus remain closely associated during both reproductive and non-reproductive periods, and often reside in same cleaning station to serve client fish.
Elacatinus, also widely known as neon gobies, also exhibit social monogamy.
People in some cultures are more sexually monogamous than people in other cultures.
Biologists, biological anthropologists, and behavioral ecologists often use the term monogamy in the sense of sexual, if not genetic, monogamy.
Paleoanthropology and genetic studies offer two perspectives on when monogamy evolved in the human species: paleoanthropologists offer tentative evidence that monogamy may have evolved very early in human history whereas genetic studies show that monogamy evolved much more recently, less than 10,000 to 20,000 years ago.
Malurus splendens and Malurus cyaneus where more than 65 percent of chicks are fathered by males outside the supposed breeding pair.
The United Nations has established the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) to monitor the progress of nations implementing the Convention.
Specifically, over 80% of the homosexuals surveyed expected to be in a monogamous relationship after age 30.
The African Union has adopted the ''Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa'' (the Maputo Protocol).
The North American microtine rodent's (vole) complex social structure and social behavior has provided unique opportunities to study the underlying neural bases for monogamy and social attachment.
Examples of these documents were found in Elephantine.
Therefore, in order to monopolize periods of more than one female’s reproductive life span without being considered polygamous and thus breaking social norms of a monogamous society, males try to remarry women younger than themselves.
Pr 5:15-19; Qo 9:9; Si 26:1-4 and eulogy of perfect wife, Proverbs 31:10-31).
It is important to have a clear understanding of the nomenclature of monogamy because scientists use the term monogamy for different relationships.
The ancient Greeks and Romans were monogamous in the sense that men were not allowed to have more than one wife or to cohabit with concubines during marriage.
Western European societies established monogamy as their marital norm.
Whatever makes a pair of animals socially monogamous does not necessarily make them sexually or genetically monogamous.
A further study drawing on the Ethnographic Atlas showed a statistical correlation between increasing size of the society, the belief in "high gods" to support human morality, and monogamy.
"The 1950 Marriage Law called for sweeping changes in many areas of family life.
Jesus avoids entangling himself in juridical or casuistic controversies; instead, he appeals twice to the "beginning".
A convenience sample means surveys are given to whoever happens to be easily available (e.g., volunteer college students or volunteer magazine readers).
Roman customs, which prohibited polygamy, may have enhanced such an attitude -  especially after 212 AD, when all the Jews became Roman citizens.
Those who remarry do so on average 3 times.
A study done in 1994 found a significant difference between ages of remarried men and women because the men have a longer reproductive window.
