In 2002, Montreal was the fourth-largest centre in North America in terms of aerospace jobs.
The Greater Montreal Area is predominantly Roman Catholic; however, weekly attendance in Quebec is among the lowest in Canada.
For over a century and a half, Montreal was the industrial and financial centre of Canada.
The Montreal games of the 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup and 2014 FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup were held at Olympic Stadium, and the venue hosted Montreal games in the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup.
In 2014, Metropolitan Montreal was responsible for C$118.7 billion of Quebec's C$340.7 billion GDP.
The city was the home of the minor-league Montreal Royals of the International League until 1960.
The South West borough was home to much of the city's industry during the late 19th and early-to-mid 20th century.
+ Active professional sports teams in Montreal
By 1643, Ville-Marie had already been attacked by Iroquois raids.
The Metro system has long had a station on the South Shore in Longueuil, and in 2007 was extended to the city of Laval, north of Montreal, with three new stations.
Montreal is the second-largest primarily French-speaking city in the world, after Paris.
This was not the first water system of its type in Montreal as there had been one in private ownership since 1801.
The colonists left France in 1641 for Quebec, and arrived on the island the following year.
At the confluence of ''Petite Riviere'' and St. Lawrence River, it is where present-day Pointe-à-Callière stands.
All three are now Mohawk reserves in Canada.
Within a few hundred years, they had built fortified villages.
Though most pavilions were temporary structures, several have become landmarks, including Buckminster Fuller's geodesic dome U.S.&nbsp;Pavilion, now the Montreal Biosphere, and Moshe Safdie's striking Habitat&nbsp;67 apartment complex.
Some 26% of the population of Montreal and 16.5% that of Greater Montreal, are members of a visible minority (non-white) group, up from 5.2% in 1981.
The anglophone enclaves of Westmount, Montreal West, Hampstead, Côte Saint-Luc, the Town of Mount Royal and the francophone enclave Montreal East are all surrounded by Montreal.
The Canadiens have played at the Bell Centre since 1996.
The Canadiens' most recent Stanley Cup victory came in 1993.
The city has four Roman Catholic basilicas: Mary, Queen of the World Cathedral, the aforementioned Notre-Dame Basilica, St Patrick's Basilica, and Saint Joseph's Oratory.
The men's tournament is a Masters 1000 event on the ATP Tour, and the women's tournament is a Premier tournament on the WTA Tour.
The most popular sport is ice hockey.
The subway and bus system are operated by the Société de transport de Montréal (STM).
In 2006 Montreal was named a UNESCO City of Design, only one of three design capitals of the world (the others being Berlin and Buenos Aires).
The Metro was inaugurated in 1966 and has 68 stations on four lines.
The Alouettes has had two periods on hiatus.
Each station was designed by different architects with individual themes and features original artwork, and the trains run on rubber tires, making the system quieter than most.
Many of these Autoroutes are frequently congested at rush hour.
Montreal's many cultural communities have given it a distinct local culture.
Coderre was sworn in on November 14.
The Circuit Gilles Villeneuve also hosted a round of the Champ Car World Series from 2002–2007, and was home to the NAPA Auto Parts 200, a NASCAR Nationwide Series race, and the Montréal 200, a Grand Am Rolex Sports Car Series race.
They had a mission village, known as Kahnewake, south of the St Lawrence River.
In the spring of 1651, the Iroquois attacks became so frequent and so violent that Ville Marie thought its end had come.
Two separate institutions are affiliated to the university: the ''École Polytechnique de Montréal'' (School of Engineering) and ''HEC Montréal'' (School of Business).
However, in recent years, the government has acknowledged this problem and is working on long-term solutions to alleviate the congestion.
Late season and playoff games are played at the much larger, enclosed Olympic Stadium, which also played host to the 2008 Grey Cup.
The stadium cost $1.5 billion; with interest that figure ballooned to nearly $3 billion, and was only paid off in December 2006.
The borough  included Goose Village and is home to the traditionally working-class Irish neighbourhoods of Griffintown and Point Saint Charles as well as the low-income neighbourhoods of Saint Henri and Little Burgundy.
Ville Marie became a centre for the fur trade and a base for further  exploration.
Being the location of the headquarters of the International Civil Aviation Organization, Montreal is one of three North American cities home to organizations of the United Nations (along with Washington, D.C. and New York) and also has the second-highest number of consulates in the continent.
The fountainiers would open and close water valves outside of buildings, as directed, all over the city.
The width of the Saint Lawrence River has made the construction of fixed links to the south shore expensive and difficult.
The studio will create 300 jobs.
It is also home to one of the world's largest cultural enterprises, the Cirque du Soleil.
During the second one, the Montreal Machine played in the World League of American Football in 1991 and 1992.
The city is home to head offices of two smaller banks, National Bank of Canada and Laurentian Bank of Canada.
Montreal is the site of a high-profile auto racing event each year: the Canadian Grand Prix of Formula One (F1) racing.
'''Montreal''' (; French: '''Montréal''', ) is the most populous city in Quebec and the second most populous municipality in Canada.
The leaders of Montreal's business community had started to build their homes in the Golden Square Mile  (~) from about 1850.
In terms of additional languages spoken, a unique feature of Montreal among Canadian cities, noted by Statistics Canada, is the working knowledge of both French and English possessed by most of its residents.
If the effort had failed, Montreal was to be abandoned and the survivors re-located downriver to Quebec City.
As one of the most important ports in Canada, it remains a trans-shipment point for grain, sugar, petroleum products, machinery, and consumer goods.
* ''Université de Montréal'' (UdeM) is the second largest research university in Canada and ranked as one of the top universities in Canada.
By 1652, the colony at Montreal had been so reduced that he was forced to return to France to raise 100 volunteers to go with him to the colony the following year.
In the larger Montreal Census Metropolitan Area, 67.9% of the population speaks French at home, compared to 16.5% who speak English.
Archeologists have found evidence of their habitation there and at other locations in the valley since at least the 14th&nbsp;century.
However, Toronto's growth had begun challenging Montreal's status as the economic capital of Canada.
The demerger took place on January 1, 2006, leaving 15 municipalities on the island, including Montreal.
Other popular festivals include the Just for Laughs (largest comedy festival in the world), Montreal World Film Festival, Les FrancoFolies de Montréal, Nuits d'Afrique, Pop Montreal, Divers/Cité, Fierté Montréal and the Montreal Fireworks Festival.
In 1745 several Mohawk families moved upriver to create another settlement, known as Akwesasne.
Historically the commercial capital of Canada, it was surpassed in population and economic strength by Toronto in the 1970s.
Political and economic uncertainties led many to leave Montreal and the province of Quebec.
STM bus routes serve 1,347,900 passengers on an average weekday in 2010.
* No religion: 18.14%
Currently, the city hosts the Canadian Grand Prix of Formula One, the Montreal International Jazz Festival and the Just for Laughs festival.
During the 1980s and early 1990s, Montreal experienced a slower rate of economic growth than many other major Canadian cities.
Montreal was the official residence of the Luxembourg royal family in exile during World War II.
This distinguished title recognizes Montreal's design community.
Montreal has the second-largest economy of Canadian cities based on GDP and the largest in Quebec.
One such example is the extension of Quebec Autoroute 30 on Montreal's south shore, which will serve as a bypass.
In Point St. Charles visitors can see the Maison Saint-Gabriel, which can trace its history back to 1698.
Although most are clustered around the Old Montreal area, such as the Sulpician Seminary adjacent to Notre Dame Basilica that dates back to 1687, and Chateau Ramezay, which was built in 1705, you can find important examples of early colonial architecture dotted throughout the city.
CEGEPs offer pre-university (2-years) and technical (3-years) programs.
The Montreal Alouettes of the Canadian Football League (CFL) play at Molson Stadium on the campus of McGill University for their regular-season games.
(See Conscription Crisis of 1944.)
Industries include aerospace, electronic goods, pharmaceuticals, printed goods, software engineering, telecommunications, textile and apparel manufacturing, tobacco, petrochemicals, and transportation.
Montreal also hosted the first ever World Outgames in the summer of 2006, attracting over 16,000 participants engaged in 35 sporting activities.
Another distinctive characteristic of cultural life is the animation of its downtown, particularly during summer, prompted by cultural and social events, particularly festivals.
Montreal was the host of the 1976 Summer Olympic Games.
There are many historic buildings in Old Montreal in their original form: Notre Dame of Montreal Basilica, Bonsecours Market, and the impressive 19th‑century headquarters of all major Canadian banks on St. James Street (French: Rue Saint Jacques).
It also provides adapted transport and wheelchair-accessible buses.
During World War&nbsp;II, Mayor Camillien Houde protested against conscription and urged Montrealers to disobey the federal government's registry of all men and women.
With 60.8% of its passengers being on non domestic flights it has the largest percentage of international flights of any Canadian airport.
The park hosts athletic, tourist and cultural activities.
Montreal has four daily newspapers, the English-language ''Montreal Gazette'' and the French-language ''La Presse'', ''Le Journal de Montréal'', and ''Le Devoir''.
The religious breakdown of the population of Montreal is:
On May 17, 1642, Ville-Marie was founded on the southern shore of Montreal island, with Maisonneuve as its first governor.
There are 50 National Historic Sites of Canada, more than any other city.
The city has also produced much talent in the fields of visual arts, theatre, music, and dance.
The 21st century has brought with it a revival of the city's economic and cultural landscape.
Before these 100 arrived in the fall of 1653, the population of Montreal was barely 50 people.
They joined North America's biggest soccer league, Major League Soccer in 2012.
The city is today an important centre of commerce, finance, industry, technology, culture, world affairs and is the headquarters of the Montreal Exchange.
CN's flagship train, the ''Super Continental'', ran daily from Central Station to Vancouver, but after it was transferred to Via it was eliminated in 1990.
Prior to that they played at the Montreal Forum.
The port of Montreal lies at one end of the Saint Lawrence Seaway, the river gateway that stretches from the Great Lakes to the Atlantic.
Thunderstorms are common in the period beginning in late spring through summer to early fall; additionally, tropical storms or their remnants can cause heavy rains and gales.
De-merged municipalities remain affiliated with the city through an agglomeration council that collects taxes from them to pay for numerous shared services.
More than 900,000 people are buried there.
There was great resistance from the suburbs to the merger, with the perception being that it was forced on the mostly English suburbs by the Parti Québécois.
It carried an average of 79,000 daily passengers in 2014, making it the seventh busiest in North America following New York, Chicago, Toronto, Boston, Philadelphia, and Mexico City.
Islam is the largest non-Christian religious group, with 154,540 members, the second-largest concentration of Muslims in Canada at 9.6%.
The Plateau Mount Royal borough was a working class francophone area.
Montreal was incorporated as a city in 1832.
Reporting directly to the council, the executive committee exercises decision-making powers similar to those of the cabinet in a parliamentary system and is responsible for preparing various documents including budgets and by-laws, submitted to the council for approval.
People of European ethnicities formed the largest cluster of ethnic groups.
Gérald Tremblay, who is a member of the ''Union Montreal'' party, resigned as mayor on November 5, 2012.
Visible minorities are defined by the Canadian Employment Equity Act as "persons, other than Aboriginals, who are non-white in colour".
Unemployment remained high in the city, and was exacerbated by the Stock Market Crash of 1929 and the Great Depression.
It has a tradition of producing both jazz and rock music.
Public local transport is served by a network of buses, subways, and commuter trains that extend across and off the island.
In 1901 the Mount Royal Cemetery Company established the first crematorium in Canada.
Many foreign subsidiaries operating in the financial sector also have offices in Montreal, including HSBC, Aon, Société Générale, BNP Paribas and AXA.
As expected, this move proved unpopular and several mergers were later rescinded.
All intercity trains and most commuter trains operate out of Central Station.
Montreal averages 2,050 hours of sunshine annually, with summer being the sunniest season, though slightly wetter than the others in terms of total precipitation—mostly from thunderstorms.
Airlines serving Trudeau offer flights to Europe, the United States, Western Asia, the Middle East, Central America, the Caribbean, Africa, Mexico and other destinations within Canada and it contains the largest duty-free shop in North America.
The Oratory is the largest church in Canada, with the second largest copper dome in the world, after Saint Peter's Basilica in Rome.
The president of the CMM is the mayor of Montreal.
Notre Dame des Neiges Cemetery is much larger, predominantly French-Canadian and officially Catholic.
All meetings include a public question period.
In 2009, the race was dropped from the Formula One calendar, to the chagrin of some fans, but the Canadian Grand Prix returned to the Formula 1 calendar in 2010.
They also review the annual budget forecasts for departments under their jurisdiction.
Other notable neighbourhoods include the multicultural areas of Notre-Dame-de-Grâce and Côte-des-Neiges in the Côte-des-Neiges–Notre-Dame-de-Grace borough, and Little Italy in the borough of Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie and Hochelaga-Maisonneuve, home of the Olympic Stadium in the borough of Mercier–Hochelaga-Maisonneuve.
The Government, part of the Allied forces, was furious over Houde's stand and held him at a prison camp until 1944.
The service sector is also strong and includes civil, mechanical and process engineering, finance, higher education, and research and development.
There are presently four road bridges (including two of the country's busiest) along with one bridge-tunnel, two railway bridges, and a Metro line.
Relatively new to the video game industry, it will be Warner Bros. first studio opened, not purchased, and will develop games for such Warner Bros. franchises as Batman and other games from their DC Comics portfolio.
In time this development led to the end of the city's economic dominance as businesses moved to other areas.
Montreal annexed 27 other cities, towns, and villages beginning with Hochelaga in 1883 with the last prior to 2002 being Pointe-aux-Trembles in 1982.
Mount Royal Cemetery is a  terraced cemetery on the north slope of Mount Royal in the borough of Outremont.
A public notice of meeting is published in both French and English daily newspapers at least seven days before each meeting.
Percival Molson Memorial StadiumOlympic Stadium
As Mark Twain noted, "This is the first time I was ever in a city where you couldn't throw a brick without breaking a church window."
It was converted to fibre optic light in 1992.
Uniprix Stadium, built in 1993 on the site of Jarry Park, is used for the Rogers Cup men's and women's tennis tournaments.
Like many major cities, Montreal has a problem with vehicular traffic congestion.
The  network, consisting of four branches and 24 stations, is planned to be completed by late 2020 and will be the third largest automated rapid transit network, after the Dubai Metro and the Vancouver Skytrain.
Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR), headquartered in Calgary, Alberta, was founded here in 1881.
Standing committees are the prime instruments for public consultation.
Other neighbourhoods of interest in the borough include the affluent Golden Square Mile neighbourhood at the foot of Mount Royal and the Shaughnessy Village/Concordia U area home to thousands of students at Concordia University.
The city is home to the Montreal Exchange, the oldest stock exchange in Canada and the only financial derivatives exchange in the country.
By 1951, Montreal's population had surpassed one million.
Montreal-based VIA Rail provides rail service to other cities in Canada, particularly to Quebec City and Toronto along the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor.
It includes a veterans section with several soldiers who were awarded the British Empire's highest military honour, the Victoria Cross.
In Montreal, seventeen CEGEPs offer courses in French and five in English.
This legacy has left a variety of buildings including factories, elevators, warehouses, mills, and refineries, that today provide an invaluable insight into the city's history, especially in the downtown area and the Old Port area.
The city's largest festival is the Montreal International Jazz Festival, which is the largest jazz festival in the world.
Between high school (which ends at grade 11) and university students must go through an additional school called CEGEP.
In 2009, Montreal was named North America's leading host city for international association events, according to the 2009 preliminary rankings of the International Congress and Convention Association (ICCA).
Given its eclectic architecture and broad availability of film services and crew members, Montreal is a popular filming location for feature-length films, and sometimes stands in for European locations.
The largest neighbourhood is the Plateau (not to be confused with the whole borough), which is undergoing considerable gentrification, and a 2001 study deemed it as Canada's most creative neighbourhood because artists comprise 8% of its labour force.
CPR connects at Montreal with the Port of Montreal, the Delaware and Hudson Railway to New York, the Quebec Gatineau Railway to Quebec City and Buckingham, the Montreal, Maine and Atlantic Railway to Halifax, and CN Rail.
Annual precipitation is around , including an average of about  of snowfall, which occurs from November through March.
Each standing committee is made up of seven to nine members, including a chairman and a vice-chairman.
The population is expected to drop as any person who owns a cat or dog will be shot on sight.
Early and late season snow storms can occur in November and March, and more rarely in April.
Protestants which include Anglican Church in Canada, United Church of Canada, Lutheran, owing to British and German immigration, and other denominations number 5.90%, with a further 3.7% consisting mostly of Orthodox Christians, fuelled by a large Greek population.
Since 2005 the city has been home for the International Council of Graphic Design Associations (Icograda); the International Design Alliance (IDA).
For this reason, Montreal is the railway hub of Canada and has always been an extremely important rail city; it is home to the headquarters of the Canadian National Railway, and was home to the headquarters of the Canadian Pacific Railway until 1995.
Nicknamed '''' (the city of a hundred steeples), Montreal is renowned for its churches.
As a North American city, Montreal shares many cultural characteristics with the rest of the continent.
While both banks moved their headquarters to Toronto, Ontario, their legal corporate offices remain in Montreal.
The Port of Montreal is one of the largest inland ports in the world handling 26 million tonnes of cargo annually.
The island of Montreal is a hub for the Quebec Autoroute system, and is served by Quebec Autoroutes A-10 (known as the Bonaventure Expressway on the island of Montreal), A-15 (aka the Decarie Expressway south of the A-40 and the Laurentian Autoroute to the north of it), A-13 (aka Chomedey Autoroute), A-20, A-25, A-40 (part of the Trans-Canada Highway system, and known as "The Metropolitan" or simply "The Met" in its elevated mid-town section), A-520, and A-720 (aka the Ville-Marie Autoroute).
Place des Arts has the headquarters of one of the world's foremost orchestras, the Montreal Symphony Orchestra.
The agglomeration Montreal is one of the most bilingual cities in Quebec and Canada with 56% of the population able to speak both English and French.
The riverside area adjacent to Old Montreal is known as the Old Port.
Amtrak, the U.S. national passenger rail system, operates its ''Adirondack'' daily to New York.
The city is named after the most prominent geographical feature on the island, a three-head hill called Mount Royal, topped at 232&nbsp;m above sea level.
The men's and women's tournaments alternate between Montreal and Toronto every year.
On his 1616 map, Samuel de Champlain named the island Lille de Villemenon, in honour of the sieur de Villemenon, a French dignitary who was seeking the viceroyship of New France.
The Montreal Impact are the city's professional soccer team.
There are two free French dailies, ''Métro'' and ''24 Heures''.
The 2014 estimate of the population of the metropolitan area of Montreal is 4.1 million.
The corporate headquarters of the Bank of Montreal and Royal Bank of Canada, two of the biggest banks in Canada, were in Montreal.
The city covers most of the Island of Montreal at the confluence of the Saint Lawrence and Ottawa Rivers.
Yet, being at the confluence of the French and the English traditions, Montreal has developed a unique and distinguished cultural face.
It was the first time a Canadian company won this prize.
The Old Port was the site of the  Port of Montreal, but its shipping operations have been moved to a larger site downstream, leaving the former location as a recreational and historical area maintained by Parks Canada.
The far narrower Rivière des Prairies to the city's north, separating Montreal from Laval, is spanned by nine road bridges (seven to the city of Laval and two that span directly to the north shore) and a Metro line.
The McGill Redmen, Concordia Stingers, and Université de Montréal Carabins play in the CIS university football league.
Montreal and the National Basketball Association (NBA) have been in early discussions for an expansion franchise located in the city.
The unique choreography of these troupes has paved the way for the success of the world-renowned Cirque du Soleil.
Montreal was merged with the 27 surrounding municipalities on the Island of Montreal on January 1, 2002, creating a unified city covering the entire island.
The park contains two belvederes, the more prominent of which is the Kondiaronk Belvedere, a semicircular plaza with a chalet, overlooking Downtown Montreal.
This is believed to be due to outmigration, epidemics of European diseases, or intertribal wars.
According to the 2015 Global Liveability Ranking by the Economist Intelligence Unit, Montreal ranked 14th out of 140 cities.
Standard Life, Hydro-Québec, AbitibiBowater, Pratt and Whitney Canada, Molson, Tembec, Canada Steamship Lines, Fednav, Alimentation Couche-Tard, SNC-Lavalin, MEGA Brands, Aeroplan, Agropur, Metro Inc., Laurentian Bank of Canada, National Bank of Canada, Transat A.T., VIA Rail, Novacam Technologies, SOLABS, Dollarama, Rona and the Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec.
A majority of the drinking water was still coming from the city's harbor, which was busy and heavily trafficked leading to the deterioration of the water within.
They played their games at Jarry Park until moving into Olympic Stadium in 1977.
The STM bus network consists of 197 daytime and 20 nighttime routes.
It was formed from the Grand Trunk, Midland and Canadian Northern Railways, and has risen to become CPR's chief rival in freight carriage in Canada.
In terms of mother language (first language learned), the 2006 census reported that in the Greater Montreal Area, 66.5% spoke French as a first language, followed by English at 13.2%, while 0.8% spoke both as a first language.
The largest reported European ethnicities in the 2006 census were French 23%, Italians 10%, Irish 5%, English 4%, Scottish 3%, and Spanish 2%.
The Council consists of 65 members from all boroughs.
In 2012, Montreal was ranked as a Beta+ world city.
The Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec, an instutitonal investor managing assets totalling $248 billion CAD, has its main business office in Montreal.
