Beginning in the mid-1990s, the state also saw an influx of Amish, who relocated to Montana from the increasingly urbanized areas of Ohio and Pennsylvania.
These lands are managed by the state for the benefit of public schools and institutions in the state.
Montana is a relative hub of beer microbrewing, ranking third in the nation in number of craft breweries per capita in 2011.
Nelson Story brought the first Texas Longhorn cattle into the territory in 1866.
Montana's personal income tax contains 7 brackets, with rates ranging from 1 percent to 6.9 percent.
The largest reservoir in the state is Fort Peck Reservoir on the Missouri river, which is contained by the second largest earthen dam and largest hydraulically filled dam in the world.
The health care, service, and government sectors also are significant to the state's economy.
Another 40,000-plus Montanans entered the armed forces in the first year following the declaration of war, and over 57,000 joined up before the war ended.
Approximately 63% of all Native people live off the reservations, concentrated in the larger Montana cities, with the largest concentration of urban Indians in Great Falls.
Various community civic groups also played a role in selecting the state grass and the state gemstones.
Gold output from 1862 through 1876 reached $144 million; silver then became even more important.
James Willard Schultz ("Apikuni") from Browning is most noted for his prolific stories about Blackfeet life and his contributions to the naming of prominent features in Glacier National Park.
The highest observed summer temperature was  at Glendive on July 20, 1893, and Medicine Lake on July 5, 1937.
It is the longest undammed, free-flowing river in the contiguous United States, and drains about a quarter of Montana ().
Areas managed by the National Park Service include:
Montana also has millions of acres open to cross-country skiing on nine of its national forests plus in Glacier National Park.
The largest mining operations were in the city of Butte, which had important silver deposits and gigantic copper deposits.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Montana was 1,032,949 on July 1, 2015, a 4.40% increase since the 2010 United States Census.
The University of Montana "was the first to establish dual admission agreements with all of the tribal colleges and as such it was the first institution in the nation to actively facilitate student transfer from the tribal colleges"
Historically, the state was traversed by the main lines of three east-west transcontinental routes: the Milwaukee Road, the Great Northern, and the Northern Pacific.
Montana contains thousands of named rivers and creeks,  of which are known for "blue-ribbon" trout fishing.
However, in August 2007 Senator Jon Tester made a request to the Navy that a submarine be christened USS ''Montana''.
Cattle ranching has been central to Montana's history and economy since Johnny Grant began wintering cattle in the Deer Lodge Valley in the 1850s and traded cattle fattened in fertile Montana valleys with emigrants on the Oregon Trail.
The first legislature authorized counties to levy taxes for schools, which set the foundations for public schooling.
Many people left, and half the banks in the state went bankrupt as a result of providing mortgages that could not be repaid.
Other major mountain ranges west of the Divide include the Cabinet Mountains, the Anaconda Range, the Missions, the Garnet Range, Sapphire Mountains, and Flint Creek Range.
Montana is ranked 4th in size, but 44th in population and 48th in population density of the 50 United States.
Other counties with large Native American populations include Blaine, Cascade, Hill, Missoula, and Yellowstone counties.
East of the divide the Missouri River, which is formed by the confluence of the Jefferson, Madison and Gallatin rivers near Three Forks, flows due north through the west-central part of the state to Great Falls.
Wheeler was brought before the Council of Defense, though he avoided formal proceedings, and a District Court judge from Forsyth was impeached.
Percentage of population(as of 2000)
Montana's only north-south Interstate Highway is Interstate 15.
The climate has become warmer in Montana and continues to do so.
Many well-known artists, photographers and authors have documented the land, culture and people of Montana in the last 100 years.
Billings (4,619), Great Falls (2,942), Missoula (1,838), Havre (1,210), and Polson (706) have the most Native Americans living there.
Montana is one of only two continental US states (along with Colorado) which is antipodal to land.
However, at the state level, the pattern of split ticket voting and divided government holds.
Granville Stuart, Samuel Hauser and Andrew J. Davis started a major open range cattle operation in Fergus County in 1879.
+ Symbols of Montana
Large-scale battles revolved around the giant Anaconda Copper company, based in Butte and controlled by Rockefeller interests, until it closed in the 1970s.
Snowfall has been recorded in all months of the year in the more mountainous areas of central and western Montana, though it is rare in July and August.
Yellowstone National Park also allows cross-country skiing.
Painter and sculptor Charles Marion Russell, known as "the cowboy artist" created more than 2,000 paintings of cowboys, Native Americans, and landscapes set in the Western United States and in Alberta, Canada.
The area east of the divide in the north-central portion of the state is known for the Missouri Breaks and other significant rock formations.
* Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area near Fort Smith
The first school year was scheduled to begin in January 1866, but severe weather postponed its opening until March.
Although the state ranked 45th in population (according to the 2010 U.S. Census), it ranked 19th in total native people population.
* Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument near Crow Agency
* Yellowstone National Park
These three communities are considered the centers of Montana's three Metropolitan Statistical Areas.
In 1870, the non-Indian population of Montana Territory was 20,595.
In the wake of the legislative action in 1918, emotions rose.
There were no textbooks used in the school.
Cox complained that the name was a misnomer given that most of the territory was not mountainous and that a Native American name would be more appropriate than a Spanish one.
In July 1889, Montanans convened their third constitutional convention and produced a constitution accepted by the people and the federal government.
There are no major league sports franchises in Montana due to the state's relatively small and dispersed population, but a number of minor league teams play in the state.
While the largest European-American population in Montana overall is German, pockets of significant Scandinavian ancestry are prevalent in some of the farming-dominated northern and eastern prairie regions, parallel to nearby regions of North Dakota and Minnesota.
These clashes, in part, contributed to the Panic of 1873, a financial crisis that delayed construction of the railroad into Montana.
Average annual precipitation is , but great variations are seen.
Many individuals claiming conscientious objector status from throughout the U.S. were sent to Montana during the war as smokejumpers and for other forest fire-fighting duties.
Other major north-south highways include U.S.
Subsequent to and particularly in the decades following the Lewis and Clark Expedition, American, British and French traders operated a fur trade, typically working with indigenous peoples, in both eastern and western portions of what would become Montana.
Eastern Montana comprises plains and badlands, broken by hills and isolated mountain ranges, and has a semi-arid, continental climate (Köppen climate classification ''BSk'').
Montana's largest circulating daily city newspapers are the ''Billings Gazette'' (circulation 39,405), ''Great Falls Tribune'' (26,733), and ''Missoulian'' (25,439).
The Kerguelen Islands are antipodal to the Montana–Saskatchewan–Alberta border.
Until 1959, the company owned five of the state's six largest newspapers.
Between many mountain ranges are rich river valleys.
Massive debt was one.
However, public opinion grew increasingly negative toward them in the 1890s and nearly half of the state's Asian population left the state by 1900.
The isolated island ranges east of the Divide include the Bear Paw Mountains, Bull Mountains, Castle Mountains, Crazy Mountains, Highwood Mountains, Judith Mountains, Little Belt Mountains, Little Rocky Mountains, the Pryor Mountains, Snowy Mountains, Sweet Grass Hills, and—in the southeastern corner of the state near Ekalaka—the Long Pines.
These steady  (or more) winds can suddenly warm parts of Montana, especially areas just to the east of the mountains, where temperatures sometimes rise up to  for periods of ten days or longer.
It is one of five states to have no sales tax.
A 1974 state severance tax on coal (which varied from 20 to 30 percent) was upheld by the Supreme Court of the United States in ''Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana'', 453 U.S. 609 (1981).
Many Montana cities set heat records during July 2007, the hottest month ever recorded in Montana.
The Montana Territorial Legislative Assembly had its inaugural meeting in 1864.
As a result, farm sizes increased while the number of farms decreased
South Dakota passed similar legislation in 2007, and Wisconsin was working to strengthen its own program based on this model - and the current practices of Montana's schools.
The Kootenai River in northwest Montana is another major tributary of the Columbia.
There are significant industries for lumber and mineral extraction; the state's resources include gold, coal, silver, talc, and vermiculite.
Montana has a  border with three Canadian provinces: British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan, the only state to do so.
The northern section of the Divide, where the mountains give way rapidly to prairie, is part of the Rocky Mountain Front.
The name was successfully changed by Representatives Henry Wilson (Massachusetts) and Benjamin F. Harding (Oregon), who complained that Montana had "no meaning".
Millions of tourists annually visit Glacier National Park, the Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument, and Yellowstone National Park.
In the post-World War II Cold War era, Montana became host to U.S. Air Force Military Air Transport Service (1947) for airlift training in C-54 Skymasters and eventually, in 1953 Strategic Air Command air and missile forces were based at Malmstrom Air Force Base in Great Falls.
The period has been dubbed "Montana's Agony" by some historians due to the suppression of civil liberties that occurred.
The Anaconda Copper Company, which was at its historic peak of copper production, was an extremely powerful force in Montana, but also faced criticism and opposition from socialist newspapers and unions struggling to make gains for their members.
Montana is one of only three states to have a "state ballad", "Montana Melody", chosen by the legislature in 1983.
A random draw grants a limited number of permits for moose, mountain goats and bighorn sheep.
By 1880, there were farms in the more verdant valleys of central and western Montana, but few on the eastern plains.
In late 1962 missiles assigned to the 341st Strategic Missile Wing would play a major role in the Cuban Missile Crisis.
With the help of an assistant teacher, Mrs. Farley, Raymond was responsible for teaching 50 to 60 students each day out of the 81 students enrolled at the school.
Eight smaller communities have airports designated for commercial service under the Essential Air Service program.
The first operational missiles were in-place and ready in early 1962.
Trapping of assorted fur bearing animals is allowed in certain seasons and many opportunities exist for migratory waterfowl and upland bird hunting.
The name Montana was added to a bill by the United States House Committee on Territories, which was chaired at the time by Rep. James Ashley of Ohio, for the territory that would become Idaho Territory.
Little's murder and the strikes that followed resulted in the National Guard being sent to Butte to restore order.
In 1940, Jeannette Rankin was again elected to Congress.
The first territorial governor was Sidney Edgerton.
According to a study done for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency by the Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Science, portions of Montana will experience a 200-percent increase in area burned by wildfires, and an 80-percent increase in related air pollution.
Air bases were built in Great Falls, Lewistown, Cut Bank and Glasgow, some of which were used as staging areas to prepare planes to be sent to allied forces in the Soviet Union.
Extremely hot weather is less common above .
Ponderosa pine (''Pinus ponderosa'')
Madison County was the first to take advantage of the newly authorized taxes and it formed fhe first public school in Virginia City in 1886.
According to the 2010 U.S. Census, the population of Montana's seven most populous cities, in rank order, are Billings, Missoula, Great Falls, Bozeman, Butte, Helena and Kalispell.
With a total area of , Montana is slightly larger than Japan.
where two continental divides intersect).
It mandates that all schools teach American Indian history, culture, and heritage from preschool through college.
Other languages spoken in Montana (as of 2013) include Assiniboine (about 150 speakers in the Montana and Canada), Blackfoot (about 100 speakers), Cheyenne (about 1,700 speakers), Plains Cree (about 100 speakers), Crow (about 3,000 speakers), Dakota (about 18,800 speakers in Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, and South Dakota), German Hutterite (about 5,600 speakers), Gros Ventre (about 10 speakers), Kalispel-Pend d'Oreille (about 64 speakers), Kutenai (about 6 speakers), and Lakota (about 6,000 speakers in Minnesota, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota).
Montana is home to a diverse array of fauna that includes 14 amphibian, 90 fish, 117 mammal, 20 reptile and 427 bird species.
For political reasons, Congress did not approve Montana statehood until 1889.
These numbers constituted about 10 percent of the state's total population, and Montana again contributed one of the highest numbers of soldiers per capita of any state.
These included a Native American language (64 percent), German (4 percent), Spanish (3 percent), Russian (1 percent), and Chinese (less than 0.5 percent).
This shift continued with the reapportionment of the state's legislative districts that took effect in 1994, when the Republican Party took control of both chambers of the state legislature, consolidating a Republican party dominance that lasted until the 2004 reapportionment produced more swing districts and a brief period of Democratic legislative majorities in the mid-2000s.
The Absaroka and Beartooth ranges in the south-central part of the state are technically part of the Central Rocky Mountains.
There have also been long-term shifts of party control.
It also borders North Dakota and South Dakota to the east, Wyoming to the south, and Idaho to the west and southwest.
However, farmers faced a number of problems.
It is the only state in the U.S. with such a constitutional mandate.
East and north of this transition zone are the expansive and sparsely populated Northern Plains, with tableland prairies, smaller island mountain ranges, and badlands.
Montana's Hispanic population is concentrated around the Billings area in south-central Montana, where many of Montana's Mexican-Americans have been in the state for generations.
During the first decade of the new century, growth was mainly concentrated in Montana's seven largest counties, with the highest percentage growth in Gallatin County, which saw a 32 percent increase in its population from 2000-2010.
'''Montana'''  is a state in the Western region of the United States.
Montana RailLink, a privately held Class II railroad, operates former Northern Pacific trackage in western Montana.
In 1916, the Stock-Raising Homestead Act allowed homesteads of 640 acres in areas unsuitable for irrigation.
The Montana Act led to the arrest of over 200 individuals and the conviction of 78, mostly of German or Austrian descent.
Of Montana's 20 largest cities, Polson (15.7 percent), Havre (13.0 percent), Great Falls (5.0 percent), Billings (4.4 percent), and Anaconda (3.1 percent) had the greatest percentage of Native American residents in 2010.
The state was sued in 2004 because of lack of funding, and the state has increased its support of the program.
The historically mining-oriented communities of western Montana such as Butte have a wider range of European-American ethnicity; Finns, Eastern Europeans and especially Irish settlers left an indelible mark on the area, as well as people originally from British mining regions such as Cornwall, Devon and Wales.
The Desert Land Act of 1877 was passed to allow settlement of arid lands in the west and allotted  to settlers for a fee of $.25 per acre and a promise to irrigate the land.
Flowers native to Montana include asters, bitterroots, daisies, lupins, poppies, primroses, columbine, lilies, orchids, and dryads.
The table below lists average temperatures for the warmest and coldest month for the seven largest cities in Montana.
There are at least 3,223 named lakes and reservoirs in Montana, including Flathead Lake, the largest natural freshwater lake in the western United States.
Schools started forming in the area before it was officially a territory as families started settling into the area.
Then, the droughts of 1917–1921 proved devastating.
As of June 2015, the state's unemployment rate is 3.9 percent.
The largest denominations in Montana as of 2010 were the Catholic Church with 127,612 adherents, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 46,484 adherents, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America with 38,665 adherents, and non-denominational Evangelical Protestant with 27,370 adherents.
Montana's motto, ''Oro y Plata'', Spanish for "Gold and Silver", recognizing the significant role of mining, was first adopted in 1865, when Montana was still a territory.
Winters are warmer, too, and have fewer cold spells.
In addition, Amtrak's ''Empire Builder'' train runs through the north of the state, stopping in Libby, Whitefish, West Glacier, Essex, East Glacier Park, Browning, Cut Bank, Shelby, Havre, Malta, Glasgow, and Wolf Point.
The smaller Pend d'Oreille and Kalispel tribes lived near Flathead Lake and the western mountains, respectively.
The property's value is multiplied by a tax rate, set by the Montana Legislature, to determine its taxable value.
The underlying surface consists of sandstone and shale.
In the wake of ramped-up mine production and the Speculator Mine disaster in June 1917, Industrial Workers of the World organizer Frank Little arrived in Butte to organize miners.
A number of smaller spur lines operated in Montana from 1881 into the 20th century including the Oregon Short Line, Montana Railroad and Milwaukee Road.
The state's Native American population grew by 27.9 percent between 1980 and 1990 (at a time when Montana's entire population rose just 1.6 percent), and by 18.5 percent between 2000 and 2010.
Until the Oregon Treaty (1846), land west of the continental divide was disputed between the British and U.S. and was known as the Oregon Country.
Other pacifists tended to be those from "peace churches" who generally opposed war.
* Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail
Foothill regions are often covered in weathered stone or broken slate, or consist of uncovered bare rock (usually igneous, quartzite, sandstone, or shale).
This represented a manpower contribution to the war that was 25 percent higher than any other state on a per capita basis.
There they join the Saskatchewan River, which ultimately empties into Hudson Bay.
On August 1, 1917, he was dragged from his boarding house by masked vigilantes, and hanged from a railroad trestle, considered a lynching.
Bitterroot (''Lewisia rediviva'')
There are  junior ice hockey teams in Montana, five of which are affiliated with the North American 3 Hockey League: Billings Bulls, Bozeman Icedogs, Glacier Nationals, Great Falls Americans, and Helena Bighorns.
Pressure over land ownership and control increased due to discoveries of gold in various parts of Montana and surrounding states.
The students of Livingston started a statewide school petition drive plus lobbied the governor and the state legislature to name the ''Maiasaura'' as the state fossil in 1985.
The most notable of these were the Marias Massacre (1870), Battle of the Little Bighorn (1876), Battle of the Big Hole (1877) and Battle of Bear Paw (1877).
Montana is the home of the Federation of Fly Fishers and hosts many of the organizations annual conclaves.
Montana has one city, Billings, with a population over 100,000; and two cities with populations over 50,000, Missoula and Great Falls.
West of the divide, the Clark Fork of the Columbia (not to be confused with the Clarks Fork of the Yellowstone River) rises near Butte and flows northwest to Missoula, where it is joined by the Blackfoot River and Bitterroot River.
Montana and South Dakota are the only states to share a land border which is not traversed by a paved road.
No towns are precisely antipodal to Kerguelen, though Chester and Rudyard are close.
The Pend Oreille River forms the outflow of Lake Pend Oreille.
The state's congressional representative is currently Republican Ryan Zinke.
Interstate 25 terminates into I-90 just south of the Montana border in Wyoming.
The Grant-Kohrs Ranch National Historic Site in Deer Lodge is maintained today as a link to the ranching style of the late 19th century.
Today, there is a significant Hmong population centered in the vicinity of Missoula.
Other major reservoirs include Hungry Horse on the Flathead River; Lake Koocanusa on the Kootenai River; Lake Elwell on the Marias River; Clark Canyon on the Beaverhead River; Yellowtail on the Bighorn River, Canyon Ferry, Hauser, Holter, Rainbow; and Black Eagle on the Missouri River.
In 1875, General Philip Sheridan pleaded to a joint session of Congress to authorize the slaughtering of herds in order to deprive the Indians of their source of food.
Montana's Remount station in Miles City provided 10,000 cavalry horses for the war, more than any other Army post in the US.
The largest European ancestry groups in Montana as of 2010 are: German (27.0 percent), Irish (14.8 percent), English (12.6 percent), Norwegian (10.9 percent), French (4.7 percent) and Italian (3.4 percent).
Montana is the only one of the first 48 states lacking a completed battleship being named for it.
The Northern Divide turns east in Montana at Triple Divide Peak, causing the Waterton River, Belly, and Saint Mary rivers to flow north into Alberta.
The U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Land Management controls  of federal land.
The design was only slightly modified after Montana became a state and adopted it as the Great Seal of the State of Montana, enacted by the legislature in 1893.
Like other states, Montana has two senators.
The Rocky Mountain Front is a significant feature in the north-central portion of the state, and there are a number of isolated island ranges that interrupt the prairie landscape common in the central and eastern parts of the state.
Bluebunch wheatgrass (''Pseudoroegneria spicata'')
In 1902, the Reclamation Act was passed, allowing irrigation projects to be built in Montana's eastern river valleys.
During the age of the Copper Kings, each Montana copper company had its own newspaper.
In presidential elections, Montana was long classified as a swing state, though the state has voted for the Republican candidate in all but two elections from 1952 to the present.
This will be the second commissioned warship to bear the name ''Montana.''
Great Falls has the highest percentage of African-Americans in its population, although Billings has more African American residents than Great Falls.
Blackspotted cutthroat trout (''Oncorhynchus clarkii'')
Approximately , or 35 percent of Montana's land is administered by federal or state agencies.
The western half is mountainous, interrupted by numerous large valleys.
According to the 2000 U.S. Census, 94.8 percent of the population aged 5 and older speak English at home.
Montana eventually became home to the largest ICBM field in the U.S. covering .
The state's seven reservations include more than twelve distinct Native American ethnolinguistic groups.
In their place was an assortment of books brought in by various emigrants.
In 1881, the Utah and Northern Railway a branch line of the Union Pacific completed a narrow gauge line from northern Utah to Butte.
The Pend Oreille River joined the Columbia River, which flows to the Pacific Ocean—making the  long Clark Fork/Pend Oreille (considered a single river system) the longest river in the Rocky Mountains.
Tracks of the Great Northern Railroad (GNR) reached eastern Montana in 1887 and when they reached the northern Rocky Mountains in 1890, the GNR became a significant promoter of tourism to Glacier National Park region.
To become a certified teacher, Raymond took a test in her home and paid a $6 fee in gold dust to obtain a teaching certificate.
Schoolchildren also chose the western meadowlark as the state bird, in a 1930 vote, and the legislature acted to endorse this decision in 1931.
Known as laccoliths, they formed when igneous rock protruded through cracks in the sedimentary rock.
Ecotaxes on resource extraction are numerous.
The Montana Department of Natural Resources and Conservation manages  of School Trust Land ceded by the federal government under the Land Ordinance of 1785 to the state in 1889 when Montana was granted statehood.
The front is most pronounced in the Lewis Range, located primarily in Glacier National Park.
It flows north through Yellowstone National Park, enters Montana near Gardiner, and passes through the Paradise Valley to Livingston.
