Two NASA GRAIL spacecraft began orbiting the Moon around 1 January 2012, on a mission to learn more about the Moon's internal structure.
This structure is thought to have developed through the fractional crystallization of a global magma ocean shortly after the Moon's formation 4.5&nbsp;billion years ago.
At  deep, its floor is the lowest point on the surface of the Moon.
The Moon's light is used by zooplankton in the Arctic when the sun is below the horizon for months on end.
In 1609, Galileo Galilei drew one of the first telescopic drawings of the Moon in his book  and noted that it was not smooth but had mountains and craters.
Long-lived instrument stations, including heat flow probes, seismometers, and magnetometers, were installed at the Apollo 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17 landing sites.
These follow-on effects are mathematically described by Cassini's laws.
Occasionally, the name "Luna" is used.
Recently, it has been suggested that a roughly  diameter region of the lunar surface was modified by a gas release event about a million years ago.
In 1994, the bistatic radar experiment located on the ''Clementine'' spacecraft, indicated the existence of small, frozen pockets of water close to the surface.
Earth and the Moon are nevertheless still considered a planet–satellite system, rather than a double planet, because their barycentre, the common centre of mass, is located  (about a quarter of Earth's radius) beneath Earth's surface.
In many prehistoric and ancient cultures, the Moon was personified as a deity or other supernatural phenomenon, and astrological views of the Moon continue to be propagated today.
It does not currently have a global dipolar magnetic field and only has crustal magnetization, probably acquired early in lunar history when a dynamo was still operating.
It is the second-brightest regularly visible celestial object in Earth's sky after the Sun, as measured by illuminance on Earth's surface.
In 2008, an analysis of volcanic lava beads, brought back to Earth aboard Apollo 15, showed small amounts of water to exist in the interior of the beads.
This mission obtained the first near-global topographic map of the Moon, and the first global multispectral images of the lunar surface.
Unlike most satellites of other planets, the Moon orbits closer to the ecliptic plane than to the planet's equatorial plane.
In so doing, ''Chang'e 3'' made the first lunar soft landing since ''Luna 24'' in 1976, and the first lunar rover mission since ''Lunokhod 2'' in 1973.
The Moon has an external magnetic field of about 1–100 nanoteslas, less than one-hundredth that of Earth.
The discovery of fault scarp cliffs by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter suggest that the Moon has shrunk within the past billion years, by a radius of about 90 metres (300&nbsp;ft).
It came to represent the goddess Artemis or Hecate, and via the patronage of Hecate came to be used as a symbol of Byzantium.
Additionally, colour constancy in the visual system recalibrates the relations between the colours of an object and its surroundings, and because the surrounding sky is comparatively dark, the sunlit Moon is perceived as a bright object.
The names Luna, Cynthia, and Selene are reflected in terminology for lunar orbits in words such as ''apolune'', ''pericynthion'', and ''selenocentric''.
The tides on Earth are mostly generated by the gradient in intensity of the Moon's gravitational pull from one side of Earth to the other, the tidal forces.
Russia and the U.S. are party to the 1967 Outer Space Treaty, which defines the Moon and all outer space as the "province of all mankind".
Privately funded lunar exploration has been promoted by the Google Lunar X Prize, announced 13 September 2007, which offers US$20&nbsp;million to anyone who can land a robotic rover on the Moon and meet other specified criteria.
Their curvilinear shape is often accentuated by low albedo regions that wind between the bright swirls.
The tidal effect of the Sun on Earth's oceans is almost half that of the Moon, and their gravitational interplay is responsible for spring and neap tides.
The U.S. co-launched the ''Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter'' (LRO) and the ''LCROSS'' impactor and follow-up observation orbiter on 18 June 2009; ''LCROSS'' completed its mission by making a planned and widely observed impact in the crater Cabeus on 9 October 2009, whereas ''LRO'' is currently in operation, obtaining precise lunar altimetry and high-resolution imagery.
The name Diana is connected to ''dies'' meaning 'day'.
The spacecraft released a smaller probe, ''Hagoromo'', in lunar orbit, but the transmitter failed, preventing further scientific use of the mission.
Despite this, it is the brightest object in the sky after the Sun.
Its surface is actually dark (although it can appear a very bright white) with a reflectance just slightly higher than that of worn asphalt.
The other major geologic process that has affected the Moon's surface is impact cratering, with craters formed when asteroids and comets collide with the lunar surface.
However, since the 1960s, scientists have hypothesized that water ice may be deposited by impacting comets or possibly produced by the reaction of oxygen-rich lunar rocks, and hydrogen from solar wind, leaving traces of water which could possibly survive in cold, permanently shadowed craters at either pole on the Moon.
The far side is often inaccurately called the "dark side", but in fact, it is illuminated as often as the near side: once per lunar day, during the new moon phase we observe on Earth when the near side is dark.
The Earth-induced component arises from libration, a result of the Moon's orbital eccentricity; if the Moon's orbit were perfectly circular, there would only be solar tides.
This results in it nearly always keeping the same face turned towards Earth.
The PIE root of ''moon'', *''méh1nōt'', derives from the PIE verbal root *''meh1''-, "to measure", "indicating a functional conception of the moon, i.e.
Crystallization of this magma ocean would have created a mafic mantle from the precipitation and sinking of the minerals olivine, clinopyroxene, and orthopyroxene; after about three-quarters of the magma ocean had crystallised, lower-density plagioclase minerals could form and float into a crust on top.
A 5,000-year-old rock carving at Knowth, Ireland, may represent the Moon, which would be the earliest depiction discovered.
The English noun ''month'' and its cognates in other Germanic languages stem from Proto-Germanic ''*mǣnṓth-'', which is connected to the above-mentioned Proto-Germanic ''*mǣnōn'', indicating the usage of a lunar calendar among the Germanic peoples (Germanic calendar) prior to the adoption of a solar calendar.
The absence of such neutral species (atoms or molecules) as oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen and magnesium, which are present in the regolith, is not understood.
Solar eclipses occur at new moon, when the Moon is between the Sun and Earth.
The American Moon landing and return was enabled by considerable technological advances in the early 1960s, in domains such as ablation chemistry, software engineering and atmospheric re-entry technology, and by highly competent management of the enormous technical undertaking.
An iconographic tradition of representing Sun and Moon with faces developed in the late medieval period.
Several geologic provinces containing shield volcanoes and volcanic domes are found within the near side maria.
The lunar soil, although it poses a problem for any moving parts of telescopes, can be mixed with carbon nanotubes and epoxies in the construction of mirrors up to 50 meters in diameter.
When exposed to solar radiation, water quickly decomposes through a process known as photodissociation and is lost to space.
This is thought to be due to a concentration of heat-producing elements under the crust on the near side, seen on geochemical maps obtained by ''Lunar Prospector'''s gamma-ray spectrometer, which would have caused the underlying mantle to heat up, partially melt, rise to the surface and erupt.
Estimates are 5 tons of comet particles strike the Moon's surface each 24 hours.
The average distance of the Moon from the Earth is 238,855 miles (384,400 km).
Computer simulations suggest that up to  of the surface may be in permanent shadow.
The Moon has an exceptionally low albedo, giving it a reflectance that is slightly brighter than that of worn asphalt.
However, more-recent tests suggest more of the Moon coalesced from Earth and not the impactor.
In 1994, the U.S. sent the joint Defense Department/NASA spacecraft ''Clementine'' to lunar orbit.
Eighteen months prior to an October 1984 conference on lunar origins, Bill Hartmann, Roger Phillips, and Jeff Taylor challenged fellow lunar scientists: "You have eighteen months.
In 2014 NASA announced "widespread evidence of young lunar volcanism" at 70 irregular mare patches identified by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, some less than 50 million years old.
The dark and relatively featureless lunar plains that can clearly be seen with the naked eye are called ''maria'' (Latin for "seas"; singular ''mare''), because they were believed by ancient astronomers to be filled with water.
Two pioneering robotic rovers landed on the Moon in 1970 and 1973 as a part of Soviet Lunokhod programme.
Archimedes (287–212 BC) designed a planetarium that could calculate the motions of the Moon and other objects in the Solar System.
The ancient Greek philosopher Anaxagoras  reasoned that the Sun and Moon were both giant spherical rocks, and that the latter reflected the light of the former.
During the Middle Ages, before the invention of the telescope, the Moon was increasingly recognised as a sphere, though many believed that it was "perfectly smooth".
Because of this, the Moon's solar illumination varies much less with season, and topographical details play a crucial role in seasonal effects.
It is relatively nearby; astronomical seeing is not a concern; certain craters near the poles are permanently dark and cold, and thus especially useful for infrared telescopes; and radio telescopes on the far side would be shielded from the radio chatter of Earth.
The 7th-century  Islamic calendar is an exceptional example of a purely lunar calendar.
Also, as it evolves toward becoming a red giant, the size of the Sun, and its apparent diameter in the sky, are slowly increasing.
The apparent size of the Moon is roughly the same as that of the Sun, with both being viewed at close to one-half a degree wide.
The existence of moonquakes was an unexpected discovery from seismometers placed on the Moon by Apollo astronauts from 1969 through 1972.
However, that program has been cancelled in favor of a manned asteroid landing by 2025 and a manned Mars orbit by 2035.
In 1998, the neutron spectrometer located on the ''Lunar Prospector'' spacecraft, indicated that high concentrations of hydrogen are present in the first meter of depth in the regolith near the polar regions.
However, later radar observations by Arecibo, suggest these findings may rather be rocks ejected from young impact craters.
The Moon is in synchronous rotation: it rotates about its axis in about the same time it takes to orbit Earth.
Just prior to this, evidence has been presented for 2–10 million years younger basaltic volcanism inside Lowell crater, Orientale basin, located in the transition zone between the near and far sides of the Moon.
The Moon has been the subject of many works of art and literature and the inspiration for countless others.
The first spacecraft to perform a successful lunar soft landing was ''Luna 9'' and the first unmanned vehicle to orbit the Moon was ''Luna 10'', both in 1966.
The majority of these lavas erupted or flowed into the depressions associated with impact basins.
On 14 December 2013, ''Chang'e 3'' improved upon its orbital mission predecessors by landing a lunar lander onto the Moon's surface, which in turn deployed a lunar rover, named ''Yutu'' (Chinese: 玉兔; literally "Jade Rabbit").
The noun ''moon'' is derived from ''moone'' (around 1380), which developed from ''mone'' (1135), which is derived from Old English ''mōna'' (dating from before 725), which ultimately stems from Proto-Germanic ''*mǣnōn'', like all Germanic language cognates.
In April 1972, the Apollo 16 mission recorded various astronomical photos and spectra in ultraviolet with the Far Ultraviolet Camera/Spectrograph.
Its prominence in the sky and its regular cycle of phases have made the Moon an important cultural influence since ancient times on language, calendars, art, and mythology.
It is the fifth-largest natural satellite in the Solar System, and the largest among planetary satellites relative to the size of the planet that it orbits (its primary).
The subsequent landing of the first humans on the Moon in 1969 is seen by many as the culmination of the Space Race.
Water vapour has been detected by ''Chandrayaan-1'' and found to vary with latitude, with a maximum at ~60–70&nbsp;degrees; it is possibly generated from the sublimation of water ice in the regolith.
In 1990, Japan became the third country to place a spacecraft into lunar orbit with its ''Hiten'' spacecraft.
This forms two tidal bulges on Earth, which are most clearly seen in elevated sea level as ocean tides.
However, the failure of Russia's ''Fobos-Grunt'' mission has delayed this project.
In this way, a solar eclipse is an occultation of the Sun.
In Greco-Roman mythology, Sun and Moon are represented as male and female, respectively (Helios/Sol and Selene/Luna).
Because the Moon's orbit around Earth is inclined by about 5° to the orbit of Earth around the Sun, eclipses do not occur at every full and new moon.
Around the core is a partially molten boundary layer with a radius of about .
The Moon used to rotate at a faster rate, but early in its history, its rotation slowed and became tidally locked in this orientation as a result of frictional effects associated with tidal deformations caused by Earth.
The Moon makes a complete orbit around Earth with respect to the fixed stars about once every 27.3&nbsp;days (its sidereal period).
Today, many of these claims are thought to be illusory, resulting from observation under different lighting conditions, poor astronomical seeing, or inadequate drawings.
Because Earth spins about 27&nbsp;times faster than the Moon moves around it, the bulges are dragged along with Earth's surface faster than the Moon moves, rotating around Earth once a day as it spins on its axis.
The full moon is highest during winter.
reported 615–1410 ppm water in melt inclusions in lunar sample 74220, the famous high-titanium "orange glass soil" of volcanic origin collected during the Apollo 17 mission in 1972.
A permanent asymmetric moon dust cloud exists around the Moon, created by small particles from comets.
The crater is one of the most visible ones from Earth.
Moonquakes are much less common and weaker than earthquakes, although they can last for up to an hour—a significantly longer time than terrestrial earthquakes—because of the absence of water to damp out the seismic vibrations.
These gases can either return into the regolith due to the Moon's gravity or be lost to space, either through solar radiation pressure or, if they are ionized, by being swept away by the solar wind's magnetic field.
A lunar zenith telescope can be made cheaply with ionic liquid.
The Moon does appear larger when close to the horizon, but this is a purely psychological effect, known as the Moon illusion, first described in the 7th century BC.
The presence of usable quantities of water on the Moon is an important factor in rendering lunar habitation as a cost-effective plan; the alternative of transporting water from Earth would be prohibitively expensive.
Meteorites show that other inner Solar System bodies such as Mars and Vesta have very different oxygen and tungsten isotopic compositions to Earth, whereas Earth and the Moon have nearly identical isotopic compositions.
The post-Apollo era has also seen two rover missions: the final Soviet Lunokhod mission in 1973, and China's ongoing Chang'e 3 mission, which deployed its Yutu rover on 14 December 2013.
The distance between the Moon and Earth varies from around  to  at perigees (closest) and apogees (farthest), respectively.
The topography of the Moon has been measured with laser altimetry and stereo image analysis.
In the 2nd century AD Lucian wrote a novel where the heroes travel to the Moon, which is inhabited.
Variations on the giant impact hypothesis may explain this data.
The Moon is visible for two weeks every 27.3 days at the North and South Pole.
On average, 120 kilograms of dust are present above the Moon, rising to 100 kilometers above the surface.
Likewise, hundreds of millions of years in the future, the Moon will no longer cover the Sun completely, and total solar eclipses will not occur.
Shen Kuo (1031–1095) of the Song dynasty created an allegory equating the waxing and waning of the Moon to a round ball of reflective silver that, when doused with white powder and viewed from the side, would appear to be a crescent.
Until recently, the youngest eruptions, dated by crater counting, appeared to have been only 1.2&nbsp;billion years ago.
This is partly due to the brightness enhancement of the opposition effect; at quarter phase, the Moon is only one-tenth as bright, rather than half as bright, as at full moon.
However, because Earth is moving in its orbit around the Sun at the same time, it takes slightly longer for the Moon to show the same phase to Earth, which is about 29.5&nbsp;days (its synodic period).
LDEX detected an average of one 0.3 micrometer moon dust particle each minute.
However, in the , Seleucus of Seleucia correctly theorized that tides were due to the attraction of the Moon, and that their height depends on the Moon's position relative to the Sun.
Direct transmission of data to Earth concluded in late 1977 due to budgetary considerations, but as the stations' lunar laser ranging corner-cube retroreflector arrays are passive instruments, they are still being used.
Most historical calendars are lunisolar.
The 2008 ''Chandrayaan-1'' spacecraft has since confirmed the existence of surface water ice, using the on-board Moon Mineralogy Mapper.
No such regions exist at the south pole.
The large amount of energy released in the giant impact event and the subsequent re-accretion of material in Earth orbit would have melted the outer shell of Earth, forming a magma ocean.
Although of considerable selenological interest, Hauri's announcement affords little comfort to would-be lunar colonists—the sample originated many kilometers below the surface, and the inclusions are so difficult to access that it took 39 years to find them with a state-of-the-art ion microprobe instrument.
The regolith of older surfaces is generally thicker than for younger surfaces: it varies in thickness from  in the highlands and  in the maria.
At lower levels, the human perception of reduced brightness as a percentage is provided by the following formula:
Lunar swirls are enigmatic features found across the Moon’s surface, which are characterized by having a high albedo, appearing optically immature (i.e.
On 19 March 2011, it was closer to Earth when at full phase than it has been since 1993, 14% closer than its farthest position in apogee.
However, both these proposals were ultimately passed over as the space program was largely transferred from the military to the civilian agency NASA.
The lack of an atmosphere, weather and recent geological processes mean that many of these craters are well-preserved.
The Moon has a solid iron-rich inner core with a radius of  and a fluid outer core primarily made of liquid iron with a radius of roughly .
Because the Moon is comparatively close to Earth, occultations of individual stars are not visible everywhere on the planet, nor at the same time.
Later, the physical form of the Moon and the cause of moonlight became understood.
Even today, people who believe in a lunar effect claim that admissions to psychiatric hospitals, traffic accidents, homicides or suicides increase during a full moon, but dozens of studies invalidate these claims.
The astronomer and physicist Alhazen (965–1039) found that sunlight was not reflected from the Moon like a mirror, but that light was emitted from every part of the Moon's sunlit surface in all directions.
NASA began to plan to resume manned missions following the call by U.S. President George W. Bush on 14 January 2004 for a manned mission to the Moon by 2019 and the construction of a lunar base by 2024.
The final liquids to crystallise would have been initially sandwiched between the crust and mantle, with a high abundance of incompatible and heat-producing elements.
Eclipses can only occur when the Sun, Earth, and Moon are all in a straight line (termed "syzygy").
The newly formed Moon would also have had its own lunar magma ocean; estimates for its depth range from about  to the entire radius of the Moon ().
The orientation of the Moon's crescent also depends on the latitude of the observation site: close to the equator, an observer can see a smile-shaped crescent moon.
A less common adjective is ''selenic'', derived from the Ancient Greek ''Selene'' (), from which is derived the prefix "seleno-" (as in ''selenography'').
The Moon is exceptionally large relative to Earth: a quarter its diameter and 1/81 its mass.
The contrast between the brighter highlands and the darker maria creates the patterns seen by different cultures as the Man in the Moon, the rabbit and the buffalo, among others.
Elements that have been detected include sodium and potassium, produced by sputtering, which are also found in the atmospheres of Mercury and Io; helium-4 and neon from the solar wind; and argon-40, radon-222, and polonium-210, outgassed after their creation by radioactive decay within the crust and mantle.
Shackleton Energy Company is building a program to establish operations on the south pole of the Moon to harvest water and supply their Propellant Depots.
The Moon is in synchronous rotation with Earth, always showing the same face, with its near side marked by dark volcanic maria that fill the spaces between the bright ancient crustal highlands and the prominent impact craters.
Because the Moon is continuously blocking our view of a half-degree-wide circular area of the sky, the related phenomenon of occultation occurs when a bright star or planet passes behind the Moon and is occulted: hidden from view.
Both the Greek Selene and the Roman goddess Diana were alternatively called Cynthia.
Between 4 October 2007 and 10 June 2009, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency's ''Kaguya (Selene)'' mission, a lunar orbiter fitted with a high-definition video camera, and two small radio-transmitter satellites, obtained lunar geophysics data and took the first high-definition movies from beyond Earth orbit.
marker of the month" (cf.
The highest altitude of the Moon in the sky varies with the lunar phase and the season of the year.
However, the Sun will become a red giant long before that, engulfing Earth.
Consistent with this, geochemical mapping from orbit shows the crust is mostly anorthosite, and Moon rock samples of the flood lavas erupted on the surface from partial melting in the mantle confirm the mafic mantle composition, which is more iron rich than that of Earth.
The Moon's linear distance from Earth is currently increasing at a rate of  per year, but this rate is not constant.
The finer regolith, the lunar soil of silicon dioxide glass, has a texture resembling snow and a scent resembling spent gunpowder.
The gravitational field of the Moon has been measured through tracking the Doppler shift of radio signals emitted by orbiting spacecraft.
China has pursued an ambitious program of lunar exploration, beginning with ''Chang'e 1'', which successfully orbited the Moon from 5 November 2007 until its controlled lunar impact on 1 March 2009.
The 18.6-year nodes cycle also has an influence: when the ascending node of the lunar orbit is in the vernal equinox, the lunar declination can go as far as 28° each month.
Left to run its course, this tidal drag would continue until the spin of Earth and the orbital period of the Moon matched, creating mutual tidal locking between the two, as is already currently the case with Pluto and its moon Charon.
the angle between Moon, the observer (on Earth) and the Sun).
The Constellation program was funded and construction and testing begun on a manned spacecraft and launch vehicle, and design studies for a lunar base.
The lunar geologic timescale is based on the most prominent impact events, including Nectaris, Imbrium, and Orientale, structures characterized by multiple rings of uplifted material, typically hundreds to thousands of kilometres in diameter and associated with a broad apron of ejecta deposits that form a regional stratigraphic horizon.
Although similar to terrestrial basalts, lunar basalts have more iron and no minerals altered by water.
Philosophers Aristotle and Pliny the Elder argued that the full moon induced insanity in susceptible individuals, believing that the brain, which is mostly water, must be affected by the Moon and its power over the tides, but the Moon's gravity is too slight to affect any single person.
Although the Chinese of the Han Dynasty believed the Moon to be energy equated to ''qi'', their 'radiating influence' theory also recognized that the light of the Moon was merely a reflection of the Sun, and Jing Fang (78–37&nbsp;BC) noted the sphericity of the Moon.
The cloud is asymmetric, more dense near the boundary between the Moon's dayside and nightside.
Reported as a "super moon", this closest point coincides within an hour of a full moon, and it was 30% more luminous than when at its greatest distance due to its angular diameter being 14% greater, because .
"The Aristarchus plateau is one of the most geologically diverse places on the Moon: a mysterious raised flat plateau, a giant rille carved by enormous outpourings of lava, fields of explosive volcanic ash, and all surrounded by massive flood basalts", said Mark Robinson, principal investigator of the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera at Arizona State University.
In contrast to Earth, no major lunar mountains are believed to have formed as a result of tectonic events.
The main lunar gravity features are mascons, large positive gravitational anomalies associated with some of the giant impact basins, partly caused by the dense mare basaltic lava flows that fill these basins.
The principal modern English adjective pertaining to the Moon is ''lunar'', derived from the Latin ''Luna''.
Alternatively, some of the remnant magnetization may be from transient magnetic fields generated during large impact events, through the expansion of an impact-generated plasma cloud in the presence of an ambient magnetic field—this is supported by the apparent location of the largest crustal magnetizations near the antipodes of the giant impact basins.
The lunar surface also experiences tides of around  amplitude over 27&nbsp;days, with two components: a fixed one due to Earth, because they are in synchronous rotation, and a varying component from the Sun.
For an eclipse to occur, the Moon must be near the intersection of the two orbital planes.
The Moon has an atmosphere so tenuous as to be nearly vacuum, with a total mass of less than .
This makes possible both total (with the Moon appearing larger than the Sun) and annular (with the Moon appearing smaller than the Sun) solar eclipses.
Once launchers had the necessary capabilities, these nations sent unmanned probes on both flyby and impact/lander missions.
The Moon is the second-densest satellite in the Solar System, after Io.
The Sun is much larger than the Moon but it is the precise vastly greater distance that gives it the same apparent size as the much closer and much smaller Moon from the perspective of Earth.
Libration also changes the angle from which the Moon is seen, allowing about 59% of its surface to be seen from Earth (but only half at any instant).
In its sixteen-month mission, it obtained a full image map of the Moon.
In 2016, planetary scientists, using data collected on the much earlier Nasa Lunar Prospector mission, found two hydrogen-rich areas on opposite sides of the Moon, probably in the form of water ice.
The side of the Moon that faces Earth is called the near side, and the opposite side the far side.
Because most of the material that went into orbit to form the Moon was thought to come from Theia, this observation was unexpected.
This means the Moon can go overhead at latitudes up to 28° from the equator, instead of only 18°.
Atomic clocks also show that Earth's day lengthens by about 15&nbsp;microseconds every year, slowly increasing the rate at which UTC is adjusted by leap seconds.
The dust measurements were made by LADEE's Lunar Dust EXperiment (LDEX), between 20 and 100 kilometers above the surface, during a six-month period.
In a total eclipse, the Moon completely covers the disc of the Sun and the solar corona becomes visible to the naked eye.
India's first lunar mission, ''Chandrayaan I'', orbited from 8 November 2008 until loss of contact on 27 August 2009, creating a high resolution chemical, mineralogical and photo-geological map of the lunar surface, and confirming the presence of water molecules in lunar soil.
The lunar far side is on average about  higher than the near side.
These simulations also show that most of the Moon came from the impactor, not from the proto-Earth.
Beneath the finely comminuted regolith layer is the ''megaregolith'', a layer of highly fractured bedrock many kilometres thick.
Upcoming lunar missions include Russia's ''Luna-Glob'': an unmanned lander with a set of seismometers, and an orbiter based on its failed Martian ''Fobos-Grunt'' mission.
The Moon is thought to have formed about 4.5 billion years ago, not long after Earth.
These figures were greatly improved by Ptolemy (90–168&nbsp;AD): his values of a mean distance of 59&nbsp;times Earth's radius and a diameter of 0.292&nbsp;Earth diameters were close to the correct values of about 60 and 0.273 respectively.
The dust stays above the Moon approximately 10 minutes, taking 5 minutes to rise, and 5 minutes to fall.
There has been historical controversy over whether features on the Moon's surface change over time.
The Moon's axial tilt with respect to the ecliptic is only 1.5424°, much less than the 23.44° of Earth.
The Soviet Union's Luna programme was the first to reach the Moon with unmanned spacecraft in 1959; the United States' NASA Apollo program achieved the only manned missions to date, beginning with the first manned lunar orbiting mission by Apollo 8 in 1968, and six manned lunar landings between 1969 and 1972, with the first being Apollo 11.
