Moose will sometimes stand their ground and defend themselves by charging at the wolves or lashing out at them with their powerful hooves.
In January 2008, the Norwegian newspaper ''Aftenposten'' estimated that some 13,000 moose had died in collisions with Norwegian trains since 2000.
There is also the achlis, which is produced in the land of Scandinavia; it has never been seen in this city, although we have had descriptions of it from many persons; it is not unlike the moose, but has no joints in the hind leg.
The maintaining of eye contact is usually the first sign of aggression, while laid-back ears or a lowered head is a definite sign of agitation.
Unlike other dangerous animals, moose are not territorial, and do not view humans as food, and will therefore usually not pursue humans if they simply run away.
It had a longer, narrower snout and a less-developed nasal cavity, more resembling that of a modern deer, lacking any sign of the modern moose-snout.
Confusingly, the word "elk" is used in North America to refer to a different animal, ''Cervus canadensis'', which is also called by the Algonkian indigenous name, "wapiti".
Its ranging goes from the Yenisey River in the west and most of Siberia.
The European moose was native to most temperate areas with suitable habitat on the continent and even Scotland from the end of the last Ice Age, as Europe had a mix of temperate boreal and deciduous forest.
Wolf packs primarily target calves and elderly animals, but can and will take healthy, adult moose.
A moose of either sex that is confronted by danger may let out a loud roar, more resembling that of a predator than a prey animal.
The exact cause of the die-off is not determined, but appears to be a combination of factors, including a change in habitat and heat stress caused by global warming, poaching, the reintroduction of wolves, and the northward migration of warmer-weather parasites to which moose have not developed a natural defense, such as liver flukes, brain worms and winter tick infestations.
Unlike most hooved, domesticated animals (ruminants), moose cannot digest hay, and feeding it to a moose can be fatal.
Moose are not usually aggressive towards humans, but can be provoked or frightened to behave with aggression.
The East Asian moose populations confine themselves mostly to the territory of the Russian Federation, with much smaller populations in Mongolia and Northeastern China.
They also have a tough tongue, lips and gums, which aid in the eating of woody vegetation.
Like giraffes, moose carefully select foods with less fiber and more concentrations of nutrients.
By September the velvet is removed by rubbing and thrashing which changes the colour of the antlers.
American black bears (''Ursus americanus'') and cougars (''Puma concolor'') can be significant predators of moose calves in May and June and can, in rare instances, predate adults (mainly cows rather than the larger bulls).
Trees serve as beds to them; they lean themselves against them, and thus reclining only slightly, they take their rest; when the huntsmen have discovered from the footsteps of these animals whither they are accustomed to betake themselves, they either undermine all the trees at the roots, or cut into them so far that the upper part of the trees may appear to be left standing.
Boosting of moose populations in Alaska for hunting purposes is one of the reasons given for allowing aerial or airborne methods to remove wolves in designated areas, e.g., Craig Medred: "A kill of 124 wolves would thus translate to the survival of 1488 moose or 2976 caribou or some combination thereof".
The distinctive looking appendages (often referred to as "devil's antlers") are the source of several myths and legends among many groups of Inuit as well as several other tribes of indigenous peoples of North America.
In the summer, moose may use this prehensile lip for grabbing branches and pulling, stripping the entire branch of leaves in a single mouthful, or for pulling forbs, like dandelions, or aquatic plants up by the base, roots and all.
a. bedfordiae''), the posterior division of the main fork divides into three tines, with no distinct flattening.
''Alces alces'' is called a "moose" in North American English, but an "elk" in British English.
For unknown reasons, the moose population is declining rapidly in the Midwest.
Other species can pluck plants from the water too, but these need to raise their heads in order to swallow.
The youngest bones were found in Scotland and are roughly 3900 years old.
Its antlers consisted of a horizontal bar  long, with no tines, ending in small palmations.
(An Alaskan moose also holds the record for the heaviest weight at ).
Moose were successfully introduced on Newfoundland in 1878 and 1904, where they are now the dominant ungulate, and somewhat less successfully on Anticosti Island in the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
The state agency in charge of railroad infrastructure (Jernbaneverket) plans to spend 80 million Norwegian kroner to reduce collision rate in the future by fencing the railways, clearing vegetation from near the tracks, and providing alternative snow-free feeding places for the animals elsewhere.
Northeastern United States including Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and northern New York near the Adirondack Mountains.
The moose was a rather strange looking deer to the colonists, and they often adopted local names for both.
During this time both sexes will call to each other.
By the age of 13, moose antlers decline in size and symmetry.
Extinct due to loss of habitat and overhunting.
Hence, it never lies down, but reclines against a tree while it sleeps; it can only be taken by previously cutting into the tree, and thus laying a trap for it, as otherwise, it would escape through its swiftness.
If the hairs on the back of the moose's neck and shoulders (hackles) stand up, a charge is usually imminent.
File:Cowcalflyingdown.JPG|(3 months)Calves stay near their mothers at all times.
Remains of wooden fences designed to guide the animals toward the pits have been found in bogs and peat.
In the West, moose populations extend well north into Canada (British Columbia and Alberta), and more isolated groups have been verified as far south as the mountains of Utah and Colorado and as far west as the Lake Wenatchee area of the Washington Cascades.
The Anchorage Visitor Centers warn tourists that "...a moose with its hackles raised is a thing to fear."
Following Bergmann's rule, population in the south (''A.
If a bull moose is castrated, either by accidental or chemical means, he will quickly shed his current set of antlers and then immediately begin to grow a new set of misshapen and deformed antlers that he will wear the rest of his life without ever shedding again.
In North America, the moose range includes almost all of Canada (excluding the arctic and Vancouver Island), most of Alaska, northern New England and upstate New York, the upper Rocky Mountains, northern Minnesota, Michigan's Upper Peninsula, and Isle Royale in Lake Superior.
Moose are distinguished by the broad, flat (or ''palmate'') antlers of the males; other members of the family have antlers with a dendritic ("twig-like") configuration.
Currently, most moose are found in Canada, Alaska, New England, Scandinavia, Latvia, Estonia and Russia.
The black moose is (by all that have hitherto writ of it) accounted a very large creature....
gallicus'' had many striking differences from its modern descendants.
a. gigas''), which can stand over  at the shoulder, has a span across the antlers of  and averages  in males and  in females.
Males (or "bulls") normally weigh from   and females (or "cows") typically weigh , depending on racial or clinal as well as individual age or nutritional variations.
The shape of these, and the varied color of their skins, is much like roes, but in size they surpass them a little and are destitute of horns, and have legs without joints and ligatures; nor do they lie down for the purpose of rest, nor, if they have been thrown down by any accident, can they raise or lift themselves up.
Ranges from Northeastern Siberia from the Alazeya River basin east to the Kolyma and Anadyr basins and south through the Koryak range and Kamchatka Peninsula.
Sometimes, wolves will chase moose into shallow streams or onto frozen rivers, where their mobility is greatly impeded.
Moose are not grazing animals but browsers (concentrate selectors).
However, brown bears are more likely to take over a wolf kill or to take young moose than to hunt adult moose on their own.
Moose have been reintroduced to some of their former habitats.
In the Canadian province of New Brunswick, collisions with moose are frequent enough that all new highways have fences to prevent moose from accessing the road, as has long been done in Finland, Norway, and Sweden.
Antler beam diameter, not the number of tines, indicates age.
''Libralces'' existed until the middle Pleistocene epoch and were followed briefly by a species called ''Cervalces carnutorum''.
A full-grown moose has few enemies except Siberian tigers (''Panthera tigris altaica'') which regularly prey on adult moose, but a pack of gray wolves (''Canis lupus'') can still pose a threat, especially to females with calves.
The Proto-Algonquian form was ''*mo·swa''.
Their long legs and bone structure suggest an animal that was adapted to running at high speeds over rough terrain.
They are also widespread through Russia on up through the borders with Finland south towards the border with Estonia, Belarus and Ukraine and stretching far away eastwards to the Yenisei River in Siberia.
They would have had steep sides lined with planks, making it impossible for the moose to escape once it fell in.
While there has been documented cases of individual moose being used for riding and/or pulling carts and sleds, Björklöf concludes no wide-scale usage has occurred outside fairytales.
Although at this stage the farm is not expected to be a profit-making enterprise, it obtains some income from the sale of moose milk and from visiting tourist groups.
Wolves typically kill moose by tearing at their haunches and perineum, causing massive blood loss.
The antlers of mature Alaskan adult bull moose (5 to 12 years old) have a normal maximum spread greater than .
Its upper lip is so extremely large, for which reason it is obliged to go backwards when grazing; otherwise, by moving onwards, the lip would get doubled up.
European moose are often more aggressive than North American moose, such as the moose in Sweden, which often become very agitated at the sight of a predator.
However, the antlers had a shorter horizontal bar and larger palmations, more resembling those of a modern moose.
Early European explorers in North America, particularly in Virginia where there were no moose, called the wapiti "elk" because of its size and resemblance to familiar-looking deer like the red deer.
The term "moose" is a name of North American origin, and the scientific name ''Alces alces'' comes from its Latin name.
Moose warning signs are used on roads in regions where there is a danger of collision with the animal.
This is most likely the time at which the species migrated from the Eurasian continent to North America.
a. cameloides'') usually grow smaller, while moose in the north and northeast (''A.
These moose were brought from Chukotka, home to the largest moose on the planet.
Farther west, it survived in Alsace and the Netherlands until the 9th century as the marshlands in the latter were drained and the forests were cleared away for feudal lands in the former.
Wolves usually follow moose at a distance of , occasionally at a distance of .
As an adaptation for feeding on plants underwater, the nose is equipped with fatty pads and muscles that close the nostrils when exposed to water pressure, preventing water from entering the nose.
...there is, also, the moose, which strongly resembles our steers, except that it is distinguished by the length of the ears and of the neck.
Males weighs about  and females weigh  in this mid-sized subspecies.
They either assess which is larger, with the smaller bull retreating, or they may engage in battles, usually only involving the antlers.
The young will stay with the mother until just before the next young are born.
Alaska and western Yukon.
Chukotka Moose or East Siberian moose
As it is a fertile environment for moose, with a milder climate, less snow, and an abundance of food, moose quickly bred and settled along the valley of the Kamchatka River and many surrounding regions.
The moose has been extinct in much of the eastern U.S. for as long as 150 years, due to colonial era overhunting and destruction of its habitat: Dutch, French, and British colonial sources all attest to its presence in the mid 17th century from Maine south to areas within a hundred miles of present-day Manhattan.
Although vehicles with higher clearances (such as trucks) are normally immune from this effect, the force of striking any 270+ kg (600+ pound) object at high speed should not be underestimated.
The size of the moose varies.
The males are polygamous and will seek several females to breed with.
(Range formerly included France, Switzerland, and Benelux nations.)
Ranges from Amur-Ussuri region of far eastern Russia, as well as the North Eastern part of China.
The '''moose''' (North America) or '''elk''' (Eurasia), ''Alces alces'', is the largest extant species in the deer family.
In terms of raw numbers, they attack more people than bears and wolves combined, but usually with only minor consequences.
Dictionaries of the 18th century simply described "elk" as a deer that was "as large as a horse".
In book 8, chapter 16 of Pliny the Elder's ''Natural History'' from 77&nbsp;AD the elk and an animal called achlis, which is presumably the same animal, are described thus:
Wyoming, Idaho, Utah, Colorado, Washington, Oregon, and Montana.
Matches, and maybe even surpasses, the Alaskan moose (''A.
Even adult bulls antlers are small and cervine with little palmation.
There are also animals, which are called moose.
The population in the past 20 years has risen to over 2900 animals.
Also, as with bears or any wild animal, moose that have become habituated to being fed by people may act aggressively when denied food.
Thus, the moose's digestive system has evolved to accommodate this relatively low-fiber diet.
This in turn means that the cow moose has at least a small degree of control over which bulls she mates with.
Kamchatka now regularly is responsible for the largest trophy moose shot around the world each season.
The last proven sighting of a moose in New Zealand was in 1952.
Such proposals remained unimplemented, mainly because the extensive hunting for moose that was deregulated in the 1790s nearly drove it to extinction.
The word "moose" first entered English by 1606 and is borrowed from the Algonquian languages (compare the Narragansett ''moos'' and Eastern Abenaki ''mos''; according to early sources, these were likely derived from ''moosu'', meaning "he strips off"), and possibly involved forms from multiple languages mutually reinforcing one another.
The widest spread recorded was  across.
When they have leant upon them, according to their habit, they knock down by their weight the unsupported trees, and fall down themselves along with them.
Wolverine (''Gulo gulo'') are most likely to eat moose as carrion but have killed moose, including adults, when the large ungulates are weakened by harsh winter conditions.
However, as the Roman era faded into medieval times, the beast slowly disappeared: soon after the reign of Charlemagne, the moose disappeared from France, where its range extended from Normandy in the north to the Pyrenees in the south.
Finland, Sweden, Norway, Latvia, Estonia, and Russia.
The moose became extinct in Britain during the Bronze Age, long before the Europeans' discovery of America.
For larger trees a moose may stand erect and walk upright on its hind legs, allowing it to reach branches up to  or higher above the ground.
The triangular warning signs common in Sweden, Norway, and Finland have become coveted souvenirs among tourists traveling in these countries, causing road authorities so much expense that the moose signs have been replaced with imageless generic warning signs in some regions.
Bull moose use dominant displays of antlers to discourage competition and will spar or fight rivals.
Its main value, however, is seen in the opportunities it offers for the research in the physiology and behavior of the moose, as well as in the insights it provides into the general principles of animal domestication.
The size and growth rate of antlers is determined by diet and age; symmetry reflects health.
Occasionally, a wolf may immobilise a moose by biting its sensitive nose, the pain of which can paralyze a moose.
The wapiti appeared very similar to the red deer of Europe (which itself was almost extinct in Southern Britain) although it was a lot larger and was not red.
Since the 1990s, moose populations have declined dramatically in much of temperate North America, although they remain stable in arctic and subarctic regions.
Moose typically inhabit boreal forests and temperate broadleaf and mixed forests of the Northern Hemisphere in temperate to subarctic climates.
When harassed or startled by people or in the presence of a dog, moose may charge.
Eastern Siberia, Mongolia, and Manchuria.
This trait serves a second purpose in cooling down the moose on summer days and ridding itself of black flies.
Yakutia Moose, or the Mid-Siberian/Lena Moose
In eastern Germany, where the scarce population is slowly increasing, there were two road accidents involving moose since 2000.
In some areas, moose are the primary source of food for wolves.
Many scientists believe that this artificial inflation of game populations is actually detrimental to both caribou and moose populations as well as the ecosystem as a whole.
For a long time neither species had an official name, but were called a variety of things.
Moose antlers are broad and palmate (flat) with tines (points) along the outer edge.
The Pleistocene epoch was a time of gigantism, in which most species were much larger than their descendants of today, including exceptionally large lions, hippopotamuses, mammoths, and deer.
In the continental-European languages, these forms of the word "elk" almost always refer to the ''Alces alces''.
In Mongolia and China, where poaching took a great toll on moose, forcing them to near extinction, they are protected, but enforcement of the policy is weak and demand for traditional medicines derived from deer parts is high.
The wapiti is very similar to the red deer of central and western Europe, although it is distinctly different behaviorally and genetically.
The earliest recorded description of the moose is in Julius Caesar's ''Commentarii de Bello Gallico'', where it is described thus:
However, moose often give warning signs prior to attacking, displaying their aggression by means of body language.
Moose have been known to dive underwater to reach plants on lake bottoms, and the complex snout may assist the moose in this type of feeding.
Alaskan moose have been reported to successfully fend off attacks from black bears, brown bears and grizzlies.
Mostly found in forests of eastern Russia.
No longer present in central and western Europe except for Poland, Lithuania and Belarus, with a certain population in the Czech Republic, Slovakia, and northern Ukraine, but can be observed in Bohemia since the 1970s and a tiny reintroduced population in Scotland, Great Britain, recently sighted in eastern Germany.
They are most likely to attack if annoyed or harassed, or if their "personal space" has been encroached upon.
Nevertheless, the method was in use until the 19th&nbsp;century.
Among other things, the moose was proposed to be used in postal distribution, and there was a suggestion to develop a moose-mounted cavalry.
In turn dispersals from northern New England have resulted in a growing population of roughly 1,000 plus moose in Massachusetts, where it has been absent since the early 18th century.
Domestication of moose was investigated in the Soviet Union before World War II.
Newfoundland and Labrador recommended that motorists use caution between dusk and dawn because that is when moose are most active and most difficult to see, increasing the risk of collisions.
Dr. Valerius Geist, who emigrated to Canada from the Soviet Union, wrote in his 1999 book ''Moose: Behaviour, Ecology, Conservation'':
These plants are rather low in sodium, and moose generally need to consume a good quantity of aquatic plants.
a. gigas''), as the largest of the races and thus the largest race of deer alive.
The male's antlers grow as cylindrical beams projecting on each side of the head at right angles to the midline of the skull, and then fork.
Unsuccessful thus far in recolonizing these areas via natural dispersal from source populations in Poland, Belarus, Ukraine, Czech Republic and Slovakia, it appears to be having more success migrating south into the Caucasus.
File:Ninemomoose.JPG|(9 months)This calf is almost ready to leave its mother.
Cows with young calves are very protective and will attack humans who come too close, especially if they come between mother and calf.
In 1736, Samuel Dale wrote to the Royal Society of Great Britain:
Population increasing and regaining territory.
In Norway, an early example of these trapping devices has been dated to around 3,700&nbsp;BC.
A moose's diet often depends on its location, but they seem to prefer the new growths from deciduous trees with a high sugar content, such as white birch, trembling aspen and striped maple, among many others.
The palmation appears to be more marked in North American moose than in the typical Scandinavian moose.
Range excludes the ranges of the Chukotka and Amur Moose to the east and Northern Mongolia.
This is bigger than even the Irish elk (megacerine), which was  tall at the shoulders.
There is, however, a Scandinavian breed of the common moose in which the antlers are simpler and recall those of the East Siberian animals.
Moose are thus attracted to marshes and river banks during warmer months as both provide suitable vegetation to eat and water to wet themselves in.
Hunting and other human activities have caused a reduction in the size of the moose's range over time.
Their diet consists of both terrestrial and aquatic vegetation.
''Libralces gallicus'' came from the warm savannahs of Pliocene Europe, with the best preserved skeletons being found in southern France.
During the fall mating season, bull moose may be aggressive toward humans because of the high hormone levels they experience.
A moose's upper lip is very sensitive, to help distinguish between fresh shoots and harder twigs, and the lip is prehensile, for grasping their food.
A demonstration project, Highway&nbsp;7 between Fredericton and Saint John, which has one of the highest frequencies of moose collisions in the province, did not have these fences until 2008, although it was and continues to be extremely well signed.
Studies suggest that the calls made by female moose during the rut not only call the males but can actually induce a bull to invade another bull's harem and fight for control of it.
Its skull and neck structure suggest an animal that fought using high-speed impacts, much like the Dall sheep, rather than locking and twisting antlers the way modern moose combat.
''Cervalces carnutorum'' was soon followed by a much larger species called ''Cervalces latifrons'' (broad-fronted stag-moose).
It has migrated into other parts of Eastern Europe and has been spotted in eastern and southern Germany.
The life span of an average moose is about 15–25 years.
The largest confirmed size for this species was a bull shot at the Yukon River in September 1897 that weighed  and measured  high at the shoulder.
This is usually attributed to a hormone imbalance.
Birds, carnivores and rodents eat dropped antlers as they are full of protein and moose themselves will eat antler velvet for the nutrients.
a. alces'') this branch usually expands into a broad palmation, with one large tine at the base and a number of smaller snags on the free border.
In winter, moose are often drawn to roadways, to lick salt that is used as a snow and ice melter.
These risks led to the development of a vehicle test referred to as the "moose test" (, ).
It is the smallest moose subspecies in Asia and the world, with both males and females standing only  at the shoulder and weigh between .
In northern Scandinavia one can still find remains of trapping pits used for hunting moose.
In 1900, an attempt to introduce moose into the Hokitika area failed; then in 1910 ten moose (four bulls and six cows) were introduced into Fiordland.
In Sweden, there was a debate in the late 18th century about the national value of using the moose as a domestic animal.
beef, deer and elk), it has a low fat content, and the fat that is present consists of a higher proportion of polyunsaturated fats rather than saturated fats.
After the mating season males drop their antlers to conserve energy for the winter.
A moose's body structure, with a large heavy body suspended on long spindly legs, makes them particularly dangerous when hit by passenger cars with low ground clearances.
They are generally solitary with the strongest bonds between mother and calf.
Eastern tribes also valued moose leather as a source for moccasins and other decorations.
The word "elk" originated from Proto-Germanic languages, from which Old English evolved.
Moose reestablished populations in eastern New York and Connecticut and appeared headed south towards the Catskill Mountains a former habitat.
Therefore, there is no safe side from which to approach.
This is because studies have shown that when these game populations are artificially boosted, it leads to both habitat destruction and a crash in these populations.
However the consumption of moose liver or kidneys significantly increased cadmium intake, with the study revealing that heavy consumers of moose organs have a relatively narrow safety margin below the levels which would probably cause adverse health effects.
However, like all ungulates known to attack predators, the more aggressive individuals are always darker in color.
In extremely rare circumstances, a cow moose may grow antlers.
