Sleek, modern designs are being constructed in cities like Rabat and Casablanca that give no particular homage to any of the past Moroccan architecture styles.
And when a cold damp air comes to Morocco from the North-West, for few days, temperatures can easily break .
Morocco was ranked the 1st African country by the Economist Intelligence Unit' quality-of-life index, ahead of South Africa.
Lamb is also consumed, but as North African sheep breeds store most of their fat in their tails, Moroccan lamb does not have the pungent flavour that Western lamb and mutton have.
It is bordered by Spain to the north (a water border through the Strait and land borders with three small Spanish-controlled exclaves, Ceuta, Melilla, and Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera), Algeria to the east, and Western Sahara to the south.
He was the first Spanish leader in 25 years to make an official visit to the territories.
Remaining challenges include a low level of wastewater treatment (only 13% of collected wastewater is being treated), lack of house connections in the poorest urban neighborhoods, and limited sustainability of rural systems (20 percent of rural systems are estimated not to function).
Morocco's official languages are Arabic and Berber.
Other important Moroccan authors include, Abdellatif Laabi, Abdelkrim Ghallab, Fouad Laroui, Mohammed Berrada and Leila Abouzeid.
Summers are very warm to moderately hot, and winters are longer, cold and snowy.
The most commonly eaten red meat in Morocco is beef; lamb is preferred but is relatively expensive.
Some bought up large amounts of the rich agricultural land, others organized the exploitation and modernization of mines and harbours.
Islamist Saad Housseini was given 15-year sentence in 2009 over the 2003 Casablanca bombings.
The first independent Muslim state in the area of modern Morocco was the Kingdom of Nekor, an emirate in the Rif Mountains.
One of those extremists was Nourredine Nafia, leader of the GICM (Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group), who was sentenced to 20 years in prison for his role in the attacks.
Construction of infrastructure and delivery of railway equipment will end in 2014 and the HSR will be operational by December 2015.
In 2004, according to the UN World Drugs Report, cultivation and transformation of Cannabis represents 0.57% of the national GDP of Morocco in 2002.
Most of the southeast portion of the country is in the Sahara Desert and as such is generally sparsely populated and unproductive economically.
Morocco was facing aggression from Spain and the Ottoman Empire allies pressing westward.
North Central Morocco receives between 700&nbsp;mm and up to 3500&nbsp;mm.
The Atlas Mountains are located mainly in the center and the south of the country.
Tourism is increasingly focused on Morocco's culture, such as its ancient cities.
Although Morocco runs a structural trade deficit, this is typically offset by substantial services earnings from tourism and large remittance inflows from the diaspora, and the country normally runs a small current-account surplus.
Morocco and the Polisario Front held UN-sponsored talks in New York but failed to come to any agreement.
The Moroccan–American Treaty of Friendship, signed in 1786, stands as the U.S.'s oldest non-broken friendship treaty.
Between 1921 and 1926, a Berber uprising in the Rif Mountains, led by Abd el-Krim, led to the establishment of the Republic of the Rif.
He can also dissolve the parliament after consulting the Prime Minister and the president of the Constitutional court.
Recognition by the United Kingdom of France's sphere of influence provoked a strong reaction from the German Empire; and a crisis loomed in 1905.
Morocco's once prominent Jewish minority has decreased significantly since its peak of 265,000 in 1948, declining to around 2,500 today.
In July 2011, the King won a landslide victory in a referendum on a reformed constitution he had proposed to placate the Arab Spring protests.
Since the constitutional reform of 1996, the bicameral legislature consists of two chambers.
Chaabi was originally performed in markets, but is now found at any celebration or meeting.
The south-Eastern regions, basically the driest areas, receive between 100&nbsp;mm and 200&nbsp;mm only, and consists basically of arid and desert lands.
Also, the region extends from the Mediterranean in the south, home of the Wergha River, to the north.
*'''Precipitations:'''
Bakeries are very common throughout Morocco and fresh bread is a staple in every city, town and village.
On 20 December 1777, Morocco's Sultan Mohammed III declared that American merchant ships would be under the protection of the sultanate and could thus enjoy safe passage.
Casablanca is the major cruise port in Morocco, and has the best developed market for tourists in Morocco, Marrakech in central Morocco is a popular tourist destination, but is more popular among tourists for one- and two-day excursions that provide a taste of Morocco's history and culture.
Nawal El Moutawakel won in the 400 metres hurdles; she was the first woman from an Arab or Islamic country to win an Olympic gold medal.
Those writers were an important influence the many Moroccan novelists, poets and playwrights that were still to come.
The prolonged war was a considerable financial drain on Morocco.
After Miknasa broke off relations with the Fatimids in 932, they were removed from power by the Maghrawa of Sijilmasa in 980.
Where winters are chilly to mild and wet.
In the 2007 Casablanca bombings, three suspected suicide bombers blew themselves up, a few weeks after a suicide blast in an internet cafe that injured three.
Moroccan and Algerian troops soon clashed in Western Sahara.
Prior to independence, Morocco was home to half a million Europeans.
The largest city is Casablanca.
Morocco remains the only African state not to be a member of the African Union due to its unilateral withdrawal on 12 November 1984 over the admission of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic in 1982 by the African Union (then called Organization of African Unity) as a full member without the organization of a referendum of self-determination in the disputed territory of Western Sahara.
Algeria borders Morocco to the east and southeast, though the border between the two countries has been closed since 1994.
Throughout this time, the Berber inhabitants in the high mountains of the interior of Morocco remained unsubdued.
Most foreign resident Christians reside in the Casablanca, Tangier, and Rabat urban areas.
The cuisine of Morocco is mainly Berber-Moorish, European, Mediterranean cuisines.
However, these phenomenons don't last for more than 2 to 5 days on average.
A sizeable portion of the population is identified as Haratin and Gnawa (or Gnaoua), black or mixed race descendants of slaves, and Moriscos, European Muslims expelled from Spain and Portugal in the 17th century.
Notable cities: Fès, Meknès, Chefchaouen, Beni-Mellal and Taza.
After the outbreak of the Great Berber Revolt in 739, the Berbers formed other independent states such as the Miknasa of Sijilmasa and the Barghawata.
Most regions live distinct seasons where summer is usually not spoiled by rain and winter turns wet, snowy and humid with mild, cool to cold temperatures.
Its political capital is Rabat.
The geography of Morocco spans from the Atlantic Ocean, to mountainous areas, to the Sahara desert.
There is a significant minority of Sub-Saharan African and European people.
North Africa and Morocco were slowly drawn into the wider emerging Mediterranean world by the Phoenicians, who established trading colonies and settlements in the early Classical period.
Morocco claims the non-self-governing territory of Western Sahara as its Southern Provinces.
French is widely used in governmental institutions, media, mid-size and large companies, international commerce with French-speaking countries, and often in international diplomacy.
They are also developing desert tourism in competition with Tunisia.
Saïd Aouita won the 5000 metres at the same games.
At higher elevations, the climate becomes Alpine in character, and can sustain ski resorts.
However, as forecasts indicate that energy requirements in Morocco will rise 6% per year between 2012 and 2050, a new law passed encouraging Moroccans to look for ways to diversify the energy supply, including more renewable resources.
''Aita'' is a Bedouin musical style sung in the countryside.
The Rif mountains stretch over the region bordering the Mediterranean from the north-west to the north-east.
Morocco is a member of the United Nations and belongs to the Arab League, Arab Maghreb Union (UMA), Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), the Non-Aligned Movement and the Community of Sahel-Saharan States (CEN_SAD).
Tennis and golf have become popular.
The Idrisids established Fes as their capital and Morocco became a centre of Muslim learning and a major regional power.
Spanish territory in North Africa neighbouring Morocco comprises five enclaves on the Mediterranean coast: Ceuta, Melilla, Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera, Peñón de Alhucemas, the Chafarinas islands, and the disputed islet Perejil.
However, It's notable to say that we usually find Mediterranean characteristics in those regions, such as the precipitation pattern and thermal attributes.
Morocco claims that the Western Sahara is part of its territory and refers to that as its Southern Provinces.
In the 5th century AD, as the Roman Empire declined, the region was invaded from the north first by the Vandals and then by the Visigoths.
Countries or regions that share the same climatic characteristics with Morocco: California (USA), Portugal, Spain and Algeria.
, no UN member state has recognized Moroccan sovereignty over Western Sahara.
Morocco is an influential member of the Arab League and a part of the Union for the Mediterranean.
*'''Sub-Mediterranean:''' it influences cities that show Mediterranean characteristics, but remain fairly influenced by other climates owing to their either relative elevation, or direct exposure to the North Atlantic Ocean.
Morocco has had strong ties to the West in order to gain economic and political benefits.
Also of note, this region hosts more "Riffians" with lighter hair, having a higher percentage of blondism than most other groups of Berbers, though the ancestry is likely mixed and quite similar.
The modern tourist industry capitalizes on Morocco's ancient Roman and Islamic sites, and on its landscape and cultural history.
Despite the reforms made by Mohamed VI demonstrators continued to call for deeper reforms.
The King of Morocco holds vast executive and legislative powers, especially over the military, foreign policy and religious affairs.
Among the buildings, and old Kasbah walls, sit French style-towns left behind by colonization and intersect with intricately detailed mosques and riad-style homes.
Approximately 5% of Moroccan land is irrigated for agricultural use.
Some 350,000 civilians were reported as being involved in the "Green March".
In 2006, the government of Morocco has suggested autonomous status for the region, through the Moroccan Royal Advisory Council for Saharan Affairs (CORCAS).
Annual precipitations vary between 500 and 900&nbsp;mm.
In 2010, there were 10,366,000 French-speakers in Morocco, or about 32% of the population.
Relict populations of the West African crocodile persisted in the Draa river until the 20th century.
Geographically, Morocco is characterized by a rugged mountainous interior and large portions of desert.
These small enclaves on the Mediterranean coast are surrounded by Morocco and have been administered by Spain for centuries.
With the 2011 constitutional reforms, the King of Morocco retains less executive powers whereas those of the prime minister have been enlarged.
In 2005 a National Sanitation Program was approved that aims at treating 60% of collected wastewater and connecting 80% of urban households to sewers by 2020.
The Rif Mountains are located in the north of the country.
More than 40 people were given long prison sentences for this bombing.
The work on the High Speed Rail project was started in September 2011.
The Maghreb arm of al-Qaeda denied involvement.
It should be noted also, that orature (oral literature) is an integral part of Moroccan culture, be it in Moroccan Arabic or Amazigh.
France allowed Mohammed V to return in 1955, and the negotiations that led to Moroccan independence began the following year.
It is also Influenced by Sephardic cuisine and by the Moriscos when they took refuge in Morocco after the Spanish Reconquista.
The Roman Empire controlled this region from the 1st century BC, naming it Mauretania Tingitana.
In 2008, two Moroccan men, Abdelilah Ahriz and Hicham Ahmidan, were sentenced to 20 and 10 years in jail respectively in Morocco over the Madrid train bombings of 2004.
The Almohad built the Koutoubia Mosque in Marrakesh, which accommodated no fewer than 25,000 people, but was also famed for its books, manuscripts, libraries and book shops, which gave it its name; the first book bazaar in history.
This is a result of the centuries-long interaction of Morocco with the outside world.
Where spring and fall see warm to mild weather characterized by flower blooming in spring and falling leaves in autumn.
The Berber language is spoken in three dialects (Tarifit, Tashelhit and Central Atlas Tamazight).
However it's important to note that temperatures drop as sun sets.
Notable cities: Khenifra, Imilchil, Midelt and Azilal.
Many countries from the Persian Gulf and Maghreb regions are getting more involved in large-scale development projects in Morocco.
The lower chamber of Parliament may dissolve the government through a vote of no confidence.
The main Moroccan dish most people are familiar with is couscous, the old national delicacy.
Sales of fish and seafood are important as well.
In 1860, a dispute over Spain's Ceuta enclave led Spain to declare war.
Mitochondrial DNA (MtDNA) studies have discovered a close link between Berbers and the Saami of Scandinavia.
Thus we have the following climate zones:
In 2008, Frédéric Deroche estimated that there were 12&nbsp;million Berber speakers, making up about 40% of the population.
The Spanish enclave of Ifni in the south was returned to Morocco in 1969.
Upon the death of King Mohammed V, Hassan II became King of Morocco on 3 March 1961.
Its leading institutions include Mohammed V University in Rabat, the country's largest university, with branches in Casablanca and Fès; the Hassan II Agriculture and Veterinary Institute in Rabat, which conducts leading social science research in addition to its agricultural specialties; and Al-Akhawayn University in Ifrane, the first English-language university in North Africa, inaugurated in 1995 with contributions from Saudi Arabia and the United States.
It has the sixth-largest economy in Africa.
In 1884, Spain created a protectorate in the coastal areas of Morocco.
Morocco has a population of over 33.8&nbsp;million and an area of .
The rebellion was eventually suppressed by French and Spanish troops.
It was founded by Salih I ibn Mansur in 710, as a client state to the Rashidun Caliphate.
Morocco is represented in the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 geographical encoding standard by the symbol ''MA''.
After the death of al-Mansur, the country was divided among his sons.
At the 1984 Olympic Games, two Moroccans won gold medals in track and field.
In 2008, about 56% of Morocco's electricity supply was provided by coal.
Hicham El Guerrouj won gold medals for Morocco at the 2004 Summer Olympics in the 1500 metres and 5000 metres and holds several world records in the mile run.
In the 13th and 14th centuries the Merinids held power in Morocco and strove to replicate the successes of the Almohads by military campaigns in Algeria and Spain.
Morocco has also some of prestigious postgraduate schools, including: École Nationale Supérieure d'Électricité et de Mecanique (ENSEM), EMI, ISCAE, INSEA, National School of Mineral Industry, École Hassania des Travaux Publics, Les Écoles nationales de commerce et de gestion, École supérieure de technologie de Casablanca.
Annual precipitation vary from 400 to 700&nbsp;mm.
Morocco and Mauritania divided up Western Sahara.
Night temperatures usually fall below , and sometimes as low as  in plain summer.
From the 13th century onwards the country saw a massive migration of Banu Hilal Arab tribes.
South of Agadir and East under Jerada near the Algerian borders, arid and desert climate starts to prevail.
Morocco participated in the 1980 Eurovision Song Contest, where it finished in the penultimate position.
"Marrakesh" (مراكش) remains the current name for Morocco in many south Asian languages such as Persian (Iran), Urdu (Pakistan), Punjabi (India) and Pashto (Afghanistan).
The following decade saw much wrangling over a proposed referendum on the future of the territory but the deadlock was not broken.
In the 15th century, the Reconquista ended Muslim rule in central and southern Spain and many Muslims and Jews fled to Morocco.
In addition to that, Morocco is a transit point for cocaine from South America destined for Western Europe.
The Arabic name ''al-Mamlakah al-Maghribiyah'' (, meaning "The Western Kingdom") and ''Al-Maghrib'' (, meaning "The West") are commonly used as alternate names.
Morocco is home to more than 20,000 sub-Saharan African immigrants.
In the beginning of the American Revolution, American merchant ships in the Atlantic Ocean were subject to attack by the Barbary pirates.
The issue of lack of water connections for some of the urban poor is being addressed as part of the National Human Development Initiative, under which residents of informal settlements have received land titles and have fees waived that are normally paid to utilities in order to connect to the water and sewer network.
The Assembly of Representatives of Morocco (''Majlis an-Nuwwâb/Assemblée des Répresentants'') has 325 members elected for a five-year term, 295 elected in multi-seat constituencies and 30 in national lists consisting only of women.
Morocco has become a major player in the African economic affairs, and is the 5th African economy by GDP (PPP).
Diplomatic relations with Algeria were restored in 1988.
Popular Western forms of music are becoming increasingly popular in Morocco, such as fusion, rock, country, metal and, in particular, hip hop.
The Baha’i community, located in urban areas, numbers 350 to 400 persons.
French is taught as an obligatory language at all schools.
Moroccan forces occupied the territory.
A historically prominent regional power, Morocco has a history of independence not shared by its neighbours.
In 1991, a UN-monitored ceasefire began in Western Sahara, but the territory's status remains undecided and ceasefire violations are reported.
Morocco's relatively high amount of tourists has been aided by its location, Morocco is close to Europe and attracts visitors to its beaches.
Moroccan literature flourished with novelists such as Mohamed Zafzaf and Mohamed Choukri, who wrote in Arabic, and Driss Chraïbi and Tahar Ben Jelloun who wrote in French.
Low-cost airlines offer cheap flights to the country.
Air services between Morocco and Algeria have been established, many Algerians have gone to Morocco to shop and visit family and friends.
He was also wanted in Spain over the Madrid bombings.
-''Oceanic:'' Determined by the cooler summers, where highs rarely go above  and in terms of Essaouira region are almost always around .
22,000 years ago, the Aterian was succeeded by the Iberomaurusian culture, which shared similarities with Iberian cultures.
In February 2003, a Casablanca court sentenced three Saudi members of al-Qaeda to 10 years after they were accused of plotting to attack US and British warships in the Straits of Gibraltar.
Many of the Berbers slowly converted to Islam, mostly after Arab rule had receded.
The Moroccan National Theatre (founded 1956) offers regular productions of Moroccan and French dramatic works.
In 1986, Morocco became the first Arab and African country to qualify for the second round of the FIFA World Cup.
The matter was resolved at the Algeciras Conference in 1906.
Morocco's relationships vary greatly between African, Arab, and Western states.
The Security Council has called upon the parties to enter into direct and unconditional negotiations to reach a mutually accepted political solution.
Notable cities that fall into this zone: Rabat, Casablanca, Kénitra, Salé and Essaouira.
Art and music festivals take place throughout the country during the summer months, among them the World Sacred Music Festival at Fès.
The institution of slavery was abolished in 1925.
Morocco has set among its top priorities the protection of its diverse legacy and the preservation of its cultural heritage.
There have been substantial improvements in access to water supply, and to a lesser extent to sanitation, over the past fifteen years.
Spectator sports in Morocco traditionally centered on the art of horsemanship until European sports—football, polo, swimming, and tennis—were introduced at the end of the 19th century.
Tea occupies a very important place in the culture of Morocco and is considered an art form.
In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 5.19% of the country's GDP.
Moroccan literature then flourished with writers such as Mohamed Choukri, Driss Chraïbi, Mohamed Zafzaf and Driss El Khouri.
Against the opposition of local tribes Ismail Ibn Sharif (1672–1727) began to create a unified state.
Moroccan dialect, referred to as ''Darija'', and French are also widely spoken.
Like many other Maghreb nations, Moroccan rugby tended to look to Europe for inspiration, rather than to the rest of Africa.
According to the 2004 census, 2.19&nbsp;million Moroccans spoke a foreign language other than French.
The Moroccan government has launched a project to build a solar thermal energy power plant and is also looking into the use of natural gas as a potential source of revenue for Morocco's government.
The Saharawi group Polisario maintains an active militia of an estimated 5,000 fighters in Western Sahara and has engaged in intermittent warfare with Moroccan forces since the 1970s.
Notable cities that fall into this zone: Tangier, Tetouan, Al Hoceima, Nador and Safi.
The religious affiliation in the country was estimated by the Pew Forum in 2010 as 99% Muslim, with all remaining groups accounting for less than 1% of the population.
Polisario claimed to have killed more than 5,000 Moroccan soldiers between 1982 and 1985.
Morocco suffers both from unemployment (9.6% in 2008), and a large external debt estimated at around $20&nbsp;billion, or half of GDP in 2002.
Morocco has more than four dozen universities, institutes of higher learning, and polytechnics dispersed at urban centres throughout the country.
A United Nations mission, MINURSO, is tasked with organizing a referendum on whether the territory should become independent or recognized as a part of Morocco.
The country's distinctive group of Moroccan Arabic dialects is referred to as Darija.
Since 1993, the country has followed a policy of privatization of certain economic sectors which used to be in the hands of the government.
Soon after, the alleged al-Qaeda leader in Morocco, Belgian-Moroccan Abdelkader Belliraj, was imprisoned for life on being found guilty of leading an Islamist militant group and committing six murders in Belgium.
In 670&nbsp;AD, the first Islamic conquest of the North African coastal plain took place under Uqba ibn Nafi, a general serving under the Umayyads of Damascus.
Three generations of writers especially shaped 20th century Moroccan literature.
It hosts various forms of beliefs, from paganism, Judaism, and Christianity to Islam.
There are also a number of flat breads and pulled unleavened pan-fried breads.
Part of the territory, the Free Zone, is a mostly uninhabited area that the Polisario Front controls as the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic.
