Morphine monohydrate
Since they derive from a strong acid but weak base, they are both at about pH = 5; as a consequence, the morphine salts are mixed with small amounts of NaOH to make them suitable for injection.
CCK might mediate some counter-regulatory pathways responsible for opioid tolerance.
A 2009 review determined that, when the analyte is morphine and the limit of detection is 1ng/ml, a 20mg intravenous (IV) dose of morphine is detectable for 12–24 hours.
1900), the dihydromorphinone class of opioids (1920s), and oxycodone (1916) and similar drugs, there were no other drugs in the same efficacy range as opium, morphine, and heroin, with synthetics still several years away (pethidine was invented in Germany in 1937) and opioid agonists among the semi-synthetics were analogues and derivatives of codeine such as dihydrocodeine (Paracodin), ethylmorphine (Dionine), and benzylmorphine (Peronine).
Metabolism rate is determined by gender, age, diet, genetic makeup, disease state (if any), and use of other medications.
Often this is done with drugs produced by catalytic reduction, hydrogenation, oxidation, or the like, producing strong derivatives of morphine and codeine.
used clinically in many countries of the world but in many cases also produced illicitly in rare instances.
A single injection of morphine has been shown to alter the expression of two major groups of genes, for proteins involved in mitochondrial respiration and for cytoskeleton-related proteins.
This idea has been a subject of controversy, as there have been suggestions that such a disease was in fact a fabrication; the first documented use of the phrase "soldier's disease" was in 1915.
and codeine to hydrocodone (Dicodid), dihydrocodeine (Paracodin), etc.
Select forms of morphine as 'morphiniums' or ''N''-protonated cations of morphine, i.e.
It is also a precursor for many drugs including heroin (3,6-diacetylmorphine), hydromorphone (dihydromorphinone), and oxymorphone (14-hydroxydihydromorphinone); many morphine derivatives can also be manufactured using thebaine or codeine as a starting material.
Short-term addiction studies by the same researchers demonstrated that tolerance developed at a similar rate to both heroin and morphine.
Like loperamide and other opioids, morphine acts on the myenteric plexus in the intestinal tract, reducing gut motility, causing constipation.
The authors suggest that morphine administration in the acute post-injury period may reduce resistance to infection and may impair the healing of the wound.
During the acute withdrawal period, systolic and diastolic blood pressures increase, usually beyond premorphine levels, and heart rate increases, which have potential to cause a heart attack, blood clot, or stroke.
Glacial acetic acid can be used to obtain a mixture high in 6-monoacetylmorphine, niacin (vitamin B3) in some form would be precursor to 6-nicotinylmorphine, salicylic acid may yield the salicyoyl analogue of 6-MAM, and so on.
For patients sensitive to the side-effects that in part may be a result of the unnatural pharmacological actions of buprenorphine and methadone, slow-release oral morphine formulations offer a promising future for use managing opiate addiction.
A number of salts of morphine are used, with the most common in current clinical use being the hydrochloride, sulfate, tartrate, and citrate; less commonly methobromide, hydrobromide, hydroiodide, lactate, chloride, and bitartrate and the others listed below.
Further studies on the effects of morphine on the immune system have shown that morphine influences the production of neutrophils and other cytokines.
This is generally believed to be the first isolation of an active ingredient from a plant.
Since heroin is one of a series of 3,6 diesters of morphine, it is possible to convert morphine to nicomorphine (Vilan) using nicotinic anhydride, dipropanoylmorphine with propionic anhydride, dibutanoylmorphine and disalicyloylmorphine with the respective acid anhydrides.
The human body produces endorphins, which are endogenous opioid peptides that function as neurotransmitters and have similar effects.
It is important to note that this study reveals that COAT patients have no domain-specific deficits, which supports the notion that chronic opioid use has minor effects on psychomotor, cognitive, or neuropsychological functioning.
Once treated with morphine, the p38 MAPK does not produce IL-10, instead favoring production of IL-12.
Another source of illicit morphine comes from the extraction of morphine from extended-release morphine products, such as MS-Contin.
Several other syntheses were reported, notably by the research groups of Rice,  Evans, Fuchs, Parker, Overman, Mulzer-Trauner, White, Taber, Trost, Fukuyama, Guillou, and Stork.
* Halogenating or making other modifications at positions 1 or 2 on the morphine carbon skeleton.
An alternative latex method sometimes used in China in the past is to cut off the poppy heads, run a large needle through them, and collect the dried latex 24 to 48 hours later.
It can be given by mouth, by injection into a muscle, by injecting under the skin, intravenously, into the space around the spinal cord, or rectally.
The primary source of morphine is isolation from poppy straw of the opium poppy.
The latter method can be as time-consuming and involved as traditional methods of smoking opium.
0.15 g/L at 20&nbsp;°C
Morphine can cross the blood–brain barrier, but, because of poor lipid solubility, protein binding, rapid conjugation with glucuronic acid and ionization, it does not cross easily.
* Attachment, removal or modification of functional groups to positions 3 or 6 (dihydrocodeine and related, hydrocodone, nicomorphine); in the case of moving the methyl functional group from position 3 to 6, codeine becomes heterocodeine, which is 72 times stronger, and therefore six times stronger than morphine
About 60% of morphine is converted to M3G, and 6–10% is converted to M6G.
Morphine hydrobromide (2 H2O)
Psychological withdrawal from morphine is usually a very long and painful process.
Morphine sulfate (5 H2O)
Morphine withdrawal is considered less dangerous than alcohol, barbiturate, or benzodiazepine withdrawal.
The poppy straw methods predominate in Continental Europe and the British Commonwealth, with the latex method in most common use in India.
This phosphorylation activates the p38 MAPK to begin producing IL-10 and IL-12.
These patients showed no impairments in higher order cognitive abilities (i.e., planning).
* Two hydroxyl functional groups: a C3-phenolic OH (p''K''a 9.9) and a C6-allylic OH,
* '''Stage III''', 16 to 24 hours after last dose: Rhinorrhea (runny nose) and increase in other of the above, dilated pupils, piloerection (goose bumps – giving the name 'cold turkey'), muscle twitches, hot flashes, cold flashes, aching bones and muscles, loss of appetite, and the beginning of intestinal cramping
Its primary actions of therapeutic value are analgesia and sedation.
The first morphine total synthesis, devised by Marshall D. Gates, Jr. in 1952, remains a widely used example of total synthesis.
Heroin is approximately 1.5 to 2 times more potent than morphine weight for weight.
Morphine is a phenanthrene opioid receptor agonist&nbsp;– its main effect is binding to and activating the μ-opioid receptors in the central nervous system.
Whereas the pH of a saturated morphine hydrate solution is 8.5, the salts are acidic.
A limit of detection of 0.6ng/ml had similar results.
The drug was first marketed to the general public by Sertürner and Company in 1817 as an analgesic, and also as a treatment for opium and alcohol addiction.
"Driving Miss Emma" is intravenous administration of morphine.
Morphine isobutyrate
Morphine is also available as a slow-release formulation for opiate substitution therapy (OST) in Austria, Bulgaria, and Slovenia, for addicts who cannot tolerate either methadone or buprenorphine.
Morphine has a high potential for addiction and abuse.
Another means of using or misusing morphine is to use chemical reactions to turn it into heroin or another stronger opioid.
Morphine meconate is a major form of the alkaloid in the poppy, as is morphine pectinate, nitrate, sulphate, and some others.
Morphine appears to mimic endorphins.
It acts directly on the central nervous system (CNS) to decrease the feeling of pain.
This species is rather a source of thebaine.
The modification of morphine and the aforementioned synthetics has also given rise to non-narcotic drugs with other uses such as emetics, stimulants, antitussives, anticholinergics, muscle relaxants, local anaesthetics, general anaesthetics, and others.
Morphine and its major metabolites, morphine-3-glucuronide and morphine-6-glucuronide, can be detected in blood, plasma, hair, and urine using an immunoassay.
* 5 centers of chirality (C5, C6, C9, C13 and C14) with morphine exhibiting a high degree of stereoselectivity of analgesic action.
Without intervention, the syndrome will run its course, and most of the overt physical symptoms will disappear within 7 to 10 days including psychological dependence.
Due to the lipid solubility of diacetylmorphine, it can cross the blood–brain barrier faster than morphine, subsequently increasing the reinforcing component of addiction.
Chromatography can be used to test for each of these substances individually.
Long-acting formulations also exist.
Morphine is a highly addictive substance.
In the opium poppy, the alkaloids are bound to meconic acid.
This regulation of cytokines appear to occur via the p38 MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinase)-dependent pathway.
"Blue Velvet" is a combination of morphine with the antihistamine tripelennamine (Pyrabenzamine, PBZ, Pelamine) taken by injection, or less commonly the mixture when swallowed or used as a retention enema; the name is also known to refer to a combination of tripelennamine and dihydrocodeine or codeine tablets or syrups taken by mouth.
Like codeine, dihydrocodeine and other (especially older) opiates, morphine has been used as the salicylate salt by some suppliers and can be easily compounded, imparting the therapeutic advantage of both the opioid and the NSAID; multiple barbiturate salts of morphine were also used in the past, as was/is morphine valerate, the salt of the acid being the active principle of valerian.
Morphine has long been known to act on receptors expressed on cells of the central nervous system resulting in pain relief and analgesia.
Morphine is the most abundant opiate found in opium, the dried latex extracted by shallowly scoring the unripe seedpods of the ''Papaver somniferum'' poppy.
Dihydromorphine can be acetylated into another 3,6 morphine diester, namely diacetyldihydromorphine (Paralaudin), and hydrocodone into thebacon.
Thus, heroin may be thought of as a more rapidly acting form of morphine.
Morphine can be extracted from these products with simple extraction techniques to yield a morphine solution that can be injected.
The exact mechanism through which the production of one cytokine is increased in favor over another is not known.
Morphine valerate produced industrially was one ingredient of a medication available for both oral and parenteral administration popular many years ago in Europe and elsewhere called Trivalin (not to be confused with the current, unrelated herbal preparation of the same name), which also included the valerates of caffeine and cocaine, with a version containing codeine valerate as a fourth ingredient being distributed under the name Tetravalin.
The first step of determining that morphine may affect the immune system was to establish that the opiate receptors known to be expressed on cells of the central nervous system are also expressed on cells of the immune system.
Morphine is generally 8–14% of the dry weight of opium, although specially bred cultivars reach 26% or produce little morphine at all (under 1%, perhaps down to 0.04%).
'''Morphine''', sold under many trade names, is a pain medication of the opiate type.
Morphine is metabolized primarily into morphine-3-glucuronide (M3G) and morphine-6-glucuronide (M6G) via glucuronidation by phase II metabolism enzyme UDP-glucuronosyl transferase-2B7 (UGT2B7).
Heroin is converted to morphine before binding to the opioid receptors in the brain and spinal cord, where morphine causes the subjective effects, which is what the addicted individuals are seeking.
Morphine methyliodide
They are also found on the terminal axons of primary afferents within laminae I and II (substantia gelatinosa) of the spinal cord and in the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve.
δ-Opioid is thought to play a role in analgesia.
In terms of cognitive abilities, one study has shown that morphine may have a negative impact on anterograde and retrograde memory, but these effects are minimal and transient.
Calcium morphenate is the intermediate in various latex and poppy-straw methods of morphine production, more rarely sodium morphenate takes its place.
Morphine became a controlled substance in the US under the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act of 1914, and possession without a prescription in the US is a criminal offense.
As commonly cited, they are:
Morphine dinicotinate HCl (Nicomorphine)
Some opioid agonist-antagonists, partial agonists, and inverse agonists are also derived from morphine.
It is also used for pain due to myocardial infarction and for labor pains.
Overall, it seems that acute doses of opioids in non-tolerant subjects produce minor effects in some sensory and motor abilities, and perhaps also in attention and cognition.
Merck began marketing it commercially in 1827.
On the streets, it is becoming more common to inhale ("Chasing the Dragon"), but, for medical purposes, intravenous (IV) injection is the most common method of administration.
The structural formula of morphine was determined by 1925 by Robert Robinson.
In general, non-medical use of morphine entails taking more than prescribed or outside of medical supervision, injecting oral formulations, mixing it with unapproved potentiators such as alcohol, cocaine, and the like, or defeating the extended-release mechanism by chewing the tablets or turning into a powder for snorting or preparing injectables.
Diacetylmorphine, which is derived from morphine, crosses the blood–brain barrier more easily, making it more potent.
Multi-purpose tablets (readily soluble hypodermic tablets that can also be swallowed or dissolved under the tongue or betwixt the cheek and jaw) are known, as are some brands of hydromorphone, as Shake & Bake or Shake & Shoot.
A 2006 review, though, found little evidence to support this practice.
Other opioids differ in the intensity and length of each, and weak opioids and mixed agonist-antagonists may have acute withdrawal syndromes that do not reach the highest level.
Morphine and most of its derivatives do not exhibit optical isomerism, although some more distant relatives like the morphinan series (levorphanol, dextorphan and the racemic parent chemical dromoran) do, and as noted above stereoselectivity in vivo is an important issue.
Resultant plasma levels after subcutaneous (SC), intramuscular (IM), and IV injection are all comparable.
Long after the physical need for morphine has passed, the addict will usually continue to think and talk about the use of morphine (or other drugs) and feel strange or overwhelmed coping with daily activities without being under the influence of morphine.
Some testing procedures hydrolyze metabolic products into morphine before the immunoassay, which must be considered when comparing morphine levels in separately published results.
Free base conversion ratio
Diacetylmorphine (better known as heroin) was synthesized from morphine in 1874 and brought to market by Bayer in 1898.
To perform a relatively crude acetylation to turn the morphine into heroin and related drugs immediately prior to use is known as AAing (for Acetic Anhydride) or home-bake, and the output of the procedure also known as home-bake or, Blue Heroin (not to be confused with Blue Magic heroin, or the linctus known as Blue Morphine or Blue Morphone, or the Blue Velvet mixture described above).
Some purpose-developed strains of poppy now produce opium that is up to 26% morphine by weight.
Multiple doses may be needed.
Combining this modification with the replacement of the 6-hydroxyl with a 6-methylene group produces a compound some 1,443 times more potent than morphine, stronger than the Bentley compounds such as etorphine (M99, the Immobilon tranquilliser dart) by some measures.
It is believed that the strong opioid with the most incomplete cross-tolerance with morphine is either methadone or dextromoramide.
The findings from this study suggest that stable opioid use does not significantly impair abilities inherent in driving (this includes physical, cognitive and perceptual skills).
Morphine has resulted in impaired functioning on critical flicker frequency (a measure of overall CNS arousal) and impaired performance on the Maddox wing test (a measure of deviation of the visual axes of the eyes).
The clandestine conversion of morphine to ketones of the hydromorphone class or other derivatives like dihydromorphine (Paramorfan), desomorphine (Permonid), metopon, etc.
Morphine was the most commonly abused narcotic analgesic in the world until heroin was synthesized and came into use.
Researchers are attempting to reproduce the biosynthetic pathway that produces morphine in genetically engineered yeast.
From the solution obtained at the last extraction step, the alkaloids are precipitated by either ammonium hydroxide or sodium carbonate.
Endogenous opioids include endorphins, enkephalins, dynorphins, and even morphine itself.
Morphine addiction is the model upon which the current perception of addiction is based.
The latter completely reverses morphine's effects, but may result in immediate onset of withdrawal in opiate-addicted subjects.
Severe headache, restlessness, irritability, loss of appetite, body aches, severe abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, tremors, and even stronger and more intense drug craving appear as the syndrome progresses.
Once in the brain, these acetyl groups are removed to yield morphine, which causes the subjective effects of heroin.
The long-acting nature of slow-release morphine mimics that of buprenorphine because the sustained blood levels are relatively flat so there is no "high" per se that a patient would feel but rather a sustained feeling of wellness and avoidance of withdrawal symptoms.
Morphine hypophosphite
However, recent studies have been able to show some impairments caused by morphine, which is not surprising, given that morphine is a central nervous system depressant.
Morphine can also be isolated from whole blood samples by solid phase extraction (SPE) and detected using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS).
As a result of the extensive study and use of this molecule, more than 250 morphine derivatives (also counting codeine and related drugs) have been developed since the last quarter of the 19th century.
At any point during this process, a suitable narcotic can be administered that will dramatically reverse the withdrawal symptoms.
Morphine hydrochloride
Addicts often suffer severe depression, anxiety, insomnia, mood swings, amnesia (forgetfulness), low self-esteem, confusion, paranoia, and other psychological disorders.
Common side effects include drowsiness, vomiting, and constipation.
Both morphine and its hydrated form, C17H19NO3H2O, are sparingly soluble in water.
In chronic opioid users, such as those on Chronic Opioid Analgesic Therapy (COAT) for managing severe, chronic pain, behavioural testing has shown normal functioning on perception, cognition, coordination and behaviour in most cases.
In August 2015 the first complete synthesis of thebaine and hydrocodone in yeast were reported, but the process would need to be 100,000 times more productive to be suitable for commercial use.
The somewhat similar Gregory process was developed in the United Kingdom during the Second World War, which begins with stewing the entire plant, in most cases save the roots and leaves, in plain or mildly acidified water, then proceeding through steps of concentration, extraction, and purification of alkaloids.
Morphine phosphate (7 H2O)
The salts listed by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration for reporting purposes, in addition to a few others, are as follows:
One study successfully showed that dendritic cells, part of the innate immune system, display opiate receptors.
Activation of the μ-opioid receptors is associated with analgesia, sedation, euphoria, physical dependence, and respiratory depression.
Following hind-paw incision, pain thresholds and cytokine production were measured.
The  enzymes involved in this process are the salutaridine synthase, salutaridine:NADPH 7-oxidoreductase and the codeinone reductase.
Severe pains in the bones and muscles of the back and extremities occur, as do muscle spasms.
Reduction in gut secretion and increased intestinal fluid absorption also contribute to the constipating effect.
It is a Schedule II drug in the United States, Class A in the United Kingdom, and Schedule I in Canada.
Morphine is also a κ-opioid and δ-opioid receptor agonist, κ-opioid's action is associated with spinal analgesia, miosis (pinpoint pupils) and psychotomimetic effects.
* '''Stage IV''', 24 to 36 hours after last dose: Increase in all of the above including severe cramping and involuntary leg movements ("kicking the habit" also called restless leg syndrome), loose stool, insomnia, elevation of blood pressure, moderate elevation in body temperature, increase in frequency of breathing and tidal volume, tachycardia (elevated pulse), restlessness, nausea
It is converted into salutaridine, thebaine, and oripavine.
Caution is advised when used during pregnancy or breast feeding, as morphine will affect the baby.
Most of the licit morphine produced is used to make codeine by methylation.
Morphine is the prototype narcotic drug and is the standard against which all other opioids are tested.
bracteatum'' does not contain morphine or codeine, or other narcotic phenanthrene-type, alkaloids.
For this reason, pharmaceutical companies produce sulfate and hydrochloride salts of the drug, both of which are over 300 times more water-soluble than their parent molecule.
Opioids also may act on the gut indirectly through tonic gut spasms after inhibition of nitric oxide generation.
Using a variety of subjective and objective measures, one study estimated the relative potency of heroin to morphine administered intravenously to post-addicts to be 1.80–2.66&nbsp;mg of morphine sulfate to 1&nbsp;mg of diamorphine hydrochloride (heroin).
Testimony to morphine's addictive and reinforcing nature is its relapse rate.
M6G binds to μ-receptors and is half as potent an analgesic as morphine in humans.
Although morphine is cheap, people in poorer countries often do not have access to it.
The withdrawal symptoms associated with morphine addiction are usually experienced shortly before the time of the next scheduled dose, sometimes within as early as a few hours (usually 6–12 hours) after the last administration.
Morphine can be stored in fat, and, thus, can be detectable even after death.
The minimum lethal dose is 200&nbsp;mg, but in case of hypersensitivity, 60&nbsp;mg can bring sudden death.
In 2013, an estimated 523,000 kilograms of morphine were produced.
ionic salts & chemical form with freebase conversion ratios:
Acute morphine withdrawal, along with that of any other opioid, proceeds through a number of stages.
Morphine is also available in a paste that is used in the production of heroin, which can be smoked by itself or turned to a soluble salt and injected; the same goes for the penultimate products of the Kompot (Polish Heroin) and black tar processes.
* Saturating, opening, or other changes to the bond between positions 7 and 8, as well as adding, removing, or modifying functional groups to these positions; saturating, reducing, eliminating, or otherwise modifying the 7–8 bond and attaching a functional group at 14 yields hydromorphinol; the oxidation of the hydroxyl group to a carbonyl and changing the 7–8 bond to single from double changes codeine into oxycodone.
The choice of heroin and morphine over other opioids by former drug addicts may also be because heroin (also known as morphine diacetate, diamorphine, or diacetyl morphine) is an ester of morphine and a morphine prodrug, essentially meaning they are identical drugs ''in vivo''.
Normally, cytokine production in and around the wounded area increases in order to fight infection and control healing (and, possibly, to control pain), but pre-incisional morphine administration (0.1–10.0&nbsp;mg/kg) reduced the number of cytokines found around the wound in a dose-dependent manner.
Few studies have investigated the effects of morphine on motor abilities; a high dose of morphine can impair finger tapping and the ability to maintain a low constant level of isometric force (i.e.
* '''Stage I''', 6 to 14 hours after last dose: Drug craving, anxiety, irritability, perspiration, and mild to moderate dysphoria
In the late eighteenth century, when the East India Company gained a direct interest in the opium trade through India, another opiate recipe called laudanum became very popular among physicians and their patients.
Endorphins, a contraction of the term endogenous morphines, are responsible for analgesia (reducing pain), causing sleepiness, and feelings of pleasure.
The μ-binding sites are discretely distributed in the human brain, with high densities in the posterior amygdala, hypothalamus, thalamus, nucleus caudatus, putamen, and certain cortical areas.
Slow-release oral morphine has been in widespread use for opiate maintenance therapy in Austria, Bulgaria, and Slovakia for many years and it is available on a small scale in many other countries including the UK.
The stop-gap drugs used by the largest absolute number of heroin addicts is probably codeine, with significant use also of dihydrocodeine, poppy straw derivatives like poppy pod and poppy seed tea, propoxyphene, and tramadol.
Maximum effect is around 20 min when given intravenously and 60 min when given by mouth while duration of effect is between three and seven hours.
Morphine is metabolised primarily in the liver and approximately 87% of a dose of morphine is excreted in the urine within 72 hours of administration.
Experts in pain management attribute the under-distribution of morphine to an unwarranted fear of the drug's potential for addiction and abuse.
Major withdrawal symptoms peak between 48 and 96 hours after the last dose and subside after about 8 to 12 days.
Overdose treatment includes the administration of naloxone.
Morphine bitartrate
However, in Turkey and Tasmania, morphine is obtained by harvesting and processing the fully mature dry seed pods with attached stalks, called ''poppy straw''.
The less affluent countries, accounting for 80% of the world's population, consumed only about 6% of the global morphine supply.
This effect was shown in animals when a nitric oxide precursor, L-arginine, reversed morphine-induced changes in gut motility.
Most use for this purpose was in the developed world.
Chemical changes to the morphine molecule yield other euphorigenics such as dihydromorphine, hydromorphone (Dilaudid, Hydal), and oxymorphone (Numorphan, Opana), as well as the latter three's methylated equivalents dihydrocodeine, hydrocodone, and oxycodone, respectively; in addition to heroin, there are dipropanoylmorphine, diacetyldihydromorphine, and other members of the 3,6 morphine diester category like nicomorphine and other similar semi-synthetic opiates like desomorphine, hydromorphinol, etc.
The euphoria, comprehensive alleviation of distress and therefore all aspects of suffering, promotion of sociability and empathy, "body high", and anxiolysis provided by narcotic drugs including the opioids can cause the use of high doses in the absence of pain for a protracted period, which can impart a morbid craving for the drug in the user.
Morphine may also be metabolized into small amounts of normorphine, codeine, and hydromorphone.
They can be released in response to pain, strenuous exercise, orgasm, or excitement.
Morphine is marketed under many different brand names in various parts of the world.
In general, until the synthesis of dihydromorphine (ca.
It was first used as a poison in 1822 when Dr. Edme Castaing of France was convicted of murdering a patient.
CCK-antagonist drugs, specifically proglumide, have been shown to slow the development of tolerance to morphine.
The rotation of morphine with chemically dissimilar opioids in the long-term treatment of pain will slow down the growth of tolerance in the longer run, particularly agents known to have significantly incomplete cross-tolerance with morphine such as levorphanol, ketobemidone, piritramide, and methadone and its derivatives; all of these drugs also have NMDA antagonist properties.
About 45,000 kilograms were used directly for pain, an increase over the last twenty years of four times.
Abusers of morphine (and heroin) have one of the highest relapse rates among all drug users, ranging up to 98% in the estimation of some medical experts.
