Upon making a mortgage loan for the purchase of a property, lenders usually require that the borrower make a down payment; that is, contribute a portion of the cost of the property.
The underwriting may take a few days to a few weeks.
The price at which the lenders borrow money therefore affects the cost of borrowing.
In the UK there is also the endowment mortgage where the borrowers pay interest while the principal is paid with a life insurance policy.
Depending on the size of the loan and the prevailing practice in the country the term may be short (10 years) or long (50 years plus).
The German Bausparkassen have reported nominal interest rates of approximately 6 per cent per annum in the last 40 years (as of 2004).
These people can now effectively remortgage onto an interest-only lifetime mortgage to maintain continuity.
Like other European countries and the rest of the world, but unlike most of the United States, mortgages loans are usually not nonrecourse debt, meaning debtors are liable for any loan deficiencies after foreclosure.
In some jurisdictions, mortgage loans are non-recourse loans: if the funds recouped from sale of the mortgaged property are insufficient to cover the outstanding debt, the lender may not have recourse to the borrower after foreclosure.
A resurgence in the equity release market has been the introduction of interest-only lifetime mortgages.
The mortgage industry of the United States is a major financial sector.
These programs include the Government National Mortgage Association (known as Ginnie Mae), the Federal National Mortgage Association (known as Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (known as Freddie Mac).
Historically, investment-backed mortgages offered various tax advantages over repayment mortgages, although this is no longer the case in the UK.
This type of arrangement is called an ''investment-backed mortgage'' or is often related to the type of plan used: endowment mortgage if an endowment policy is used, similarly a Personal Equity Plan (PEP) mortgage, Individual Savings Account (ISA) mortgage or pension mortgage.
Instead, most properties there are paid with cash due to the lack of available mortgages.
Until recently it was not uncommon for interest only mortgages to be arranged without a repayment vehicle, with the borrower gambling that the property market will rise sufficiently for the loan to be repaid by trading down at retirement (or when rent on the property and inflation combine to surpass the interest rate).
The mortgage origination and underwriting process involves checking credit scores, debt-to-income, downpayments, and assets.
It is advisable to maintain the same employment and not to use or open new credit during the underwriting process.
A biweekly mortgage has payments made every two weeks instead of monthly.
The charge to the borrower depends upon the credit risk in addition to the interest rate risk.
Combinations of fixed and floating rate mortgages are also common, whereby a mortgage loan will have a fixed rate for some period, for example the first five years, and vary after the end of that period.
Mortgage lending will also take into account the (perceived) riskiness of the mortgage loan, that is, the likelihood that the funds will be repaid (usually considered a function of the creditworthiness of the borrower); that if they are not repaid, the lender will be able to foreclose on the real estate assets; and the financial, interest rate risk and time delays that may be involved in certain circumstances.
Bridge loans may be used as temporary financing pending a longer-term loan.
An alternative to mortgages that meets the requirements of Sharia (Islamic law), is the Islamic mortgage.
Home ownership rates are comparable to the United States, but overall default rates are lower.
A closed mortgage account is said to be "redeemed".
Builders may take out blanket loans which cover several properties at once.
This type of mortgage is common in the UK, especially when associated with a regular investment plan.
Islamic Sharia law prohibits the payment or receipt of interest, meaning that Muslims cannot use conventional mortgages.
Bali, Indonesia is an exception to the rule of most home purchase being funded by a mortgage.
The homebuyer, in addition to paying rent, will pay a contribution towards the purchase of the property.
Therefore, a mortgage loan in which the purchaser has made a down payment of 20% has a loan to value ratio of 80%.
Other aspects that define a specific mortgage market may be regional, historical, or driven by specific characteristics of the legal or financial system.
Verification will be made for the applicant’s credit history and the value of the home being purchased.
In the US, foreign nationals due to their unique situation face Foreign National mortgage conditions.
Mortgage can also be described  as "a borrower giving consideration in the form of a collateral for a benefit (loan)."
The loan to value ratio (or LTV) is the size of the loan against the value of the property.
In addition to the two standard means of setting the ''cost'' of a mortgage loan (fixed at a set interest rate for the term, or variable relative to market interest rates), there are variations in ''how'' that cost is paid, and how the loan itself is repaid.
* In a fixed rate mortgage, the interest rate, remains fixed for the life (or term) of the loan.
(In some countries, particularly the United States, Lenders may also be investors who own an interest in the mortgage through a mortgage-backed security.
In the United States, the mortgage loan involves two separate documents: the mortgage note (a promissory note) and the security interest evidenced by the "mortgage" document; generally, the two are assigned together, but if they are split traditionally the holder of the note and not the mortgage has the right to foreclose.
Mortgages in Malaysia can be categorised into 2 different groups: conventional home loan and Islamic home loan.
This means that a legal mechanism is put in place which allows the lender to take possession and sell the secured property ("foreclosure" or "repossession") to pay off the loan in the event that the borrower defaults on the loan or otherwise fails to abide by its terms.
They have also proved beneficial to people who had an interest-only mortgage with no repayment vehicle and now need to settle the loan.
Homeowners can also take out equity loans in which they receive cash for a mortgage debt on their house.
This down payment may be expressed as a portion of the value of the property (see below for a definition of this term).
Many countries have similar concepts or agencies that define what are "standard" mortgages.
In many countries, the ability of lenders to foreclose is extremely limited, and mortgage market development has been notably slower.
For Islamic home financing, it follows the Sharia Law and comes in 2 common types: Bai’ Bithaman Ajil (BBA) or Musharakah Mutanaqisah (MM).
Balloon payment mortgages have only partial amortization, meaning that amount of monthly payments due are calculated (amortized) over a certain term, but the outstanding principal balance is due at some point short of that term, and at the end of the term a balloon payment is due.
In addition, they charge administration and service fees (about 1.5 per cent of the loan amount).
Over this period the principal component of the loan (the original loan) would be slowly paid down through amortization.
This is commonly referred to as (self) '''amortization''' in the U.S. and as a '''repayment mortgage''' in the UK.
* In an adjustable rate mortgage, the interest rate is generally fixed for a period of time, after which it will periodically (for example, annually or monthly) adjust up or down to some market index.
In this way the payment amount determined at outset is calculated to ensure the loan is repaid at a specified date in the future.
This market is set to increase as more retirees require finance in retirement.
Mortgage loan financing relies less on securitizing mortgages and more on formal government guarantees backed by covered bonds (such as the Pfandbriefe) and deposits, except Denmark and Germany where asset-backed securities are also common.
In many jurisdictions, it is normal for home purchases to be funded by a mortgage loan.
* Principal: the original size of the loan, which may or may not include certain other costs; as any principal is repaid, the principal will go down in size.
They work by having the options of paying the interest on a monthly basis.
In the U.S. a partial amortization or balloon loan is one where the amount of monthly payments due are calculated (amortized) over a certain term, but the outstanding balance on the principal is due at some point short of that term.
A standard or conforming mortgage is a key concept as it often defines whether or not the mortgage can be easily sold or securitized, or, if non-standard, may affect the price at which it may be sold.
Because ownership changes twice in an Islamic mortgage, a stamp tax may be charged twice.
There will also be requirements for documentation of the creditworthiness, such as income tax returns, pay stubs, etc.
Musharakah Mutanaqisah is when the bank buys the property together with you.
Much of Europe has home ownership rates comparable to the United States, but overall default rates are lower in Europe than in the United States.
Adjustable rates transfer part of the interest rate risk from the lender to the borrower, and thus are widely used where fixed rate funding is difficult to obtain or prohibitively expensive.
the specifics will vary from location to location.
In the UK, a partial repayment mortgage is quite common, especially where the original mortgage was investment-backed.
: is the number of payments; for monthly payments over 30 years, 12 months x 30 years = 360 payments.
In other words, the borrower may be required to show the availability of enough assets to pay for the housing costs (including mortgage, taxes, etc.)
There are currently over 200 significant separate financial organizations supplying mortgage loans to house buyers in Britain.
Within the European Union, covered bonds market volume (covered bonds outstanding) amounted to about EUR 2 trillion at year-end 2007 with Germany, Denmark, Spain, and France each having outstandings above 200,000 EUR million.
Flexible mortgages allow for more freedom by the borrower to skip payments or prepay.
In most jurisdictions, a lender may foreclose the mortgaged property if certain conditions occur – principally, non-payment of the mortgage loan.
Therefore, the mortgage insurance acts as a hedge should the repossessing authority recover less than full and fair market value for any hard asset.
The loan is "secured" on the borrower's property.
As such the likes of Nationwide and other lenders have pulled out of the interest-only market.
The most basic arrangement would require a fixed monthly payment over a period of ten to thirty years, depending on local conditions.
Graduated payment mortgage loan have increasing costs over time and are geared to young borrowers who expect wage increases over time.
Few individuals have enough savings or liquid funds to enable them to purchase property outright.
for a period of time in the event of the job loss or other loss of income.
In many countries, credit scores are used in lieu of or to supplement these measures.
George Soros's October 10, 2008 Wall Street Journal editorial promoted the Danish mortgage market model.
Thus, lenders prefer variable-rate mortgages to fixed rate ones and whole-of-term fixed rate mortgages are generally not available.
In the United Kingdom, the dual application of stamp duty in such transactions was removed in the Finance Act 2003 in order to facilitate Islamic mortgages.
In countries where the demand for home ownership is highest, strong domestic markets for mortgages have developed.
Investment-backed mortgages are seen as higher risk as they are dependent on the investment making sufficient return to clear the debt.
In one variation, the bank will buy the house outright and then act as a landlord.
The mortgage industry of the United Kingdom has traditionally been dominated by building societies, but from the 1970s the share of the new mortgage loans market held by building societies has declined substantially.
Common measures include payment to income (mortgage payments as a percentage of gross or net income); debt to income (all debt payments, including mortgage payments, as a percentage of income); and various net worth measures.
Sometimes the underwriting process takes so long that the provided financial statements need to be resubmitted so they are current.
In case of an annuity repayment scheme, the periodic payment remains the same amount throughout the loan.
Offset mortgages allow deposits to be counted against the mortgage loan.
In some countries with currencies that tend to depreciate, foreign currency mortgages are common, enabling lenders to lend in a stable foreign currency, whilst the borrower takes on the currency risk that the currency will depreciate and they will therefore need to convert higher amounts of the domestic currency to repay the loan.
The amount going toward the principal in each payment varies throughout the term of the mortgage.
Prepayment penalties during a fixed rate period are common, whilst the United States has discouraged their use.
The lender's rights over the secured property take priority over the borrower's other creditors which means that if the borrower becomes bankrupt or insolvent, the other creditors will only be repaid the debts owed to them from a sale of the secured property if the mortgage lender is repaid in full first.
The two basic types of amortized loans are the fixed rate mortgage (FRM) and adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) (also known as a floating rate or variable rate mortgage).
A '''mortgage loan''', also referred to as a '''mortgage''', is used by purchasers of real property to raise funds to buy real estate; by existing property owners to raise funds for any purpose while putting a lien on the property being mortgaged.
Unlike much of the United States, mortgage loans are usually not nonrecourse debt.
An appraisal may be ordered.
From 2007 to the beginning of 2013 between 50% and 83% of new mortgages had initial periods fixed in this way.
Under the conventional home loan, bank normally charges fixed interest rate or variable interest rate, or both.
The loan to value ratio is considered an important indicator of the riskiness of a mortgage loan: the higher the LTV, the higher the risk that the value of the property (in case of foreclosure) will be insufficient to cover the remaining principal of the loan.
: is the percentage rate per period divided by 100; for a monthly payment, take the Annual Percentage Rate (APR)/12/100
By paying off the interest means the balance will remain level for the rest of their life.
In the UK and U.S., 25 to 30 years is the usual maximum term (although shorter periods, such as 15-year mortgage loans, are common).
Other innovations described below can affect the rates as well.
* Completion: legal completion of the mortgage deed, and hence the ''start'' of the mortgage.
For loans made against properties that the borrower already owns, the loan to value ratio will be imputed against the estimated value of the property.
# Estimated value: lenders or other parties may use their own internal estimates, particularly in jurisdictions where no official appraisal procedure exists, but also in some other circumstances.
Bai' Bithaman Ajil is when the bank buys the property at current market price and sells it back to you at a much higher price.
Once the mortgage application enters into the final steps, the loan application is moved to a Mortgage Underwriter.
A study issued by the UN Economic Commission for Europe compared German, US, and Danish mortgage systems.
When interest rates are high relative to the rate on an existing seller's loan, the buyer can consider assuming the seller's mortgage.
Interest-only lifetime mortgage schemes are offered by two lenders currently – Stonehaven & more2life.
Mortgage loans are generally structured as long-term loans, the periodic payments for which are similar to an annuity and calculated according to the time value of money formulae.
Since the risk is transferred to the borrower, the initial interest rate may be, for example, 0.5% to 2% lower than the average 30-year fixed rate; the size of the price differential will be related to debt market conditions, including the yield curve.
The Underwriter verifies the financial information that the applicant has provided to the lender.
In some countries, such as the United States, fixed rate mortgages are the norm, but floating rate mortgages are relatively common.
A wraparound mortgage is a form of seller financing that can make it easier for a seller to sell a property.
In the early years the repayments are mostly interest.
* Foreclosure or repossession: the possibility that the lender has to foreclose, repossess or seize the property under certain circumstances is essential to a mortgage loan; without this aspect, the loan is arguably no different from any other type of loan.
Certain details may be specific to different locations: interest may be calculated on the basis of a 360-day year, for example; interest may be compounded daily, yearly, or semi-annually; prepayment penalties may apply; and other factors.
In most countries, a number of more or less standard measures of creditworthiness may be used.
The financial and employment information of the applicant will also be verified.
Repayment depends on locality, tax laws and prevailing culture.
The problem for many people has been the fact that no repayment vehicle had been implemented, or the vehicle itself (e.g.
The main alternative to a principal and interest mortgage is an interest-only mortgage, where the principal is not repaid throughout the term.
When the last payment is made, the property changes hands.
In April 2014, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (OSFI) released guidelines for mortgage insurance providers aimed at tightening standards around underwriting and risk management.
Mortgage payments, which are typically made monthly, contain a repayment of the principal and an interest element.
The most common way to repay a secured mortgage loan is to make regular payments toward the principal and interest over a set term.
In the United States, a conforming mortgage is one which meets the established rules and procedures of the two major government-sponsored entities in the housing finance market (including some legal requirements).
Jumbo mortgages and subprime lending are not supported by government guarantees and face higher interest rates.
For example, banks and mortgage brokerages in Canada face restrictions on lending more than 80% of the property value; beyond this level, mortgage insurance is generally required.
The major lenders include building societies, banks, specialized mortgage corporations, insurance companies, and pension funds.
Both of these methods compensate the lender as if they were charging interest, but the loans are structured in a way that in name they are not, and the lender shares the financial risks involved in the transaction with the homebuyer.
This gives borrowers assurance that by maintaining repayment the loan will be cleared at a specified date, if the interest rate does not change.
This is in part because mortgage loan financing relies less on fixed income securitized assets (such as mortgage-backed securities) than in the United States, Denmark, and Germany, and more on retail savings deposits like Australia and Spain.
A mortgage is a form of annuity (from the perspective of the lender), and the calculation of the periodic payments is based on the time value of money formulas.
Prepayment penalties are still common, whilst the United States has discouraged their use.
Subject to local legal requirements, the property may then be sold.
There are strict or judicial foreclosures and non-judicial foreclosures, also known as power of sale foreclosures.
Nevertheless, in recent years fixing the rate of the mortgage for short periods has become popular and the initial two, three, five and, occasionally, ten years of a mortgage can be fixed.
You will then slowly buy the bank's portion of the property through rental (whereby a portion of the rental goes to paying for purchase of a part the bank's share in the property until the property comes to your complete ownership).
In a statement, the OSFI has stated that the guideline will “provide clarity about best practices in respect of residential mortgage insurance underwriting, which contribute to a stable financial system.” This comes after several years of federal government scrutiny over the CMHC, with former Finance Minister Jim Flaherty musing publicly as far back as 2012 about privatizing the Crown corporation.
Many countries have lower requirements for certain borrowers, or "no-doc" / "low-doc" lending standards that may be acceptable under certain circumstances.
must resort to selling the property to recoup their original investment (the money lent), and are able to dispose of hard assets (such as real estate) more quickly by reductions in price.
Features of mortgage loans such as the size of the loan, maturity of the loan, interest rate, method of paying off the loan, and other characteristics can vary considerably.
There may be legal restrictions on certain matters, and consumer protection laws may specify or prohibit certain practices.
endowment/ISA policy) performed poorly and therefore insufficient funds were available to repay balance at the end of the term.
Governments usually regulate many aspects of mortgage lending, either directly (through legal requirements, for example) or indirectly (through regulation of the participants or the financial markets, such as the banking industry), and often through state intervention (direct lending by the government, by state-owned banks, or sponsorship of various entities).
An amortization schedule is typically worked out taking the principal left at the end of each month, multiplying by the monthly rate and then subtracting the monthly payment.
Commercial mortgages typically have different interest rates, risks, and contracts than personal loans.
Any amounts received from the sale (net of costs) are applied to the original debt.
Towards the end of the mortgage, payments are mostly for principal.
Many other specific characteristics are common to many markets, but the above are the essential features.
Typically, this may lead to a higher final price for the buyers.
Hard money loans provide financing in exchange for the mortgaging of real estate collateral.
Some lenders and 3rd parties offer a bi-weekly mortgage payment program designed to accelerate the payoff of the loan.
In practice, many variants are possible and common worldwide and within each country.
Many other jurisdictions have similar transaction taxes on change of ownership which may be levied.
In virtually all jurisdictions, specific procedures for foreclosure and sale of the mortgaged property apply, and may be tightly regulated by the relevant government.
Recent Financial Services Authority guidelines to UK lenders regarding interest-only mortgages has tightened the criteria on new lending on an interest-only basis.
The word ''mortgage'' is derived from a "Law French" term used by English lawyers in the Middle Ages meaning "death pledge", and refers to the pledge ending (dying) when either the obligation is fulfilled or the property is taken through foreclosure.
In some jurisdictions, foreclosure and sale can occur quite rapidly, while in others, foreclosure may take many months or even years.
There are also various mortgage repayment structures to suit different types of borrower.
Pfandbrief-like securities have been introduced in more than 25 European countries—and in recent years also in the U.S. and other countries outside Europe—each with their own unique law and regulations.
Shared appreciation mortgages are a form of equity release.
In contrast, lenders who decide to make nonconforming loans are exercising a higher risk tolerance and do so knowing that they face more challenge in reselling the loan.
Where an interest-only mortgage has a fixed term, an interest-only lifetime mortgage will continue for the rest of the mortgagors life.
Buydown mortgages allow the seller or lender to pay something similar to points to reduce interest rate and encourage buyers.
The FCA and PRA were established in 2013 with the aim of responding to criticism of regulatory failings highlighted by the financial crisis of 2007–08 and its aftermath.
Between 1977 and 1987, the share fell from 96% to 66% while that of banks and other institutions rose from 3% to 36%.
Some lenders may also require a potential borrower have one or more months of "reserve assets" available.
Throughout the financial crisis and the ensuing recession, Canada’s mortgage market continued to function well, partly due to the residential mortgage market's policy framework, which includes an effective regulatory and supervisory regime that applies to most lenders.
Lenders may also, in many countries, sell the mortgage loan to other parties who are interested in receiving the stream of cash payments from the borrower, often in the form of a security (by means of a securitization).
* Redemption: final repayment of the amount outstanding, which may be a "natural redemption" at the end of the scheduled term or a lump sum redemption, typically when the borrower decides to sell the property.
Since the crisis however, the low interest rate environment that as arisen has contributed to a significant increases in mortgage debt in the country.
This is typically generated by an amortization calculator using the following formula:
Any changes made in the applicant’s credit, employment, or financial information can result in the loan being denied.
Regulated lenders (such as banks) may be subject to limits or higher risk weightings for non-standard mortgages.
These interest rates are tied to Base Rate (individual bank's benchmark rate).
For further details, see ''equity release''.
The US mortgage sector has been the center of major financial crises over the last century.
In addition, an acquisition fee is charged which amounts to one per cent of the principal.
The most common mortgage in Canada is the five-year fixed-rate closed mortgage, as opposed to the U.S. where the most common type is the 30-year fixed-rate open mortgage.
An alternative scheme involves the bank reselling the property according to an installment plan, at a price higher than the original price.
The payments from the borrower are thereafter collected by a loan servicer.)
: is the principal amount borrowed
These schemes have proved of interest to people who do like the roll-up effect (compounding) of interest on traditional equity release schemes.
However, in the United States, the average interest rates for fixed-rate mortgages in the housing market started in the tens and twenties in the 1980s and have (as of 2004) reached about 6 per cent per annum.
In most of Western Europe (except Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany), variable-rate mortgages are more common, unlike the fixed-rate mortgage common in the United States.
In other jurisdictions, the borrower remains responsible for any remaining debt.
In the UK variable-rate mortgages are more common than in the United States.
Mortgage borrowers can be individuals mortgaging their home or they can be businesses mortgaging commercial property (for example, their own business premises, residential property let to tenants or an investment portfolio).
With this arrangement regular contributions are made to a separate investment plan designed to build up a lump sum to repay the mortgage at maturity.
Moving forward, the FSA under the Mortgage Market Review (MMR) have stated there must be strict criteria on the repayment vehicle being used.
