In 1462 Ivan III, known as Ivan the Great (1440–1505) became Grand Prince of Moscow (then part of the medieval Muscovy state).
Apartments were built and partly furnished in the factory before being raised and stacked into tall columns.
Afterwards, Moscow took the leading role in liberating Russia from Mongol domination.
The Russian famine of 1601–03 killed perhaps 100,000 in Moscow.
These new outskirts of the city came to be known as the ''Meshchanskaya sloboda'', after Ruthenian ''meshchane'' "town people".
The ''Moskovskiye Vedomosti'' newspaper appeared from 1756, originally in weekly intervals, and from 1859 as a daily newspaper.
Summer dachas are being converted into year-round residences, and with the proliferation of automobiles there is heavy traffic congestion.
This network became separated in 1973, but until 1997 it could easily have been reconnected by about  of track and three switches.
Trams still remain important in some districts as feeders to Metro stations.
A taxi can be called using a smartphone, tablet or PC in 5–15 minutes.
In the early 19th century, the Arch of Konstantino-Elenensky gate was paved with bricks, but the Spassky Gate was the main front gate of the Kremlin and used for royal entrances.
The temperature difference between the centre of Moscow and nearby areas of Moscow Oblast can sometimes be more than 10&nbsp;°C (18&nbsp;°F) on frosty winter nights.
A Fourth Ring freeway (in addition to Moscow Automobile Ring Road, Garden Ring and the Third Ring) has been designed and is being built around Moscow.
Moscow is situated on the Moskva River in the Central Federal District of European Russia, making it the world's most populated inland city.
In addition, tram advocates have suggested that the new rapid transit services (metro to City, Butovo light metro, Monorail) would be more effective as at-grade tram lines and that the current problems with trams are only due to poor management and operation, not the technical properties of trams.
Among the churches reconstructed in the 1990s is an impressive new Cathedral of Christ the Savior which once more has become a landmark.
The lowest ever recorded temperature was  in January 1940.
File:Eurasia1-Moscow-city.jpg|Eurasia
Fires burned out much of the wooden city in 1626 and 1648.
It was officially inaugurated on September 23, 2015.
Its main building was reconstructed after the 1812 fire by Domenico Giliardi.
Books were sold on this bridge and stone platforms were built nearby for guns – "raskats".
Thus the climate becomes less stable, but the average yearly temperature is growing.
In 1941, 16 divisions of the national volunteers (more than 160,000 people), 25 battalions (18,000 people) and 4 engineering regiments were formed among the Muscovites.
During the period of 1920-1930s a great number of churches in Moscow were demolished, including historical Chudov Monastery in the Kremlin, dating from the 14th century, Kazansky Cathedral on the Red Square, the Cathedral of Christ the Savior, constructed in the 19th century in memory of a victory over Napoleon's army in 1812, and many more.
There have been proposed several theories of the origin of the name of the river.
A rail shuttle service, directly connecting MIBC with the Sheremetyevo International Airport is also planned.
Temperature changes in the city are depicted in the table below:
The area is the only spot in downtown Moscow that can accommodate a project of this magnitude.
In the 1830s, general Alexander Bashilov planned the first regular grid of city streets north from Petrovsky Palace.
During the Great Patriotic War, the Soviet State Committee of Defense and the General Staff of the Red Army were located in Moscow.
* Krasnopresnenskoye depot network with the westernmost point at Strogino (depot location) and the easternmost point near platform Dmitrovskaya.
English-language media include ''The Moscow Times'' and ''Moscow News'', which are, respectively, the largest and oldest English-language weekly newspapers in all of Russia.
This continued even after the Second World War, in 1940-1970s, when persecutions against religion in the Soviet Union became less severe.
Christianity is the predominant religion in the city, of which the Russian Orthodox Church is the most popular.
In addition, route taxis are in widespread use.
The construction of Moscow-City takes place on the Krasnopresnenskaya embankment.
It is recognized as one of the city's landmarks due to the rich architecture of its 200 stations.
There are three tram networks in the city:
However, in the wake of Russia's failures in the Crimean War in 1855–56, confidence in the ability of the state to maintain order in the slums eroded, and demands for improved public health put filth back on the agenda.
By its territorial expansion on July 1, 2012 southwest into the Moscow Oblast, the area of the capital more than doubled, going from , and it gained an additional population of 233,000 people.
It had four lanes running 109&nbsp;km along the city borders.
In 1995–1997 the MKAD ring road was widened from the initial four to ten lanes.
The MKAD ring road was opened in 1961.
Moscow is situated on the banks of the Moskva River, which flows for just over  through the East European Plain in central Russia.
By AD 1100, a minor settlement had appeared on the mouth of the Neglinnaya River.
In 1380, prince Dmitry Donskoy of Moscow led a united Russian army to an important victory over the Mongols in the Battle of Kulikovo.
By 1682, there were 692 households established north of the ramparts, by Ukrainians and Belarusians abducted from their hometowns in the course of Russo-Polish War (1654–1667).
The whole project takes up to 1 square kilometer (247&nbsp;acres).
Snow, which is present for about five months a year, often begins to fall mid October, while snow cover lies in November and melts in the beginning of April.
This moat, known as the Alevizov moat and having a length of , width of , and a depth of  was lined with limestone and, in 1533, fenced on both sides with low,  cogged-brick walls.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, the three circular defenses were built: Kitay-gorod (Китай-город), the White City (Белый город) and the Earthen City (Земляной город).
During these time periods of extreme heat are often observed in the city (2001, 2002, 2003, 2010, 2011).
Smolensky Rail station (forerunner of present-day Belorussky Rail Terminal) was inaugurated in 1870.
The average July temperature from 1981–2010 is .
The plague epidemics ravaged Moscow in 1570–1571, 1592 and 1654–1656.
Both chambers of the Russian parliament (the State Duma and the Federation Council) also sit in the city.
In November 1730, the permanent street light was introduced, and by 1867 many streets had a gaslight.
The Kremlin walls as they now appear are those designed by Solarius, completed in 1495.
In 1592, an outer earth rampart with 50 towers was erected around the city, including an area on the right bank of the Moscow River.
File:Nabereshnaya Tower2016.jpg|Naberezhnaya Tower
A second connection by Vostochnaya (Eastern) street was withdrawn in 1987 due to fire at Dinamo plant and has not been recovered, and remains lost (Avtozavodsky bridge) at 1992.
In 1741 Moscow was surrounded by a barricade  long, the Kamer-Kollezhskiy barrier, with 16 gates at which customs tolls were collected.
Moscow Cathedral Mosque has been built at the site of the former one.
At the end of January–February it is often colder, with frosts reaching  a few nights per year (2006, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013).
The 17th century was rich in popular risings, such as the liberation of Moscow from the Polish–Lithuanian invaders (1612), the Salt Riot (1648), the Copper Riot (1662), and the Moscow Uprising of 1682.
In 1508–1516, the Italian architect Aleviz Fryazin (Novy) arranged for the construction of a moat in front of the eastern wall, which would connect the Moskva and Neglinnaya and be filled in with water from Neglinnaya.
Other religions practiced in Moscow include Armenian Apostolicism, Buddhism, Hinduism, Catholicism, Islam, Judaism, Yazidism, Old Believers, Protestantism, and Rodnovery.
49 bridges span the river and its canals within the city's limits.
Many factories were evacuated, together with much of the government, and from October 20 the city was declared to be in a state of siege.
The demonym for a Moscow resident is "" (''moskvich'') for male or "ка" (''moskvichka'') for female, rendered in English as ''Muscovite''.
With a southern part of Central Russia, after few last years hot summer seasons, climate of city gets dfa trends.
The name of the city is thought to be derived from the name of the Moskva River.
Mason and Nigmatullina argue that Soviet-era urban-growth controls (before 1991) produced controlled and sustainable metropolitan development, typified by the greenbelt built in 1935.
File:City Of Capitals 20th October 2012.JPG|City of Capitals
Between 2004 and 2010, the average was between 1800 and 2000 hours with a tendency to more sunshine in summer months, up to record 411 hours in July 2014, 79% of possible sunshine.
Moscow has an extensive tram system, which first opened in 1899.
In a similar manner the Latin name ''Moscovia'' has been formed, later it became a colloquial name for Russia used in Western Europe in the 16th–17th centuries.
These periods usually last about a week or two.
On the right bank of the Moskva River, at a distance of  from the Kremlin, not later than in 1282, Daniel founded the first monastery with the wooden church of St. Daniel-Stylite.
Moscow was stable and prosperous for many years and attracted a large numbers of refugees from across Russia.
The popular Soviet-era comic film ''Irony of Fate'' parodies this construction method.
Teplostanskaya highland is the city's highest point at .
During the first half of the 17th century, the population of Moscow doubled from roughly 100,000 to 200,000.
The official population of Moscow is based on those holding "permanent residency."
File:Wikitrip to Moscow International Business Center 2016-03-22 049.JPG|Mercury City Tower
In 1813 a Commission for the Construction of the City of Moscow was established.
A rail connection linking the international airports at Vnukovo and Sheremetyevo with downtown terminals is also planned.
File:KTM 71-630 experimental.jpg|KTM 71-630
By 1500 it had a population of 100,000 and was one of the largest cities in the world.
Daniel has been credited with founding the first Moscow monasteries, dedicated to the Lord's Epiphany and to Saint Daniel.
The width of Moscow city (not limiting MKAD) from west to east is , and the length from north to south is .
The line opened in 2004.
The city is well known for its architecture, particularly its historic buildings such as Saint Basil's Cathedral with its brightly colored domes.
In the winter, average temperatures normally drop to approximately , though almost every winter there are periods of warmth with day temperatures rising above , and periods of cooling with night temperatures falling below .
It expanded beyond its ramparts in the later 17th century.
This network is connected only by the four-way Dubininskaya and Kozhevnicheskaya streets.
On May 1, 1944 a medal "For the defense of Moscow" and in 1947 another medal "In memory of the 800th anniversary of Moscow" were instituted.
Lazar Kaganovich was in charge; he designed the subway so that citizens would absorb the values and ethos of Stalinist civilization as they rode.
There are four mosques in the city.
The line connects Timiryazevskaya metro station and Ulitsa Sergeya Eisensteina, passing close to VVTs.
It was destroyed in the fire of 1812 and was rebuilt completely in the early 19th century.
With over 40 percent of its territory covered by greenery, it is one of the greenest capitals and major cities in Europe and the world, having the largest forest in an urban area within its borders—more than any other major city—even before its expansion in 2012.
Multiple old churches and architecture that had been demolished during Stalin era has been restored such as Cathedral of Christ the Saviour.
No additional fare is needed (first metro-monorail transfer in 90 minutes does not charge).
The new mosque has the capacity of ten thousand worshippers.
In 1612, the people of Nizhny Novgorod and other Russian cities conducted by prince Dmitry Pozharsky and Kuzma Minin rose against the Polish occupants, besieged the Kremlin, and expelled them.
The annual temperature rose from  to  in the new 1981–2010 normals.
It was built on the site of the old demolished cathedral, where there had been a huge open swimming-pool until 1994.
Three square gates existed on the eastern side of the Kremlin wall, which in the 17th century, were known as: Konstantino-Eleninsky, Spassky, Nikolsky (owing their names to the icons of Constantine and Helen, the Savior and St. Nicholas which hung over them).
Now it is the Danilov Monastery.
The original Old Russian form of the name is reconstructed as *, *''Mosky'', hence it was one of a few Slavic ''ū''-stem nouns.
File:OKO Towers2016.jpg|OKO
Today, most of the buildings there are old factories and industrial complexes.
Its line is traced today by a number of streets called ''val'' (“ramparts”).
By 1700, the building of cobbled roads had begun.
In 1883, near the Prechistinskiye Gates, arc lamps were installed.
By broader definitions Moscow is among the world's largest cities, being the 14th largest metro area, the 18th largest agglomeration, the 15th largest urban area, and the 11th largest by population within city limits worldwide.
File:MosMonorail.JPG
The elevation of Moscow at the All-Russia Exhibition Center (VVC), where the leading Moscow weather station is situated, is 156&nbsp;m (512&nbsp;ft).
''Kommersant'' and ''Vedomosti'' are among the country's leading and oldest Russian-language business newspapers.
Moscow is the northernmost and coldest megacity and metropolis on Earth.
The Moscow International Business Center is a projected new part of central Moscow.
File:Трамвай 025.jpg|KTM-19K
Moscow has acquired a number of epithets, most referring to its size and preeminent status within the nation: The Third Rome (), The Whitestone One (), The First Throne (), The Forty Forties (), and The Hero City ().
By the beginning of 2015 newcomers were servicing more than 50% of all taxi orders in Moscow and are still rapidly growing.
Also to be included in the project are a water park and other recreational facilities; business and entertainment complexes, office and residential buildings, the transport network and the new site of the Moscow government.
Moscow State University was established in 1755.
There exist as well similar place names in Poland like Mozgawa.
In March 2009 the Russian business newspaper ''Kommersant'' reported that because of the worldwide economic crisis, which started in 2008 and spread globally, many of the construction projects in Moscow (especially in the Moscow International Business Center) are frozen and may be cancelled altogether—like the ambitious "Russia Tower" in "Moscow-city".
The city is served by a transit network, which includes four international airports, nine railway terminals, numerous trams, a monorail system and one of the deepest underground rapid transit systems in the world, the Moscow Metro, the fourth-largest in the world and largest outside of Asia in terms of passenger numbers, and the busiest in Europe.
The areas operate in what is referred to in international standards as ''Moscow Standard Time (MSK, мск)'', which is 3 hours ahead of UTC, or UTC+3.
However, in 1547, two fires destroyed much of the town, and in 1571 the Crimean Tatars captured Moscow, burning everything except the Kremlin.
The Moscow mufti council claimed that Muslims numbered around 1.5 million of 10.5 millions of the city's population in 2010.
Moscow is a major political, economic, cultural, and scientific center of Russia and Eastern Europe, as well as the largest city entirely on the European continent.
The suburban Savyolovsky Rail Terminal was built in 1902.
The Federation Tower, completed in 2016, is the tallest building in Europe.
From the latter forms came the modern Russian name , ''Moskva'', which is a result of morphological generalization with the numerous Slavic ''ā''-stem nouns.
He began fighting the Tatars, enlarged the territory of Muscovy, and enriched his capital city.
Among many buildings constructed or reconstructed at this time were the Grand Kremlin Palace and the Kremlin Armoury, the Moscow University, the Moscow Manege (Riding School), and the Bolshoi Theatre.
While Khan of the Golden Horde initially attempted to limit Moscow's influence, when the growth of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania began to threaten all of Russia, the Khan strengthened Moscow to counterbalance Lithuania, allowing it to become one of the most powerful cities in Russia.
Some of the notable people are Boris Pasternak and Fyodor Dostoyevsky (writers), and Sergey Brin, (co-founder of Google).
In 2015, the average annual temperature reached a record of
The artwork of the 13 original stations became nationally and internationally famous.
File:Moscow tramvay.jpg
In old Russian the word "" (''forty'') also meant a church administrative district, which consisted of about forty churches.
New tram models have been developed for the Moscow network despite the lack of expansion.
Since then however, there has been a dramatic growth of low-density suburban sprawl, created by a heavy demand for single-family dwellings as opposed to crowded apartments.
By paying high tribute, Ivan won an important concession from the Khan.
The MKAD marked the administrative boundaries of the city of Moscow until the 1980s, when outlying suburbs beyond the ring road began to be incorporated.
The Rurikids maintained large landholdings by practicing primogeniture, whereby all land was passed to the eldest sons, rather than dividing it up among all sons.
It is home to the Ostankino Tower, the tallest free standing structure in Europe; the Federation Tower, the tallest skyscraper in Europe; and the Moscow International Business Center.
The Third Ring Road, intermediate between the early 19th-century Garden Ring and the Soviet era outer ring road, was completed in 2004.
National political and military successes from 1812 through 1855 calmed the critics and validated efforts to produce a more enlightened and stable society.
On average Moscow has 1731 hours of sunshine per year, varying from a low of 8% in December to 52% from May to August.
From 1610 through 1612, troops of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth occupied Moscow, as its ruler Sigismund III tried to take the Russian throne.
The city has continued to grow during the 1990s to 2000s, its population rising from below nine to above ten million.
Taxi service market in Moscow has changed dramatically over the years 2014–2015.
The highest temperature ever recorded was  at the VVC weather station and  in the center of Moscow and Domodedovo airport on July 29, 2010 during the unusual 2010 Northern Hemisphere summer heat wave.
It launched a great program of rebuilding, including a partial replanning of the city-center.
The greenbelt is becoming more and more fragmented, and satellite cities are appearing at the fringe.
In December 2002 Bulvar Dmitriya Donskogo became the first Moscow Metro station that opened beyond the limits of MKAD.
The Moscow Kremlin and Red Square are also one of several World Heritage Sites in the city.
Three metro stations were initially planned for the Filyovskaya Line.
The term ''meshchane'' (мещане) acquired pejorative connotations in 18th-century Russia and today means "petty bourgeois" or "narrow-minded philistine".
* The Apakov depot services the south-western part from the Varshavsky lane – Simferopolsky boulevard in the east to the Universitet station in the west and Boulevard lane at the center.
Between 1781–1804 the Mytischinskiy water-pipe (the first in Russia) was built.
There has been as well a naïve scholastic etymology that connected the name of Mosoch, a son of Japheth, with the name of the city, so that it was thought that the biblical figure was a forefather of Russians as well as other Slavs.
There are about 13,000  of these standardized and prefabricated apartment blocks, housing the majority of Moscow's population.
Situated in Presnensky District, located at the Third Ring, the Moscow City area is under intense development.
In 1980 it hosted the Summer Olympic Games.
Engineers for the Metropolitan Vickers Electrical Company were given a show trial and deported in 1933, ending the role of British business in the USSR.
The project was conceived by the Moscow government in 1992.
The metro was touted as the symbol of the new social order—a sort of Communist cathedral of engineering modernity.
File:Monorail Moskau - Einfahrt in Station Telezentrum.jpg
It was reconstructed by Ivan, who in the 1480s invited architects from Renaissance Italy, such as Petrus Antonius Solarius, who designed the new Kremlin wall and its towers, and Marco Ruffo who designed the new palace for the prince.
From it as well came English ''Muscovy''.
Daniel died in 1303, at the age of 42.
Moscow, being in the mid-latitudes of the northern hemisphere, is a place with the most expressed signs of global warming.
File:Federation-Tower in July.jpg|Federation Tower
The Moskva River was incorporated as part of Rostov-Suzdal into the Kievan Rus in the 11th century.
As many as 400,000 of Napoleon's soldiers died during this time.
However, the form ''Moskovĭ'' has left some traces in many other languages, such as , , , , , , , , etc.
''Source:  world-weather.ru''
The Kremlin's Great Bell Tower was built in 1505–08 and augmented to its present height in 1600.
By 1304, Yury of Moscow contested with Mikhail of Tver for the throne of the principality of Vladimir.
He conquered the far larger principality of Novgorod to the north, which had been allied to the hostile Lithuanians.
Daylight saving time is no longer observed.
The branch extended to the Mezhdunarodnaya station in 2006, and all work on third station, Dorogomilovskaya (between Kiyevskaya and Delovoi Tsentr), has been postponed.
New technology and service platforms  Yandex.Taxi,  Uber and  Gett (ex-GetTaxi) displaced many private drivers and small service providers.
Temperatures in the centre of Moscow are often significantly higher than in the outskirts and nearby suburbs, especially in winter.
During the postwar years, there was a serious housing crisis, solved by the invention of high-rise apartments.
The entire city of the late 17th century, including the slobodas which grew up outside of the city ramparts, are contained within what is today Moscow's Central Administrative Okrug.
Moscow is home to nearly all of Russia's nationwide television networks, radio stations, newspapers and magazines.
File:Moscow International Business Center A 02.jpg|Evolution Tower
In 1991 Moscow was the scene of a coup attempt by conservators opposed to the liberal reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev.
File:Imperia Tower 20th October 2012.JPG|Imperia Tower
The paranoia of Stalin and the NKVD was evident when the secret police arrested numerous British engineers for espionage—that is for gaining an in-depth knowledge of the city's physical layout.
The Tsar Cannon was located on the platform of the Lobnoye mesto.
Elites called for improving sanitation, which became part of Catherine's plans for increasing control over social life.
