He also lamented having recited Kaddish for his father "three times too often for a man who never observed half the Ten Commandments".
Dayan was the second child born at Degania, after Gideon Baratz (1913–1988).
Another son, novelist Ehud Dayan, who was cut out of his father's will, wrote a book critical of his father months after he died, mocking his military, writing, and political skills, calling him a philanderer, and accusing him of greed.
On 6 January 1952, an armoured infantry company from the same battalion attacked a Bedouin camp, ''Nabahim,'' near Bureij refugee camp killing 15.
Following his death, Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, arranged that the yearlong memorial service of kaddish be recited in honor of Dayan.
With Ben-Gurion's return, this changed.
Ben-Gurion and Dayan had told Sharett that their estimate of Egyptian casualties was 10.
On 14 April 1948, his brother, Zorik, was killed in fighting.
Following the 17 September 1948 assassination of Count Folke Bernadotte, it was over 20 hours before he imposed a curfew over Jewish Jerusalem and began arresting members of Lehi, the underground organisation believed to be responsible.
* Strengthened combat units at the expense of the administrative "tail."
If we try to search for that Arab, it has no value.
In the aftermath, paratroop officers severely criticized Dayan for alleged tactical mistakes.
On 18 May, Dayan was given command of the Jordan Valley sector.
After being blamed for the army's lack of preparation before the outbreak of the 1973 Yom Kippur War, and for his failure of nerve during the war, he left the military and joined politics.
Dayan believed that the Temple Mount was more important to Judaism as a historical rather than holy site.
Ariel Sharon noted about Dayan:
We cannot save each water pipe from explosion or each tree from being uprooted.
On 23 October 1955, Ben-Gurion instructed Dayan to prepare plans to capture Sharm al Sheikh.
Moshe and Ruth's daughter Yael Dayan, a novelist, is best known in Israel for her book, ''My Father, His Daughter'', about her relationship with her father.
Soon afterward, Dayan's parents moved to Nahalal, the first ''moshav'', or farming cooperative, to be established.
He was named Moshe after Moshe Barsky, the first member of Degania to be killed in an Arab attack, who died getting medication for his father.
At the age of 14, he joined the Jewish defence force Haganah ("Defence").
Until 1964, he was the Minister of Agriculture.
During the war, Dayan was in contact with Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, who urged him to allow Israeli forces to enter Damascus, even for a few moments.
In 1977, despite having been re-elected to the Knesset for the Alignment, he accepted the offer to become Foreign Minister in the new Likud government led by Menachem Begin.
Dayan's parents, Shmuel and Devorah Dayan, were Jewish immigrants from Ukraine.
He is buried in Nahalal in the ''moshav'' (a collective village) where he was raised.
The territory from the Litani southward will be totally annexed to Israel, and everything will fall into place.
This is something we've known for many years.
Prime Minister Levi Eshkol disliked Dayan.
The year 1952 was a time of economic crisis for the new state.
The two leaders thought war with Egypt could be achieved by provoking an Egyptian response to retaliation raids, which could then be used to justify an all-out attack.
In June, he became the first commander of the 89th Battalion, part of Sadeh's Armoured Brigade.
A Cabinet 15 December 1955 meeting voted against further provocations and ruled that any retaliation attacks must have full Cabinet approval.
On 11 December, hoping an attack on Syria would provoke an Egyptian response, Operation Olive Leaves/Sea of Galilee (''Mivtza 'Alei Zayit/Kinneret'') was launched in which a number of Syrian positions on the eastern shore of the Sea of Galilee were destroyed.
On the night of 27 October 1955, an IDF battalion attacked an Egyptian army post at Kuntilla (Operation Egged), killing 12 Egyptian soldiers.
It is the only method that has proved effective, not justified or moral but effective, when the Arab plants mines on our side.
One hundred and thirty IDF soldiers, of whom a third came from Unit 101, carried out the operation.
He added that he was "ready to make any effort and stand any suffering, if only I could get rid of my black eyepatch.
This ended with Lavon's resignation over who ordered the sabotage operation in Egypt, which led to the trial of a number of Egyptian Jews, two of whom were executed.
"I think that Dayan himself didn't want to go to the Golan Heights.
He once said that he preferred Sharm-al-Sheikh (an Egyptian town on the southern edge of the Sinai Peninsula overlooking Israel's shipping lane to the Red Sea via the Gulf of Aqaba) without peace, to peace without Sharm-al-Sheikh.
In May 1955 Dayan attended a meeting convened by Ben-Gurion.
In one recollection, having seen rabbis flocking on the Temple Mount shortly after Jerusalem was captured in 1967, he asked, "What is this?
Following the killing of two workers near Even-Yehuda, Dayan ordered a similar attack, Operation Samaria/''Mivtza Shomron,'' on the Qalqilya police station.
By the beginning of November 1956, the Israeli army had 380 tanks.
On 30 October 1939, most of the group were sentenced to 10 years in prison.
In 1949, he had at least five face-to-face meetings with King Abdullah of Jordan over the Armistice Agreement and the search for a long-term peace agreement.
Between December 1953 and September 1954, at least 48 Arabs were killed in over 18 cross-border raids.
The international criticism over the killed civilians led to a change of tactics.
His battalion was then transferred to the south, where they captured Karatiya, close to Faluja on 15 July.
The Egyptians did not react.
Faced with demands of a 20% cut in budget and the discharge of 6,000 IDF members, Yigal Yadin resigned as chief of staff in November 1952, and was replaced by Mordechai Maklef.
In July 1953, whilst on the General staff, Dayan was party to the setting up of Unit 101, which was to specialise in night-time cross-border retaliation raids.
Moshe Sharett wrote in his diaries on Dayan's point of view "The state of Israel must invent dangers, and to do this it must adopt the methods of provocation and revenge….
IDF squads were sent into the Gaza strip to lay mines.
In 2005, his eye patch was offered for sale on Ebay with a starting bid of $75,000 U.S. dollars.
Dayan attended the agricultural school there.
But no kibbutz got any land from conquering the Golan Heights.
Indeed, on June 8, 1967, Dayan bypassed both the Prime Minister and the Chief of staff in ordering the Israeli army to attack and capture the Golan.
When they were not relieved as expected, at 04:00 on 8 June, the unit perceived that it was exposed to possible attack and—on its own initiative—assaulted a nearby Vichy police station, capturing it.
Using his home kibbutz of Hanita as a forward base, the unit frequently infiltrated Vichy French Lebanon, wearing traditional Arab dress, on covert surveillance missions.
On 10 November 1955, an agreement was signed for the delivery of 100 AMX-13 tanks and assorted anti-tank weapons.
Dayan was assigned to a small Australian-Palmach-Arab reconnaissance task force, formed in preparation for the Allied invasion of Syria and Lebanon and attached to the Australian 7th Division.
But if we harass the nearby village ... then the population there comes out against the saboteur... and the Egyptian Government and the Transjordanian government are willing... to prevent such incidents, because their prestige is at stake... as the Jews have opened fire, and they are unready to begin a war ...
There were fewer large-scale cross-border raids in 1954.
During 1950, Dayan also developed a policy of punitive cross-border reprisal raids.
On 18 June 1950, Dayan explained his thinking to the Mapai faction in the Knesset:
* Revamping the mobilisation scheme and ensuring earmarking for adequate equipment.
A military court found him guilty and briefly demoted him from lieutenant colonel to major.
In September 1950, several thousand more were driven from the demilitarized zone at Al-Ajua During 1950, the remaining population of al-Majdal were transferred to the Gaza Strip In a notorious incident on 31 May 1950, the army forced 120 Arabs across the Jordanian border at 'Arava.
He assumed that Israel would be able to win easily even if the Arabs attacked and, more importantly, did not want Israel to appear as the aggressor, as it would have undoubtedly cost it the invaluable support of the United States (who would later mount a massive airlift to rearm Israel).
Questions were asked about how such a large force was arrested by a much smaller one.
It's cynicism to say the kibbutzim wanted land."
I would not say the same about his civil courage.
He would wake up with a hundred ideas.
On 29 June 1949, he was appointed head of all Israeli delegations to the Mixed Armistice Commission meetings.
Although Dayan did not take part in most of the planning before the Six-Day War of June 1967, he personally oversaw the capture of East Jerusalem during the 5–7 June fighting.
Dayan believed in the value of punitive cross-border retaliation raids:
"Two or three dozen" died of thirst before reaching safety.
Prime Minister Sharett was an advocate of restraint and was not as confident in the attacks' effectiveness.
I am no Cohen and no mamzer (bastard) so there was no trouble."
To put a stop to the out-of-control looting, he ordered that anything that could be used by the army be stored in Haganah warehouses and the rest be distributed amongst Jewish agricultural settlements.
In 1965, Dayan joined with the group of Ben-Gurion loyalists who defected from Mapai to form Rafi.
At the end of September 1956, a further 100 Sherman tanks, 300 half-tracks, and 300 6x6 trucks were added.
In 1959, a year after he retired from the IDF, Dayan joined Mapai, the Israeli leftist party, then led by David Ben-Gurion.
He spoke Hebrew, Arabic, and English.
Dayan combined a kibbutznik's secular identity and pragmatism with a deep love and appreciation for the Jewish people and the land of Israel—but not a religious identification.
Then the Israeli army will enter Lebanon, occupy the necessary territory, and create a Christian regime that will ally itself with Israel.
This did not prevent him from attending the armistice negotiations on Rhodes.
Thirty-seven Legionnaires and National Guardsmen were killed as well as two civilians.
On 8 March 1951, 18 were killed at Idna.
Chief of Staff Yigael Yadin instructed the military attorney general to proceed, but the case was dismissed.
Six companies set out but were pinned down by machine-gun fire in the wadi below Beit Jala and were forced to withdraw.
In the future, targets were to be the Arab Legion, the Frontier Police, and the Egyptian or Syrian Armies.
A few hours later, as Dayan was on the roof of the building using binoculars to scan Vichy French positions on the other side of the river, the binoculars were struck by a French rifle bullet fired by a sniper from several hundred yards away, propelling metal and glass fragments into his left eye and causing severe damage.
Dayan was an advocate of a "harsh" policy along the border.
In early 1950, 700 bedouin, '''Azame'', were expelled from the South Hebron area.
In the hours preceding the war, Dayan chose not to order a full mobilization or a preemptive strike against the Egyptians and Syrians.
* Emphasised strike forces (Air Force, Armour) and on training of commando battalions.
He modified these views later in his career and played an important role in the eventual peace agreement between Israel and Egypt.
The IDF force consisted of 120 paratroops and suffered 14 dead; 36 Egyptian soldiers were killed as well as two Palestinian civilians.
Both were night-time operations and both failed.
On 31 August 1955, despite Sharett's opposition, three paratroop companies attacked the British-built Tegart fort in Khan Yunis.
The method of collective punishment so far has proved effective ...
On 7 June 1941, the night before the invasion of the Syria–Lebanon Campaign, Dayan's unit crossed the border and secured two bridges over the Litani River.
In September 1949, despite being involved in these negotiations, Dayan recommended to Ben-Gurion that the army should be used to open the road to Jerusalem and gain access to the Western Wall and Mount Scopus.
In fact, he was on patrol as an observer with members of the US Marine Corps.
But we ''can'' put a very high price on their blood, a price so high that it will no longer be worthwhile for the Arabs, the Arab armies, for the Arab states to pay it.
* Surrendering the activities of stores and procurement to the civilian Defence Ministry.
* Developed GADNA, a youth wing for military training.
When tensions began to rise in early 1967, however, Eshkol appointed the charismatic and popular Dayan defence minister to raise public morale and bring Rafi into a unity government.
Moshe Carmel, the group's deputy commander, was also critical of Dayan's willingness to talk to his interrogators in Acre prison.
Fifteen of the dead were civilians: farmers, shepherds, and a doctor; two were women.
He went into political eclipse for a time.
In Jerusalem, he had given instructions that infiltrators killed in no-man's-land or the Arab side of the border should be moved to the Israeli side before UN inspections.
The Mystere were in addition to 53 already on order.
I replied then: "because he does not accept responsibility".
The major problem in the south of the country was Palestinians crossing the border, "infiltrating," from the Gaza Strip, Sinai, and the Hebron hills.
Seven months later, Dayan was replaced as the prisoners' representative after it was discovered that moves were being made to get him an individual pardon.
He was still in that post when the Yom Kippur War began catastrophically for Israel on 6 October 1973.
As commander of the Jerusalem front in the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, chief of staff of the Israel Defense Forces (1953–58) during the 1956 Suez Crisis, but mainly as Defense Minister during the Six-Day War in 1967, he became to the world a fighting symbol of the new state of Israel.
Its objective was to capture Bethlehem via Beit Jala.
One of Dayan's actions in this post was to commence work on the canal diverting water from the River Jordan, September 1953.
This appointment was Ben-Gurion's last act as prime minister before his replacement by acting Prime Minister Moshe Sharett.
Glubb Pasha noted that the objective of this new strategy seemed to "be merely to kill Arabs indiscriminately."
* Raising the Intelligence and Training Branches of the Israeli Army.
It was the last large-scale IDF attack on civilian buildings.
Dayan was a complex character; his opinions were never strictly black and white.
Fifty-eight civilians were killed, including 10 children.
Israel occasionally exploited incidents in the de-militarized zones to strike at the Syrian water diversion project and to punish the Syrians for their support of the Palestinian resistance.
One of his sons, Assi Dayan, was an actor and a movie director.
The Central Command Operation Instructions were more specific: "carry out destruction and maximum killings."
On taking command, based on Ben-Gurion's three-year defence programme, Dayan carried out a major reorganisation of the Israeli army, which, among others, included:
On the night of 25 September, following a number of incidents including the machine-gunning of large gathering at Ramat Rachel in which four Israelis were killed, and the murder of a girl southwest of Jerusalem, the 890th Battalion attacked the Husan police station and nearby Arab Legion positions close to the armistice lines.
On 2 November, al Sabha, close to the DMZ, was attacked, in Operation Volcano (''Mivtza Ha Ga'ash''), killing 81 Egyptian soldiers.
Following the 1955 elections, Ben-Gurion resumed his dual role as prime minister and defence minister.
'', Ruth Dayan wrote a chapter about "Moshe's bad taste in women".
On 3 October 1939, he was the commanding instructor for Haganah Leader's courses held at Yavniel when two British Palestine Police officers discovered a quantity of illegal rifles.
One reason for this delay was the need to bring loyal troops from Tel Aviv into the city.
Leading a group of 43 men through Wadi Bira, early the following morning, 12 to 15 Arab members of the Transjordan Frontier Force arrested them.
In addition, the damage to the extraocular muscles was such that Dayan could not be fitted with a glass eye, and he was compelled to adopt the black eyepatch that became his trademark.
As Foreign Minister Dayan played an important part in negotiating the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel.
Dayan resigned his post in October 1979, because of a disagreement with Begin over whether the Palestinian territories were an internal Israeli matter (the Camp David treaty included provisions for future negotiations with the Palestinians; Begin, who did not like the idea, did not put Dayan in charge of the negotiating team).
The Israelis suffered 18 killed and 68 wounded; 70-90 Jordanians were killed.
Ruth Dayan, his first wife, divorced Moshe in 1971 after 36 years of marriage due to his numerous extramarital affairs.
As Israel Defense Forces Chief of staff, Moshe Dayan personally commanded the Israeli forces fighting in the Sinai during the 1956 Suez Crisis.
At this time, Dayan was the leader of the hawkish camp within the Labor government, opposing a return to anything like Israel's pre-1967 borders.
In a nine-hour battle, his troops stopped the Syrian advance south of the Sea of Galilee.
We cannot prevent the murder of workers in orange groves or of families in their beds.
In the spring of 1950, Dayan authorized the Israeli Air Force to strafe shepherds and their herds in the Beit Govrin area.
In 1947, Dayan was appointed to the Haganah General Staff working on Arab affairs, in particular recruiting agents to gain information about irregular Arab forces in Palestine.
In the Israeli best-selling book that followed the divorce, ''Or Did I Dream the Dream?
"She is divorced and I am divorced.
The attention it drew was intolerable to me.
* Starting a military academy for officers of the rank of major and above.
During the fighting, Jordanian troops surrounded a paratroop company.
Following a February 1949 incident, he was courtmartialed for disobeying an order from his superior, Major-General Zvi Ayalon OC Central Command.
He was initially opposed to setting up such a group because he argued it would undermine his attempts to prepare the IDF for an offensive war.
On 16 February 1941, after Chaim Weizmann's intervention in London, they were all released.
Kibbutz Degania Alef, with 11 members, was the first kibbutz, and would become part of the State of Israel.
Dayan later ordered the Israeli flag removed from the Dome of the Rock, and gave administrative control of the Temple Mount over to the Waqf, a Muslim council.
People who went there went on their own.
Dayan humorously told well-wishers that he had no trouble getting a marriage license.
Six hours passed before he could be evacuated, and he would have died if not for Bernard Dov Protter, who took care of him until they were evacuated.
Prime Minister Moshe Sharett, shocked by the officers' indifference to neighbouring Lebanon, turned down the plan as divorced from reality.
One of his military heroes was the British pro-Zionist intelligence officer Orde Wingate, under whom he served in several Special Night Squads operations.
Dayan merged Unit 101 with the Paratroopers Brigade and assigned its command to the commander of 101 who had led the Qibya attack, Ariel Sharon.
In the years immediately following, the disability caused him some psychological pain.
Operation Elkayam directives called for "killing as many enemy soldiers as possible."
Chief of Staff David Elazar objected to these plans and was proved correct.
Dayan, who believed in the inevitability of the "Second Round," argued for a preemptive attack on Israel's neighbours, particularly Egypt.
Ben Gurion asked: "why not as prime minister?".
Allon had already introduced a 7 kilometre "free-fire" zone along the southern borders.
The Telem party won two seats in the 1981 elections, but Dayan died shortly thereafter, in Tel Aviv, from a massive heart attack.
On 20 October 1951, two Battalion 79 (7th Brigade) companies destroyed several houses and an ice factory in eastern Gaza City; dozens were killed and injured.
He had few close friends; his mental brilliance and charismatic manner were combined with cynicism and lack of restraint.
There were issues over spending priorities and over Lavon's dealings with senior IDF members behind Dayan's back.
She followed him into politics and has been a member of several Israeli leftist parties over the years.
It was the last time the IDF launched a reprisal raid at night.
As the highest-ranking official responsible for military planning, Dayan may bear part of the responsibility for the Israeli leadership having missed the signs for the upcoming war.
Most of the staff officers resigned in protest of his replacement of Yigal Allon.
Moshe Dayan was covering the Vietnam War to observe modern warfare up close after he left political life.
During 1953, Prime Minister and Defence Minister David Ben-Gurion began to make preparations for his retirement.
Dayan's remarks must also be taken in context of the fact that he was a member of the opposition at the time.
Dayan proposed that:
All that is required is to find an officer, even a captain would do, to win his heart or buy him with money to get him to agree to declare himself the savior of the Maronite population.
According to those who knew him, the war deeply depressed Dayan.
The General Staff order stated "temporarily to conquer the village of Qibya – with the aim of blowing up houses and hitting the inhabitants."
Such a move, argued Schneerson, would provide Israel with a decisive victory.
He was expelled from the Alignment, as a result and sat as an independent MK.
Of them ninety-five were dangerous; three more had to be rejected; the remaining two, however, were brilliant.He had courage amounting to insanity, as well as displays of a lack of responsibility.
And above all, let us hope for a new war with the Arab countries so that we may finally get rid of our troubles and acquire our space."
Dayan wrote in his autobiography: "I reflected with considerable misgivings on my future as a cripple without a skill, trade, or profession to provide for my family."
Dayan's contention was denied by Muky Tsur, a longtime leader of the United Kibbutz Movement who said "For sure there were discussions about going up the Golan Heights or not going up the Golan Heights, but the discussions were about security for the kibbutzim in Galilee," he said.
On 24 June 1956, a $80&nbsp;million deal was agreed involving 72 Mystere IV jets, 120 AMX-13 tanks, 40 Sherman tanks and 18 105mm artillery.
During the years following the war, Dayan enjoyed enormous popularity in Israel and was widely viewed as a potential Prime Minister.
His withdrawal of his troops after only two hours leaving a Givati Company to face an Egyptian counterattack led to Givati Commander Shimon Avidan to demand that Dayan be disciplined for breach of discipline.
Forty-eight Syrian soldiers were killed as well as six civilians.
About Dayan's comments, Israeli ambassador to the United States Michael Oren has said
