Most female Yazidis from Mosul and the greater Mosul region (Nineveh) are imprisoned and occasionally many are slaughtered because of their resistance to being sold as sex slaves.
Mosul fell on April 11, 2003, when the Iraqi Army 5th Corps, loyal to Saddam, abandoned the city and eventually surrendered, two days after the fall of Baghdad.
When the 2003 invasion of Iraq was being planned, the United States had originally intended to base troops in Turkey and mount a thrust into northern Iraq to capture Mosul.
Although this prevented Saddam's forces from mounting large-scale military operations again in the region, it did not stop the regime from implementing a steady policy of "Arabisation" by which the demography of some areas of Nineveh Governorate were gradually changed.
In 637 (other sources say 641), during the period of the Caliph Umar ibn al-Khattab, the city was annexed to the Rashidun Caliphate by Utba bin Farqad Al-Salami, during the Arab Islamic Conquest, after which Assyria/Athura/Assuristan was dissolved as a geo-political entity.
* Mar Matte: This famous monastery is situated about  east of Mosul on the top of a high mountain (Mount Maqloub).
According to a UN report ISIL forces are persecuting ethnic groups in and near Mosul.
Among the most famous surviving Mosul pieces is a brass ewer inlaid with silver from 1232, and now in the British Museum, by the artist Shujā’ ibn Mana.
It displays the familiar medallions but is also engraved with scenes showing Christ as a child.
Among the 112,709 books and manuscripts thought lost are a collection of Iraqi newspapers dating from the early 20th century, as well as maps, books and collections from the Ottoman period; some were registered on a UNESCO rarities list.
Then with the Ottoman reconquest of Baghdad (1638), the liwa’ of Mosul became an independent wilaya."
The indigenous Assyrians who have a history in the region dating back over 4,000 years suffered their Christian churches and monasteries being vandalised and burned down, their ancient heritage sites dating back to the Iron Age destroyed, their homes and possessions stolen by ISIL, and ultimatums to convert to Islam, leave their ancient homelands, or be murdered.
While little is known of the city from the Hellenistic period, Mosul likely belonged to the Seleucid satrapy of ''Syria'' (the Greek term for ''Assyria''), which was conquered by the Parthian Empire circa 150 BC where it once more became a part of Athura.
Most Mosul paintings were illustrations of manuscripts—mainly scientific works, animal books, and lyric poetry.
In its current Arabic form and spelling, the term Mosul, or rather "Mawsil", stands for the "linking point" – or loosely, the ''Junction City'', in Arabic.
* St. Elijah's Monastery (Dair Mar Elia): Dating from the 6th century, it was the oldest Christian Monastery in Iraq, until its destruction by ISIS in January 2016.
After the war, the city and the surrounding area became part of the Occupied Enemy Territory Administration (1918–20), and shortly Mandatory Iraq (1920–32).
An estimated half million persons fled Mosul in the second half of 2014, and while some returned, more fled in 2015 as ISIL violence in the city worsened.
People can get mineral water from the well in its yard.
As was predicted by the DIA and others, Mosul was attacked on June 4, 2014 and after 6 days of fighting, on  June 10, 2014, the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant took over the city during the 2014 Northern Iraq offensive.
ISIL acquired three divisions' worth of up-to-date American arms and munitions—including M1129 Stryker 120-mm mortars and at least 700 armoured Humvee vehicles from the then fleeing, or since massacred, Iraqi army.
Most Iraqi Jews have moved to Israel, and some to the United States.
The library was ransacked and destroyed by explosives on 25 February 2015.
During 1165 Benjamin of Tudela passed through Mosul; in his papers he wrote that he found a small Jewish community estimated as 7000 people in Mosul, the community was led by rebbi Zakhi (זכאי) presumably connected to the King David dynasty.
and appointing new, non-Maslawi governors directly.
In the Treaty of Lausanne, the dispute over Mosul was left for future resolution by the League of Nations.
The murder of a dozen Assyrians, threats that others would be murdered unless they converted to Islam and the destruction of their houses sparked a rapid exodus of the Christian population.
* Mosque of the Prophet Jerjis (Georges): The mosque is believed to be the burial place of Prophet Jerjis.
The markets are particularly interesting not simply for themselves alone but for the mixture of people who jostle there: Arabs, Kurds, Assyrians, Iraqi Jews, Kurdish Jews, Iraqi Turkmens, Armenians, Yazidi, Mandeans, Romani and Shabaks.
The Pentagon reported that 72 other personnel were injured in the attack carried out by a suicide bomber wearing an explosive vest and the uniform of the Iraqi security services.
, the city's new ISIL administration was initially dysfunctional with frequent power cuts, tainted water supply, collapse of infrastructure support and failing health care.
The mound of Kuyunjik in Mosul is the site of the palaces of King Sennacherib and his grandson Ashurbanipal, who established the Library of Ashurbanipal.
This mandate was contested by Turkey which continued to claim the area based on the fact that it was under Ottoman control during the signature of the Armistice.
Half a million people escaped on foot or by car in the next 2 days.
The painting is in a variety of whole hues; reds, blues, greens, and gold.
Thereafter began widespread looting before an agreement was reached to cede overall control to US forces.
In the early 16th century Mosul was under the Turkmen federation of the Ak Koyunlu, but in 1508 it was conquered by the Persian Safawids.
Women are required to cover their bodies from head to foot in a strict variant of Sharia rule and men are required to fully grow their beards and hair as does the members of the Islamic State.
Mosul was thenceforth ruled by the Mongol Ilkhanid and Jalayrid dynasties, and escaped Tamerlan's destructions.
US Army Special Forces with Kurdish fighters quickly took civil control of the city.
Reconstructed last in 1743.
Jonah the son of Amittai, from the 8th century BC, is believed to be buried here, where King Esarhaddon of Assyria had once built a palace.
Shabaks were concentrated on the eastern outskirts of the city.
The opening of the University of Mosul in 1967 enabled the education of many in the city and surrounding areas.
The city's population grew rapidly around the turn of the millennium and by 2004 was estimated to be 1,846,500.
Artifacts within the tomb were removed to an unknown location.
The city's fortunes revived with the discovery of oil in the area, from the late 1920s onward.
Other US Army units to have occupied the city include the 4th Brigade Combat Team of the 1st Cavalry Division, the 172nd Stryker Brigade, the 3rd Brigade-2nd Infantry Division, 18th Engineer Brigade (Combat), Alpha Company 14th Engineer Battalion-555th Combat Engineer Brigade, 1st Brigade-25th Infantry Division, the 511th Military Police Company, the 812th Military Police Company and company-size units from Reserve components, an element of the 364th Civil Affairs Brigade, and the 404th Civil Affairs Battalion which covered the areas north of the Green Line.
On July 22, 2003, Saddam Hussein's sons, Uday Hussein and Qusay Hussein, were killed in a gunbattle with Coalition forces in Mosul after a failed attempt at their apprehension.
The ISIS governor of Mosul, Alian Natiq Mabroush was killed on 18 March 2016 along with ten other jihadist leaders in a U.S. airstrike.
On June 24, 2004, a coordinated series of car-bombs killed 62 people, many of them policemen.
After the Mongol defeat in the Battle of Ain Jalut against the Mamluks, Badr al-Din's son sided with the latter; this led to the destruction of the city, which later regained some importance but never recovered its original splendor.
Saddam was able to garrison portions of the 5th Army within the city of Mosul, had Mosul International Airport under military control, and recruited heavily from the city for his military's officer corps; this may have been due to the fact that most of the officers and generals of the Iraqi Army were from Mosul long before the Saddam regime era.
On July 24, 2014, the building was destroyed by explosives set by forces of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.
A hall was built on one of its three parts in 1942.
It is the first Chaldean Catholic church in Mosul, after the union of many Assyrians with Rome in the 17th century.
The technique was carried by Mosul metalworkers to Aleppo, Damascus, Baghdad, Cairo, and Persia; similar pieces from those centres are called Mosul bronzes.
In the nineteenth century the Ottoman government started to reclaim central control over its outlying provinces.
The monastery, a great fort-like building, rises next to the tomb of Mar Behnam, a prince who was killed by the Sassanians, perhaps during the 4th century AD.
On June 10, 2014, Mosul was occupied by Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Be that as it may, the name Mepsila is doubtless the root for the modern name.
A frontispiece painting, now held in the Bibliothèque nationale, Paris, dating from a late 12th century copy of Galen's medical treatise, the Kitab al-diriyak ("Book of Antidotes"), is a good example of the earlier work of the Mosul school.
The background is decorated with typically Islamic vine scrolls and intricate arabesques, giving the piece a unique look.
The Mosul Museum is a beautiful old building, around a courtyard and with an impressive facade of Mosul marble containing displays of Mosul life depicted in tableau form.
Mosul had the highest proportion of Assyrian Christians of all the Iraqi cities outside of the Kurdish region, and contains several interesting old churches, some of which originally date back to the early centuries of Christianity.
During the ISIS occupation of Mosul, phone lines have been cut by ISIL and cell phone towers and internet access destroyed.
Such families proceed to establish themselves through private enterprise, solidifying their influence and assets through rents on land and taxes on urban and rural manufacturing.
It was one of the most important mosques in Mosul and one of the few historic mosques that are found on the east side of the city.
* Monastery of Mar Behnam: Also called Deir Al-Jubb (The Cistern Monastery) and built in the 12th or 13th century, it lies in the Nineveh Plain near Nimrud about  southwest of Mosul.
The site contains the tomb of the Biblical Jonah, as he lived and died there, in the then capital of ancient Assyria.
It became part of the Seleucid Empire after Alexander’s conquests in 332 BC.
In the countryside around Mosul, Kurdish and Assyrian militia have also taken up arms to resist ISIL oppression.
With the invasion of the Mongols in the mid-13th century the Mosul school came to an end, but its achievements were influential in both the Mamluk and the Mongol schools of miniature painting.
From Mosul, the Hamdanids under Abdallah ibn Hamdan and his son Nasir al-Dawla expanded their control over the Jazira for several decades, first as governors of the Abbassids and later as ''de facto'' independent rulers.
* Mosul library: Including the Sunni Muslim library, the library of the 265-year-old Latin Church and Monastery of the Dominican Fathers and the Mosul Museum Library.
However, the Turkish parliament refused to grant permission for the operation.
Previously the city's largest university, the University of Mosul was closed in 2014.
Scores of people have been executed without fair trial.
It dates back to the 10th century, and lies 3 m below street level.
Their plans for uprising were accelerated when ISIL scheduled the destruction of the al-Ḥadbā Many former supporters of ISIL's Caliphate have voiced protest against ISIL online in the aftermath of destruction of ancient cultural sites.
As per ISIS policy, even primary schools are gender segregated, putting a strain on educational resources.
ISIL issued an edict expelling (in effect ethnically cleansing) the remaining predominantly ethnic Assyrian and Armenian Christian Mosul citizens, after the Christians failed to attend a meeting to discuss their future status.
It dates back to the 10th century, lies 7 m below street level and was first reconstructed in 1970.
In technique and style the Mosul school was similar to the painting of the Seljuq Turks, who controlled Iraq at that time, but the Mosul artists had a sharper sense of realism based on the subject matter and degree of detail in the painting rather than on representation in three dimensions, which did not occur.
In the late 9th century control over the city was seized by the Turkish dynasts Ishaq ibn Kundajiq and his son Muhammad, but in 893 Mosul came once again under the direct control of the Abbasid Caliphate.
Like their counterparts elsewhere in Iraq, most left in 1950–51.
Along with the al-Umari and Tasin al-Mufti families, the Jalilis formed an "urban-based small and medium gentry and a new landed elite", which proceeded to displace the control of previous rural tribes.
Mosul had a Jewish population.
Many residents initially welcomed ISIL and according to a member of the UK Defence Select Committee Mosul "fell because the people living there were fed up with the sectarianism of the Shia dominated Iraqi government."
It has a precious library containing Syrianic scriptures.
Until 2014 the city was a historic centre for the Assyrian Church of the East of the indigenous Assyrians, containing the tombs of several Old Testament prophets such as Jonah which was destroyed by the Islamic State occupation army in July 2014.
Mosul craftsmen used both gold and silver for inlay on bronze and brass.
The Islamic State was in August 2015 reported to be selling captured women and girls to sex slave traders.
Amongst the newly appointed Safavid governors of Mesopotamia during those years, was Qasem Sultan Afshar, who was appointed governor of Mosul in 1622.
The Assyrians, Kurds, Armenians, Yazidis, Turcoman, Mandeans and Shabaks are victims of unprovoked religiously motivated murders, assaults, theft, kidnappings and the destruction of their cultural sites.
The total effect is best described as majestic.
The ewer features representational as well as abstract design, depicting battle scenes, animals and musicians within medallions.
In the early 10th century Mosul came under the control of the native Arab Hamdanid dynasty.
In December 2007, Iraq reopened Mosul International Airport.
Most of the Mosul iconography was Seljuq—for example, the use of figures seated cross-legged in a frontal position.
The nuns also established workshops to teach girls sewing and embroidery.
Mosul was conquered by the Seljuks in the 11th century.
A modern church was built over the old one in 1931, abolishing much of its archeological significance.
"Mosuli culture developed less along Ottoman–Turkish lines than along Iraqi–Arab lines; and Turkish, the official language of the State, was certainly not the dominant language in the province."
After a period under semi-independent atabeg such as Mawdud, in 1127 it became the centre of power of the Zengid dynasty.
Accusations were exchanged between Sunni fundamentalists and some Kurdish groups for being behind this new exodus.
Some of them have suffered from overmuch restoration.
No evidence helps to determine its exact area.
Once home to 70,000 Assyrian (Syriac) Christians there are possibly none left today in Mosul, any that do remain are forced to pay a tax for remaining Christian, and live under the constant threat of violence.
Over 120 Assyrian Iraqi Sisters belonged to this congregation.
In order to reestablish rule in 1834 the Sultan abolished public elections for the position of governor, and began "neutralizing local families such as the Jalilis and their class."
Mosul remained under Ottoman control until 1918 when it was taken by the British, with a brief break in 1623 when Persia seized the city, and was the capital of Mosul Vilayet one of the three vilayets (provinces) of Ottoman Iraq.
The University has since been closed but at the choice of the Islamic State's leadership in Mosul, the Medical College remains open but barely functional.
They may then leave the city upon paying a significant "departure tax"  on a three-day pass (for a higher fee they can surrender their home, pay the fee and leave for good) and if those with a three-day pass fail to return in that time their assets will be seized and family will be killed.
Qyuarrah Refinery was built within about an hour's drive from the city and was used to process tar for road-building projects.
The chain, fixed in the wall, is thought to cure epileptics.
The urban guerrilla warfare groups may be called the Nabi Yunus Brigade after the Nabi Yunus mosque, or the Kataeb al-Mosul (Mosul Brigade).
Al-Tahira Church dates back to the 7th century, and it lies 3 m below street level.
* Mashad Yahya Abul Kassem: Built in the 13th century it was on the right bank of the Tigris and was known for its conical dome, decorative brickwork and calligraphy engraved in Mosul blue marble.
* Mosul Museum and Nergal Gate: Statues and artefacts that date from the Assyrian and Akkadian empires, including artefacts from sites including the Assyrian cities of Nineveh, Ashur, Arrapha, Dur-Sharrukin and Kalhu (Nimrud) and the Neo-Assyrian site of Hatra.
The residents of the city have been de facto prisoners, forbidden to leave the city unless they post with ISIL a significant collateral of family members, personal wealth and property.
Pilgrims from different parts of the North visit it yearly in the spring, when many people also go out to its whereabouts on holiday.
In one notable incident they were able to kill five ISIS militants and destroy two of their vehicles.
Iraq's possession of Mosul was confirmed by the League of Nations brokered agreement between Turkey and Great Britain in 1926.
After the Peace of Amasya, the Safavids recaptured most of Mesopotamia one more time during the reign of king Abbas I (r. 1588-1629).
It became an episcopal seat of the Assyrian Church of the East in the 6th century.
The Islamist group Army of Ansar al-Sunna (partly evolved from Ansar al-Islam) declared responsibility for the attack in an Internet statement.
Its ancient Assyrian churches are often hidden and their entrances in thick walls are not easy to find.
On January 23, 2008, an explosion in an apartment building killed 36 people.
After the 1991 uprisings by the Kurds Mosul did not fall within the Kurdish-ruled area, but it was included in the northern no-fly zone imposed and patrolled by the United States and Britain between 1991 and 2003.
As a result, most of its artistic features have been severely damaged.
The Küfic lettering is blue.
A congregation of Dominican sisters, founded in the 19th century, still had its motherhouse in Mosul by the early 21st century.
There, he notes a small Assyrian town of "Mépsila" () on the Tigris somewhere about where modern Mosul is today (''Anabasis'', III.iv.10).
This process started in 1834 with the appointment of Bayraktar Mehmet Pasha, who was to rule Mosul for the next four years.
In May 2008, a military offensive of the Ninawa campaign was launched by US-backed Iraqi Army Forces led by Maj. Gen. Riyadh Jalal Tawfiq, the commander of military operations in Mosul, in the hope of bringing back stability and security to the city.
During the 20th century, Mosul city had been indicative of the mingling ethnic and religious cultures of Iraq.
The only monuments left are a marble door-frame decorated with a carved Estrangelo (Syriac) inscription, and two niches, which date back to the 13th or 14th century.
In the 13th century it was captured by the Mongols led by Hulegu, but was spared the usual destruction since its governor, Badr al-Din Luʾluʾ, helped the Khan in his following campaigns in Syria.
They were followed by the Dominican nuns in 1873.
At the end of World War I in October 1918, after the signature of the Armistice of Mudros, British forces occupied Mosul.
Saladin besieged the city unsuccessfully in 1182 but finally gained control of it in 1186.
On December 21, 2004, fourteen US soldiers, four American employees of Halliburton, and four Iraqi soldiers were killed in a suicide attack on a dining hall at the Forward Operating Base (FOB) Marez next to the main US military airfield at Mosul.
There are sometimes impromptu checkpoints.
According to Duraid Hikmat, an expert on minority relationships and resident of Mosul, the Christians were fearful to attend.
After the reign of Bayraktar Mehmet Pasha, the Ottoman government (wishing still to restrain the influence of powerful local families) appointed a series of governors in rapid succession, ruling “for only a brief period before being sent somewhere else to govern, making it impossible for any of them to achieve a substantial local power base.” Mosul's importance as a trading center declined after the opening of the Suez canal, which enabled goods to travel to and from India by sea rather than by land across Iraq and through Mosul.
In the early 21st century, the majority of Mosul's population is Arab, Assyrian, with Iraqi Turkmen, Yazidis, Armenian, Shabaki and other minorities.
When the Iraq War did break out in March 2003, US military activity in the area was confined to strategic bombing with airdropped special forces operating in the vicinity.
During its tenure, the 101st Airborne Division was able to extensively survey the city and, advised by the 431st Civil Affairs Battalion, non-governmental organizations, and the people of Mosul, began reconstruction work by employing the people of Mosul in the areas of security, electricity, local governance, drinking water, wastewater, trash disposal, roads, bridges, and environmental concerns.
Water supply cuts are common and mobile phone networks have been shut down.
In 1535, Ottoman Sultan Suleyman the Magnificent added Mosul to his empire by capturing it from his archrivals — Safavid Persia.
There are old houses here of beauty.
Though the representatives of Mosul in the Iraqi Parliament, the intellectuals of the city, and other concerned humanitarian groups agreed on the pressing need for a solution to the unbearable conditions of the city, they still believed that the solution was merely political and administrative.
The city has one football team capable of competing in the top-flight of Iraqi football – Mosul FC.
Civilians living in Mosul are not permitted to leave ISIS-controlled areas.
A legend made him a son of an Assyrian king.
The so-called Mosul School of Painting refers to a style of miniature painting that developed in northern Iraq in the late 12th to early 13th century under the patronage of the Zangid dynasty (1127–1222).
The following day, a suicide bomber dressed as a police officer assassinated the local police chief, Brig.
In 2003, during the Iraq War, a rabbi in the American army found an abandoned, dilapidated synagogue in Mosul dating back to the 13th century.
Earlier it had the name of the two Apostles, Peter and Paul, and was inhabited by the nuns of the Sacred Hearts.
Despite being a part of the Ottoman Empire, during the four centuries of Ottoman rule Mosul was considered "the most independent district" within the Middle East, following the Roman model of indirect rule through local notables.
The city of Mosul is home to the University of Mosul and its renowned Medical College, which together was one of the largest educational and research centres in Iraq and the Middle East.
Another mid-13th century frontispiece held in the Nationalbibliothek, Vienna, to another copy of the same text suggests the quality of later Mosul painting.
The Mosul Museum contains many interesting finds from the ancient sites of the old Assyrian capital cities Nineveh and Nimrud.
On 21 January 2015, the US began coordinating airstrikes with a Kurdish-launched offensive, to help them begin the planned operation to retake the city of Mosul.
After delicate engraving had prepared the surface of the piece, strips of gold and silver were worked so carefully that not the slightest irregularity appeared in the whole of the elaborate design.
In approximately 850 BC, King Ashurnasirpal II of Assyria chose the city of Kalhu as his capital in place of Assur (Ashur),  from present day Mosul.
In line with its status as a politically stable trade route between the Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf the city developed considerably during the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
This area is known today as the town of Nebi Yunus ("prophet Jonah") and is  populated largely by Kurds, which makes it the only fully-Kurdish neighborhood in Mosul.
Other Christian historical buildings:
Thenceforth Mosul was governed by a pasha.
It could be either the remnants of the church of the Upper Monastery or the ruined Mar Zena Church.
The brigade claims to have killed ISIL members with sniper fire.
In approximately 700 BC, King Sennacherib made Nineveh the new capital of Assyria.
* Mar Petion Church: Mar Petion, educated by his cousin in a monastery, was martyred in 446 AD.
Gen. Salah Mohammed al-Jubouri, the director of police for Ninevah province, as he toured the site of the blast.
Beginning in 2014, there were public executions held by ISIL.
In 2008, many Assyrian Christians (about 12,000) fled the city following a wave of murders and threats against their community.
As well as elected officials, the social architecture of Mosul was highly influenced by the Dominican fathers who arrived in Mosul in 1750, sent by Pope Benedict XIV (Mosul had a large Christian population, predominantly Assyrians).
The name of the city is first mentioned by Xenophon in his expeditionary logs in Achaemenid Assyria (Athura) of 401 BC, during the reign of the Persian Achaemenid dynasty in this region.
It was built by Mar Matte, a monk who fled with several other monks in 362 AD from the Monastery of Zuknin near the City of Amid (Diyarbakir) in the southern part of Asia Minor (modern Turkey) and the north of Iraq during the reign of Emperor Julian the Apostate (361–363 AD).
Mosul is rich in old historical places and ancient buildings: mosques, castles, churches, monasteries, and schools, many of which have architectural features and decorative work of significance.
An Iraqi Airways flight carried 152 Hajj pilgrims to Baghdad, the first commercial flight since US forces declared a no-fly zone in 1993, although further commercial flight remained prohibited.
In 1288–1289, the Exilarch was in Mosul and signed a supporting paper for Maimonides.
This church suffered destruction, and it has been reconstructed many times.
* Ancient Tahira Church (The Immaculate): Near Bash Tapia, considered one of the most ancient churches in Mosul.
The composition is more elaborate but less successful.
Life in Mosul is one of violent oppression where people suspected of activism against the occupiers, resistance activities, homosexuality, promiscuity or adultery are brutally and summarily tortured and murdered.
Built of marble with shen reliefs and renovated last in 1393 AD it was mentioned by the explorer Ibn Jubair in the 12th century AD, and is believed also to embrace the tomb of Al-Hur bin Yousif.
Some families crossed the borders to Syria and Turkey while others were given shelter in churches and monasteries.
Turkish diplomats and consular staff were detained for over 100 days.
A candlestick of this variety from 1238 and housed in the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris, attributed to Dà’ūd ibn Salamah of Mosul, is bronze with silver inlay.
Kurdish intelligence had been warned by a reliable source in early 2014 that Mosul would be attacked by ISIL and ex-Baathists (and had informed the US and UK) however Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and the Defence Minister turned down repeated offers of help from the Peshmerga.
The indigenous Assyrians still refer to the entire city of Mosul as ''Nineveh'' (or rather, Ninweh).
* Rabban Hormizd Monastery, the monastery of Notre-Dame des Semences, near the Assyrian town of Alqosh
Christianity was present among the indigenous Assyrian people in Mosul as early as the 1st century.
There is realism in its depiction of the preparation of a ruler's meal and of horsemen engaged in various activities, and the painting is as many hued as that of the early Mosul school, yet it is somehow less spirited.
The town center is dominated by a maze of streets and attractive 19th-century houses.
It is about 6 m below street level.
They also questioned whether such a large scale military offensive would spare the lives of innocent people.
