Dr. Ranjan Mustafi, who told ''The New York Times'' he had treated Besra, said that the cyst was not cancer at all but a cyst caused by tuberculosis.
In one publicly released letter to a spiritual confidant, the Rev.
'''Mother Teresa''' MC, known in the Catholic Church as '''Saint Teresa of Calcutta''' (born '''Anjezë Gonxhe Bojaxhiu''' ; 26 August 1910&nbsp;– 5 September 1997), was an Albanian-Indian Roman Catholic nun and missionary.
Her authorised biography was written by Indian civil servant Navin Chawla and published in 1992, and there are other books and films about her.
Aroup Chatterjee, a physician who was born and raised in Calcutta and worked in the city's slums as an activist for years around 1980 before moving to the UK, recalls that he "never even saw any nuns in those slums".
In that survey, she out-polled all other volunteered answers by a wide margin, and was in first place in all major demographic categories except the very young (millenials).
Other civilian awards include the Balzan Prize for promoting humanity, peace and brotherhood among peoples (1978), and the Albert Schweitzer International Prize (1975).
By faith, I am a Catholic nun.
She was both praised and criticised for her anti-abortion views.
''Time'' magazine said that calls to  Sister Betta and to the office of Sister Nirmala, Mother Teresa's successor as head of the order, elicited no comment on this.
The first Missionaries of Charity home in the United States was established in the South Bronx, New York; by 1984 the congregation operated 19 establishments throughout the country.
In 2009 the Memorial House of Mother Teresa was opened in her hometown Skopje, in Macedonia.
She was appointed an honorary Companion of the Order of Australia in 1982, "for service to the community of Australia and humanity at large."
Mother Teresa specified that "It is only by mental prayer and spiritual reading that we can cultivate the gift of prayer."
Teresa experienced doubt, loneliness and the temptation to return to the comfort of convent life during these early months.
Besra said that a beam of light emanated from the picture, curing the cancerous tumour.
She said, 'I'm not a social worker.
Privately, Mother Teresa experienced doubts and struggles over her religious beliefs which lasted nearly 50 years until the end of her life, during which "she felt no presence of God whatsoever", "neither in her heart or in the eucharist" as put by her postulator, the Rev.
Despite this request, the correspondences have been compiled in ''Mother Teresa: Come Be My Light'' (Doubleday).
In his first encyclical ''Deus caritas est'', Benedict XVI mentioned Teresa of Calcutta three times and he also used her life to clarify one of his main points of the encyclical.
Chatterjee criticizes Teresa for promoting a "cult of suffering" and a distortedly negative image of Calcutta, exaggerating the work done by her Mission, and misusing the funds and privileges at her disposal.
In answer to the requests of many priests, in 1981 Mother Teresa also began the Corpus Christi Movement for Priests, and in 1984 founded with Fr.
She renamed it Kalighat, the Home of the Pure Heart (Nirmal Hriday).
The Missionaries of Charity also established several leprosy outreach clinics throughout Calcutta, providing medication, bandages and food.
She visited the Soviet republic of Armenia following the 1988 earthquake, and met with Nikolai Ryzhkov, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers.
She was criticised for the poor conditions in the houses for the dying she ran.
The officials at the Balurghat Hospital where Besra was seeking medical treatment said that they were being pressured by the Catholic order to say her cure was miraculous.
Indian Railways introduced a new train, "Mother Express", named after Mother Teresa, on 26 August 2010 to mark the centenary of her birth.
She was undeterred by criticism about her firm stand against abortion and divorce stating, "No matter who says what, you should accept it with a smile and do your own work."
In April 1976, Mother Teresa visited the University of Scranton in northeastern Pennsylvania where she was awarded the La Storta Medal for Human Service by the university’s president, William Byron, S.J.
They run homes for people dying of HIV/AIDS, leprosy and tuberculosis; soup kitchens; dispensaries and mobile clinics; children's and family counselling programmes; orphanages; and schools.
In April 1996 Teresa fell and broke her collar bone.
But a person that is shut out, that feels unwanted, unloved, terrified, the person that has been thrown out from society—that poverty is so hurtable  and so much, and I find that very difficult."
Teresa inspired a variety of commemorations.
A controversial figure both during her life and after her death, Teresa was widely admired by many for her charitable works.
The Mother Teresa Women's University in the Indian city of Kodaikanal, Tamil Nadu, was established in 1984 as a public university by the government of Tamil Nadu.
This miracle is a hoax."
In the process of examining Teresa's suitability for beatification and canonisation, the Roman Curia (the Vatican) studied a great deal of published and unpublished criticism of her life and work.
In Kolkata, she is worshipped by some Hindus as a goddess.
Chatterjee has acknowleged that some of the hygiene problems he had been criticizing (e.g.
The group found no obstacle for the Holy See to Mother Teresa's canonisation, issuing a ''nihil obstat'' on 21 April 1999.
Since her death, Mother Teresa had progressed rapidly along the steps towards sainthood, completing it by canonisation.
She died on 5 September 1997.
She spent her life opposing the only known cure for poverty, which is the empowerment of women and the emancipation of them from a livestock version of compulsory reproduction."
Mother Teresa expressed grave doubts about God's existence and pain over her lack of faith:
A separate medical committee ruled that the miracle of Monica Besra, among three Kolodiejchuk considered, was evidence of divine intercession.
Although praising her "selfless caring", energy and bravery, the author of the tribute was critical of Mother Teresa's public campaigning against abortion and that she claimed to be non-political when doing so.
Muggeridge was undergoing a spiritual journey of his own at the time.
I want you to pray for me—that I let Him have a free hand."
By 1996 Teresa was operating 517 missions in more than 100 countries.
English was the language the Sisters of Loreto used to teach schoolchildren in India.
Muggeridge later converted to Catholicism.
"In the example of Blessed Teresa of Calcutta we have a clear illustration of the fact that time devoted to God in prayer not only does not detract from effective and loving service to our neighbour but is in fact the inexhaustible source of that service."
On 28 August 2010, to commemorate the 100th anniversary of her birth, the government of India issued a special 5 rupee coin, being the sum she first arrived in India with.
Tens of thousands of people gathered for the ceremony, including 15 official government delegations and 1,500 homeless people from across Italy.
Teresa had first been recognised by the Indian government more than a third of a century earlier when she was awarded the Padma Shri in 1962 and the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding in 1969.
I do it for Christ.
Mother Teresa agreed to continue her work as head of the congregation.
Her final resolution was taken on 15 August 1928, while praying at the shrine of the Black Madonna of Vitina-Letnice, where she often went on pilgrimage.
which is translated to "My God, My God, why have you forsaken me?"
She was granted a state funeral by the Indian government in gratitude for her services to the poor of all religions in India.
Vatican officials said that the allegations raised had been investigated by the agency charged with such matters, the Congregation for the Causes of Saints.
In 1971  Pope Paul VI awarded her the first Pope John XXIII Peace Prize, commending her for her work with the poor, display of Christian charity and efforts for peace.
By 2007 the Missionaries of Charity numbered approximately 450 brothers and 5,000 sisters worldwide, operating 600 missions, schools and shelters in 120 countries.
Trinamool Congress MP Derek O'Brien, CPI leader Atul Anjan and Delhi's chief minister Arvind Kejriwal protested against the remarks.
By citizenship, an Indian.
Many other saints had similar experiences of spiritual dryness, or what Catholics believe to be spiritual tests ("passive purifications"), such as Mother Teresa's namesake, St. Therese of Lisieux, who called it a "night of nothingness."
It began as a small congregation with 13 members in Calcutta; by 1997 it had grown to more than 4,000 sisters running orphanages, AIDS hospices and charity centres worldwide, and caring for refugees, the blind, disabled, aged, alcoholics, the poor and homeless, and victims of floods, epidemics, and famine.
When I pick up a person from the street, hungry, I give him a plate of rice, a piece of bread, I have satisfied.
Barbara Smoker from secular humanist magazine ''The Freethinker'' criticised Teresa after the award of the Nobel Peace Prize since she felt that Teresa has promoting the Catholic Church's moral teachings on abortion and contraception, which some felt diverted funds from more effective methods of solving India's problems.
When Mother Teresa received the prize, she was asked, "What can we do to promote world peace?"
Her death was mourned in both secular and religious communities.
At the time of her death, Mother Teresa's Missionaries of Charity had over 4,000 sisters, and an associated brotherhood of 300 members, operating 610 missions in 123 countries.
During the filming of the documentary, footage taken in poor lighting conditions, particularly the Home for the Dying, was thought unlikely to be of usable quality by the crew.
Analysing her deeds and achievements, John Paul II asked: "Where did Mother Teresa find the strength and perseverance to place herself completely at the service of others?
In 1982, at the height of the Siege of Beirut, Teresa rescued 37 children trapped in a front line hospital by brokering a temporary cease-fire between the Israeli army and Palestinian guerrillas.
Teresa lay in repose in St Thomas, Calcutta, for one week prior to her funeral in September 1997.
Over the years, Mother Teresa's Missionaries of Charity grew from twelve to thousands serving the "poorest of the poor" in 450 centres around the world.
In 1999, a poll of Americans ranked her first in Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th Century.
Teresa opened a home for those suffering from Hansen's disease, commonly known as leprosy, and called the hospice Shanti Nagar (City of Peace).
She found it in prayer and in the silent contemplation of Jesus Christ, his Holy Face, his Sacred Heart."
Teresa adopted Indian citizenship, spent a few months in Patna to receive a basic medical training in the ''Holy Family Hospital'' and then ventured out into the slums.
Accompanied by Red Cross workers, she travelled through the war zone to the devastated hospital to evacuate the young patients.
Joseph Langford the Missionaries of Charity Fathers to combine the vocational aims of the Missionaries of Charity with the resources of the ministerial priesthood.
According to Besra's husband, "My wife was cured by the doctors and not by any miracle ...
Hitchens as well as Chatterjee, the author of ''The Final Verdict'', a book that is critical of Teresa, spoke to the tribunal.
Mother Teresa then expanded the congregation throughout the globe.
Kolodiejchuk said, "We didn’t have to prove that she was perfect or never made a mistake..." but he did have to prove that Teresa was of heroic virtue.
Asked by the Diocese of Calcutta, Kolodiejchuk was appointed postulator.
Teresa suffered a heart attack in Rome in 1983 while visiting Pope John Paul II.
She was a friend of ''poverty''.
With the help of Indian officials she converted an abandoned Hindu temple into the Kalighat Home for the Dying, a free hospice for the poor.
She later received the Pacem in Terris Award (1976).
Although Teresa enjoyed teaching at the school, she was increasingly disturbed by the poverty surrounding her in Calcutta.
After a second attack in 1989, she received an artificial pacemaker.
This process requires the documentation of a miracle performed from the intercession of Mother Teresa.
Her official biography was written by an Indian civil servant, Navin Chawla, and published in 1992.
In 1950, Teresa founded the Missionaries of Charity, a Roman Catholic religious congregation, which in 2012 consisted of over 4,500 sisters and was active in 133 countries.
She has been memorialised through museums, been named patroness of various churches, and had various structures and roads named after her, including Albania's international airport.
Her acceptance of this and the Haitian Legion of Honour proved controversial.
She was canonised (recognised by the church as a saint) on 4 September 2016, and the anniversary of her death, 5 September, was made her feast day.
At the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, Teresa stated "Yet we can destroy this gift of motherhood, especially by the evil of abortion, but also by thinking that other things like jobs or positions are more important than loving."
The Vishwa Hindu Parishad, on the other hand, opposed the government's decision to grant her a state funeral.
In 1952, Mother Teresa opened the first Home for the Dying in space made available by the city of Calcutta.
One of Teresa's most outspoken critics was the English journalist, literary critic and antitheist Christopher Hitchens, who wrote the extended essay ''The Missionary Position: Mother Teresa in Theory and Practice'' (1995) and wrote in a 2003 article, "This returns us to the medieval corruption of the church, which sold indulgences to the rich while preaching hellfire and continence to the poor.
One author later observed, "Though no one knew it at the time, Sister Teresa had just become ''Mother'' Teresa".
By the early 1970s, Mother Teresa had become an international celebrity.
According to a paper written by three Canadian academics, Serge Larivée, Geneviève Chénard, and Carole Sénéchal, Teresa's clinics received millions of dollars in donations, yet their conditions drew criticism from people disturbed by the shortage of medical care, systematic diagnosis, and necessary nutrition, as well as the scarcity of analgesics for those in pain; they said that "Mother Teresa believed the sick must suffer like Christ on the cross".
Building on this theme in her Nobel Lecture, she said: "Around the world, not only in the poor countries, but I found the poverty of the West so much more difficult to remove.
As the Missionaries of Charity took in increasing numbers of lost children, Mother Teresa felt the need to create a home for them.
Its first house outside India opened in Venezuela in 1965 with five sisters.
The Bengal famine of 1943 brought misery and death to the city; and the outbreak of Hindu/Muslim violence in August 1946 plunged the city into despair and horror.
She began her missionary work with the poor in 1948, replacing her traditional Loreto habit with a simple white cotton ''sari'' decorated with a blue border.
He submitted 76 documents totalling 35,000 pages based on interviews with 113 witnesses who were each asked to respond to 263 questions.
After Mother Teresa's death in 1997, the Holy See began the process of beatification, the third step towards possible canonisation.
During her life, Teresa was named 18 times in the yearly Gallup's most admired man and woman poll as one of the 10 women around the world who Americans admired most, finishing first several times in the 1980s and 1990s.
"A beautiful death", she said, "is for people who lived like animals to die like angels—loved and wanted."
Michael van der Peet, she wrote, "Jesus has a very special love for you.
She also singled out abortion as "the greatest destroyer of peace today.
Although there was no direct connection between Mother Teresa's order and the Franciscan orders, she was known as a great admirer of St. Francis of Assisi.
Mother Teresa's Albanian homeland granted her the Golden Honour of the Nation in 1994.
In 1991, Mother Teresa returned for the first time to her homeland and opened a Missionaries of Charity Brothers home in Tirana, Albania.
With reference to the above words, Kolodiejchuk (the official responsible for gathering the evidence for her sanctification) said he thought that some might misinterpret her meaning, but her faith that God was working through her remained undiminished, and that while she pined for the lost sentiment of closeness with God, she did not question his existence, and that she may have experienced something similar to what is believed of Jesus Christ when crucified who was heard to say "Eli Eli lama sabachthani?"
At that time she chose to be named after Thérèse de Lisieux, the patron saint of missionaries, but because one nun in the convent had already chosen that name, Agnes opted for the Spanish spelling of ''Teresa''.
The party accused the media of "distorting facts about Bhagwat's remarks".
St. Francis emphasised poverty, chastity, obedience and submission to Christ.
The charitable organisation Sevalaya runs the Mother Teresa Girls Home, named in her honour and designed to provide poor and orphan girls children in the vicinity of the underserved Kasuva village in Tamil Nadu with free food, clothing, shelter, and education.
He said, "It was not a miracle.... She took medicines for nine months to one year."
Beginning 5 September 2013, the anniversary of her death has been designated as the International Day of Charity by the United Nations General Assembly.
In August she suffered from malaria and failure of the left heart ventricle.
Muggeridge claimed this was a miracle of "divine light" from Mother Teresa herself.
Besra's medical records contain sonograms, prescriptions, and physicians' notes; Monica Besra said that Sister Betta of the Missionaries of Charity took them away.
Teresa wrote in her diary that her first year was fraught with difficulties.
The Archbishop of Calcutta, Henry Sebastian D'Souza, said he ordered a priest to perform an exorcism on Mother Teresa with her permission when she was first hospitalised with cardiac problems because he thought she may be under attack by the devil.
Teresa wrote many letters to her confessors and superiors over a 66-year period, most notably to Calcutta Archbishop Ferdinand Perier and a Jesuit priest, Celeste van Exem, who had been her spiritual advisor since the formation of the Missionaries of Charity.
Lay Catholics and non-Catholics were enrolled in the Co-Workers of Mother Teresa, the Sick and Suffering Co-Workers, and the Lay Missionaries of Charity.
Her father may have been from Prizren, Kosovo, while her mother may have been from a village near Gjakova.
She answered "Go home and love your family."
I do it for the church.'
Teresa was the recipient of numerous honours, including the 1962 Ramon Magsaysay Peace Prize and 1979 Nobel Peace Prize.
In February 2015, Mohan Bhagwat, leader of the Hindu right-wing organisation Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, said that her objective was "to convert the person, who was being served, into a Christian" Former RSS spokesperson MG Vaidhya backed Bhagwat's remarks.
Mother Teresa was beatified on 19 October 2003, becoming known by Catholics as "Blessed".
Because of the attacks she received, some Catholic writers called her a sign of contradiction.
As to my heart, I belong entirely to the Heart of Jesus."
Hitchens said that "her intention was not to help people", and that she lied to donors about the use of their contributions.
However, five weeks later, she described returning to her difficulties in believing.
After having lived in Macedonia for eighteen years, she moved to Ireland and then to India, where she lived for most of her life.
Accordingly, her influence and life show influences of Franciscan spirituality.
Mother Teresa was not a friend of the poor.
In 1955 she opened the Nirmala Shishu Bhavan, the Children's Home of the Immaculate Heart, as a haven for orphans and homeless youth.
She wrote in her diary:
The congregation soon began to attract both recruits and charitable donations, and by the 1960s had opened hospices, orphanages and leper houses all over India.
Those brought to the home received medical attention and were afforded the opportunity to die with dignity, according to the rituals of their faith; Muslims were read the Quran, Hindus received water from the Ganges, and Catholics received the Last Rites.
Members must adhere to the vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience, as well as a fourth vow, to give "wholehearted free service to the poorest of the poor".
Her family continued to live in Skopje until 1934, when they moved to Tirana in Albania.
Teresa described, after ten years of doubt, a short period of renewed faith.
She said that suffering was a gift from God.
She took her solemn vows on 14 May 1937, while serving as a teacher at the Loreto convent school in Entally, eastern Calcutta.
James Langford said these doubts were typical and would not be an impediment to canonisation.
She also spoke to the students as well as members of the Diocese of Scranton, numbering over 4000 individuals, telling them about her service to the "poorest of the poor" and instructing them to "do small things with great love."
He also devoted much of his own life to service of the poor, especially lepers in the area where he lived.
On the Hindu right, the Bharatiya Janata Party clashed with her over the Christian Dalits ("untouchables"), but praised her in death, sending a representative to her funeral.
Others followed in Rome, Tanzania, and Austria in 1968; during the 1970s the congregation opened houses and foundations in dozens of countries in Asia, Africa, Europe and the United States.
Brian Kolodiejchuk.
To fail would have been to break the faith."
He also accused her of hypocrisy for opting to receive advanced treatment for her heart condition.
But as for me, the silence and the emptiness is so great, that I look and do not see,—Listen and do not hear—the tongue moves in prayer but does not speak ...
Indian views on Teresa are not uniformly favourable.
The United Kingdom and the United States each repeatedly granted awards, culminating in the Order of Merit in 1983, and honorary citizenship of the United States received on 16 November 1996.
On 17 December 2015 the Vatican confirmed that Pope Francis had recognised a second miracle attributed to her, involving the healing of a Brazilian man with multiple brain tumours.
Mother Teresa attracted criticism from a number of people for implicitly giving support to the Duvaliers and to corrupt businessmen such as Charles Keating and Robert Maxwell.
Some of Besra's medical staff and Besra's husband said that conventional medical treatment had eradicated the tumour.
She was born in Skopje (now capital of the Republic of Macedonia), then part of the Kosovo Vilayet in the Ottoman Empire.
She refused the conventional ceremonial banquet given to laureates, and asked that the $192,000 funds be given to the poor in India, stating that earthly rewards were important only if they helped her help the world's needy.
Abortion rights groups criticised her stance on abortion, while anti-abortion advocates praised her support of fetal rights.
In tribute, Nawaz Sharif, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, said that she was "a rare and unique individual who lived long for higher purposes.
The Roman Catholic cathedral in Pristina, Kosovo, inaugurated in 2010, is also dedicated in her honour.
She had no income and had to resort to begging for food and supplies.
Its secretary Giriraj Kishore said that "her first duty was to the Church and social service was incidental" and accused her of favouring Christians and conducting "secret baptisms" of the dying.
He began a research effort that involved more than 100 interviews with volunteers, nuns and others familiar with the Missionaries of Charity, described in a 2003 book that is highly critical of Teresa.
At the time of the death of Pope Pius XII in 1958, praying for him at a Requiem Mass, she said she had been relieved of "the long darkness: that strange suffering."
Again, in August 1987, Mother Teresa visited the University of Scranton and was awarded an honorary doctor of social science degree in recognition of her selfless service and her ministry to help the destitute and sick.
After returning from India, however, the footage was found to be extremely well lit.
The Sisters of Charity recite the peace prayer of St. Francis every morning during thanksgiving after Communion and many of the vows and emphasis of her ministry are similar.
In Keating's case she wrote to the judge of his trial asking for clemency to be shown.
Teresa served there for almost twenty years and in 1944 was appointed headmistress.
Because if a mother can kill her own child – what is left for me to kill you and you kill me – there is nothing between."
Hitchens thought he was the only witness (Chatterjee, another with views antagonistic to Teresa, was also called) called by the Vatican to give evidence against Teresa's beatification and canonisation process, because the Vatican had abolished the traditional "devil's advocate" role which fulfilled a similar purpose.
Teresa travelled to assist and minister to the hungry in Ethiopia, radiation victims at Chernobyl, and earthquake victims in Armenia.
The Tamil Nadu State government organised centenary celebrations of Mother Teresa on 4 December 2010 in Chennai, headed by Tamil Nadu chief minister M Karunanidhi.
She continued to receive major Indian awards in subsequent years, including India's highest civilian award, the Bharat Ratna, in 1980.
She is peace in the world."
According to a biography written by Joan Graff Clucas, in her early years Agnes was fascinated by stories of the lives of missionaries and their service in Bengal, and by age 12 had become convinced that she should commit herself to a religious life.
These included hospices and homes for people with HIV/AIDS, leprosy and tuberculosis, soup kitchens, children's and family counselling programmes, personal helpers, orphanages and schools.
The Mother Theresa Post Graduate and Research Institute of Health Sciences Pondicherry, India was established in 1999 by the government of Puducherry.
She arrived in India in 1929, and began her novitiate in Darjeeling, near the Himalayan mountains, where she learnt Bengali and taught at St. Teresa's School, a schoolhouse close to her convent.
She continued, stating that "the poor will help us grow in sanctity, for they are Christ in the guise of distress", calling the students and residents of the city of Scranton to give to suffering members in their community.
She had heart surgery but it was clear that her health was declining.
In her speech, she called the audience to "know poor people in your own home and local neighbourhood", whether it meant feeding others or simply spreading joy and love.
In 1991, after having pneumonia while in Mexico, she suffered further heart problems.
