In 1906 ten mothers who had nine children each were given an award recognising "High Maternal Merit" ("Haut mérite maternel").
The Congress intended to improve women's rights in education and marriage.
In Kyrgyzstan, Mother's Day is celebrated on 19 May every year.
Constance Penswick-Smith worked unsuccessfully to revive the festival in the 1910s–1920s.
The government sought to counter these claims by organizing widespread masses and asking religious women to assist with the state-sponsored events in order to "depaganize" them.
The son then married and left without showing any gratitude to his mother.
In Bolivia, Mother's Day is celebrated on 27 May.
Within a few years, Mother's Day became one of the most popular dates in the Maltese calendar.
After World War II communists replaced Mother's Day with International Woman's Day, celebrated on 8 March.
Law 319/2009 made both Mother's Day and Father's Day official holidays in Romania.
As a result of this tradition, most mothers were reunited with their children on this day when young apprentices and young women in service were released by their masters for that weekend.
In Armenia, Mother's Day is celebrated on 8 March, and on 7 April as Maternity and Beauty Day.
It has gradually become a major commercial event, with special pastries, flowers and other presents offered by retailers.
The Congress took place in a building called Dalem Jayadipuran, which now serves as the office of the Center of History and Traditional Values Preservation () in Brigjen Katamso Street, Yogyakarta.
In Samoa, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday in May, and as a recognised national holiday on the Monday following.
It was declared by the first President of Georgia Zviad Gamsakhurdia in order to replace the International Women Day, and it was officially approved by the Supreme Council in 1991.
Belarus celebrates Mother's Day on 14 October.
While honoring their family and heroes, men sing songs.
In France, amidst alarm at the low birth rate, there were attempts in 1896 and 1904 to create a national celebration honoring the mothers of large families.
The Royal Dutch Society for Horticulture and Botany, a group protecting the interest of Dutch florists, worked to promote the holiday; they hoped to emulate the commercial success achieved by American florists.
In Hungary, Mother's Day is celebrated on the first Sunday of May.
In this battle, women fighting for the country's independence were slaughtered by the Spanish army.
In 1980 President Ferdinand Marcos issued Presidential Proclamation No.
This was established in 1931 when the Imperial Women's Union was organized.
In Malta, this day is commemorated on the second Sunday in May.
In 1937 President Manuel L. Quezon issued Presidential Proclamation No.
However, supporters of the choice contend that there is much more to her life story than simply such "traditional" roles.
Hearing this, Amin became motivated to promote "Mother's Day".
Traditionally, in the Kathmandu valley the South-Western corner is reserved for women and women-related rituals, and the North-Eastern is for men and men-related rituals.
According to some Islamic traditions, Heaven is said to be found under a mother's feet, meaning that one can attain admission into heaven after death if they are caring and loving sons to their mothers.
In the Slovak Republic, Mother's Day is celebrated every second Sunday in May.
Czechoslovakia celebrated only Women's Day until the Velvet Revolution in 1989.
The promoter of this celebration was Alice Masaryková.
The idea was first ridiculed by president Gamal Abdel Nasser but he eventually accepted it and Mother's Day was first celebrated on 21 March 1956.
It falls on the last day of the dark fortnight in the month of Baishakh which falls in April–May (in 2015, it will occur on 18 April).
Other trade groups tried to cash in on the holiday and to give new meaning to the holiday in order to promote their own wares as gifts.
In response, Governor-General Charles Yeater issued Circular No.
In some countries, it is potentially offensive to one's mother not to mark Mother's Day.
This created conflicts with other organizations that resented Nazi control of the holiday, including Catholic and Protestant churches and local women's organizations.
The observance was instituted at the 1938 Indonesian Women Congress.
Most historians believe that Mothering Sunday evolved from the 16th-century Christian practice of visiting one's mother church annually on Laetare Sunday.
The Cárdenas government tried to use the holiday as a vehicle for various efforts: to stress the importance of families as the basis for national development; to benefit from the loyalty that Mexicans felt towards their mothers; to introduce new morals to Mexican women; and to reduce the influence that the church and the Catholic right exerted over women.
It was first celebrated in 1925 by the Hungarian Red Cross Youth.
This is the sixth month in the Islamic calendar (a lunar calendar) and every year the holiday falls on a different day of the Gregorian calendar.
In Hindu tradition, Mother's Day is called "Mata Tirtha Aunshi" or "Mother Pilgrimage fortnight", and is celebrated in countries with a Hindu population, especially in Nepal.
In 1923, this resulted in the unanimous adoption of ''Muttertag'', the Mother's Day holiday as imported from America and Norway.
Later Amin heard the story of a widowed mother who devoted her whole life to raising her son until he became a doctor.
People also allow mothers a day off from domestic chores.
8 December was adopted as Mother's Day under Law 69, which was passed the same year.
The United States celebrates Mother's Day on the second Sunday in May.
They are organized to bring some dishes and eat all together or maybe to visit any restaurant.
In 1932, then President Getúlio Vargas made the second Sunday of May the official date for Mother's Day.
He expected that the holiday would unite the divided country.
Local authorities resisted the guidelines from the Nazi government and continued assigning resources to families who were in economic need, much to the dismay of the Nazi officials.
Her 1870 "Appeal to womanhood throughout the world" is sometimes referred to as Mother's Day Proclamation.
In 1942, at the same time as Soledad's greatest celebration of Mother's Day, the clergy organized the 210th celebration of the Virgin Mary with a large parade in León.
People present gifts to mothers (such as flowers) and hold surprise parties and competitions, which include cooking and kebaya wearing.
Indians do not celebrate the occasion as a religious event, and it is celebrated primarily in urban centers.
Father's Day is celebrated on the King's birthday.
The smaller one is used to "look upon mother's face", and it's fenced by iron bars to prevent people from bathing on it.
The holiday did not celebrate individual women, but an idealized standard of motherhood.
According to a 2008 article by the Philippine News Agency, in 1921 the Ilocos Norte Federation of Women's Clubs asked to declare the first Monday of December as Mother's Day "to honor these fabulous women who brought forth God’s children into this world."
The holiday was first celebrated around the 1980s as part of the campaign by the Prime Minister of Thailand Prem Tinsulanonda to promote Thailand's Royal family.
From the position of the German Nazi government, the role of mothers was to give healthy children to the German nation.
It was introduced in Egypt by journalist Mustafa Amin and was first celebrated in 1956.
This economic modernization was inspired by US models and was sponsored by the state.
Li and the Society want to replace the Western-style gift of carnations with lilies, which, in ancient times, were planted by Chinese mothers when children left home.
They sent so much mail back to their country for Mother's Day that the Union Franco-Américaine created a postal card for that purpose.
''Die Frau'', the newspaper of the Federation of German Women's Associations, refused to recognize the holiday.
Swedes born in the early nineteen hundreds typically did not celebrate the day because of the common belief that the holiday was invented strictly for commercial purposes.
Children in South Sudan are presenting mothers with gifts and flowers.
The government sponsored the holiday in the schools.
In the Maldives, Mother's Day is celebrated on 13 May.
In 1988 President Corazon Aquino issued Presidential Proclamation No.
The modern Mother's Day has been assimilated into Indian culture, and it is celebrated every year on the second Sunday of May.
In Brazil, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday of May.
The traditions of the two holidays are now mixed together and celebrated on the same day, although many people are not aware that the festivities have quite separate origins.
According to another account, in 1924 the Rotary Club of Panama asked that Mother's Day be celebrated on 11 May.
Children give gifts and spend time with their mothers.
But still, women's day must be celebrated as are other holidays."
The nearby Mata Tirtha village is named after these ponds.
In the United States, celebration of Mother's Day began in the early 20th century.
316 in 1953, on the 25th anniversary of the 1928 Indonesian Women Congress.
Media channels celebrate with special shows.
Traditionally, the chrysanthemum is given to mothers for Mother's Day as the flower is naturally in season during May (autumn in Australia) and ends in "mum", a common affectionate shortening of "mother" in Australia.
The practice has since been copied by other Arab countries.
This was attributed to women's participation in the labor market.
However, US World War II soldiers brought the US Mother's Day celebration to the UK, and the holiday was merged with the Mothering Sunday traditions still celebrated in the Church of England.
In general, mothers receive gifts by their family members and this day is meant to be celebrated with the whole family.
A group of young people attempted to gather 20,000 signatures to ask the Parliament to move Mother's Day.
As a result, Barrios asked that the celebration be moved to the end of the month.
Now this festival is widely celebrated across the country.
The guidelines for the subsidies had eugenics criteria, but there is no indication that social workers ever implemented them in practice, and subsidies were given preferentially to families in economic need rather than to families with more children or "healthier" children.
It is celebrated on various days in many parts of the world, most commonly in the months of March or May.
This included the publication of a book of articles written by famous intellectuals, radio broadcasts, newspapers ads, and the collaboration of priests and teachers who wanted to promote the celebration for their own reasons.
In the Roman Catholic Church, the holiday is strongly associated with revering the Virgin Mary.
In New Zealand, Mother's Day is celebrated on the second Sunday in May.
Mother's Day is mainly celebrated by children at kindergartens.
It took several decades for the day to be widely recognized.
The weeks leading up to this Sunday, school children spend a few hours a day to prepare a gift for their mothers, aided by their school teachers.
Currently this holiday practice is viewed as very conservative, but the 1940s' UNS saw Mother's Day as part of the larger debate on the modernization that was happening at the time.
The fact that the holiday was originally imported from the US was seen as evidence of an attempt at imposing capitalism and materialism in Mexican society.
The ingredients are divided along genders, with girls bringing spices, vegetables, cheese and butter, while the boys bring a lamb or bull.
As it is a holiday, some people prefer to go out for a picnic to celebrate this festival.
The holiday was then seen as a means to encourage women to bear more children, which nationalists saw as a way to rejuvenate the nation.
In the week before this holiday children make little presents at primary school, which they give to their mothers in the early morning of Mother's Day.
They concluded that the government's long-term goal was to cause women to abandon their traditional roles at home in order to spiritually weaken men.
Mothering Sunday can fall at the earliest on 1 March (in years when Easter Day falls on 22 March) and at the latest on 4 April (when Easter Day falls on 25 April).
In Buddhism, the festival of Ullambana is derived from the story of Maudgalyayana and his mother.
The dark fortnight lasts for 15 days from the full moon to the new moon.
The Jewish population of Israel used to celebrate Mother's Day on Shevat 30 of the Jewish calendar, which falls between 30 January and 1 March.
The weeks leading up to this Sunday, school children spend a few hours a day to prepare a gift for their mothers, aided by their school teachers.
In 1914, Woodrow Wilson signed a proclamation designating Mother's Day, held on the second Sunday in May, as a national holiday to honor mothers.
In Iran, Mother's Day is celebrated on 20 Jumada al-thani.
The 1942 celebration lasted a full week and included an announcement that all women could reclaim their pawned sewing machines from the Monte de Piedad at no cost.
Jarvis protested at a candy makers' convention in Philadelphia in 1923, and at a meeting of American War Mothers in 1925.
Mother's Day is celebrated in more than 46 countries throughout the world.
Previously, the tradition was observed primarily by the Newar community and other people living in the Kathmandu Valley.
The Synarchists worried that this promoted both materialism and the idleness of lower classes, and in turn, reinforced the systemic social problems of the country.
The holiday was more inspired by anti-depopulation efforts than by the US holiday, with medals awarded to the mothers of large families.
In the mid-1930s the slogan ''Moederdag - Bloemendag'' (Mother's Day - Flowers' Day) was coined, and the phrase was popular for many years.
The Nazi party's intention was to create a pure "Aryan race" according to nazi eugenics.
However, owing to the efforts of Anna Jarvis, by 1911 all US states observed the holiday, with some of them officially recognizing Mother's Day as a local holiday, the first being West Virginia, Jarvis' home state, in 1910.
Center-right parties want Mother's Day to replace Women's Day, and social-democrats want to make Women's Day an official holiday.
These attempts were unsuccessful and celebrations continued to be held on that day; classic songs celebrating mothers remain famous to this day.
In the mid-1930s, the leftist government of Lázaro Cárdenas promoted the holiday as a "patriotic festival".
It started in former Czechoslovakia in 1923.
Men will often wear a chrysanthemum in their lapels in honor of mothers.
Mother's Day continues to be one of the most commercially successful U.S. occasions.
She also championed children's rights.
The holiday has evolved over time, becoming a celebration of mutual love inside the family, called Family Day (יוֹם הַמִשְּפָּחָה, yom hamishpacha).
Mother's Day in Latvia was celebrated for the first time in 1922.
There is a consensus among scholars that the Mexican government abandoned its revolutionary initiatives during the 1940s, including its efforts to influence Mother's Day.
In 1918, also inspired by Jarvis, the town of Lyon wanted to celebrate a "journée des Mères", but instead decided to celebrate a "Journée Nationale des Mères de familles nombreuses."
In recent years, the Communist Party member Li Hanqiu began to advocate for the official adoption of Mother's Day in memory of Meng Mu, the mother of Mèng Zǐ.
The custom was still popular by the start of the 19th century, but with the Industrial Revolution, traditions changed and the Mothering Day customs declined.
In Estonia, Mother's Day (''emadepäev'' in Estonian) is celebrated on the second Sunday of May.
The first Mother's Day was held in that country on 2 July 2012.
In the United States, Mother's Day remains one of the biggest days for sales of flowers, greeting cards, and the like; Mother's Day is also the biggest holiday for long-distance telephone calls.
Since then the French government awards the Médaille de la Famille française to mothers of large families.
Catholic organizations and priests tried to Christianize the holiday, but those attempts were rendered futile around the 1960s when the church lost influence and the holiday was completely secularized.
This festival is observed to commemorate and honor mothers, and it is celebrated by giving gifts to mothers and remembering mothers who are no more.
The day is celebrated in different ways.
In 1950, after the war, the celebration was reinstated.
Mother's day in Thailand is celebrated on the birthday of the Queen of Thailand, Queen Sirikit (12 August).
Mother's Day was originally observed on 16 December but the date was changed after the Iranian Revolution in 1979.
The Islamic Republic government is accused of using the holiday as a tool to undercut feminist movements and to promote role models for the traditional concept of family.
Mother's Day remains an unofficial festival, except in a small number of cities.
A Filipina mother is called the "light of the household" around which all activities revolve, and in accordance with Filipino culture, is the object of filial piety.
The date was chosen by President Anastasio Somoza García because it was the birthday of Casimira Sacasa, his wife's mother.
This is also the spelling used by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson in his 1914 presidential proclamation, by the U.S. Congress in relevant bills, and by various U.S. presidents in their proclamations concerning Mother's Day.
Maldivians love to celebrate Mother's day, and they have it specially written on their calendar.
Since then, many people visited the pond, hoping to see their deceased mother's face.
Daughters give their mothers cards and handmade gifts and sons give their mothers gifts and flowers.
Because of this, it is considered one of the celebrations most related to consumerism in the country, second only to Christmas Day as the most commercially lucrative holiday.
As a result of the influence of the American Mother's Day, Mothering Sunday transformed into the tradition of showing appreciation to one's mother.
In Japan,  was initially commemorated during the Shōwa period as the birthday of Empress Kōjun (mother of Emperor Akihito) on 6 March.
Mothers are also honored on International Women's Day.
Since then Ukrainian society struggles to transition the main holiday that recognizes woman from the International Women's Day, a holiday adopted under the Soviet Union that remained as a legacy in Ukraine after its collapse, to Mother's Day.
This holiday has its roots in the church and was originally unrelated to the American holiday.
The tradition of giving gifts to mothers on Mother's Day in Australia was started by Janet Heyden, a resident of Leichhardt, Sydney, in 1924.
In 1937, the first meeting of "Praise Mothers" was held on 8 May, and in 1949 Japanese society adopted the second Sunday of May as the official date for Mother's Day in Japan.
This was in contrast to Father's Day, which has been widely celebrated in Sweden since the late 1970s.
It was introduced in Egypt by journalist Mustafa Amin in his book ''Smiling America'' (1943).
This date was suggested in 1930 by the wife of Panama's President Florencio Harmodio Arosemena.
The Shah's government honored and gave awards to women who represented the idealized view of the regime, including mothers who had many healthy children.
This is the birthday anniversary of Fatimah, Prophet Muhammad's only daughter according to Shia Islam orthodoxy.
There are also many people who celebrate Mother's Day on 15 August instead; these are mostly people around Antwerp, who consider that day (Assumption) the classical Mother's Day and the observance in May an invention for commercial reasons.
One of the most popular ways people celebrate Mother's Day is by giving their mother a card and bouquet of flowers.
For the feast, ingredients will be brought by the children for a traditional hash recipe.
After the split of the country in 1993, the Czech Republic started celebrating Mother's Day again.
Other Protestant holidays from the same time, such as Children's Day and Temperance Sunday, do not have the same level of popularity.
Mothers are also honored on International Women's Day.
In 1941, by initiative of Philippe Pétain, the wartime Vichy government used the celebration in support of their policy to encourage larger families, but all mothers were now honored, even mothers with smaller families.
They also saw the holiday as an attempt to secularize the cult to the Virgin Mary, inside a larger effort to dechristianize several holidays.
The worship place for Mata Tirtha Aunsi is located in Mata Tirtha in the South-Western half of the valley, while the worship place for Gokarna Aunsi, the equivalent celebration for deceased fathers, is located in Gokarna, Nepal, in the North-Eastern half.
However, all groups strongly agreed on the promotion of the values of motherhood.
This is a celebration of the emancipation of women.
When Mustafa Amin was arrested and imprisoned, there were attempts to change the name of the holiday from "Mother's Day" to "Family Day" as the government wished to prevent the occasion from reminding people of its founder.
Mother's Day in Egypt is celebrated on the 21 of March, the first day of spring in the northern hemisphere.
It is recognized nationally, but is not a public holiday.
The head of the Association of German Florists cited "the inner conflict of our ''Volk'' and the loosening of the family" as his reason for introducing the holiday.
They were imitating the campaign already underway by florists in Germany and Austria, but they were aware that the traditions had originated in the US.
Today, the meaning of Mother's Day has changed, and it is celebrated by expressing love and gratitude to mothers.
Celebratory practices are very similar to those of other western nations.
In the 1880s and 1890s there were several further attempts to establish an American "Mother's Day", but these did not succeed beyond the local level.
The holiday is celebrated on the anniversary of the opening day of the first Indonesian Women Congress (), which was held from 22 to 25 December 1928.
People from UK started celebrating Mother's Day on the fourth Sunday of Lent, the same day on which Mothering Sunday had been celebrated for centuries.
Moreover, churchgoing is also popular on Mother's Day, yielding the highest church attendance after Christmas Eve and Easter.
By the 1950s, the celebration became popular again in the whole of the UK, thanks to the efforts of UK merchants, who saw in the festival a great commercial opportunity.
Georgia celebrates Mother's Day on 3 March.
In Panama, Mother's Day is celebrated on 8 December, the same day as the Feast of the Immaculate Conception.
Individuals who have lost their mothers pray and pay their respects to their loved ones lost.
In schools, kids dedicate poems to their mothers and also performs various roles on this day.
In 1926 Mother's Day was celebrated on 7 July in order to address these complaints.
Currently, both days are festive, but they are not "state holidays".
Mother's Day in Sweden is celebrated on the last Sunday in May.
But Howe's day was not for honouring mothers but for organizing pacifist mothers against war.
Mother's Day in Bhutan is celebrated on the 8 of May.
In 1931 the second Sunday of May was adopted as the official celebration date.
