(see also Kayaking for more on this style of activity)
Its massif includes neighbouring peaks Lhotse, ; Nuptse,  and Changtse, .
If weather does not cooperate within these short few days, climbers are forced to descend, many all the way back down to Base Camp.
Expeditions trek to the Rongbuk Glacier, setting up base camp at  on a gravel plain just below the glacier.
Nearly all attempts at the summit are done using one of the two main routes.
When Tenzing and Hillary made the first successful summit in 1953, they used bottled oxygen, with the expedition's physiologist Griffith Pugh referring to the oxygen debate as a "futile controversy", noting that oxygen "greatly increases subjective appreciation of the surroundings, which after all is one of the chief reasons for climbing."
The project would install a device at Everest that converts human waste into methane, which can then be used as fuel (for heating, etc.
Also, a Eurocopter AS350 B3 flown by M.&nbsp;Folini achieved a record breaking rescue at  on the morning of 20 May 2013, by retrieving fallen climber Sudarshan Gautam between Camps III and IV in Everest's Yellow Band.
Yet the use of oxygen was considered so unsportsmanlike that none of the rest of the Alpine world recognised this high ascent rate.
The elevation of  was first determined by an Indian survey in 1955, made closer to the mountain, also using theodolites.
An official announcement that Peak&nbsp;XV was the highest was delayed for several years as the calculations were repeatedly verified.
China argued it should be measured by its rock height which is 8844 m but Nepal said it should be measured by its snow height 8848 m. In 2010, an agreement was finally reached by both sides that the height of Everest is 8,848 m and Nepal recognises China's claim that the rock height of Everest is 8,844 m. In 1865, Everest was given its official English name by the Royal Geographical Society upon a recommendation by Andrew Waugh, the British Surveyor General of India.
Even at base camp, the low partial pressure of oxygen had direct effect on blood oxygen saturation levels.
A detailed photogrammetric map (at a scale of 1:50,000) of the Khumbu region, including the south side of Mount Everest, was made by Erwin Schneider as part of the 1955 International Himalayan Expedition, which also attempted Lhotse.
Words were exchanged and the situation escalated.
The upper five metres of the Yellow Band lying adjacent to the Qomolangma Detachment is badly deformed.
(The Second Step includes a climbing aid called the "Chinese ladder", a metal ladder placed semi-permanently in 1975 by a party of Chinese climbers.
During the entire 1996 season, 15 people died while climbing on Mount Everest.
Some still wanted to climb but there was really too much controversy to continue that year.
When he arrived in camp 4, fellow climbers considered his condition terminal and left him in a tent to die overnight.
Over 200 volunteers climbed to Everest Base Camp where various medical tests were performed to examine blood oxygen levels.
The next attempt was that of Norton and Somervell, who climbed without oxygen and in perfect weather, traversing the North Face into the Great Couloir.
In 1986 Steve McKinney led an expedition to Mount Everest, during which he became the first person to fly a hang-glider off the mountain.
Recognising her heroic rescue, Major Meagan McGrath was selected as a 2011 recipient of the Sir Edmund Hillary Foundation of Canada Humanitarian Award, which recognises a Canadian who has personally or administratively contributed a significant service or act in the Himalayan Region of Nepal.
For Sherpas living on the slopes of Everest in the Khumbu region of Nepal, Rongbuk Monastery was an important pilgrimage site, accessed in a few days of travel across the Himalaya through Nangpa La.
Everest and its flanks are blessed with spiritual energy, and one should show reverence when passing through this sacred landscape.
There is very little native flora or fauna on Everest.
Wang won International Mountaineer of the Year Award from the Nepal government in June 2014.
Mount Everest has had a 3G wireless data communication network since 2010.
Once the climbing community was satisfied that the mountain could be climbed without supplemental oxygen, many purists then took the next logical step of insisting that is how it ''should'' be climbed.
Although lower mountains can be longer or steeper climbs, Everest is so high the jet stream can hit it.
This was, however, a route decision dictated more by politics than by design as the Chinese border was closed to the western world in the 1950s after the People's Republic of China invaded Tibet.
It was the route used by Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay in 1953 and the first recognised of fifteen routes to the top by 1996.
Waugh began work on Nicolson's data in 1854, and along with his staff spent almost two years working on the calculations, having to deal with the problems of light refraction, barometric pressure, and temperature over the vast distances of the observations.
The Nepalese government said if climbers were attacked, action would be taken against the aggressors.
In 2005, China remeasured the height of the mountain and got a result of 8844.43 m. An argument regarding the height between China and Nepal lasted 5 years from 2005 to 2010.
They reached the Himalayan foothills by the 1830s, but Nepal was unwilling to allow the British to enter the country because of suspicions of political aggression and possible annexation.
To reach Camp IV on the north col, climbers ascend the glacier to the foot of the col where fixed ropes are used to reach the North Col at .
In the early 1960s, the Nepalese government coined a Nepali name for Mount Everest, ''Sagarmāthā'' or ''Sagar-Matha'' (सागर-मथ्था), allegedly to supplant the Tibetan name among the locals, a usage which the Nepali government felt was "not acceptable".
In 1980, Messner summited the mountain solo, without supplemental oxygen or any porters or climbing partners, on the more difficult northwest route.
The British returned for a 1922 expedition.
Delsalle also rescued two Japanese climbers at  while he was there.
This included 72-year old Bill Burke, the Indian teenage girl and a Chinese woman Jing Wang.
Although it has not been officially recognised by Nepal, this figure is widely quoted.
The first person with Cystic Fibrosis also summited Mount Everest on their third try.
Nicolson retreated to Patna on the Ganges to perform the necessary calculations based on his observations.
18 bodies were recovered from Mount Everest by the Indian army mountaineering team.
The storm's impact on climbers on the North Ridge of Mount Everest, where several climbers also died, was detailed in a first-hand account by British filmmaker and writer Matt Dickinson in his book ''The Other Side of Everest''.
From the North Col, climbers ascend the rocky north ridge to set up Camp V at around .
Even for the able, the Everest North-East ridge is a recognised as a challenge, which is why it is so hard to rescue someone who has become incapacitated&nbsp;— it is beyond their ability to save them in such a difficult spot.
Another woman from the Americas, the Ecuadorian woman Carla Perez also summited Mount Everest in 2016 without supplementary oxygen.
He ascended at a remarkable speed— per hour, and reached an altitude of , the first time a human reported to climb higher than 8,000 m. This feat was entirely lost on the British climbing establishment—except for its "unsporting" nature.
People who die during the climb are typically left behind.
Francys Arsentiev died on descent in 1998 despite the efforts of her husband and a team from Uzbekistan that ran low of bottled oxygen.
The Himalayas are rising by about 5&nbsp;mm per year.
The summit of Everest is the point at which Earth's surface reaches the greatest distance above sea level.
The three climbers crossed over lines being laid by the Sherpas, contrary to the etiquette that climbers should avoid Sherpas working on the mountain.
Various types of gliding descents have slowly become more popular, and are noted for their rapid descents to lower camps.
The Chinese team also measured a snow/ice depth of , which is in agreement with a net elevation of .
Two accounts suggest the rates of change are  per year (upwards) and  per year (northeastwards), but another account mentions more lateral movement (),
Kangchenjunga and Dhaulagiri), Waugh argued that he could not find any commonly used local name.
Michael Hennessy, one of Waugh's assistants, had begun designating peaks based on Roman numerals, with Kangchenjunga named Peak&nbsp;IX, while peak "b" now became known as Peak&nbsp;XV.
Before leaving camp 4 Jon Krakauer heard Weathers calling for help from his tent.
Mont Blanc has more deaths each year than Everest, with over one hundred dying in a typical year and over eight thousand killed since records were kept.
As planned, their work in route finding and breaking trail and their caches of extra oxygen were of great aid to the following pair.
Most attempts are made during May before the summer monsoon season.
Of the two main routes, the southeast ridge is technically easier and is the more frequently used route.
National Geographic noted how a village festooned Wang with honours after she donated 30,000 USD to the town's hospital.
Boivin would not repeat this feat, as he was killed two years later in 1990, base-jumping off Venezuela's Angel Falls.
In 2012 Montana State University conducted a scientific expedition to Everest.
The Nepal Department of Tourism said by June 2016 that about 456 people made it to summit of Mount Everest, including 45 women.
The question was whether climbers that season had left a man to die, and whether he could have been saved.
The first mainland British ascent of Mount Everest (Hillary was from New Zealand), led by Chris Bonnington, was an autumn ascent in 1975.
High winds at these altitudes on Everest are also a potential threat to climbers.
Mauna Kea in Hawaii is tallest when measured from its base; it rises over  when measured from its base on the mid-ocean floor, but only attains  above sea level.
In one balloon was Andy Elson and Eric Jones (cameraman), and in the other balloon Chris Dewhirst and Leo Dickinson (cameraman).
Other animals in the region include the Himalayan tahr which is sometimes eaten by the snow leopard.
The first American to climb Everest, Jim Whittaker, joined by Nawang Gombu, reached the summit on 1 May 1963.
The Everest tragedy was small compared the impact overall on Nepal, with almost 9 thousand dead in Nepal and about 22 thousand injured.
In the summer, the Indian monsoon brings warm wet air from the Indian ocean to Everest's south side.
The following year, Waugh sent a survey official back to Terai to make closer observations of peak "b", but clouds thwarted all attempts.
In 1933, Lady Houston, a British millionairess, funded the ''Houston Everest Flight of 1933'', which saw a formation of aircraft led by the Marquess of Clydesdale fly over the summit in an effort to deploy the British Union Flag at the top.
Kangchenjunga was then considered the highest peak in the world, and with interest he noted a peak beyond it, about  away.
He died on October 5, 1993 and was buried on Mount Everest.
Yaks are often used to haul gear for Mount Everest climbs; they can haul 100&nbsp;kg (220 pounds), and have thick fur and big lungs.
Despite this, Nepal has been very welcoming to tourists and a significant tourism industry has been established.
Lack of oxygen, exhaustion, extreme cold, and climbing hazards all contribute to the death toll.
It was first used on the 1922 British Mount Everest Expedition by George Finch and Geoffrey Bruce who climbed up to  at a spectacular speed of 1000 vertical feet per hour (vf/h).
Other samples were so badly sheared and recrystallised that their original constituents could not be determined.
Anatoli Boukreev, a guide who felt impugned by Krakauer's book, co-authored a rebuttal book called ''The Climb.''
They had been spotted high on the mountain that day but disappeared in the clouds, never to be seen again, until Mallory's body was found in 1999 at  on the North face.
She was further evacuated by the Himalayan Rescue Association and airlifted to Kathmandu with bad frostbite injuries.
The rock summit is made of Ordovician limestone and is a  low-grade metamorphic rock according to Montana State University.
This bed, which crops out starting about  below the summit of Mount Everest, consists of sediments trapped, bound, and cemented by the biofilms of micro-organisms, especially cyanobacteria, in shallow marine waters.
Going with a "celebrity guide", usually a well-known mountaineer typically with decades of climbing experience and perhaps multiple Everest summits, can cost over £100,000 as of 2015.
A guide company called Arnold Coster Expeditions suffered two fatalities, and third client had to be airlifted out.
A set of climbing routes has been established over several decades of climbing expeditions to the mountain.
The elephant in the room is Dexamethasone, which is extremely valuable as a life-saver because it can reduce swelling in the brain if someone comes down with HACE but has nevertheless may have become popular.
The Sherpa people also believe that Mt.
With Nepal not allowing foreigners into the country at the time, the British made several attempts on the north ridge route from the Tibetan side.
Another woman record breaker in 2016 was the first woman from Thailand to summit Mount Everest, Napassaporn Chumnarnsit, who was even given a meeting with Prime Minister of Thailand for achievement upon her return.
Everest can be climbed without supplementary oxygen, but only by the most accomplished mountaineers and at increased risk.
The Mount Everest Biogas Project aims to make a bioreactor for converting compost material,  especially faeces, into a gas maker.
The mountain has also been climbed in the winter, but that is not popular because of the combination of cold high winds and shorter days.
One of the problems is that there are hundreds of climbers passing by people's tents, although the weather can also damage or even blow people's equipment away.
One of the issues that was triggered was pre-existing resentment that had been building over unreasonable client requests during climbs.
One common piece of advice for those in the Everest region is to be on higher ground when around yaks and other animals, as they can knock people off the mountain if standing on the downhill edge of a trail.
The only climber permit for the autumn season was awarded to Japanese climber Nobukazu Kuriki, who had tried four times previously to summit Everest without success.
(See also Effects of high altitude on humans)
One British climber gave up his summit bid to help a Bengali woman that had fallen and was ailing on her descent.
Early expeditions—such as General Charles Bruce's in the 1920s and Hugh Ruttledge's two unsuccessful attempts in 1933 and 1936—tried to make an ascent of the mountain from Tibet, via the north face.
There are issues with the management of guiding firms in Nepal, and one Canadian woman was left begging for help when her guide firm, which she had paid perhaps 40,000 dollars to, couldn't stop her from dying in 2012.
Two Japanese summited in October 1973 also.
Some press reports suggested that the report of the summit landing was a misunderstanding of a South Col landing, but he had also landed on South Col two days earlier, with this landing and the Everest records confirmed by the FAI.
On 24 August 2015 Nepal re-opened Everest to tourism including mountain climbers.
Though the rate of fatalities has decreased since the year 2000 (1.4 fatalities for every 100 summits, with 3938 summits since 2000), the significant increase in the total number of climbers still means 54 fatalities since 2000: 33 on the northeast ridge, 17 on the southeast ridge, 2 on southwest face, and 2 on north face.
The first pair (Tom Bourdillon and Charles Evans) came within  of the summit on 26 May 1953, but turned back after running into oxygen problems.
Everest is Miyolangsangma's palace and playground, and all climbers are only partially welcome guests, having arrived without invitation.
The youngest Japanese woman also summited (and returned alive) at the age of 19.
The project was orchestrated by Stations at High Altitude for Research on the Environment (SHARE), who also placed the Mount Everest webcam in 2011.
The article argued that British colonialists did not "first discover" the mountain, as it had been known to the Tibetans and mapped by the Chinese as "Qomolangma" since at least 1719.
The summit is capped with snow over ice over rock, and the layer of snow varies from year to year.
On 18 April 2014, an avalanche hit the area just below the Base Camp 2 at around 0100 UTC (0630 local time) and at an elevation of about 5,900 metres.
Most expeditions use oxygen masks and tanks above .
The next day another six people reached the top.
It may be the highest altitude plant species.
Once above the step, it is a comparatively easy climb to the top on moderately angled snow slopes—though the exposure on the ridge is extreme, especially while traversing large cornices of snow.
The expedition established a route through the Khumbu ice fall and ascended to the South Col at an elevation of .
Achieving even this level of performance requires prolonged altitude acclimatisation, which takes 40–60 days for a typical expedition.
With Mallory leading (and thus becoming the first European to set foot on Everest's flanks) they climbed the North Col to an altitude of .
One study found that Mount Everest may be the highest an acclimatised human could go, but also found that climbers may suffer permanent neurological damage despite returning to lower altitudes.
(see survey section for more on its height and about the Everest rock summit)
There have been 219 fatalities recorded on Mount Everest from the 1922 British Mount Everest Expedition through the end of 2010, a rate of 4.3 fatalities for every 100 summits (this is a general rate, and includes fatalities amongst support climbers, those who turned back before the peak, those who died en route to the peak and those who died while descending from the peak).
Controversy has raged in the mountaineering community whether one or both of them reached the summit 29&nbsp;years before the confirmed ascent (and of course, safe descent) of Everest by Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay in 1953.
On 27 April three climbers were attacked by a mob of 100 Sherpas at 21,000 feet altitude.
From there, it is another 500 metres to Camp IV on the South Col at .
In 1856, the Great Trigonometrical Survey of India established the first published height of Everest, then known as '''Peak XV''', at .
Additionally, one team used a helicopter to fly from South base camp to Camp 2 to avoid the Khumbu Icefall, then reached the Everest summit.
The Swiss expedition of 1952, led by Edouard Wyss-Dunant, was granted permission to attempt a climb from Nepal.
Summiting Everest with disabilities such as amputations and diseases has become popular in the 21st century, with stories like that of Sudarshan Gautam, a man with no arms who made it to the top in 2013.
Tenzing, a Nepali sherpa who was a citizen of India, was granted the George Medal by the UK.
The weather station is located on the South Col and is solar powered.
On 26 September 1988, having climbed the mountain via the south-east ridge, Jean-Marc Boivin made the first paraglider descent of Everest,  in the process creating the record for the fastest descent of the mountain and the highest paraglider flight.
Despite its height above sea level of only , Denali sits atop a sloping plain with elevations from , yielding a height above base in the range of ; a commonly quoted figure is .
An even more detailed topographic map of the Everest area was made in the late 1980s under the direction of Bradford Washburn, using extensive aerial photography.
On the other hand, a limited support service, offering only some meals at base camp and bureaucratic overhead like a permit, can be as little as 7,000 USD.
The disaster was partially caused by the sheer number of climbers (34 on that day) attempting to ascend, causing bottlenecks at the Hillary Step and delaying many climbers, most of whom summitted after the usual 2&nbsp;pm turnaround time.
He proposed banning bottled oxygen except for emergency cases, arguing that this would both decrease the growing pollution on Everest—many bottles have accumulated on its slopes—and keep marginally qualified climbers off the mountain.
By the 21st century, summer and autumn can be more popular with skiing and snowboard attempts on Mount Everest.
For example, in 2010 Eric Larsen and five Nepali guides summited Everest in the autumn for the first time in ten years.
Some studies have found that high-altitude climbers, including Everest climbers, experience altered brain structure.
One had never climbed, and one had never para-glided, but together they accomplished a ground-breaking feat.
By 2013, the Himalayan database recorded 6,871 summits by 4,042 different people.
The base of the North Col Formation is a regional low-angle normal fault called the "Lhotse detachment".
On 11 May 2016 a Canadian doctor from Calgary died in Tibet, in the Chinese-side base camp.
In 2008, a new weather station at about 8000 m altitude (26,246 feet) went online.
A side effect of low blood oxygen is a greatly increased breathing rate, often 80–90 breaths per minute as opposed to a more typical 20–30.
Beck Weathers of the 1996 Mount Everest disaster said that those who are dying are often left behind, and that he himself had been left for dead twice but was able to keep walking.
Frenchman Jean-Marc Boivin made the first paraglider descent of Everest in September 1988, descending in minutes from the south-east ridge to a lower camp.
Most importantly, Sharp's decision to climb without support left him with no margin for recovery.
A 25-year old Nepali fixing lines near the Lhotse summit fell, named Phurba Sherpa (note: this name is shared by other well-known Sherpas).
The Cenozoic collision of India with Asia subsequently deformed and metamorphosed these strata as it thrust them southward and upward.
In May 2004, Kent Moore, a physicist, and John L. Semple, a surgeon, both researchers from the University of Toronto, told ''New Scientist'' magazine that an analysis of weather conditions on 11 May suggested that freak weather caused oxygen levels to plunge approximately 14%.
The death of Canadian climber Shriya Shah-Klorfine in 2012 made headlines and fed a debate about whether inexperienced climbers should be climbing Mount Everest.
When Hillary and Tenzing climbed Everest in 1953, the British expedition that they were part of (over 400 climbers, porters and sherpas at that point) started from the Kathmandu Valley, as there were no roads further east at that time.
Nepal ended up investigating Wang, and she denied the charge but admitted she did fly some support crew over the Khumbu Icefall to Camp 2 using a helicopter.
The modern pronunciation of Everest () are different from Sir George's pronunciation of his surname ( ).
In severe cases, climbers can experience hallucinations.
Some factors that affect total mountain lethality include the level of popularity of the mountain, the skill of those climbing, and of course the difficulty of the climb.
Mallory and Col. Felix Norton made a second unsuccessful attempt.
The summit of Everest has been described as "the size of a dining room table".
Birds, such as the bar-headed goose, have been seen flying at the higher altitudes of the mountain, while others, such as the chough, have been spotted as high as the South Col at .
Journalist Jon Krakauer, on assignment from ''Outside'' magazine, was in one of the affected parties, and afterwards published the bestseller ''Into Thin Air'', which related his experience.
It consists of sillimanite-K-feldspar grade schist and gneiss intruded by numerous sills and dikes of leucogranite ranging in thickness from 1&nbsp;cm to 1,500&nbsp;m (0.4&nbsp;in to 4,900&nbsp;ft).
Krakauer wrote that the use of bottled oxygen allowed otherwise unqualified climbers to attempt to summit, leading to dangerous situations and more deaths.
When American Bill Burke was interviewed for his attempt, he noted how one of his team-members had overdosed on Dex causing a medical evacuation even as in his more recent expedition someone had 25 doses of dex.
The Himalayan black bear can be found up to about  and the red panda is also in the region.
Exhaustion can occur merely attempting to breathe.
His raw data gave an average height of  for peak "b", but this did not consider light refraction, which distorts heights.
Everest lies Rongbuk Monastery, which has been called the "sacred threshold to Mount Everest, with the most dramatic views of the world."
It was subsequently reaffirmed by a 1975 Chinese measurement of .
By comparison, reasonable base elevations for Everest range from  on the south side to  on the Tibetan Plateau, yielding a height above base in the range of .
Waugh's proposed name prevailed despite the objections, and in 1865, the Royal Geographical Society officially adopted Mount Everest as the name for the highest mountain in the world.
He was not alone in being grief-stricken, as many climbers connected with Everest mountaineering community lost climbing buddies in two years of disasters.
However, this is considered difficult and dangerous (as illustrated by the case of David Sharp).
In response to the tragedy numerous Sherpa climbing guides walked off the job and most climbing companies pulled out in respect for the Sherpa people mourning the loss.
Guide Anatoli Boukreev's decision not to use bottled oxygen was sharply criticised by Jon Krakauer.
Climbers typically spend less than half an hour at the summit to allow time to descend to Camp IV before darkness sets in, to avoid serious problems with afternoon weather, or because supplemental oxygen tanks run out.
Miyolangsangma, a Tibetan Buddhist "''Goddess of Inexhaustible Giving''", is believed to have lived at the top of Mt.
Reinhold Messner called one of Leo's panoramic views of Everest, captured on the now discontinued Kodak Kodachrome film, the "best snap on Earth", according to UK newspaper The Telegraph.
The avalanche began on Pumori, moved through the Khumbu Icefall on the southwest side of Mount Everest, and slammed into the South Base Camp.
16-year-old Mark Pfetzer was on the climb and wrote about it in his account, ''Within Reach: My Everest Story''.
Jon Krakauer's ''Into Thin Air'' (1997) expressed the author's personal criticisms of the use of bottled oxygen.
The peak of Mount Everest extends into the upper troposphere and penetrates the stratosphere, which can expose it to the fast and freezing wind of the jet stream.
It is technically possible to reach the summit with minimal additional expenses, and there are "budget" travel agencies which offer logistical support for such trips.
The amount of background radiation increases with higher altitudes.
Mount Everest is located in the Mahalangur mountain range in Nepal.
Once above these steps, the summit pyramid is climbed by a snow slope of 50 degrees, to the final summit ridge along which the top is reached.
Whereas a western firm will convince those they deem incapable to turn back, other firms simply give people the freedom to choose.
The team made a huge effort for the next 12 hours to try to get him down the mountain, but to no avail, as they were not successful getting him down the difficult sections.
