The first winter climb was by Bozkurt Ergör, the former president of the Turkish Mountaineering Federation, who climbed on 21 February 1970.
During the early Eocene and early Miocene, the collision of Arabian platform with Laurasia closed and eliminated the Tethys Ocean from the area of what is now Anatolia.
In a 1926 poem dedicated to the mountain Avetik Isahakyan wrote: "Ages as though in second came, / Touched the grey crest of Ararat, / And passed by...!
The 13th century missionary William of Rubruck wrote that "Many have tried to climb it, but none has been able."
'''Mount Ararat''' ( ; ; traditional , ''Masis'') is a snow-capped and dormant compound volcano in the eastern extremity of Turkey.
Its summit is located some  west of the Turkey-Iran border and  south of the Turco-Armenian border.
The radiometric dating of these lava flows yielded radiometric ages of 0.4, 0.48 and 0.81 Ma.
The publications of the Social Democrat Hunchakian Party in Lebanon (''Ararad'' daily) and California, U.S. (''Massis'' weekly) are both named for Ararat.
Along its northwest–southeast trending long axis, Mount Ararat is about  long and is about  long along its short axis.
According to Turkish political scientist Bayram Balci, regular references to the Armenian Genocide and Mount Ararat "clearly indicates" that the border with Turkey in contested in Armenia.
Blumenthal explained the absence of such moraines by the lack of confining ridges to control glaciers, insufficient debris load in the ice to form moraines, and their burial by later eruptions.
Later in the 19th century, two British scholars on Armenia—James Bryce (1876) and H. F. B. Lynch (1893)—climbed the mountain.
The lower moraine occurs about  downstream from Lake Balik Golu.
Third, during a ''climatic phase'', copious flows of andesitic and basaltic lavas were erupted.
One scholar noted that the image of Ararat is "so ubiquitous in everyday material culture ... that it would prove quite a feat to spend a day in Yerevan without seeing its pictorial representations framed within a nationalizing discourse."
Abovian also picked up a chunk of ice from the summit and carried it down with him in a bottle, considering the water holy.
The 1871 Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary mentions it as the "mountain which tradition points to as the one on which the ark rested."
It formally became part of Turkey according to the 1921 Treaty of Moscow and Treaty of Kars.
The eastern volcanic cone, Lesser Ararat, is  high and  across.
Indo-European *mņs-.
The Ararat massif is about  in diameter.
It is suspected that Lake Balik Golu occupies a glacial basin.
Following the 1826–28 Russo-Persian War and the Treaty of Turkmenchay, the Persian controlled territory was ceded to the Russian Empire.
The Baltic German naturalist Friedrich Parrot of the University of Dorpat arrived at Etchmiadzin in mid-September 1829, almost two years after Russian capture of Erivan, for the single purpose of exploring Ararat.
Mount Ararat is located in the Eastern Anatolia Region of Turkey between Doğubeyazıt and Iğdır, near the border with Iran, Armenia and Nakhchivan exclave of Azerbaijan, between the Aras and Murat rivers.
This volcanic activity has continued uninterrupted until historical times.
The Ararat plain runs along its northwest to western side.
'''Ararat''' (; ) is the Hebrew spelling of Urartu, a kingdom that existed in the Armenian plateau in the 9th-6th centuries BC.
Within Anatolia, regional volcanism started middle-late Miocene.
In collection of poems, ''Knar Hayastani'' (Lyre of Armenia) published in 1958, there are many poems "with very strong nationalist overtones, especially with respect to Mount Ararat (in Turkey) and the irredentism it entailed."
One scholar defined the historic Greater Armenia as "the area about 200 miles in every direction from Mount Ararat."
Lee Spencer and Jean Luc Lienard name the 13th century Franciscan missionary William of Rubruck as the earliest reference for the tradition of Mount Ararat as the landing place of the ark in European literature.
With rise of Christianity, the mythology associated with pagan worship of the mountain was lost.
Arnold wrote in his 2008 Genesis commentary, "The location 'on the mountains' of Ararat indicates not a specific mountain by that name, but rather the mountainous region of the land of Ararat."
The phrase is translated as "mountains of Armenia" (''montes Armeniae'') in the Vulgate, the fourth century Latin translation of the Bible.
It consists of two major volcanic cones: Greater Ararat, the highest peak in Turkey and the Armenian plateau with an elevation of ; and Little Ararat, with an elevation of .
This crack is the surface expression of an extensional fault.
Such a snow line would have created an ice cap of  in extent.
The chronology of Holocene volcanic activity associated with Mount Ararat is poorly documented.
Abovian dug a hole in the ice and erected a wooden cross facing north.
Ararat is "almost a required backdrop in paintings and prints" and is "the inevitable trademark on local products" in Armenia.
It has therefore been called a biblical mountain.
A Turkish journalist wrote in ''Radikal'' that "for the residents of Armenia, it means much more than a mountain."
However, a number of other sources, such as public domain and verifiable Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (STRM) data and a 2007 GPS measurement show that the alternatively widespread figure of  is probably more accurate, and that the current elevation may be even lower due to the melting of its snow-covered ice cap.
Scholars agree the biblical "mountains of Ararat" do not refer to specifically Mt.
The strike-slip fault system within which Mount Ararat located is the result of north–south convergence and tectonic compression between the Arabian Platform and Laurasia that continued after the Tethys Ocean closed during the Eocene epoch along the Bitlis–Zagros suture.
They flowed across the Doğubeyazıt plain and along the southerly flowing Sarısu River.
Archaeological evidence demonstrates that explosive eruptions and pyroclastic flows from the northwest flank of Mount Ararat destroyed and buried at least one Koura–Arax culture settlement and caused numerous fatalities in 2500–2400 BC.
Mount Ararat consists of two distinct volcanic cones, Greater Ararat and Lesser Ararat (Little Ararat).
The mountain is known as Ararat in European languages.
During the Quaternary, the volcanism became restricted to a few local volcanoes such as Mount Ararat.
Adriaans wrote, "In everyday banal irredentism we can see that mount Ararat, indeed, features as a sanctified territory for the Armenians, following in the footsteps of the Ark of Noah, its image providing an imaginary link to a golden past."
The current international boundaries were formed throughout the 20th century.
Abovian and Parrot crossed the Aras River and headed to the Armenian village of Agori situated on the northern slope of Ararat  above sea level.
Tension between these faults, not only formed the original pull-apart basin, but created a system of faults, exhibiting a horsetail splay pattern, that control the position of the principal volcanic eruption centers of Mount Ararat and associated linear belt of parasitic volcanic cones.
Searches for Noah's Ark are considered by scholars an example of pseudoarchaeology.
Accompanying this uplift was extensive deformation by faulting and folding, which resulted in the creation of numerous local basins.
In a 2010 interview with ''Der Spiegel'', Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan was asked: "You can see Mount Ararat, Armenia's national symbol, from the windows of your residence.
The last two lines of Yeghishe Charents's 1920 poem "I Love My Armenia" (Ես իմ անուշ Հայաստանի) read: "And in the entire world you will not find a mountaintop like Ararat's.
and thereupon, / The Ark, her melancholy voyage done!
The closure of these masses of continental crust, collapsed this ocean basin by middle Eocene and resulted in a progressively shallowing of the remnant seas, until the end of early Miocene period.
Ararat is featured prominently in Armenian literature.
Current Republic (1992–)
These lava flows formed black ʻaʻā and pāhoehoe lava flows that contain well preserved lava tubes.
During the late Miocene–Pliocene period, widespread volcanism blanketed the entire East Anatolian–Iranian plateau under thick volcanic rocks.
Nevertheless, it has been perceived as the traditional resting place of Noah's Ark since the 11th century.
American Christian missionary H. G. O. Dwight wrote in 1856 that "the general opinion of the learned in Europe" is that Noah's Ark rested on Mount Ararat.
in the burning west, the craggy nape/ Of a proud Ararat!
In 19th-century era of romantic nationalism, when an Armenian state did not exist, Mt.
The Genesis flood narrative was linked to the Armenian myth of origin by the early medieval historian Movses Khorenatsi.
One subsidiary cone erupted voluminous basalt and andesite lava flows.
, it is the largest volcanic edifice within the region.
Oral histories indicated that a significant eruption of uncertain magitude occurred in 550 BC and minor eruptions of uncertain nature might have occurred in 1450 AD and 1783 AD.
Both moraines are about  high.
The Turkish name is  ,  ''Ağır Dağ''), i.e.
5,137 m is also supported by numerous topographic maps.
However, he observed a lack of any clear evidence of prehistoric moraines other than those which were close to the 1958 glacier tongues.
Mount Ararat lies within a complex, sinistral pull-apart basin that originally was a single, continuous depression.
The western volcanic cone, Greater Ararat, is a steep-sided volcanic cone that is larger and higher than the eastern volcanic cone.
Mount Ararat has historically been associated with Armenia, and is widely considered the country's principal national symbol.
It consists of about  of dacitic and rhyolitic pyroclastic debris and dacitic, rhyolitic, and basaltic lavas.
The north–south compressional deformation continues today as evidenced by ongoing faulting, volcanism, and seismicity.
Ararat symbolized the historical Armenian nation-state.
However, either archaeological excavations, oral history, historical records, or combination of these data provide solid evidence that volcanic eruptions of Mount Ararat occurred in 2500–2400 BC, 550 BC, possibly in 1450 AD and 1783 AD, and definitely in 1840 AD.
In classical antiquity, particularly in Strabo's ''Geographica'', the peaks of Ararat were known in Greek as Ἄβος (''Abos'') and Νίβαρος (''Nibaros'').
File:Büyük ve Küçük Ağrı Dağı.jpg|from Nakhchivan
However, nowadays, the terms Masis and Ararat are both widely, often interchangeably, used in Armenian.
By the Tehran Convention of 1932, a border change was made in Turkey's favor, allowing it to occupy the eastern flank of Lesser Ararat.
The logo of Armavia, Armenia's now defunct flag carrier, also depicted Ararat.
Greater Ararat is known as simply ''Masis'' or Մեծ Մասիս (''Mets Masis'', "Great/Big Masis").
Parrot measured the elevation at  using a mercury barometer.
The prominent Armenian writer Khachatur Abovian, then a deacon and translator at Etchmiadzin, was assigned by Catholicos Yeprem, the head of the Armenian Church, as interpreter and guide.
The Turkish–Armenian–Azerbaijani and Turkish–Iranian–Azerbaijani tripoints are some 8&nbsp;km apart, separated by a narrow strip of Turkish territory containing the E99 road which enters Nakhchivan at .
Overall, radiometric ages obtained from the volcanic rocks erupted by Mount Ararat range from 1.5 to 0.02 Ma.
Hayk established the roots of the Armenian nation around Mount Ararat.
This was not only the first ascent of Ararat, but also the second highest elevation climbed by man up to that date outside of Mount Licancabur in the Chilean Andes.
Turkey fears demands for land and compensation.
Mount Ararat has been depicted on the coat of arms of Armenia consistently since 1918.
Ararat is depicted along with the ark on its peak on the shield on an orange background.
Stephanie Platz wrote, "Omnipresent, the vision of Ararat rising above Yerevan and its outskirts constantly reminds Armenians of their putative ethnogenesis … and of their exile from Eastern Anatolia after the Armenian genocide of 1915."
Ararat, "Avidly I looked at the Biblical mountain, saw the ark moored to its peak with the hope of regeneration and life, saw both the raven and dove, flying forth, the symbols of punishment and reconciliation..."
Kenneth Feder writes, "As the flood story itself is unsupported by any archaeological evidence, it is not surprising that there is no archaeological evidence for the existence of an impossibly large boat dating to 5,000 years ago."
This pull-apart basin is the result of strike-slip movement along two en-echelon fault segments, the Doğubeyazıt–Gürbulak and Iğdir faults, of a sinistral strike–slip fault system.
In the late 1950s, Blumenthal observed that there existed 11 outlet glaciers emerging from a summit snow mass that covered about .
The group included Parrot, Abovian, two Russian (Cossack) soldiers—Alexei Zdorovenko and Matvei Chalpanov, and two Armenian Agori villagers—Hovannes Aivazian, and Murat Poghossian.
Up to 10,000 people in the Mount Ararart region died in the earthquake, including 1900 villagers in the village of Akory who were killed by a gigantic landslide and subsequent debris flow.
The First Republic's coat of arms was designed by architect Alexander Tamanian and painter Hakob Kojoyan.
Ağrı literally translates to "pain" or "sorrow".
According to Arnold, Mount Ararat has been associated with the Genesis flood story since the 11-12th centuries.
Along with Noah's Ark, it is depicted on the coat of arms of Armenia.
Blumenthal estimated that the snow line had been as low as  in elevation during the Late Pleistocene.
Mount Ararat has an ice cap on its summit.
According to the interpretation of historical and archaeological data, strong earthquakes not associated with volcanic eruptions also occurred the area of Mount Ararat in 139, 368, 851–893, and 1319 AD.
These volcanoes are typically associated with north–south tensional fractures formed by the continuing the north–south shortening deformation of Anatolia.
The growth of Mount Ararat partitioned this depression into two smaller basins, the Iğdir and Doğubeyazıt basins.
The 14th century English traveler John Mandeville is another early author who mentioned Mount Ararat, "where Noah's ship rested, and it is still there."
Those critical of this view point out that Ararat was the name of the country, not the mountain, at the time when Genesis was written.
This name has been known since the late Middle Ages.
These volcanic cones, which lie  apart, are separated by a wide north–south-trending crack.
From the 16th century until 1828 Great Ararat's summit and the northern slopes, along with the eastern slopes of Little Ararat were part of Persia, while the range was part of the Ottoman-Persian border.
It is featured prominently in Armenian literature and art and is an icon for Armenian irredentism.
Its summit is located some  west of both the Iranian border and the border of the  Nakhchivan exclave of Azerbaijan, and   south of the Armenian border.
Searches for Noah's Ark have traditionally concentrated on Mount Ararat.
First, they recognized a ''fissure eruption phase'' of Plinian-subPlinian fissure eruptions that deposited more than  of pyroclastic rocks and a few basaltic lava flows.
The folk etymology expressed in Movses Khorenatsi's ''History of Armenia'' derives the name from king Amasya, the great-grandson of the legendary Armenian patriarch Hayk, who is said to have called the mountain ''Masis'' after himself.
While Lesser Ararat is known as ''Sis'' (Սիս) or Փոքր Մասիս (''P′ok′r Masis'', "Little/Small Masis").
According to Razmik Panossian, this myth of creation "makes Armenia the cradle of all civilisation since Noah's Ark landed on the 'Armenian' mountain of Ararat.
The Armenian government has not made official claims to any Turkish territory, however the Armenian government has avoided "an explicit and formal recognition of the existing Turkish-Armenian border."
/ Clearly we shall have to accept / That we, and only we, have an Ararat"
In his ''Journey to Arzrum'' (Путешествие в Арзрум), which is about his travels to Erzurum in 1829, the prominent Russian poet Alexander Pushkin wrote of Mt.
In his ''History of Armenia'', Khorenatsi wrote that Hayk, the legendary founding father and the name giver of the Armenian people is the son of Torgom, the great-grandson of Japheth, one of Noah's sons.
The titles of at least two books describe Armenians as the "people of Ararat."
/ We do not think ourselves superior to anyone.
Howard F. Vos wrote in the International Standard Bible Encyclopedia that most Christians identify Mt.
On , Parrot and Abovian together with the Agori hunter Sahak’s brother Hago, acting as a guide climbed up Lesser Ararat.
The nationalist Armenian Revolutionary Federation (Dashnaktsutyun) party claims eastern Turkey (Western Armenia) as part of what it considers United Armenia.
Apparently, it reached a climax during the latest Miocene–Pliocene, 6 to 3 Ma.
Ararat to "keep it forever, / As the language of us Armenians, as the pillar of your father’s home."
It is depicted on the logos of Football Club Ararat Yerevan (since the Soviet times) and the Football Federation of Armenia.
Mount Ararat is depicted in the center and makes up a large portion of it.
During this phase, the eruption of successive flows of lava up to  thick and pyroclastic flows of andesite and dacite composition and the following eruption of basaltic lava flows, formed the Greater Ararat cone with a low conical profile.
The higher moraine lies at an altitude of about  and the lower moraine lies at an altitude of about .
It is the principal national symbol of Armenia and has been considered a sacred mountain by Armenians.
Ararat has been described as Armenia's calling card and the country's main brand.
Second, a ''cone-building phase'' began when the volcanic activity became localized at a point along a fissure.
Ari L. Goldman noted in 1988, "In most Armenian homes in the modern diaspora, there are pictures of Mount Ararat, a bittersweet reminder of the homeland and national aspirations."
In addition, this combination of landslide and debris flow destroyed the town of Aralik, several villages, and Russian military barracks.
In their detailed study and summary of the Quaternary volcanism of Anatolia, Yilmaz and others recognized four phases to the construction of Mount Ararat from volcanic rocks exposed in glacial valleys deeply carved into it flanks.
Mount Ararat has been depicted on various Armenian dram banknotes issued in 1993-2001; on the reverse of the 10 dram banknotes issued in 1993, on the reverse of the 50 dram banknotes issued in 1998, on the obverse of the 100 and 500 dram banknotes issued in 1993, and on the reverse of the 50,000 dram banknotes issued in 2001.
He also found two morainal deposits that were created by a Mount Ararat valley glacier of Pleistocene, possibly Wisconsinan (Last Glacial Maximum) age downvalley from Lake Balik Golu.
British orientalist F. C. Conybeare in his 1901 review of Friedrich Murad's book on Ararat wrote that the mountain was "a center and focus of pagan myths and cults ... and it was only in the eleventh century, after these had vanished from the popular mind, that the Armenian theologians ventured to locate on its eternal snows the resting-place of Noah's ark."
Mount Ararat forms a near-quadripoint between Turkey, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Iran.
Despite numerous reports of ark sightings (e.g.
The mountain came under Turkish control during the 1920 Turkish–Armenian War.
The peaks are referred to in plural as Մասիսներ ''Masisner''.
Russian Symbolist poet Valery Bryusov often referred to Ararat in his poetry and dedicated two poems to the mountain, which were published in 1917.
Greater Ararat is about  wide at the base and rises about  above the adjacent floors of the Iğdir and Doğubeyazıt basins.
Herbert Lottman noted in 1976 that Mt.
It was also depicted on the reverse of the Turkish 100 lira banknotes of 1972-1986.
According to Bardakjian, Ararat "epitomizes Armenia and Armenian suffering and aspirations, especially the consequences of the 1915 genocide: almost total annihilation, loss of a unique culture and land ... and an implicit determination never to recognize the new political borders."
The first lines of Paruyr Sevak's 1961 poem "We Are Few..." (Քիչ ենք, բայց հայ ենք) read: "We are few, but they say of us we are Armenians.
In ''The Maximus Poems'' American poet Charles Olson, who grew up near the Armenian neighborhood in Worcester, Massachusetts, compares the Ararat Hill near his childhood home to the mountain and "imagines he can capture an Armenian's immigrant perspective: the view of Ararat Hill as Mount Ararat."
Along this fault and the subsidiary fissures and cracks, a number of parasitic cones and domes were built by minor eruptions.
Today, the mountain is inaccessible, on the other side of the Turkish border.
This coat of arms was adopted by the legislature of the Republic of Armenia on April 19, 1992, after Armenia regained independence.
Finally, the volcanic eruptions at Mount Ararat transitioned into a ''flank eruption phase'' during which a major north–south-trending fault offset the two cones developed along with a number of number of subsidiary fissures and cracks on the volcano's flanks.
For Bryusov, Ararat is the embodiment of antiquity of the Armenian people and their culture.
Ararat with the biblical "mountains of Ararat," despite the fact that six other landing places have been proposed.
During this phase, the current cones of Greater and Lesser Ararat were formed as eruptions along subsidiary fissures and cracks and flank occurred.
In the aftermath of the Armenian Genocide of 1915, a large portion of the Armenian homeland, particularly what is now eastern Turkey, was left with little to no Armenian population.
British historian and politician James Bryce, while admitting that the biblical passage implies that the ark rested upon a "mountain in the district which the Hebrews knew as Ararat, or Armenia", wrote in an 1878 article that the biblical writer must have had Mt.
Sargsyan, in response, said:
Ararat has become a symbol of Armenian efforts to reclaim its "lost lands", i.e.
According to Russian orientalist Anatoly Novoseltsev the word ''Masis'' derives from Middle Persian ''masist'', "the largest."
It's now your turn; you too, now, / Stare at its high and lordly brow, / And pass by...!"
According to Meliné Karakashian, Armenian poets "attribute to it symbolic meanings of unity, freedom, and independence."
It is known as the "holy mountain" of the Armenian people, largely due to its association with the Biblical flood story.
However, it was not until 1829 when Friedrich Parrot and Khachatur Abovian, accompanied with four others, made the first recorded ascent.
Ethnographer Levon Abrahamian noted that Ararat is visually present for Armenians in reality (it can be seen from many houses in Yerevan and settlements in the Ararat plain), symbolically (through many visual representations, such as on Armenia's coats of arms), and culturally—in numerous and various nostalgic poetical, political, architectural representation.
They set up a base camp at the Monastery of Saint Jacob some  higher, at an elevation of .
One 19th century scholar argued that "these peaks do not seem suitable for the purpose."
At that time, it was found that the present glaciers on the summit of Ararat to extend as low as an elevation of  on the north-facing slope, and an elevation of
The emblem of the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic (Soviet Armenia) was created by the painters Martiros Saryan and Hakob Kojoyan in 1921.
Ararat in mind because it is so "very much higher, more conspicuous, and more majestic than any other summit in Armenia."
… it makes Mount Ararat the national symbol of all Armenians, and the territory around it the Armenian homeland from time immemorial."
They calculated that between 1976 and 2011, the ice cap on top of Mount Ararat had lost 29% of its total area at an average rate of ice loss of  per year over 35 years.
According to Armenian historian Sargis Petrosyan the ''mas'' root in Masis means "mountain", cf.
Historical records and oral history document a phreatic eruption and pyroclastic flow from radial fissures on the upper north flank of Mount Ararat and a possibly associated earthquake of magnitude 7.4 that caused severe damage and numerous casualties in 1840 AD.
The Kurdish name of the mountain is  , which translates to "fiery mountain".
However, none of the native peoples have traditionally referred to the mountain by that name.
Most historians and Bible scholars agree that "Ararat" is the Hebrew name of Urartu, the geographic predecessor of Armenia and referred to the wider region at the time and not the mountain today known as Ararat.
Although Ararat was then part of the Russian Empire's Erivan Governorate and was ceded to Turkey by the 1921 Treaty of Kars, it came to represent the loss of Western Armenia (eastern Turkey) in the national consciousness of the Armenians.
This rate is consistent with the general rates of retreat of other Turkish summit glaciers and ice caps that have been documented by other studies.
The First Republic of Armenia, the first modern Armenian state that existed between 1918 and 1920, was sometimes called the Araratian Republic or the Republic of Ararat as it was centered in the Ararat plain.
During his visit to Armenia in 2001 Pope John Paul II declared in his homily in Yerevan's St. Gregory the Illuminator Cathedral: "We are close to Mount Ararat, where tradition says that the Ark of Noah came to rest."
Using pre-existing aerial imagery and remote sensing data, Sarıkaya and others studied the extent of the ice cap on Mount Ararat between 1976 and 2011.
By contrast, in the 21st century to climb Ararat is "the most highly valued goal of some of the patriotic pilgrimages that are organized in growing number from Armenia and the Armenian diaspora."
After two failed attempts, they reached the summit on their third attempt at 3:15&nbsp;p.m. on October 9, 1829.
Do you want Mount Ararat back?"
Little Ararat became the point where the Turkish, Persian, and Russian imperial frontiers converged.
