It enjoyed the protection of the emperors of the Byzantine Empire during the following centuries, and its wealth and possessions grew considerably.
Each cell has to organize some activities for income.
new occupations have been taken up, for example taxi driving, couriers, car repairing and computer services.
The next year, in an imperial edict of emperor Leo VI the Wise we read about the "so-called ancient seat of the council of gerondes (council of elders)", meaning that there was already a kind of monks' administration and that it was already "ancient".
The Esphigmenou monastery is particularly outspoken in this respect, having raised black flags to protest against the meeting of Patriarch Athenagoras I of Constantinople and Pope Paul VI in 1972.
By the year 2000, the monastic population had reached 1,610, with all 20 monasteries and their associated sketes receiving an infusion of mainly young well-educated monks.
During the reign of Julian the Apostate (361–363), the churches of Mount Athos were destroyed, and Christians hid in the woods and inaccessible places.
Written on the skull: "What I am, you will be too.
(Herodotus, VII:22) Strabo also mentions the city of Dion (Dium) and that Acrothoï is near the crest.
This eventually culminated in an economic crisis in Athos during the 17th century.
In this way the Athonite independence was somewhat guaranteed.
Following the Battle of Thasos in 829, Athos was deserted for some time due to the destructive raids of the Cretan Saracens.
The Battle of Greece was reported in ''Time'' magazine, "The Stukas swooped across the Aegean skies like dark, dreadful birds, but they dropped no bombs on the monks of Mount Athos".
On a chrysobull of emperor Basil I, dated 885, the Holy Mountain is proclaimed a place of monks, and no laymen or farmers or cattle-breeders are allowed to be settled there.
They are all-wheel drive vehicles since most roads in the mountain are unpaved.
However the monks consider them for their religious function only, not as "treasures" and most are in regular use for their original purpose.
The monk(s) living in a cell, having to take care of all daily chores, make up their own schedules.
There is also a smaller speed boat, the ''Agia Anna'', which travels the same route, but with no intermediate stops.
Some of the cells resemble tidy farmhouses, others are poor huts, others have the gentility of Byzantine tradition or of Russian architecture of the past century.
Some monasteries also have a clock showing civil time since boat schedules run thereon (and on the civil calendar) as well as for pilgrims who may be disoriented by Byzantine time reckoning.
Although Mount Athos is technically part of the European Union like the rest of Greece, the status of the Monastic State of the Holy Mountain, and the jurisdiction of the Athonite institutions, were expressly described and ratified upon admission of Greece to the European Community (precursor to the EU).
In 1517, he issued a fatwa and a ''Hatt-i Sharif'' ("noble edict") that "the place, where the Holy Gospel is preached, whenever it is burned or even damaged, shall be erected again."
Archaeologists have not been able to determine the exact location of the cities reported by Strabo.
Since there are monks from many nations in Athos, they naturally also speak their own native languages.
(Diodorus Siculus, "Bibliotheca historica" XIII 41, 1–3).
Other languages of orthodox tradition also use names translating to "Holy Mountain" (e.g.
After the Islamic conquest of Egypt in the seventh century, many orthodox monks from the Egyptian desert tried to find another calm place; some of them came to the Athos peninsula.
On 11 September 2004, the Eastern Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria, Peter VII, was killed, together with 16 others, when a Greek military Chinook helicopter in which he was travelling crashed in the Aegean Sea off the peninsula.
Visits to the peninsula are possible for laymen, but they need a special permit known as a  (), similar to a visa.
After the storming of St. Panteleimon Monastery, the monks from the Andreevsky Skete (Skiti Agiou Andrea) surrendered voluntarily.
Homer mentions the mountain Athos in the Iliad (book 14, 229).
Small communities of neighbouring cells were developed since the beginning of monastic life on Mount Athos and some of them were using the word "skete" (σκήτη) meaning "monastic settlement" or "lavra" (λαύρα) meaning "monastic congregation".
The military transport ''Kherson'' was converted into a prison ship and more than a thousand ''imiaslavtsy'' monks were sent to Odessa where they were excommunicated and dispersed throughout Russia.
Political instability in Greece during the mid-20th century that affected Mount Athos included Nazi occupation from the Easter season of 1941 through late 1944, followed immediately by the Greek Civil War in a struggle where Communist efforts failed.
Athos threw a massive rock against Poseidon which fell in the Aegean sea and became Mount Athos.
Some information is already given above, in the section "Administration and organization".
Another one is Bulgarian, "Skētē Bogoroditsa" (which belongs to the Agiou Panteleimonos Monastery).
But there are also some duties for the community.
In 2009, the population stood at nearly 2,000.
At the same time, the monasteries' abbots were replaced by committees and at Karyes the Protos was replaced by a four-member committee.
The term "cells" can be used under a more generalised meaning, comprising all the above but sketae, and following this term we can talk about three different kind of institutions in Mount Athos: monasteries, sketae and cells.
The unknown author of the "History of the Egyptian Monks" (Historia Monachorum in Aegypto), perhaps Flavius Rufinus visited the area at the end of the fourth century.
File:Saint Demetrius of Protat.JPG|A fresco of Saint Demetrius
An example of this is the foundation of Stavronikita monastery which completed the current number of Athonite monasteries.
The actual Mount Athos has steep, densely forested slopes reaching up to .
Although, since the beginning of Mount Athos' history, monks were living in lodgings of different size and construction quality.
Her escapade was discussed in the 13 July 1953, ''Time'' magazine article entitled "The Climax of Sin".
Among the sketes, most are predominantly ethnic Greek.
Monastic life in the cells is totally different from that in a monastery.
Mount Athos has been inhabited since ancient times and is known for its nearly 1,800-year continuous Christian presence and its long historical monastic traditions, which date back to at least 800 A.D. and the Byzantine era.
Timothy Ware, Metropolitan Kallistos of Diokleia, is the President and Chairman of the society.
Russian tsars, and princes from Moldavia, Wallachia and Serbia (until the end of the 15th century), helped the monasteries survive with large donations.
It is governed as an autonomous polity within the Greek Republic under the official name '''Autonomous Monastic State of the Holy Mountain''' ().
''Athos'' in Greek mythology is the name of one of the Gigantes that challenged the Greek gods during the Gigantomachia.
'''Mount Athos''' (;  ) is a mountain and peninsula in northeastern Greece and an important centre of Eastern Orthodox monasticism.
At least one other city was established in the Classical period: Acanthus (Akanthos).
File:Megistis Lavras.jpg|Courtyard of Megistis Lavras Monastery and the Phiale
File:Philotheou.jpg|Courtyard of Philotheou Monastery
Greece claimed the peninsula as part of the peace treaty of London signed on 30 May 1913.
In June 1913, a small Russian fleet, consisting of the gunboat ''Donets'' and the transport ships ''Tsar'' and ''Kherson'', delivered the archbishop of Vologda, and a number of troops to Mount Athos to intervene in the theological controversy over ''imiaslavie'' (a Russian Orthodox movement).
File:Vatopedi 4.jpg|Phiale of Vatopedi
This institution offered high level education, especially under Eugenios Voulgaris, where ancient philosophy and modern physical science were taught.
The Fourth Crusade in the 13th century brought new Roman Catholic overlords which forced the monks to complain and ask for the intervention of Pope Innocent III, until the restoration of the Byzantine Empire came.
For the pilgrim/visitor it is worth experiencing this side of monastic life as well, but most of the cells have very limited or no capacity for hospitality.
Usually, each cell possesses a piece of land for agricultural or other use.
However, although under the direct jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, the spiritual head of the monastic state, nearly all the monasteries of Athos refused to follow the revised calendar and finally, for the sake of uniformity, the patriarch asked the single monastery that used the revised calendar to revert to the Julian.
He also endowed privileges to the Abbey and financed the construction of the dining area and underground of the Abbey as well as the renovation of the wall paintings in the central church that were completed between the years 1533–1541.
Herodotus (VI.44) writes that, during the Persian invasion of Thrace in 492 BC, the fleet of the Persian commander Mardonius was wrecked, with losses of 300 ships and 20,000 men, by a strong North wind while attempting to round the coast near Mount Athos.
It is believed that they must have been deserted when Athos' new inhabitants, the monks, started arriving some time before the ninth century AD.
All the other establishments (sketes, cells, huts, retreats, hermitages) are dependencies of some of the 20 monasteries and are assigned to the monks by a document called "''homologon''" (ομόλογον).
It also publishes ''A Pilgrim's Guide to Mount Athos'' as well as a yearly directory of members.
There is a prohibition on entry for women, called ''avaton'' (Άβατον) in Greek, to make living in celibacy easier for men who have chosen to do so.
In ancient Greek history two fleet disasters in the area are recorded: In 492 BC Darius, the king of Persia, lost 300 ships under general Mardonius (Herodotus "Histories" book VI (Erato), Aeschylus "The Persians").
Although the monks were not armed and did not actively resist, the troops showed very heavy-handed tactics.
As a result, the monastic population grew steadily throughout the century, reaching a high point of over 7,000 monks in 1902.
Following the conquest of the Serbian Despotate by the Ottomans many Serbian monks came to Athos.
A 2003 resolution of the European Parliament requested the lifting of the ban for violating "the universally recognised principle of gender equality".
The free movement of people and goods in its territory is prohibited, unless formal permission is granted by the Monastic State's authorities.
Mount Athos is home to 20 monasteries under the direct jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople.
(Strabo, ''Geography'', VII:33:1) Eretria also established colonies on Acte.
All these monastic lodging types exist until today, named as seats (καθίσματα), cells (κελλιά), huts (καλύβες), retreats (ησυχαστήρια), hermitages (ερημιτήρια), caves (σπήλαια), sketai (σκήτες) and all of them are known under the general term "dependencies" (εξαρτήματα) of the Holy Monasteries.
Historical documents on ancient Mount Athos history are very few.
This new way of monastic organization was an emergency measure taken by the monastic communities to counter their harsh economic environment.
The object of the society, as stated on its official web page, is officially described as: "the advancement of education of the public in the study and knowledge of the history, culture, arts, architecture, natural history, and literature of the Orthodox monasteries of Mount Athos and the promotion of the religious and other charitable work of the Holy Community and monasteries of Mount Athos."
After a brief diplomatic conflict between Greece and Russia over sovereignty, the peninsula formally came under Greek sovereignty after World War I.
The peninsula, the easternmost "leg" of the larger Chalkidiki peninsula in central Macedonia, protrudes  into the Aegean Sea at a width of between  and covers an area of .
Esphigmenou was subsequently expelled from the representative bodies of the Athonite Community.
In return, Murad recognized the monasteries' properties, something which Mehmed II formally ratified after the fall of Constantinople in 1453.
File:Stavronikita 2.jpg|Interior and Roman aqueduct of Stavronikita Monastery
Mount Athos survived World War II nearly untouched, and for the remainder of the war, the monks of Mount Athos referred to Adolf Hitler as "High Protector of the Holy Mountain" ().
Projected to take several decades to complete, this restorative and archival work is well under way, funded by UNESCO and the EU, and aided by many academic institutions.
File:Iviron.jpg|Refectory of Iviron Monastery
The peninsula was raided by Catalan mercenaries in the 14th century, a century that also saw the theological conflict over the hesychasm practised on Mount Athos and defended by Gregory Palamas (Άγιος Γρηγόριος ο Παλαμάς).
The first ones, both in architecture and life-style, follow the typical model of a monastery, that of a community living together, sharing and distributing work, and praying together daily.
The word "skete" is of Coptic origin and in its original form is a placename of a location in the Egyptian desert.
Greek is commonly used in all the Greek monasteries, but in some monasteries there are other languages in use: in Agiou Panteleimonos, Russian (67 monks in 2011); in Helandariou Monastery, Serbian (58); in Zographou Monastery and Skiti Bogoroditsa, Bulgarian (32); and in the sketes of Timiou Prodromou and Lakkoskiti, Romanian (64).
After reaching a low point of just 1,145 mainly elderly monks in 1971, the monasteries have been undergoing a steady and sustained renewal.
Since then, more sketes followed on the same way, and gradually the term "skete" (within the Holy Mountain) came to be used only for the monastic settlements having an internal rule ratified by the Patriarchate.
In 887, some monks expostulate to the emperor Leo the Wise as the monastery of Kolovos is growing more and more and they lose their peace.
Although most time the monasteries were left on their own, the Ottomans heavily taxed them and sometimes they seized important land parcels from them.
Monks feel that the presence of women alters the social dynamics of the community and therefore slows their path towards spiritual enlightenment.
For laymen there are generally two kinds of diamonētēria: the general diamonētērion that enables the visitor to stay overnight at any one of the monasteries but only to stay in the mountain for several days (more in winter, when there are fewer visitors, than in summer), and the special diamonētērion which allows a visitor to visit only one monastery or skete but to stay as many days as he has agreed with the monks.
From the account of Russian pilgrim Isaiah by the end of the 15th century half of the monasteries were either Slav or Albanian, in particular, Docheiariou, Grigoriou, Ayiou Pavlou, Ayiou Dionysiou, and Chilandariou were Serbian, Karakalou and Philotheou were Albanian, Panteleïmon was Russian, Simonopetra was Bulgarian, Pantokratoros and Stavronikita was Greek while he mentions that Zographou, Kastamonitou, Xeropotamou, Koutloumousiou, Xenophontos, Iviron and Protaton did not bear any designation.
During the reign of emperor Basil I the Macedonian, the former Archbishop of Crete (and later of Thessaloniki) Basil the Confessor built a small monastery at the place of the modern harbour ("arsanas") of Hilandariou Monastery.
The surrounding seas, especially at the end of the peninsula, can be dangerous.
Many younger monks possess university education and advanced skills that allow them to work on the cataloging and restoration of the Mountain's vast repository of manuscripts, vestments, icons, liturgical objects and other works of art, most of which remain unknown to the public because of their sheer volume.
The status of the Holy Mountain and the jurisdiction of the Agiorite institutions were expressly described and ratified upon admission of Greece to the European Union (then the European Community).
He tells us: "Then we came to Nitria, the best-known of all monasteries of Egypt, about forty miles 60&nbsp;km from Alexandria; it takes its name from a nearby town where Nitre is collected...
Clergy of the Orthodox Church are required to obtain permission of the Patriarch of Constantinople.
What you are, I've already been."
Among its members are Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and Charles, Prince of Wales, Heir Apparent to the British throne.
The Athonite monasteries feature a rich collection of well-preserved artifacts, rare books, ancient documents, and artworks of immense historical value, and Mount Athos has been listed as a World Heritage Site since 1988.
The cause of the crash remains unknown.
This led to relative prosperity for the monasteries.
Until recently no organized study and archiving had been carried out, but an EU-funded effort to catalogue, protect and restore them is underway since the late 1980s.
The ban was officially proclaimed by several emperors, including Constantine Monomachos, in a chrysobull of 1046.
Since the number of the Monasteries in Mount Athos was restricted to 20, a new term was introduced: the '''"coenobitic skete"''' (κοινόβιος σκήτη), while a skete of the traditional form was named '''"idiorrythmic skete"''' (ιδιόρρυθμος σκήτη) in order to underline the difference.
The number of daily visitors to Mount Athos is restricted, and all are required to obtain a special entrance permit valid for a limited period.
In 1953, Cora Miller, an American Fulbright Program teacher from Athens, Ohio, landed briefly along with two other women, stirring up a controversy among the local monks.
In 908, the existence of a ''Protos'' ("First monk"), the "head" of the monastic community, is documented.
Though they are divided by their dwellings they remain bound together and inseparable in faith and love".
After the death of Alexander the Great, the architect Dinocrates (Deinokrates) proposed to carve the entire mountain into a statue of Alexander.
Usually there are also an administration house, a refectory for common celebrations, a cemetery, a library, storehouses and a guesthouse.
In 1680 the ex-patriarch Dionysios III Vardalis built in the Saint Anne skete of the Holy Mountain a big central church to accommodate all the monks of the area and in 1689 an internal regulatory text was constituted by the monks and ratified first by the Monastery of Megisti Lavra and finally by the patriarch Dionysios V Haritonidis; and later again by patriarch Kyrilos V, who contributed in its evolution.
Later, during Theodosius I's reign (379–395), the pagan temples were destroyed.
Near the centre of the settlement is the central church called ''Kyriakon'' (Κυριακόν, that could be translated "for Sunday"), where the whole brotherhood meets for the Divine Liturgy service, on Sundays and on greater feasts.
During Constantine I's reign (324–337) both Christians and pagans were living there.
However, two are Romanian, the coenobitic "Skētē Timiou Prodromou" (which belongs to the Megistis Lavras Monastery) and the idiorrythmic "Skētē Agiou Dēmētriou tou Lakkou", also called "Lakkoskētē" (which belongs to the Agiou Pavlou Monastery).
It is certain that monks have been there since the fourth century, and possibly since the third.
Today, over 2,000 monks from Greece and many other Eastern Orthodox countries, such as Romania, Moldova, Georgia, Bulgaria, Serbia and Russia, live an ascetic life in Athos, isolated from the rest of the world.
It is in the Egyptian desert where monasticism made its first steps.
In 943, the borders of the monastic state were precisely mapped while we know that Karyes is already the capital town and seat of the administration and has the name "Megali Mesi Lavra" (Big Central Assembly).
Sultan Selim I was a substantial benefactor of the Xiropotamou monastery.
The historian Genesios recorded that monks from Athos participated at the seventh Ecumenical Council of Nicaea of 787.
Around 860, the famous monk Efthymios the Younger came to Athos and a number of monk-huts ("skete of Saint Basil") were created around his habitation, possibly near Krya Nera.
In late 1371 or early 1372 the Byzantines defeated an Ottoman attack on Athos.
Besides the traditional occupations (agriculture, fishing, woodcarving, spirit distillation, iconography, tailoring, book binding etc.)
The Byzantine Empire was conquered in the 15th century and the Ottoman Empire took its place.
The monks are also worried that the agreement could affect their traditional right to offer sanctuary to people from orthodox countries such as Russia and Serbia.
Of the 20 monasteries located on the Holy Mountain, the brethren of 17 are predominantly ethnically Greek.
In this place there are about fifty dwellings, or not many less, set near together and under one father.
Female animals, chickens, cows, ewes, nanny-goats, mares, and sows are also barred except for female cats, female insects and female songbirds.
Laymen are required to have short hair and any non-cleric arriving on Athos with long hair has his hair cut.
Contrary to the cenobitic system, monks in idiorrhythmic communities have private property, work for themselves, they are solely responsible for acquiring food and other necessities and they dine separately in their cells, only meeting with other monks at church.
Because the time interval from sundown to sundown is not constant, clocks showing the Byzantine time require continual manual readjusting which in current practice is done weekly, on Saturday, if the sky is clear; where the summit of Athos is visible, 12:00 is set when the last rays of sunlight cease to shine on the tip.
In keeping with those objects, the society is empowered "to make grants, donations and other payments for the restoration or conservation of buildings or of works of art and books of educational or religious significance on Mount Athos within the above objects."
While outside the EU's Value Added Tax area, Mount Athos is part of the Schengen Area.
The monasteries of Mount Athos have a history of opposing ecumenism, or movements towards reconciliation between the Orthodox Church of Constantinople and the Roman Catholic Church.
File:Prodromos-9.jpg|Relics in the Romanian skete "Prodromos".
In contrast, the idiorrhythmic community (intermediary between the ceonobitic community and the seclusion of a hermit) resembles a hamlet, and the daily life there is much like that of a cell.
Residents on the peninsula must be males aged 18 and over who are members of the Eastern Orthodox Church and also either monks or workers.
There is a public bus between Dafni and Karyes.
In each of the 20 monasteries&nbsp;– which today all follow again the coenobitic system&nbsp;– the administration is in the hands of the Abbot (Ηγούμενος&nbsp;– Hēgoumenos) who is elected by the brotherhood for life.
The 15th and 16th centuries were particularly peaceful for the Athonite community.
The Julian calendar, which currently has a difference of 13 days from the Gregorian calendar, is still used on Mount Athos.
The history of the peninsula during latter ages is shrouded by the lack of historical accounts.
The Athonite monasteries possess huge deposits of invaluable medieval art treasures, including icons, liturgical vestments and objects (crosses, chalices), codices and other Christian texts, imperial chrysobulls, holy relics etc.
Expensive taxis operated by monks are available for hire at Dafni and Karyes.
A voice was heard saying "" (Translation: "Let this place be your inheritance and your garden, a paradise and a haven of salvation for those seeking to be saved").
Once granted, the pilgrim can contact the monastery where he would like to stay in order to reserve a bed (one night only per monastery).
According to the Athonite tradition, the Blessed Virgin Mary was sailing accompanied by St John the Evangelist from Joppa to Cyprus to visit Lazarus.
In the next year, with the support of his friend, Emperor Nicephorus Phocas, the monastery of Great Lavra was founded, still the largest and most prominent of the twenty monasteries existing today.
In 1749, with the establishment of the Athonite Academy near Vatopedi monastery, the local monastic community took a leading role in the modern Greek Enlightenment movement of the 18th century.
The Convention of the brotherhood (Γεροντία) is the legislative body.
A final peace was agreed at the Treaty of Bucharest on 10 August 1913.
To that end the society produces publications, arranges lectures, and organizes conferences and exhibitions devoted to Athonite themes.
Later a "Special Double Assembly" of the Holy Community in Karyes passed the "Constitutional Charter" of the Holy Mountain, which was ratified by the Greek Parliament.
The general diamonētērion is available upon application to the Pilgrims' Bureau in Thessaloniki.
After the Nazi takeover of Greece, the Epistassia, Athos's four-member executive committee, formally asked Hitler to place the Autonomous Monastic State under his personal protection, and Hitler agreed.
The Patriarch was heading to Mount Athos.
A pilgrim/visitor to a monastery, who is accommodated in the guest-house (αρχονταρίκι) can have a taste of the monastic life in it by following its daily schedule: praying (services in church or in private), common dining, working (according to the duties of each monk) and rest.
This important document is preserved in the House of the Holy Administration in Karyes.
In 956, a decree offered land of about  to the Xiropotamou monastery, which means that this monastery was already quite big.
The lexicographer Hesychius of Alexandria states that in the fifth century there was still a temple and a statue of "Zeus Athonite".
As a result of the shortcomings of the Treaty of London, the Second Balkan War broke out between the combatants in June 1913.
The conflict escalated in 2002 with Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople declaring the monks of Esphigmenou an illegal brotherhood and ordering their eviction; the monks refused to be evicted, and the Patriarch ordered a new brotherhood to replace them.
In the classical era, while the mountain was called ''Athos'', the peninsula was known as ''Acté'' or ''Akté'' (Ἀκτή).
Their sheer number is such, it is estimated that several decades will pass before the work is completed.
The duration of the general visa can be extended by several days by personally applying at the main office in Karyes or, as is done typically for someone seeking to become a monk, by a request from a monastery.
A cell is a house with a small church, where 1–3 monks live under the spiritual and administrative supervision of a monastery.
The Virgin walked ashore and, overwhelmed by the wonderful and wild natural beauty of the mountain, she blessed it and asked her Son for it to be her garden.
He is the lord and spiritual father of the monastery.
The extensive presence of Serbian monks is depicted in the numerous elections of Serbian monks to the office of the Protos during the era.
The Athonite monks tried to maintain good relations with the Ottoman Sultans and therefore when Murad II conquered Thessaloniki in 1430 they immediately pledged allegiance to him.
Bulgarian and Serbian ).
A declaration attached to Greece's accession treaty to the Schengen Agreement states that Mount Athos' "special status" should be taken into account in the application of the Schengen rules.
The monks forgave them for trespassing and informed them that the area was forbidden to females.
There was an incident in the 1930s regarding Aliki Diplarakou, the first Greek beauty pageant contestant to win the Miss Europe title, who shocked the world when she dressed up as a man and sneaked into Mount Athos.
Such monks do nowadays need a Greek visa and permission to stay, even if that is given generously by the Greek ministry, based on requests from Athos.
Soon after this, a document of 883 states that a certain Ioannis Kolovos built a monastery at Megali Vigla.
However the prohibition persists and a special permit is required to enter the peninsula.
Most visitors arrive at the small port of Dafni from where they can take the only paved road in the mountain to the capital Karyes or continue via another smaller boat to other monasteries down the coast.
Among the society's publications are its annual bulletin (''Friends of Mount Athos Annual Report'') offering articles, book reviews and other features related to Mount Athos.
During religious celebrations usually long vigils are held and the entire daily program is radically reshaped.
The archbishop held talks with the ''imiaslavtsy'' and tried to make them change their beliefs voluntarily, but was unsuccessful.
In 958, the monk Athanasios the Athonite (Άγιος Αθανάσιος ο Αθωνίτης) arrived on Mount Athos.
It is possible to travel by ferry to and from Ierissos for direct access to monasteries along the eastern coast.
This led to the adoption of the so-called "idiorrhythmic" lifestyle (a semi-eremitic variant of Christian monasticism) by a few monasteries at first and later, during the first half of the 18th century, by all.
This is exactly the main idea of a "skete", the communal way, just between the eremetic way and the coenobitic way of monasticism, with all 3 coexisting until today.
On 31 July 1913, the troops stormed the St. Panteleimon Monastery.
