* '''Advertising:''' Some moviegoers complain about commercial advertising shorts played before films, arguing that their absence used to be one of the main advantages of going to a movie theater.
In various Canadian cities, including Toronto, Calgary, Ottawa and Halifax, al-fresco movies projected on the walls of buildings or temporarily erected screens in parks operate during the Summer and cater to a pedestrian audience.
* '''Loudness:''' Another major recent concern is that the dramatic improvements in stereo sound systems and in subwoofer systems have led to cinemas playing the soundtracks of films at unacceptably high volume levels.
Fantasound (developed by RCA in 1940 for Disney's Fantasia) was an early interlock system.
According to such systems, children or teenagers below a certain age may be forbidden access to theaters showing certain movies, or only admitted when accompanied by a parent or other adult.
Separate admission for a short subject is rare; it is either an extra before a feature film or part of a series of short films sold as one admission (this mainly occurs at film festivals).
Movie theaters in North America generally have open seating.
Sound interlocks were used for stereophonic sound systems before the advent of magnetic film prints.
The most modern theaters have movable armrests throughout the theater that when down can hold a food container as well as act as an armrest or partition between the seats and when up allow closer contact between the couple.
As a result, the customer geography area of multiplexes and megaplexes typically overlaps with smaller theaters, which face threat of having their audience siphoned by bigger theaters that cut a wider swath in the movie-going landscape.
The first theater in the U.S. built from the ground up as a megaplex was the AMC Grand 24 in Dallas, Texas, which opened in May 1995, while the first megaplex in the U.S. based on an expansion of an existing facility was Studio 28 in Grand Rapids, Michigan, which reopened in November 1988 with 20 screens and a seating capacity of 6,000.
In most markets, nearly all single-screen theaters (sometimes referred to as a "Uniplex") have gone out of business; the ones remaining are generally used for arthouse films, e.g.
In some cases,   lobbies and corridors cannot hold as many people as the auditoriums, thus making holdout lines necessary.
One reason for the decline in ticket sales in the 2000s is that "home-entertainment options are improving all the time— whether streamed movies and television, video games, or mobile apps—and studios releasing fewer movies", which means that "people are less likely to head to their local multiplex".
The magic lantern could project rudimentary moving images, which was achieved by the use of various types of mechanical slides.
Likewise, early stereophonic films such as ''This Is Cinerama'' and ''House of Wax'' utilized a separate, magnetic oxide-coated film to reproduce up to six or more tracks of stereophonic sound.
Common restrictions include a waiting period after a movie's release before the pass can be exchanged for a ticket or specific theaters where a pass is ineligible for admission.
Because of their outdoor nature, drive-ins usually only operate seasonally, and after sunset.
In the US, the "...number of tickets sold fell nearly 11% between 2004 and 2013, according to the report, while box office revenue increased 17%" due to increased ticket prices.
The price of a ticket may be discounted during off-peak times e.g.
The studios once controlled many theaters, but after the appearance of Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, Congress passed the Neely Anti-Block Booking Act, which eventually broke the link between the studios and the theaters.
In the United States, the major chains now include AMC Entertainment Inc - 5,206 screens in 346 theaters, Cinemark Theatres - 4,457 screens in 334 theaters, Landmark Theatres - 220 screens in 54 theaters, Marcus Theatres - 681 screens in 53 theaters.National Amusements - 409 screens in 32 theaters and Regal Entertainment Group - 7,334 screens in 588 cinemas.
Still photographs were used later on after the widespread availability of photography technologies after the mid-19th century.
Two or three screens may be created by dividing up an existing cinema (as Durwood did with his Roxy in 1964), but newly built multiplexes usually have at least six to eight screens, and often as many as twelve, fourteen or even sixteen.
Using a very futuristic look, these 27-seat cinema vehicles were designed to attract attention.
A typical modern theater presents commercial advertising shorts, then movie trailers, and then the feature film.
Other critics such as Roger Ebert have expressed concerns that these advertisements, plus an excessive number of movie trailers, could lead to pressure to restrict the preferred length of the feature films themselves to facilitate playing schedules.
In 2009, movie exhibitors became more interested in 3D film.
Cinemas must have a liquor license to serve alcohol.
The RealD company expects 15,000 screens worldwide in 2010.
(See also anthology film.)
The Vue Cinema chain is a good example of a large-scale offering of such a service, called "Gold Class" and similarly, ODEON, Britain's largest cinema chain, have gallery areas in some of their bigger cinemas where there is a separate foyer area with a bar and unlimited snacks.
Depending on the system used, these are typically polarized glasses.
A drive-in movie theater is an outdoor parking area with a screen—sometimes an inflatable screen—at one end and a projection booth at the other.
Individual theaters within a chain also sometimes adopt this policy.
Pianists and organists would either play from sheet music or improvise; an orchestra would play from sheet music.
Volume is normally adjusted based on the projectionist's judgment of a high or low attendance.
A '''movie theater''' (also called a '''cinema''') is a venue, usually a building, that contains an auditorium for viewing films, for entertainment.
Some alternative methods of showing movies have been popular in the past.
Innovations in sound-on-film led to the first commercial screening of short motion pictures using the technology, which took place in 1923.
Sound is either provided through portable loudspeakers located by each parking space, or is broadcast on an FM radio frequency, to be played through the car's stereo system.
Many modern theaters have accessible seating areas for patrons in wheelchairs.
Sometimes movie theaters provide digital projection of a live broadcast of an opera, concert, or other performance or event.
Movies are also commonly shown on airliners in flight, using large screens in each cabin or smaller screens for each group of rows or each individual seat; the airline company sometimes charges a fee for the headphones needed to hear the movie's sound.
The film starred Robert Stack, Barbara Britton and Nigel Bruce.
These slides were originally hand-painted.
At first, the sound films incorporating synchronized dialogue—known as "talking pictures", or "talkies"—were exclusively shorts; the earliest feature-length movies with recorded sound included only music and effects.
The smallest movie theaters have a single viewing room with a single screen.
The relatively strong uniformity of movie ticket prices, particularly in the U.S., is a common economics puzzle, because conventional supply and demand theory would suggest higher prices for more popular and more expensive movies, and lower prices for an unpopular "bomb" or for a documentary with less audience appeal.
Movie theaters also often have a counter and/or self-service facilities for buying snacks and drinks in the movie theater lobby, film posters, arcade games, movie schedules, theater entrances, entrance halls, entrance signs, and washrooms.
Some theaters in Mexico offer numbered seating, in particular, Cinepolis VIP.
Compared with being together in a room without other people, it may also be reassuring for one or both of the couple (and for parents) that the intimacy is necessarily limited.
So far, the theater companies have typically been highly resistant to these complaints, citing the need for the supplementary income.
Chilean chains include Hoyts and Cinemark.
Advertisements for Fandango and other convenient methods of purchasing tickets is often shown.
Depending on the angle of rake of the seats, the aisles have steps.
In the 1970s many large 1920s movie palaces were converted into multiple screen venues by dividing their large auditoriums, and sometimes even the stage space, into smaller theaters.
Sometimes tickets are cheaper on Monday, or on Sunday morning.
Accordingly, a movie theater may either not be allowed to program an unrated film, or voluntarily refrain from that.
* '''Refunds:''' Most cinema companies issue refunds if there is a technical fault such as a power outage that stops people from seeing a movie.
Japanese chains include Toho and Shochiku.
Drive-in movie theaters are mainly found in the United States, where they were especially popular in the 1950s and 1960s.
Cinemas in Europe can have free seating or numbered seating.
Brazilian chains include Cinemark and Moviecom.
Furthermore, higher-budget films on the "opening weekend," or the three days, Friday to Sunday, can signify how much revenue it will bring in, not only to America, but as well as overseas.
Ward Parkway Center in Kansas City, Missouri had the first multiplex cinema in the United States.
Currently, in multiplexes, theater chains often feature a continuous slideshow between showings featuring a loop of movie trivia, promotional material for the theater chains (such as encouraging patrons to purchase drinks, snacks and popcorn, gift vouchers and group rates, or other foyer retail offers), or advertising for local and national businesses.
A silver screen is used to reflect this light back at the audience and reduce loss of brightness.
Theaters often have booster seats for children and other short people to put on the seat, to sit higher, for a better view.
For many years, most 3-D movies were shown in amusement parks and even "4-D" techniques have been used when certain effects such as spraying of water, movement of seats, and other effects are used to simulate actions seen on the screen.
The increasing number of 3D movies, for which an additional fee is required, somewhat undermines the concept of unlimited entrance to regular showings, in particular if no 2D version is screened, except in the cases where 3D is included.
In the early decades of "talkie" films, many movie theaters presented a number of shorter items in addition to the feature film.
IMAX is a system using film with more than ten times the frame size of a 35 mm film to produce image quality far superior to conventional film.
In some jurisdictions this is illegal unless the practice has been announced to the public in advance.
Some adult theaters sell a day pass, either as standard ticket, or as an option that costs a little more than a single admission.
Arm rests pose a hindrance to intimacy.
Until the multiplex era, prior to showtime, the screen in some theaters would be covered by a curtain, in the style of a theater for a play.
Sometimes the attendee cannot see the screen and has to make a choice based on a verbal description of the still available seats.
There may also be a break between the introductory material and the feature.
In the 2010s, most movie theaters are equipped for digital cinema projection, removing the need to create and transport a physical film print on a heavy reel.
Discount theaters show films at a greatly discounted rate, however, the films shown are generally films that have already run for many weeks at regular theaters and thus are no longer a major draw, or films which flopped at the box office and thus have already been removed from showings at major theaters in order to free up screens for films that are a better box office draw.
Touring since 2010 the cinema is actually a converted 1972 caravan.
In silent films for entertainment, the dialogue was transmitted through muted gestures, mime and title cards, which contained a written indication of the plot or key dialogue.
In turn, ticket holders may be enticed to shop or eat while stuck outside in the holdout line.
Some chains like Famous Players and AMC Theatres have compromised with the commercials restricted to being shown before the scheduled start time for the trailers and the feature film.
A filter is placed in front of the projector that changes the polarization of the light coming from the projector.
Reliable synchronization was difficult to achieve with the early sound-on-disc systems, and amplification and recording quality were also inadequate.
Moviegoers drive into the parking spaces which are sometimes sloped upwards at the front to give a more direct view of the movie screen.
At the IMAX cinema attached to the National Media Museum in Bradford, West Yorkshire, England, in the United Kingdom, visitors to the museum's sixth floor can observe the IMAX projection booth via a glass rear wall, and watch the large format films being loaded and projected.
Chromotrope slides, which produced eye-dazzling displays of continuously cycling abstract geometrical patterns and colors, were operated by means of a small crank and pulley wheel that rotated a glass disc.
James Mage was  an early pioneer in the 3D craze.
It has been "...estimated that movie theaters make an 85% profit at the concessions stand on overpriced soda, candy, nachos, hot dogs and, of course, popcorn.
Visitors usually borrow or keep special glasses to wear while watching the movie.
The sound is not adjusted downward for a sparsely occupied theater, and some patrons employ earplugs for the trailer period.
Since the introduction of the movie theater, this tradition continued.
The earliest 3-D movies were presented in the 1920s.
This experience was further demonstrated through Roget's introduction of the thaumatrope, a device which spun a disk with an image on its surface at a fairly high rate of speed.
Movie theaters typically sell soft drinks, popcorn and candy and some theaters also sell hot fast food.
The smallest purpose-built cinema is the Cabiria Cine-Cafe which measures 24 m² (258.3&nbsp;ft²) and has a seating capacity of 18.
In Europe (and, to a lesser degree, elsewhere), the new development was treated with suspicion by many filmmakers and critics, who worried that a focus on dialogue would subvert the unique aesthetic virtues of soundless cinema.
At a theater with a sold-out show there is often an additional ticket check, to make sure that everybody with a ticket for that show can find a seat.
Hong Kong has AMC Theatres.
Muvico Theaters, Regal Entertainment Group, Pacific Theatres and AMC Theatres are some theaters that interlock films.
Specific to North American term is ''the movies'', while specific terms in the UK are ''the pictures'', ''the flicks'' and for the facility itself ''the flea pit'' (or ''fleapit'').
It was built by Renata Carneiro Agostinho da Silva (Brazil) in Brasília DF, Brazil in 2008.
See also luxury screens below.
Cinemas in Thailand have a restriction of one viewing per movie.
The first decline in the theatrical 3D craze started in August and September 1953.
From an etiquette standpoint, ''Cinemablend'' states that a short kiss on the lips is almost always acceptable but to avoid disturbing other movie patrons, kissing should not go on beyond ten seconds;  as well, couples who wish to kiss should try to sit at the back of the auditorium and choose a sparsely attended film.
Admission prices are often more than twice the regular movie theater admission prices.
The audience members typically sit on padded seats which in most theaters are set up on a sloped floor, with the highest part at the rear of the theater.
By the early 1930s, the talkies were a global phenomenon.
The curtain would be drawn for the feature.
The IMAX 3D system and digital 3D systems are used (the latter is used in the animated movies of Disney/Pixar).
Some cinemas in city centers offer luxury seating with services like complimentary refills of soft drinks and popcorn, a bar serving beer, wine and liquor, reclining leather seats and service bells.
Refunds may be offered during the initial 30 minutes of the screening.
* '''Crowd control:''' As movie theaters have grown into multiplexes and megaplexes, crowd control has become a major concern.
Historical and cultural factors are sometimes also cited.
In the 2010s, most movie theaters have multiple screens.
The 1922 Princess Theatre in Honolulu, Hawaii featured "stadium seating," sharply raked rows of seats extending from in front of the screen back towards the ceiling.
The invention of the Argand lamp in the 1790s, limelight in the 1820s and the intensely bright electric arc lamp in the 1860s increased the brightness of the images.
In conventional low pitch viewing floors the preferred seating arrangement is to use staggered rows.
Some films show mid-credits scenes while the credits are rolling, which in comedy films are often "bloopers" and outtakes, or post-credits scenes, which typically set up the audience for a sequel.
Unlike seemingly similar forms of entertainment such as rock concerts, in which a popular performer's tickets cost much more than an unpopular performer's tickets, the demand for movies is very difficult to predict ahead of time.
3-D glasses deliver the proper image to the proper eye and make the image appear to "pop-out" at the viewer and even follow the viewer when he/she moves so viewers relatively see the same image.
The first megaplex is generally considered to be the Kinepolis in Brussels, Belgium, which opened in 1988 with 25 screens and a seating capacity of 7,500.
These warnings threaten customers with being removed from the cinema and arrested by the police.
IMAX theaters use an oversized screen as well as special projectors.
Most, but not all, movie theaters are commercial operations catering to the general public, who attend by purchasing a ticket.
At particularly anticipated showings, theaters may employ night vision equipment to detect a working camera during a screening.
Some theaters have "loveseats": seats designed for two, without an armrest in the middle.
In Canada, Cineplex Entertainment is the largest and movie theater company with 161 locations and 1,635 screens.
In older theaters, aisle lights were often built into the end seats of each row to help patrons find their way in the dark.
Also for some film festivals, a pass is sold for unlimited entrance.
In the countries where those terms are used, the word "theatre" is usually reserved for live performance venues.
Sometimes two feature films are sold as one admission (double feature), with a break in between.
This is easiest and causes the least inconvenience when it is not crowded, and/or one is not very choosy about where one wants to sit.
More expensive theaters may have large comfortable sofas.
A single foyer area is shared among them.
In South America, Argentine chains include Hoyts, Village Cinemas, Cinemark and Showcase Cinemas.
The "golden era" of 3D film began in the early 1950s with the release of the first color stereoscopic feature, ''Bwana Devil''.
In the United States, many movie theater chains sell discounted passes, which can be exchanged for tickets to regular showings.
In India, sound was the transformative element that led to the rapid expansion of the nation's film industry.
and in recent years, added reminders to silence mobile phones as well warning as concerning movie piracy with camcorders ("camming").
Although definitions vary, a large multiplex with 20 or more screens is usually called a megaplex however in the United Kingdom this was a brand name for large Virgin Cinema (later UGC).
Usually, the trailers are presented at a very high sound level, presumably to overcome the sounds of a busy crowd.
Almost all movie theaters employ economic price discrimination: tickets for youth, students, and seniors are typically cheaper.
Another source of competition is television, which has "...stolen a lot of cinema's best tricks – like good production values and top tier actors – and brought them into people's living rooms."
The lobby may be before or after the ticket check.
Typically, two glass slides, one with the stationary part of the picture and the other with the part that was to move, would be placed one on top of the other and projected together, then the moving slide would be hand-operated, either directly or by means of a lever or other mechanism.
Sound-on-film, however, would soon become the standard for talking pictures.
Even prior to the invention of motion pictures, the darkened auditoriums of opera houses were associated with physical intimacy between couples, particularly in the expensive private boxes ("loges") in the balcony, which had curtains that could be drawn.
Canada was the first country in the world to have a two-screen theater.
In some jurisdictions, movie theaters are licensed to sell alcoholic drinks.
In the 2010s, 3D films became popular again.
During silent films, a pianist, theater organist, or in large cities, even a small orchestra would often play music to accompany the films.
Usually the lights are switched on after the credits, sometimes already during them.
For 2013, the average price for a movie ticket in the United States was $8.13.
The most well-known measure is the ubiquitous '''holdout line''' which prevents ticket holders for the next showing of that weekend's most popular movie from entering the building until their particular auditorium has been cleared out and cleaned.
During the closing credits many people leave, but some stay until the end.
One incentive for theaters to show 3D films is that although ticket sales have declined, revenues from 3D tickets have grown.
Colleges and universities have often sponsored movie screenings in lecture halls.
In Oceania (particularly Australia), large chains include Event Cinemas (known as Village Cinemas in Victoria and Tasmania), Hoyts Cinemas and Palace Cinemas.
A "talkie" or sound film is a motion picture with synchronized sound, or sound technologically coupled to image, as opposed to a silent film.
The ''New York Times'' reported that some audience members walked out of Terrence Malick's film ''Tree of Life'' and asked for refunds.
Indonesia has the 21 Cineplex chain.
Also prior to showing the film, reminders, in varying forms would be shown concerning theater etiquette (no smoking, no talking, no littering, removing crying babies, etc.)
Movie theaters have also been identified as one of the various locations in which "uncommitted, non-romantic sexual encounters" take place, with other locations including dance clubs, bars and parks.
Some movie theaters, however, are operated by non-profit organizations or societies which charge members a membership fee to view films.
The latter terms, as well as their derivative adjectives "cinematic" and "kinematic", ultimately derive from Greek κινῆμα, κινήματος (kinema, kinematos)—"movement", "motion".
Also, in one Pathé theater in the Netherlands on one day of the week buying a drink and a snack is compulsory.
An overcrowded megaplex can be rather unpleasant, and in an emergency can be extremely dangerous (indeed, "shouting fire in a crowded theater" is the standard example in American English of the limits to free speech, because it could cause a deadly panic).
Some theaters, lacking a curtain, filled the screen with slides of some form of abstract art prior to the start of the movie.
This is not considered a projector interlock, however.
At AMC theaters, "...patrons who sat through the entire film and then decided they wanted their money back were out of luck, as AMC's policy is to only offer refunds 30 minutes into a screening.
for matinees, and higher at busy times, typically evenings and/or weekends.
They were built on a Bedford SB3 chassis with a custom Coventry Steel Caravan extruded aluminum body.
Essentially, if the film does not succeed in the first few weeks of its inception, it will most likely fail in its attempt to gain a sustainable amount of revenue and thus being taken out from movie theaters.
If one has a ticket for a specific seat (see below) one is formally assured of that, but it is still inconvenient and disturbing to find and claim it during the commercials and trailers, unless it is near an aisle.
The Elgin Theatre in Ottawa became the first venue to offer two film programs on different screens in 1957 when Canadian theater-owner Nat Taylor converted the dual screen theater into one capable of showing two different movies simultaneously.
In Mexico, the major chains are Cinepolis and Cinemex.
As a rule of thumb, they pull audiences from an eight to 12 mile radius, versus a three to five mile radius for smaller theaters (though the size of this radius depends on population density).
Some patrons record the movie in order to sell "bootleg" copies on the black market.
When a system is used that requires inexpensive 3D glasses, they can sometimes be kept by the patron.
Many of these early theaters contain a balcony, an elevated level across the auditorium above the theater's rearmost seats.
A great variety of films are shown at cinemas, ranging from animated films for children, blockbusters for general audiences and documentaries for patrons who are interested in non-fiction topics.
In the case of numbered seating systems the attendee can often pick seats from a video screen.
Usually in the 2010s, an admission is for one feature film.
In Australia, Canada and New Zealand, when this practice is used, it is traditional to offer the lower prices for Tuesday for all showings, one of the slowest days of the week in the movie theater business, which has led to the nickname "cheap Tuesday."
Movie studios/film distributors in the U.S. traditionally drive hard bargains entitling them to as much as 100% of the gross ticket revenue during the first weeks (and then the balance changes in 10% increments in favor of exhibitors at intervals that vary from film to film).
From 1894 to the late 1920s, movie theaters showed silent films, which were films with no synchronized recorded sound or dialogue.
The term "theater" comes from the Old French word "theatre", from the 12th century and "...directly from Latin theatrum which meant 'play-house, theater; stage; spectators in a theater'", which in turn came from the Greek word "theatron", which meant "theater; the people in the theater; a show, a spectacle," or literally "place for viewing."
The RealD 3D system works by using a single digital projector that swaps back and forth between the images for eyes.
Movie-theater popcorn has been called one of America's biggest rip-offs, with a retail price of nine times what it costs to make."
A magic lantern show at the 1851 World's Fair caused a sensation among the audience.
According to The Contemporary Hollywood Film Industry, Philip Drake states that box office takings currently account for less than a quarter of total revenues and have become increasingly "front loaded," earning the majority of receipts in the opening two weeks of exhibition, meaning that films need to make an almost instant impact in order to avoid being dropped from screens by exhibitors.
The first feature film originally presented as a talkie was ''The Jazz Singer'', released in October 1927.
In the 1980s the introduction of VHS cassettes made possible video-salons, small rooms where visitors viewed movies on a large TV.
In the case of free seats, already seated customers may be asked by staff to move one or more places for the benefit of an arriving couple or group wanting to sit together.
Using his 16&nbsp;mm 3D Bolex system, he premiered his ''Triorama'' program in February 1953 with his four shorts: ''Sunday In Stereo'', ''Indian Summer'', ''American Life'', and ''This is Bolex Stereo''.
