This is compared with 598.8 in 2008 and 385 in 1990.
Prepositions appear in these languages as locative prefixes prefixed to the noun and declined according to their own noun-class.
Mozambique attracts tourists.
Dr. Erwin Richards began a Methodist mission at Chicuque in Inhambane Province.
Mozambique is divided into ten provinces (''provincias'') and one capital city (''cidade capital'') with provincial status.
The government of Mozambique has taken steps to address the problem of corruption, and some positive developments can be observed, such as the passages of several new anti-corruption bills in 2012.
From a military standpoint, the Portuguese regular army maintained control of the population centres while the guerrilla forces sought to undermine their influence in rural and tribal areas in the north and west.
They are organised in several "tariqa" or brotherhoods.
The island-town was the capital of the Portuguese colony until 1898, when it was moved south to Lourenço Marques (now Maputo).
Mozambique has a tropical climate with two seasons, a wet season from October to March and a dry season from April to September.
Musical instruments are usually handmade.
According to EU observers, the elections shortcomings have probably not affected the final result in the presidential election.
Between 1994 and 2006, average annual GDP growth was approximately 8%, however, the country remains one of the poorest and most underdeveloped in the world.
It received diplomatic and some military support from Cuba and the Soviet Union and proceeded to crack down on opposition.
However, after the general elections, a new political crisis emerged and the country appears to be once again on the brink of violent conflict.
Turnout was very low.
The major cities are Maputo, Beira, Nampula, Tete, Quelimane, Chimoio, Pemba, Inhambane, Xai-Xai and Lichinga.
This is exemplified by the government radio station, Rádio Moçambique, the most popular station in the country.
An estimated one million Mozambicans perished during the civil war, 1.7 million took refuge in neighbouring states, and several million more were internally displaced.
Connections are evident at sites including Manyikeni for 11–14th century ties with the inland Great Zimbabwe kingdoms.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) has established a growing presence in Mozambique.
Mozambique's decision to enforce UN sanctions against Rhodesia and deny that country access to the sea led Ian Smith's government to undertake overt and covert actions to oppose the country.
There were ten survivors, but President Machel and thirty-three others died, including ministers and officials of the Mozambique government.
The Bahá'í Faith has been present in Mozambique since the early 1950s but did not openly identify itself in those years because of the strong influence of the Catholic Church which did not recognise it officially as a world religion.
The marimba is a popular instrument with the Chopi of the south central coast, who are famous for their musical skill and dance.
Muslims are particularly present in the north of the country.
Unable to salvage any of their assets, most of them returned to Portugal penniless.
Roughly 45,000 people of Indian descent reside in Mozambique.
However, since 2013, following more than 20 years of peace, a renewed insurgency by RENAMO has been occurring.
Among the main Protestant churches are Igreja União Baptista de Moçambique, the Assembleias de Deus, the Seventh-day Adventists, the Anglican Church of Southern Africa, the Igreja do Evangelho Completo de Deus, the Igreja Metodista Unida, the Igreja Presbiteriana de Moçambique, the Igrejas de Cristo and the Assembleia Evangélica de Deus.
Average temperature ranges in Maputo are from  in July to  in February.
As part of their response to FRELIMO, the Portuguese government began to pay more attention to creating favourable conditions for social development and economic growth.
The new constitution enacted in 1990 provided for a multi-party political system, market-based economy, and free elections.
This began to change in 1983; in 1984 Mozambique joined the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
Within a year, most of the 250,000 Portuguese in Mozambique had left—some expelled by the government of the nearly independent territory, some fleeing in fear—and Mozambique became independent from Portugal on 25 June 1975.
The RENAMO's attack on government infrastructures included health and education systems from 1980 to 1992.
Since 2013, an insurgency by RENAMO has been occurring, mainly in the country's central and northern regions.
According to a 2011 survey, the total fertility rate was 5.9 children per woman, with 6.6 in rural areas and 4.5 in urban areas.
The country is divided into two topographical regions by the Zambezi River.
The independence in 1975 saw the entrance of new pioneers.
Two national organisations also exist—the ''Conselho Islâmico de Moçambique'' and the ''Congresso Islâmico de Moçambique''.
'''Mozambique''' ( or ), officially the '''Republic of Mozambique''' ( or '''', ) is a country in Southeast Africa bordered by the Indian Ocean to the east, Tanzania to the north, Malawi and Zambia to the northwest, Zimbabwe to the west, and Swaziland and South Africa to the southwest.
Some of the instruments used in Mozambican musical expression include drums made of wood and animal skin; the ''lupembe'', a woodwind instrument made from animal horns or wood; and the marimba, which is a kind of xylophone native to Mozambique and other parts of Africa.
This period was also marked by the exodus of Portuguese nationals and Mozambicans of Portuguese heritage, a collapsed infrastructure, lack of investment in productive assets, and government nationalisation of privately owned industries, as well as widespread famine.
The FRELIMO regime also gave shelter and support to South African (African National Congress) and Zimbabwean (Zimbabwe African National Union) rebel movements, while the governments of Rhodesia and later South Africa (at that time still apartheid) backed RENAMO in the civil war.
By 1993, more than 1.5 million Mozambican refugees had returned who had sought asylum in neighbouring Malawi, Zimbabwe, Swaziland, Zambia, Tanzania, and South Africa as a result of war and drought, as part of the largest repatriation witnessed in sub-Saharan Africa.
Other music types are popular in Mozambique like marrabenta, and other Lusophone music forms like fado, bossa nova, and maxixe (with origins from kizomba, Maxixe, and samba).
Since 2001, Mozambique's annual average GDP growth has been among the world's highest.
The official currency is the New Metical (as of October 2015, 1&nbsp;USD is roughly equivalent to 40 New Meticals), which replaced old Meticals at the rate of a thousand to one.
Since 1998, 53 "Municípios" (Municipalities) have been created in Mozambique.
Italy also maintains a profile in Mozambique as a result of its key role during the peace process.
After grade 7, pupils must take standardised national exams to enter secondary school, which runs from eighth to 10th grade.
This was what happened in 1942 with the Mozambique Company, which however continued to operate in the agricultural and commercial sectors as a corporation, and had already happened in 1929 with the termination of the Niassa Company's concession.
Staples and crops, such as cassava (a starchy root of Brazilian origin), cashew nuts (also of Brazilian origin, though Mozambique was once the largest producer of these nuts), and ''pãozinho'' (pronounced , those are Portuguese-style French buns) were brought in by the Portuguese.
FRELIMO candidate Armando Guebuza won with 64% of the popular vote, while his opponent, Afonso Dhlakama of RENAMO, received 32% of the popular vote.
The Chopi, for instance, act out battles dressed in animal skins.
This was the first time that FRELIMO, RENAMO-UE, and independent parties competed without significant boycotts.
After over four centuries of Portuguese rule, Mozambique gained independence in 1975, becoming the People's Republic of Mozambique shortly thereafter.
The languages in this group are, judging by the short vocabularies, very vaguely similar to Zulu, but obviously not in the same immediate group.
Similarly, in early 1996 Mozambique joined its Anglophone neighbours in the Commonwealth of Nations.
There is eMakhuwa proper, with the related eLomwe and eChuwabo, with a small eKoti-speaking area at the coast.
Climatic conditions, however, vary depending on altitude.
On the other hand, the observers have declared that the outcome of the parliamentary election and thus the distribution of seats in the National Assembly does not reflect the will of the Mozambican people and is clearly to the disadvantage of RENAMO.
Mozambique also belongs to the African Union (formerly the Organisation of African Unity) and the Southern African Development Community.
According to the official guerrilla statements, this affected a majority of the indigenous population who suffered both state-sponsored discrimination and enormous social pressure.
The SADC free trade protocol is aimed at making the Southern African region more competitive by eliminating tariffs and other trade barriers.
The United Methodist Church has tripled in size in Mozambique since 1998.
''Postos administrativos'' (administrative posts) are the main subdivisions of districts.
The capital and largest city is Maputo (known as "Lourenço Marques" before independence).
By 1999, more than one-half (53%) of the legislation passed originated in the Assembly.
Plans for 2003–04 include Commercial Code reform; comprehensive judicial reform; financial sector strengthening; continued civil service reform; and improved government budget, audit, and inspection capability.
At , Mozambique is the world's 36th-largest country.
In the aftermath of the 1998 local elections, the government resolved to make more accommodations to the opposition's procedural concerns for the second round of multiparty national elections in 1999.
In an area straddling the lower Zambezi, Sena, which belongs to the same group as Nyanja, is spoken, with areas speaking the related CiNyungwe and CiSenga further upriver.
Through cable and satellite, viewers can access tens of other African, Asian, Brazilian, and European channels.
His successor, Filipe Nyusi, became the 4th President of Mozambique on 15 January 2015.
The central government executed tens of thousands of people while trying to extend its control throughout the country and sent many people to "re-education camps" where thousands died.
Many ''prazos'' had declined by the mid-19th century, but several of them survived.
There are now more than 150,000 members in more than 180 congregations of the 24 districts.
About 12,000 refugees are now in neighboring Malawi.
Mozambique was ruled by Portugal, and they share a main language (Portuguese) and main religion (Roman Catholicism).
Among the most highly circulated newspapers are state-controlled dailies, such as ''Noticias'' and ''Diário de Moçambique'', and the weekly ''Domingo''.
The resettlement of civil war refugees and successful economic reform have led to a high growth rate: the country enjoyed a remarkable recovery, achieving an average annual rate of economic growth of 8% between 1996 and 2006 and between 6–7% from 2006 to 2011.
Mozambique is one of the poorest and most underdeveloped countries in the world.
They established agricultural communities or societies based on herding cattle.
FRELIMO won twenty-eight mayoral positions and the majority in twenty-nine municipal assemblies, while RENAMO won five mayoral positions and the majority in four municipal assemblies.
FRELIMO won 160 seats in Parliament, with a coalition of RENAMO and several small parties winning the 90 remaining seats.
The new government under president Samora Machel established a one-party state based on Marxist principles.
The Makonde are renowned for their wood carving and elaborate masks (see picture), that are commonly used in traditional dances.
The country's tourism sector is also growing.
In the early 21st century there were 3 physicians per 100,000 people in the country.
The civil war ended in October 1992 with the Rome General Peace Accords, first brokered by the Christian Council of Mozambique (Council of Protestant Churches) and then taken over by Community of Sant'Egidio.
A law had been passed on the initiative of the relatively unknown Armando Guebuza of the FRELIMO party, ordering the Portuguese to leave the country in 24 hours with only 20 kilograms (44 pounds) of luggage.
South Africa is Mozambique's main trading partner and source of foreign direct investment.
Many go to work as teachers or are unemployed.
Mozambican food, music, movies (by RTP África), and traditions are now part of everyday lifestyles of Portugal.
The Administrative Committee is located in Maputo.
Cyclones are common during the wet season.
International and domestic observers agreed that the voting process was well organized and went smoothly.
Mozambique is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement and ranks among the moderate members of the African bloc in the United Nations and other international organisations.
Dances are usually intricate, highly developed traditions throughout Mozambique.
The Mozambique civil war led to a great setback in the primary health system in Mozambique.
Machel's successor Joaquim Chissano implemented sweeping changes in the country, starting reforms such as changing from Marxism to capitalism, and began peace talks with RENAMO.
During most of the civil war, the FRELIMO-formed central government was unable to exercise effective control outside of urban areas, many of which were cut off from the capital.
The Zambezia Company, the most profitable chartered company, took over a number of smaller ''prazeiro'' holdings, and established military outposts to protect its property.
Health expenditure per capita was 42 US$ (PPP) in 2004.
The largest religion in Mozambique is Christianity, with significant minorities following Islam and African traditional religions.
However, the number of private newspapers with critical views of the government have increased significantly in recent years.
Mozambique is a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).
Commercial settlements such as Sofala, Angoche, and others along the Mozambican Swahili Coast became important centers for the Arab, Persian, and later Portuguese trade in slaves, gold, ivory, and other commodities.
The old currency was redeemable at the Bank of Mozambique until the end of 2012.
Although the change of government in Zimbabwe in 1980 removed this threat, the government of South Africa continued to back RENAMO in its war with the FRELIMO government.
The country was named Moçambique by the Portuguese after the Island of Mozambique, derived from ''Musa Al Big'' or ''Mossa Al Bique'' or ''Mussa Ben Mbiki'', an Arab trader who first visited the island and later lived there.
Somewhat different from all of these are the languages of the eMakhuwa group, with a loss of initial k-, which means that many nouns begin with a vowel: for example, ''epula'' = "rain".
As per December 2011 240,000 were receiving such treatment, increasing to 416,000 in March 2014 according to the health authorities.
Mozambique is endowed with rich and extensive natural resources.
In a 2006 survey, three-quarters of Mozambicans said that in the past five years their economic position had remained the same or become worse.
Western aid by the Scandinavian countries of Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Iceland quickly replaced Soviet support.
It was established shortly after Mozambique's independence.
A Igreja Metodista Unida em Moçambique (the UMC in Mozambique) observed the 100th anniversary of Methodist presence in Mozambique in 1990.
President Chissano won the presidency with a margin of 4% over the RENAMO-Electoral Union coalition candidate, Afonso Dhlakama, and began his five-year term in January 2000.
Yet, despite this apparent success, both the World Bank and UNICEF used the word 'paradox' to describe rising chronic child malnutrition in the face of GDP growth.
The provinces are subdivided into 129 districts (''distritos'').
The districts are further divided in 405 "Postos Administrativos" (Administrative Posts) and then into Localidades (Localities), the lowest geographical level of the central state administration.
Mozambique is a member of the African Union, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, the Latin Union, the Non-Aligned Movement, and the Southern African Development Community, and is an observer at La Francophonie.
The country has four notable lakes: Lake Niassa (or Malawi), Lake Chiuta, Lake Cahora Bassa and Lake Shirwa, all in the north.
Public expenditure on health was at 2.7% of the GDP in 2004, whereas private expenditure on health was at 1.3% in the same year.
RENAMO-UE coalition won 116 seats, one went independent, and no third parties are represented.
There is a National Assembly and municipal assemblies.
These claims were supported by international observers (among others by the European Union Election Observation Mission to Mozambique and the Carter Centre) to the elections who criticised the fact that the National Electoral Commission (CNE) did not conduct fair and transparent elections.
After some delays, in 1998 the country held its first local elections to provide for local representation and some budgetary authority at the municipal level.
In the same year, Mozambique became a founding member and the first President of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), and maintains close ties with other Portuguese-speaking countries.
State-owned radio stations are more popular than privately owned media.
Swahili (and later Arab) commercial ports existed along the coasts until the arrival of Europeans.
Infant mortality was at 100 per 1,000 births in 2005.
After only two years of independence, the country descended into an intense and protracted civil war lasting from 1977 to 1992.
Statistically, Mozambique's Portuguese whites were indeed wealthier and more skilled than the black indigenous majority.
Additionally, customs duties have been reduced, and customs management has been streamlined and reformed.
In the 1994 elections, Joaquim Chissano was elected President with 53% of the vote, and a 250-member National Assembly was voted in with 129 Liberation Front of Mozambique (FRELIMO) deputies, 112 Mozambican National Resistance (RENAMO) deputies, and nine representatives of three smaller parties that formed the Democratic Union (UD).
Mozambique also belonged to the Front Line States.
During the 1970s and the early 1980s, Mozambique's foreign policy was inextricably linked to the struggles for majority rule in Rhodesia and South Africa as well as superpower competition and the Cold War.
This language area extends into neighbouring South Africa.
South of this area are languages of the Shangaan group, which are quite different again.
FRELIMO increased its majority in the National Assembly with 133 out of 250 seats.
The music of Mozambique serves many purposes, ranging from religious expression to traditional ceremonies.
During the last years of the colonial period, Mozambican art reflected the oppression by the colonial power, and became symbol of the resistance.
Especially after the Mozambican Civil War (1977–1992), with post-war enrollments reaching all-time highs due to stability and youth population growth, the quality of education has suffered.
They brought with them the technology for smelting and smithing iron.
The World Bank in 2007 talked of Mozambique's 'blistering pace of economic growth'.
Relations with Portugal, the former colonial power, continue to be important because Portuguese investors play a visible role in Mozambique's economy.
The chartered companies built roads and ports to bring their goods to market including a railroad linking present day Zimbabwe with the Mozambican port of Beira.
There are various estimates for the size of Mozambique's Chinese community, ranging from 7,000 to 12,000 .
During the period of the early 1980s, around 11% of the government budget was targeted on health care.
'''Radio programmes''' are the most influential form of media in the country due to their ease of access.
Representatives of the Soviet Union advanced the theory that the plane had been intentionally diverted by a false navigational beacon signal, using a technology provided by military intelligence operatives of the South African government.
They listed a whole range of shortcomings by the electoral authorities that benefited the ruling party FRELIMO.
The minimum legal salary is around US$60 per month.
Armando Guebuza was inaugurated as the President of Mozambique on 2 February 2005.
In May 2009, the government approved a new general elections law that contained innovations based on the experience of the 2003 municipal elections.
Since its formation in 1994, the National Assembly has made progress in becoming a body increasingly more independent of the executive.
Although Portuguese influence gradually expanded, its power was limited and exercised through individual settlers and officials who were granted extensive autonomy.
A coalition of RENAMO and several small parties won the 90 remaining seats.
Makonde and Yao belong to a different group, Yao being very close to the Mwera language of the Rondo Plateau area in Tanzania.
Suffrage is universal at eighteen.
All Mozambicans are required by law to attend school through the primary level; however, a lot of children in Mozambique do not go to primary school because they have to work for their families' subsistence farms for a living.
Human beings were bought and sold by African tribal chiefs, Arab Muslim traders and Portuguese and other European traders as well.
Girls’ enrollment increased from 3 million in 2002 to 4.1 million in 2006 while the completion rate increased from 31,000 to 90,000, which testified a very poor completion rate.
For the southern parts of Mozambique—Maputo and Gaza provinces, and city of Maputo itself—the official figures are more than twice as high as the national average.
In 1994, the government became a full member of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, in part to broaden its base of international support but also to please the country's sizable Muslim population.
The men of Makua dress in colourful outfits and masks while dancing on stilts around the village for hours.
Common native languages include Makhuwa, Sena, and Swahili.
It is comparable in size to Turkey.
After its independence from Portugal in 1975, the Mozambique government established a primary health care system that was cited by the WHO as a model for other developing countries.
The two best known and most influential contemporary Mozambican artists are the painter Malangatana Ngwenya and the sculptor Alberto Chissano.
This process gained momentum with South Africa's elimination of apartheid, which culminated in the establishment of full diplomatic relations in October 1993.
In 2011 the health authorities estimated about 1.7 million Mozambicans were HIV-positive, of whom 600,000 were in need of anti-retroviral treatment.
Since the end of the civil war in 1992, about 300 RENAMO guards had remained armed and refused to join the national army or the police force.
However, it was re-established in 1986.
The United Nations' Soviet delegation issued a minority report contending that their expertise and experience had been undermined by the South Africans.
XiTswa or Tswa occurs at the coast and inland, XiTsonga or Tsonga straddles the area around the Limpopo River, including such local dialects as XiChangana.
Most funding and advertising revenue is given to pro-government newspapers.
Mozambican culture also influences the Portuguese culture.
After independence in 1975, the modern art came into a new phase.
Arabs, Chinese and Indians primarily speak Portuguese and some Hindi.
Some would say that Mozambique's music is similar to reggae and West Indian calypso.
RENAMO-controlled areas included up to 50% of the rural areas in several provinces, and it is reported that health services of any kind were isolated from assistance for years in those areas.
Both the opposition and observers subsequently cited flaws in the tabulation process that, had they not occurred, might have changed the outcome.
Preparations for privatisation and/or sector liberalisation are underway for the remaining parastatal enterprises, including telecommunications, energy, ports, and railways.
On September 5, 2014, former president Guebuza and the leader of RENAMO Dhlakama signed the Accord on Cessation of Hostilities, which brought the military hostilities to a halt and allowed both parties to concentrate on the general elections to be held in October 2014.
Many of these left the country after independence from Portugal in 1975.
Apart from its lingua franca uses in the north of the country, Swahili is spoken in a small area of the coast next to the Tanzanian border; south of this, towards Moçambique Island, Kimwani, regarded as a dialect of Swahili, is used.
It is separated from Madagascar by the Mozambique Channel to the east.
The executive branch comprises a President, Prime Minister, and Council of Ministers.
The second general elections were held 3–5 December 1999, with high voter turnout.
'Espetada'' (kebab), the popular ''inteiro com piripiri'' (whole chicken in piri-piri sauce), ''prego'' (steak roll), ''pudim'' (pudding), and ''rissóis'' (battered shrimp) are all Portuguese dishes commonly eaten in present-day Mozambique.
The principal opposition party, RENAMO, boycotted the local elections, citing flaws in the registration process.
Peace returned to Mozambique, under supervision of the ONUMOZ peacekeeping force of the United Nations.
To the north of the Zambezi River, the narrow coastal strip gives way to inland hills and low plateaus.
After independence from Portugal in 1975, a number of Mozambican pupils continued to be admitted every year at Portuguese high schools, polytechnical institutes and universities, through bilateral agreements between the Portuguese government and the Mozambican government.
Many felt they had received too little opportunity or resources to upgrade their skills and improve their economic and social situation to a degree comparable to that of the Europeans.
