He returned to Karachi for the 1 July opening ceremony for the State Bank of Pakistan, at which he spoke.
In Karachi, he attended the Sindh-Madrasa-tul-Islam and the Christian Missionary Society High School.
He came to own over 200 suits, which he wore with heavily starched shirts with detachable collars, and as a barrister took pride in never wearing the same silk tie twice.
The Congress was much better prepared for the provincial elections in 1937, and the League failed to win a majority even of the Muslim seats in any of the provinces where members of that faith held a majority.
The "Jinnah Tower" in Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India, was built to commemorate Jinnah.
Ahmed suggests that depicting the ''Quaid'' drinking would weaken Jinnah's Islamic identity, and by extension, Pakistan's.
From then on, Muhammad Jinnah would receive personal care and support from her as he aged and began to suffer from the lung ailments which would kill him.
'''Muhammad Ali Jinnah''' ( ALA-LC: , born '''Mahomedali Jinnahbhai'''; 25 December 1876&nbsp;– 11 September 1948) was a lawyer, politician, and the founder of Pakistan.
Jinnah also worked to increase the League's political control at the provincial level.
In addition, the governor-general would initially be a powerful figure, and Jinnah did not trust anyone else to take that office.
These became known as his Fourteen Points.
Among those who met with Jinnah to seek his return was Liaquat Ali Khan, who would be a major political associate of Jinnah in the years to come and the first Prime Minister of Pakistan.
The Cabinet was influenced by minister Winston Churchill, who strongly opposed self-government for India, and members hoped that by having the commission appointed early, the policies for India which they favoured would survive their government.
On 7 August, Jinnah, with his sister and close staff, flew from Delhi to Karachi in Mountbatten's plane, and as the plane taxied, he was heard to murmur, "That's the end of that."
By 1940, Jinnah had come to believe that Indian Muslims should have their own state.
His birthday is observed as a national holiday.
Doctors urged him to return to Karachi, where he could receive better care, and with his agreement, he was flown there on 11 September.
Jinnah attended a reception for Gandhi, and returned home to India in January 1915.
His first three years in the law, from 1897 to 1900, brought him few briefs.
With the Congress leaders absent from the political scene, Jinnah warned against the threat of Hindu domination and maintained his Pakistan demand without going into great detail about what that would entail.
Relations between Indians and British were strained in 1919 when the Imperial Legislative Council extended emergency wartime restrictions on civil liberties; Jinnah resigned from it when it did.
As such, the homeland Jinnah asked for following his "conversion" was of an ''"unequivocal Islamic nature."''
Jinnah devoted much of his time to his law practice in the early 1920s, but remained politically involved.
During his student years in England, Jinnah was influenced by 19th-century British liberalism, like many other future Indian independence leaders.
In the weeks which followed Punjab and Bengal cast the votes which resulted in partition.
His other title is ''Baba-i-Qaum'' (Father of the Nation).
The Muslim League's claims that it alone could safeguard Muslim interests thus received a major boost.
Provinces would have the option of leaving the union entirely, and there would be an interim government with representation from the Congress and the League.
Most did so prior to independence, but the holdouts contributed to what have become lasting divisions between the two nations.
Christopher Lee who portrayed Jinnah, called his performance the best of his career.
The Lahore Resolution (sometimes called the "Pakistan Resolution", although it does not contain that name), based on the sub-committee's work, embraced the Two-Nation Theory and called for a union of the Muslim-majority provinces in the northwest of British India, with complete autonomy.
Jinnah is depicted on all Pakistani rupee currency, and is the namesake of many Pakistani public institutions.
He accepted the position despite the opposition of his mother, who before he left, had him enter an arranged marriage with his cousin, two years his junior from the ancestral village of Paneli, Emibai Jinnah.
The League was slower to do so, not entering until October 1946.
British Cabinet minister Edwin Montagu recalled Jinnah in his memoirs, "young, perfectly mannered, impressive-looking, armed to the teeth with dialectics, and insistent on the whole of his scheme".
During the Second World War, the League gained strength while leaders of the Congress were imprisoned, and in the elections held shortly after the war, it won most of the seats reserved for Muslims.
Plebiscites would take place in the North-West Frontier Province (which did not have a League government despite an overwhelmingly Muslim population), and in the majority-Muslim Sylhet district of Assam, adjacent to eastern Bengal.
Wavell attempted to save the situation by flying leaders such as Jinnah, Liaquat, and Jawaharlal Nehru to London in December 1946.
Jinnah had no comment on the change of government, but called a meeting of his Working Committee and issued a statement calling for new elections in India.
On 11 August, he presided over the new constituent assembly for Pakistan at Karachi, and addressed them, "You are free; you are free to go to your temples, you are free to go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this State of Pakistan&nbsp;... You may belong to any religion or caste or creed—that has nothing to do with the business of the State ...
Nevertheless, as Governor-General of Pakistan, he would refuse to accept a large salary, fixing it at 1 rupee per month.
Iqbal gradually succeeded in converting Jinnah over to his view, who eventually accepted Iqbal as his ''"mentor"''.
To come up with such a position, the League's Working Committee met for four days in February 1940 to set out terms of reference to a constitutional sub-committee.
His official biographer, Hector Bolitho, writing in 1954, interviewed surviving boyhood associates, and obtained a tale that the young Jinnah discouraged other children from playing marbles in the dust, urging them to rise up, keep their hands and clothes clean, and play cricket instead.
It did win a majority of the Muslim seats in Delhi, but could not form a government anywhere, though it was part of the ruling coalition in Bengal.
Full power remained in the hands of the Viceroy, however, who could dissolve legislatures and rule by decree.
When Jinnah urged Dina to marry a Muslim, she reminded him that he had married a woman not raised in his faith.
Another of his fellow barristers described him, saying:
When many of the same leaders met in Dacca in December of that year to form the All-India Muslim League to advocate for their community's interests, Jinnah was again opposed.
In the wake of the 1937 balloting, Jinnah demanded that the question of power sharing be settled on an all-India basis, and that he, as president of the League, be accepted as the sole spokesman for the Muslim community.
According to Singh, "the events of 1937 had a tremendous, almost a traumatic effect upon Jinnah".
He gained his matriculation from Bombay University at the high school.
Mountbatten took office as Viceroy on 24 March 1947, two days after his arrival in India.
Jinnah withdrew the order.
These notes were in circulation till 30 June 1949.
From the 1930s, Jinnah suffered from tuberculosis; only his sister and a few others close to him were aware of his condition.
Many years later, Mountbatten stated that if he had known Jinnah was so physically ill, he would have stalled, hoping Jinnah's death would avert partition.
Until the late 1930s, most Muslims of the British Raj expected, upon independence, to be part of a unitary state encompassing all of British India, as did the Hindus and others who advocated self-government.
There were shortages of machinery, not all of which was made in Pakistan.
Early meetings of the Congress contained a minority of Muslims, mostly from the elite.
English had become his principal language and would remain so throughout his life.
The plane landed at Karachi that afternoon, to be met by Jinnah's limousine, and an ambulance into which Jinnah's stretcher was placed.
Most members of the League's executive council remained loyal to Jinnah, attending the League meeting in December 1927 and January 1928 which confirmed him as the League's permanent president.
On 12 August 1948 the Babrra massacre in Charsadda was ordered resulting in the death of 400 people aligned with the Khudai Khidmatgar movement.
Cripps proposed giving some provinces what was dubbed the "local option" to remain outside of an Indian central government either for a period of time or permanently, to become dominions on their own or be part of another confederation.
Jinnah was also appointed to a committee which helped to establish the Indian Military Academy in Dehra Dun.
On 6 February, Jinnah informed the Viceroy that the Muslim League would be demanding partition instead of the federation contemplated in the 1935 Act.
Jinnah was a delegate to the first two conferences, but was not invited to the last.
In April 1913, he again went to Britain, with Gokhale, to meet with officials on behalf of the Congress.
The aspiring barrister joined Lincoln's Inn, later stating that the reason he chose Lincoln's over the other Inns of Court was that over the main entrance to Lincoln's Inn were the names of the world's great lawgivers, including Muhammad.
He worked to expand the League, reducing the cost of membership to two annas (⅛ of a rupee), half of what it cost to join the Congress.
By December 1939, Liaquat estimated that the League had three million two-anna members.
Jinnah gained great esteem from leading the case for Sir Pherozeshah, himself a noted barrister.
In India there will not easily arrive another Gandhi, nor in Pakistan another Jinnah."
Vali Nasr says Jinnah "was an Ismaili by birth and a Twelver Shia by confession, though not a religiously observant man."
The Jinnah House in Malabar Hill, Bombay, is in the possession of the Government of India, but the issue of its ownership has been disputed by the Government of Pakistan.
Gandhi's local style of leadership gained great popularity with the Indian people.
), where the League won no seats despite the fact that almost all residents were Muslim.
Indian politician Jaswant Singh's book ''Jinnah: India, Partition, Independence''  (2009) drew controversy in India.
A reception by the Canadian trade commissioner that evening in honour of Dominion Day was the last public event he attended.
In its earliest years, however, the League was not influential; Minto refused to consider it as the Muslim community's representative, and it was ineffective in preventing the 1911 repeal of the partition of Bengal, an action seen as a blow to Muslim interests.
A minority of Muslims, though, withdrew from the League, choosing to welcome the Simon Commission and repudiating Jinnah.
Some historians allege that Jinnah's courting the rulers of Hindu-majority states and his gambit with Junagadh are evidence of ill-intent towards India, as Jinnah had promoted separation by religion, yet tried to gain the accession of Hindu-majority states.
On the same day, the then Finance Minister of Pakistan, Malik Ghulam Muhammad, presented a new set of seven coins (Re.
In 1900, P. H. Dastoor, a Bombay presidency magistrate, left the post temporarily and Jinnah succeeded in getting the interim position.
Ahmed further claims that those scholars who have painted a secular picture of Jinnah have misread his speeches which, he argues, must be read in the context of Islamic History and culture.
The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 brought the United States into the war.
Soon after his arrival in London, Jinnah gave up the apprenticeship in order to study law, enraging his father, who had, before his departure, given him enough money to live for three years.
In a 1970 legal challenge, Hussain Ali Ganji Walji claimed Jinnah had converted to Sunni Islam, but the High Court rejected this claim in 1976, effectively accepting the Jinnah family as Shia.
Jinnah did not succeed, but obtained an acquittal for Tilak when he was charged with sedition again in 1916.
Similar rights were to grant the Muslim-majority areas in the east, and unspecified protections given to Muslim minorities in other provinces.
They contend that Jinnah only used the Pakistan demand in an attempt to mobilise support to obtain significant political rights for Muslims.
Although he returned to Karachi, he remained there only a short time before moving to Bombay.
By coincidence, he was in Britain at the same time as a man who would become a great political rival of his, Mohandas Gandhi, a Hindu lawyer who had become well known for advocating ''satyagraha'', non-violent non-cooperation, while in South Africa.
Along with political leaders Annie Besant and Tilak, Jinnah demanded "home rule" for India—the status of a self-governing dominion in the Empire similar to Canada, New Zealand and Australia, although, with the war, Britain's politicians were not interested in considering Indian constitutional reform.
In his book ''Patel: A Life'', Rajmohan Gandhi asserts that Jinnah hoped for a plebiscite in Junagadh, knowing Pakistan would lose, in the hope the principle would be established for Kashmir.
The League held influence at the provincial level in the Muslim-majority states mostly by alliance, and Jinnah believed that, given the opportunity, the League would improve its electoral standing and lend added support to his claim to be the sole spokesman for the Muslims.
As a boy, Jinnah lived for a time in Bombay with an aunt and may have attended the Gokal Das Tej Primary School there, later on studying at the Cathedral and John Connon School.
Although many leaders of the Congress sought a strong central government for an Indian state, some Muslim politicians, including Jinnah, were unwilling to accept this without powerful protections for their community.
Although the pact was never fully implemented, its signing ushered in a period of cooperation between the Congress and the League.
In 1857, many Indians had risen in revolt against British rule.
One of Jinnah's fellow barristers from the Bombay High Court remembered that "Jinnah's faith in himself was incredible"; he recalled that on being admonished by a judge with "Mr. Jinnah, remember that you are not addressing a third-class magistrate", Jinnah shot back, "My Lord, allow me to warn you that you are not addressing a third-class pleader."
Muhammad Jinnah's daughter, Dina, was educated in England and India.
When the Congress leadership was released from prison in June 1945, they repudiated the agreement and censured Desai for acting without proper authority.
Three Round Table Conferences followed over as many years, none of which resulted in a settlement.
A boundary commission would determine the final lines in the partitioned provinces.
The Aga Khan later wrote that it was "freakishly ironic" that Jinnah, who would lead the League to independence, "came out in bitter hostility toward all that I and my friends had done&nbsp;...
Gandhi, however, was placed on house arrest in one of the Aga Khan's palaces prior to his release for health reasons in 1944.
I have been very angry with him often during the past years.
Jinnah, on the other hand, was more willing to accommodate the British, and they in turn increasingly recognised him and the League as the representatives of India's Muslims.
In agreeing to have the League join the government, Jinnah abandoned his demands for parity with the Congress and a veto on matters concerning Muslims.
Wavell returned to India in September after consultation with his new masters in London; elections, both for the centre and for the provinces, were announced soon after.
I was treated on the same basis as Mr. Gandhi.
Leaders of the Congress were more vocal; Jawaharlal Nehru referred to Lahore as "Jinnah's fantastic proposals" while Chakravarti Rajagopalachari deemed Jinnah's views on partition "a sign of a diseased mentality".
Beginning in December 1946, British officials began looking for a viceregal successor to Wavell, and soon fixed on Admiral Lord Mountbatten of Burma, a war leader popular among Conservatives as the great-grandson of Queen Victoria and among Labour for his political views.
Jinnah concluded his address with "''Pakistan zindabad&nbsp;''" (Long live Pakistan), which was not in the script.
They were impelled by Gandhi, who threatened a fast until death.
Jinnah's legal education followed the pupillage (legal apprenticeship) system, which had been in force there for centuries.
The alliance between Gandhi and the Khilafat faction did not last long, and the campaign of resistance proved less effective than hoped, as India's institutions continued to function.
At the age of 20, Jinnah began his practice in Bombay, the only Muslim barrister in the city.
In January 1948, the Indian government finally agreed to pay Pakistan its share of British India's assets.
Events which separated the communities included the failed attempt to form a coalition government including the Congress and the League in the United Provinces following the 1937 election.
The Pakistani Army was still commanded by British officers, and the commanding officer, General Sir Douglas Gracey, refused the order, stating that he would not move into what he considered the territory of another nation without approval from higher authority, which was not forthcoming.
Field Marshal Viscount Wavell succeeded Linlithgow as Viceroy in 1943.
The following day, the Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow, without consulting Indian political leaders, announced that India had entered the war along with Britain.
He joined the following year, although he remained a member of the Congress as well and stressed that League membership took second priority to the "greater national cause" of a free India.
On 3 June, Mountbatten, Nehru, Jinnah and Sikh leader Baldev Singh made the formal announcement by radio.
He opposed Gandhi, but the tide of Indian opinion was against him.
Ahmed comments that in his notes to Iqbal's letters, Jinnah expressed unanimity with Iqbal's views: That Muslims required a separate homeland.
According to the journalist Khaled Ahmed, Jinnah publicly had a non-sectarian stance and "was at pains to gather the Muslims of India under the banner of a general Muslim faith and not under a divisive sectarian identity."
Jinnah sought alternative political ideas, and contemplated organising a new political party as a rival to the Congress.
Bengal and Punjab would also vote, both on the question of which assembly to join, and on the partition.
Jinnah arranged to sell his house in Bombay and procured a new one in Karachi.
As many as 14,500,000 people relocated between India and Pakistan during and after partition.
Pakistan was supposed to receive one-sixth of the pre-independence government's assets, carefully divided by agreement, even specifying how many sheets of paper each side would receive.
In the next two years, Jinnah worked to build support among Muslims for the League.
Fatima Jinnah later wrote, "even in his hour of triumph, the ''Quaid-e-Azam'' was gravely ill&nbsp;...
There were widespread protests in India.
Linlithgow met with Jinnah in June 1940, soon after Winston Churchill became the British prime minister, and in August offered both the Congress and the League a deal whereby in exchange for full support for the war, Linlithgow would allow Indian representation on his major war councils.
He helped to found the newspaper ''Dawn'' in the early 1940s in Delhi; it helped to spread the League's message and eventually became the major English-language newspaper of Pakistan.
Only officials could vote in the council; non-official members, such as Jinnah, had no vote.
Jinnah regarded Gandhi's proposed ''satyagraha'' campaign as political anarchy, and believed that self-government should be secured through constitutional means.
One observer wrote, "here indeed is Pakistan's King Emperor, Archbishop of Canterbury, Speaker and Prime Minister concentrated into one formidable ''Quaid-e-Azam''."
I suffered, which was not because there was anything wrong with me, but the irregularities of the schedule and over-strain told upon my health".
Jinnah had personally requested Prime Minister Nehru to preserve the house, hoping one day he could return to Bombay.
On the way back from London, Jinnah and Liaquat stopped in Cairo for several days of pan-Islamic meetings.
Jinnah insisted on Pakistan being conceded prior to the British departure, and to come into being immediately on their departure, while Gandhi proposed that plebiscites on partition occur sometime after a united India gained its independence.
Jinnah's moderate faction in the Congress was undermined by the deaths of Mehta and Gokhale in 1915; he was further isolated by the fact that Naoroji was in London, where he remained until his death in 1917.
The 1954 Hector Bolitho's book ''Jinnah: Creator of Pakistan'' prompted Fatima Jinnah to release a book, titled ''My Brother'' (1987), as she thought that Bolitho's book had failed to express the political aspects of Jinnah.
The failure of the Congress leadership to disavow Hindu communalists worried Congress-supporting Muslims.
In June 1948, he and Fatima flew to Quetta, in the mountains of Baluchistan, where the weather was cooler than in Karachi.
As the first Governor-General of Pakistan, Jinnah worked to establish the new nation's government and policies, and to aid the millions of Muslim migrants who had emigrated from the new nation of India to Pakistan after independence, personally supervising the establishment of refugee camps.
But on 1 April 1949, these notes were stamped with "Government of Pakistan" and were used as legal tenders.
Jinnah, however, was reluctant to go, not wishing his aides to see him as an invalid on a stretcher.
In 1908, his factional foe in the Indian National Congress, Bal Gangadhar Tilak, was arrested for sedition.
Nehru stated in 1960, "the truth is that we were tired men and we were getting on in years&nbsp;...
One of the largest streets in the Turkish capital Ankara, Cinnah Caddesi, is named after him, as is the Mohammad Ali Jenah Expressway in Tehran, Iran.
He secured the right to speak for the Muslim-led Bengali and Punjabi provincial governments in the central government in New Delhi ("the centre").
He was moved to the lower altitude of Quetta on 13 August, the eve of Independence Day, for which a statement ghost-written for him was released.
Two weeks of talks followed, which resulted in no agreement.
Mountbatten had been warned in his briefing papers that Jinnah would be his "toughest customer" who had proved a chronic nuisance because "no one in this country India had so far gotten into Jinnah's mind".
The Congress and its allies formed the government even in the North-West Frontier Province (N.W.F.P.
The League refused to do so, and took no part in the constitutional discussions.
Mountbatten was not favourably impressed with Jinnah, repeatedly expressing frustration to his staff about Jinnah's insistence on Pakistan in the face of all argument.
He put forth proposals that he hoped might satisfy a broad range of Muslims and reunite the League, calling for mandatory representation for Muslims in legislatures and cabinets.
The couple resided at South Court Mansion in Bombay, and frequently travelled across India and Europe.
The Mazar-e-Quaid, Jinnah's mausoleum, is among Karachi's landmarks.
This subsequently became the part of the argument in Pakistan about Jinnah's religious affiliation.
''Jinnah of Pakistan'' (1984) by Stanley Wolpert is regarded as one of the best biographical books on Jinnah.
Despite the rejection, Jinnah and the League saw the Cripps proposal as recognising Pakistan in principle.
The sessions began lightly when Jinnah, photographed between Louis and Edwina Mountbatten, quipped "A rose between two thorns" which the Viceroy took, perhaps gratuitously, as evidence that the Muslim leader had pre-planned his joke but had expected the vicereine to stand in the middle.
The resulting commission, led by Liberal MP John Simon, though with a majority of Conservatives, arrived in India in March 1928.
Karachi was then enjoying an economic boom: the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 meant it was 200 nautical miles closer to Europe for shipping than Bombay.
The Congress also rejected the Cripps plan, demanding immediate concessions which Cripps was not prepared to give.
In a speech given at Allahabad to a League session in 1930, Sir Muhammad Iqbal called for a state for Muslims in India.
Jinnah continued to correspond cordially with his daughter, but their personal relationship was strained, and she did not come to Pakistan in his lifetime, but only for his funeral.
Padamsee later stated that his portrayal was not historically accurate.
The Indian Princely States, of which there were several hundred, were advised by the departing British to choose whether to join Pakistan or India.
The Viceroy was also influenced by negative Muslim reaction to the constitutional report of the assembly, which envisioned broad powers for the post-independence central government.
There was unrest across India, which worsened after the Jallianwala Bagh massacre in Amritsar, in which British troops fired upon a protest meeting, killing hundreds.
Muslims were not enthusiastic about calls for democratic institutions in British India, as they constituted a quarter to a third of the population, outnumbered by the Hindus.
Jinnah's mother and first wife both died during his absence in England.
After the establishment of Pakistan, Pakistani currency notes had the image of George V printed on them.
As his health got worse, he took longer and longer rest breaks in the private wing of Government House in Karachi, where only he, Fatima and the servants were allowed.
In a journal article on Pakistan's first governor-general, historian R. J. Moore wrote that Jinnah is universally recognised as central to the creation of Pakistan.
Jinnah served as leader of the All-India Muslim League from 1913 until Pakistan's creation on 14 August 1947, and then as Pakistan's first Governor-General until his death.
The men met over six days beginning on 5 April.
In 1906, a delegation of Muslim leaders headed by the Aga Khan called on the new Viceroy of India, Lord Minto, to assure him of their loyalty and to ask for assurances that in any political reforms they would be protected from the "unsympathetic Hindu majority".
His first step towards a brighter career occurred when the acting Advocate General of Bombay, John Molesworth MacPherson, invited Jinnah to work from his chambers.
Jinnah began political life by attending the Congress's twentieth annual meeting, in Bombay in December 1904.
Jinnah politely declined the offer, stating that he planned to earn 1,500 rupees a day—a huge sum at that time—which he eventually did.
In 1927, the British Government, under Conservative Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin, undertook a decennial review of Indian policy mandated by the Government of India Act 1919.
On 4 July 1947, Liaquat asked Mountbatten on Jinnah's behalf to recommend to the British king, George VI, that Jinnah be appointed Pakistan's first governor-general.
Jinnah's legacy is Pakistan.
According to Ahmed, some books published about Jinnah outside Pakistan mention that he consumed alcohol, but this is omitted from books published inside Pakistan.
Negotiations for a settlement are not to come from our side&nbsp;... By appointing an exclusively white Commission, Secretary of State for India Lord Birkenhead has declared our unfitness for self-government."
MacDonald desired a conference of Indian and British leaders in London to discuss India's future, a course of action supported by Jinnah.
Christopher Beaumont, Radcliffe's private secretary, later wrote that Mountbatten "must take the blame—though not the sole blame—for the massacres in the Punjab in which between 500,000 to a million men, women and children perished".
Ahmed reports a 1970 Pakistani court decision stating that Jinnah's "secular Muslim faith made him neither Shia nor Sunni", and one from 1984 maintaining that "the ''Quaid'' was definitely not a Shia".
The former Quaid-i-Azam International Airport in Karachi, now called the Jinnah International Airport, is Pakistan's busiest.
