The fact that he was proud to be a black man and that he had so much talent... made some people think that he was dangerous.
Before the match, Ali mocked Patterson, who was widely known to call him by his former name Cassius Clay, as an "Uncle Tom", calling him "The Rabbit".
Liston was an intimidating personality, a dominating fighter with a criminal past and ties to the mob.
He knew Ali had nothing left; he knew it would be a horror."
Never an overpowering puncher, Ali relied early in his career on his superior hand speed, superb reflexes and constant movement, dancing and circling opponents for most of the fight, holding his hands low and lashing out with a quick, cutting left jab that he threw from unpredictable angles.
The latter film was directed by Michael Mann, with mixed reviews, the positives given to Smith's portrayal of Ali.
In the eighth round, Ali dropped an exhausted Foreman with a combination at center ring; Foreman failed to make the count.
''When We Were Kings'', a 1996 documentary about the Rumble in the Jungle, won an Academy Award, and the 2001 biopic ''Ali'' garnered an Oscar nomination for Will Smith's portrayal of the lead role.
He was eventually arrested, found guilty of draft evasion charges and stripped of his boxing titles.
The Muhammad Ali Boxing Reform Act was introduced in 1999 and passed in 2000, to protect the rights and welfare of boxers in the United States.
Ali often flaunted his movement by dancing the "Ali Shuffle", a sort of center-ring jig.
In 1977 the book was adapted into a film called ''The Greatest'', in which Ali played himself and Ernest Borgnine played Angelo Dundee.
Marciano died in a plane crash three weeks after the completion of filming, which prevented any form of feedback regarding the fight, while Ali criticized the film for being promoted as an actual fight, claiming audiences were left angered by the depicted outcome, while also claiming his predicted loss was a result of him not taking the simulation seriously, though he praised Marciano as a boxer and stated they left the filming on good terms.
In 1978, three years before Ali's permanent retirement, the Louisville Board of Aldermen in his hometown of Louisville, Kentucky, voted 6–5 to rename Walnut Street to Muhammad Ali Boulevard.
He'd be out of punching range, and as he moved into range he'd already begun to throw the punch.
It had been scheduled for Boston the previous November, but was postponed for six months due to Ali's emergency surgery for a hernia three days before.
Then there was Ali's rapid-fire jab—three to five jabs in succession rapidly fired at his opponents' eyes to create a blur in his face so he wouldn't be able to see the right hand coming behind it."
Terrell was billed as Ali's toughest opponent since Liston—unbeaten in five years and having defeated many of the boxers Ali had faced.
It has since been speculated that Liston dropped to the ground purposely.
In 1985, he visited Israel to request the release of Muslim prisoners at Atlit detainee camp, which Israel declined.
Ali successfully secured the release of the hostages, in exchange for promising Hussein that he'd bring America "an honest account" of Iraq.
Frazier and his camp always considered Ali's words cruel and unfair, far beyond what was necessary to sell tickets.
Ali had been placed in a fantasy fight with several boxers, and was unhappy regarding the outcome of his quarter final fantasy bout with Jim Jeffries in which he was predicted to have lost.
In 1998, Ali began working with actor Michael J Fox, who has Parkinson's disease, to raise awareness and fund research for a cure.
Ali's funeral was preplanned by himself and others beginning years prior to his actual death.
I got nothing back in response.
In November 2005, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President George W. Bush, followed by the Otto Hahn Peace Medal in Gold of the UN Association of Germany (DGVN) in Berlin for his work with the U.S. civil rights movement and the United Nations (December 17, 2005).
As a result, he did not fight from March 1967 to October 1970—from ages 25 to almost 29—as his case worked its way through the appeals process before his conviction was overturned in 1971.
By early 1966, the army lowered its standards to permit soldiers above the 15th percentile and Ali was again classified as 1-A.
Ali has been cited as an inspiration by rappers such as LL Cool J, Public Enemy's Chuck D, Jay-Z, Eminem, Sean Combs, Slick Rick, Nas and MC Lyte.
In the first rounds, Ali was aggressive, moving and exchanging blows with Frazier.
In February 1978, Ali faced Leon Spinks at the Hilton Hotel in Las Vegas.
In 1984, Ali was diagnosed with Parkinson's syndrome, which his doctors attributed to boxing-related brain injuries.
From early in his career, Ali was known as an inspiring, controversial, and polarizing figure both inside and outside the ring.
We don't take part in Christian wars or wars of any unbelievers."
He called Jones "an ugly little man" and Cooper a "bum".
Madison Square Garden was "too small for me".
Terrell was big, strong and had a three-inch reach advantage over Ali.
Ali settled for a $10,000 payoff from Woroner in exchange for his participation in a filmed version of a fantasy fight with boxing legend Rocky Marciano, who had retired 13 years earlier while World Heavyweight Champion and finished his career undefeated at 49–0.
He was one of only three boxers to be named "Sportsman of the Year" by ''Sports Illustrated''.
An ailing Ali said afterwards that the fight "was the closest thing to dying that I know", and, when later asked if he had viewed the fight on videotape, reportedly said, "Why would I want to go back and see Hell?"
Floyd Patterson said, "It's very hard to hit a moving target, and (Ali) moved all the time, with such grace, three minutes of every round for fifteen rounds.
After retiring from boxing in 1981, Ali devoted his life to religious and charitable work.
On January 19, 1981, in Los Angeles, Ali talked a suicidal man down from jumping off a ninth-floor ledge, an event that made national news.
Ali's early style was so unusual that he was initially discounted because he reminded boxing writers of a lightweight, and it was assumed he would be vulnerable to big hitters like Sonny Liston.
''The Trials of Muhammad Ali'', a documentary directed by Bill Siegel that focuses on Ali's refusal of the draft during the Vietnam War, opened in Manhattan on August 23, 2013.
His retirement was short-lived, however; Ali announced his comeback to face Larry Holmes for the WBC belt in an attempt to win the heavyweight championship an unprecedented fourth time.
The match inspired Inoki's students Masakatsu Funaki and Minoru Suzuki to found Pancrase in 1993, which in turn inspired the foundation of Pride Fighting Championships in 1997.
He told the press, "I've done something new for this fight.
Clay made his professional debut on October 29, 1960, winning a six-round decision over Tunney Hunsaker.
He went on another Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1988.
Ali and then-WBA heavyweight champion boxer Ernie Terrell had agreed to meet for a bout in Chicago on March 29, 1966 (the WBA, one of two boxing associations, had stripped Ali of his title following his joining the Nation of Islam).
A month earlier, a victory in federal court forced the New York State Boxing Commission to reinstate Ali's license.
It was a bout that would inspire Sylvester Stallone to create the acclaimed film, ''Rocky''.
The Nation of Islam was widely viewed by whites and even some African Americans as a black separatist "hate religion" with a propensity toward violence; Ali had few qualms about using his influential voice to speak Nation of Islam doctrine.
Clay turned the pre-fight weigh-in into a circus, shouting at Liston that "someone is going to die at ringside tonight".
He fought Oscar Bonavena at Madison Square Garden in December, an uninspired performance that ended in a dramatic technical knockout of Bonavena in the 15th round.
In relation to integration, he said: "We who follow the teachings of Elijah Muhammad don't want to be forced to integrate.
On September 1, 2009, Ali visited Ennis, County Clare, Ireland, the home of his great-grandfather, Abe Grady, who emigrated to the U.S. in the 1860s, eventually settling in Kentucky.
His star is the only one to be mounted on a vertical surface, out of deference to his request that his name not be walked upon.
Ali was a resident of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, in the early 1970s.
Kiiursti Mensah-Ali claims to be Ali's biological daughter with Barbara Mensah, with whom he had a 20-year relationship, citing photographs and a paternity test conducted in 1988.
and LL Cool J, and his "outsized ego foreshadowed the vainglorious excesses of Kanye West, while his Afrocentric consciousness and cutting honesty pointed forward to modern bards like Rakim, Nas, Jay-Z, and Kendrick Lamar."
''Ring Magazine'', a prominent boxing magazine, named him number 1 in a 1998 ranking of greatest heavyweights from all eras.
Ali said that he first heard of the Nation of Islam when he was fighting in the Golden Gloves tournament in Chicago in 1959, and attended his first Nation of Islam meeting in 1961.
Ali's trainer Angelo Dundee finally stopped the fight in the eleventh round, the only fight Ali lost by knockout.
But get used to me.
On June 5, 2007, he received an honorary doctorate of humanities at Princeton University's 260th graduation ceremony.
His provocative and outlandish behavior in the ring was inspired by professional wrestler "Gorgeous George" Wagner.
As public opinion began turning against the war and the Civil Rights Movement continued to gather momentum, Ali became a popular speaker at colleges and universities across the country, rare if not unprecedented for a boxer.
Ali's example inspired countless black Americans and others.
His mother recalled one occasion where he was denied a drink of water at a store—"They wouldn't give him one because of his color.
Named Sports Personality of the Century in a BBC poll, he received more votes than the other contenders (which included Pelé, Jesse Owens and Jack Nicklaus) combined.
I wrote to Angelo Dundee, Ali's trainer, his wife and Ali himself.
The film depicted that had the fight been actual, Marciano defeated Ali in the 13th round.
At a time when most fighters let their managers do the talking, Ali thrived in—and indeed craved—the spotlight, where he was often provocative and outlandish.
He had gone on the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1972, which inspired Ali in a similar manner to Malcolm X, meeting people of different colors from all over the world giving him a different outlook and greater spiritual awareness.
One was a jab that Ali called the 'snake lick', like cobra striking that comes from the floor almost, really low down.
After Ali's death, ''The New York Times'' declared it his least memorable fight.
Clay was first directed toward boxing by Louisville police officer and boxing coach Joe E. Martin, who encountered the 12-year-old fuming over a thief taking his bicycle.
The fight with Doug Jones on March 13, 1963, was Clay's toughest fight during this stretch.
On November 19, 1986, Ali married Yolanda ("Lonnie") Williams.
In 1971, his Fight of the Century with Frazier provided cover for an activist group, the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI, to successfully pull off a burglary at an FBI office in Pennsylvania, which exposed the COINTELPRO operations that included illegal spying on activists involved with the civil rights and anti-war movements.
''The New York Times'' columnist William Rhoden wrote, "Ali's actions changed my standard of what constituted an athlete's greatness.
Ali then lived in Scottsdale, Arizona, with Lonnie.
Ali published an oral history, ''Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times'' by Thomas Hauser, in 1991.
It was around this time that Ali started struggling with vocal stutters and trembling hands.
He threw his punches when he was in motion.
At the time of their marriage, they had a baby girl, Hana, and Veronica was pregnant with their second child.
Williams had once been considered among the hardest punchers in the heavyweight division, but in 1964 he had been shot at point-blank range by a Texas policeman, resulting in the loss of one kidney and  of his small intestine.
Ali defended his title against former heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson on November 22, 1965.
Ali began training at a farm near Reading, Pennsylvania, in 1971 and, finding the country setting to his liking, sought to develop a real training camp in the countryside.
This classification meant he was now eligible for the draft and induction into the U.S. Army at a time when the U.S. was involved in the Vietnam War, a war which put him further at odds with the white establishment.
When notified of this status, Ali declared that he would refuse to serve in the army and publicly considered himself a conscientious objector.
He throws punches so easily that you don't realize how much they hurt you until it's too late."
Ali later announced: "Cassius Clay is my slave name."
The Holmes fight is said to have contributed to Ali's Parkinson's syndrome.
The bout drew a record-breaking indoor crowd of 35,460 people.
He remains the only three-time lineal heavyweight champion; he won the title in 1964, 1974, and 1978.
Wepner, a journeyman known as "The Bayonne Bleeder", stunned Ali with a knockdown in the ninth round; Ali would later say he tripped on Wepner's foot.
After a Court of Appeals upheld the conviction, the case went to the U.S. Supreme Court.
On the set of ''Freedom Road'' Ali met Canadian singer-songwriter Michel (also known as Robert Williams, a co-founder of The Kindness Offensive), and subsequently helped create Michel's album entitled ''The First Flight of the Gizzelda Dragon'' and an unaired television special featuring them both.
"Frazier is too dumb to be champ."
Ali and Frazier's first fight, held at the Garden on March 8, 1971, was nicknamed the "Fight of the Century", due to the tremendous excitement surrounding a bout between two undefeated fighters, each with a legitimate claim as heavyweight champions.
Despite this, Clay taunted Liston during the pre-fight buildup, dubbing him "the big ugly bear".
The pallbearers included Will Smith, Lennox Lewis and Mike Tyson, with honorary pallbearers including George Chuvalo, Larry Holmes and George Foreman.
From then until the end of 1963, Clay amassed a record of 19–0 with 15 wins by knockout.
Ali later said that turning his back on Malcolm was one of the mistakes he regretted most in his life.
Ali also contributed an on-camera segment to the ''America: A Tribute to Heroes'' benefit concert.
On several occasions in the early rounds he played to the crowd and shook his head "no" after he was hit.
Ali then agreed to a third match with Joe Frazier in Manila.
Giachetti called the fight "awful ... the worst sports event I ever had to cover".
Writer Jerry Izenberg once noted that, "the Nation became Ali's family and Elijah Muhammad became his father.
Because of Ali's apparent intent to prolong the fight to inflict maximum punishment, critics described the bout as "one of the ugliest boxing fights".
She said he accepted responsibility and took care of her, but all contacts with him were cut off after he married his fourth wife Lonnie.
A rematch followed shortly thereafter in New Orleans, which broke attendance records.
In 1975, Ali began an affair with Veronica Porché, an actress and model.
The entire fight lasted less than two minutes.
After Ali's title defense against Zora Folley on March 22, he was stripped of his title due to his refusal to be drafted to army service.
The Monday night fight lived up to its billing.
Referee Tony Perez mistakenly thought he heard the bell ending the round and stepped between the two fighters as Ali was pressing his attack, giving Frazier time to recover.
Ali sparred less than two dozen rounds in preparation for the fight, and was seriously out of shape by the opening bell.
That really affected him."
Based on Clay's uninspired performance against Jones and Cooper in his previous two fights, and Liston's destruction of former heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson in two first-round knock outs, Clay was a 7–1 underdog.
"Liston even smells like a bear", Clay said.
Proposed motivations include threats on his life from the Nation of Islam, that he had bet against himself and that he "took a dive" to pay off debts.
He later received a second Grammy nomination, for "Best Recording for Children", with his 1976 spoken word novelty record, ''The Adventures of Ali and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay''.
He paid a bond and remained free while the verdict was being appealed.
Adding to the atmosphere were the considerable pre-fight theatrics and name calling.
In 1993, the Associated Press reported that Ali was tied with Babe Ruth as the most recognized athlete, out of over 800 dead or living athletes, in America.
It has been speculated that the problem was due to ointment used to seal Liston's cuts, perhaps deliberately applied by his corner to his gloves.
He was embarrassed to get in the ring with Alex Miteff.
Ali's friendship with Malcolm X ended as Malcolm split with the Nation of Islam a couple of weeks after Ali joined, and Ali remained with the Nation of Islam.
Veteran boxing writer John Condon called it "the greatest event I've ever worked on in my life".
Prior to making the film, Smith rejected the role until Ali requested that he accept it.
He is the only boxer to be named ''The Ring'' magazine Fighter of the Year six times.
After the fight he cited Frazier as "the greatest fighter of all times next to me".
I done wrestled with an alligator, I done tussled with a whale; handcuffed lightning, thrown thunder in jail; only last week, I murdered a rock, injured a stone, hospitalized a brick; I'm so mean I make medicine sick."
Boxing writer Richie Giachetti said, "Larry didn't want to fight Ali.
Though his condition was initially described as "fair", it worsened and he died the following day, at the age of 74, from septic shock.
Ali's resistance to the draft was covered in the 2013 documentary ''The Trials of Muhammad Ali''.
He was helped to his feet by his wife Lonnie to stand before the flag due to his Parkinson's rendering him unable to carry it into the stadium.
Ali won a unanimous 15-round decision.
On this site, Ali carved out what was to become his training camp, the camp where he lived and trained for all the many fights he had from 1972 on to the end of his career in the 1980s.
In 1978, following his defeat to Spinks and before winning the rematch, Ali visited Bangladesh and received honorary citizenship there.
Shortly afterwards, Elijah Muhammad recorded a statement that Clay would be renamed Muhammad (one who is worthy of praise) Ali (Ali is the most important figure after Muhammad in Shia view and fourth rightly guided caliph in Sunni view).
Ali won a unanimous decision in an uninspiring fight, making him the first heavyweight champion to win the belt three times.
He told interviewer David Frost, "If you think the world was surprised when Nixon resigned, wait 'til I whup Foreman's behind!"
In the years between the Appellate Court decision and the Supreme Court verdict, Ali remained free.
Disciplined, world-class boxers chased Ali and threw themselves off balance attempting to hit him because he seemed to be an open target, only missing and leaving themselves exposed to Ali's counter punches, usually a chopping right.
Though unconfirmed, Bert Sugar claimed that two of Liston's opponents also complained about their eyes "burning".
BET played their documentary ''Muhammad Ali: Made In Miami''.
Ali's grave is marked with a simple granite marker that bears only his name.
Clay then changed his legal name from Cassius Clay, which he called his "slave name", to Muhammad Ali, and gave a message of racial pride for African Americans and resistance to white domination during the 1960s Civil Rights Movement.
Although the seven foot two inch tall Chamberlain had formidable physical advantages over Ali, weighing 60pounds more and able to reach 14inches further, Ali was able to intimidate Chamberlain into calling off the bout by taunting him with calls of "Timber!"
Ali was once again hospitalized on January 15, 2015, for a urinary tract infection after being found unresponsive at a guest house in Scottsdale, Arizona.
Cassius Jr. attended Central High School in Louisville.
Following the win, a triumphant Clay rushed to the edge of the ring and, pointing to the ringside press, shouted: "Eat your words!"
Clay also beat his former trainer and veteran boxer Archie Moore in a 1962 match.
On January 8, 2001, Muhammad Ali was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Bill Clinton.
Cassius Clay was born and raised in Louisville, Kentucky, and began training as an amateur boxer when he was 12 years old.
Jones staggered Clay in the first round, and the unanimous decision for Clay was greeted by boos and a rain of debris thrown into the ring (watching on closed-circuit TV, heavyweight champ Sonny Liston quipped that if he fought Clay he might get locked up for murder).
A public memorial service for Ali at downtown Louisville's KFC Yum!
Ali seemed intent on humiliating Terrell.
At the opening bell, Liston rushed at Clay, seemingly angry and looking for a quick knockout, but Clay's superior speed and mobility enabled him to elude Liston, making the champion miss and look awkward.
In 2013, ''The Guardian'' said Ali exemplified boxing's "golden age of trash talking".
"After I beat him I'm going to donate him to the zoo."
Politicians such as Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, Bill Clinton, Donald Trump, David Cameron and more paid tribute to Ali.
As a "rhyming trickster", he was noted for his "funky delivery", "boasts", "comical trash talk", and "endless quotables".
Using a synchronizer, Jimmy Jacobs, who co-managed Mike Tyson, measured young Ali's punching speed versus Sugar Ray Robinson, a welter/middleweight, often considered the best pound-for-pound fighter in history.
I shook up the world.
As a musician, Ali recorded two spoken word albums and a rhythm and blues song, and received two Grammy Award nominations.
Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. () was born on January 17, 1942, in Louisville, Kentucky.
Ali also received numerous tributes from the world of sports including Michael Jordan, Tiger Woods, Floyd Mayweather, Mike Tyson, the Miami Marlins, LeBron James, Steph Curry and more.
At the end of round four, as Clay returned to his corner, he began experiencing blinding pain in his eyes and asked his trainer Angelo Dundee to cut off his gloves.
Around this time, Clay sought longtime idol Sugar Ray Robinson to be his manager, but was rebuffed.
He successfully appealed in the U.S. Supreme Court, which overturned his conviction in 1971, by which time he had not fought for nearly four years—losing a period of peak performance as an athlete.
Many of those in attendance thought Clay's behavior stemmed from fear, and some commentators wondered if he would show up for the bout.
Ali adopted the latter practice from "Gorgeous" George Wagner, a professional wrestling champion who drew thousands of fans to his matches as "the man you love to hate".
At the time, Spinks had only seven professional fights to his credit, and had recently fought a draw with journeyman Scott LeDoux.
He was systematically denied a boxing license in every state and stripped of his passport.
The fight was stopped when Frazier's trainer, Eddie Futch, refused to allow Frazier to answer the bell for the 15th and final round, despite Frazier's protests.
The outcome of the fight was a major upset.
The number-two and -three heavyweight contenders respectively, Clay and Jones fought on Jones' home turf at New York's Madison Square Garden.
Nicknamed "The Greatest", he was involved in several historic boxing matches.
Thomas Hauser's biography of Ali stated that Ali was refused service at the diner but that he lost his medal a year after he won it.
Clay's amateur record was 100 wins with five losses.
Then, beginning in the second round—and to the consternation of his corner—Ali retreated to the ropes and invited Foreman to hit him while covering up, clinching and counter-punching, all while verbally taunting Foreman.
During the lead up to the bout, Terrell repeatedly called Ali "Clay", much to Ali's annoyance (Ali called Cassius Clay his "slave name").
Ali was hospitalized in Scottsdale on June 2, 2016, with a respiratory illness.
On November 19, 2005 (Ali's 19th wedding anniversary), the $60million non-profit Muhammad Ali Center opened in downtown Louisville.
The fight took place on October 2, 1980, in Las Vegas Valley, with Holmes easily dominating Ali, who was weakened from thyroid medication he had taken to lose weight.
Ali would not be able to obtain a license to box in any state for over three years.
Slow motion replays show that this was precisely the way Sonny Liston was hit and apparently knocked out by Ali in their second fight.
As a result, he was arrested.
The study found that over 97% of Americans over 12 years of age identified both Ali and Ruth.
Nevertheless, Ali lost by unanimous decision, his first professional defeat.
But in a little while I found myself getting dizzier and dizzier every time he hit me.
(He was quoted as saying, "I said I was the greatest, not the smartest!")
He said Frazier was "too dumb to be champion", that he would whip Liston "like his Daddy did", that Terrell was an "Uncle Tom" for refusing to call Ali by his name and continuing to call him Cassius Clay, and that Patterson was a "rabbit".
