The ''Korea Times'' suggested in 2009 that South Korea was likely to become a multicultural society.
The same year, Stephen Castles of the International Migration Institute argued:
Some nation-states pursued violent policies of cultural assimilation and even ethnic cleansing.
Among its several ethnic groups, the Philippines has 10 major distinct groups mainly the Bicolano, Ibanag, Ilocano, Kapampangan, Moro, Pangasinan, Sambal, Tagalog and Visayan.
In many ways, this homogeneity is one of Korea’s greatest strengths.
"many, yet one") enshrined in Pancasila national ideology, articulates the diversity that shapes the country.
As such change takes place in such short period of time, it can be understood that many conflicts arise among different groups of people; the immigrants, government, and the rest of Korean society.
Case studies of the United States, Africa and South-East Asia find that multi-ethnic societies are less charitable and less able to cooperate to develop public infrastructure.
In 2010, an opinion editorial written by Peter Underwood for the ''JoongAng Ilbo'' stated: "Media in South Korea is abuzz with the new era of multiculturalism.
A similar policy exists in politics as all Group Representation Constituencies are required to field at least one candidate from an ethnic minority.
... Having a 2 percent foreign population unquestionably causes ripples, but having one million temporary foreign residents does not make Korea a multicultural society.
Following the murders of Pim Fortuyn (in 2002) and Theo van Gogh (in 2004) there was increased political debate on the role of multiculturalism in the Netherlands.
Until the riots 1969, co-existence between the three ethnicities (and other minor groups) was largely peaceful, although the three main racial groups for the most part lived in separate communities - the Malays in the villages, the Chinese in the urban areas, and the Indians in the towns and plantation.
It was quickly adopted as official policy by most member-states of the European Union.
Another big changing factor is that Korea already has multi-ethnic, multi-cultural families appearing in great numbers, as one in every ten marriage is between a South Korean and a foreigner, and in the rural side this portion is greater.
Canadian students are taught about privilege in regards to race, gender, class, sexual orientation, disability and religion.
Mexico has historically always been a multicultural country, with people of ethnic groups including those of indigenous background, various European backgrounds, Africans, and a small Asian community.
The Philippines ranks 8th among 240 countries in terms of ethnic diversity.
Moscow beggars receive more gifts from fellow ethnics than from other ethnies .
In 1995, Kazakhstan created the Assembly of People of Kazakhstan, an advisory body designed to represent the country's ethnic minorities.
The Republic of India's state boundaries are largely drawn based on linguistic groups; this decision led to the preservation and continuation of local ethno-linguistic sub-cultures, except for the Hindi ''sprachraum'' which is itself divided into many states.
:''"If you stay too long, Koreans become uncomfortable with you.
The contact hypothesis in sociology is a well documented phenomenon in which cooperative interactions with those from a different group than one's own reduce prejudice and inter-group hostility.
The culture of India has been shaped by its long history, unique geography and diverse demography.
Studies estimated 46.3 million Americans ages 14 to 24 to be the most diverse generation in American society.
Other prominent smaller groups include Peranakans and Eurasians.
Unity, under this ideology, is seen as an essential feature of the nation and the nation-state—unity of descent, unity of culture, unity of language, and often unity of religion.
In the Western English-speaking countries, multiculturalism as an official national policy started in Canada in 1971, followed by Australia in 1973 where it is maintained today.
Multiculturalism is reflected in the law through the Canadian Multiculturalism Act and section 27 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
At the moment of registration it had 33 members, at present, according to the organization's website, 68,000 members plus 24,000 in the organization's youth wing .
Dick Lamm, former three-term Democratic governor of the US state of Colorado, wrote in his essay "I have a plan to destroy America":
Multiculturalism (a Just Society) was adopted as the official policy of the Canadian government during the premiership of Pierre Elliott Trudeau in the 1970s and 1980s.
Korea is faced by a different decision today: what type of multicultural society does it want to be?"''
Malaysia is a multiethnic country, with Malays making up the majority, close to 58% of the population.
Canadian society is often depicted as being "very progressive, diverse, and multicultural".
As this history shows, multiculturalism in Western countries was seen to combat racism, to protect minority communities of all types, and to undo policies that had prevented minorities from having full access to the opportunities for freedom and equality promised by the liberalism that has been the hallmark of Western societies since the Age of Enlightenment.
The first focuses on interaction and communication between different cultures; this approach is also often known as interculturalism.
Wikimedia Foundation suggests that "diversity of perspectives is crucial to increasing the quality of the free knowledge resources that their movement provides.".
The UAE hosts expatriate workers from 200 countries, with a majority coming from the Indian subcontinent.
Indonesia's national motto, ''Bhinneka Tunggal Ika'' ("Unity in Diversity" lit.
However, these efforts have failed resulting to the annexation of Islamic regions particularly the Sultanate of Sulu to the Philippines.
Tariq Modood argues that in the early years of the 21st century, multiculturalism "is most timely and necessary, and ... we need more not less", since it is "the form of integration" that (1) best fits the ideal of egalitarianism, (2) has "the best chance of succeeding" in the "post-9/11, post 7/7" world, and (3) has remained "moderate and pragmatic".
As a philosophy, multiculturalism began as part of the pragmatism movement at the end of the nineteenth century in Europe and the United States, then as political and cultural pluralism at the turn of the twentieth.
On January 4, 1990 the activists of the movement registered an organization with the legal name «Movement for Rights and Freedom» (MRF) (in Bulgarian: Движение за права и свободи: in Turkish: Hak ve Özgürlükler Hareketi) in the Bulgarian city of Varna.
According to the European Commission, it is important, both at EU and national level, to review and adapt existing policies.
The Indian caste system describes the social stratification and social restrictions in the Indian subcontinent, in which social classes are defined by thousands of endogamous hereditary groups, often termed ''jātis'' or castes.
Following a public debate, a 2006 EU policy paper identified five key policy responses to manage demographic change, among them receiving and integrating migrants into Europe.
Multiculturalism has been described as a "salad bowl" and "cultural mosaic".
These pluralist policies have come under pressure from racialist Malay parties, who oppose perceived subversion of Malay rights.
The Philippine government has various programs supporting and preserving the nation's ethnic diversity.
In 2005, former Japanese Prime Minister and current Japanese Deputy Prime Minister Taro Aso described Japan as a "one civilization, one language, one culture and one race" nation.
Due to migration within Indonesia (as part of government transmigration programs or otherwise), there are significant populations of ethnic groups who reside outside of their traditional regions.
In New Zealand (Aotearoa), which is officially bi-cultural, multiculturalism has been seen as a threat to the Maori, and possibly an attempt by the New Zealand Government to undermine Maori demands for self determination.
This can happen when a jurisdiction is created or expanded by amalgamating areas with two or more different cultures (e.g.
English was established as the medium of instruction in schools during the 1960s and 1970s and is the language of trade and government while the other three languages are taught as second languages ("mother tongues").
For example, the degree of ethnic homogeneity correlates with the government's share of gross domestic product as well as the average wealth of citizens.
This country and this people seem to have been made for each other, and it appears as if it was the design of Providence, that an inheritance so proper and convenient for a band of brethren, united to each other by the strongest ties, should never be split into a number of unsocial, jealous, and alien sovereignties."
About 24.6% of the population are Malaysians of Chinese descent.
Recognition in the context of multicultural education is a demand not just for recognition of aspects of a group's actual culture but also for the history of group subordination and its entire experience.
Other countries have instituted policies which encourage cultural separation.
Jakarta in particular, has almost all of Indonesian ethnic groups represented.
In 2012 Bulgarian Turks were represented at every level of government: local, with MRF having mayors in 35 municipalities, at parliamentary level with MRF having 38 deputies (14% of the votes in Parliamentary elections for 2009-13) and at executive level, where there is one Turkish minister, Vezhdi Rashidov.
Because of urbanization, major Indonesian cities such as Greater Jakarta, Surabaya, Bandung, Palembang, Medan and Makassar has attracted large numbers of Indonesians from various ethnics, cultural and religious background.
Further, India does not have any national language.
The absorption of the stream of immigrants became, in itself, a prominent feature of America's national myth.
According to the ''Dongponews'', an online media that connects migrants and immigrants of South Korea, the number of foreigners residing in South Korea reached 1.43 million by 2012, and is likely to increase more and more, reaching to the scale that cannot be undermined.
A common aspect of many policies following the second approach is that they avoid presenting any specific ethnic, religious, or cultural community values as central.
The nation-state constitutes a culturally homogeneous society, although some national movements recognized regional differences.
Howard had long been a critic of multiculturalism, releasing his One Australia policy in the late 1980s.
It has a multi-ethnic and multi-cultural identity; there are more than 26 ethnic groups in the province, which has six official languages.
Saint Patrick's Day), supporting all kinds of art or cultural expression from ethnic groups, as well as their diffusion through an important multicultural presence in the media; for instance it is not uncommon to find newspapers or radio programs in English, German, Italian or French in Argentina.
This policy subsequently gave way to more assimilationist policies in the 1990s.
Such as the already mentioned Ainu and Ryukyuan people.
The Javanese are the largest ethnic group in Indonesia who make up nearly 42% of the total population.
The Malay Peninsula has a long history of international trade contacts, influencing its ethnic and religious composition.
Soon after the fourth Indonesian President, Abdurrahman Wahid came into power in 1999, he quickly abolished some of the discriminatory laws in efforts to promote acceptance and to improve inter-racial relationships, such as abolishing the ban on Chinese culture and allowed Chinese traditions to be practised freely.
Where cultural unity was insufficient, it was encouraged and enforced by the state.
The Broadcasting Act of 1991 asserts the Canadian broadcasting system should reflect the diversity of cultures in the country.
:''"Korea no longer has to decide whether it wants to become a multicultural society.
Although Arabic is the official language of the United Arab Emirates, English, Malayalam, Hindi, Urdu, Tagalog, Bengali, Indonesian, Persian and many other languages are widely spoken and understood, particularly in the main cities of Dubai and Abu Dhabi.
One potential reason that Canadians have more successfully adopted multiculturalism is because it is taught in their public schools.
Hindi (spoken in the form of Hindustani) is the official federal language, English has the federal status of associate/subsidiary official language and each state has its own state official language (in the Hindi ''sprachraum'', this reduces to bilingualism).
Contact between people of different cultures in Australia has been characterised by tolerance and engagement, but have also occasionally resulted in conflict and rifts.
Chinese Indonesians were forced to adopt Indonesian-sounding names, and the use of Chinese culture and language was banned.
Despite the fact that multiculturalism has mainly been used as a term to define disadvantaged groups, including African Americans, members of the LGBT community, and the disabled, many theorists tend to focus their arguments on immigrants who are ethnic and religious minorities, minority nations, and indigenous peoples.
Multiculturalism that promotes maintaining the distinctiveness of multiple cultures is often contrasted to other settlement policies such as social integration, cultural assimilation and racial segregation.
This has added to a growing debate within Germany on the levels of immigration, its effect on Germany and the degree to which Muslim immigrants have integrated into German society.
The expansion of Javanese and their influence throughout Indonesia has raised the issue of Javanization, although Minangkabau, Malay, Madurese, Bugis and Makassar people, as a result of their ''merantau'' (migrating) culture are also quite widely distributed throughout Indonesian archipelago, while Chinese Indonesians can be found in most of urban areas.
Though 97% of Argentina's population self-identify as of European descent to this day a high level of multiculturalism remains a feature of Argentina's culture, allowing foreign festivals and holidays (e.g.
* Native East Malaysians, namely Bajau, Bruneian, Bidayuh, Dusun, Iban, Kadazan, Kedayan, Melanau, Orang Ulu, Sarawakian Malays, etc.
It made that decision years ago – perhaps unconsciously – when it decided to be a full participant in the emerging global economy.
He explained that the experience of Canadian governance - its commitment to pluralism and its support for the rich multicultural diversity of its peoples - is something that must be shared and would be of benefit to all societies in other parts of the world.
* Other native tribes of Peninsular Malaysia, such as the Orang Asli and Siamese people, and
They chose to juxtapose Abraham Lincoln's inaugural address with that of Confederate president Jefferson Davis; they debated removing Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall and labor-leader Cesar Chavez and rejected calls to include more Hispanic figures, in spite of the high Hispanic population in the state.
The Philippines also has several aboriginal stocks such as the Badjao, Igorot, Lumad, Mangyan and Negrito.
The Chinese Indonesians were treated as the scapegoat of 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, and it was the result of ongoing discrimination and segregation policy enforced during Suharto's New Order regime.
However, there are "International Society" NPOs funded by local governments throughout Japan.
Canadian multiculturalism is looked upon with admiration outside the country, resulting in the Canadian public dismissing most critics of the concept.
Foreigners make up about 85% of the population.
Multiculturalism in Canada is often cited as one of Canada's significant accomplishments, and a key distinguishing element of Canadian identity.
Government policies have also changed very recently; a lot of welfare programs and extracurricular activities are launched under the name of "multicultural policy."
'''Multiculturalism''' describes the existence, acceptance, and/or promotion of multiple cultural traditions within a single jurisdiction, usually considered in terms of the culture associated with an aboriginal ethnic group and foreigner ethnic groups.
Its largest ethnic minorities, Turks and Roma, enjoy wide political representation.
India's languages, religions, dance, music, architecture and customs differ from place to place within the country, but nevertheless possess a commonality.
However, the word "multiculturalism" is increasingly heard in South Korea.
In the 19th century, the ideology of nationalism transformed the way Europeans thought about the state.
Historically, support for modern multiculturalism stems from the changes in Western societies after World War II, in what Susanne Wessendorf calls the "human rights revolution", in which the horrors of institutionalized racism and ethnic cleansing became almost impossible to ignore in the wake of the Holocaust; with the collapse of the European colonial system, as colonized nations in Africa and Asia successfully fought for their independence and pointed out the discriminatory underpinnings of the colonial system; and, in the United States in particular, with the rise of the Civil Rights Movement, which criticized ideals of assimilation that often led to prejudices against those who did not act according to Anglo-American standards and which led to the development of academic ethnic studies programs as a way to counteract the neglect of contributions by racial minorities in classrooms.
Besides English, Singapore recognizes three other languages - Malay, Mandarin Chinese and Tamil.
Rather, it was found that promoting diversity actually help in advancing disadvantaged students.
The Canadian government has often been described as the instigator of multicultural ideology because of its public emphasis on the social importance of immigration.
There are also more than 700 living languages spoken in Indonesia and although predominantly Muslim the country also has large Christian and Hindu populations.
The White Australia Policy was quietly dismantled after World War II by various changes to immigration policy, although the official policy of multiculturalism was not formally introduced until 1972.
Balibar characterizes criticisms of multiculturalism as "differentialist racism", which he describes as a covert form of racism that does not purport ethnic superiority as much as it asserts stereotypes of perceived "incompatibility of life-styles and traditions".
Cultural isolation can protect the uniqueness of the local culture of a nation or area and also contribute to global cultural diversity.
Linguistically, the two main language families in India are Indo-Aryan (a branch of Indo-European) and Dravidian.
Philosophers, psychologists and historians and early sociologists such as Charles Sanders Peirce, William James, George Santayana, Horace Kallen, John Dewey, W. E. B.
Many nation-states in Africa, Asia, and the Americas are culturally diverse, and are 'multicultural' in a descriptive sense.
The language itself was often standardized by a linguistic academy, and regional languages were ignored or suppressed.
He surveyed 26,200 people in 40 American communities, finding that when the data were adjusted for class, income and other factors, the more racially diverse a community is, the greater the loss of trust.
The policies include:
There are over 300 ethnic groups in Indonesia.
Continuous mass immigration was a feature of the United States economy and society since the first half of the 19th century.
*introduction of an official national history, such as the national canon defined for the Netherlands by the van Oostrom Commission, and promotion of that history (e.g., by exhibitions about national heroes)
He argued, however, that "the current discourses and concerns on multiculturalism in South Korea" lacked "the constructive and analytical concepts for transforming a society".
The contract as reflected in the 1957 Malayan Constitution and the 1963 Malaysian Constitution states that the immigrant groups are granted citizenship, and Malays' special rights are guaranteed.
With more than one million foreigners in South Korea, 2 percent of the population comes from other cultures."
* Non-native tribes of Peninsular Malaysia such as the Chettiars, the Peranakan and the Portuguese.
A recent multi-city study of municipal spending on public goods in the United States found that ethnically or racially diverse cities spend a smaller portion of their budgets and less per capita on public services than do the more homogeneous cities.
Shared values create harmony.
*tests designed to elicit "unacceptable" values.
The second centers on diversity and cultural uniqueness which can sometimes result in intercultural competition over jobs among other things and may lead to ethnic conflict.
Instead, he argues that multiculturalism is in fact "not about minorities" but "is about the proper terms of relationship between different cultural communities", which means that the standards by which the communities resolve their differences, e.g., "the principles of justice" must not come from only one of the cultures but must come "through an open and equal dialogue between them."
Preceding independence of the Federation of Malaya, a social contract was negotiated as the basis of a new society.
Multiculturalism can refer to a demographic fact, a particular set of philosophical ideas, or a specific orientation by government or institutions toward a diverse population.
This is different than multiculturalism as defined above, which does not include complete assimilation and integration.
In June 2011 the First Rutte cabinet said the Netherlands would turn away from multiculturalism: "Dutch culture, norms and values must be dominant" Minister Donner said.
The European Union is facing unprecedented demographic changes (an ageing population, low birth rates, changing family structures and migration).
Multicultural ideologies and policies vary widely, ranging from the advocacy of equal respect to the various cultures in a society, to a policy of promoting the maintenance of cultural diversity, to policies in which people of various ethnic and religious groups are addressed by the authorities as defined by the group to which they belong.
The 19th-century nation-states developed an array of policies—the most important was compulsory primary education in the national language.
The government then embraced a policy of community cohesion instead.
In Serbia there are 19 officially recognised ethnical groups with a status of national minorities.
The policies adopted by these states often have parallels with multicultural-ist policies in the Western world, but the historical background is different, and the goal may be a mono-cultural or mono-ethnic nation-building - for instance in the Malaysian government's attempt to create a 'Malaysian race' by 2020.
Two years later President Megawati Sukarnoputri declared that the Chinese New Year ('''') would be marked as a national holiday from 2003.
In some, communalism is a major political issue.
The culture of India is an amalgamation of these diverse sub-cultures spread all over the Indian subcontinent and traditions that are several millennia old.
India has the world's largest population of some non-Indian origin religions, such as Bahá'í Faith and Zoroastrianism.
Multiculturalism has been official policy in several Western nations since the 1970s, for reasons that varied from country to country, including the fact that many of the great cities of the Western world are increasingly made of a mosaic of cultures.
This is often referred to the Bumiputra policy.
Radio Television of Vojvodina broadcasts program in 10 local languages.
Besides being a multilingual country, Singapore also acknowledges festivals celebrated by the three main ethnic communities.
It is closely associated with "identity politics," "the politics of difference," and "the politics of recognition."
An Americanized (and often stereotypical) version of the original nation's cuisine, and its holidays, survived.
Multiculturalism will introduce contrasting views and challenge existing assumptions.
Consequently, within the Balkan region Bulgaria has become an example for multiculturalism in terms of variety of religions, artistic creativity and ethnicity.
... Koreans are immersed in their culture and are thus blind to its characteristics and quirks.
Two different and seemingly inconsistent strategies have developed through different government policies and strategies.
The Suharto ''Orde Baru'' or New Order adopted a forced assimilation policy; which indicated that Chinese cultural elements were unacceptable.
Kazakhstan is among the most multicultural countries in Eurasia, with sizeable populations of ethnic Kazakhs, Russians, Uzbeks, Ukrainians, Uighurs, Tatars, Germans and more.
Sacrifice for the nation is a given.
Multiculturalism in the Netherlands began with major increases in immigration during the mid-1950s and 1960s.
Multiculturalism has been a characteristic feature of the island of Mauritius.
It is also a matter of economic interests and political power.
C. James Trotman argues that multiculturalism is valuable because it "uses several disciplines to highlight neglected aspects of our social history, particularly the histories of women and minorities ...and promotes respect for the dignity of the lives and voices of the forgotten.
During British colonial rule, ethnic enclaves such as Geylang, Chinatown, and Little India were enforced.
Because Koreans share values and views, they support decisions even when they are obviously bad.
It is easy to anticipate the needs and behavior of others.
The UAE has widely accepted all other religions, granting permission for the construction of temples or churches.
More Malays however have moved into the cities since the 1970s, and the proportion of the non-Malays have been decreasing continually, especially the Chinese, due in large part to lower birth-rate and emigration as a result of institutionalized discrimination.
But there is a downside, too.
India (officially) follows a three-language policy.
The educational approach to multiculturalism has since spread to the grade school system, as school systems try to rework their curricula to introduce students to diversity earlier—often on the grounds that it is important for minority students to see themselves represented in the classroom.
Australia's diverse migrant communities have brought with them food, lifestyle and cultural practices, which have been absorbed into mainstream Australian culture.
Historically, Europe has always been a mixture of Latin, Slavic, Germanic, Uralic, Celtic, Hellenic, Illyrian, Thracian and other cultures influenced by the importation of Jewish, Christian, Muslim and other belief systems; although the continent was supposedly unified by the super-position of Imperial Roman Christianity, it is accepted that geographic and cultural differences continued from antiquity into the modern age.
*compulsory courses and/or tests on national history, on the constitution and the legal system (e.g., the computer-based test for individuals seeking naturalization in the UK named Life in the United Kingdom test)
In 1997 the New Labour government committed to a multiculturalist approach at a national level, but after 2001 there was something of a backlash, led by centre-left commentators such as David Goodhart and Trevor Phillips.
Though not called ''Multiculturalism'' as such, the preamble of Argentina's constitution explicitly promotes immigration, and recognizes the individual's multiple citizenship from other countries.
Such as clashes between native Dayak tribes against Madurese transmigrants in Kalimantan during Sambas riots in 1999 and the Sampit conflict in 2001.
Presently (2010), remnants of colonial ethnic concentration still exist but housing in Singapore is governed by the Ethnic Integration Policy, which ensures an even ethnic distribution throughout Singapore.
The second edition added Christian, Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander religions and the Bahá'í Faith to the list of religions was published in 2002.
Most of the debate over multiculturalism centers around whether or not public multiculturalism is the appropriate way to deal with diversity and immigrant integration.
:"Diverse peoples worldwide are mostly engaged in hating each other - that is, when they are not killing each other.
The Ahmadiyya Muslim Community of Germany is the first Muslim group to have been granted "corporation under public law status", putting the Community on par with the major Christian churches and Jewish communities of Germany.
The first edition was published in 1999.
The concept of "Cultural exception" proposed by France in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations in 1993 was an example of a measure aimed at protecting local cultures.
The project by the Government of AP Vojvodina titled ''"Promotion of Multiculturalism and Tolerance in Vojvodina"'', whose primary goal is to foster the cultural diversity and develop the atmosphere of interethnic tolerance among the citizens of Vojvodina, has been successfully implemented since 2005.
Although many debates still take place as to whether South Korea really is a multicultural society or not, it is generally agreed that South Korea has probably entered a stage of multiculturalism and has moved away from its homogeneous identity.
Bhikhu Parekh counters what he sees as the tendencies to equate multiculturalism with racial minorities "demanding special rights" and to see it as promoting a "thinly veiled racism".
The violence targeting Chinese Indonesians erupted during riots in 1998 as the looting and destructions took place, numbers of Chinese Indonesians as well as looters were died.
The first edition covered Buddhist, Hindu, Islamic, Jewish and Sikh faiths with participation of representatives of the various religions.
Since the 1899 Moro Rebellion, Muslim groups across Mindanao have bolstered armed offensives against foreign colonizers due to aspirations of self-determination.
Although there had been no ethnic-based incidents of aggression between many Christian and animist groups, the same cannot be said about relations between them on the one hand and their Muslim compatriots on the other.
Several regions in the then British Malaya such as Penang, Malacca and Singapore became Chinese dominated.
The issue is sometimes related to the controversial status of religious freedom in Malaysia.
Despite centuries of acculturation with native Indonesians, because of their disproportionately influence on Indonesian economy, and alleged question of national loyalty, Chinese Indonesian have suffered discrimination.
Some European Union countries have introduced policies for "social cohesion", "integration", and (sometimes) "assimilation".
She continued to say that immigrants should integrate and adopt Germany's culture and values.
Wikidata also suggests that "the world is complicated and there is no single consensus--especially in a knowledge base that is supposed to serve many cultures."
A diverse, peaceful, or stable society is against most historical precedent."
The Sundanese, Malay, and Madurese are the next largest groups in the country.
In 2007, Han Geon-Soo, Professor of Cultural Anthropology at Kangwon National University, published an article entitled "Multicultural Korea: Celebration or Challenge of Multiethnic Shift in Contemporary Korea?
