Of this, the island city spans 67.79&nbsp;km2 (26 sq mi), while the suburban district spans 370&nbsp;km2 (143 sq mi), together accounting for 437.71&nbsp;km2 (169 sq mi) under the administration of Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM).
Almost all of Mumbai's daily refuse of 7,800&nbsp;metric tonnes, of which 40&nbsp;metric tonnes is plastic waste, is transported to dumping grounds in Gorai in the northwest, Mulund in the northeast, and to the Deonar dumping ground in the east.
Cricket is more popular than any other sport in the city.
The Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport (formerly Sahar International Airport) is the main aviation hub in the city and the second busiest airport in India in terms of passenger traffic.
By the middle of the 17th century the growing power of the Dutch Empire forced the English to acquire a station in western India.
A week-long annual fair known as Bandra Fair, starting on the following Sunday after 8 September, is celebrated by people of all faiths, to commemorate the Nativity of Mary, mother of Jesus, on 8 September.
The national television broadcaster, Doordarshan, provides two free terrestrial channels, while three main cable networks serve most households.
Suburban railway and BEST bus services together accounted for about 88% of the passenger traffic in 2008.
The Elephanta Festival—celebrated every February on the Elephanta Islands—is dedicated to classical Indian dance and music and attracts performers from across the country.
This led filmmaking to new heights in terms of quality, cinematography and innovative story lines as well as technical advances such as special effects and animation.
According to the 2011 census, the population of Mumbai city was 12,479,608.
The Mumbai cricket team represents the city in the Ranji Trophy and has won 40 titles, the most by any team.
There are 31 buildings taller than 100&nbsp;m, compared with 200 in Shanghai, 500 in Hong Kong and 500 in New York.
Along with the rest of India, Mumbai has witnessed an economic boom since the liberalisation of 1991, the finance boom in the mid-nineties and the IT, export, services and outsourcing boom in 2000s.
It sits on Salsette Island (Sashti Island), which it partially shares with the Thane district.
The Monorail opened in early February 2014.
Some of the oldest edifices in the city built during this period are, Jogeshwari Caves (between 520 and 525), Elephanta Caves (between the sixth to seventh century), Walkeshwar Temple (10th century), and Banganga Tank (12th century).
Mumbai had been a traditional stronghold and birthplace of the Indian National Congress, also known as the Congress Party.
Although the Municipal Corporation is the legislative body that lays down policies for the governance of the city, it is the Commissioner who is responsible for the execution of the policies.
India's first underground water tunnel was completed in Mumbai to supply water to the Bhandup filtration plant.
Mumbai has approximately  of roads.
The maximum annual rainfall ever recorded was  for 1954.
Mumbai sits on a seismically active zone owing to the presence of 23 fault lines in the vicinity.
Taxis and rickshaws in Mumbai are required by law to run on compressed natural gas (CNG), and are a convenient, economical, and easily available means of transport.
In March 2004, the Mumbai Grand Prix was part of the F1 powerboat world championship, and the Force India F1 team car was unveiled in the city, in 2008.
The city also hosts the Marathi film industry which has seen increased popularity in recent years, and TV production companies.
The seven islands that came to constitute Mumbai were home to communities of fishing colonies.
On April 1950, Municipal limits of Bombay were expanded by merging the Bombay Suburban District and Bombay City to form the Greater Bombay Municipal Corporation.
A resident of Mumbai is called ''mumbaikar'' in the Marathi language, in which the suffix ''kar'' means ''resident of''.
The Mumbai Fire Brigade, under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Corporation, is headed by the Chief Fire Officer, who is assisted by four Deputy Chief Fire Officers and six Divisional Officers.
Mumbai is built on what was once an archipelago of seven islands: Bombay Island, Parel, Mazagaon, Mahim, Colaba, Worli, and Old Woman's Island (also known as ''Little Colaba'').
King Bhimdev founded his kingdom in the region in the late 13th century and established his capital in ''Mahikawati'' (present day Mahim).
The British were able to secure Salsette from the Marathas without violence through the Treaty of Purandar (1776), and later through the Treaty of Salbai (1782), signed to settle the outcome of the First Anglo-Maratha War.
Its fleet consists of single-decker, double-decker, vestibule, low-floor, disabled-friendly, air-conditioned and Euro III compliant diesel and compressed natural gas powered buses.
The number of migrants to Mumbai from outside Maharashtra during the 1991–2001 decade was 1.12&nbsp;million, which amounted to 54.8% of the net addition to the population of Mumbai.
With available land at a premium, Mumbai residents often reside in cramped, relatively expensive housing, usually far from workplaces, and therefore requiring long commutes on crowded mass transit, or clogged roadways.
As Per 2011 census, Greater Mumbai, the area under the administration of the MCGM, has a literacy rate of 94.7%, higher than the national average of 86.7%.
The city is planning to build its own F1 track and various sites in the city were being chalked out, of which the authorities have planned to zero down on Marve-Malad or Panvel-Kalyan land.
Elections are also held every five years to elect corporators to power in the MCGM.
The city eventually became the headquarters of the Bombay Presidency.
It is operated by the Central Railway and Western Railway zones of the Indian Railways.
By the middle of the 18th century, Bombay began to grow into a major trading town, and received a huge influx of migrants from across India.
The population density is estimated to be about 20,482 persons per square kilometre.
Shiv Sena switched from 'Marathi Cause' to larger 'Hindutva Cause' in 1985 and joined hands with Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) in same year.
After India's independence in 1947, the territory of the Bombay Presidency retained by India was restructured into Bombay State.
''Bombay Durpan'', the first Marathi newspaper, was started by Balshastri Jambhekar in Mumbai in 1832.
Matches in the city are played at the Mahindra Hockey Stadium.
Following the transfer, Bombay was placed at the head of all the company's establishments in India.
This name possibly originated as the Old Portuguese phrase ''bom baim'', meaning "good little bay", and ''Bombaim'' is still commonly used in Portuguese.
From 1429 to 1431, the islands were a source of contention between the Gujarat Sultanate and the Bahamani Sultanate of Deccan.
BEST buses are red in colour, based originally on the Routemaster buses of London.
The first session of the Indian National Congress was held in Bombay from 28–31 December 1885.
A colloquial form of Hindi, known as ''Bambaiya'' – a blend of Marathi, Hindi, Gujarati, Konkani, Urdu, Indian English and some invented words – is spoken on the streets.
The Mumbai Suburban Railway, popularly referred to as Locals forms the backbone of the city's transport system.
Every February, Mumbai holds derby races at the Mahalaxmi Racecourse.
The Santacruz Electronic Export Processing Zone (SEEPZ) and the International Infotech Park (Navi Mumbai) offer excellent facilities to IT companies.
The name Bollywood is a blend of Bombay and Hollywood.
The Traffic Police is a semi-autonomous body under the Mumbai Police.
Thadomal Shahani Engineering College is the first and the oldest private engineering college affiliated to the federal University of Mumbai and is also pioneered to be the first institute in the city's university to offer undergraduate level courses in Computer Engineering, Information Technology, Biomedical Engineering and Biotechnology.
About 700 million litres of water, out of a daily supply of 3500&nbsp;million litres, is lost by way of water thefts, illegal connections and leakages, per day in Mumbai.
They were subsequently scrapped due to lack of adequate infrastructure.
Mumbai is the commercial capital of India and has evolved into a global financial hub.
Studios in Goregaon, including Film City, are the location for most movie sets.
The Portuguese were actively involved in the foundation and growth of their Roman Catholic religious orders in Bombay.
Soil cover in the city region is predominantly sandy due to its proximity to the sea.
Mumbai has a large polyglot population like any other metropolitan city of India.
The largest telephone service provider is the state-owned MTNL, which held a monopoly over fixed line and cellular services up until 2000, and provides fixed line as well as mobile WLL services.
and its per-capita (PPP) income in 2009 was , which is almost three times the national average.
It serves as an economic hub of India, contributing 10% of factory employment, 25% of industrial output, 33% of income tax collections, 60% of customs duty collections, 20% of central excise tax collections, 40% of India's foreign trade and  in corporate taxes.
Mumbai is served by two major ports, Mumbai Port Trust and Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust, which lies just across the creek in Navi Mumbai.
Beaches are a major tourist attraction in the city.
Football is another popular sport in the city, with the FIFA World Cup and the English Premier League being followed widely.
Mumbai is India's largest city (by population) and is the financial and commercial capital of the country as it generates 6.16% of the total GDP.
Mumbai has two UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus and the Elephanta Caves.
Mumbai is also home to the largest population of Parsi Zoroastrians in the world, numbering about 80,000.
Mumbai suffers from the same major urbanisation problems seen in many fast growing cities in developing countries: widespread poverty and unemployment, poor public health and poor civic and educational standards for a large section of the population.
The oldest Muslim communities in Mumbai include the Dawoodi Bohras, Ismaili Khojas, and Konkani Muslims.
Public buses run by BEST cover almost all parts of the metropolis, as well as parts of Navi Mumbai, Mira-Bhayandar and Thane.
The islands were later governed by the independent Gujarat Sultanate, which was established in 1407.
The Bene Israeli Jewish community of Bombay, who migrated from the Konkan villages, south of Bombay, are believed to be the descendants of the Jews of Israel who were shipwrecked off the Konkan coast, probably in the year 175 BCE, during the reign of the Greek ruler, Antiochus IV Epiphanes.
The Collectors are in charge of property records and revenue collection for the Central Government, and oversee the national elections held in the city.
Perhaps at the beginning of the Common era (2,000 years ago), or possibly earlier, they came to be occupied by the Koli fishing community.
The Indian Institute of Technology (Bombay), Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute (VJTI), University Institute of Chemical Technology (UICT) which are India's premier engineering and technology schools, and SNDT Women's University are the other autonomous universities in Mumbai.
Pleistocene sediments found along the coastal areas around Kandivali in northern Mumbai suggest that the islands were inhabited since the Stone Age.
The primary education system of the MCGM is the largest urban primary education system in Asia.
Sixteen major languages of India are also spoken in Mumbai, most common being Marathi, Hindi, Gujarati and English.
It handles 55–60% of the country's total containerised cargo.
News channels entirely dedicated to Mumbai include Sahara Samay Mumbai.
The area is classified as a Seismic Zone III region, which means an earthquake of up to magnitude 6.5 on the Richter scale may be expected.
The key sectors contributing to the city's economy are: finance, gems & jewellery, leather processing, IT and ITES, textiles, and entertainment.
On the West coast are former-textile mills being demolished and skyscrapers built on top.
The biggest cricketing event to be staged in the city so far is the final of the 2011 ICC Cricket World Cup which was played at the Wankhede Stadium.
Long-distance trains originate from Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus, Dadar, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Mumbai Central, Bandra Terminus, Andheri and Borivali.
Maharashtra State with Bombay as its capital was formed with the merger of Marathi-speaking areas of Bombay State, eight districts from Central Provinces and Berar, five districts from Hyderabad State, and numerous princely states enclosed between them.
The Portuguese also built several fortifications around the city like the Bombay Castle, ''Castella de Aguada'' (Castelo da Aguada or Bandra Fort), and Madh Fort.
It is also the wealthiest city in India, and has the highest GDP of any city in South, West, or Central Asia.
Mumbai Metropolitan Region was home to 20,748,395 people by 2011.
Popular English language newspapers published and sold in Mumbai include ''The Times of India'', ''Mid-day'', ''Hindustan Times'', ''DNA India'', and ''The Indian Express''.
Mumbai lies at the mouth of the Ulhas River on the western coast of India, in the coastal region known as the Konkan.
In 2006, 209 people were killed and over 700 injured when seven bombs exploded on the city's commuter trains.
The water is filtered at Bhandup, which is Asia's largest water filtration plant.
Its nominal per capita income is , (US$2,094).
The 1960s saw the rise of regionalist politics in Bombay, with the formation of the Shiv Sena on 19 June 1966, out of a feeling of resentment about the relative marginalisation of the native Marathi people in Bombay.
Moreover, the University of Mumbai was ranked 5th in the list of best Universities in India by ''India Today'' in 2013 and ranked at 62 in the QS BRICS University rankings for 2013, a ranking of leading universities in the five BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa).
The total area of Mumbai is 603.4&nbsp;km2 (233 sq mi).
Subsequently, the city became the capital of Bombay State.
The Mumbai Metropolitan Region which includes portions of Thane, Palghar and Raigad districts in addition to Greater Mumbai, covers an area of 4,355&nbsp;km2 (1681.5 sq mi).
It is not exactly known when these islands were first inhabited.
Bombay Citizens' Committee, an advocacy group of leading Gujarati industrialists lobbied for Bombay's independent status.
State and central government employees make up a large percentage of the city's workforce.
It handled 36.6 million passengers and 694,300 tonnes of cargo during FY 2014–2015.
Upon India's independence in 1947 the city was incorporated into Bombay State.
According to ''Slate'' magazine, "they argued that 'Bombay' was a corrupted English version of 'Mumbai' and an unwanted legacy of British colonial rule."
The city is also represented by the Mumbai Indians in the Indian Premier League.
In 1687, the English East India Company transferred its headquarters from Surat to Bombay.
The Juhu Aerodrome was India's first airport, and now hosts the Bombay Flying Club and a heliport operated by state-owned Pawan Hans.
The islands were leased to several Portuguese officers during their regime.
Sewage treatment is carried out at Worli and Bandra, and disposed of by two independent marine outfalls of  and  at Bandra and Worli respectively.
The MCGM is in charge of the civic and infrastructure needs of the metropolis.
It is the most populous city in India and the ninth most populous agglomeration in the world, with an estimated city population of 18.4&nbsp;million.
The number of households in Mumbai is forecast to rise from 4.2 million in 2008 to 6.6 million in 2020.
Between the second century BCE and ninth century CE, the islands came under the control of successive indigenous dynasties: Satavahanas, Western Kshatrapas, Abhiras, Vakatakas, Kalachuris, Konkan Mauryas, Chalukyas and Rashtrakutas, before being ruled by the Silhara dynasty from 810 to 1260.
In 1817, the British East India Company under Mountstuart Elphinstone defeated Baji Rao II, the last of the Maratha ''Peshwa'' in the Battle of Khadki.
In the Indian Super League, Mumbai City FC represents the city;
According to the treaty, the seven islands of Bombay, the nearby strategic town of Bassein and its dependencies were offered to the Portuguese.
When the Elite Football League of India was introduced in August 2011, Mumbai was noted as one of eight cities to be awarded a team for the inaugural season.
On 1 October 1990, the Greater Bombay district was bifurcated to form two revenue districts namely, Bombay City and Bombay Suburban, though they continued to be administered by same Municipal Administration.
accessdate=6 July 2015}}
The Mumbai Heritage Conservation Committee (MHCC), established in 1995, formulates special regulations and by-laws to assist in the conservation of the city's heritage structures.
The first cricket test match in India was played in Mumbai at the Bombay Gymkhana.
In Hockey, Mumbai is home to the Mumbai Marines and Mumbai Magicians in the World Series Hockey and Hockey India League respectively.
The sex ratio in 2011 was 838 females per 1,000 males in the island city, 857 in the suburbs, and 848 as a whole in Greater Mumbai, all numbers lower than the national average of 914 females per 1,000 males.
Occasionally, north-east monsoon showers occur in October and November.
Mumbai, along with the area served by telephone exchanges in Navi Mumbai and Kalyan is classified as a ''Metro'' telecom circle.
The Sultanate's patronage led to the construction of many mosques, prominent being the Haji Ali Dargah in Worli, built in honour of the Muslim saint Haji Ali in 1431.
In the south of Mumbai, there are colonial-era buildings and Soviet-style offices.
Mumbai has numerous newspaper publications, television and radio stations.
Ali Muhammad Khan, in the ''Mirat-i-Ahmedi'' (1507) referred to the city as ''Manbai''.
first 50 years, and became a strong base for the Indian independence movement during the 20th century.
The success of the British campaign in the Deccan marked the end of all attacks by native powers.
Mumbai Port has one of the best natural harbours in the world, and has extensive wet and dry dock accommodation facilities.
It was ranked 41 among the Top 50 Engineering Schools of the world by America's news broadcasting firm Business Insider in 2012 and was the only university in the list from the five emerging BRICS nations viz Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.
In the 2012 municipal corporation elections, out of the 227 seats, the Shiv Sena-BJP alliance secured 107 seats, holding power with the support of independent candidates in the MCGM, while the Congress-NCP alliance bagged 64 seats.
Mumbai is the seat of the Bombay High Court, which exercises jurisdiction over the states of Maharashtra and Goa, and the Union Territories of Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
The living space is 4.5sq metre per person.
The two revenue districts of Mumbai come under the jurisdiction of a District Collector.
On 16 April 1853, India's first passenger railway line was established, connecting Bombay to the neighbouring town of Thana (now Thane).
The first line of the Mumbai Metro opened in early June 2014.
Mumbai is also home to National Institute of Industrial Engineering (NITIE), Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies (JBIMS), Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies (NMIMS), S P Jain Institute of Management and Research, Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) and several other management schools.
In 1999, several members left the Congress to form the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) but later allied with the Congress as part of an alliance known as the Democratic Front.
The architecture of the city is a blend of Gothic Revival, Indo-Saracenic, Art Deco, and other contemporary styles.
In 2008, a series of ten coordinated attacks by armed terrorists for three days resulted in 173 deaths, 308 injuries, and severe damage to several heritage landmarks and prestigious hotels.
The territories were later surrendered on 25 October 1535.
In 1493, Bahadur Khan Gilani of the Bahamani Sultanate attempted to conquer the islands but was defeated.
Residents of Mumbai call themselves ''Mumbaikar'', ''Mumbaiite'', ''Bombayite'' or ''Bombaiite''.
In 1960, following the Samyukta Maharashtra movement, a new state of Maharashtra was created with Bombay as the capital.
It is also one of the world's top ten centres of commerce in terms of global financial flow, generating 6.16% of India's GDP and accounting for 25% of industrial output, 70% of maritime trade in India (Mumbai Port Trust and JNPT), and 70% of capital transactions to India's economy.
From 1782 onwards, the city was reshaped with large-scale civil engineering projects aimed at merging all the seven islands into a single amalgamated mass.
Mumbai's culture is a blend of traditional festivals, food, music, and theatres.
An upgrade plan was initiated in 2006, targeted at increasing the capacity of the airport to handle up to 40&nbsp;million passengers annually and the new terminal T2 was opened in February 2014.
While the city is still referred to as Bombay by some of its residents and by Indians from other regions, mention of the city by a name other than ''Mumbai'' has been controversial, resulting in emotional outbursts sometimes of a violently political nature.
During the early 20th century it became a strong base for the Indian independence movement.
The cooler season from December to February is followed by the summer season from March to June.
''Slate'' also said "The push to rename Bombay was part of a larger movement to strengthen Marathi identity in the Maharashtra region."
Though 88% of the city's commuters travel by public transport, Mumbai still continues to struggle with traffic congestion.
In the ''Lok Sabha'' discussions in 1955, the Congress party demanded that the city be constituted as an autonomous city-state.
Both GSM and CDMA services are available in the city.
The Banganga Festival is a two-day music festival, held annually in the month of January, which is organised by the Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation (MTDC) at the historic Banganga Tank in Mumbai.
'''Mumbai''' (; also known as '''Bombay''', the official name until 1995) is the capital city of the Indian state of Maharashtra.
Towards the end of the 17th century, the islands again suffered incursions from Yakut Khan in 1689–90.
Mumbai also has a special Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (TADA) court for people accused of conspiring and abetting acts of terrorism in the city.
while in the I-League (matches in the city are played at the Cooperage Ground), the city is represented by two teams: Mumbai FC and Air-India.
On 12 March 1993, a series of 13 co-ordinated bombings at several city landmarks by Islamic extremists and the Bombay underworld resulted in 257 deaths and over 700 injuries.
The eastern coast of Salsette Island is covered with large mangrove swamps, rich in biodiversity, while the western coast is mostly sandy and rocky.
Mumbai lies on the west coast of India and has a deep natural harbour.
The Pathare Prabhus, among the earliest known settlers of the city, were brought to ''Mahikawati'' from Saurashtra in Gujarat around 1298 by Bhimdev.
Many parts of the city lie just above sea level, with elevations ranging from 10&nbsp;m (33&nbsp;ft) to 15&nbsp;m (49&nbsp;ft); the city has an average elevation of 14&nbsp;m (46&nbsp;ft).
The city houses important financial institutions such as the Reserve Bank of India, the Bombay Stock Exchange, the National Stock Exchange of India, the SEBI and the corporate headquarters of numerous Indian companies and multinational corporations.
, the Globalization and World Cities Study Group (GaWC) has ranked Mumbai as an "Alpha world city", third in its categories of Global cities.
Rugby is another growing sport in Mumbai with league matches being held at the Bombay Gymkhana from June to November.
In the Maharashtra state assembly elections held every five years, Mumbai is represented by 36 assembly constituencies.
Diwali, Holi, Eid, Christmas, Navratri, Good Friday, Dussera, Moharram, Ganesh Chaturthi, Durga Puja and Maha Shivratri are some of the popular festivals in the city.
Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) lanes have been planned throughout Mumbai.
Mumbai's bus services carried over 5.5 million passengers per day in 2008, which dropped to 2.8 million in 2015.
Auto rickshaws are allowed to operate only in the suburban areas of Mumbai, while taxis are allowed to operate throughout Mumbai, but generally operate in South Mumbai.
Mumbai has been ranked sixth among top ten global cities on the billionaire count, 48th on the Worldwide Centres of Commerce Index 2008, seventh in the list of "Top Ten Cities for Billionaires" by ''Forbes'' magazine (April 2008), and first in terms of those billionaires' average wealth.
Mumbai is the financial, commercial and entertainment capital of India.
From being an ancient fishing community and a colonial centre of trade, Mumbai has become South Asia's largest city and home of the world's most prolific film industry.
Zing a popular Bollywood gossip channel is also based out of Mumbai.
Native Christians include East Indian Catholics, who were converted by the Portuguese during the 16th century, while Goan and Mangalorean Catholics also constitute a significant portion of the Christian community of the city.
Mumbai is the birthplace of Indian cinema—Dadasaheb Phalke laid the foundations with silent movies followed by Marathi talkies—and the oldest film broadcast took place in the early 20th century.
Public transport systems in Mumbai include the Mumbai Suburban Railway, Monorail, Metro, Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport (BEST) buses, black-and-yellow meter taxis, auto rickshaws and ferries.
Mumbai is also home to the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) and Indian Premier League (IPL).
The city played host to the Indian National Congress six times during its
Trains are overcrowded during peak hours, with nine-car trains of rated capacity 1,700 passengers, actually carrying around 4,500 passengers at peak hours.
However, Salsette, Bassein, Mazagaon, Parel, Worli, Sion, Dharavi, and Wadala still remained under Portuguese possession.
In the newer suburbs, modern buildings dominate the landscape.
Newspapers are also printed in other Indian languages.
The rich literary traditions of the city have been highlighted internationally by Booker Prize winners Salman Rushdie, Aravind Adiga.
The highest rainfall recorded in a single day was  on 26 July 2005.
