All of the hair had been removed from the skull later when farmers had dug through the casket.
The museum claims to have the smallest mummy in the world on display (a mummified fetus).
At the end of this time, the body was removed and the cedar oil, now containing the liquefied organs, was drained through the rectum.
The mummies are dated between the 14th and 19th centuries.
New mummies continue to be uncovered in Europe well into the 21st Century.
Philippine mummies are called Kabayan Mummies.They are common in Igorot culture and their heritage.The mummies are found in some areas named Kabayan, Sagada and among others.
In 1993, a team of Russian archaeologists led by Dr. Natalia Polosmak discovered the Siberian Ice Maiden, a Scytho-Siberian woman, on the Ukok Plateau in the Altai Mountains near the Mongolian border.
She was found with several artifacts made of bronze, consisting of buttons, a belt plate, and rings, showing she was of higher class.
Some of the reasons for intentional mummification in South America include memorialization, immortalization, and religious offerings.
Mummies are typically divided into one of two distinct categories: anthropogenic or spontaneous.
Radiocarbon tests in the 1990s dated the mummy to being nearly 9,000 years old.
One of the earliest appearances was ''The Jewel of Seven Stars'', a horror novel by Bram Stoker first published in 1903 that concerned an archaeologist's plot to revive an ancient Egyptian mummy.
By the 4th dynasty (about 2600 BCE) Egyptian embalmers began to achieve "true mummification" through a process of evisceration, followed by preserving the body in various minerals and oils.
Mummies are commonly featured in horror genres as undead creatures.
Workers digging a trench accidentally broke into the crypt, which began to fill with waste water.
In the 1830s, Jeremy Bentham, the founder of utilitarianism, left instructions to be followed upon his death which led to the creation of a sort of modern-day mummy.
The European continent is home to a diverse spectrum of spontaneous and anthropogenic mummies.
These bodies are collectively known as Aztec mummies.
British chemist Alfred Lucas applied chemical analyses to Egyptian mummies during this same period, which returned many results about the types of substances used in embalming.
Australian mummies lack some of the technical ability of the Torres Strait mummies, however much of the ritual aspects of the mummification process are similar.
More evidence that the Inca left sacrificial victims to die in the elements, and later be unintentionally preserved, came in 1999 with the discovery of the Llullaillaco mummies on the border of Argentina and Peru.
There has been some controversy within the local Native American community, who began petitioning to have the remains returned and reburied in 1995.
The mummy's skin has suffered some slight decay, and the tattoos have faded since the excavation.
The Chinchorro mummies are the oldest intentionally prepared mummified bodies ever found.
The embalmers then wash the body again and wrapped it with linen bandages.
Within the layers, Egyptian priests placed small amulets to guard the decedent from evil.
The dominant theory for the drugging reasons that, alongside ritual uses, the substances probably made the children more docile.
In 1994, 265 mummified bodies were found in the crypt of a Dominican church in Vác, Hungary from the 1729–1838 period.
These substances were defined as mummia.
Some of the best-preserved mummies have come from bogs located across the region.
During the American Civil War, mummy-wrapping linens were said to have been used to manufacture paper.
This was not possible prior to the Congress due to the unique and highly specialized techniques required to gather such data.
Written in Book 2 of the ''Histories'' is one of the most detailed descriptions of the Egyptian mummification process, including the mention of using natron in order to dehydrate corpses for preservation.
The first Incan ice mummy was discovered in 1954 atop El Plomo Peak in Chile, after an eruption of the nearby volcano Sabancaya melted away ice that covered the body.
After curious deposits and cave paintings were discovered on the surfaces of the cave, expedition leaders decided to excavate.
The heads were later put on display in museums, 16 of which being housed across France alone.
In 1975, an esoteric organization by the name of Summum introduced "Modern Mummification", a service that utilizes modern techniques along with aspects of ancient methods of mummification.
The three mummies are children, two girls and one boy, who are thought to be sacrifices associated with the ancient ritual of ''qhapaq hucha''.
The Egtved Girl, dated to 1370 BCE, was found also inside a sealed coffin inside of a tumulus, in 1921.
Many areas in which mummies have been uncovered are difficult for preservation, due to their warm, moist climates.
The earliest ancient Egyptian mummies were created naturally due to the environment in which they were buried.
This is particularly common in the desert areas of the Tarim Basin and Iran.
In late 19th-century Venezuela, a German-born doctor named Gottfried Knoche conducted experiments in mummification at his laboratory in the forest near La Guaira.
In such cases, the acidity of the water, low temperature and lack of oxygen combined to tan the body's skin and soft tissues.
She was erroneously identified as an early medieval Danish queen, and for that reason was placed in a royal sarcophagus at the Saint Nicolai Church, Vejle, where she currently remains.
In the 19th Century, many of the trophies were acquired by Europeans who found the tattooed skin to be a phenomenal curiosity.
In 1972, eight remarkably preserved mummies were discovered at an abandoned Inuit settlement called Qilakitsoq, in Greenland.
Originally intended to hold the deliberately mummified remains of dead friars, interment in the catacombs became a status symbol for the local population in the following centuries.
While most individual mummies exclusively belong to one category or the other, there are examples of both types being connected to a single culture, such as those from the ancient Egyptian culture.
It was most popular in the 17th century, but was discontinued in the early 19th century when its composition became generally known to artists who replaced the said pigment by a totally different blend -but keeping the original name, mummia or mummy brown-yielding a similar tint and based on ground minerals(oxides and fired earths) and or blends of powdered gums and oleoresins (such as myrrh and frankincense) as well as ground bitumen.
Next, the embalmers made an incision along the flank with a sharp blade fashioned from an Ethiopian stone and removed the contents of the abdomen.
New research of an 11-year study by University of York, Macquarie University and University of Oxford suggests mummification occurred 1,500 years earlier than first thought.
In the case of smoking, some tribes would collect the fat that drained from the body to mix with ocher to create red paint that would then be smeared back on the skin of the mummy.
These sessions destroyed hundreds of mummies, because the exposure to the air caused them to disintegrate.
DNA sequence data  shows that the mummies had Haplogroup R1a (Y-DNA) characteristic of western Eurasia in the area of East-Central Europe, Central Asia and Indus Valley.
Billis made the decision to allow his body to be mummified after being diagnosed with terminal cancer in 2009.
Due to their salt preservation, these bodies are collectively known as Saltmen.
Beginning in 5th millennium BCE and continuing for an estimated 3,500 years, all human burials within the Chinchorro culture were prepared for mummification.
The dry desert climate of the basin proved to be an excellent agent for desiccation.
The exact reason why her body was so completely preserved has yet to be determined.
Once the mummy was completely wrapped, it was coated in a resin in order to keep the threat of moist air away.
This discovery helped to dispel the claim within Herodotus' works that the rod had been a hook made of iron.
The mausoleum itself was modeled by Alexey Shchusev on the Pyramid of Djoser and the Tomb of Cyrus.
He was considered to be the most well-preserved ice mummy in the world until the discovery of Mummy Juanita in 1995.
While interest in the study of mummies dates as far back as Ptolemaic Greece, most structured scientific study began at the beginning of the 20th century.
Lucas also made significant contributions to the analysis of Tutankhamun in 1922.
Their bodies were naturally mummified by the sub-zero temperatures and dry winds in the cave in which they were found.
She was wearing a blouse and a necklace as well as two golden earrings, showing she was of higher class.
The technique was invented by Gunther von Hagens when working at the anatomical institute of the Heidelberg University in 1978.
During the 20th century, horror films and other mass media popularized the notion of a curse associated with mummies (''see Curse of the pharaohs'').
The Capuchin Catacombs of Palermo were built in to the 16th century by the monks of Palermo’s Capuchin monastery.
His skin was also marked with tattoos of two monsters resembling griffins, which decorated his chest, and three partially obliterated images which seem to represent two deer and a mountain goat on his left arm.
This has led to many legal actions by Native American councils, leading to most museums keeping mummified remains out of the public eye.
During the 19th century, following the discovery of the first tombs and artifacts in Egypt, Egyptology was a huge fad in Europe, especially in Victorian England.
Approximately fifty mummies were discovered in an abandoned crypt beneath the Church of St. Procopius of Sázava in Vamberk in the mid-1980s.
Embalming was carried out by specialized groups, organized according to gender, who were considered unclean by the rest of the community.
Built in the 15th Century as a cannon hold and later converted in the 16th Century, the crypt had been sealed once it had reached capacity, leaving the bodies to be protected and preserved.
Mummies from the Oceania are not limited only to Australia.
Public knowledge of Aztec mummies increased due to traveling exhibits and museums in the 19th and 20th centuries, though these bodies were typically naturally desiccated remains and not actually the mummies associated with Aztec culture.
Also known as Princess Ukok, the mummy was dressed in finely detailed clothing and wore an elaborate headdress and jewelry.
Also applied to the frozen carcase of an animal imbedded in prehistoric snow".
Genuine Aztec mummies were "bundled" in a woven wrap and often had their faces covered by a ceremonial mask.
Much of this early experimentation with mummification in Egypt is unknown.
Other mummified remains have been recovered from around the Tarim Basin at sites including Qäwrighul, Yanghai, Shengjindian, Shanpula, Zaghunluq, and Qizilchoqa.
Egyptians saw the preservation of the body after death as an important step to living well in the afterlife.
The Mummy of El Plomo was a male child who was presumed to be wealthy due to his well-fed bodily characteristics.
The internal organs were also dried and either sealed in individual jars, or wrapped to be replaced within the body.
The use of mummies as fuel for locomotives was documented by Mark Twain (likely as a joke or humor), but the truth of the story remains debatable.
Her body had been so thoroughly frozen that it had not been desiccated; much of her skin, muscle tissue, and internal organs retained their original structure.
In the Middle Ages, based on a mistranslation from the Arabic term for bitumen, it was thought that mummies possessed healing properties.
Some residents of the Altai Republic, formed after the breakup of the Soviet Union, have requested the return of the Ice Maiden, who is currently stored in Novosibirsk in Siberia.
These blends appeared on the market as forgeries of powdered mummy pigment but were ultimately considered as acceptable replacements, once antique mummies were no longer permitted to be destroyed.
However, these descriptions are short and fairly vague, leaving scholars to infer the majority of the techniques that were used by studying mummies that have been unearthed.
The mummified remains of an infant were discovered during an expedition by archaeologist Fabrizio Mori to Libya during the winter of 1958–1959 in the natural cave structure of Uan Muhuggiag.
However, Xin Zhui's body was the only one of the three to be mummified.
A text known as ''The Ritual of Embalming'' does describe some of the practical logistics of embalming, however, there are only two known copies and each is incomplete.
Herodotus does not describe the process of burial of such mummies, but they were perhaps placed in a shaft tomb.
The body was then placed in natron for seventy days and returned to the family.
These are collectively known as "ice mummies".
There were at least three different processes of mummification according to Herodotus.
The discussion of Maori mummification has been historically controversial, with some experts in past decades claiming that such mummies have never existed.
Robot mummies were featured in a ''Doctor Who'' story, ''Pyramids of Mars'', in the 1970s, while the Hammer Horror film series had also included what had become a stock genre character.
Rather than developing elaborate processes such as later-dynasty ancient Egyptians, the early South Americans often left their dead in naturally dry or frozen areas, though some did perform surgical preparation when mummification was intentional.
Several Incan ceremonial artifacts and temporary shelters uncovered in the surrounding area seem to support this theory.
The idea was so popular that, after Vladimir Lenin's death, Leonid Krasin and Alexander Bogdanov suggested to cryonically preserve his body and brain in order to revive him in the future.
(It should be noted that the Spirit Cave mummy although not well preserved, is much older.)
However, the boom of interest generated by the scientific study of Egyptian mummification lead to more concentrated study of mummies in other cultures, including the Oceania.
The bandages were covered with a gum that modern research has shown is both waterproofing agent and an antimicrobial agent.
The discovery proved to be scientifically important, and by 2006 an exhibition was established in the Museum of Natural History in Budapest.
The Spirit Cave mummies of Fallon, Nevada in North America were accurately dated at more than 9,400 years old.
First, the brain was removed by passing an iron hook through the nose into the cranium and retracting it by the same pathway; the gray matter was discarded.
In this method, an oil derived from cedar trees was injected with a syringe into the abdomen.
Professor Tongiorgi of the University of Pisa radiocarbon-dated the infant to between 5,000–8,000 years old.
Such modelling has been utilized to perform digital autopsies on mummies to determine cause of death and lifestyle, such as in the case of Tutankhamun.
Her corpse was so well-preserved that surgeons from the Hunan Provincial Medical Institute were able to perform an autopsy.
It was during this time that researchers determined the mine suffered a major collapse, which likely caused the death of the miners.
In the early 1930s, the mummies were accidentally damaged during repairs, resulting in the loss of 140 bodies.
Natural mummification has been known to occur in several places in Mexico, though the most famous are the mummies of Guanajuato.
This cultural hierarchy lead to the creation of elaborate tombs, and more sophisticated methods of embalming.
Her original hairstyle is unknown.
Mexican mummies are also on display in the small town of Encarnación de Díaz, Jalisco.
There is also evidence that some Maori tribes may have practiced full-body mummification, though the practice is not thought to have been widespread.
Discoveries of mummified remains have also been located in New Zealand, and the Torres Strait, though these mummies have been historically harder to examine and classify.
Mummies from various dynasties throughout China's history have been discovered in several locations across the country.
The United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden, and Denmark have produced a number of bog bodies, mummies of people deposited in sphagnum bogs, apparently as a result of murder or ritual sacrifices.
The natural preservation of the dead had a profound effect on ancient Egyptian religion.
They range from "the most perfect" to the method employed by the "poorer classes".
The mummies quickly began to deteriorate, though thirty-four were able to be rescued and stored temporarily at the District Museum of the Orlické Mountains until they could be returned to the monastery in 2000.
In 1992, the First World Congress on Mummy Studies was held in Puerto de la Cruz on Tenerife in the Canary Islands.
In 1979, the American Broadcasting Company aired a TV holiday show, ''The Halloween That Almost Wasn't'', in which a mummy from Egypt (Robert Fitch) arrived at Count Dracula's castle without speaking.
: Or a Tale of the Twenty-Second Century'', an 1827 novel written by Jane C. Loudon.
Mummification is one of the defining customs in ancient Egyptian society for people today.
Several naturally-preserved, unintentional mummies dating from the Incan period have been found in the colder regions of Argentina, Chile, and Peru.
The mummies of Asia are usually considered to be accidental.
Nicknamed Moses, the mummy was estimated to be around 2,000 years old.
Initial radiocarbon tests date the mummy to around 550 years-old.
Later isotopic research on the other mummies returned similar dates, however, many of these individuals were found to be from a region that is not closely associated with the mine.
She was wearing a bodice and a skirt, including a belt and bronze bracelets.
The mummy was then sealed within its tomb, alongside the worldly goods that were believed to help aid it in the afterlife.
The English word ''mummy'' is derived from medieval Latin ''mumia'', a borrowing of the medieval Arabic word ''mūmiya'' (مومياء) and from a Persian word ''mūm'' (wax), which meant an embalmed corpse, and as well as the bituminous embalming substance, and also meant "bitumen".
The first X-ray of a mummy came in 1903, when professors Grafton Elliot Smith and Howard Carter used the only X-ray machine in Cairo at the time to examine the mummified body of Thutmose IV.
The tool was a rod, made of an organic material, that was used to break apart the brain to allow it to drain out of the nose.
Before this discovery, the oldest known deliberate mummy is a child, one of the Chinchorro mummies found in the Camarones Valley, Chile, which dates around 5050 BCE.
The oldest natural mummy in Europe was discovered in 1991 in the Ötztal Alps on the Austrian-Italian border.
The mummies were found buried in upside-down boats with hundreds of 13-foot long wooden poles in the place of tombstones.
The film was a box-office success and was followed by two sequels, ''The Mummy Returns'' in 2001 and ''The Mummy: Tomb of the Dragon Emperor'' in 2008.
In addition to the mummies of Egypt, there have been instances of mummies being discovered in other areas of the African continent.
Spirit Cave Man was discovered in 1940 during salvage work prior to guano mining activity that was scheduled to begin in the area.
While attempting to replicate Egyptian mummification, Brier and Wade discovered that removal of the brain was much easier when the brain was liquefied and allowed to drain with the help of gravity, as opposed to trying to pull the organ out piece-by-piece with a hook.
The Klatovy catacombs currently house an exhibition of Jesuit mummies, alongside some aristocrats, that were originally interred between 1674–1783.
The majority of the Vamberk mummies date from the 18th century.
After cleansing, the body was then dried out with natron inside the empty body cavity as well as outside on the skin.
Carbon-14 testing conducted in 2008 dated three of the bodies to around 400 BCE.
American Sinologist Victor H. Mair claims that "''the earliest mummies in the Tarim Basin were exclusively Caucasoid, or Europoid''" with "east Asian migrants arriving in the eastern portions of the Tarim Basin around 3,000 years ago", while Mair also notes that it was not until 842 that the Uighur peoples settled in the area.
Also known as Lady Dai, she was discovered in the early 1970s at the Mawangdui archaeological site in Changsha.
Resin was also applied to the coffin in order to seal it.
During the early 20th century, the Russian movement of Cosmism, as represented by Nikolai Fyodorovich Fyodorov, envisioned scientific resurrection of dead people.
In 2010, a team led by forensic archaeologist Stephen Buckley mummified Alan Billis using techniques based on 19 years of research of 18th-dynasty Egyptian mummification.
All three mummies were dated to 1351–1345 BCE.
Mummies have been discovered in more humid Asian climates, however these are subject to rapid decay after being removed from the grave.
The mummies of the Canary Islands belong to the indigenous Guanche people and date to the time before 14th Century Spanish explorers settled in the area.
European aristocrats would occasionally entertain themselves by purchasing mummies, having them unwrapped, and holding observation sessions.
One of the earliest examples of this is ''The Mummy!
Another Siberian mummy, a man, was discovered much earlier in 1929.
The majority of the papyri that have survived only describe the ceremonial rituals involved in embalming, not the actual surgical processes involved.
In more recent years, CT scanning has become an invaluable tool in the study of mummification by allowing researchers to digitally "unwrap" mummies without risking damage to the body.
Summum is currently considered to be the only "commercial mummification business" in the world.
This oil probably had the dual purpose of liquefying the internal organs, but also of disinfecting the abdominal cavity.
Poorer people used coffins fashioned from terracotta.
The mummies range in age and social status at time of death, with at least two children and one priest.
His body, outfitted with a wax head created because of problems preparing it as Bentham requested, is on open display in the University College London.
Two centuries ago, mummies were still believed to have medicinal properties to stop bleeding, and were sold as pharmaceuticals in powdered form as in mellified man.
The second process that Herodotus describes was used by middle-class people or people who "wish to avoid expense".
The Capuchin monks that inhabited the area left behind hundreds of intentionally-preserved bodies that have provided insight into the customs and cultures of people from various eras.
(See: Catacombe dei Cappuccini)
As of 2012, at least eight mummified human remains have been recovered from the Douzlakh Salt Mine at Chehr Abad in northwestern Iran.
Chewed coca leaves found inside the eldest child's mouth upon her discovery in 1999 supports this theory.
Recent biochemical analysis of the mummies has revealed that the victims had consumed increasing quantities of alcohol and coca, possibly in the form of chicha, in the months leading up to sacrifice.
Von Hagens has patented the technique in several countries and is heavily involved in its promotion, especially as the creator and director of the Body Worlds traveling exhibitions, exhibiting plastinated human bodies internationally.
She was the wife of the marquis of Dai during the Han dynasty, who was also buried with her alongside another young man often considered to be a very close relative.
Slapstick comedy trio The Three Stooges humorously exploited the discovery in the short film ''We Want Our Mummy'', in which they explored the tomb of the midget King Rutentuten (and his Queen, Hotsy Totsy).
The South American continent contains some of the oldest mummies in the world, both deliberate and accidental.
A collection of these mummies, most of which date to the late 19th century, have been on display at ''El Museo de las Momias'' in the city of Guanajuato since 1970.
The tomb of Tjay designated TT23,  is one of only two known which show the wrapping of a mummy (Riggs 2014).
Herodotus insists that the body did not stay in the natron longer than seventy days.
(By liquefying the organs, the family avoided the expense of canopic jars and separate preservation).
However, Chamber's ''Cyclopædia'' and the Victorian zoologist Francis Trevelyan Buckland define a mummy as follows: "A human or animal body desiccated by exposure to sun or air.
The few documents that directly describe the mummification process date to the Greco-Roman period.
The third and least-expensive method the embalmers offered was to clear the intestines with an unnamed liquid, injected as an enema.
The most recent discovery of mummies in Italy came in 2010, when sixty mummified human remains were found in the crypt of the Conversion of St Paul church in Roccapelago di Pievepelago, Italy.
The 1922 discovery of Tutankhamun's tomb by archaeologist Howard Carter brought mummies into the mainstream.
In 1875, the Borum Eshøj grave mound was uncovered, which had been built around three coffins, which belonged to a middle aged man and woman as well as a man in his early twenties.
Bodies purported to be those of self-mummified monks are exhibited in several Japanese shrines, and it has been claimed that the monks, prior to their death, stuck to a sparse diet made up of salt, nuts, seeds, roots, pine bark, and ''urushi'' tea.
The bodies show a mix of anthropogenic and spontaneous mummification, with some being thousands of years old.
The OED defines a mummy as "the body of a human being or animal embalmed (according to the ancient Egyptian or some analogous method) as a preparation for burial", citing sources from 1615 CE onward.
Intentional mummification in pre-Columbian Mexico was practiced by the Aztec culture.
The first mummy to be discovered in South Africa  was found in the Baviaanskloof Wilderness Area by Dr. Johan Binneman in 1999.
They are almost exclusively considered to be unintentional mummifications.
A series of CT scans performed on a 2,400-year-old mummy in 2008 revealed a tool that was left inside the cranial cavity of the skull.
Nicknamed Ötzi, the mummy is a 5,300-year-old male believed to be a member of the Tamins-Carasso-Isera cultural group of South Tyrol.
