Munich is also a centre for biotechnology, software and other service industries.
In 1971, the Filmverlag der Autoren was founded, cementing the city's role in the movement's history.
* Technical University of Munich (TUM), founded in 1868
Karl Valentin was Germany's most important cabaret performer and comedian and is to this day well-remembered and beloved as a cultural icon of his hometown.
Only the two Munich universities and the Technical University of Karlsruhe (now part of Karlsruhe Institute of Technology) have held this honour, and the implied greater chances of attracting research funds, since the first evaluation round in 2006.
While the republican government had been restored, Munich subsequently became a hotbed of extremist politics, among which Adolf Hitler and the National Socialists rose to prominence.
* Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich (LMU), founded in 1472 in Ingolstadt, moved to Munich in 1826
For its high quality of life and safety the city has been nicknamed "Toytown" among the English-speaking residents.
The city center lies between both climates, while the airport of Munich has a humid continental climate.
Munich is one of the most prosperous and fastest growing cities in Germany.
From the main railway station the journey takes 40–45 minutes.
The northern part of this sandy plateau includes a highly fertile flint area which is no longer affected by the folding processes found in the Alps, while the southern part is covered with morainic hills.
After the murder of the first republican premier of Bavaria Kurt Eisner in February 1919 by Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley, the Bavarian Soviet Republic was proclaimed.
When the bubonic plague broke out in 1634 and 1635 about one third of the population died.
Munich is home to many national and international authorities, major universities, major museums and theaters.
The period immediately before World War I saw continued economic and cultural prominence for the city.
It is available and popular during the Lenten ''Starkbierzeit'' (strong beer season), which begins on or before St. Joseph's Day (19 March).
Its strikingly modern caricatures and biting satirical attacks on Wilhelmine German society were the result of countless of collaborative efforts by many of the best visual artists and writers from Munich and elsewhere.
There are countless ''Wirtshäuser'' (traditional Bavarian ale houses/restaurants) all over the city area, many of which also have small outside areas.
It was the typical beer in Munich in the 19th century, but today it is more of a specialty.
Munich was (and in some cases, still is) home to many of the most important authors of the New German Cinema movement, including Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Werner Herzog, Edgar Reitz and Herbert Achternbusch.
In 1806, the city became the capital of the new Kingdom of Bavaria, with the state's parliament (the ''Landtag)'' and the new archdiocese of Munich and Freising being located in the city.
The city is known as the site of the culmination of the policy of appeasement employed by Britain and France leading up to World War II.
Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt's two main quarters, Gärtnerplatzviertel and Glockenbachviertel, are both considered decidedly less mainstream than most other nightlife hotspots in the city and are renowned for their many hip and laid back bars and clubs as well as for being Munich's main centers of gay culture.
* University of Television and Film Munich (''Hochschule für Fernsehen und Film''), founded in 1966
For example, Wassily Kandinsky chose Munich over Paris to study at the Akademie der Bildenden Künste München, and, along with many other painters and writers living in Schwabing at that time, had a profound influence on modern art.
In Schwabing and Maxvorstadt, many beautiful streets with continuous rows of Gründerzeit buildings can be found.
Munich was the site of the 1972 Summer Olympics, during which Israeli athletes were assassinated by Palestinian fedayeen in the Munich massacre, when gunmen from the Palestinian "Black September" group took hostage members of the Israeli Olympic team.
As in the rest of Germany, the Roman Catholic and Protestant churches have experienced a continuous decline in their memberships.
Major displays include Albrecht Dürer's Christ-like Self-Portrait, his Four Apostles, Raphael's paintings'' The Canigiani Holy Family'' and'' Madonna Tempi'' as well as Peter Paul Rubens two-story-high ''Judgment Day''.
The headquarters of the German branch of Random House, the world's largest publishing house, and of Burda publishing group are also in Munich.
It replaced the smaller Munich-Riem airport in 1992.
The city was heavily damaged by allied bombing during World War II—the city was hit by 71 air raids over a period of five years.
The ''Peterskirche'' close to Marienplatz is the oldest church of the inner city.
Among the internationally well-known films produced at the studios are ''The Pleasure Garden'' by Alfred Hitchcock, ''The Great Escape'' by John Sturges, ''Paths of Glory'' by Stanley Kubrick, ''Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory'' by Mel Stuart and both ''Das Boot'' and ''The Neverending Story'' by Wolfgang Petersen.
The city has several important art galleries, most of which can be found in the ''Kunstareal'', including the ''Alte Pinakothek'', the ''Neue Pinakothek'', the ''Pinakothek der Moderne'' and the ''Museum Brandhorst''.
The skin has to be removed before the meat can be eaten, and to accomplish this as elegantly as possible is considered an art form in itself.
Among the baroque and neoclassical mansions which still exist in Munich are the ''Palais Porcia'', the ''Palais Preysing'', the ''Palais Holnstein'' and the ''Prinz-Carl-Palais''.
The city's ice hockey club is EHC Munich.
Its tower contains the ''Rathaus-Glockenspiel''.
* Spaten-Franziskaner-Bräu
The Kultfabrik was closed at the end of the year 2015 to convert the area into a residential and office area.
As the capital of the Free State of Bavaria, Munich is an important political centre in Germany and the seat of the Bavarian State Parliament, the Staatskanzlei (the State Chancellery) and of all state departments.
The ''Simpl'', which survives to this day (although with little relevance to the city's contemporary art scene), was named after Munich's famous anti-authoritarian satirical magazine ''Simplicissimus'', founded in 1896 by Albert Langen and Thomas Theodor Heine, which quickly became an important organ of the ''Schwabinger Bohème''.
The modern ''Gasteig'' centre houses the Munich Philharmonic Orchestra.
Among locals, connoisseurs and well-informed tourists, ''Augustiner-Keller'', near ''Hauptbahnhof'' (central station) at ''Arnulfstraße'', is one of the most popular beer gardens in the city, since it is the only one in which Munich's most popular beer, ''Augustiner'', is drawn from wooden barrels.
The ''Nationaltheater'', where several of Richard Wagner's operas had their premieres under the patronage of Ludwig II of Bavaria, is the home of the Bavarian State Opera and the Bavarian State Orchestra.
Munich also has an extensive network of bus lines.
* Hochschule für Musik und Theater München, founded in 1830
Despite its name, most of Oktoberfest occurs in September.
The same company also ranks Munich as the world's 39th most expensive city to live in and the most expensive major city in Germany.
''Biergärten'' (beer gardens) are the most famous and popular fixtures of Munich's gastronomic landscape.
* Schumann's – Charles Schumann's Cocktail Bar
To this day, Munich remains one of the centres of the German film and entertainment industry.
Bars (Pubs are located all over the city):
Austro-Bavarian has no official status by the Bavarian authorities or local government yet is recognised by the SIL and has its own ISO-639 code.
It was one of the host cities for the 2006 Football World Cup which was not held in Munich's Olympic Stadium but in a new football specific stadium, the Allianz Arena.
The city is known as the second largest publishing center in the world (around 250 publishing houses have offices in the city), and many national and international publications are published in Munich, such as Arts in Munich, LAXMag and Prinz.
A ''halbe Ente'' (roasted duck, literally "half of a duck") with ''Knödel'' and ''Apfelrotkraut'' (red cabbage with apple chunks) is especially popular in the colder months.
'''Munich''' (; also  in British English; , ,  ) is the capital and largest city of the German state of Bavaria, on the banks of River Isar north of the Bavarian Alps.
The Bavaria Film Studios are located in the suburb of Grünwald.
Munich has the strongest economy of any German city and the lowest unemployment rate (3.0% in June 2014) of any German city with more than a million people (the others being Berlin, Hamburg and Cologne).
Most high-rise buildings are clustered at the northern edge of Munich in the skyline, like the ''Hypo-Haus'', the ''Arabella High-Rise Building'', the ''Highlight Towers'', ''Uptown Munich'', ''Münchner Tor'' and the ''BMW Headquarters'' next to the Olympic Park.
Munich served as the location for many of Fassbinder's films, among them ''Ali: Fear Eats the Soul''.
In 1933, 840,901 inhabitants were counted and in 1957, Munich's population passed the 1 million mark.
Showers and thunderstorms bring the highest average monthly precipitation totals in late spring and throughout the summer.
On the other hand, Ludwig II, famous the world over as the fairytale king, held himself mostly aloof from his capital and focused more on his fanciful castles in the Bavarian countryside.
The Munich area currently has three clubs: Bayern Munich, 1860 Munich and SpVgg Unterhaching in the Bundesliga, 2.
* Munich School of Philosophy, founded in 1925 in Pullach, moved to Munich in 1971
Half a kilometer down the river, there is a second, easier wave for beginners, the so-called ''Kleine Eisbachwelle''.
Three gates of the demolished medieval fortification have survived to this day—the ''Isartor'' in the east, the ''Sendlinger Tor'' in the south and the ''Karlstor'' in the west of the inner city.
Especially Ludwig I has rendered outstanding services to Munich's status as a centre of the arts, attracting numerous artists and enhancing the city's architectural substance with grand boulevards and buildings.
The neo-Gothic ''Maximilianstraße'' starts at ''Max-Joseph-Platz'', where the ''Residenz'' and the National Theatre are situated, and runs from west to east.
''Prinzregentenstrasse'' runs parallel to Maximilianstraße and begins at ''Prinz-Carl-Palais''.
FC Bayern Munich Basketball currently playing in Beko Basket Bundesliga.
: "Capital of the movement").
The ''Asamkirche'' was endowed and built by the Brothers Asam, pioneering artists of the rococo period.
An express train will be added that will cut down travel time to 20–25 minutes with limited stops on dedicated tracks.
In 1240, Munich was transferred to Otto II Wittelsbach and in 1255, when the Duchy of Bavaria was split in two, Munich became the ducal residence of Upper Bavaria.
The Alps affect the city's climate in other ways too: the warm downhill wind from the Alps (föhn wind), which can raise temperatures sharply within a few hours even in the winter is but one example.
It is dark amber in colour and has a heavy malty taste.
For two weeks, the Oktoberfest attracts millions of people visiting its beer tents ("Bierzelte") and fairground attractions.
It is a top-ranked destination for migration and expatriate location, despite being the municipality with the highest density of population (4,500 inh.
Munich has more than 100 night clubs and thousands of bars and restaurants within city limits.
Munich is home to several professional football teams including Bayern Munich, Germany's most successful club and a multiple UEFA Champions League winner.
The NSDAP headquarters were in Munich and many ''Führerbauten'' ("''Führer''-buildings") were built around the Königsplatz, some of which have survived to this day.
37% of foreign nationals come from the European Union.
Munich's current mayor is Dieter Reiter of the Social Democratic Party of Germany.
Some specialities are typical cold dishes served in beer gardens: ''Obatzda'' is a Bavarian cheese delicacy, a savoury blend of smashed mellow camembert prepared with cream cheese, cut onions and spicy paprika (and sometimes some butter).
It derives from the monks of the Benedictine order who ran a monastery at the place that was later to become the Old Town of Munich; hence the monk depicted on the city's coat of arms.
The higher elevation of Munich and the proximity of the Alps play a significant role on the climate, causing the city to have more rain and snow than many other parts of Germany.
Having evolved from a duchy's capital into that of an electorate (1623), and later a sovereign kingdom (1806), Munich has been a major European centre of arts, architecture, culture and science since the early 19th century, heavily sponsored by the Bavarian monarchs.
Two further surf spots within the city are located along the river Isar, the wave in the Floßlände channel and a wave downstream of the Wittelsbacherbrücke bridge.
Despite being  from Munich, Memmingen Airport has been advertised as ''Airport Munich West''.
A common dish made with beef, onions and a thick dark sauce is ''Zwiebelrostbraten''.
Its primary concert venue is the ''Herkulessaal'' in the former city royal residence, the Munich Residenz.
There is also a small Old Catholic parish and an English-speaking parish of the Episcopal Church in the city.
Next to the Bavarian Staatsschauspiel in the Residenz Theatre (Residenztheater), the ''Munich Kammerspiele'' in the Schauspielhaus is one of the most important German language theatres in the world.
A modern bike hire system is available within the area bounded by the ''Mittlerer Ring''.
Nevertheless, some of its more excentric aspects have survived, and there are still a few legendary venues like the underground Schwabinger 7 and live clubs such as Schwabinger Podium.
Today, the crime rate is low compared with other large German cities, such as Hamburg or Berlin.
''Schweinsbraten'' (pot roasted pork) with ''Knödel'' (dumplings made from potatoes or white bread) and ''Krautsalat'' (a salad of white cabbage made with oil and vinegar, not to be confused with Sauerkraut) and ''Schweinshaxe'' (grilled pork knuckle) are the most typical heavy dishes in restaurants and beer gardens.
Other baroque churches in the inner city which are worth a detour are the ''Bürgersaalkirche'', the ''Dreifaltigkeitskirche'', the ''St.
* P1 – Favourite meeting place of Munich's High Society, the so-called Schickeria
: economic miracle) after 1949.
Under the regency of the Bavarian electors Munich was an important centre of baroque life but also had to suffer under Habsburg occupations in 1704 and 1742.
It was first built during the Romanesque period, and was the focus of the early monastic settlement in Munich before the city's official foundation in 1158.
It outranks Frankfurt though as home of insurance companies such as Allianz and Munich Re.
Anna im Lehel'', the first rococo church in Bavaria.
Unlike many other German cities which were heavily bombed and destroyed during World War II, Munich rebuilt most of its traditional cityscape and added a modern face to the city with the Olympic Stadium, while hosting the 1972 Summer Olympics.
A stage for shows, big events and musicals is the ''Deutsche Theater''.
Munich enjoys a thriving economy, driven by the information technology, biotechnology, and publishing sectors.
Deutsches Museum's ''Flugwerft Schleissheim'' flight exhibition centre is located nearby, on the Schleissheim Special Landing Field.Several non-centralised museums (many of those are public collections at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität) show the expanded state collections of palaeontology, geology, mineralogy, zoology, botany and anthropology.
King Ludwig I managed to acquire such famous pieces as the Medusa Rondanini, the Barberini Faun and figures from the Temple of Aphaea on Aegina for the Glyptothek.
It is often served in the beer gardens along with ''Radi'', white radish cut in thin slices and salted, and ''Münchner Wurstsalat'', Munich's famous sausage salad with thinly sliced Knackwurst marinated in vinegar and oil with onions on a bed of lettuce.
Munich hosted the 1972 Summer Olympics, where the Munich Massacre took place.
Several national and international authorities are located in Munich, including the Federal Finance Court of Germany and the European Patent Office.
Central to Schwabing's bohemian scene (although they were actually often located in the nearby Maxvorstadt quarter) were ''Künstlerlokale'' (artist's cafés) like ''Café Stefanie'' or Kabarett ''Simpl'', whose liberal ways differed fundamentally from Munich's more traditional localities.
''Schloss Fürstenried'' (''Fürstenried Palace''), a baroque palace of similar structure to Nymphenburg but of much smaller size, was erected around the same time in the south west of Munich.
The arts and politics became increasingly influenced by the court (see Orlando di Lasso, Heinrich Schütz and later Mozart and Richard Wagner).
The former Dachau concentration camp is  outside the city.
It was designed and laid out by Benjamin Thompson, Count of Rumford, for both pleasure and as a work area for the city's vagrants and homeless.
By that time the Guelph Henry the Lion, Duke of Saxony and Bavaria, had built a bridge over the river Isar next to a settlement of Benedictine monks—this was on the Old Salt Route and a toll bridge.
Munich is famous for its breweries and the ''Weissbier'' (or ''Weißbier''/''Weizenbier'', wheat beer) is a speciality from Bavaria.
Especially since the 1980s, Munich and the entire surrounding region was characterized by a strong economic growth, the location of high-tech industries and scientific institutions, very low unemployment rates and a strong influx of people.
Munich was the base of the White Rose, a student resistance movement from June 1942 to February 1943.
Generally speaking, Munich nightlife tends to change quite dramatically over very short periods of time.
The city once again became a Nazi stronghold when the National Socialists took power in Germany in 1933.
Some notable establishments are:
Anna Damenstiftskirche'' and ''St.
From the Gothic to the Baroque era, the fine arts were represented in Munich by artists like Erasmus Grasser, Jan Polack, Johann Baptist Straub, Ignaz Günther, Hans Krumpper, Ludwig von Schwanthaler, Cosmas Damian Asam, Egid Quirin Asam, Johann Baptist Zimmermann, Johann Michael Fischer and François de Cuvilliés.
A thick slice of it in a bun, called ''Leberkässemmel'', is sold as a cheap snack in almost every butcher's shop of the city.
Another area for the arts next to the Kunstareal is the Lehel quarter between the old town and the river Isar: The ''Museum Five Continents'' in Maximilianstraße is the second largest collection in Germany of artifacts and objects from outside Europe, while the ''Bavarian National Museum'' and the adjoining ''Bavarian State Archaeological Collection'' in Prinzregentenstrasse rank among Europe's major art and cultural history museums.
Another classic is ''a hoibs Hendl'' (half a grilled chicken).
The nearby ''Michaelskirche'' is the largest renaissance church north of the Alps, while the ''Theatinerkirche'' is a basilica in Italianate high baroque which had a major influence on Southern German baroque architecture.
For its urban population of 2.6&nbsp;million people, Munich and its closest suburbs have one of the most comprehensive and punctual systems in the world, incorporating the Munich U-Bahn (underground railway), the Munich S-Bahn (suburban trains), trams and buses.
In the late 15th century Munich underwent a revival of gothic arts—the Old Town Hall was enlarged, and Munich's largest gothic church, now a cathedral—the Frauenkirche—constructed in only twenty years, starting in 1468.
In recent years, the Feierbanane has become the mainstream focus of Munich's nightlife and tends to get quite crowded, especially on weekends.
They are one of Europe's biggest and most famous film production studios.
Especially in its suburbs, Munich features a wide and diverse array of modern architecture, although strict culturally sensitive height limitations for buildings have limited the construction of skyscrapers to avoid a loss of views to the distant Bavarian Alps.
per km²) in Germany.
These plans were opposed by many residents in the Oberpfaffenhofen area as well as other branches of local Government, including the city of Munich, which took the case to court.
* Bayerische Akademie für Außenwirtschaft, founded in 1989
* Munich Intellectual Property Law Center (MIPLC)
In November 1918 on the eve of revolution, Ludwig III and his family fled the city.
''Starkbier'' is the strongest Munich beer, containing 6–9 per cent alcohol.
The cycle paths usually involve a longer route than by the road, as they are diverted around objects, and the presence of pedestrians can make them quite slow.
The Austro-Bavarian language is spoken in and around Munich, with its variety ''Upper Bavarian'' (''Oberbayrisch'').
Munich is situated in the Northern Alpine Foreland.
June, on average, records the most precipitation of any month.
''Schlachtplatte'' (literally "slaughter plate") consists of ''Kesselfleisch'' (boiled pork), fresh ''Blutwurst'' (blood sausage), ''Leberwurst'' (liverwurst) and ''Sauerkraut''.
From 1995 to 2001, Munich was also home to the Union Move, one of the largest technoparades in Germany.
New German Cinema is considered by far the most important artistic movement in German cinema history since the era of German Expressionism in the 1920s.
Allach-Untermenzing (23), Altstadt-Lehel (1), Aubing-Lochhausen-Langwied  (22), Au-Haidhausen  (5), Berg am Laim (14), Bogenhausen  (13), Feldmoching-Hasenbergl  (24), Hadern  (20), Laim (25), Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt (2), Maxvorstadt (3), Milbertshofen-Am Hart (11), Moosach (10), Neuhausen-Nymphenburg  (9), Obergiesing  (17), Pasing-Obermenzing (21), Ramersdorf-Perlach (16), Schwabing-Freimann (12), Schwabing-West (4), Schwanthalerhöhe (8), Sendling (6), Sendling-Westpark  (7), Thalkirchen-Obersendling-Forstenried-Fürstenried-Solln (19), Trudering-Riem (15) and Untergiesing-Harlaching  (18).
The warmest month of the year, on average, is July.
Its dome dominates the Odeonsplatz.
Many of their works can now be seen at the ''Lenbachhaus''.
Apart from the Kultfarbik and its smaller cousin Optimolwerke, there exists a wide variety of establishments in the more urban parts of Haidhausen.
There are many smaller beer gardens and around twenty major ones, providing at least one thousand seats, with four of the most famous and popular in the Englischer Garten: ''Chinesischer Turm'' (Munich's second largest beer garden with 7,000 seats), ''Seehaus'', ''Hirschau'' and ''Aumeister''.
From only 24,000 inhabitants in 1700, the population doubled about every 30 years.
The ''Deutsches Museum'' or German Museum, located on an island in the River Isar, is the largest and one of the oldest science museums in the world.
The airport can be reached by suburban train lines '''S8''' from the east and '''S1''' from the west of the city.
Munich nowadays hosts more than 530,000 people of international background, making up 37.7% of the entire population.
Munich has a reputation as a surfing hotspot, offering the world's best known river surfing spot, the Eisbach wave, which is located at the southern edge of the Englischer Garten park and used by surfers day and night and throughout the year.
Many operas were staged there, including the premiere of Mozart's ''Idomeneo'' in 1781.
The collection reflects the eclectic tastes of the Wittelsbachs over four centuries, and is sorted by schools over two sprawling floors.
There are few "green waves" or roundabouts, and the city's prosperity often causes an abundance of obstructive construction sites.
The city's oldest park is the ''Hofgarten'', near the Residenz, dating back to the 16th century.
Popular desserts include ''Apfelstrudel'' (apple strudel) with vanilla sauce, ''Millirahmstrudel'' (a cream cheese strudel), ''Dampfnudeln'' (yeast dumplings served with custard) and ''Auszogene'', a fried pastry shaped like a large doughnut without a hole.
The transformation of the historic area into a pedestrian priority zone enables and invites walking and biking by making these active modes of transport comfortable, safe and enjoyable.
Munich has been governed by the SPD for all but six years since 1948.
Other examples of notable musicians and bands from Munich are Konstantin Wecker, Willy Astor, Spider Murphy Gang, Münchener Freiheit, Lou Bega, Megaherz, FSK, Colour Haze and Sportfreunde Stiller.
The growing number of bicycle lanes are widely used throughout the year.
InterCity and EuroCity trains to destinations east of Munich also stop at Munich East.
The city is an eclectic mix of historic buildings and modern architecture, Munich having reconstructed the ruins of those historic buildings that have been destroyed in World War II while creating new landmarks of architecture.
Nevertheless, his patronage of Richard Wagner secured his posthumous reputation, as do his castles, which generate significant tourist income for Bavaria to this day.
Environmental pollution is low, although  the city council is concerned about levels of particulate matter (PM), especially along the city's major thoroughfares.
About 45% of Munich's residents are not affiliated with any religious group, and this ratio represents the fastest growing segment of the population.
In 2006, Munich blue-collar workers enjoyed an average hourly wage of 18.62 euro (ca.
A ''Leberknödel'' is a bread dumpling seasoned with liver and onions.
Since then, Munich has become Germany's third largest city.
''Schloss Nymphenburg'' (''Nymphenburg Palace''), some  north west of the city centre, is surrounded by an impressive park and is considered to be one of Europe's most beautiful royal residences.
The ''Prinzregententheater'' is at Prinzregentenplatz further to the east.
Nowadays it is entirely a park, its southern half being dominated by wide and extremely well-kept open areas, hills, monuments and beach-like stretches (along the streams Eisbach and Schwabinger Bach), which can get very crowded in the summertime.
In the 1970s, the Musicland Studios developed into one of the most prominent recording studios in the world, with famous bands such as the Rolling Stones, Led Zeppelin, Deep Purple and Queen recording albums there.
It is used by about 34 million passengers a year, and lies some  north east of the city centre.
In 1919, the Bavaria Film Studios were founded, which developed into one of Europe's biggest film studios.
The Grünwald castle is the only medieval castle in the Munich area which still exisists.
Twenty years later Landshut University was moved to Munich.
The large ''Residenz'' palace complex (begun in 1385) on the edge of Munich's Old Town, Germany's largest urban palace, ranks among Europe's most significant museums of interior decoration.
Many of the city's finest buildings belong to this period and were built under the first three Bavarian kings.
The beer served at Oktoberfest is a special type of ''Märzen'' beer with a higher alcohol content than regular Helles.
Many important conductors have been attracted by the city's orchestras, including Felix Weingartner, Hans Pfitzner, Hans Rosbaud, Hans Knappertsbusch, Sergiu Celibidache, James Levine, Christian Thielemann, Lorin Maazel, Rafael Kubelík, Eugen Jochum, Sir Colin Davis, Mariss Jansons, Bruno Walter, Georg Solti, Zubin Mehta and Kent Nagano.
Alte Pinakothek's monolithic structure contains a treasure trove of the works of European masters between the 14th and 18th centuries.
All three are connected to the public transport system and serve as transportation hubs.
Munich also played a significant role in the development of electronic music, with genre pioneer Giorgio Moroder, who invented synth disco and electronic dance music, and Donna Summer, one of disco music's most important performers, both living and working in the city.
Mercer HR Consulting consistently rates the city among the top 10 cities with the highest quality of life worldwide—a 2011 survey ranked Munich as 4th.
Best known for the largest beergarden in town is the former royal ''Hirschgarten'', founded in 1780 for deer which still live there.
Maxvorstadt has many smaller bars that are especially popular with university students, whereas legendary Schwabing, once Munich's first and foremost party district, has lost much of its nightlife activity in the last few decades, mainly due to gentrification and the resulting extraordinarily high rents (even for Munich standards).
An important collection of Greek and Roman art is held in the ''Glyptothek'' and the ''Staatliche Antikensammlung'' (State Antiquities Collection).
