According to University of Florida's Professor Eric Kilgerman, "While a museum in which a particular narrative unfolds within its halls is diachronic, those museums that limit their space to a single experience are called synchronic."
The Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago is a very popular museum.
They communicate closely with the board to guide and govern the museum.
Notable zoos include the San Diego Zoo, the London Zoo, Brookfield Zoo at Chicago, Berlin Zoological Garden, the Bronx Zoo in New York City, Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden, Jardin des Plantes in Paris, and Zürich Zoologischer Garten in Switzerland.
Types of museums vary, from large institutions, covering many of the categories below, to very small institutions focusing on a specific subject, location, or a notable person.
Examples are the San Francisco Maritime National Historical Park and Mystic Seaport.
According to The World Museum Community, there are more than 55,000 museums in 202 countries.
For years, living history museums were relatively nonexistent outside of Scandinavia, though some military garrisons in North America used some living history techniques.
* the Belvedere Palace of the Habsburg monarchs in Vienna opened with a collection of art in 1781.
Prospective visitors to the British Museum had to apply in writing for admission, and small groups were allowed into the galleries each day.
The beginnings of the living history museum can be traced back to 1873 with the opening of the Skansen Museum near Stockholm, Sweden.
This exhibition design intentionally signifies metonymically the nameless and victims themselves.
* the Louvre Museum in Paris (France), also a former royal palace, opened to the public in 1793
Another early public museum was the British Museum in London, which opened to the public in 1759.
The Great American Dollhouse Museum in Danville, Kentucky, U.S.A., depicts American social history in miniature.
By the nineteenth century, science museums had flourished, and with it 'the capacity of exhibitionary representation to render the world as visible and ordered... part of the instantiation of wider senses of scientific and political certainty' (MacDonald, 1998: 11).
In the United States, the nation's first hospital, the Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia, already had a collection of plaster casts and crayon drawings of the stages of pregnancy as early as 1762.
* Indian Museum, Kolkata, established in 1814 is the oldest museum in India.
The events commemorated by memorial museums tend to involve mostly civilian victims who died under "morally problematic circumstances" that cannot easily be interpreted as heroic.
This has caused many specialized museums to be established such as the National LGBT Museum in New York City and the National Women's History Museum planned for the National Mall.
In 2010, the Whitney Museum in New York organized what it called the first ever online Twitter museum tour.
Apothecaries and physicians collected specimens as a part of their professional activities and to increase their professional status among their peers.
The gallery had been open to visitors by request since the sixteenth century, and in 1765 it was officially opened to the public.
Most mid-size and large museums employ exhibit design staff for graphic and environmental design projects, including exhibitions.
Some examples of pop-up museums include:
By the 1960s, these interactive science centers with their specialized hands-on galleries became prevalent.
The Brooklyn Children's Museum was established in 1899 by the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences.
To city leaders, a healthy museum community can be seen as a gauge of the economic health of a city, and a way to increase the sophistication of its inhabitants.
Some historians and scholars have criticized the British Museum for its possession of rare antiquities from Egypt, Greece, and the Middle East.
Other mobile museums have no "home site", and use travel as their exclusive means of presentation.
Not every museum is participating in this trend, but that seems to be the trajectory of museums in the twenty-first century with its emphasis on inclusiveness.
Most museums in the United States that are national in scope such as the Smithsonian often focus solely on white upper class heterosexual male history and ignore most others.
Key to this is the large demographic of foreign visitors to the museum, with 63% of the visitors residing outside of Spain and thus feeding foreign investment straight into Bilbao.
Many of the items in these collections were new discoveries and these collectors or naturalists, since many of these people held interest in natural sciences, were eager to obtain them.
Some museum activists also see this method of museum use as a deeply flawed model for such institutions.
New developments in preserving soft tissue samples long term in spirits appeared in the 17th century, and by the mid-18th century physicians like John Hunter were using personal anatomical collections as teaching tools.
The tradition of restoring homes of the past and designating them as museums draws on the English custom of preserving ancient buildings and monuments.
A values statement explains the beliefs of the museum.
In recent years, some cities have turned to museums as an avenue for economic development or rejuvenation.
In other instances, museums emphasize regional culture and natural history, such as the Regional Museum of the National University of San Martin, Tarapoto, Peru.
Due to the flexibility of the pop-up museums and their rejection of traditional structure, even these latter provisions need not be supplied by an institution; in some cases the themes have been chosen collectively by a committee of interested participants while exhibitions designated as pop-ups have been mounted in places as varied as community centers and even a walk-in closet.
While at times juxtaposed, the alternative technique of the use of authentic objects is seen the same exhibit mentioned above.
A concept developed in the 1990s, the pop-up museum is generally defined as a short term institution existing in a temporary space.
Dorothy Canfield Fisher observed that the reduction in objects has pushed museums to grow from institutions that artlessly showcased their many artifacts (in the style of early cabinets of curiosity) to instead "thinning out" the objects presented "for a general view of any given subject or period, and to put the rest away in archive-storage-rooms, where they could be consulted by students, the only people who really needed to see them."
After the Brooklyn Children's Museum opened in 1899, other American museums followed suit by opening small children's sections of their institutions designed with children in mind and equipped with interactive activities, such as the Smithsonian's children's room opened in 1901.
The Uffizi Gallery in Florence was initially conceived as offices for the Florentine civil service (hence the name), but evolved into a display place for many of the paintings and sculpture collected by the Medici family or commissioned by them.
Recreated historical settings simulating past time periods can offer the visitor a sense of traveling back in time.
Many design museums were founded as museums for applied arts or decorative arts and started only in the late 20th century to collect design.
"The museum's primary mission is to advance and disseminate knowledge about this unprecedented tragedy; to preserve the memory of those who suffered; and to encourage its visitors to reflect upon the moral and spiritual questions raised by the events of the Holocaust as well as their own responsibilities as citizens of a democracy."
Has extended past its original close date & is seeking a permanent home.
A number of different museums exist to demonstrate a variety of topics.
A '''museum''' (/mjuˈziːəm/; ''myoo-'''zee'''-um'') is an institution that cares for (conserves) a collection of artifacts and other objects of artistic, cultural, historical, or scientific importance and some public museums make them available for public viewing through exhibits that may be permanent or temporary.
Some cover specialized curatorial aspects of history or a particular locality; others are more general.
The museum's founder, Artur Hazelius, began the museum by using his personal collection of buildings and other cultural materials of pre-industrial society.
Medical museums functioned as an integral part of medical students education through the 19th century and into the early 20th century.
Some, such as the Western Australian Museum, exhibit maritime archaeological materials.
* the Museo del Prado in Madrid was founded in 1785 by Charles III of Spain and was opened to the public for the first time in 1819.
Cancun Underwater Museum, or the Subaquatic Sculpture Museum, in Mexico is the largest underwater museum in the world.
The founders of the Brooklyn Children's Museum were concerned with education and realized that no other institution had attempted to establish "a Museum that will be of especial value and interest to young people between the ages of six and twenty years."
In addition to its architectural exhibits and collections, the museum seeks to educate the public about engineering and design.
Public access to these museums was often possible for the "respectable", especially to private art collections, but at the whim of the owner and his staff.
The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington D.C., for example, employs this technique in its shoe exhibition.
Metonymy, or "the substitution of the name of an attribute or adjunct for that of the thing meant," is a technique used by many museums but few as heavily and as influentially as Holocaust museums.
University of Louisiana in Lafayette has also created a mobile museum as part of the graduate program in History.
A common type of history museum is a historic house.
Intentional museum planning has its beginnings with the museum founder and librarian John Cotton Dana.
A very different and much smaller example of an American architectural museum is the Schifferstadt Architectural Museum in Frederick, Maryland.
An independent survey conducted by Peggy Coats in 1990 revealed that sixty-five percent of historic house museums did not have a full-time staff and 19 to 27 percent of historic homes employed only one full-time employee.
Memorial museums also often have close connections with, and advocate for, a specific clientele who have a special relationship to the event or its victims, such as family members or survivors, and regularly hold politically significant special events.
Some museums may have exhibits on topics such as computers, aviation, railway museums, physics, astronomy, and the animal kingdom.
Colonial Williamsburg (in Williamsburg, Virginia), is another great example of a town devoted to preserving the story of America through reenactment.
Today there are numerous prominent memorial museums including the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, the Toul Sleng Museum of Genocidal Crimes in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, the District Six Museum in Cape Town, South Africa, and the National September 11 Memorial & Museum in New York City.
In addition to traditional 2-D and 3-D designers and architects, these staff departments may include audio-visual specialists, software designers, audience research and evaluation specialists, writers, editors, and preparators or art handlers.
The practice of open storage is all part of an ongoing debate in the museum field of the role objects play and how accessible they should be.
Corral and the Tombstone Epitaph) in which visitors can learn about historical events from actors playing the parts of historical figures like Wyatt Earp, Doc Holliday, and John Clum.
The museum opened on 24 May 1683, with naturalist Robert Plot as the first keeper.
Despite efforts to tell multicultural histories, history museums have a problem with diversity and inclusion.
Colonial Williamsburg is a living history museum in Virginia that represents the colony on the eve of the American Revolution in the 18th century.
According to Dana, museums should be planned according to community's needs:
The idea behind the Brooklyn Children's Museum implicitly acknowledged that existing American museums were not designed with children in mind.
They explore the relationship between societies and certain bodies of water.
It opened to the public in 1660, though there had been paying privileged visitors to the armouries displays from 1592.
While albeit necessary to some degree in any museum repertoire, the use of authentic artifacts can not only be misleading but as equally problematic as the aforementioned metonymic technique.
This showed the beginnings of removing art collections from the private domain of aristocracy and the wealthy into the public sphere, where they were seen as sites for educating the masses in taste and cultural refinement.
Other music museums include live music recitals, such as the Handel House Museum in London, England.
* the Teylers Museum in Haarlem (The Netherlands) established in 1778 and is the oldest Dutch museum.
Increasingly, Americans have fought to preserve structures characteristic of a more typical American past that represents the lives of everyday people including minorities.
Generally speaking, museums collect objects of significance that comply with their mission statement for conservation and display.
While most subside if a museum is successful, as happened in Bilbao, others continue especially if a museum struggles to attract visitors.
This is particularly true in the case of postindustrial cities.
Science centers include interactive exhibits that respond to the visitor's action and invite further response, as well as hands-on exhibits that do not offer feedback to the visitor, In general, science centers offer 'a decontextualized scattering of interactive exhibits, which can be thought of as exploring stations of ideas  usually presented in small rooms or galleries, with scant attention paid to applications of science, social political contexts, or moral and ethical implications.
Similarly, many European museum collections often contain objects and cultural artifacts acquired through imperialism and colonization.
Others display artifacts found in archaeological sites inside buildings.
The Ashmolean Museum in Oxford opened on 24 May 1683 as the world's first university art museum.
The specialised art museum is considered a fairly modern invention, the first being the Hermitage in Saint Petersburg which was established in 1764.
The aim of encyclopedic museums is to provide examples of each classification available for a field of knowledge.
The following mission statement of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum is typical in its focus on commemoration, education and advocacy:
The Uffizi Palace (built 1560-1581) was designed by the Renaissance painter and architect Giorgio Vasari.
Much care, expertise, and expense is invested in preservation efforts to retard decomposition in aging documents, artifacts, artworks, and buildings.
* Curator – Curators are the intellectual drivers behind exhibits.
Unfortunately, many small, local museums lack this guidance since accreditation with AAM requires a museum to operate on an annual budget of at least $25,000.
In Glendale, Arizona, the Bead Museum  fosters an appreciation and understanding of the global, historical, cultural, and artistic significance of beads and related artifacts dating as far back as 15,000 years.
A museum normally houses a core collection of important selected objects in its field.
Still other museums adopt a more aesthetic approach and use the homes to display the architecture and artistic objects.
Some of the earliest living history museums in the United States include Colonial Williamsburg (1926), Greenfield Village (1929), Conner Prairie Pioneer Settlement (1930s), Old Sturbridge Village (1946), and Plimoth Plantation (1947).
Local and national governments often create museums to their history.
A feasibility study, analysis of comparable facilities, and an interpretive plan are all developed as part of the museum planning process.
All museum employees should work together toward the museum's institutional goal.
Another type of history museum is a living history museum.
The fabulous art treasures collected by the French monarchy over centuries were accessible to the public three days each "''décade''" (the 10-day unit which had replaced the week in the French Republican Calendar).
The purpose can also depend on one's point of view.
This is not necessarily a negative development.
Some institutions, such as St. Vital Historical Society and the Walker Art Center, use the term to refer to a portion of their collection that travels to sites away from the museum for educational purposes.
History museums cover the knowledge of history and its relevance to the present and future.
In 1907, it was incorporated into the Norsk Folkemuseum.
Most open-air museums are located in regions where wooden architecture prevail, as wooden structures may be translocated without substantial loss of authenticity.
In third person interpretation, the interpreters openly acknowledge themselves to be a contemporary of the museum visitor.
Other positions commonly found at museums include: building operator, public programming staff, photographer, librarian, archivist, groundskeeper, volunteer coordinator, preparator, security staff, development officer, membership officer, business officer, gift shop manager, public relations staff, and graphic designer.
While many large museums, such as the Smithsonian Institution, are still respected as research centers, research is no longer a main purpose of most museums.
By the last quarter of the 19th century, the scientific research in the universities was shifting toward biological research on a cellular level, and cutting edge research moved from museums to university laboratories.
Some are not-for-profit while others are run as a private business.
They are responsible for the accessibility of collections and collections policy.
By the twentieth century, museums of science had built 'on their earlier emphasis on public education to present themselves as experts in the mediation between the obscure world of science and that of the public.
The collection included antique coins, books, engravings, geological specimens, and zoological specimens—one of which was the stuffed body of the last dodo ever seen in Europe; but by 1755 the stuffed dodo was so moth-eaten that it was destroyed, except for its head and one claw.
The way that museums are planned and designed vary according to what collections they house, but overall, they adhere to planning a space that is easily accessed by the public and easily displays the chosen artifacts.
His plan was never fully realized, but his concept of a museum as an agent of nationalistic fervor had a profound influence throughout Europe.
Exhibitions educate the public on natural history, dinosaurs, zoology, oceanography, anthropology, and more.
The purpose of modern museums is to collect, preserve, interpret, and display items of artistic, cultural, or scientific significance for the education of the public.
The idea was to consume and collect as much knowledge as possible, to put everything they collected and everything they knew in these displays.
This type of museum usually were built in countries possessing diverse ethnic groups or significant numbers of ethnic minorities.
In France, the first public museum was the Louvre Museum in Paris, opened in 1793 during the French Revolution, which enabled for the first time free access to the former French royal collections for people of all stations and status.
Women are one of the worst examples of this, with less than 10% of historic sites devoted to women.
Initially expecting modest visitor numbers of 425,000 annually, first year visitor numbers reached over 800,000, with almost 60% coming from outside Northern Ireland.
* the Royal Armouries in the Tower of London is the oldest museum in the United Kingdom.
Living history museums combine historic architecture, material culture, and costumed interpretation with natural and cultural landscapes to create an immersive learning environment.
Their goal was to gain children's interest and "to stimulate their powers of observation and reflection" as well as to "illustrate by collections of pictures, cartoons, charts, models, maps and so on, each of the important branches of knowledge which is taught in elementary schools."
Museums in cities like Charleston, South Carolina must interact with a broader heritage tourism industry where the history of the majority population is traditionally privileged over the minority.
A more recent but related idea is realized in ecomuseums, which originated in France.
Notable botanic gardens include Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Chicago Botanic Garden, Taipei Botanical Garden, and Royal Botanical Gardens (Ontario).
The number of children's museums in the United States continued to grow over the course of the twentieth century, with over 40 museums opened by the 1960s and more than 70 children's museums opened to the public between 1990 and 1997.
The late twentieth century witnessed intense debate concerning the repatriation of religious, ethnic, and cultural artifacts housed in museum collections.
Categories include: fine arts, applied arts, craft, archaeology, anthropology and ethnology, biography, history, cultural history, science, technology, children's museums, natural history, botanical and zoological gardens.
Some museum scholars have even begun to question whether museums truly need artifacts at all.
Military-focused maritime museums are a third variety, of which the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum and Battleship IOWA Museum are examples.
They work with the staff to ensure the museum runs smoothly.
The oldest such museum in evidence was Ennigaldi-Nanna's museum, dating from c. 530 BC and devoted to Mesopotamian antiquities; it apparently had sufficient traffic as to warrant labels for the ordered collection, although there is no source for this information.
To a museum professional, a museum might be seen as a way to educate the public about the museum's mission, such as civil rights or environmentalism.
Medical museums today are largely an extinct subtype of museum with a few notable exceptions, such as the Mütter Museum in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and the Hunterian Museum at the Royal College of Surgeons in Glasgow, Scotland.
The first "public" museums were often accessible only by the middle and upper classes.
There are frequently unresolved issues concerning the identity, culpability, and punishment of the perpetrators of these killings and memorial museums often play an active research role aimed at benefiting both the victims and those prosecuting the perpetrators.
*The Charleston Museum was established in 1773 thereby making it the first museum in the Southern United States.
The collection included that of Elias Ashmole which he had collected himself, including objects he had acquired from the gardeners, travellers and collectors John Tradescant the elder and his son of the same name.
Museum purposes vary from institution to institution.
Military museums specialize in military histories; they are often organized from a national point of view, where a museum in a particular country will have displays organized around conflicts in which that country has taken part.
As time goes by, more and more museums dedicated to classic cars of yesteryear are opening.
The establishment of historic house museums increased in popularity through the 1970s and 1980s as the Revolutionary bicentennial set off a wave of patriotism and alerted Americans to the destruction of their physical heritage.
While traditional history museums tend to be in neutral institutional settings, memorial museums are very often situated at the scene of the atrocity they seek to commemorate.
Museums may have IMAX feature films, which may provide 3-D viewing or higher quality picture.
Similar to the National Building Museum, the building of the Schifferstadt is an historic structure, built in 1758, and therefore also an embodiment of historic preservation and restoration.
In 1891, inspired by a visit to the open-air museum in Oslo, Artur Hazelius founded the Skansen in Stockholm, which became the model for subsequent open-air museums in Northern and Eastern Europe, and eventually in other parts of the world.
While a powerful technique, Hansen-Glucklick points out that when used ''en masse'' the metonym suffers as the memory and suffering of the individual is lost in the chorus of the whole.
While some historic home museums are fortunate to possess a collection containing many of the original furnishings once present in the home, many face the challenge of displaying a collection consistent with the historical structure.
The basic idea behind exhibiting authentic artifacts is to provide not only legitimacy to the exhibit's historical narrative but, at times, to help create the narrative as well.
These museums include the collection, preservation or interpretation of material culture, traditional skills, and historical processes.
While museums like Mount Vernon and Colonial Williamsburg were visited by over one million tourists a year, more than fifty percent of historic house museums received less than 5,000 visitors per year.
The National Museum of Crime & Punishment explores the science of solving crimes.
Managers must also set legal and ethical standards and maintain involvement in the museum profession."
Although zoos and botanical gardens are not often thought of as museums, they are in fact "living museums".
Hansen-Glucklick explains, "The danger of such a strategy lies in the fact that by claiming to offer the remnants of the past to the spectator, the museum creates the illusion of standing before a complete picture.
By putting their collections in a museum and on display, they not only got to show their fantastic finds but they also used the museum as a way to sort and "manage the empirical explosion of materials that wider dissemination of ancient texts, increased travel, voyages of discovery, and more systematic forms of communication and exchange had produced."
The U.S. National Park Service defines a historic site as the "location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure."
Science museums traditionally emphasize cultural heritage through objects of intrinsic value, echoes of the 'curiosity cabinets' of the Renaissance period.
Such museums contain a wide range of objects, including documents, artifacts of all kinds, art, archaeological objects.
First, as mentioned above, maritime museums can be primarily archaeological.
They typically include displays of weapons and other military equipment, uniforms, wartime propaganda, and exhibits on civilian life during wartime, and decorations, among others.
It was founded and opened to public in 1773 by the Riga Town Council as Himsel Museum.
Nevertheless, museums to this day contribute new knowledge to their fields and continue to build collections that are useful for both research and display.
Metonymy, however, Jennifer Hansen-Glucklich argues, is not without its own problems.
A period of intense museum building, in both an intellectual and physical sense was realized in the late 19th and early 20th centuries (this is often called "The Museum Period" or "The Museum Age").
Notable museums include the Natural History Museum in London, the Oxford University Museum of Natural History in Oxford, the Muséum national d'histoire naturelle in Paris, the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C., the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, and the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
It could be difficult to gain entrance.
Visitors to the museum were able to compare the composition, weight, and hardness of minerals, learn to use a microscope to examine natural objects, and build their own collections of natural objects to be displayed in a special room of the museum.
Collections of drawings and old master prints are often not displayed on the walls, but kept in a print room.
These museums are also unique in that the actual structure belongs to the museum collection as a historical object.
* Rumphius built a botanical museum in Ambon in 1662, making it the oldest recorded museum in Indonesia.
It is originally from the Ancient Greek Μουσεῖον (''Mouseion''), which denotes a place or temple dedicated to the Muses (the patron divinities in Greek mythology of the arts), and hence a building set apart for study and the arts, especially the Musaeum (institute) for philosophy and research at Alexandria by Ptolemy I Soter about 280 BCE.
Gathering all examples of each classification of a field of knowledge for research and for display was the purpose.
Also residing in the American Southwest are living history towns such as Tombstone, Arizona.
* Museum of Motherhood, currently located on Manhattan's Upper East Side.
As of the 2010s, the continuing acceleration in the digitization of information, combined with the increasing capacity of digital information storage, is causing the traditional model of museums (i.e.
There are now about 500 images in the underwater museum.
* Denver Community Museum- a pop-up museum that existed for nine months during 2008-9, located in downtown Denver, Colorado.
Interpretation centres are modern museums or visitors centres that often use new means of communication with the public.
The ''Taubman Museum'' is an example of a museum which cost a lot (eventually $66 million) but attained little success, and continues to have a low endowment for its size.
After the house of Medici was extinguished, the art treasures remained in Florence, forming one of the first modern museums.
While many American museums, both natural history museums and art museums alike, were founded with the intention of focusing on the scientific discoveries and artistic developments in North America, many moved to emulate their European counterparts in certain ways (including the development of Classical collections from ancient Egypt, Greece, Mesopotamia, and Rome).
Historian Steven Conn provocatively asks this question, suggesting that there are fewer objects in ''all'' museums now, as they have been progressively replaced by interactive technology.
In addition to emphasis on allowing interaction with objects, Gallup also encouraged learning through play.
"With 3% of the world's population, or nearly 200 million people, living outside the country of their birth, encyclopedic museums play an especially important role in the building of civil society.
They exist for the same purpose as other museums: to educate, inspire action, and to study, develop, and manage collections.
