Music hall did not adopt its own unique style.
They sold the right to sing songs to particular artists, and no other person had the right to sing the songs in public.
The music hall was first imported into France in its British form in 1862, but under the French law protecting the state theatres, performers could not wear costumes or recite dialogue, something only allowed in theaters..
Another spectacular example of the new variety theatre was the Tivoli in the Strand built 1888–90 in an eclectic neo-Romanesque style with Baroque and Moorish-Indian embellishments.
A new type of music hall entertainment had arrived, in the form of variety, and many music hall performers failed to make the transition.
Other large suburban music halls included:
In a theatre, by contrast, the audience was seated in stalls and there was a separate bar-room.
This differed somewhat from the conventional type of theatre, which until then seated the audience in stalls with a separate bar-room.
Nevertheless, these included some more sophisticated performers such as Vesta Tilley, whose male impersonations communicated real social commentary.
In 1867, he acquired a public house in Villiers Street named "The Arches", under the arches of the elevated railway line leading to Charing Cross station.
The term is derived from a type of theatre or venue in which such entertainment took place.
The saloon was a room where for an admission fee or a greater price at the bar, singing, dancing, drama or comedy was performed.
Another early music hall was The Middlesex, Drury Lane (1851).
An exception to this rule was the Britannia Theatre, Hoxton (1841) which somehow managed to evade this regulation and served drinks to its customers.
The construction of Weston's Music Hall, High Holborn (1857), built up on the site of the Six Cans and Punch Bowl Tavern by the licensed victualler of the premises, Henry Weston, signalled that the West End was fruitful territory for the music hall.
Lloyd explained her advocacy:
The final demise was competition from television, which grew very popular after the Queen's coronation was televised.
This theatre was rebuilt during 1894 by Frank Matcham, the architect of the Hackney Empire.
The acceptance of music hall as a legitimate cultural form was established by the first Royal Variety Performance before King George V during 1912 at the Palace Theatre.
Originating in saloon bars within public houses during the 1830s, music hall entertainment became increasingly popular with audiences, so much so, that during the 1850s, the public houses were demolished and specialized music hall theatres developed in their place.
Songs like "Glorious Beer", and the first major music hall success, ''Champagne Charlie'' (1867) had a major influence in establishing the new art form.
It's a lovely war" ( 1917), popularised by male impersonator Ella Shields.
This venue was also known as 'Evans Late Joys' – Joy being the name of the previous owner.
Music hall songs could be romantic, patriotic, humorous or sentimental, as the need arose.
World War I may have been the high-water mark of music hall popularity.
Several large music halls were built in the East End.
The New London Theatre stands on its site.
In June 2007, the World Monuments Fund added the building to its list of the world's "100 most endangered sites".
The emergence of a distinct music hall style can be credited to a fusion of musical influences.
These included the London Music Hall, otherwise known as The Shoreditch Empire, 95–99 Shoreditch High Street, (1856–1935).
In Glasgow, the Britannia Music Hall (1857), by architects Thomas Gildard and H.M. McFarlane remains standing, with much of the theatre intact but in a poor state having closed in 1938.
Facade of 1885 rebuild still extant.
Her nightclub appearance led to her first two records produced that same year, and the beginning of a legendary career.
During 1906 it was rebuilt as a variety theatre and renamed as the Holborn Empire.
Music halls in London were the scene of important industrial conflict in 1907 with a dispute between artists and stage hands on the one hand and theatre managers on the other, which ended in a strike.
Baker sailed to Paris, France.
This in turn increased the profitability of the music publication industry, and the sale of music in printed form.
Music hall entertainment continued after the war, but became less popular due to upcoming Jazz, Swing, and Big Band dance music acts.
He converted the restaurant into a second Gatti's music hall, known as "Gatti's-in-the-Road", in 1865.
Major music halls include the Folies-Bergere, Crazy Horse Saloon, Casino de Paris, Olympia, and Moulin Rouge.
Denied by the newly created LCC permission to construct the promenade, which was such a popular feature of the Empire and Alhambra, the Palace compensated in the way of adult entertainment by featuring apparently nude women in tableaux vivants, though the concerned LCC hastened to reassure patrons that the girls who featured in these displays were actually wearing flesh-toned body stockings and were not naked at all.
Up and down the City RoadIn and out The EagleThat's the way the money goesPop goes the weasel.
Music hall songs were often composed with their working class audiences in mind.
Opened by Sam Collins, in 1862, as the Lansdowne Music Hall, converting the pre-existing Lansdowne Arms public house, it was renamed as Collins' Music Hall in 1863.
One of the few fully functional music hall entertainments, is at the  Brick Lane Music Hall in a former church in North Woolwich.
There are also surviving music halls outside London, a notable example being the Leeds City Varieties (1865) with a preserved interior.
Music hall continued during the interwar period, but no longer as the single dominant form of popular entertainment in Britain.
The halls created a demand for new and catchy popular songs that could no longer be met from the traditional folk song repertoire.
This 1858 example of the ''giant pub hall'' survived use as a church, fire, flood and war intact, but was virtually derelict, after its use as a rag warehouse, in the 1960s.
Her risqué routines captivated Paris, and she became one of the most highly-paid and popular French entertainers of her time.
The Wilton's Music Hall Trust has embarked on a fund-raising campaign to restore the building.
In Northern Ireland, the Grand Opera House, Belfast, Frank Matcham 1895, was preserved and restored in the 1980s.
By 1865, there were 32 music halls in London seating between 500 and 5,000 people plus an unknown, but large, number of smaller venues.
One of the most popular entertainers in Paris during the period was the American singer Josephine Baker.
(ed) (1986) ''The Last Empires: A Music Hall Companion'' pp.
Professional songwriters were enlisted to fill the gap.
Songs like "Old Folks at Home" (1851) and "Oh, Dem Golden Slippers" ( James Bland, 1879) spread round the globe, taking with them the idiom and appurtenances of the minstrel song.
Tilley became more popular than ever during this time, when she and her husband, Walter de Frece, managed a military recruitment drive.
Licensing restrictions had also changed, and drinking was banned from the auditorium.
British music hall was similar to American vaudeville, featuring rousing songs and comic acts, while in the United Kingdom the term "vaudeville"' referred to more working-class types of entertainment that would have been termed "burlesque" in America.
However, a few still flourish, with tourists as their primary audience.
It was restored in 1986, and is a fine example of the late Edwardian style.
The most popular music hall songs became the basis for the pub songs of the typical Cockney "knees up".
The singer Mistinguett made her debut the Casino de Paris in 1895 and continued to appear regularly in the 1920s and 1930s at the Folies Bergère, Moulin Rouge and Eldorado.
It now had to compete with jazz, swing and big band dance music.
Several music hall entertainers such as Marie Dainton, Marie Lloyd, Arthur Roberts, Joe Elvin and Gus Elen were strong advocates of the strike, though they themselves earned enough not to be concerned personally in a material sense.
One of the grandest of these new halls was the Coliseum Theatre built by Oswald Stoll in 1904 at the bottom of St. Martin's Lane.
It became extremely well known, and was advocated enthusiastically by the main spokesmen of the trade union and Labour movement&nbsp;– Ben Tillett and Keir Hardie for example.
The Olympia was converted into a movie theater, and others closed.
The Players' Theatre Club is another group performing a Victorian style music hall show at a variety of venues and The Music Hall Guild of Great Britain and America stage music hall-style entertainments.
* Deacons in Clerkenwell (1862).
Deemed old fashioned and with the closure of many halls, music hall entertainment ceased and the modern day variety began.
This sophisticated venue was noted for its alluring corps de ballet and was a focal point for West End pleasure seekers.
Stage and film musicals, however, continued to be influenced by the music hall idiom, including ''Oliver!
In the nondescript Grace's Alley, off Cable Street, Stepney stands Wilton's Music Hall.
Once the reality of war began to sink home, the recruiting songs all but disappeared&nbsp;– the Greatest Hits collection for 1915 published by top music publisher Francis and Day contains no recruitment songs.
Competition from movies and television largely brought an end to the Paris music hall.
In the guise of characters like 'Tommy in the Trench' and 'Jack Tar Home from Sea', Tilley performed songs such as "The army of today's all right" and "Jolly Good Luck to the Girl who Loves a Soldier".
It is still famous because of an English nursery rhyme, with the somewhat mysterious lyrics:
These theatres were designed chiefly so people could consume food and alcohol and smoke tobacco in the auditorium while the entertainment took place.
The Bedford was a favourite haunt of the artists known as the Camden Town Group headed by Walter Sickert who featured interior scenes of music halls in his paintings, including one entitled 'Little Dot Hetherington at The Old Bedford'.
The first Paris music call built specially for that purpose was the Folies-Bergere (1869);  it was followed by the Moulin Rouge (1889), the Alhambra (1866), the first to be called a music hall, and the  Olympia (1893).
Many also expressed anxiety about the new roles women were taking in society;
Although a number of songs show a sharply ironic and knowing view of working class life, no doubt a larger number were repetitive, derivative, written quickly and sung to make a living rather than a work of art.
In 1878, numbers peaked, with 78 large music halls in the metropolis and 300 smaller venues.
Towards the end of the style the music became influenced by ragtime and jazz, before being overtaken by them.
Like the nearby Alhambra this theatre appealed to the men of leisure by featuring alluring ballet dancers and had a notorious promenade which was the resort of courtesans.
Another famous "song and supper" room of this period was Evans Music-and-Supper Rooms, 43 King Street, Covent Garden, established in the 1840s by W.H.
Significant West End music halls include:
Collins was a star of his own theatre, singing mostly Irish songs specially composed for him.
Many of these buildings can be seen as part of the annual London Open House event.
She first arrived in Paris in 1925 to perform in a show called  "''La Revue Nègre''" at the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées.
These venues replaced earlier semi-rural amusements provided by fairs and suburban pleasure gardens such as Vauxhall Gardens and the Cremorne Gardens.
As music hall grew in popularity and respectability, and as the licensing authorities exercised ever firmer regulation, the original arrangement of a large hall with tables at which drink was served, changed to that of a drink-free auditorium.
The music video of the Frankie Goes to Hollywood single Relax was shot here.
The tune of "Champagne Charlie" became used for the Salvation Army hymn "Bless His Name, He Sets Me Free" (1881).
This was used for many years as the setting for the BBC television variety show, based on the music hall genre, ''The Good Old Days''.
In the early 1950s, rock and roll, whose performers initially topped music hall bills, attracted a young audience who had little interest in the music hall acts while driving the older audience away.
The musical forms most associated with music hall evolved in part from traditional folk song and songs written for popular drama, becoming by the 1850s a distinct musical style.
When asked why the tune should be used like this, William Booth is said to have replied "Why should the devil have all the good tunes?''
* The Alhambra, Leicester Square (1860), in the former premises of the London Panopticon.
Until well into the twentieth century, the acts were essentially vocal, with songs telling a story, accompanied by a minimum of patter.
Her husband was knighted in 1919 for his own services to the war effort, and Tilley became Lady de Frece.
They included a variety of genres, including:
He sold the music hall to South Eastern Railway in 1862, and the site became Charing Cross railway station.
This is how she got the nickname ''Britain's best recruiting sergeant''&nbsp;– young men were sometimes asked to join the army on stage during her show.
* Male and female impersonators, perhaps more in the style of a pantomime dame than a modern drag queen.
He persuaded her to sing despite her extreme nervousness.
It involved a mixture of popular songs, comedy, speciality acts, and variety entertainment.
Licensing restrictions also changed its character.
7 (Pavilion, 1986) ISBN 1-85145-061-0 The hall looked like most contemporary pub concert rooms, but its replacement in 1854 was of then unprecedented size.
After conscription was brought in 1916, songs dealing with the war spoke mostly of the desire to return home.
In Nottingham, the Malt Cross music hall retains its restored cast-iron interior.
Songs like ''My Old Man (Said Follow the Van)'', ''Knocked 'em in the Old Kent Road'', and ''Waiting at the Church'', expressed in melodic form situations with which the urban poor were very familiar.
Designed by William Finch Hill (the designer of the Britannia theatre in nearby Hoxton), it was rebuilt after a fire in 1898.
Baker performed the 'Danse sauvage,' wearing a costume consisting of a skirt made of a string of artificial bananas.
The Old Bedford was demolished in 1969.
She also performed in hospitals and sold war bonds.
* Collins', Islington Green (1862).
Subject matter became more contemporary and humorous, and accompaniment was provided by larger house-orchestras as increasing affluence gave the lower classes more access to commercial entertainment and to a wider range of musical instruments, including the piano.
Music hall songs needed to gain and hold the attention of an often jaded and unruly urban audience.
It was closed as a result of enemy action in the Blitz on the night of 11–12 May 1941 and the building was pulled down in 1960.
Older theaters also transformed themselves into music halls, including the Bobino Music Hall (1873), the Bataclan (1864), and the Alcazar  (1858).
With the decline in popularity of music hall, many were abandoned, or converted to other uses, such as cinemas and their interiors lost.
Other song and supper rooms included the Coal Hole in The Strand, the Cyder Cellars in Maiden Lane, Covent Garden and the Mogul Saloon in Drury Lane.
The improvement of cinema, the development of radio, and the cheapening of the gramophone damaged its popularity greatly.
Picket lines were organized outside the theatres by the artistes, while in the provinces theatre management attempted to oblige artistes to sign a document promising never to join a trade union.
The Greenwich Theatre was originally the Rose and Crown Music Hall (1855), and later became 'Crowder's Music Hall and Temple of Varieties'.
The newly created urban communities, cut off from their cultural roots, required new and readily accessible forms of entertainment.
In the neighbouring borough, Collins Music Hall (built about 1860) still stands on the north side of Islington Green.
* Lion comiques: essentially, men dressed as "toffs", who sang songs about drinking champagne, going to the races, going to the ball, womanising and gambling, and living the life of an aristocrat.
The halls had recovered by the start of the First World War and were used to stage charity events in aid of the war effort.
The strike ended in arbitration, which satisfied most of the main demands, including a minimum wage and maximum working week for musicians.
She became an immediate success for her erotic dancing, and for appearing practically nude on stage.
The rhymes give a sense of grim humour (''When they wipe my face with sponges/ and they feed me on blancmanges/ I'm glad I've got a bit of a blighty one'').
The strike lasted for almost two weeks and was known as the ''Music Hall War''.
By the middle years of the nineteenth century, the first purpose-built music halls were being built in London.
At the beginning, music halls offered dance reviews, theater and songs, but gradually songs and singers became the main attraction.
The building was badly damaged in the Second World War, and was demolished in 1950.
The building has been extensively modernised and little of the original layout remains.
(here, being set for a wedding).
Both were designed by the prolific Frank Matcham.
The typical music hall comedian was a man or woman, usually dressed in character to suit the subject of the song, or sometimes attired in absurd and eccentric style.
It was demolished in 1936.
In Clapham, The Grand, originally the Grand Palace of Varieties (1900), has been restored, but its interior reflects its modern use as a music venue and nightclub.
The ''Printania'' (1903) was a music-garden, open only in summer, with a theater, restaurant, circus, and horse-racing.
When the law changed in 1867, the Paris music hall flourished, and a half-dozen new halls opened, offering acrobats, singers, dancers, magicians, and trained animals.
London was the centre of music hall with hundreds of venues, often in the entertainment rooms of public houses.
According to John Hollingshead, proprietor of the Gaiety Theatre, London (originally the Strand Music Hall), this establishment was "the father and mother, the dry and wet nurse of the Music Hall".
The music-halls suffered growing hardships in the 1930s.
"The people the Army sought to save, knew nothing of the hymn tunes or gospel melodies used in the churches, but 'the music hall had been their melody school.
Strikes in other London and suburban halls followed, organised by the Variety Artistes' Federation.
Moss Empires, the largest British Music Hall chain, closed the majority of its theatres in 1960, closely followed by the death of music hall stalwart Max Miller in 1963, prompting one contemporary to write that: "Music-halls&nbsp;... died this afternoon when they buried Max Miller".
"The Tivoli" became a brand name for music-halls all over the British Empire.
The development of syndicates controlling a number of theatres, such as the Stoll circuit, increased tensions between employees and employers.
The consequent change in musical taste from traditional to more professional forms of entertainment arose in response to the rapid industrialisation and urbanisation of previously rural populations during the Industrial Revolution.
Typically, a music hall song consists of a series of verses sung by the performer alone, and a repeated chorus which carries the principal melody, and in which the audience is encouraged to join.
The pressure for greater rewards for music hall songwriters resulted in the application of copyright law to musical compositions.
In America, from the 1840s, Stephen Foster had reinvigorated folk song with the admixture of Negro spiritual to produce a new type of popular song.
'', ''Dr Dolittle'' and ''My Fair Lady''.
A noted music hall entrepreneur of this time was Carlo Gatti who built a music hall, known as Gatti's, at Hungerford Market in 1857.
Patriotic music hall compositions such as "Keep the Home Fires Burning" ( 1914), "Pack up Your Troubles" ( 1915), "It's a Long Way to Tipperary" ( 1914) and "We Don't Want to Lose You (but we think you ought to Go)", were sung by music hall audiences, and sometimes by soldiers in the trenches.
Such establishments were distinguished from theatres by the fact that in a music hall you would be seated at a table in the auditorium and could drink alcohol and smoke tobacco whilst watching the show.
Some music halls tried to retain an audience by putting on striptease acts.
Instead all forms of entertainment were performed: male and female impersonators, lions comiques, mime artists and impressionists, trampoline acts, and comic pianists such as John Orlando Parry and George Grossmith were just a few of the many types of entertainments the audiences could expect to find over the next forty years.
As a result, professional songwriters were enlisted to provide the music for a plethora of star performers, such as Marie Lloyd, Dan Leno, Little Tich, and George Leybourne.
The Alhambra Theatre, Bradford was built in 1914 for theatre impresario Francis Laidler, and later owned by the Stoll-Moss Empire'.
Aimed at a younger audience, but still owing a lot to the music hall heritage, was the late '70s series ''The Muppet Show''.
Many music hall performers, unable to find work, fell into poverty; some did not even have a home, having spent their working lives living in digs between performances.
He opened it as another music hall, known as "Gatti's-in-The-Arches".
Possibly the most notorious of music hall songs from the First World War was "Oh!
There are a number of purpose-built survivors, including the Hackney Empire, an outstanding example of the late music hall period (Frank Matcham 1901).
'''Music hall''' is a type of British theatrical entertainment that was popular from the early Victorian era circa 1850 and lasting until 1960.
This has been restored to its Moorish splendour and now provides an eclectic programme of events from opera to "Black Variety Nights".
After his death his family continued to operate the music hall, known for a period as the Hungerford or Gatti's Hungerford Palace of Varieties.
Leplée ran an intense publicity campaign leading up to her opening night, attracting the presence of many celebrities, including Maurice Chevalier.
By the mid-19th century, the halls created a demand for new and catchy popular songs.
"What did you do in the Great war, Daddy" ( 1919) criticised profiteers and slackers; Vesta Tilley's "I've got a bit of a blighty one" ( 1916) showed a soldier delighted to have a wound just serious enough to be sent home.
Later converted into a theatre it was demolished in 1965.
This was followed by the London Palladium (1910) in Little Argyll Street.
In Britain, the first music hall songs often promoted the alcoholic wares of the owners of the halls in which they were performed.
It was colloquially known as 'The Chapel on the Green'.
* The Old Bedford, 93–95 High Street, Camden Town (1861).
In 1911, the Olympia had introduced the giant stairway as a set for its productions, an idea copied by other music halls.
The hall closed in the 1960s and currently forms part of a bookshop.
It became a cinema in 1910, and the Players' Theatre in 1946.
The Gaiety Theatre, Isle of Man is another Matcham design from 1900 that remains in use after an extensive restoration programme in the 1970s.
The music publishers at the time (Feldman, Francis and Day...) were large, extremely profitable companies.
Though a theatre rather than a music hall, this establishment later hosted music hall variety acts.
In 1935, a twenty-year old singer named Édith Piaf was discovered in the Pigalle  by nightclub owner Louis Leplée, whose club ''Le Gerny'', off the Champs-Élysées, was frequented by the upper and lower classes alike.
It is run as a cafe bar by a Christian charitable trust promoting responsible drinking, also as the location of a safe space late at night and for operating a street pastor service.
It is now a ''receiving theatre'' for touring productions, and opera.
The exemption of the theatres from this latter act prompted some critics to denounce this legislation as an attempt to deprive the working classes of their pleasures, as a form of social control, whilst sparing the supposedly more responsible upper classes who patronised the theatres (though this could be due to the licensing restrictions brought about due to the Defence of the Realm Act 1914, which also applied to public houses as well).
During 1892, the Royal English Opera House, which had been a financial failure in Shaftesbury Avenue, applied for a music hall licence and was converted by Walter Emden into a grand music hall and renamed the Palace Theatre of Varieties, managed by Charles Morton.
It closed in 1956, after a fire, but the street front of the building still survives (see below).
It was further extended in 1859, later rebuilt as a variety theatre and finally destroyed by bombing in 1942.
The music hall as we know it developed from such establishments during the 1850s and were built in and on the grounds of public houses.
There is a preservation trust attempting to rescue the theatre.
By the 1870s, the songs were free of their folk music origins, and particular songs also started to become associated with particular singers, often with exclusive contracts with the songwriter, just as many pop songs are today.
These latter became subject to urban development and became fewer and less popular.
