There is a host of music classifications for non-Western music, many of which are caught up in the argument over the definition of music.
To give another example, while some art music pieces, such as symphonies are very long, some pop songs are just a few minutes long.
Musical texture is the overall sound of a piece of music or song.
The common elements of music are pitch (which governs melody and harmony), rhythm (and its associated concepts tempo, meter, and articulation), dynamics (loudness and softness), and the sonic qualities of timbre and texture (which are sometimes termed the "color" of a musical sound).
* What is meaning in relation to music?
Although Baroque composers also wrote sonatas, the Classical style of sonata is completely distinct.
In the Baroque era, performers improvised ornaments and basso continuo keyboard players improvised chord voicings based on figured bass notation.
It can be further categorized as a branch of psychophysics.
By using a well-structured computer environment, the systematic structures of these cognitive phenomena can be investigated.
Some composers promoted nationalistic pride with patriotic orchestral music inspired by folk music.
Amateur musicians typically learn basic musical rudiments (e.g., learning about musical notation for musical scales and rhythms) and beginner- to intermediate-level singing or instrument-playing techniques.
What is most commonly taught in beginning music theory classes are guidelines to write in the style of the common practice period, or tonal music.
Consumers' growing awareness of their increased choice results in a closer association between listening tastes and social identity, and the creation of thousands of niche markets.
The origin of this philosophic shift is sometimes attributed to Baumgarten in the 18th century, followed by Kant.
If we acknowledge that sound is not organised and conceptualised (that is, made to form music) merely by its producer, but by the mind that perceives it, then music is uniquely human."
The physical characteristics of sound that determine the perception of timbre include the spectrum, envelope and overtones of a note or musical sound.
Music that contains a large number of independent parts (e.g., a double concerto accompanied by 100 orchestral instruments with many interweaving melodic lines) is generally said to have a "thicker" or "denser" texture than a work with few parts (e.g., a solo flute melody accompanied by a single cello).
Using a multitrack system, a band and their music producer could overdub many layers of instrument tracks and vocals, creating new sounds that would not be possible in a live performance.
Different cultures emphasised different instruments, techniques, singing styles and uses for music.
Different styles or types of music may emphasize, de-emphasize or omit some of these elements.
of a and/or bA1ab1+coda).
A 2015 article on concerto soloists in major Canadian orchestras, however, indicated that 84% of the soloists with the Orchestre Symphonique de Montreal were men.
In Greek mythology, the nine muses were the goddesses who inspired literature, science, and the arts and who were the source of the knowledge embodied in the poetry, song-lyrics, and myths in the Greek culture.
Women comprise a significant proportion of instrumental soloists in classical music and the percentage of women in orchestras is increasing.
The standard body of choices and techniques present at a given time and a given place is referred to as performance practice, whereas interpretation is generally used to mean the individual choices of a performer.
When music is written down, the pitches and rhythm of the music, such as the notes of a melody, are notated.
He noted that music has an "excellent power ...to expel many other diseases" and he called it "a sovereign remedy against despair and melancholy."
"Composition" is the act or practice of creating a song or other piece of music.
In classical Greece, the term "music" refers to any art in which the Muses presided, but especially music and lyric poetry."
*USA: pitch, timbre, texture, dynamics, rhythm, form, harmony, style/articulation.
In addition to its focus on fundamental perceptions and cognitive processes, music psychology is a field of research with practical relevance for many areas, including music performance, composition, education, criticism, and therapy, as well as investigations of human aptitude, skill, intelligence, creativity, and social behavior.
In Classical pieces that are based on motifs, the motif is usually combined, varied and worked out in different ways, perhaps having a symmetrical or arch-like underpinning and a progressive development from beginning to end.
The Seikilos epitaph is the oldest surviving example of a complete musical composition, including musical notation, from anywhere in the world.
There are often many links between amateur and professional musicians.
Prehistoric music can only be theorized based on findings from paleolithic archaeology sites.
Also many modern composers like La Monte Young, Rhys Chatham and Glenn Branca paid much attention to a scale called just intonation.
A more commonly known example of chance-based music is the sound of wind chimes jingling in a breeze.
It has its own unique systems of musical notation, as well as musical tuning and pitch, musical instruments and styles or musical genres.
Graduate music degrees include the Master of Music, the Master of Arts, the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) (e.g., in musicology or music theory), and more recently, the Doctor of Musical Arts, or DMA.
Igor Stravinsky, Arnold Schoenberg, and John Cage were all influential composers in 20th-century art music.
Music theory is the study of music, generally in a highly technical manner outside of other disciplines.
* What is the definition of music?
The Indus Valley civilization has sculptures that show dance and old musical instruments, like the seven holed flute.
In the early 20th century (in the late 1920s), as talking pictures emerged in the early 20th century, with their prerecorded musical tracks, an increasing number of moviehouse orchestra musicians found themselves out of work.
As such, in popular and traditional music styles, even when a band plays a cover song, they can make changes to it such as adding a guitar solo to or inserting an introduction.
In the early 20th century, Tin Pan Alley songs and Broadway musical songs were often in AABA 32 bar form, in which the A sections repeated the same eight bar melody and the B section provided a contrasting melody and/or harmony for 8 bars.
The philosopher Plato suggests in ''the Republic'' that music has a direct effect on the soul.
This form has three parts.
It seeks to understand music perception and activity in the context of evolutionary theory.
Cognitive neuroscience of music is the scientific study of brain-based mechanisms involved in the cognitive processes underlying music.
The aristocracy still played a significant role in the sponsorship of concerts and compositions, but it was now possible for composers to survive without being  permanent employees of queens or princes.
At the university level, students in most arts and humanities programs can receive credit for taking a few music courses, which typically take the form of an overview course on the history of music, or a music appreciation course that focuses on listening to music and learning about different musical styles.
Ancient Greek and Indian philosophers defined music as tones ordered horizontally as melodies and vertically as harmonies.
However, as it gets performed, the interpretation of a song or piece can evolve and change.
Others main kinds were the trio, string quartet, serenade and divertimento.
By the middle of the 15th century, composers wrote richly polyphonic sacred music, in which different melody lines were interwoven simultaneously.
The only European Medieval repertory that has been found in written form from before 800 is the monophonic liturgical plainsong chant of the Roman Catholic Church, the central tradition of which was called Gregorian chant.
Two online sources for public domain music are IMSLP (International Music Score Library Project) and Choral Public Domain Library (CPDL).
In popular music, while there are many women singers recording songs, there are very few women behind the audio console acting as music producers, the individuals who direct and manage the recording process.
In the 18th century, focus shifted to the experience of hearing music, and thus to questions about its beauty and human enjoyment (''plaisir'' and ''jouissance'') of music.
Since the 2000s, the increasing popularity and availability of Internet forums and YouTube "how-to" videos have enabled many singers and musicians from metal, blues and similar genres to improve their skills.
Many smaller independent CD stores went out of business as music buyers decreased their purchases of CDs, and many labels had lower CD sales.
Nonetheless these elemental components link precisely with four of the most common musical elements: "Pitch" and "timbre" match exactly, "loudness" links with dynamics and "time" links with the time-based elements of rhythm, duration and tempo.
Music and theatre scholars studying the history and anthropology of Semitic and early Judeo-Christian culture have discovered common links in theatrical and musical activity between the classical cultures of the Hebrews and those of later Greeks and Romans.
Later, influences from the Roman Empire, Eastern Europe, and the Byzantine Empire changed Greek music.
These sites make it easier for aspiring singers and amateur bands to distribute videos of their songs, connect with other musicians, and gain audience interest.
While most university and conservatory music programs focus on training students in classical music, there are a number of universities and colleges that train musicians for careers as jazz or popular music musicians and composers, with notable U.S. examples including the Manhattan School of Music and the Berklee College of Music.
Flutes are often discovered, carved from bones in which lateral holes have been pierced; these are thought to have been blown at one end like the Japanese shakuhachi.
Audiences can also ''become'' performers by participating in karaoke, an activity of Japanese origin centered on a device that plays voice-eliminated versions of well-known songs.
In popular music and jazz, music notation almost always indicates only the basic framework of the melody, harmony, or performance approach; musicians and singers are expected to know the performance conventions and styles associated with specific genres and pieces.
For example, the "lead sheet" for a jazz tune may only indicate the melody and the chord changes.
Precise pitch can only be determined in sounds that have a frequency that is clear and stable enough to distinguish from noise.
This helped to spread musical styles.
This is said by Scholes (1977) to be the form ''par excellence'' of unaccompanied or accompanied solo instrumental music.
People who study these properties are known as music theorists.
Africa and Asia is also taught in Western universities.
* What does musical history reveal to us about the world?
Romantic music (c. 1810 to 1900) from the 19th century had many elements in common with the Romantic styles in literature and painting of the era.
One of these layers could be a string section, or another brass.
Below is a list of the three official versions of the "elements of music":
The invention of sound recording and the ability to edit music gave rise to new subgenre of classical music, including the acousmatic and Musique concrète schools of electronic composition.
Since the emergence of the study of psychoacoustics in the 1930s, most lists of elements of music have related more to how we ''hear'' music than how we learn to play it or study it.
Alongside these traditions of sacred and church music there existed a vibrant tradition of secular song (non-religious songs).
In the jam band scene, live, improvised jam sessions are preferred to studio recordings.
Music was an important part of education, and boys were taught music starting at age six.
The music industry includes the individuals who create new songs and musical pieces, such as songwriters and composers; individuals who perform music, which include orchestra, jazz band and rock band musicians, singers and conductors; individuals who record music (music producers and sound engineers) and organize concert tours; and those who sell recordings and sheet music to customers.
Timbre is what makes a particular musical sound different from another, even when they have the same pitch and loudness.
The detail included explicitly in the music notation varies between genres and historical periods.
One of the earliest mentions of music therapy was in Al-Farabi's (c. 872 – 950) treatise ''Meanings of the Intellect'', which described the therapeutic effects of music on the soul.
Chinese classical music, the traditional art or court music of China, has a history stretching over around three thousand years.
In elementary schools, children often learn to play instruments such as the recorder, sing in small choirs, and learn about the history of Western art music and traditional music.
Writers of lists of "rudimentary elements of music" vary their lists depending on their personal priorities.
Carnatic music, popular in the southern states, is largely devotional; the majority of the songs are addressed to the Hindu deities.
With the advent of sound recording, records of popular songs, rather than sheet music became the dominant way that music lovers would enjoy their favourite songs.
Students can pursue the undergraduate study of musicology, ethnomusicology, music history, and music theory through several different types of degrees, including bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and PhD degrees.
In the 2010s, while women comprise a significant proportion of popular music and classical music singers, and a significant proportion of songwriters (many of them being singer-songwriters), there are few women record producers, rock critics and rock instrumentalists.
The Hurrian song, found on clay tablets that date back to approximately 1400&nbsp;BC, is the oldest surviving notated work of music.
This form uses two sections ('''AB'''...), each often repeated ('''AABB'''...).
The increased availability of sheet music helped to spread musical styles more quickly and across a larger area.
These degrees provide students with a grounding in music theory and music history, and many students also study an instrument or learn singing technique as part of their program.
Music that makes heavy use of randomness and chance is called aleatoric music, and is associated with contemporary composers active in the 20th century, such as John Cage, Morton Feldman, and Witold Lutosławski.
Until the later 20th century, the division between "high" and "low" musical forms was widely accepted as a valid distinction that separated out better quality, more advanced "art music" from the popular styles of music heard in bars and dance halls.
*heterophony: two or more instruments or singers playing/singing the same melody, but with each performer slightly varying the rhythm or speed of the melody or adding different ornaments to the melody.
of mousikos "pertaining to the Muses," from Mousa "Muse" (see muse (n.)).
Improvisation is the act of instantaneous composition by performers, where compositional techniques are employed with or without preparation.
At the same time, Western universities and colleges are widening their curriculum to include music of non-Western cultures, such as the music of Africa or Bali (e.g.
Even two instrumentalists playing the same note on the same instrument (one after the other) may sound different due to different ways of playing the instrument (e.g., two string players might hold the bow differently).
Music therapy is used with individuals of all ages and with a variety of conditions, including: psychiatric disorders, medical problems, physical handicaps, sensory impairments, developmental disabilities, substance abuse, communication disorders, interpersonal problems, and aging.
Indian classical music is one of the oldest musical traditions in the world.
The expansion of orchestral concerts necessitated the building of large public performance spaces.
This has led some scholars to believe that the prophet Samuel was the patriarch of a school, which taught not only prophets and holy men, but also sacred-rite musicians.
In Western art music, the most common types of written notation are scores, which include all the music parts of an ensemble piece, and parts, which are the music notation for the individual performers or singers.
Beethoven and Schubert are also considered to be composers in the later part of the Classical era, as it began to move towards Romanticism.
In ancient times, such as with the Ancient Greeks, the aesthetics of music explored the mathematical and cosmological dimensions of rhythmic and harmonic organization.
However, there are also many cases where a live performance in front of an audience is also recorded and distributed.
In 18th-century Western classical music, "simple binary" form was often used for dances and carried with it the convention that the two sections should be in different musical keys but same rhythm, duration and tone.
Common sayings such as "the harmony of the spheres" and "it is music to my ears" point to the notion that music is often ordered and pleasant to listen to.
Undergraduate university degrees in music, including the Bachelor of Music, the Bachelor of Music Education, and the Bachelor of Arts (with a major in music) typically take about four years to complete.
In Indian classical music, improvisation is a core component and an essential criterion of performances.
By far the most important developmental form in Western classical music is Sonata form.
Public concerts became an important part of well-to-do urban society.
Biologically inspired models of computation are often included in research, such as neural networks and evolutionary programs.
Involvement in playing and singing music is thought to teach basic skills such as concentration, counting, listening, and cooperation while also promoting understanding of language, improving the ability to recall information, and creating an environment more conducive to learning in other areas.
The instruments used chamber music and orchestra became more standardized.
Written notation varies with style and period of music.
Young women "...were not socialized to see themselves as people who create music."
We can talk about the highness or lowness of pitch in the more general sense, such as the way a listener hears a piercingly high piccolo note or whistling tone as higher in pitch than a deep thump of a bass drum.
An important variant of this, much used in 17th-century British music and in the Passacaglia and Chaconne, was that of the ground bass - a repeating bass theme or ''basso ostinato'' over and around which the rest of the structure unfolds, often, but not always, spinning polyphonic or contrapuntal threads, or improvising divisions and descants.
Broadly, music theory may include any statement, belief, or conception of or about music.
Music theory encompasses the nature and mechanics of music.
In the 20th century, important contributions were made by Peter Kivy, Jerrold Levinson, Roger Scruton, and Stephen Davies.
In the 19th century, art music for solo performers may give a general instruction such as to perform the music expressively, without describing in detail how the performer should do this.
Scholes states that European classical music had only six stand-alone forms: simple binary, simple ternary, compound binary, rondo, air with variations, and fugue (although musicologist Alfred Mann emphasized that the fugue is primarily a method of composition that has sometimes taken on certain structural conventions.)
Evolutionary musicology concerns the "origins of music, the question of animal song, selection pressures underlying music evolution", and "music evolution and human evolution".
*monophony: a single melody (or "tune") with neither instrumental accompaniment nor a harmony part.
The Master of Music degree, which takes one to two years to complete, is typically awarded to students studying the performance of an instrument, education, voice (singing) or composition.
YouTube users, for example, no longer only download and listen to MP3s, but also actively create their own.
Musical notation was used since Ancient times in Greek culture, but in the Middle Ages, notation was first introduced by the Catholic church so that the chant melodies could be written down, to facilitate the use of the same melodies for religious music across the entire Catholic empire.
:"While Genesis 4.21 identifies Jubal as the "father of all such as handle the harp and pipe," the Pentateuch is nearly silent about the practice and instruction of music in the early life of Israel.
In music, form describes how  the overall structure or plan of a song or piece of music, and it describes the layout of a composition as divided into sections.
For example, a thick texture contains many 'layers' of instruments.
''Silappadhikaram'' by Ilango Adigal provides information about how new scales can be formed by modal shifting of the tonic from an existing scale.
The performer was expected to know how to use tempo changes, accentuation, and pauses (among other devices) to obtain this "expressive" performance style.
This form has a recurring theme alternating with different (usually contrasting) sections called "episodes".
''Speculative music theory'', contrasted with ''analytic music theory'', is devoted to the analysis and synthesis of music materials, for example tuning systems, generally as preparation for composition.
In the Western art music tradition, improvisation was an important skill during the Baroque era and during the Classical era.
The emotional and expressive qualities of music came to take precedence over tradition.
Music was an important part of social and cultural life in Ancient Greece.
For example, it is much easier for listeners to discern the pitch of a single note played on a piano  than to try to discern the pitch of a crash cymbal that is struck.
Some elementary school children also learn about popular music styles.
Melodies also often contain notes from the chords used in the song.
In place of the basso continuo group of the Baroque era, which consisted of harpsichord, organ or lute along with a number of bass instruments selected at the discretion of the group leader (e.g., viol, cello, theorbo, serpent), Classical chamber groups used specified, standardized instruments (e.g., a string quartet would be performed by two violins, a viola and a cello).
The field is distinguished by its reliance on direct observations of the brain, using such techniques as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), magnetoencephalography (MEG), electroencephalography (EEG), and positron emission tomography (PET).
Research in this field and its subfields are primarily empirical; their knowledge tends to advance on the basis of interpretations of data collected by systematic observation of and interaction with human participants.
Indian music, for example, is one of the oldest and longest living types of music, and is still widely heard and performed in South Asia, as well as internationally (especially since the 1960s).
The sound of rock often revolves around the electric guitar or acoustic guitar, and it uses a strong back beat laid down by a rhythm section of electric bass guitar, drums, and keyboard instruments such as organ, piano, or, since the 1970s, analog synthesizers and digital ones and computers since the 1990s.
US copyright law formerly protected printed music published after 1923 for 28 years and with renewal for another 28 years, but the Copyright Act of 1976 made renewal automatic, and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act changed the calculation of the copyright term to 70 years after the death of the creator.
In the Ottoman Empire, mental illnesses were treated with music.
The word derives from Greek μουσική (''mousike''; "art of the Muses").
We also talk about pitch in the precise sense associated with musical melodies, basslines and chords.
Some genres do not fit neatly into one of these "big two" classifications, (such as folk music, world music, or jazz-related music).
Then, in I Samuel 10 and the texts that follow, a curious thing happens.
Choral music written in the Renaissance music era was typically written in this style.
Jazz has, from its early-20th-century inception, spawned a variety of subgenres, ranging from New Orleans Dixieland (1910s) to 1970s and 1980s-era jazz-rock fusion.
* What is the connection between music and emotions?
They generated complex and often much longer musical works.
As George Herzog (1941) asked, "do animals have music?"
(What are the necessary and sufficient conditions for classifying something as music?)
Performers, including singers and instrumentalists, can add musical expression to a song or piece by adding phrasing, by adding effects such as vibrato (with voice and some instruments, such as guitar, violin, brass instruments and woodwinds), dynamics (the loudness or softness of piece or a section of it), tempo fluctuations (e.g., ritardando or accelerando, which are, respectively slowing down and speeding up the tempo), by adding pauses or fermatas on a cadence, and by changing the articulation of the notes (e.g., making notes more pronounced or accented, by making notes more legato, which means smoothly connected, or by making notes shorter).
'''Theme and Variations:''' a theme, which in itself can be of any shorter form (binary, ternary, etc.
Music has many different fundamentals or elements.
Late-period Beethoven string quartets, Stravinsky ballet scores, serialism, bebop-era jazz, hip hop, punk rock, and electronica have all been considered non-music by some critics when they were first introduced.
For example, the sheet music for a song may state that the song is a "slow blues" or a "fast swing", which indicates the tempo and the genre.
Expressive qualities are those elements in music that create change in music without changing the main pitches or substantially changing the rhythms of the melody and its accompaniment.
Indian music has mainly three forms of classical music, Hindustani, Carnatic, and Dhrupad styles.
According to the UK's Radio 3 editor, Edwina Wolstencroft, the music industry has long been open to having women in performance or entertainment roles, but women are much less likely to have positions of authority, such as being the leader of an orchestra.
Musical performances take different forms in different cultures and socioeconomic milieus.
These behaviours include music listening, performing, composing, reading, writing, and ancillary activities.
Later Romantic composers such as Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, Antonín Dvořák, and Gustav Mahler used more unusual chords and more dissonance to create dramatic tension.
In classical music, a musical work is written in music notation by a composer and then it is performed once the composer is satisfied with its structure and instrumentation.
Most karaoke machines also have video screens that show lyrics to songs being performed; performers can follow the lyrics as they sing over the instrumental tracks.
Music therapy is an interpersonal process in which the therapist uses music and all of its facets—physical, emotional, mental, social, aesthetic, and spiritual—to help clients to improve or maintain their health.
During the Baroque era, polyphonic contrapuntal music, in which multiple, simultaneous independent melody lines were used, remained important (counterpoint was important in the vocal music of the Medieval era).
To read music notation, a person must have an understanding of music theory, harmony and the performance practice associated with a particular song or piece's genre.
The sonata was the most important and developed form.
Sectional forms include:
Graduates of undergraduate music programs can seek employment or go on to further study in music graduate programs.
Some music labels are "independent," while others are subsidiaries of larger corporate entities or international media groups.
When composers introduce styles of music that break with convention, there can be a strong resistance from academic music experts and popular culture.
"repeat from the top") form.
Prominent composers from this era include Guillaume Dufay, Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, Thomas Morley, and Orlande de Lassus.
Important composers from the Baroque era include Johann Sebastian Bach, George Frideric Handel, Georg Philipp Telemann and Vivaldi.
Though there were plenty of female singers on the radio, women ...were primarily seen as consumers:... Singing was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl, but playing an instrument, writing songs, or producing records simply wasn't done."
Duchen states that while "there are women musicians who refuse to play on their looks,...the ones who do tend to be more materially successful."
In Europe and North America, there is often a divide between what types of music are viewed as a "high culture" and "low culture."
The UK's curriculum switch to the "inter-related dimensions of music" seems to be a move back to using the rudimentary elements of music.
This is derived from the "...Greek ''mousike (techne)'' "(art) of the Muses," from fem.
Another effect of the Internet arose with online communities and social media websites like YouTube and Facebook, a social networking service.
This public music school, perhaps the earliest in recorded history, was not restricted to a priestly class—which is how the shepherd boy David appears on the scene as a minstrel to King Saul."
However, in the 20th and early 21st century, as "common practice" Western art music performance became institutionalized in symphony orchestras, opera houses and ballets, improvisation has played a smaller role.
