These excavations, carried out by Leonard Woolley in the 1920s, uncovered non-degradable fragments of instruments and the voids left by the degraded segments that, together, have been used to reconstruct them.
Other books followed, including Arnolt Schlick's ''Spiegel der Orgelmacher und Organisten'' ('Mirror of Organ Makers and Organ Players') the following year, a treatise on organ building and organ playing.
Cultures who used these instrument pairs associated genders with them; the "father" was the bigger or more energetic instrument, while the "mother" was the smaller or duller instrument.
The proliferation of electricity in the twentieth century lead to the creation of an entirely new category of musical instruments: electronic instruments, or electrophones.
As a result, many instruments that were incapable of larger ranges and dynamics, and therefore were seen as unemotional, fell out of favor.
The Chinese believed that music was an essential part of character and community, and developed a unique system of classifying their musical instruments according to their material makeup.
The construction of pneumatic organs evolved in Europe starting in fifth-century Spain, spreading to England in about 700.
The civilization also made use of sistra, vertical flutes, double clarinets, arched and angular harps, and various drums.
Idiophones such as bells and clappers served various practical purposes, such as warning of the approach of a leper.
Little history is available in the period between 2700 BC and 1500 BC, as Egypt (and indeed, Babylon) entered a long violent period of war and destruction.
There are many different methods of classifying musical instruments.
Tubular drums, stick zithers (veena), short fiddles, double and triple flutes, coiled trumpets, and curved India horns emerged in this time period.
Ordering instruments by geography is also not totally reliable, as it cannot always be determined when and how cultures contacted one another and shared knowledge.
Virtually every material in nature has been used by at least one culture to make musical instruments.
The resulting instruments varied in size and use from portable organs worn around the neck to large pipe organs.
However, by 2700 BC the cultural contacts seem to have dissipated; the lyre, a prominent ceremonial instrument in Sumer, did not appear in Egypt for another 800 years.
The history of musical instruments dates to the beginnings of human culture.
This discovery is among many indications that the Indus Valley and Sumerian cultures maintained cultural contact.
Virdung's work is noted as being particularly thorough for including descriptions of "irregular" instruments such as hunters' horns and cow bells, though Virdung is critical of the same.
The people of Mesopotamia preferred stringed instruments to any other, as evidenced by their proliferation in Mesopotamian figurines, plaques, and seals.
Instruments meant to play together, as in an orchestra, must be tuned to the same standard lest they produce audibly different sounds while playing the same notes.
The details of this transformation are unclear, but the modern horn or, more colloquially, French horn, had emerged by 1725.
An emphasis on aesthetic beauty also developed; listeners were as pleased with the physical appearance of an instrument as they were with its sound.
However, most historians believe that determining a specific time of musical instrument invention is impossible due to the subjectivity of the definition and the relative instability of materials used to make them.
Wind instruments such as flute, pan-pipes, pitch-pipes, and mouth organs also appeared in this time period.
In all, India had no unique musical instruments until the Middle Ages.
The Hebrew texts mention two prominent instruments associated with Jubal: the ''ugab'' (pipes) and ''kinnor'' (lyre).
Popular instruments, simple and playable by anyone, evolved differently from professional instruments whose development focused on effectiveness and skill.
Musical instrument construction is a specialized trade that requires years of training, practice, and sometimes an apprenticeship.
These instruments, one of the first ensembles of instruments yet discovered, include nine lyres ( the Lyres of Ur), two harps, a silver double flute, sistra and cymbals.
People also began writing books about creating, playing, and cataloging musical instruments; the first such book was Sebastian Virdung's 1511 treatise ''Musica getuscht und ausgezogen'' ('Music Germanized and Abstracted').
Those cultures developed more complex percussion instruments and other instruments such as ribbon reeds, flutes, and trumpets.
For example, a bass flute's range is from C3 to F♯6, while a bass clarinet plays about one octave lower.
Under their new cultural influences, the people of the New Kingdom began using oboes, trumpets, lyres, lutes, castanets, and cymbals.
Most methods are specific to a geographic area or cultural group and were developed to serve the unique classification requirements of the group.
The areas of Mesopotamia and the Arabian Peninsula experiences rapid growth and sharing of musical instruments once they were united by Islamic culture in the seventh century.
A '''musical instrument''' is an instrument created or adapted to make musical sounds.
This book, the ''Syntagma musicum'' by Michael Praetorius, is now considered an authoritative reference of sixteenth-century musical instruments.
Early musical instruments may have been used for ritual, such as a trumpet to signal success on the hunt, or a drum in a religious ceremony.
However, the most common academic method, Hornbostel-Sachs, uses the means by which they produce sound.
Beginning around 2000 BC, Sumerian and Babylonian cultures began delineating two distinct classes of musical instruments due to division of labor and the evolving class system.
In fact, Chinese tradition attributes many musical instruments from this period to those regions and countries.
The emphasis on rhythm is an aspect native to Indian music.
A player sounding a flute to signal the start of a hunt does so without thought of the modern notion of "making music".
Lyres propagated through the same areas, as far east as Estonia.
Despite the influences of Greece and Rome, most musical instruments in Europe during the Middles Ages came from Asia.
Sachs proposed that a geographical chronology until approximately 1400 is preferable, however, due to its limited subjectivity.
In her book ''A Survey of Musical Instruments'', American musicologist Sibyl Marcuse proposes that the nevel must be similar to vertical harp due to its relation to ''nabla'', the Phoenician term for "harp".
Humans eventually developed the concept of using musical instruments for producing a melody.
Persian influence brought oboes and sitars, although Persian sitars had three strings and Indian version had from four to seven.
Among early cultures for whom drums developed ritual, even sacred importance are the Chukchi people of the Russian Far East, the indigenous people of Melanesia, and many cultures of Africa.
In the mid-seventeenth century, what was known as a hunter's horn underwent transformation into an "art instrument" consisting of a lengthened tube, a narrower bore, a wider bell, and much wider range.
Gradual iterations do emerge; for example, the "New Violin Family" began in 1964 to provide differently sized violins to expand the range of available sounds.
Organs underwent tonal changes in the Baroque period, as manufacturers such as Abraham Jordan of London made the stops more expressive and added devices such as expressive pedals.
Trumpets traditionally had a "defective" range—they were incapable of producing certain notes with precision.
Therefore, builders paid special attention to materials and workmanship, and instruments became collectibles in homes and museums.
While stringed instruments of China were designed to produce precise tones capable of matching the tones of chimes, stringed instruments of India were considerably more flexible.
The 9th-century Persian geographer Ibn Khordadbeh mentioned in his lexicographical discussion of music instruments that, in the Byzantine Empire, typical instruments included the ''urghun'' (organ), ''shilyani'' (probably a type of harp or lyre), ''salandj'' (probably a bagpipe) and the lyra.
Flutes and bowed instruments underwent many modifications and design changes—most of them unsuccessful—in efforts to increase volume.
The system has been criticised and revised over the years, but remains widely used by ethnomusicologists and organologists.
Sometimes, instruments that do not usually have a keyboard, such as the ''glockenspiel'', are fitted with one.
Southeast Asian musical innovations include those during a period of Indian influence that ended around 920 AD.
Every key generates one or more sounds; most keyboard instruments have extra means (pedals for a piano, stops and a pedal keyboard for an organ) to manipulate these sounds.
Many instruments have their range as part of their name: soprano saxophone, tenor saxophone, baritone horn, alto flute, bass guitar, etc.
Clappers and concussion sticks appear on Egyptian vases as early as 3000 BC.
If the instrument has strings parallel to the sounding board or chamber and the strings extend past the board with a neck, then the instrument is a lute, whether the sound chamber is constructed of wood like a guitar or uses a membrane like a banjo.
Lyres were the principal instrument, as musicians used them to honor the gods.
), the use for the instrument, the means by which music is produced with the instrument, the range of the instrument, and the instrument's place in an orchestra or other ensemble.
For example, if the strings are laid out parallel to the sounding board and there is no neck, the instrument is a zither whether it is plucked like an autoharp or struck with hammers like a piano.
In fact, drums were pervasive throughout every African culture.
The sheer variety of instruments developed overshadows any prior period.
The introduction of a monarchy in Israel during the 11th&nbsp;century BC produced the first professional musicians and with them a drastic increase in the number and variety of musical instruments.
Various lutes, zithers, dulcimers, and harps spread as far as Madagascar to the south and modern-day Sulawesi to the east.
Idiophones were extremely important in Chinese music, hence the majority of early instruments were idiophones.
Keyboards and lutes developed as polyphonic instruments, and composers arranged increasingly complex pieces using more advanced tablature.
Instruments like the violin, flute, french horn, harp, and so on are largely the same as those manufactured throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Musical instruments evolved in step with changing applications.
In pre-Islamic times, idiophones such hand bells, cymbals, and peculiar instruments resembling gongs came into wide use in Hindu music.
Scholars must therefore rely on information gleaned from the Bible and the Talmud.
One East African tribe, the Wahinda, believed it was so holy that seeing a drum would be fatal to any person other than the sultan.
Accompanying the changes to timbre and volume was a shift in the typical pitch used to tune instruments.
Sachs viewed this trend as a "degeneration" of the general organ sound.
However, some archaeologists and ethnomusicologists dispute the flute's status as a musical instrument.
As instruments evolved, so did the selection and quality of materials.
The carving, named the Divje Babe Flute, features four holes that Canadian musicologist Bob Fink determined could have been used to play four notes of a diatonic scale.
The academic study of musical instruments is called organology.
Regardless of how the sound in an instrument is produced, many musical instruments have a keyboard as the user-interface.
While the history of musical instruments in Mesopotamia and Egypt relies on artistic representations, the culture in Israel produced few such representations.
Despite this trend in traditional instruments, the development of new musical instruments exploded in the twentieth century.
Poetry of the Shang dynasty mentions bells, chimes, drums, and globular flutes carved from bone, the latter of which has been excavated and preserved by archaeologists.
In ancient Mexico, for example, the material drums were made from might contain actual human body parts obtained from sacrificial offerings.
Other prominent instruments in use during the early centuries AD were the snake charmer's double clarinet, bagpipes, barrel drums, cross flutes, and short lutes.
The central and northern regions used mainly lutes, stringed instruments with necks, while the southern region used lyres, which featured a two-armed body and a crossbar.
For example, stringed instruments of uncertain design called nevals and asors existed, but neither archaeology nor etymology can clearly define them.
Cymbals gained popularity, along with more advanced trumpets, clarinets, oboes, flutes, drums, and lutes.
Reed players of the Middle Ages were limited to oboes; no evidence of clarinets exists during this period.
The Yakuts believe that making drums from trees struck by lightning gives them a special connection to nature.
Beginning in about 1400, the rate of development of musical instruments increased in earnest as compositions demanded more dynamic sounds.
The cylindrical pipes feature three side-holes that allowed players to produce whole tone scales.
In the late 1960s, Bob Moog and other inventors began an era of development of commercial synthesizers.
Development in the Americas occurred at a slower pace, but cultures of North, Central, and South America shared musical instruments.
Additional adjectives describe instruments above the soprano range or below the bass, for example: sopranino saxophone, contrabass clarinet.
Similar to the process of reduplication in language, instrument players first developed repetition and then arrangement.
By 1400, musical instrument development slowed in many areas and was dominated by the Occident.
Beginning in 1762, the average concert pitch began rising from a low of 377 vibrations to a high of 457 in 1880 Vienna.
As the prevalence of string orchestras rose, wind instruments such as the flute, oboe, and bassoon were readmitted to counteract the monotony of hearing only strings.
Other instruments were changed just so they could play their parts in the scores.
Instruments took on other purposes than accompanying singing or dance, and performers used them as solo instruments.
Southern Europeans played short and long lutes whose pegs extended to the sides, unlike the rear-facing pegs of Central and Northern European instruments.
Some of these labels carry far different connotations from those used in modern day; early flutes and trumpets are so-labeled for their basic operation and function rather than any resemblance to modern instruments.
Examples of electromechanical instruments include Hammond organs and electric guitars.
Various harps served Central and Northern Europe as far north as Ireland, where the harp eventually became a national symbol.
Rhythm was of paramount importance in Indian music of the time, as evidenced by the frequent depiction of drums in reliefs dating to the Middle Ages.
Within each category are many subgroups.
Whatever the instrument constructed, the instrument maker must consider materials, construction technique, and decoration, creating a balanced instrument that is both functional and aesthetically pleasing.
They may produce sound by wind being fanned (organ) or pumped (accordion), vibrating strings either hammered (piano) or plucked (harpsichord), by electronic means (synthesizer), or in some other way.
Various rattles and whistles found among excavated artifacts are the only physical evidence of musical instruments.
Some instruments fall into more than one category: for example, the cello may be considered tenor, baritone or bass, depending on how its music fits into the ensemble, and the trombone may be alto, tenor, baritone, or bass and the French horn, bass, baritone, tenor, or alto, depending on the range it is played in.
One of the first of these instruments was the Moog synthesizer.
For example, a system based on instrument use would fail if a culture invented a new use for the same instrument.
The science of marking the order of musical instrument development relies on archaeological artifacts, artistic depictions, and literary references.
In 1880, Victor-Charles Mahillon adapted the ''Natya Shastra'' and assigned Greek labels to the four classifications: ''chordophones'' (stringed instruments), ''membranophones'' (skin-head percussion instruments), ''aerophones'' (wind instruments), and ''autophones'' (non-skin percussion instruments).
They felt that a monophonic style better suited the emotional music and wrote musical parts for instruments that would complement the singing human voice.
Composers now specified orchestration where individual performers once applied their own discretion.
Some of the first bowed zithers appeared in China in the 9th or 10th century, influenced by Mongolian culture.
European music between 800 and 1100 became more sophisticated, more frequently requiring instruments capable of polyphony.
Stringed instruments were prominent in Middle Age Europe.
The most common types of instrument classifications are strings, brass, woodwind, and percussion.
When the Pharaohs of Egypt conquered Southwest Asia in around 1500 BC, the cultural ties to Mesopotamia were renewed and Egypt's musical instruments also reflected heavy influence from Asiatic cultures.
Beginning in the seventeenth century, composers began creating works of a more emotional style.
German musicologist Curt Sachs, one of the most prominent musicologists and musical ethnologists in modern times, argues that it is misleading to arrange the development of musical instruments by workmanship, since cultures advance at different rates and have access to different raw materials.
Archaeological evidence of musical instruments was discovered in excavations at the Royal Cemetery in the Sumerian city of Ur.
During the period of time loosely referred to as the Middle Ages, China developed a tradition of integrating musical influence from other regions.
Some instruments also had to become louder to fill larger halls and be heard over sizable orchestras.
While the gong likely originated in the geographical area between Tibet and Burma, it was part of every category of human activity in maritime Southeast Asia including Java.
The graves these instruments were buried in have been carbon dated to between 2600 and 2500 BC, providing evidence that these instruments were used in Sumeria by this time.
An ancient system named the ''Natya Shastra'', written by the sage Bharata Muni and dating from between 200 BC and 200 AD, divides instruments into four main classification groups: instruments where the sound is produced by vibrating strings; percussion instruments with skin heads; instruments where the sound is produced by vibrating columns of air; and "solid", or non-skin, percussion instruments.
In other words, they have mechanical parts that produce sound vibrations, and those vibrations are picked up and amplified by electrical components.
Islamic influences brought new types of drums, perfectly circular or octagonal as opposed to the irregular pre-Islamic drums.
Composers also began designing pieces of music for specific instruments.
The instruments of the time were simple and virtually all of them were imported from other cultures.
His system divided instruments into two categories: instruments with solid, vibrating bodies and instruments containing vibrating air.
Modern histories have replaced such mythology with anthropological speculation, occasionally informed by archeological evidence.
One such instrument was the shawm.
Scholars recognize Hornbostel-Sachs as the only system that applies to any culture and, more important, provides only possible classification for each instrument.
This period saw the Kassites destroy the Babylonian empire in Mesopotamia and the Hyksos destroy the Middle Kingdom of Egypt.
The Zhou dynasty saw percussion instruments such as clappers, troughs, wooden fish, and ''yǔ'' (wooden tiger).
Among the first devices external to the human body that are considered instruments are rattles, stampers, and various drums.
Until the 19th century AD, European-written music histories began with mythological accounts of how musical instruments were invented.
As such, the specimens found cannot be irrefutably placed as the earliest musical instruments.
When used in the name of an instrument, these terms are relative, describing the instrument's range in comparison to other instruments of its family and not in comparison to the human voice range or instruments of other families.
Instruments such as the clarinet also grew into entire "families" of instruments capable of different ranges: small clarinets, normal clarinets, bass clarinets, and so on.
For example, while organs with multiple keyboards and pedals already existed, the first organs with solo stops emerged in the early fifteenth century.
For example, construction of early slit drums involved felling and hollowing out large trees; later slit drums were made by opening bamboo stalks, a much simpler task.
South American cultures of the time used pan-pipes as well as varieties of flutes, idiophones, drums, and shell or wood trumpets.
Xylophones originated in the mainland and archipelago of Southeast Asia, eventually spreading to Africa, the Americas, and Europe.
The ninth century revealed the first bagpipes, which spread throughout Europe and had many uses from folk instruments to military instruments.
The flutes were made in the Upper Paleolithic age, and are more commonly accepted as being the oldest known musical instruments.
Such accounts included Jubal, descendant of Cain and "father of all such as handle the harp and the organ", Pan, inventor of the pan pipes, and Mercury, who is said to have made a dried tortoise shell into the first lyre.
Scholars agree that there are no completely reliable methods of determining the exact chronology of musical instruments across cultures.
Despite even the efforts of two organized international summits attended by noted composers like Hector Berlioz, no standard could be agreed upon.
The problem with these specialized classification schemes is that they tend to break down once they are applied outside of their original area.
Beginning in around 1750, however, the lute disappeared from musical compositions in favor of the rising popularity of the guitar.
The evolution of traditional musical instruments slowed beginning in the twentieth century.
Different regions, countries, and even instrument manufacturers preferred different standards, making orchestral collaboration a challenge.
In the latter half of the sixteenth century, orchestration came into common practice as a method of writing music for a variety of instruments.
Other instruments in common use in the region included vertical harps derived from those of the Orient, lutes of Egyptian design, various pipes and organs, and clappers, which were played primarily by women.
The latter half of the twentieth century saw the gradual evolution of synthesizers—instruments that artificially produce sound using analog or digital circuits and microchips.
Musical instrument classification is a discipline in its own right, and many systems of classification have been used over the years.
* Chordophones, which produce sound by vibrating one or more strings; they are sorted into according to the relationship between the string(s) and the sounding board or chamber.
Sachs later added a fifth category, electrophones, such as theremins, which produce sound by electronic means.
The design changes that broadened the quality of timbres allowed instruments to produce a wider variety of expression.
Beyond 1400, one can follow the overall development of musical instruments by time period.
Musical instruments are constructed in a broad array of styles and shapes, using many different materials.
Although civilizations in Central America attained a relatively high level of sophistication by the eleventh century AD, they lagged behind other civilizations in the development of musical instruments.
The Byzantine lyra, a bowed string instrument, is an ancestor of most European bowed instruments, including the violin.
(Hornbostel-Sachs, for example, divide aerophones on the basis of sound production, but membranophones on the basis of the shape of the instrument).
These stops were meant to produce a mixture of timbres, a development needed for the complexity of music of the time.
Consensus solidifies about artifacts dated back to around 37,000 years old and later.
The monochord served as a precise measure of the notes of a musical scale, allowing more accurate musical arrangements.
A clay statuette indicates the use of drums, and examination of the Indus script has also revealed representations of vertical arched harps identical in design to those depicted in Sumerian artifacts.
Comparing and organizing instruments based on their complexity is misleading, since advancements in musical instruments have sometimes reduced complexity.
Although Sumerian and Babylonian artists mainly depicted ceremonial instruments, historians have been able to distinguish six idiophones used in early Mesopotamia: concussion clubs, clappers, sistra, bells, cymbals, and rattles.
The gong-like instrument was a bronze disk that was struck with a hammer instead of a mallet.
The oldest object that some scholars refer to as a musical instrument, a simple flute, dates back as far as 67,000 years.
Romans played reed instruments named ''tibia'', featuring side-holes that could be opened or closed, allowing for greater flexibility in playing modes.
One plays a musical instrument by interacting with it in some way—for example, by plucking the strings on a string instrument.
These songs used various drums, shell trumpets, harps, and flutes.
The ''xiao'' (an end-blown flute) and various other instruments that spread through many cultures, came into use in China during and after the Han dynasty.
Even the process of assigning names to these instruments is challenging since there is no clear distinction among various instruments and the words used to describe them.
Of the instructional books and references published in the Renaissance era, one is noted for its detailed description and depiction of all wind and stringed instruments, including their relative sizes.
Influences from Middle East, Persia, India, Mongolia, and other countries followed.
Such instrument pairs also included bullroarers, slit drums, shell trumpets, and skin drums.
Of these, only the flute was capable of producing a melody.
Persian miniatures provide information on the development of kettle drums in Mesopotamia that spread as far as Java.
Most makers of musical instruments specialize in one genre of instruments; for example, a luthier makes only stringed instruments.
Eventually, some cultures assigned ritual functions to their musical instruments, using them for hunting and various ceremonies.
The most prominent and important musical instrument of Southeast Asia was the gong.
Since data in one research path can be inconclusive, all three paths provide a better historical picture.
Literary accounts of organs being played in English Benedictine abbeys toward the end of the tenth century are the first references to organs being connected to churches.
