While many believe that during the ''Sakoku'' the political power of the samurai led to muskets being banned in Japan, this is a misconception brought on by romantic views.
A tompion was a wooden plug inserted into the end of the barrel.
These are typically used by hunters during hunting seasons specifically for black powder muzzle loaders.
The hammer was often referred to as a dogshead or a cock due to the fact that it looked somewhat like a dog or chicken's head when viewed from the side.
The musket was brought straight up, perpendicular to the ground, with the left hand on the swell of the musket stock, the lock turned toward the soldier's face, and the soldier's right hand pulled the lock to full cock, and grasped the wrist of the musket.
From around 1750 rifles began to be used by skirmishers (Frederick the Great raised a Jager unit in 1744, from game-keepers and foresters, armed with rifles) but the very slow rate of fire of muzzle-loading rifles restricted their use until the invention of the Minié ball.
The platoon fire would begin at one of the flank platoons of the battalion or regiment, and one or two seconds after the platoon beside them fired, the next platoon would fire.
This was not a problem for hunters, who often used weapons with rifled barrels, but musketeers could not afford to stop firing and clean their barrels in the middle of a battle.
He then closed the frizzen so that the priming powder was trapped.
However, it is indeed true that the feudal Daimyo, other than the Shogun himself, were forbidden from manufacturing or stockpiling firearms.
Modern musket designs are also available, such as those made by Thompson Center, though they are often just called "muzzle loaders" or "black powder rifles" instead of "muskets".
A fouling scraper was another attachment that could go onto the end of a ramrod.
The matchlock had several disadvantages due to it being slow to reload and the occasional accidental ignition of gunpowder stores.
In the 19th century, rifled muskets (which were technically rifles, but were referred to as muskets) became common, combining the advantages of rifles and muskets.
By the end of the 17th century, a lighter version of the musket had edged out the arquebus, and the addition of the bayonet edged out the pike, and almost all infantry became musketeers.
The guns came into wide use by not only the Indian Mughal Empires but also by rival South Indian kingdoms.
The hand cannon was a very simple weapon, consisting of a metal tube enclosed on one end, with a touch hole drilled into the side of it.
The last contact with the barrel gave the ball a spin at right angles to the direction of flight.
Only when the hammer was pulled back into the "full cocked" position could it be fired.
However, at this point long-barreled, musket-caliber weapons had been in use as wall-defence weapons in Europe for almost a century.
In battle the barrel was never cleaned  so progressively smaller balls were used to load the musket to compensate for lead and ash fouling.
However, P.E.P.Deraniyagala points out that the Sinhala term for gun, ‘bondikula’ matches the Arabic term for gun, ‘bunduk’.
If the musket was not being reloaded after a previous shot, the soldiers would be ordered to "''Open Pan''".
The musket went through further evolution in the 17th century, the most important of these changes being the introduction of the flintlock firing mechanism, where the gunpowder in a musket's pan was ignited by a flint suspended on hammer, which struck the pan on pulling the trigger.
The hand cannon was first used in China in the 13th century.
The main advantage of the British Army was that the infantry soldier trained at this procedure almost every day.
Instead, the musketeer would tear open the paper (usually with his teeth), pour some of the powder into the pan and the rest into the barrel, follow it with the ammunition (and the paper as wadding if not using a Minié ball), then use the ramrod as normal to push it all into the barrel.
There was also illustration and description of how the Chinese had adopted the Ottoman kneeling position in firing while favoring European-made muskets.
The Minié ball had an expanding skirt which was intended to be used with rifled barrels, leading to what was called the rifled musket, which came into widespread use in the mid-19th century.
A ramrod, made out of wood or metal, was used to push the ball or bullet into the barrel.
The phrase "don't go off half cocked" has its origins in this type of weapon.
Almost all muskets in this period were fired by the matchlock mechanism, where a length of smouldering rope ignited the gunpowder in the weapon's pan, causing the musket ball to be fired out of the barrel.
Second, he pioneered the use of the volley or "salvo" as an offensive tactic for Swedish infantry in the Thirty Years' War.
In the late 19th century, the rifle took another major step forward with the introduction of breech-loading rifles.
The cartridge was then reversed, and the end of the cartridge holding the musket ball was inserted into the muzzle, with the remaining paper shoved into the muzzle above the musket ball.
The matchlock mechanism was a simple solution to this problem, and placed the match in a clamp on the end of a lever.
The Italian ''moscetto'' is a diminutive of ''mosca'', a fly.
For this reason, smoothbore muskets remained the primary arm of most armies until the mid-19th century.
By the 18th century a very experienced soldier could load and fire at a rate of four shots per minute.
A large screw attached to the breech (called the tang screw) also held the barrel in place.
In order to counter the seemingly unbeatable firepower of the Prussian infantry, the Austrian army during the Seven Years' War introduced the use of large numbers of skirmishers, provided by formations of pandur, jaeger and grenzer troops recruited among the ethnic minorities of the Habsburg Empire.
Use of musket infantry tactics was utilized to the fullest by King Frederick the Great of Prussia during the Silesian Wars and the Seven Years' War.
"Muskets" based on breech-loading cartridge rifles that have been smoothbored and re-chambered for a shotgun-type cartridge have been used in some countries to arm police or security forces.
Once measured, the powder could be loaded directly into the barrel, or it could be placed in a paper cartridge for later loading.
(At no time did the soldier place the musket on the ground to load)
The introduction of breech loaders meant that the rifling of a weapon was no longer damaged when it was loaded, and reloading was a much faster process.
The soldier's hand then grasped the top of the ramrod.
Likewise, Maori resorted to thumping the butt of the musket on the ground to settle the ball instead of using a ramrod.
At the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600, nearly 20,000 muskets were used, comparable to if not greater than the numbers employed on contemporary European battlefields.
This process was drilled into troops until they could complete the procedure upon hearing a single command of "''prime and load''".
Prussian troops under his leadership could fire a shot every fifteen seconds with almost unrivaled discipline, and his finest infantry units could fire a shot every ten seconds.
In order to keep the ball in place once the weapon was loaded, it would be partially wrapped in a small piece of cloth.
* Upon the command "''draw ramrods''", the soldier drew the ramrod from the musket.
Cartridges would then be placed in a cartridge box, which would typically be worn on the musketeer's belt during a battle.
The difficulty of reloading—and thus the time needed to do it—was diminished by making the musket ball much smaller than the internal diameter of the barrel, so as the interior of the barrel became dirty from soot from previously fired rounds, the musket ball from the next shot could still be easily rammed.
In New Zealand during the period 1818 to 1842 native Maori bought increasingly  large numbers of Trade Muskets which were regularly used in intertribal warfare.
Maori developed a number of special techniques to over come their lack of professional training.
From this period (c. 1870) on, the musket was obsolete in modern warfare.
Cotton cleaning patches could be wrapped around the end of the jag, which would then be run through the barrel for cleaning.
In the USA black powder shooting, particularly of Civil War era weapons has become popularised by the North-South Skirmish Association who engage in matches known as Skirmishes.
The barrel of a musket was usually smooth bore.
When a trigger was pulled, the lever would rotate and allowed the match to come in contact with the touch hole, discharging the weapon.
Hand cannons had a crude handle, or no handle at all.
If the defenders did not break and flee, however, a bayonet charge and hand-to-hand combat would be necessary.
The Minié ball was small enough in diameter that it could be loaded as quickly as a round ball, even with a barrel that had been fouled with black powder residue after firing many shots, and the expanding skirt of the Minié ball meant that it would still form a tight fit with the barrel and impart a good spin into the round when fired.
Gunpowder and ammunition were placed in the tube, and a match (a short piece of burning rope) was touched to the touch hole, causing the powder to explode and the ammunition to be discharged.
Their use led to a decline in the use of massed attacking formations, as these formations were too vulnerable to the accurate, long-range fire a rifle could produce.
The British Army was the first army that fought in two ranks rather than three.
They were more commonly used by the early 15th century, particularly in the Hussite wars.
The paper powder charge was first introduced in Europe by the King of Poland, Stefan Batory.
Gradual advances in the empirical understanding of the corning of gunpowder made possible a more powerful explosive (dating is still uncertain from c. 1420 &ndash; c. 1550 and probably varied by country).
In the 19th century, a new tactical approach was devised by the French during the French Revolutionary Wars.
By the 1860s, it was not uncommon for a warrior to have multiple muskets.
At the time a platoon was a half-company.
The barrel is the tube where the musket ball (or other ammunition) accelerates and exits the weapon.
During the Musket war period in New Zealand between 1805 and 1843, at least 500 conflicts took place between various Maori groups - often using trade muskets in addition to traditional Maori weapons.
The total victory he won at this battle quickly led other daimyo to acquire muskets in large quantities, which proved highly effective during the Japanese invasion of Korea in the 1590s ordered by Toyotomi Hideyoshi.
Barrel bands were typically held in place either with springs or screws.
The front of the barrel was called the muzzle, and the rear was called the breech.
These light infantry would snipe and harass at the meticulously drilled line of Prussian infantry, firing and moving individually and taking advantage of cover, much like early period musketeers.
The term "musket" is applied to a variety of weapons, including the long, heavy guns with matchlock, wheel lock or flint lock and loose powder fired with the gun barrel resting on a stand, and also lighter weapons with a snaphance, flintlock, or caplock and bullets using a stabilizing spin (Minié ball), affixed with a bayonet.
Round balls could be combined with buckshot to produce buck and ball ammunition, which combined the wider area of attack of shot with the large mass of the round ball.
Locks came in many different varieties.
Bayonets in modern fighting are intended as last-ditch weapons which are only used in emergencies, but in muskets, bayonets played a much more significant role, typically accounting for roughly one third of all casualties on the battlefield.
Sometime around 1630–60, at least in England, the musket barrel was cut down from 4 feet to 3 feet at about the same time the rest was given up.
The need to defeat armour gave rise to the musket proper referring to a heavier weapon, firing a heavier shot, which had to balance on a rest.
Its usage is thought to be similar to the Afghanistan Jezail or American Kentucky Rifle.
The ramrod was grasped and reversed when removed, and the large end was inserted about one inch into the muzzle.
They often resorted to using nails, stones or anything convenient as "shot".
The aerodynamics meant that the ball veered off in a random direction from the aiming point.
The minie ball, which came into use in the 1840s, allowed the use of rifled muskets.
When percussion locks became popular, musketeers also carried another small box on their belt which held the percussion caps.
Typically, the entire musket, with the possible exception of the lock mechanism, could be disassembled using only this one combination tool.
The term ''muzzle-loading'' therefore indicates that muskets were loaded through the front end of the barrel.
Made out of brass to prevent possible problems with sparks, it was used to scrape powder fouling out of the barrel.
The Minié ball, which despite its name was actually bullet shaped and not ball shaped, was developed in the 1840s.
Modern replicas of many muskets are available, from manufacturers such as Pedersoli, Armi-sport, and Euroarms.
There was now no need for two types of infantry and the pike disappeared.
One of the authors was a ''Pakeha'' (European) who lived amongst Maori, spoke the language fluently, had a Maori wife and took part in many intertribal conflicts as a warrior.
By today's standards, muskets are not accurate due to the lack of rifling.
The Crimean War (1853–1856) saw the first widespread use of the rifled musket for the common infantryman and by the time of the American Civil War (1860s) most infantry were equipped with the rifled musket.
With its soft, all-lead composition, the ball would easily flatten or burst on contact, much like a modern soft-point bullet.
The soldier then tore off the twisted end of the cartridge with the teeth and spat it out, and continued to hold the now open cartridge in his right hand.
About the time of the introduction of cartridge, breechloading, and multiple rounds of ammunition just a few years later, muskets fell out of fashion.
Despite this, musket balls continued to be used until well into the late 19th century, as regular armies and militias had accumulated vast stores of them over time.
Rifling, grooves put in the barrel of the weapon which cause the projectile to spin on the same axis as the line of flight, prevented this veering off from the aiming point.
A musket cartridge consisted of a pre-measured amount of black powder and ammunition such as a round ball, Nessler ball or Minié ball all wrapped up in paper.
* Upon the command "''Make Ready''".
The main tactic for infantry attacks from 1700 or so was a slow measured advance, with pauses to fire volleys at enemy infantry.
The smooth bore muskets of the Brown Bess period had considerable hitting power and were able to penetrate the armor of the day, but had limited accuracy due to the lack of rifling in the barrel.
A '''musket''' is  a muzzle-loaded, smoothbore firearm, fired from the shoulder.
Most musketeers carried some sort of specialized combination tool, usually consisting of one or two screwdriver blades and a small pick.
These events are not primarily re-enactments of specific Civil War battles, instead they are focused more on promoting the accurate shooting of firearms from the era.
The disadvantage of the early rifle for military use was its long reloading time and the tendency for powder fouling to accumulate in the rifling, making the piece more difficult to load with each shot.
The soldier then poured the rest of the powder from the cartridge down the muzzle.
The initial role of the musket was as a specialist armour piercing weapon.
The simplest ammunition for musket was the round ball, which was simply a round ball of lead.
The stock of a musket was typically heavy enough and sturdy enough that the butt could be used as a blunt force weapon in hand-to-hand combat.
Flintlocks and percussion locks typically had a "half cocked" position, which was a "safe" position from which the weapon could be loaded but not fired.
Because of the musket's slow reloading time it was necessary until 1700 or later to use pikemen to protect them from cavalry.
The stock is the wooden base.
The effect would be platoon volley after platoon volley rolling down the face of the battalion or regiment, and the result of such disciplined fire was a constant hail of bullets on the enemy formation.
The lock is the mechanism that causes the weapon to fire.
A powder flask or powder horn could be used to hold black powder.
In the U.S. Army, generals thought their soldiers would waste ammunition, so they kept muzzle-loading black powder rifles until after the American Civil War.
For example, in the King Sukjong era (1700's), the 76.4% of the local standing army in Chungcheong region's army list were musketeers.
Armour 2&nbsp;mm thick required 2.9 times as much energy to defeat it as armour 1&nbsp;mm thick.
Musketeers were trained to always replace their ramrods after loading so that they would not leave their ramrods on the field if they were forced to hastily retreat.
The stock was made out of wood.
Musket calibers generally ranged from .
In actuality, the Japanese were fully capable of manufacturing their own muskets, and the shogunate even created several political positions to oversee their manufacture and inventory.
Some muskets had small boxes built into the stock called a patch box, since it was used to carry small cotton patches which were used both for cleaning and for wadding when firing the weapon.
These were far more accurate than smoothbore muskets and had a far longer range, while preserving the musket's comparatively faster reloading rate.
By the 16th century the handheld firearm became commonplace, replacing the crossbow and longbow in all advanced armies, and known as the arquebus.
The hand cannon evolved into the arquebus.
According to the Etymology Dictionary, firearms were often named after animals, and the word musket derived from the French word ''mousquette,'' which is a male sparrowhawk.
* Upon the command "''prime''", the soldier then pulled the hammer back to half-cock, and poured a small amount of powder from the cartridge into the priming pan.
The musket coexisted with the arquebus over the period c. 1521 &ndash; c. 1650.
However, the smaller ball could move within the barrel as the musket was fired, decreasing the accuracy of musket fire (it was complained that it took a man's weight in lead musket balls to kill him).
made Chunbochong(천보총), which has larger range of fire than the existing ones.
After that, Joseon continuously raised musketeers and eventually became the nation which had the largest percentage of musketeers in east Asia.
Rifles started as sporting weapons and had little use on the battlefield.
It became standard issue for European infantrymen by 1700.
They often use black powder pellets instead of loose black powder, and more modern projectiles such as sabots and maxi-balls.
By having the front rank kneel, all three ranks would be able to fire at the same time.
It was originally known as the countermarch, where troops were arranged in lines up to twelve, but more usually eight or six deep.
No additional verbal orders were given until the musket was loaded, and the option was either to give the soldiers the command "''Make Ready''", or to hold the musket for movement with the command of "''Shoulder your firelock''".
The brass cartridge had been introduced earlier; however, it was not widely adopted for various reasons.
A lighter alternative to either the arquebus or the musket was the caliver, which was often used at sea, or by irregular troops.
Maori favoured the shorter barrel versions.
These rifles also used brass cartridges.
The only way to make musket fire effective was to mass large numbers of musketmen and have them fire at the same time.
Muskets were the firearms first used by many non-Eurasians.
Some muskets were designed to be used with a bayonet, which is a triangular spike or blade designed to fit onto the end of the musket's barrel, allowing the musket to be used as a pike or spear.
Many such conversions were performed in India during British colonial rule, some of these muskets remain in Indian and Pakistani police service to this day.
Popular records state that the daimyo Oda Nobunaga revolutionized musket tactics in Japan by inventing the Maurice-style three-line formation at the Battle of Nagashino in 1575 as an effective check on the massed cavalry charges then in use by his Takeda rival.
Early matchlock and wheel lock mechanisms were replaced by later flintlock mechanisms and finally percussion locks.
Arquebuses were utilized in China the Ming Dynasty (1368–1644) and Qing Dynasty (1644–1911).
Some ramrods were equipped with threaded ends, allowing different attachments to be used.
An example is the conversion of the Lee–Enfield MkIII rifle to a single-shot musket chambering the .410&nbsp;inch Indian Police cartridge.
Early arquebusiers just held on to the rope match, or attached it to their belt, which was dangerous since the match could accidentally contact the touch hole as the arquebusier moved around while loading the weapon in battle.
Most muskets had a groove in the stock under the barrel, allowing the ramrod to be slid into place and stored there.
Together with its large size, this meant it could cause large wounds.
The musketeers were the first infantry to give up armour entirely.
British armies during the Seven Years' War(particularly in the American theatre known as the French & Indian War), formed rifle units, and these units were formed again during the American Revolutionary War.
Some ramrods were flared, essentially having a cleaning jag built into them.
This allowed the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic infantry a much greater degree of mobility compared to their Ancien Régime opponents, and also allowed much closer cooperation of infantry with cavalry and artillery, which were free to move in between the infantry columns of the former rather than being trapped in between the linear formation of the latter.
First, he simplified and standardized reloading, then drilled his musketeers ceaselessly until they reloaded in action by reflex, without becoming distracted.
Muskets could also fire smaller lead pellets called lead shot or buckshot, which struck a wider area but with less force than a single lead ball.
As early as the beginning of the 18th century German regiments from many principalities fielded companies of riflemen known as Jäger.
For example, combat ranges of 300 yards were achievable using the rifled muskets of the American Civil War.
An alternative to the matchlock in the earlier period was the wheellock mechanism.
In 1654 and 1658, hundreds of Joseon musket troops were dispatched by the request of the Qing Dynasty engaged Russians near Khabarovsk Battle of Hutong.
The advantage of this extended range was demonstrated at the Battle of Four Lakes, where Springfield Model 1855 rifled muskets inflicted heavy casualties among the Indian warriors before they could get their smooth bore muskets into range.
This was used to prevent dirt from getting into the barrel and was removed prior to loading and firing the weapon.
Soldiers expecting to face musket fire learned disciplined drills to move in precise formations and to obey orders unquestioningly.
A Venetian envoy, Vincenzo di Alessandri, in a report presented to the Council of Ten on 24 September 1572, observes:
This paper acted as wadding to stop the ball and powder from falling out if the muzzle was lowered.
Black Powder shooting is also popular in other countries particularly in Europe where shooting competitions and re-enactment events are relatively commonplace.
The arquebus and caliver were phased out in the 17th century as the musket became lighter and more portable, and "musket" thereafter became the generic name for long-barrelled, handheld firearms.
These were removable, so that the barrel could be taken off and cleaned.
Rather, they had the objective of delivering a mass of musket balls into the enemy line.
Rifled barrels were more accurate, but the black powder used at the time quickly fouled the barrel, making reloading slower and more difficult.
The screwdriver blades were used to change the flint, remove the barrel bands, and otherwise disassemble the musket for cleaning.
As booty from the Japanese invaders, muskets were introduced to Korea (Joseon dynasty).
Some Maori groups took advantage of runaway sailors and escaped convicts to expand their understanding of muskets.
A crack infantry company could load and fire five rounds in a minute.
Rifled muskets, due to their longer range, were usually equipped with sights.
The intent is to provide a military-type weapon that is less powerful and has a shorter range than the standard military rifle.
It is possible that the noise was at least as important as the missile, for the effect on the horses of the enemy knights.
The Mughals introduced  arquebuses into India.
However, in the Italian War of 1859, French forces were able to defeat the longer range of Austrian rifle muskets by aggressive skirmishing and rapid bayonet assaults during close quarters combat.
While some British historian such as Sir Charles Oman has postulated that it was the standard French tactic to charge enemy line infantry head on with their columns, relying on the morale effect of the huge column and hence were often beaten off by the devastating firepower of the redcoats, more current research into the subject has revealed that such occasions were far from the norm, and the French normally tried deploying into line before combat as well.
These were very short ranged, inaccurate and difficult to load and fire.
While rifled muskets can fire other ammunition like round ball or buck and ball without issues, they were generally only issued Minié ball ammunition.
These tools often came in a "private" version and a "sergeant" version, the difference usually being that only the sergeant version contained the necessary parts (like a spring vise) needed to disassemble the lock mechanism.
The number of musketeers relative to pikemen grew, partly because they were now more mobile than pikemen.
By the time of the Napoleonic Wars, the British created and maintained a rifle regiment.
The worm could also be used with a small piece of cloth for cleaning.
Shortly afterwards, magazine loading rifles were introduced, which further increased the weapons' rate of fire.
