Burmese folk religion is practiced by many Bamars alongside Buddhism.
It was one of several competing city-states until the late 10th century when it grew in authority and grandeur.
The Northern regions of Myanmar are the coolest, with average temperatures of .
The annual import of medicine and medical equipment to Myanmar during the 2000s was 160 million USD.
In English, the country is popularly known as either "Burma" or "Myanmar" .
During the strict censorship days, activity at internet cafes were regulated, and one blogger named Zarganar, was sentenced to a few years in prison for publishing a video of destruction caused by the Cyclone Nargis in 2008; Zarganar was released in October 2011.
The legislature, called the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw, is bicameral and made up of two houses: the 224-seat upper house Amyotha Hluttaw (House of Nationalities) and the 440-seat lower house Pyithu Hluttaw (House of Representatives).
Goods travel primarily across the Thai border (where most illegal drugs are exported) and along the Irrawaddy River.
Fertile plains exist in the valleys between the mountain chains.
According to 2014 Myanmar Census, 87.9% of the population identifies as Buddhists.
Observer accounts of the 2010 election describe the event as mostly peaceful; however, allegations of polling station irregularities were raised, and the United Nations (UN) and a number of Western countries condemned the elections as fraudulent.
The evolution and growth of Burmese literature and theatre continued, aided by an extremely high adult male literacy rate for the era (half of all males and 5% of females).
The Burma National Army and the Arakan National Army fought with the Japanese from 1942 to 1944 but switched allegiance to the Allied side in 1945.
Myanmar was bombed extensively by both sides.
Myanmar's fertility rate  is 2.23, which is slightly above replacement level and is low compared to Southeast Asian countries of similar economic standing, such Cambodia (3.18) and Laos (4.41).
Myanmar previously hosted the Games in 1961 and 1969.
International relations progress indicators continued in September 2012 when Aung San Suu Kyi visited to the US followed by Myanmar's reformist president visit to the United Nations.
The wealth was however, mainly concentrated in the hands of Europeans.
The United Nations General Assembly has repeatedly called on the Burmese Military Junta to respect human rights and in November 2009 the General Assembly adopted a resolution "strongly condemning the ongoing systematic violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms" and calling on the Burmese Military Regime "to take urgent measures to put an end to violations of international human rights and humanitarian law."
Many mountain ranges, such as the Rakhine Yoma, the Bago Yoma, the Shan Hills and the Tenasserim Hills exist within Myanmar, all of which run north-to-south from the Himalayas.
In March 2012, a draft foreign investment law emerged, the first in more than 2 decades.
Burma lost Arakan, Manipur, Assam and Tenasserim to the British in the First Anglo-Burmese War (1824–1826).
The two major Indo-European languages are Pali, the liturgical language of Theravada Buddhism, and English.
Many refugees headed to neighbouring Bangladesh, including 200,000 in 1978 as a result of the King Dragon operation in Arakan.
In 1989, SLORC declared martial law after widespread protests.
", and states that, "It is not possible for foreigners to go to/from Myanmar by sea or river."
The impact of the post-election reforms has been observed in numerous areas, including ASEAN's approval of Myanmar's bid for the position of ASEAN chair in 2014; the visit by United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in December 2011 for the encouragement of further progress, which was the first visit by a Secretary of State in more than fifty years, during which Clinton met with the Burmese president and former military commander Thein Sein, as well as opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi; and the participation of Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy (NLD) party in the 2012 by-elections, facilitated by the government's abolition of the laws that previously barred the NLD.
The national currency is Kyat.
Myanmar's armed forces are known as the Tatmadaw, which numbers 488,000.
In 2007 the international movement to defend women's human rights issues in Myanmar was said to be gaining speed.
In the west, a politically fragmented Arakan was under competing influences of its stronger neighbours until the Kingdom of Mrauk U unified the Arakan coastline for the first time in 1437.
The military is very influential in Myanmar, with all top cabinet and ministry posts usually held by military officials.
In 1988, unrest over economic mismanagement and political oppression by the government led to widespread pro-democracy demonstrations throughout the country known as the 8888 Uprising.
The catastrophic programme turned Myanmar into one of the world's most impoverished countries.
Burmese, the mother tongue of the Bamar and official language of Myanmar, is related to Tibetan and Chinese.
In the critical days following this disaster, Myanmar's isolationist government was accused of hindering United Nations recovery efforts.
Seafood is a common ingredient in coastal cities such as Sittwe, Kyaukpyu, Mawlamyaing (formerly Moulmein), Mergui (Myeik) and Dawei, while meat and poultry are more commonly used in landlocked cities like Mandalay.
On 7 July 1962, the government broke up demonstrations at Rangoon University, killing 15 students.
A diverse range of indigenous cultures exist in Myanmar, the majority culture is primarily Buddhist and Bamar.
On 1 April 1937, Burma became a separately administered colony of Great Britain and Ba Maw the first Prime Minister and Premier of Burma.
Railways are old and rudimentary, with few repairs since their construction in the late 19th century.
The city-states were founded as part of the southward migration by the Tibeto-Burman-speaking Pyu city-states, the earliest inhabitants of Myanmar of whom records are extant, from present-day Yunnan.
Some are privately owned.
The dynasty regrouped and defeated the Portuguese in 1613 and Siam in 1614.
Public hospitals lack many of the basic facilities and equipment.
The government spends anywhere from 0.5% to 3% of the country's GDP on health care, consistently ranking among the lowest in the world.
Myanmar's admittance to least developed country status by the UN in 1987 highlighted its economic bankruptcy.
A ''Bangkok Post'' article on 23 December 2012 reported that the Myanmar Armed Forces continued to use child soldiers including during the army's large offensive against the KIA in December 2012.
Though it gave up its turn to hold the ASEAN chair and host the ASEAN Summit in 2006, it chaired the forum and hosted the summit in 2014.
Festivals can be held on a grand scale.
Foreign journalists and visitors require a special travel permit to visit the areas in which Myanmar's civil wars continue.
There were also rumours of disagreement within the Burmese armed forces, but none was confirmed.
Myanmar is the primary subject of a 2007 graphic novel titled ''Chroniques Birmanes'' by Québécois author and animator, Guy Delisle.
The United States and European Union eased most of their sanctions in 2012.
Improving basic human, social and economic infrastructure required to advance individual living standards have not received focused government efforts.
Typical jungle animals, particularly tigers and leopards, occur sparsely in Myanmar.
However, the military junta refused to cede power and continued to rule the nation as SLORC until 1997, and then as the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC) until its dissolution in March 2011.
There are 10 Technical Training Schools, 23 nursing training schools, 1 sport academy and 20 midwifery schools.
The upper house consists of 224 members, of whom 168 are directly elected and 56 are appointed by the Burmese Armed Forces.
The government recognises 135 distinct ethnic groups.
On 6 April 2016, Aung San Suu Kyi assumed the newly created role of State Counsellor, a role akin to a Prime Minister.
Such persecution and targeting of civilians is particularly notable in Eastern Myanmar, where over 3000 villages have been destroyed in the past ten years.
''The Lady'' had its world premiere on 12 September 2011 at the 36th Toronto International Film Festival.
The majority of Myanmar's population lives in the Irrawaddy valley, which is situated between the Rakhine Yoma and the Shan Plateau.
The graphic novel was translated into English under the title ''Burma Chronicles'' in 2008.
Many Rohingya Muslims fled Myanmar.
The two leaders discussed to release more political prisoners, the institutionalisation of political reform and rule of law, and ending ethnic conflict in Myanmar—the two governments agreed to sign a bilateral trade and investment framework agreement on 21 May 2013.
Various foreign observers questioned the fairness of the elections.
By the 1950s, rice exports had fallen by two thirds and mineral exports by over 96% (as compared to the pre-World War II period).
Foreigners will no longer require a local partner to start a business in the country, and will be able to legally lease but not own property.
On 23 June 1997, Myanmar was admitted into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Schooling is compulsory until the end of elementary school, approximately about 9 years old, while the compulsory schooling age is 15 or 16 at international level.
As part of the referendum process, the name of the country was changed from the "Union of Myanmar" to the "Republic of the Union of Myanmar", and general elections were held under the new constitution in 2010.
Freshwater fish and shrimp have been incorporated into inland cooking as a primary source of protein and are used in a variety of ways, fresh, salted whole or filleted, salted and dried, made into a salty paste, or fermented sour and pressed.
The early 19th century Konbaung Dynasty ruled over an area that included modern Myanmar and briefly controlled Manipur and Assam as well.
More than 200,000 Muslims have fled to Bangladesh over the last 20 years to escape persecution.
In the highlands of the north, oak, pine and various rhododendrons cover much of the land.
By March 1942, within months after they entered the war, Japanese troops had advanced on Rangoon and the British administration had collapsed.
They migrated to escape racial discrimination and the wholesale nationalisation of private enterprise that took place in 1964.
There are over 600,000 registered migrant workers from Myanmar in Thailand, and millions more work illegally.
For the first time in numerous decades, the publication of privately owned newspapers commenced in the country.
In December 2014, Myanmar signed an agreement to set up its first stock exchange.
According to the Crisis Group, since Myanmar transitioned to a new government in August 2011, the country's human rights record has been improving.
With Burma preoccupied by the Chinese threat, Ayutthaya recovered its territories by 1770, and went on to capture Lan Na by 1776.
The 2013 Southeast Asian Games took place in Naypyidaw, Yangon, Mandalay and Ngwesaung Beach in December representing the third occasion that the event has been staged in Myanmar.
A new constitution of the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma was adopted in 1974.
The opium industry was a monopoly during colonial times and has since been illegally operated by corrupt officials in the Burmese military and rebel fighters, primarily as the basis for heroin manufacture.
In 1989, the military government officially changed the English translations of many names dating back to Burma's colonial period or earlier, including that of the country itself: "Burma" became "Myanmar".
During this time, the United Nations and several other organisations have reported consistent and systematic human rights violations in the country.
No data is currently available for previous years.
Religious edifices and orders have been in existence for many years.
However, the largest empire in the history of Southeast Asia unravelled soon after Bayinnaung's death in 1581, completely collapsing by 1599.
The arts, particularly literature, have historically been influenced by the local form of Theravada Buddhism.
The educational system of Myanmar is operated by the government agency, the Ministry of Education.
Official United States policy retains Burma as the country's name, although the State Department's website lists the country as "Burma (Myanmar)" and Barack Obama has referred to the country by both names.
Evidence gathered by a British researcher was published in 2005 regarding the extermination or 'Burmisation' of certain ethnic minorities, such as the Karen, Karenni and Shan.
Myanmar Engineering Society has identified at least 39 locations capable of geothermal power production and some of these hydrothermal reservoirs lie quite close to Yangon which is a significant underutilized resource for electrical production.
In 2007 the German professor Bassam Tibi suggested that the Rohingya conflict may be driven by an Islamist political agenda to impose religious laws, while non-religious causes have also been raised, such as a lingering resentment over the violence that occurred during the Japanese occupation of Burma in World War II—during this time period the British allied themselves with the Rohingya and fought against the puppet government of Burma (composed mostly of Bamar Japanese) that helped to establish the Tatmadaw military organisation that remains in power as of March 2013.
To qualify for least developed country status by the UN to receive debt relief, Myanmar lowered its official literacy rate from 79% to 19% in 1987.
The government issues strict rules on censorship and largely determines who produces films, as well as who gets academy awards.
The Iron Age began around 500 BC with the emergence of iron-working settlements in an area south of present-day Mandalay.
The first Burmese silent film Myitta Ne Thuya (Love and Liquor) in 1920 which proved a major success, despite its poor quality due to a fixed camera position and inadequate film accessories.
Overseas Chinese form approximately 3% of the population.
Hundreds of species of freshwater fish are wide-ranging, plentiful and are very important food sources.
250,000 more left in 1991.
Both these names are derived from the name of the majority Burmese Bamar ethnic group.
Myanmar's ethnic minority groups prefer the term "ethnic nationality" over "ethnic minority" as the term "minority" furthers their sense of insecurity in the face of what is often described as "Burmanisation"—the proliferation and domination of the dominant Bamar culture over minority cultures.
The military government finalised plans for People's Assembly elections on 31 May 1989.
Burmese cuisine also includes a variety of salads (''a thoke''), centred on one major ingredient, ranging from starches like rice, wheat and rice noodles, glass noodles and vermicelli, to potato, ginger, tomato, kaffir lime, long bean, lahpet (pickled tea leaves), and ngapi (fish paste).
Between 1962 and 1974, Myanmar was ruled by a revolutionary council headed by the general.
Several activists in exile, including Thee Lay Thee Anyeint members, have returned to Myanmar after President Thein Sein's invitation to expatriates to return home to work for national development.
A novitiation ceremony called shinbyu is the most important coming of age events for a boy, during which he enters the monastery for a short time.
While it is extremely difficult to verify this statement, there are at least 108 different ethnolinguistic groups in Myanmar, consisting mainly of distinct Tibeto-Burman peoples, but with sizeable populations of Tai–Kadai, Hmong–Mien, and Austroasiatic (Mon–Khmer) peoples.
The newspaper reported that "Many of them were pulled off Yangon streets and elsewhere and given a minimum of training before being sent to the front line."
Following the announcement, newspapers and other outlets no longer required approved by state censors; however, journalists in the country can still face consequences for what they write and say.
Nevertheless, much of the country is off-limits to tourists, and interactions between foreigners and the people of Myanmar, particularly in the border regions, are subject to police scrutiny.
There were sporadic protests against military rule during the Ne Win years and these were almost always violently suppressed.
Myanmar rates as a corrupt nation on the Corruption Perceptions Index with a rank of 157th out of 177 countries worldwide and a rating of 2.1 out of 10 (10 being least corrupt and 0 being highly corrupt) .
Brazil, Portugal and other Portuguese-speaking countries, as well as France and other French-speaking countries, now use mainly "Myanmar".
Its trade and secular administrative reforms built a prosperous economy for more than 80 years.
Konbaung kings extended Restored Toungoo's administrative reforms, and achieved unprecedented levels of internal control and external expansion.
The primary Tai–Kadai language is Shan.
In addition, al-Qaeda signalled an intention to become involved in Myanmar.
In July 2014 five journalists were sentenced to 10 years in jail after publishing a report saying the country was  planning to build a new chemical weapons plant.
According to the 2010 estimates of the Pew Research Center, 7% of the population is Christian; 4% is Muslim; 1% follows traditional animistic beliefs; and 2% follow other religions, including Mahayana Buddhism, Hinduism, and East Asian religions.
In July 2013, the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners indicated that there were approximately 100 political prisoners being held in Burmese prisons.
After independence, the country was in ruins with its major infrastructure completely destroyed.
Flights are available from most countries, though direct flights are limited to mainly Thai and other ASEAN airlines.
Pagan's collapse was followed by 250 years of political fragmentation that lasted well into the 16th century.
Much of the country lies between the Tropic of Cancer and the Equator.
Such an assertion assumes that reforms only occurred when the military was able to safeguard its own interests through the transition—here, "transition" does not refer to a transition to a liberal democracy, but transition to a quasi-military rule.
The thaw in relations began on 28 November 2011, when Belarusian Prime Minister Mikhail Myasnikovich and his wife Ludmila arrived in the capital, Naypyidaw, the same day as the country received a visit by US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who also met with pro-democracy opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi.
The Burmese army and police have been accused of targeting Rohingya Muslims through mass arrests and arbitrary violence.
These patterns stem from several cultural and economic dynamics.
Controversy surrounding the Rohingya population also remains an issue between Bangladesh and Myanmar.
In May 1990, the government held free elections for the first time in almost 30 years and the National League for Democracy (NLD), the party of Aung San Suu Kyi, won 392 out of a total 492 seats (i.e., 80% of the seats).
In the 12th and 13th centuries, the Pagan Empire and the Khmer Empire were two main powers in mainland Southeast Asia.
Theravada Buddhism slowly began to spread to the village level, although Tantric, Mahayana, Hinduism, and folk religion remained heavily entrenched.
Many religions are practised in Myanmar.
The refugee camps are under the care of the  Thai-Burma Border Consortium (TBBC).
His successor Bayinnaung went on to conquer a vast swath of mainland Southeast Asia including the Shan states, Lan Na, Manipur, Mong Mao, the Ayutthaya Kingdom, Lan Xang and southern Arakan.
It is also used to write Pali, the sacred language of Theravada Buddhism, as well as several ethnic minority languages, including Shan, several Karen dialects, and Kayah (Karenni), with the addition of specialised characters and diacritics for each language.
The Yangon Stock Exchange (YSX) officially opened for business on Friday, March 25, 2016.
In 1961, U Thant, then the Union of Burma's Permanent Representative to the United Nations and former Secretary to the Prime Minister, was elected Secretary-General of the United Nations, a position he held for ten years.
The series of reforms includes the release of pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi from house arrest, the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission, the granting of general amnesties for more than 200 political prisoners, new labour laws that permit labour unions and strikes, a relaxation of press censorship, and the regulation of currency practices.
After World War II, Burmese cinema continued to address political themes.
Myanmar used to be known as "Birmânia" in Portuguese, and as "Birmanie" in French.
But the origin of 'most persecuted minority' statement is unclear.
A number of monks' organisations that played a vital role in Myanmar's struggle for democracy have taken measures to block any humanitarian assistance to the Rohingya community.
There were a total of 8,044 murders in Myanmar in 2012.
Several strains of Hinduism existed alongside both Theravada Buddhism and Mahayana Buddhism in the Mon and Pyu period in the first millennium, and down to the Pagan period (9th to 13th centuries) when "Saivite and Vaishana elements enjoyed greater elite influence than they would later do."
The relatively rapid decline in fertility is attributed to several factors, including extreme delays in marriage (almost unparalleled among developing countries in the region), the prevalence of illegal abortions, and the high proportion of single, unmarried women of reproductive age, with 25.9% of women aged 30–34 and 33.1% of men and women aged 25–34 single.
Burma's education system is modelled after that of the United Kingdom.
It restored a smaller, more manageable kingdom, encompassing Lower Myanmar, Upper Myanmar, Shan states, Lan Na and upper Tenasserim.
In 2010 as part of the Wikileaks leaked cables, Myanmar was suspected of using North Korean construction teams to build a fortified Surface-to-Air Missile facility.
The lands along the coast support all varieties of tropical fruits and once had large areas of mangroves although much of the protective mangroves have disappeared.
Many nations, including the United States and Canada, and the European Union, have imposed investment and trade sanctions on Myanmar.
Thailand buys the majority of the country's gems.
In recent years, both China and India have attempted to strengthen ties with the government for economic benefit.
Unlike most other former British colonies and overseas territories, Burma did not become a member of the Commonwealth.
In Myanmar, political and economic ideological struggles have affected living standards.
The goal of the Burmese constitutional referendum of 2008, held on 10 May 2008, is the creation of a "discipline-flourishing democracy".
The Rakhine people constitute 4% of the population.
Over 200 have died in recent years and over 7,000 have been held in detention centres even after surviving the boat trip.
'''Myanmar''' (  ,   or   (also with the stress on first syllable); ), officially the '''Republic of the Union of Myanmar''' and also known as '''Burma''', is a sovereign state in South East Asia bordered by Bangladesh, India, China, Laos and Thailand.
Evidence of neolithic age domestication of plants and animals and the use of polished stone tools dating to sometime between 10,000 and 6,000 BC has been discovered in the form of cave paintings in Padah-Lin Caves.
The 2010 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Myanmar is 240.
Countries that do not officially recognise that name use the long form "Union of Burma" instead.
It is estimated that 52,000 Anglo-Burmese remain in Myanmar.
A 2011 report by the Hauser Center for Nonprofit Organizations found that, while contact with the Myanmar government was constrained by donor restrictions, international humanitarian non-governmental organisations (NGOs) see opportunities for effective advocacy with government officials, especially at the local level.
During 8–12 August, the first days of the conflict, as many as 10,000 Burmese civilians fled to Yunnan province in neighbouring China.
Its capital city is Naypyidaw and its largest city is Yangon (Rangoon).
Myanmar is a signatory to a special ASEAN treaty that bans all types of nuclear weapons in signatory states in Southeast Asia.
The Pagan Kingdom fell due to the Mongol invasions and several warring states emerged.
Burmese society has traditionally stressed the importance of education.
Student protests in 1975, 1976, and 1977 were quickly suppressed by overwhelming force.
Burmese officials have been historically "manipulated" and pressured by the communist Chinese government throughout Burmese modern history to create closer and binding ties with China, creating a Chinese satellite state in Southeast Asia.
Burma and Siam went to war until 1855, but all resulted in a stalemate, exchanging Tenasserim (to Burma) and Lan Na (to Ayutthaya).
On 4 January 1948, the nation became an independent republic, named the ''Union of Burma'', with Sao Shwe Thaik as its first President and U Nu as its first Prime Minister.
One criticism of the election was that only government sanctioned political parties were allowed to contest in it and the popular National League for Democracy was declared illegal.
Some well known contemporary artists are Lun Gywe, Aung Kyaw Htet, MPP Yei Myint, Myint Swe, Min Wai Aung, Aung Myint, Khin Maung Yin, Po Po and Zaw Zaw Aung.
The government also tried to implement a poorly considered Eight-Year plan.
However, the National AIDS Programme Myanmar found that 32% of sex workers and 43% of intravenous drug users in Myanmar have HIV.
Many of the films produced in the early Cold War era had a strong propaganda element to them.
Smaller mammals are also numerous, ranging from gibbons and monkeys to flying foxes and tapirs.
According to ''Eleven'' magazine, "In the past, there were only 15 international airlines and increasing numbers of airlines have began launching direct flights from Japan, Qatar, Taiwan, South Korea, Germany and Singapore."
Over 300 houses and a number of public buildings have been razed.
Despite Western isolation, Asian corporations have generally remained willing to continue investing in the country and to initiate new investments, particularly in natural resource extraction.
According to the UNESCO Institute of Statistics, Myanmar's official literacy rate as of 2000 was 90%.
Its north and northeast border is with the Tibet Autonomous Region and Yunnan province for a Sino-Burman border total of .
They are not to discuss politics with foreigners, under penalty of imprisonment and, in 2001, the Myanmar Tourism Promotion Board issued an order for local officials to protect tourists and limit "unnecessary contact" between foreigners and ordinary Burmese people.
Until 2005, the United Nations General Assembly annually adopted a detailed resolution about the situation in Myanmar by consensus.
Until 1988, the country was ruled as a one-party system, with the General and other military officers resigning and ruling through the Burma Socialist Programme Party (BSPP).
The abundance of birds is notable with over 800 species, including parrots, peafowl, pheasants, crows, herons, and paddybirds.
A bicameral parliament was formed, consisting of a Chamber of Deputies and a Chamber of Nationalities, and multi-party elections were held in 1951–1952, 1956 and 1960.
The crackdown was harsh, with reports of barricades at the Shwedagon Pagoda and monks killed.
In 1947, Aung San became Deputy Chairman of the Executive Council of Myanmar, a transitional government.
The conflict had forced 40,000 to 50,000 civilians to flee their homes and seek shelter on the Chinese side of the border.
In September 2012, the Myanmar Armed Forces released 42 child soldiers and the International Labour Organization met with representatives of the government as well as the Kachin Independence Army to secure the release of more child soldiers.
Journalists described the jailings as a blow to the recently-won news media freedoms that had followed five decades of censorship and persecution.
