The land possessed by the king is usually called , ''te-me-no'' (, "témenos"), a word that survived in classical Greece (the ''temenos'' placed by Hephaestus on the shield of Achilles is called "royal").
Perseus married Andromeda and had many sons, but in the course of time, went to war with Argos and was slain by Megapenthes.
Whatever the historical realities reflected in these stories, the Atreids are firmly set in the epoch near the end of the Heroic Age, leading up to the arrival of the Dorians.
There are several reasonable guesses that can be made, however.
Gods and men had common origins, but there was an enormous gap between the immortal gods and mortal men.
These may have been both residences and workshops.
A temple dedicated to Hera was built on the summit of the Mycenaean citadel during the Archaic Period.
In the shaft graves discovered by Heinrich Schliemann, the corpses were lightly exposed to fire in order to preserve them.
The construction of palaces at that time with a similar architecture was general throughout southern Greece.
His son, Tisamenus, the last of the Atreid dynasty, was killed by the Heracleidae on their return to the Peloponnesus.
An EH–MH settlement was discovered near a fresh-water well on top of the Kalkani hill southwest of the acropolis.
Later, Hesiod uses a lot of eastern material in his cosmology and in the genealogical trees of the gods, and he introduces the idea of the existence of something else behind the gods, which was more powerful than they.
They all featured a megaron, or throne room, with a raised central hearth under an opening in the roof, which was supported by four columns in a square around the hearth.
Within these walls, much of which can still be seen, successive monumental palaces were built.
Amenhotep III's relations with ''m-w-k-i-n-u'', *Mukana, have corroboration from the inscription at Kom al-Hetan - but Amenhotep's reign is thought to align with late LHIIIA:1.
He suggests that useful parallels will be found in the relations between Etruscan and Archaic Greek culture and religion, or between Roman and Hellenistic culture.
A similar belief may be guessed from the Mycenaean Hagia Triada sarcophagus (1400 BC), which combines features of Minoan civilization and Mycenaean style.
The final palace, remains of which are currently visible on the acropolis of Mycenae, dates to the start of LHIIIA:2.
Somewhat later, toward the end of LHIIIB, another extension to the citadel was undertaken.
A Mycenaean contingent fought at Thermopylae and Plataea during the Persian Wars.
It is doubtful that the wanax was responsible for religious matters, but probably his title indicates that his right to rule was given by the god.
An undecorated postern gate also was constructed through the north wall.
Later sacrifice became a feast at which oxen were slaughtered.
The site was subsequently abandoned, and by the Roman period in Greece its ruins had become a tourist attraction.
Later in some cults, Zeus is united with the Aegean Great Goddess, who is represented by Hera in a "holy wedding" (''hieros gamos'').
Clytemnestra was aided in her crime by Aegistheus, who reigned subsequently, but Orestes, son of Agamemnon, was smuggled out to Phocis.
Legend tells us that the long and arduous Trojan War, although nominally a Greek victory, brought anarchy, piracy, and ruin; already before the Greek fleet set sail for Troy, the conflict had divided the gods as well, and this contributed to curses and acts of vengeance following many of the Greek heroes.
Already in LHIIIA:1, Egypt knew *Mukana by name as a capital city on the level of Thebes and Knossos.
Emily Vermeule suggests that the disruption of commercial networks at the end of the 13th century BC, was disastrous for Greece and this was followed by the coming of the mysterious "Sea Peoples", who caused chaos in the Aegean.
when gods walked along friendly with men, and the "Heroic Age" when great heroes dominated the scene.
During the Bronze Age, the pattern of settlement at Mycenae was a fortified hill surrounded by hamlets and estates, in contrast to the dense urbanity on the coast (cf.
The , ''e-qe-ta'' (''equetai'', "companions" or "followers") were a group of nobles (aristocrats), who followed the king in peace and war.
Outside the partial circuit wall, Grave Circle B, named for its enclosing wall, contained ten cist graves in Middle Helladic style and several shaft graves, sunk more deeply, with interments resting in cists.
Minimum stone required: 145,215 Cu.M or 14,420 average stones (10 tons)
''Lawagetas'' is placed next to the king and he could be the leader of the army, but this is not confirmed by the inscriptions.
(Homer mentions many ''basilees'' in Ithaca).
It is possible that this procedure started before the end of the Mycenaean age, but the idea is almost absent or vague in the Homeric poems, where the interference of the gods is not related to the rightness or wrongness of men's actions.
However, no conclusive evidence has been brought forward to confirm any theory of why the Mycenaean citadel and others throughout Greece fell almost simultaneously at this time.
The communal land was held at the hands of , ''da-mo'' (literally, "people", cf.
'''Mycenae''' (Greek:  ''Mykēnai'' or   ''Mykēnē'') is an archaeological site in Greece, located about  southwest of Athens, in the north-eastern Peloponnese.
It was one of the cities of the ''tj-n3-jj'' ("Tinay"?
Some inscriptions with a list of offerings indicate that the king was probably divine, but the term "for the king" is usually accompanied by another name.
When a son of Heracles, Hyllus, killed Sthenelus, Eurystheus became noted for his enmity to Heracles and for his ruthless persecution of the Heracleidae, the descendants of Heracles.
From the hill on which the palace was located, one can see across the Argolid to the Saronic Gulf.
While establishing the credibility of the Mycenaean Greeks as a historical power, these documents create as many problems as they solve.
Aegisthus, the son of Thyestes, killed Atreus and restored Thyestes to the throne.
A collision with the Hittite Empire over their sometime dependency at a then strategic location, Troy, was to be expected.
It appears that the Mycenaean state was ruled by kings identified by the title , ''wa-na-ka'' ("wanax') in the Linear B inscriptions at Knossos and Pylos.
), The Homeric Danaans were named, in myth, after Danaë, which suggests that the Perseids were in fact in some sort of dominion.
Many of them were absorbed by more powerful divinities, and some like the vegetation goddesses Ariadne and Helen survived in Greek folklore together with the cult of the "divine child", who was probably the precursor of Dionysos.
The Athens Archaeological Society is currently excavating the Mycenae Lower Town (), with support from Dickinson College and the Institute for Aegean Prehistory.
The earliest written form of the name is ''Mykēnē'' (Μυκήνη), which is found in Homer.
The sequence of further construction at Mycenae is approximately as follows.
Since Schliemann's day, more scientific excavations have taken place at Mycenae, mainly by Greek archaeologists but also by the British School at Athens.
However, certain elements in some Greek cults indicate the survival of some older cults from a less rationalized world: old cults of the dead, agrarian magic, exorcism of evil spirits, peculiar sacrifices, and animal-headed gods.
He set the stage for future greatness by marrying Nicippe, a daughter of King Pelops of Elis, the most powerful state of the region and the times.
The Greek divinities live with Zeus at the helm and each is concerned with a recognizable sphere.
In the Homeric poems, the word form is ''anax'' (), often translated in English as "lord".
Moses I. Finley detected only few authentic Mycenaean beliefs in the 8th-century Homeric world, but Nilsson suggested that the Mycenean religion was the mother of the Greek religion.
Manolis Andronikos claimed that internal conflicts involving social revolutions were the sole cause behind the destruction of Mycenaean sites, but this is contradicted by the fact that all the Mycenaean centers throughout Greece were destroyed almost simultaneously.
After Wace died in 1957, excavation work was finished by Lord William Taylor from 1958 to 1969, especially on the west slope of the citadel.
Circuit length: 1105M
Probably most of these cults existed in the Mycenaean period and survived by immemorial practice.
After his death, Eurystheus determined to annihilate these rivals for the throne of Mycenae, but they took refuge in Athens, and in the course of war, Eurystheus and all his sons were killed.
It is suggested that ''qa-si-re-u'' had a council of elders, a , ''ke-ro-si-ja'', (later "", gerousia), but Palmer believes that it was an organization of "bronze smiths".
Having killed his grandfather by accident, Perseus could not, or would not, inherit the throne of Argos.
The external LHIIIA:1-era sources do, however, agree in their omission of a great king or other unifying structure behind Ahhiya and the Tinay.
Stelae surmounted the mounds.
This is the powerful Fate (Moira), who in the Homeric poems is acting in parallel with the gods and predestinates the events.
Heracles had been a Perseid.
A grand staircase led from a terrace below to the courtyard on the acropolis.
Richer grave goods mark the burials as possibly regal.
Upon discovering a human skull beneath a gold death mask in one of the tombs, he declared: "I have gazed upon the face of Agamemnon".
The presence of engraved and inlaid swords and daggers, with spear points and arrowheads, leave little doubt that warrior chieftains and their families were buried here.
He may have functioned as a pre-Hellenic chthonic Zeus, the lord or spouse of the Earth goddess.
From the history traced by Nilsson and Guthrie, the Mycenaean pantheon consisted of Minoan deities, but also of gods and goddesses who appear under different names with similar functions in East and West.
Schliemann believed in the historical truth of the Homeric stories and interpreted the site accordingly.
In Arcadia were depicted animal-headed gods, indicating that in the remote past the gods were conceived as animals and birds, in a surrounding of animal-headed daemons.
Agamemnon conducted a 10-year war against Troy to get her back for his brother.
Somewhere in the shades of the centuries between the fall of the Mycenaean civilization and the end of the Greek Dark Ages, the original Mycenaean religion persisted and adapted until it finally emerged in the stories of human devotion, apostasy, and divine capriciousness that exists in the two great epic poems of Homer.
The room was accessed from a courtyard with a columned portico.
According to some versions of the legend, the hunting goddess Artemis replaced her at the very last moment with a deer on the altar, and took Iphigenia to Tauris (see ''Iphigenia'' by Euripides).
A secondary level of importance was the cult of the heroes, which seems to have started in the Mycenaean era.
do not allow very precise dating, even augmented by the few existing C-14 dates due to the tolerance inherent in these.
The Perseid dynasty came to an end and the people of Mycenae placed Eurystheus's maternal uncle, Atreus, a Pelopid, on the throne.
It was fed by a tunnel from a spring on more distant higher ground.
In these cults, Poseidon appears usually as a horse, representing the river spirit of the underworld as it usually happens in northern-European folklore.
During LHIIIA:2, Ahhiya, now known as ''Ahhiyawa'', extended its influence over Miletus, settling on the coast of Anatolia, and competed with the Hittites for influence and control in western Anatolia.
Leonard Robert Palmer suggests that the "telestai were the men of telos- the fief holders".
Argos is  to the south; Corinth,  to the north.
Since there are few documents on site with datable contents (such as an Egyptian scarab) and since no dendrochronology has yet been performed upon the remains here, the events are listed here according to Helladic period material culture.
The term , ''qa-si-re-u'' (cf.
At its peak in 1350 BC, the citadel and lower town had a population of 30,000 and an area of 32 hectares.
Other important landowners were the , ''ra-wa-ke-ta'' ("lāwāgetas"), the leader of the people, and the , ''te-re-ta'' ("telestai"), the officials.
During LHIIIB, Mycenae's political, military and economic influence likely extended as far as Crete, Pylos in the western Peloponnese, and to Athens and Thebes.
Frescos adorned the plaster walls and floor.
It seems that the blood of a bull was used for the regeneration of the reappearing dead.
A late date is implied for the Trojan War, which would, in that case, have been against Troy VIIa after all.
δῆμος, ''dễmos''), or "plot holders".
The Lion Gate was constructed in the form of a "Relieving Triangle" in order to support the weight of the stones.
The final group, Group III: the Treasury of Atreus, the Tomb of Clytemnestra and the Tomb of the Genii, are dated to LHIIIB by a sherd under the threshold of the Treasury of Atreus, the largest of the nine tombs.
The change of ''ā'' to ''ē'' in more recent versions of the name is the result of a well-known sound change in later Attic-Ionic.
Another theory has drought as the primary cause behind the Mycenaean decline, but there is no climatological evidence to support this.
Also in the 14th century BC, Ahhiya began to be troublesome to numerous kings of the Hittite Empire.
Instead he arranged an exchange of realms with his cousin, Megapenthes, and became king of Tiryns, Megapenthes taking Argos.
In 1985, excavation work was directed by Spyros Iakovidis who, , is still overseeing the ASA's research mission in both fieldwork and publication preparation.
The pantheon also included deities representing the powers of nature and wildlife, who appear with similar functions in the Mediterranean region.
Atreus argued that because the sun had reversed its path, the election of Thyestes should be reversed.
The Perseids would have been in power circa 1380 BC, the date of a statue base from Kom el-Heitan in Egypt recording the itinerary of an Egyptian embassy to the Aegean in the time of Amenhotep III (r. 1391–1353 BC or 1388–1351 BC).
The care taken to preserve the shaft graves testifies that they were by then part of the royal heritage, the tombs of the ancestral heroes.
For instance, Uhha-Ziti's Arzawa and through him Manapa-Tarhunta's Seha River Land.
According to Egyptian records, the "Sea Peoples" destroyed the Hittite Empire then attacked the 19th and the 20th dynasties of Egypt, (circa 1300–1164).
Recovering, Orestes returned to Mycenae to kill him and take the throne.
Neither of the names of the great kings are stated; the Hittite king could be either Muwatalli II or his brother Hattusili III, which at least dates the letter to LHIIIB by Mycenaean standards.
The wall was extended again on the northeast, with a sally port and also a secret passage through and under the wall, of corbeled construction, leading downward by some 99 steps to a cistern carved out of rock 15 m below the surface.
The Hittites did not use "Danaja" as did the Egyptians, even though the first Ahhiya reference in the "Indictment of Madduwatta" precedes the correspondence between Amenhotep III and one of Madduwatta's subsequent successors in Arzawa, Tarhunta-Radu.
However at the end of LHIIIB period, the Mycenaeans undertook an expedition against Troy, which meant that the sea was safe with no indication of destruction in the Aegean islands.
The eventual destruction of Mycenae formed part of the general Bronze Age collapse in the Greek mainland and beyond.
Though the world is dominated by a divine power that the gods bestow in different ways on men, nothing but "darkness" lay ahead and life was sometimes frail and unsubstantial.
It seems that originally the Mycenaeans, like many Indo-Europeans, considered divine any object that inherited an internal power (anima).
Time to move all Blocks using oxen: 9.9 years
Men kept the meat, and gave the gods the bones wrapped in fat.
In order to please the gods so that they might make the winds start to blow, Agamemnon sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia.
The , ''da-mo-ko-ro'' (''damokoros'') was an official appointment but his duties are not very clear.
Pottery and decorative styles were changing rapidly with craftsmanship and fine art undergoing a decline.
At the end of the second millennium BC, when the Mycenaean palaces collapsed, it seems that Greek thought was gradually released from the idea that each man was a servant to the gods, and sought a "moral purpose".
In the Homeric poems, there seems to be a lingering cultural memory of human sacrifice in King Agamemnon's sacrifice of his daughter, Iphigenia; several of the stories of Trojan heroes involve tragic human sacrifice.
After that, he founded Mycenae and ruled the kingdoms jointly from there.
Certain religious beliefs were mixed with the beliefs of the local populations as it appears in the old cults of isolated Arcadia, which survived up to classical Greece.
Wace’s second group of tholoi are dated between LHIIA and LHIIIB: Kato Phournos, Panagia Tholos, and the Lion Tomb.
The people of Mycenae had received advice from an oracle that they should choose a new king from among the Pelopids.
In folklore, the powerful Pelopid family ruled many Greek states, one branch of which was the Atreid dynasty at Mycenae.
Later, the cult of Dionysos Zagreus indicates that life-blood of animals was needed to renew that of men.
Through oral tradition, Homer transferred the beliefs during the Dark Ages, but he kept in memory the confederacy of the Greeks under the powerful king of Mycenae.
Athena whose task was to protect the olive-trees is a civic Artemis.
The precursor goddesses of Demeter and Persephone are closely related with the springs and the animals, and especially with Poseidon and Artemis who was the first nymph.
Hellenic settlements already were being placed on the coast of Anatolia.
This is the first we hear in legend of those noted sons, who became a symbol of the Dorians.
A throne was placed against the center of a wall to the side of the hearth, allowing an unobstructed view of the ruler from the entrance.
'''Citadel Facts and Figures '''
They claimed the right of the Perseids to inherit the various kingdoms of the Peloponnese and cast lots for the dominion of them.
The argument was heeded, and Atreus became king.
The first excavations at Mycenae were carried out by Greek archaeologist Kyriakos Pittakis in 1841 where he found and restored the Lion Gate.
Within a short time around 1200 BC, all the palace complexes of southern Greece were burned, including that at Mycenae.
Meanwhile, the throne of Mycenae went to Aletes, son of Aegistheus, but not for long.
The powers of animal nature fostered a belief in nymphs whose existence was bound to the trees and the waters, and in gods with human forms and the heads or tails of animals who stood for primitive bodily instincts.
At this moment nature intervened and the sun appeared to reverse direction by setting in the east.
Preserved height: up to 12.5M
In legend, Atreus had two sons, Agamemnon and Menelaus, the Atreids.
However, certain elements indicate that the Myceneans probably believed in a future existence.
They may be related with the destruction of the Mycenaean centers (the records of Pylos mention sea-attack).
From the existing evidence, it seems that the kingdom was further subdivided into sixteen districts.
Classical Greek myths assert that Mycenae was founded by Perseus, grandson of king Acrisius of Argos, son of Acrisius's daughter, Danaë and the god Zeus.
The latter was chosen at first.
In the far past, even human beings might be offered to placate inscrutable gods, especially in times of guilty fear.
Some art objects obtained from the graves are the Silver Siege Rhyton, the Mask of Agamemnon, the Cup of Nestor, and weapons both votive and practical.
The Olympian Pantheon is an ordered system.
Beyond this speculation we can go no further.
The Mycenaeans adopted probably from the east a priest-king system and the belief of a ruling deity in the hands of a theocratic society.
Much of the Mycenaean religion survived into classical Greece in their pantheon of Greek deities, but it is not known to what extent Greek religious belief is Mycenaean, nor how much is a product of the Greek Dark Ages or later.
Time to move all Blocks using men: 110.52 years
Mycenaean religion certainly involved offerings and sacrifices to the deities, and some have speculated that their ceremonies involved human sacrifice based on textual evidence and bones found outside tombs.
He found the ancient shaft graves with their royal skeletons and spectacular grave goods.
In the Homeric poems, the avenging Fate was probably originally a daemon acting in parallel with the gods.
Among the Hindus, this sky-deity becomes "Dyaus Pita".
Mycenae, an acropolis site, was continuously inhabited from the Early Neolithic (EN) down through the Early Helladic (EH) and Middle Helladic (MH) periods; EN Rainbow Ware constitutes the earliest ceramic evidence discovered so far.
was one of the cities visited, a rare early document of the name of Mycenae.
In Latin he becomes "deus pater" or Jupiter; we still encounter this word in the etymologies of the words "deity" and "divine".
Similarly, a Hittite king wrote the so-called Tawagalawa Letter to the Great King of Ahhiyawa, concerning the depredations of the Luwiyan adventurer Piyama-Radu.
Orestes then built a larger state in the Peloponnese, but he died in Arcadia from a snake bite.
Athena and Hera survived and were tutelary goddesses, the guardians of the palaces and the cities.
It was the beginning of the religion which later the Greeks considered Hellenic, and embodies a paradox.
The belief in gods as embodiments of power, the heroic outlook inherited from a distant past together with the local chthonic cults, were later fitted into the frame of the city-states.
He believes that in the Argolid there was internal fighting, and this was followed by the Dorian invasion.
In the temple built within the citadel, a scarab of Queen Tiye of Egypt, who was married to Amenhotep III, was placed in the Room of the Idols alongside at least one statue of either LHIIIA:2 or B:1 type.
Earlier palaces must have existed, but they had been cleared away or built over.
Tyndareus had two ill-starred daughters, Helen and Clytemnestra, whom Menelaus and Agamemnon married, respectively.
Hesiod complies to the Greek desire of an order in the universe, and tries to bring the gods under a rule comparable to the rule which controls the lives of men.
Whatever the cause, by the LHIIIC period (whose latest phase is also termed "Submycenaean"), Mycenae was no longer a major power.
These were great men of the past who were exalted to honor after death, because of what they had done.
His son, Electryon, became the second of the dynasty, but the succession was disputed by the Taphians under Pterelaos, another Perseid, who assaulted Mycenae, lost, and retreated with the cattle.
George E. Mylonas noticed that after 1200 BC, some attempt was made for recovery in Mycenae.
The period of Greek history from about 1600 BC to about 1100 BC is called Mycenaean in reference to Mycenae.
It seems that "damo" was a collective body of men, representing the local district.
In 1874, Heinrich Schliemann excavated deep shafts all over the acropolis without permission; in August 1876, a complete excavation of the site by Schliemann commenced with the permission of the Archaeological Society of Athens (ASA) and the supervision of one of its members, Panayiotis Stamatakis.
Some of the old gods survived in the cult of Dionysos (Satyrs) and Pan (the goat-god).
Afterwards, Tsountas and the ASA gave permission to the British School of Archaeology (BSA) to excavate; the BSA conducted excavations from 1920 to 1955 under the supervision of Alan John Bayard Wace.
, "basileús"), which was later used in Greece for "king", was apparently used for the "chief" of any group of people, or for a provincial official.
Like the Treasury of Minyas at Orchomenus the tomb had been looted of its contents and its nature as funerary monument had been forgotten.
The first correct identification of Mycenae in modern literature was during a survey conducted by Francesco Grimani, commissioned by the Provveditore Generale of the Kingdom of the Morea in 1700, who used Pausanias's description of the Lion Gate to identify the ruins of Mycenae.
After the war, Agamemnon, returning, was greeted royally with a red carpet rolled out for him and then was slain in his bathtub by Clytemnestra, who hated him bitterly for having ordered the sacrifice of their daughter Iphigenia (although the life of the latter had been saved).
He returned as an adult to slay Clytemnestra and Aegistheus.
At a conventional date of 1350 BC, the fortifications on the acropolis, and other surrounding hills, were rebuilt in a style known as cyclopean because the blocks of stone used were so massive that they were thought in later ages to be the work of the one-eyed giants known as the Cyclopes (singular: Cyclops).
A walled enclosure, Grave Circle A, included six more shaft graves, with nine female, eight male, and two juvenile interments.
Because of lack of wind, the warships could not sail to Troy.
The reconstructed Mycenaean Greek name of the site is ''Mukānai'', which has the form of a plural like ''Athānai''.
This is the only known occurrence of a man named Attarissiya.
In the middle of LHIIIB, around 1250 BC or so, the Cyclopean wall was extended on the west slope to include Grave Circle A.
After the death of the latter and in the reign of his son, Arnuwanda, Madduwatta allies with Attarissiya and they, along with another ruler, raid Alasiya, that is, Cyprus.
It seems that the Dorians moved southward gradually in small clans, until they managed to establish themselves.
