Those who have had cardiac arrest may benefit from targeted temperature management with evaluation for implementation of hypothermia protocols.
If PCI cannot be performed within 90 to 120 minutes then thrombolysis, preferably within 30 minutes of arrival to hospital, is recommended.
Copeptin may be useful to rule out MI rapidly when used along with troponin.
While others state there is little evidence that reducing dietary saturated fat or increasing polyunsaturated fat intake affects heart attack risk.
Exercise is both safe and effective even if people have had stents or heart failure.
A 2015 meta-analysis concluded that the use of an intra-aortic balloon pump during an acute MI with or without cardiogenic shock does not reduce mortality.
The World Health Organization estimated in 2004, that 12.2% of worldwide deaths were from ischemic heart disease; with it being the leading cause of death in high- or middle-income countries and second only to lower respiratory infections in lower-income countries.
Chest pain due to ischemia (a lack of blood and hence oxygen supply) of the heart muscle is termed angina pectoris.
Based on numerous studies in different groups (e.g.
In women, chest pain may be less predictive of coronary ischemia than in men.
Nitroglycerin or opioids may be used to help with chest pain; however, they do not improve overall outcomes.
STEMIs occur about twice as often in men as women.
Heparins in those who have had an NSTEMI or unstable angina do not change the risk of death.
In stable patients whose symptoms have resolved by the time of evaluation, technetium (99mTc) sestamibi (i.e.
Calcium deposition as calcification is another part of atherosclerotic plaque formation.
As of 2011, P2Y12 inhibitors are recommended for 12 months following NSTEMI in Europe.
Myocardial infarction can also occur as a late consequence of Kawasaki disease.
An MI may cause heart failure, an irregular heartbeat, or cardiac arrest.
A STEMI is the combination of symptoms related to poor oxygenation of the heart with elevation of the ST segments on the electrocardiogram followed by an increase in proteins in the blood related to heart muscle's death.
At least one quarter of all MIs are silent, without chest pain or other symptoms.
Depending on whether early PCI is planned, a factor Xa inhibitor or a potentiator of antithrombin (fondaparinux or low molecular weight heparin respectively) may be added.
Morphine may be used if nitroglycerin is not effective.
Patients who have a normal ECG and who are able to exercise, for example, do not merit routine imaging.
Cholesterol-lowering drugs from the statin class may be used in those at an elevated risk of cardiovascular disease; this can be calculated with validated risk prediction tools such as QRISK2.
* ACE inhibitor therapy should be started when stable and continued indefinitely at the highest tolerated dose.
For a person to qualify as having a STEMI, in addition to reported angina, the ECG must show new ST elevation in two or more adjacent ECG leads.
** Type 4a – MI associated with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
Worldwide, more than 3 million people have STEMIs and 4 million have NSTEMIs a year.
In early STEMIs there may just be peaked T waves with ST elevation developing later.
Heart attacks appear to occur more commonly  in the morning hours, especially between 6AM and noon.
People with an acute coronary syndrome where no ST elevation is demonstrated (non-ST elevation ACS or NSTEACS) are treated with aspirin.
When a severe enough plaque rupture occurs in the coronary arteries, it leads to MI (necrosis of downstream myocardium).
They should not be used in those who have recently taken cocaine.
Fatigue, sleep disturbances, and dyspnea have been reported as frequently occurring symptoms that may manifest as long as one month before the actual clinically manifested ischemic event.
More than 3 million people had an ST elevation MI and more than 4 million had an NSTEMI.
* Type 3 – sudden unexpected cardiac death, including cardiac arrest, often with symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia, accompanied by new ST elevation, or new left bundle branch block (LBBB), or evidence of fresh thrombus in a coronary artery by angiography and/or at autopsy, but death occurring before blood samples could be obtained, or at a time before the appearance of cardiac biomarkers in the blood
Myocardial infarction in the setting of plaque results from underlying atherosclerosis.
The evidence for saturated fat is unclear.
In the meantime, the calculated risk of further cardiovascular events (e.g.
Imaging tests such as stress radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging or stress echocardiography can confirm a diagnosis when a patient's history, physical exam, ECG, and cardiac biomarkers suggest the likelihood of a problem.
At autopsy, a pathologist can diagnose an MI based on anatomopathological findings.
Tobacco smoking (including secondhand smoke) and short-term exposure to air pollution such as carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide (but not ozone) have been associated with MI.
These cases can be discovered later on electrocardiograms, using blood enzyme tests, or at autopsy without a prior history of related complaints.
The difference in conduction velocity between injured and uninjured tissue can trigger re-entry or a feedback loop that is believed to be the cause of many lethal arrhythmias.
Hyperhomocysteinemia (high blood levels of the amino acid homocysteine) in homocysteinuria is associated with premature atherosclerosis; whether elevated homocysteine in the normal range is causal is controversial.
Throughout hospital departments, practitioners use TIMI scores to assess mortality risk.
Other symptoms include diaphoresis (an excessive form of sweating), weakness, light-headedness, nausea, vomiting, and palpitations.
The differential diagnosis for MI includes other catastrophic causes of chest pain, such as pulmonary embolism, aortic dissection, esophageal rupture, tension pneumothorax, or pericardial effusion causing cardiac tamponade.
This may be part of regional cardiovascular disease prevention programs, or through the health impact assessment of regional and local plans and policies.
Assessment of left ventricular ejection fraction may increase the predictive power.
In general, a heart attack is not covered; however, it may be a work-related injury if it results, for example, from unusual emotional stress or unusual exertion.
The dietary pattern with the greatest support is the Mediterranean diet.
This therapy is time-dependent, and the odds of successful defibrillation decline rapidly after the onset of cardiopulmonary arrest.
Thrombolysis agents include streptokinase, reteplase, alteplase, and tenecteplase.
Inflammation is known to be an important step in the process of atherosclerotic plaque formation.
In the United States, women who have had an MI are often treated with fewer medical interventions than men.
A number of lifestyle recommendations are available to those who have experienced myocardial infarction.
Women may also experience back or jaw pain during an episode.
However, VT usually results in rapid heart rates that prevent the heart from pumping blood effectively.
Dietary cholesterol does not appear to have a significant effect on blood cholesterol and thus recommendations about its consumption may not be needed.
There are TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction) scores for unstable angina or NSTEMI and STEMI, both using routine patient data from history taking, medication use and lab results.
Acute complications may include heart failure if the damaged heart is no longer able to pump blood adequately around the body; aneurysm of the left ventricle myocardium; ventricular septal rupture or free wall rupture; mitral regurgitation, in particular if the infarction causes dysfunction of the papillary muscle; Dressler's syndrome; and abnormal heart rhythms, such as ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, and heart block.
An ECG may confirm an ST elevation MI if ST elevation is present.
Myocardial infarction and other related cardiovascular diseases can be prevented to a large extent by a number of lifestyle changes and medical treatments.
These symptoms are likely induced by a massive surge of catecholamines from the sympathetic nervous system, which occurs in response to pain and the blood flow abnormalities that result from dysfunction of the heart muscle.
Nitroglycerin (administered under the tongue or intravenously) may be administered to improve the blood supply to the heart.
In addition, in some jurisdictions, heart attacks suffered by persons in particular occupations such as police officers may be classified as line-of-duty injuries by statute or policy.
Olive oil, rapeseed oil and related products are to be used instead of saturated fat.
Acute myocardial infarction refers to two subtypes of acute coronary syndrome, namely non-ST-elevated and ST-elevated MIs, which are most frequently (but not always) a manifestation of coronary artery disease.
This must be greater than 2&nbsp;mm (0.2&nbsp;mV) for males and greater than 1.5&nbsp;mm (0.15 mV) in females if in leads V2 and V3 or greater than 1&nbsp;mm (0.1&nbsp;mV) if it is in other ECG leads.
Commonly used blood tests include troponin and less often creatine kinase MB.
Those who cannot tolerate ACE inhibitors may be treated with an angiotensin II receptor antagonist.
In those who have had a stent, more than 12 months of clopidogrel plus aspirin does not affect the risk of death.
* Type 1 – spontaneous MI related to ischemia due to a primary coronary event such as plaque erosion and/or rupture, fissuring, or dissection
Women also report more numerous symptoms compared with men (2.6 on average vs. 1.8 symptoms in men).
Thallium may also be used to determine viability of tissue, distinguishing whether nonfunctional myocardium is actually dead or merely in a state of hibernation or of being stunned.
Nevertheless, many clinical practice guidelines continue to recommend aspirin for primary prevention, and some researchers feel that those with very high cardiovascular risk but low risk of bleeding should continue to receive aspirin.
The cardiac defibrillator device was specifically designed to terminate these potentially fatal arrhythmias.
Other factors that increase the risk of MI and are associated with worse outcomes after an MI include lack of physical activity and psychosocial factors including low socioeconomic status, social isolation, and negative emotions.
C-reactive protein (CRP) is a sensitive but nonspecific marker for inflammation.
Plaques can become unstable, rupture, and additionally promote the formation of a blood clot that occludes the artery; this can occur in minutes.
On a population level, public health measures may be used to reduce unhealthy diets (excessive salt, saturated fat and trans fat) including food labeling and marketing requirements as well as requirements for catering and restaurants, and stimulating physical activity.
Clopidogrel is added in many cases, particularly if the risk of cardiovascular events is felt to be high and early PCI is being considered.
Following a heart attack, nitrates, when taken for two days, and ACE-inhibitors decrease the risk of death.
As a result, the person's heart will be permanently damaged.
However, 1 in 200 people were prevented from a repeat heart attack, and another 1 in 200 from having an abnormal heart rhythm.
A 2007 consensus document classifies MI into five main types:
Old age increases risk of a heart attack.
Other noncatastrophic differentials include gastroesophageal reflux and Tietze's syndrome.
* Type 5 – MI associated with CABG
* Beta blocker therapy such as metoprolol or carvedilol is recommended to be started within 24 hours, provided there is no acute heart failure or heart block.
This can create coverage issues in the administration of no-fault insurance schemes such as workers' compensation.
The device works by delivering an electrical shock to the person to depolarize a critical mass of the heart muscle, in effect  "rebooting" the heart.
Worldwide, about 8.6 million myocardial infarctions occurred in 2013.
People who have a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) are often managed with the blood thinner heparin, with the additional use of angioplasty in those at high risk.
They make up about 25 to 40&nbsp;percent of cases.
Pain radiates most often to the left arm, but may also radiate to the lower jaw, neck, right arm, back, and upper abdomen, where it may mimic heartburn.
Loss of consciousness (due to inadequate blood flow to the brain and cardiogenic shock) and sudden death (frequently due to the development of ventricular fibrillation) can occur in MIs.
In people with blockages of multiple coronary arteries and diabetes, bypass surgery (CABG) may be recommended rather than angioplasty.
Rates of death from ischemic heart disease (IHD) have slowed or declined in most high-income countries, although cardiovascular disease still accounted for one in three of all deaths in the USA in 2008.
The protective effects of statins may be due to more than their LDL lowering effects.
Evidence suggests that heart attacks are at least three times more likely to occur in the morning than in the late evening.
Cardiac rehabilitation benefits many who have experienced myocardial infarction, even if there has been substantial heart damage and resultant left ventricular failure; ideally other medical conditions that could interfere with participation should be managed optimally.
Both scores have been found effective and reliable in multiple settings, including the emergency room.
Additionally, for 1 in 91 the drug causes a temporary poor ability of the heart to pump blood.
Pre-hospital thrombolysis reduces time to thrombolytic treatment, based on studies conducted in higher income countries.
Morbidity and mortality from myocardial infarction has improved over the years due to better treatment.
Any group of symptoms compatible with a sudden interruption of the blood flow to the heart, which includes STEMI, NSTEMI or unstable angina, are called an acute coronary syndrome.
The majority of these variants are in regions that have not been previously implicated in coronary artery disease.
MIs are less commonly caused by coronary artery spasms, which may be due to cocaine, significant emotional stress, and extreme cold, among others.
The risks were major bleeding (1 in 143) and brain bleeding (1 in 250).
The main treatment for MI with ECG evidence of ST elevation (STEMI) include thrombolysis and percutaneous coronary intervention.
The authors thus concluded that their routine use prior to PCI is of questionable value.
a "MIBI scan") or thallium-201 chloride can be used in nuclear medicine to visualize areas of reduced blood flow in conjunction with physiological or pharmacological stress.
About one million people have an MI each year in the United States.
A 2014 review of P2Y12 inhibitors such as clopidogrel found they do not change the risk of death when given to people with a suspected NSTEMI prior to PCI.
As of 2013, there is no evidence of benefit from antibiotics or vaccination, however, calling the association into question.
Atypical symptoms are more frequently reported by women, the elderly, and those with diabetes when compared to their male and younger counterparts.
Genome-wide association studies have found 27 genetic variants that are associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction.
The discomfort may occasionally feel like heartburn.
Another life-threatening arrhythmia is ventricular tachycardia (V-tach/VT), which can cause sudden cardiac death.
STEMIs occur about twice as often in men as women.
Furthermore, those with cardiac arrest, and ST elevation at any time, should usually have angiography.
Recommendations include increasing the intake of wholegrain starch, reducing sugar intake (particularly of refined sugar), consuming five portions of fruit and vegetables daily, consuming two or more portions of fish per week, and consuming 4–5 portions of unsalted nuts, seeds, or legumes per week.
Trans fats do appear to increase risk.
If someone has another medical condition that requires anticoagulation (e.g.
Many of the risk factors for myocardial infarction are modifiable and thus many cases may be preventable.
Myocardial infarctions are generally classified into ST elevation MI (STEMI) and non-ST elevation MI (NSTEMI).
Elevated CRP blood levels, especially measured with high-sensitivity assays, can predict the risk of MI, as well as stroke and development of diabetes.
Chest pain is the most common symptom of acute MI and is often described as a sensation of tightness, pressure, or squeezing.
In ST elevation MIs treatments which attempt to restore blood flow to the heart are typically recommended and include angioplasty, where the arteries are pushed open, or thrombolysis, where the blockage is removed using medications.
A left bundle branch block that is believed to be new used to be considered the same as ST elevation; however, this is no longer the case.
About 30% of people have atypical symptoms, with women more likely than men to present atypically.
In people with diabetes, differences in pain threshold, autonomic neuropathy, and psychological factors have been cited as possible explanations for the lack of symptoms.
The onset of symptoms in myocardial infarction (MI) is usually gradual, over several minutes, and rarely instantaneous.
** Type 4b – MI associated with stent thrombosis as documented by angiography or at autopsy
A number of tests are useful to help with diagnosis, including electrocardiograms (ECGs), blood tests, and coronary angiography.
Some state there is evidence of benefit from reducing saturated fat, specifically a benefit from eating polyunsaturated fat instead of saturated fat.
Most MIs occur due to coronary artery disease.
If a person has had symptoms for 12 to 24 hours evidence for thrombolysis is less and if they have had symptoms for more than 24 hours it is not recommended.
The most serious of these arrhythmias is ventricular fibrillation (V-Fib/VF), an extremely fast and chaotic heart rhythm that is the leading cause of sudden cardiac death.
This includes the adoption of a Mediterranean-type diet, maintaining alcohol intake within recommended limits, exercising to the point of mild breathlessness for 20–30 minutes every day, stopping smoking, and trying to achieve a healthy weight.
However, an MI may lead to heart failure.
If despite thrombolysis there is significant cardiogenic shock, continued severe chest pain, or less than a 50% improvement in ST elevation on the ECG recording after 90 minutes, then rescue PCI is indicated emergently.
Acute and prolonged intake of high quantities of alcoholic drinks (3-4 or more) increase the risk of a heart attack.
Prognosis is worse if a mechanical complication such as papillary muscle or myocardial free wall rupture occurs.
Cardiac output and blood pressure may fall to dangerous levels, which can lead to further coronary ischemia and extension of the infarct.
It should start soon after discharge from the hospital.
* Previous studies suggested a benefit from omega-3 fatty acid supplementation but this has not been confirmed.
Women who use combined oral contraceptive pills have a modestly increased risk of myocardial infarction, especially in the presence of other risk factors, such as smoking.
Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is the treatment of choice for STEMI if it can be performed in a timely manner.
Contrary to what was long believed, the use of beta blockers does not appear to affect the risk of death, possibly because other treatments for MI have improved.
The most common triggering event is the disruption of an atherosclerotic plaque in an epicardial coronary artery, which leads to a clotting cascade, sometimes resulting in total occlusion of the artery.
At common law, in general, a myocardial infarction is a disease, but may sometimes be an injury.
In the absence of ST elevation, diagnosis of MI is based on a blood test for biomarkers (usually troponin).
This can take 3–6 hours after the onset of symptoms to become positive.
Medical societies and professional guidelines recommend that the physician confirm a person is at high risk for myocardial infarction before conducting imaging tests to make a diagnosis.
Aspirin is an appropriate immediate treatment for a suspected MI.
Rates of MI for a given age have decreased globally between 1990 and 2010.
There is some controversy surrounding the effect of dietary fat on the development of cardiovascular disease.
Strongest association of MI has been found with the 9p21 genomic locus, which contains genes CDKN2A & 2B, although the single nucleotide polymorphisms that are implicated are within a non-coding region.
Calcium deposits in the coronary arteries can be detected with CT scans.
An MI requires immediate medical attention.
This is not the case in the setting of peri-procedural MI where use of troponin and CK-MB assays are considered useful.
Myocardial infarction is a common presentation of coronary artery disease.
Whether CRP plays a direct role in atherosclerosis remains uncertain.
The following genes have an association with MI: PCSK9, SORT1, MIA3, WDR12, MRAS, PHACTR1, LPA, TCF21, MTHFDSL, ZC3HC1, CDKN2A, 2B, ABO, PDGF0, APOA5, MNF1ASM283, COL4A1, HHIPC1, SMAD3, ADAMTS7, RAS1, SMG6, SNF8, LDLR, SLC5A3, MRPS6, KCNE2.
People are often advised to keep a diet where less than 30% of the energy intake derives from fat, a diet that contains less than 7% of the energy intake in the form of saturated fat, and a diet that contains less than 300&nbsp;mg/day of cholesterol.
Thrombolysis involves the administration of medication that activates the enzymes that normally destroy blood clots.
After an MI, lifestyle modifications, along with long term treatment with aspirin, beta blockers, and statins, are typically recommended.
The scenario is referred to as "non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome" (NSTEACS).
Keeping a healthy weight, drinking alcohol within the recommended limits, and quitting smoking are measures that also appear to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Physical activity can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, and people at risk are advised to engage in 150 minutes of moderate or 75 minutes of vigorous intensity aerobic exercise a week.
Bloodstream column irregularities visible on angiography reflect artery lumen narrowing as a result of decades of advancing atherosclerosis.
Aspirin and nitroglycerin may be administered.
Moreover, some drugs for MI might also reduce CRP levels.
More recently, routine use was found to lead to increased mortality and infarct size.
Other analgesics such as nitrous oxide are of unknown benefit.
* Type 2 – MI secondary to ischemia due to either increased oxygen demand or decreased supply, e.g.
In the developed world the risk of death in those who have had an STEMI is about 10%.
Longer-term complications include heart failure, atrial fibrillation, and an increased risk of a second MI.
Shortness of breath occurs when the damage to the heart limits the output of the left ventricle, causing left ventricular failure and consequent pulmonary edema.
Levine's sign, in which a person localizes the chest pain by clenching their fists over their sternum, has classically been thought to be predictive of cardiac chest pain, although a prospective observational study showed it had a poor positive predictive value.
Replacing saturated with mono- polyunsaturated fat is also recommended, as the consumption of polyunsaturated fat instead of saturated fat may decrease coronary heart disease.
The program may include lifestyle advice, exercise, social support, as well as recommendations about driving, flying, sport participation, stress management, and sexual intercourse.
The most common symptom is chest pain or discomfort which may travel into the shoulder, arm, back, neck, or jaw.
* Type 4 – associated with coronary angioplasty or stents:
It is also distinct from heart failure, in which the pumping action of the heart is impaired.
A collagen scar forms in their place.
Often it is in the center or left side of the chest and lasts for more than a few minutes.
In some countries or states, a person having suffered from an MI may be prevented from participating in activity that puts other people's lives at risk, for example driving a car or flying an airplane.
Some risk factors for death include age, hemodynamic parameters (such as heart failure, cardiac arrest on admission, systolic blood pressure, or Killip class of two or greater), ST-segment deviation, diabetes, serum creatinine, peripheral vascular disease, and elevation of cardiac markers.
Smoking appears to be the cause of about 36% and obesity the cause of 20% of coronary artery disease.
Injured heart tissue conducts electrical impulses more slowly than normal heart tissue.
* Statin therapy has been shown to reduce mortality and morbidity.
using the GRACE score) and the presence of other ECG changes and clinical features determines ongoing management.
When given to people suspected of having a STEMI within 6 hours of the onset of symptoms, thrombolytic drugs save the life of 1 in 43 who received them.
In the past, high flow oxygen was recommended for everyone with possible myocardial infarction.
When beta blocker medication are given within the first 24–72 hours of a major heart attack (“STEMI”) no lives are saved.
For example, rates of death from cardiovascular disease have decreased almost a third between 2001 and 2011 in the United States.
