According to Hindu mythology, the area was ruled by the demon Mahishasura.
Purnaiah is credited with improving Mysore's public works.
''Mysore Peta'', the traditional indigenous turban worn by the erstwhile rulers of Mysore, is worn by men in some traditional ceremonies.
The city is located between two rivers: the Kaveri River that flows through the north of the city and the Kabini River, a tributary of the Kaveri, that lies to the south.
Among the most notable are Amba Vilas, popularly known as Mysore Palace; Jaganmohana Palace, which also serves as an art gallery; Rajendra Vilas, also known as the summer palace; Lalitha Mahal, which has been converted into a hotel; and Jayalakshmi Vilas.
According to the National Crime Records Bureau of India, the number of cognisable crime incidents reported in Mysore during 2010 was 3,407 (second in the state, after Bangalore's 32,188), increasing from 3,183 incidents reported in 2009.
The city has had an underground drainage system since 1904.
The central government approved this request in October 2014 and Mysore was renamed (along with other 12 cities) to "Mysuru" on November 1, 2014.
The education system was enhanced by the establishment of the University of Mysore in 1916, making it the first outside the British administration in India.
Mysore sometimes faces water crises, mainly during the summer months (March–June) and in years of low rainfall.
The Jayalakshmi Vilas Mansion was constructed by Sri Chamaraja Wodeyar for his daughter Jayalakshammanni.
As of 2011, Mysore gets 42.5&nbsp;million&nbsp;gallons water per day.
The city contributed Rs.&nbsp;1363&nbsp;crore (US$275&nbsp;million) to Karnataka's IT exports.
Mysore is a major tourist destination in its own right and serves as a base for other tourist attractions in the vicinity.
Mysore also has a  long ring road that is being upgraded to six lanes by the MUDA.
Cricket is by far the most popular sport in Mysore.
Kannada is the most widely spoken language in the city.
As of 2011, the literacy rate of the city is 86.84 per cent, which is higher than the state's average of 75.6 per cent.
After Indian independence, Mysore city remained as part of the Mysore State, now known as Karnataka.
This led to the establishment of industries such as the Mysore Sandalwood Oil Factory in 1917 and the Sri Krishnarajendra Mills in 1920.
The Chamarajendra Academy of Visual Arts (CAVA) offers education in visual art forms such as painting, graphics, sculpture, applied art, photography, photojournalism and art history.
State Highways 33 and 88 which connect Mysore to H D Kote and Madikeri respectively.
Mysore was the location of the first private radio broadcasting station in India when ''Akashavani'' (voice from the sky) was established in the city on 10 September 1935 by M.V.
The Chamundeshwari Electricity Supply Corporation is responsible for electric supply to the city.
The latter demolished parts of Mysore to remove legacies of the Wodeyar dynasty.
According to the census of 2001, 76.8% of thepopulatiion are Hindus, 19% are Muslims, 2.8% are Christians, and the remainder belong to other religions.
Tourism is the major industry, while information technology has emerged as a major employer alongside the traditional industries.
'''Mysore''' (), officially renamed as '''Mysuru''', is the third most populous city in the state of Karnataka, India.
The city got its first piped water supply when the Belagola project was commissioned in 1896.
Nanjangud Industrial area  also boasts being 2nd highest VAT / Sales Tax payer which is about 400+ crores  after Peenya which is in state capital Bangalore.
In an exercise  carried out by the Urban Development Ministry under the national urban sanitation policy, Mysore was rated the second cleanest city in India in 2010 and the cleanest in Karnataka.
According to the provisional results of the 2011 national census of India, the population is 887,446.
On the ninth day of ''Dasara'', called ''Mahanavami'', the royal sword is worshipped and is taken on a procession of decorated elephants, camels and horses.
The first railway line established in the city was the Bangalore–Mysore Junction metre gauge line, which was commissioned in 1882.
Newspaper publishing in Mysore started in 1859 when Bhashyam Bhashyacharya began publishing a weekly newspaper in Kannada called the ''Mysooru Vrittanta Bodhini'', the first of a number of weekly newspapers published in the following three decades.
The former Wodeyar rulers were reinstated as puppet monarchs, now styled ''Maharajas''.
Mysore is known for rosewood inlay work; around 4,000 craftsmen were estimated to be involved in this art in 2002.
Mysore was the venue for six sports: archery, gymnastics, equestrianism, handball, table tennis and wrestling.
Growth in the information technology industry in Mysore has led to a change in the city's demographic profile; likely strains on the infrastructure and haphazard growth of the city resulting from the demographic change have been a cause of concern for some of its citizens.
R. K. Narayan, a popular English-language novelist and creator of the fictional town of Malgudi, and his cartoonist brother R. K. Laxman spent much of their life in Mysore.
B R Hills, Himavad Gopalaswamy Betta hill and the hill stations of Ooty, Sultan Bathery and Madikeri are close to Mysore.
According to the 2001 census, 35.75% of the population in the urban areas of Karnataka are workers, but only 33.3% of the population of Mysore are.
The Mysore municipality was established in 1888 and the city was divided into eight wards.
The politics in the city is dominated by three political parties: the Indian National Congress (INC), the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and the Janata Dal (Secular) (JDS).
However, airlines have had difficulty maintaining service to the airport.
The gender ratio of the city is 1000&nbsp;females to every 1000&nbsp;males and the population density is .
Chamundeshwari Temple, atop the Chamundi Hills, and St. Philomena's Church, Wesley's Cathedral are notable religious places in Mysore.
The city's average annual rainfall is .
The demon was killed by the Goddess Chamundeshwari, whose temple is situated atop the Chamundi Hills.
Following three decades of dormancy, Mysore Airport was modernised in the mid-2000s, reopening to scheduled passenger service in October 2010.
A new division of KSRTC called Mysore City Transport Corporation (MCTC) has been proposed.
The city was the location of the first private radio station in India.
Before the advent of the European system of education in Mysore, ''agraharas'' (Brahmin quarters) provided Vedic education to Hindus, and ''madrassas'' provided schooling for Muslims.
Nanjangud industrial area hosts a number of Big industries like Reid and Taylor, Jubiliant, TVS, Asian Paints.
The ''Industrial School'', the first institute for technical education in the city, was established in 1892; this was followed by the Chamarajendra Technical Institute in 1913.
The Rangayana repertory company performs plays and offers certificate courses in subjects related to theatre.
Though in Sanskrit ''Mahisha'' means buffalo, here ''Mahisha'' refers to Mahishasura, a mythological demon who could assume the form of both human and buffalo.
The Mysore Zoo, established in 1892, the Karanji and Kukkarahalli lakes are popular recreational destinations.
A high school exclusively for girls was established in 1881 and later converted into the ''Maharani's Women's College''.
Mysore is connected by National Highway NH-212 to the state border town of Gundlupet, where the road forks into the states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
Even though the Government of Karnataka maintains the Mysore palace, a small portion has been allocated for the erstwhile Royal family to live in.
The 17th century saw a steady expansion of its territory and, under Narasaraja Wodeyar I and Chikka Devaraja Wodeyar, the kingdom annexed large expanses of what is now southern Karnataka and parts of Tamil Nadu, to become a powerful state in the southern Deccan.
As of  , the airport is without commercial service.
Modern education began in Mysore when a free English school was established in 1833.
Mysore is the location of the International Ganjifa Research Centre, which researches the ancient card game ''Ganjifa'' and the art associated with it.
The main seasons are summer from March to June, the monsoon season from July to November and winter from December to February.
India's first youth hostel was formed in the Maharaja's College Hostel in 1949.
The Jaganmohana Palace, The Sand Sculpture Museum the Jayalakshmi Vilas and the Lalitha Mahal are other palaces in the city.
Sudharma, the only Indian daily newspaper in Sanskrit, is published in Mysore.
While the modern system of education was making inroads, colleges such as the ''Mysore Sanskrit college'', established in 1876, continued to provide Vedic education.
Within the city, buses are cheap and popular means of transport, auto-rickshaws are also available and ''tongas'' (horse-drawn carriages) are popular with tourists.
The Wodeyar kings of Mysore were patrons of games and sports.
The citizens of Mysore elect four representatives to the Legislative assembly of Karnataka through the constituencies of Chamaraja, Krishnaraja, Narasimharaja and Chamundeshwari.
This was approved by the Government of India, but  the formalities necessary to incorporate the name change were yet to be completed.
State Highway 17, which connects Mysore to Bangalore, was upgraded to a four-lane highway in 2006, reducing travel time between the two cities.
The planned industrial growth of the city and the state was first envisaged at the ''Mysore economic conference'' in 1911.
Patrons of art and culture, the Wodeyars contributed significantly to the cultural growth of the city.
This was the only channel available to Mysoreans until Star TV started satellite channels in 1991.
The residents of the city are known as ''Mysoreans'' in English and ''Mysoorinavaru'' in Kannada.
The name ''Mysore'' is an anglicised version of ''Mahishūru'', which means the abode of ''Mahisha'' in the local Kannada language.
He died in September 1974 and was cremated in Mysore city.
Mysore is noted for its palaces, including the Mysore Palace, and for the festivities that take place during the ''Dasara'' festival when the city receives a large number of tourists.
During this time, Mysore kingdom came into conflict with the Marathas, the British and the ''Nizam'' of Golconda, leading to the four Anglo-Mysore wars, success in the first two of which was followed by defeat in the third and fourth.
The Kingdom was ruled by the Wodeyar dynasty, except for a brief period in the late 18th century when Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan were in power.
The highest temperature recorded in Mysore was  on 4 April 1914, and the lowest was  on 16 January 2012.
The city lends its name to the Mysore silk saree, a women's garment made with pure silk and gold ''zari'' (thread).
In 2001, total land area usage in Mysore city was 39.9% residential, 16.1% roads, 13.74% parks and open spaces, 13.48% industrial, 8.96% public property, 3.02% commercial, 2.27% agriculture and 2.02 water.
With the decline of the Vijayanagara Empire after the Battle of Talikota in 1565, the Mysore Kingdom gradually achieved independence, and by the time of King Narasaraja Wodeyar (1637) it had become a sovereign state.
The landlocked interior of the previous Mysore Kingdom was turned into a princely state under the suzerainty of the British Crown.
Many local newspapers are published in Mysore and carry news mostly related to the city and its surroundings, and national and regional dailies in English and Kannada are available, as in the other parts of the state.
The Mysore race course hosts a racing season each year from August through October.
The Mysore Kingdom, governed by the Wodeyar family, initially served as a vassal state of the Vijayanagara Empire.
Drinking water for Mysore is sourced from the Kaveri and Kabini rivers.
The British administration was assisted locally by ''Diwan'' (chief minister) Purnaiah.
All railway lines that serve the city are single track at some points and the rest of the stretch is double track, impeding faster connections to the city.
The main palace of Mysore was burned down in 1897, and the present-day structure was built on the same site.
It is spread across an area of  at the base of the Chamundi Hills in the southern region of Karnataka.
The ''Dasara'' festivities, which are celebrated over a ten-day period, were first introduced by King Raja Wodeyar I in 1610.
Citizens of Mysore have criticised MUDA for its inability to prevent land mafias and ensure lawful distribution of housing lands among city residents.
Other prominent sportsmen from the city are Prahlad Srinath, who has represented India in Davis Cup tennis tournaments; Reeth Abraham, a national champion in the heptathlon and a long jump record holder; Sagar Kashyap, the youngest Indian to officiate at the Wimbledon Championships; and Rahul Ganapathy, a national amateur golf champion.
In 1957, ''Akashvani'' was chosen as the official name of All India Radio (AIR), the radio broadcaster of the Government of India.
It is now a museum dedicated to folk culture and artefacts of the royal family.
Amba Vilas palace exhibits an Indo-Saracenic style of architecture on the outside, but a distinctly Hoysala style in the interior.
Mysore has a tropical savanna climate designated ''Aw'' under the Köppen climate classification.
The Mysore painting style is an offshoot of the Vijayanagar school of painting, and King Raja Wodeyar (1578–1617 CE) is credited with having been its patron.
Overseeing engineering works, health, sanitation, water supply, administration and taxation, the corporation is headed by a mayor, who is assisted by commissioners and council members.
Mysore is called the ''City of Palaces'' because of several ornate examples in the city.
A well-known Mysore publisher during Wodeyar rule was M. Venkatakrishnaiah, known as the father of Kannada journalism, who started several news magazines.
Jayachamarajendra Wodeyar, then king of Mysore, was allowed to retain his titles and was nominated as the ''Rajapramukh'' (appointed governor) of the state.
Mysore houses Mysore University, which has produced several notable authors, particularly in the field of Kannada literature.
One of the major industrial in the proximity of Mysore is Nanjangud which will be Satellite town to Mysore.
King Krishnaraja Wodeyar III had a passion for indoor games.
Mysore served as the capital city of Kingdom of Mysore for nearly six centuries, from 1399 until 1974.
The ''Mahishūru Fort'' was constructed in 1524 by Chamaraja Wodeyar III (1513–1553), who passed on the dominion of ''Puragere'' to his son Chamaraja Wodeyar IV (1572–1576).
Public demonstrations and meetings were held there during the Quit India movement and other phases of the Indian independence movement.
Mysore is slowly becoming a consumer city with a very big outside population working with the industries and IT hubs.
It lends its name to the Mysore style of painting, the sweet dish ''Mysore Pak'', the ''Mysore Peta'' (a traditional silk turban) and the garment known as the Mysore silk saree.
People in and around Mysore extensively use Kannada as medium of language.
Mysore has traditionally been home to industries such as weaving, sandalwood carving, bronze work and the production of lime and salt.
The annual budget of the Corporation for the year 2011–2012 was .
Tourism is the major industry in Mysore.
The city attracted about 3.15&nbsp;million tourists in 2010.
After numerous legal hurdles, it remains unfinished .
Cricket is the most popular sport in the city.
The population exceeded 100,000 in the census of 1931 and grew by 20.5 per cent in the decade 1991–2001.
The city has four established cricket grounds, but is yet to host an international cricket match.
The AIR station at Mysore broadcasts an FM radio channel at 100.6&nbsp;MHz, and Gyan Vani broadcasts on 105.2.
It regained that status in 1881 and remained the capital of the Princely State of Mysore within the British Indian Empire until India became independent in 1947.
The procession starts from the Mysore Palace and culminates at a place called ''Bannimantapa'', where the ''banni'' tree (''Prosopis spicigera'') is worshipped.
The council members in turn elect the mayor.
Members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled tribes constitute 15.1% of the population.
He invented new board games and popularised the ''ganjifa'' card game.
The kingdom reached the height of its military power and dominion in the latter half of the 18th century under the de facto rulers Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan.
According to the provisional results of the 2011 census of India, Mysore had a population of 887,446, consisting of 443,813 males and 443,633 females, making it the third most populous city in Karnataka.
All trains that connect to Mysore are operated by South Western Railway Zone, Hubli of Indian Railways.
Maharaja College was founded in 1864.
Popular destinations for wildlife enthusiasts near Mysore include the Nagarhole National Park, the wildlife sanctuaries at Melkote and B R Hills and the bird sanctuaries at Ranganathittu and Kokrebellur.
Among 63 cities covered under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission, Mysore City Corporation was adjudged the second best city municipal corporation and was given the ''"Nagara Ratna"'' award in 2011.
The growth of the information technology industry in the first decade of the 21st century has resulted in the city emerging as the second largest software exporter in Karnataka, next to Bangalore.
Urban growth and expansion is managed by the Mysore Urban Development Authority (MUDA), which is headed by a commissioner.
The wrestling competition held in Mysore during the ''Dasara''  celebrations attracts wrestlers from all over India.
Among the events that took place in Mysore and made national headlines were a fire at a television studio that claimed 62 lives in 1989, and the sudden deaths of many animals at the Mysore Zoo.
After Tipu Sultan's death in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War in 1799, the capital of the kingdom was moved back to Mysore from Seringapatam, and the kingdom was distributed by the British to their allies of the Fourth Mysore war.
Seringapatam (modern-day Srirangapatna), near Mysore, was the capital of the kingdom from 1610.
The ''Dasara'' festivities culminate on the night of ''Vijayadashami'' with a torchlight parade, known locally as ''Panjina Kavayatthu''.
Mysore railway station has three lines, connecting it to Bangalore, Hassan and Chamarajanagar.
Its activities include developing new layouts and roads, town planning and land acquisition.
Vivekananda Institute, Mysore is an international organisation giving training to Indians and foreigners in development management.
Over the years, Mysore became well known as a centre for tourism; the city remained largely peaceful, except for occasional riots related to the Kaveri river water dispute.
Other tourist spots near Mysore include the religious locations of Nanjanagud and Bylakuppe and the waterfalls at Shivanasamudra.
Other important institutes are CFTRI, MYRA School of Business (founded in 2011) and Mysore Medical College.
Mysore City Corporation is responsible for the civic administration of the city, which is also the headquarters of the Mysore district and the Mysore division.
The site where Mysore Palace now stands was occupied by a village named Puragere at the beginning of the 16th century.
Places of historic importance close to Mysore are Srirangapatna, Somanathapura and Talakad.
Mysore is the southern-most city of Karnataka, and is a neighbouring city of the states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu in the south, flanked by the state cities Mercara, Chamarajanagara, and Mandya.
Mysore is currently twinned with Cincinnati.
In 1997 Mysore and Bangalore co-hosted the city's biggest sports event ever, the National Games of India.
The dispute between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu over the sharing of Kaveri river water often leads to minor altercations and demonstrations in the city.
''Mahishūru'' later became ''Mahisūru'' (a name which, even now, the royal family uses) and finally came to be called Maisūru, its present name in the Kannada language.
Mysore city, being part of the larger Mysore Lok Sabha constituency, also elects one member to the Lok Sabha, the lower house of the Indian Parliament.
A notable local dessert that traces its history to the kitchen in the Mysore palace is ''Mysore pak''.
For the industrial development of the city, the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board (KIADB) has established four industrial areas in and around Mysore, in the Belagola, Belawadi, Hebbal and Hootagalli areas.
Javagal Srinath, who represented India for several years as its frontline fast bowler, comes from Mysore.
The city receives large number of tourists during the 10-day ''Dasara'' festival.
The station was taken over by the princely state of Mysore in 1941 and was moved to Bangalore in 1955.
The cultural ambience and achievements of Mysore earned it the sobriquet ''Cultural capital of Karnataka''.
Mysore has the Regional Museum of Natural History, the Folk Lore Museum, the Railway Museum and the Oriental Research Institute.
Located at the base of the Chamundi Hills about  southwest of the state capital Bangalore, it is spread across an area of .
Mysore has several lakes, such as the Kukkarahalli, the Karanji, and the Lingambudhi lakes.
A short distance from Mysore city is the Krishnarajasagar Dam and the adjoining Brindavan Gardens, where a musical fountain show is held every evening.
With the establishment of the City Improvement Trust Board (CITB) in 1903, Mysore became one of the first cities in Asia to undertake planned development of the city.
The distinctive feature of these paintings is the ''gesso'' work, to which gold foil is applied.
One of the most visited monuments in India, the Amba Vilas Palace, or Mysore Palace, is the centre of the ''Dasara'' festivities.
Mysore lost its status as the administrative centre of the kingdom in 1831, when the British commissioner moved the capital to Bangalore.
The fastest train to serve the city is the Shatabdi Express.
Referred to as the ''cultural capital'' of South Karnataka, Mysore is well known for the festivities that take place during the period of ''Dasara'', the state festival of Karnataka.
The city is a centre for yoga-related health tourism that attracts domestic and foreign visitors, particularly those who, for years, came to study with the late ashtanga yoga guru K. Pattabhi Jois.
Mysore also hosts many central government organisations like CFTRI, DFRL, CIPET, RPM ( Rare Material Project ),   RBI Note printing Press and RBI  Paper Printing Press.
Malla-yuddha (traditional wrestling) has a history in Mysore dating back to the 16th century.
An annual sports meeting is organised there during the ''Dasara'' season too.
Bandipur National Park and Mudumalai National Park, which are sanctuaries for gaur, chital, elephants, tigers, Indian leopards and other threatened species, lie between  to the south.
The civic administration of the city is managed by the Mysore City Corporation, which was established as a municipality in 1888 and converted into a corporation in 1977.
A project was planned in 1994 to construct a new expressway to connect Bangalore and Mysore.
New housing layouts are appearing every month and the number of supermarkets and other shopping facilities is increasing very fast.
In 1897 an outbreak of bubonic plague killed nearly half of the population of the city.
On the tenth day, called ''Vijayadashami'', the traditional ''Dasara'' procession (locally known as ''Jumboo Savari'') is held on the streets of Mysore which usually falls in the month of September or October.. the Idol of the Goddess Chamundeshwari is placed on a golden ''mantapa'' on the back of a decorated elephant and taken on a procession, accompanied by tabla, dance groups, music bands, decorated elephants, horses and camels.
The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) and other private agencies operate buses both within the city and between cities.
Kannada writers Kuvempu, Gopalakrishna Adiga and U. R. Ananthamurthy were educated in Mysore and served as professors at the Mysore University.
In December 2005, the Government of Karnataka announced its intention to change the English name of the city to ''Mysuru''.
BIG FM and Red FM are the two private FM channels operating in the city.
The entire sewage from the city drains into four valleys: Kesare, Malalavadi, Dalavai and Belavatha.
Mysore started receiving television broadcasts in the early 1980s, when Doordarshan (public service broadcaster of the Indian government) started broadcasting its national channel all over India.
Since the 16th century, the name of ''Mahishūru'' has commonly been used to denote the city.
Gopalaswamy, a professor of psychology, at his house in the Vontikoppal area of Mysore, using a 50-watt transmitter.
One of the major projects undertaken by MUDA is the creation of an Outer Ring Road to ease traffic congestion.
Mysore is located at  and has an average altitude of .
Approximately 19% of the population live below the poverty line, and 9% live in slums.
Mysore depends on rail and bus transport for inter-city connections.
The city is divided into 65 wards and the council members (also known as ''corporators'') are elected by the citizens of Mysore every five years.
Direct-to-home channels are now available in Mysore.
