By the end of August, the countrywide revolt had been suppressed and Qasim was executed.
The Nablus municipal government established its own cultural center in 2003, called the Nablus Municipality Cultural Center (NMCC) aimed at establishing and developing educational facilities.
The Samaritan community built a new synagogue in the 1130s.
Al-Hana in Yasmina, was the last ''hamaam'' built in the city in the 19th century.
Taxis are the main form of public transportation within Nablus and the city contains 28 taxi offices and garages.
Terebinthus then fled to Constantinople, requesting an army garrison to prevent further attacks.
Today, the population is predominantly Muslim, with small Christian and Samaritan minorities.
Olive oil was the primary product of Nablus and fueled other related industries such as soap-making and basket weaving.
Nablus exported three-fourths of its soap — the city's most important commodity — to Cairo by caravan through Gaza and the Sinai Peninsula, and by sea through the ports of Jaffa and Gaza.
The extension of the railway to Nablus was built in 1911–12.
The club participated in the Middle East Mediterranean Scholar Athlete Games in 2000.
The al-Huda Textiles factory is also located in Nablus.
The town prevailed as an important trade center during the centuries of Islamic Arab rule under the Umayyad, Abbasid and Fatimid dynasties.
The most influential military family were the Nimrs, who were originally local governors of Homs and Hama's rural subdistricts.
Nablus became part of the royal domain of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
Nabulsi soap) and food products (e.g.
In May 1834, Qasim al-Ahmad—the chief of the Jamma'in ''nahiya''—rallied the rural sheikhs and ''fellahin'' (peasants) of Jabal Nablus and launched a revolt against Governor Ibrahim Pasha, in protest at conscription orders, among other new policies.
Pipe water is provided for 100% of the city's households, primarily through a public network (99.3%), but some residents receive water through a private system (0.7%).
An-Najah was closed down by Israeli authorities during the First Intifada, but reopened in 1991.
The former held the post of ''mutasallim'' (tax collector, strongman) of Nablus longer, though non-consecutively, than any other family.
Arab geographer Al-Dimashqi, recorded that under the rule of the Mamluk Dynasty (Muslim Dynasty based in Egypt), local Muslims, Samaritans, Orthodox Christians, Catholics and Jews populated the city.
It produces 50 tons a day, and exports to Jordan and Iraq.
Since 2000, most of the workforce has been employed in agriculture and local trade.
The gender distribution was 50,945 males (50.92%) and 49,089 females (49.07%).
The forces of Emperor Justinian I were sent in to quell the revolt, which ended with the slaughter of the majority of the Samaritan population in the city.
The majority of the inhabitants today are Muslim, but there are small Christian and Samaritan communities as well.
Jabal Nablus enjoyed a greater degree of autonomy than other ''sanjaqs'' under Ottoman control, probably because the city was the capital of a hilly region, in which there were no "foreigners" who held any military or bureaucratic posts.
According to a liturgical manuscript in Syriac, Latin Christians fled Nablus, but the original Eastern Orthodox Christian inhabitants remained.
Due to the city's strategic geographic position and the abundance of water from nearby springs, Neapolis prospered, accumulating extensive territory, including the former Judean toparchy of Acraba.
Egyptian rule in Palestine resulted in the destruction of Acre and thus, the political importance of Nablus was further elevated.
Neapolis was entirely pagan at this time.
For daily wear, ''thobs'' were often made of white cotton or linen, with a preference for winged sleeves.
According to the historian Fayyad Altif, large numbers of Samaritans converted due to persecution and because the monotheistic nature of Islam made it easy for them to accept it.
The Jarrars came to dominate the hinterland of Nablus, while the Tuqans and Nimrs competed for influence in the town.
Other sweets made in Nablus include ''baklawa'', "Tamriya", ''mabrumeh'' and ''ghuraybeh'', a plain pastry made of butter, flour and sugar in an "S"-shape, or shaped as fingers or bracelets.
The Child Cultural Center (CCC), founded in 1998 and built in a renovated historic building, operates an art and drawing workshop, a stage for play performances, a music room, a children's library and a multimedia lab.
There are a number of historic monuments in the old city including the Khan al-Tujjar and the al-Manara Clock Tower built in 1906.
Nearby cities and towns include Huwara and Aqraba to the south, Beit Furik to the southeast, Tammun to the northeast, Asira ash-Shamaliya to the north and Kafr Qaddum and Tell to the west.
The city and the refugee camps of Balata and Askar constituted the center of "knowhow" for the production and operation of the rockets in the West Bank.
There are several mosques in the Old City: The Great Mosque of Nablus, An-Nasr Mosque, al-Tina Mosque, al-Khadra Mosque, Hanbali Mosque, al-Anbia Mosque, Ajaj Mosque and others
Certain Nabulsi family names are associated with Samaritan ancestry – Muslimani, Yaish, and Shakshir among others.
Crusaders began building Christian institutions in Nablus, including a church dedicated to the Passion and Resurrection of Jesus, and in 1170 they erected a hospice for pilgrims.
In 1242, the Great Mosque was burnt by the Templar Knights during a three-day raid in which they killed 1,000 people and took many women and children who were then sold in the slave markets of Acre.
However, they were later defeated by Ibrahim Pasha's forces the next month.
The Ottomans did not attempt to restructure the political configuration of the region on the local level such that the borders of the ''nahiya'' were drawn to coincide with the historic strongholds of certain families.
Other industries include furniture production, tile production, stone quarrying, textile manufacturing and leather tanning.
Made in a cube-like shape about  tall and  wide, the color of Nabulsi soap is like that of "the page of an old book."
About 19.8% of high school students received bachelor diplomas or higher diplomas.
In 2007, the department had seventy members and over twenty vehicles.
On August 18, two Palestinian Police servicemen were killed in the city.
The population of Nablus city comprises 40% of its governorate's inhabitants.
In the 5th and 6th centuries, conflict between the city's Christian and Samaritan inhabitants climaxed in a series of Samaritan revolts against Byzantine rule, before their violent quelling in 529 CE drastically dwindled that community's numbers in the city.
In 244 CE, Philip the Arab transformed Flavius Neapolis into a Roman colony named ''Julia Neapolis''.
Local Ottoman authorities recorded a population of around 20,000 residents in Nablus in 1849.
They converted the Samaritan synagogue in Nablus into a church.
A policy of conscription and new taxation was instituted which led to a revolt organized by the ''a'ayan'' (notables) of Nablus, Hebron and the Jerusalem-Jaffa area.
Over those three months, there had been more than 70 days of full 24-hour curfews.
Originating in Nablus during the 15th century, by 1575, its recipe was exported throughout the Ottoman Empire — which controlled Palestine at the time.
From 1997 to 2006, Nablus' fire department extinguished 15,346 fires.
Nablus was one of the most important municipalities where Fatah failed to resolve internal conflicts that resulted in two competing Fatah lists: one headed by former mayor Ghassan Shakaa and one headed by Amin Makboul.
During the beginning of the British Mandate, one weekly train was operated from Haifa to Nablus via Afula and Jenin.
He spent 15 months in prison without being charged.
Coins found in Nablus dating to this period depict Roman military emblems and gods and goddesses of the Greek pantheon such as Zeus, Artemis, Serapis, and Asklepios.
With regard to the local economy, agriculture was the major component.
The tension was a result of Monophysite Christian attempts to prevent the return of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, Juvenal, to his episcopal see.
In the 2nd century CE, Emperor Hadrian built a grand theater in Neapolis that could seat up to 7,000 people.
The restrictions placed on Nablus during the First Intifada were met by a back-to-the-land movement to secure self-sufficiency, and had a notable outcome in boosting local agricultural production.
The two primary political parties in the municipal council are Hamas and Fatah.
In the city, the ashes and coals were pounded into a fine natural alkaline soda powder called ''qilw''.
During the Jordanian period, the adjacent villages of Rafidia, Balata al-Balad, al-Juneid and Askar were annexed to the Nablus municipality.
Former mayor Ghassan Shakaa, a former local Fatah leader, won the vote as an independent against Fatah member Amin Makboul and another independent candidate.
The Ottoman government ensured adequate safety and funding for the annual pilgrimage caravan (''qafilat al-hajj'') from Damascus to the Islamic holy cities of Mecca and Medina.
Crops, such as tomatoes, cucumbers, melons and ''mulukhiyya'' were grown in the fields, vegetable gardens, and grain mills scattered across central Samaria.
Al-Watani Hospital specializes in oncology services.
Today, the university has three campuses in Nablus with over 16,500 students and 300 professors.
According to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS), in 1997, 44,926 were enrolled in schools (41.2% in primary school, 36.2% in secondary school, and 22.6% in high school).
The city flourished until the civil war between Septimius Severus and Pescennius Niger in 198–9 CE.
Since the 10th century, Nabulsi soap has enjoyed a reputation for being a fine product, and has been exported across the Arab world and to Europe.
For a brief period in the early 17th century, the governor of Nablus, Farrukh Pasha, was appointed leader of the pilgrimage caravan (''amir al-hajj''), and he constructued a large commercial compound in Nablus for that purpose.
Spring arrives around March–April and the hottest months in Nablus are July and August with the average high being .
For several years, movements in and out of the city were highly restricted.
Justin Martyr who was born in the city c. 100 CE, came into contact with Platonism, but not with Christians there.
Pilgrimage caravans became the key factor in the fiscal and political relationship between Nablus and the central government.
In the October 2012 municipal elections, Hamas boycotted the polls, protesting the holding of elections while reconciliation efforts with Fatah were at a standstill.
Habala is the largest quarter and its population growth led to the development of two smaller neighborhoods: al-Arda and Tal al-Kreim.
The stadium is home to the city's football club al-Ittihad, which is in the main league of the Palestinian Territories.
The old city is densely populated and prominent families include the Nimrs, Tuqans, and Abd al-Hadis.
Other political parties, such as the Palestinian People's Party and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine failed to gain any seats in the council, though they each received over 1,000 votes.
''Nabulsi'', meaning "from Nablus", is used to describe items such as handicrafts (e.g.
This policy benefited Nablus economically.
Shortly the raid of Police on the suspected areas in the Old city deteriorated into a gun battle, in which 3 armed militia men were killed, including one killed by beating following his arrest.
Zahir's successor, Jezzar Pasha, maintained Acre's dominance over Nablus.
He also noted that it was nicknamed "Little Damascus."
As tensions among the Christians of Neapolis decreased, tensions between the Christian community and the Samaritans grew dramatically.
The Children Happiness Center (CHC) was also established in 1998.
Al-Shifa Hamaam was built by the Tuqans in 1624.
The Nablus football stadium has a capacity of 8,000.
The Vegetable Oil Industry Co. is a Nablus factory that produces refined vegetable oils, especially olive oil, and vegetable butter from the factory is exported to Jordan.
The Al-Arz ice-cream company is the largest of six ice-cream manufacturers in the Palestinian territories.
Similar in construction to the garments worn in the Galilee, both long and short Turkish style jackets were worn over the ''thob'' ("robe").
There are seventeen Islamic monuments and eleven mosques in the Old City.
The Ottomans divided Palestine into six ''sanjaqs'' ("districts"): Safad, Jenin, Jerusalem, Gaza, Ajlun and Nablus, all of which were part of Ottoman Syria.
The leaders of Nablus and its hinterland sent thousands of rebels to attack Jerusalem, the center of government authority in Palestine, aided by the Abu Ghosh clan, and they conquered the city on 31 May.
The current mayor, Adly Yaish, a Hamas member, was arrested by the Israel Defense Forces in May 2007, during Operation Summer Rains, launched in retaliation for the kidnapping of Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit by Hamas.
The ''Encyclopaedia Judaica'' speculates that Christianity was dominant in the 2nd or 3rd century, with some sources positing a later date of 480 CE.
In 2008, Noa Meir, an Israeli military spokeswoman, said Nablus remains "capital of terror" of the West Bank.
The cubes are stamped on the top with the seal of the factory that produces it.
Founded by the Roman Emperor Vespasian in 72 CE as ''Flavia Neapolis'', Nablus has been ruled by many empires over the course of its almost 2,000-year-long history.
Until 1986, it was responsible for all of the northern West Bank, but today it only covers the Nablus and Tubas Governorates.
The city was connected to Tulkarm, Qalqilya and Jenin by roads which are now blocked by the Israeli West Bank barrier.
Thus, the Samaritans rebelled again under the rule of emperor Anastasius I, reoccupying Mount Gerizim, which was subsequently reconquered by the Byzantine governor of Edessa, Procopius.
Located between Mount Ebal and Mount Gerizim, the new city lay  west of the Biblical city of Shechem which was destroyed by the Romans that same year during the First Jewish-Roman War.
According to Gush Shalom, IDF bulldozers damaged the al-Khadra Mosque, the Great Mosque, the al-Satoon Mosque and the Greek Orthodox Church in 2002.
Nablus' Old City had a population of 12,000 in 2006.
In the center of Nablus lies the old city, composed of six major quarters: Yasmina, Gharb, Qaryun, Aqaba, Qaysariyya and Habala.
There are six ''hamaams'' (Turkish baths) in the Old City, the most prominent of them being al-Shifa and al-Hana.
It is known for certain that a bishop from Nablus participated in the Council of Nicaea in 325 CE.
In the years following the 1657 campaign, two other families migrated to Nablus: the Jarrars from Balqa and the Tuqans from northern Syria or Transjordan.
Its economic activity and regional leadership position surpassed that of Jerusalem and the coastal cities of Jaffa and Acre.
In 1967, there were about 3,500 Christians of various denominations in Nablus, but that figure dwindled to about 650 in 2008.
After its recapture by the Muslims, the Great Mosque of Nablus, which had become a church under Crusader rule, was restored as a mosque by the Ayyubids, who also built a mausoleum in the old city.
The Samaritan synagogue, built in 362 CE by the high priest Akbon and converted into a church by the Crusaders, was converted into al-Khadra Mosque in 1244; and two other Crusader churches became the An-Nasr Mosque and al-Masakim Mosque during that century.
Most Christians used to live in the suburb of Rafidia in the western part of the city.
The Muslim, Eastern Orthodox Christian, and Samaritan populations remained in the city, and were joined by some Crusaders who settled therein to take advantage of the city's abundant resources.
Ibrahim then forced the heads of the Jabal Nablus clans to leave for nearby villages.
Much of the local Palestinian Muslim population of Nablus is believed to be descended from Samaritans who converted to Islam.
In addition to Muslim houses of worship, Nablus contains an Orthodox church dedicated Saint Justin Martyr, built in 1898 and the ancient Samaritan synagogue, which is still in use.
In 1137, Arab and Turkish troops stationed in Damascus raided Nablus, killing many Christians and burning down the city's churches.
However, the conflict did not grow into civil strife.
Holy places at the site of the city's founding include Joseph's Tomb and Jacob's Well.
In 636, ''Neapolis'', along with most of Palestine, came under the rule of the Islamic Arab Caliphate of Umar ibn al-Khattab; its name Arabicized to ''Nablus''.
Approximately half of population is under 20 years old.
After Saladin's Ayyubid forces took control of the interior of Palestine in 1187, Islamic rule was reestablished, and continued under the Mamluk and Ottoman empires to follow.
In the 10th century, the Arab geographer al-Muqaddasi, described it as abundant of olive trees, with a large marketplace, a finely paved Great Mosque, houses built of stone, a stream running through the center of the city, and notable mills.
There are three cultural centers in Nablus.
Boiled sugar is used as a syrup for ''kanafeh''.
Municipal council members Abdel Jabbar Adel Musa "Dweikat", Majida Fadda, Khulood El-Masri, and Mahdi Hanbali were also arrested.
During the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, Nablus came under Jordanian control.
As a result of the revolt, the Byzantine emperor Zeno erected a church dedicated to Mary on Mount Gerizim.
It was also the largest producer of cotton in the Levant, topping the production of northern cities such as Damascus.
However, this census was taken after the 1929 Palestine riots which drove the Jews out of many majority-Arab cities.
The PSE's first trading session took place on February 19, 1997.
Its population doubled and the influx of refugees put a heavy strain on the city's resources.
After the Danish cartoons was published in 2006, militias kidnapped two foreigners and threatened to kidnap more as a protest.
According to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS), Nablus had a population of 126,132 in 2007.
His death was branded by the UN and Palestinian factions as an part of “extrajudicial executions.” A widespread manhunt for multiple gunmen was initiated by the police as a result, concluding with the arrest of one suspect Salah al-Kurdi on August 25.
Today, there are only two soap factories still operating in the city.
Palestine Tomorrow, representing Fatah, gained the remaining two seats with 13.0% of the vote.
Most of these industries are centered in the old city.
Ibn Battuta, the Arab explorer, visited Nablus in 1355, and described it as a city "full of trees and streams and full of olives."
Other officer families included the Akhrami, Asqalan, Bayram, Jawhari, Khammash, Mir'i, Shafi, Sultan and Tamimi families, some of which remained in active service, while some left service for other pursuits.
IDF forces reentered Nablus during Operation Determined Path in June 2002, remaining inside the city until the end of September.
In 1773, he tried again without success.
Nabulsi soap or ''sabon nabulsi'' is a type of castile soap produced only in Nablus and made of three primary ingredients: virgin olive oil, water, and a sodium compound.
Some 60 houses were destroyed, and parts of the stone-paving in the old city were damaged.
The Mamluk dynasty gained control of Nablus in 1260 and during their reign, they built numerous mosques and schools.
In addition to that, in 2001, Nablus Speciality Hospital was built, in which it is specialized in open heart surgery, angiograms and angioplasties.
In addition to hospitals, Nablus contains the al-Rahma and at-Tadamon clinics, the al-Razi medical center, the Amal Center for Rehabilitation and 68 pharmacies.
Conflict among the Christian population of Neapolis emerged in 451.
It was closed in 1928 but restored and reopened in 1994.
Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, Nablus was the principal trade and manufacturing center in Ottoman Syria.
In the 1922 British census of Palestine, there was a total of 15,947 inhabitants, rising to 17,498 at the 1931 census of Palestine.
Nablus' once thriving soap industry has been largely isolated due to difficult transportation conditions stemming from West Bank closures and IDF incursions.
Samaritans reacted by entering the cathedral of Neapolis, killing the Christians inside and severing the fingers of the bishop Terebinthus.
Al-Huda mainly imports textiles from China and exports finished products to Israel.
In 2007, the capitalization of the PSE topped 3.5 million Jordanian dinars.
Prior to its establishment in 1957, electricity came from private generators.
Flavia Neapolis ("new city of the emperor Flavius") was founded in 72 CE by the Roman emperor Vespasian over an older Samaritan village, variously called ''Mabartha'' ("the passage") or ''Mamorpha''.
Since 2011, there has been a relaxation of travel restrictions and the dismantlement of some checkpoints.
Though it is now made throughout the Middle East, to the present day, ''kanafeh Nabulsi'' enjoys continued fame, partly due to its use of a white-brine cheese called ''jibneh Nabulsi''.
Following its incorporation into the Ottoman Empire in 1517, Nablus was designated capital of the ''Jabal Nablus'' ("Mount Nablus") district.
The Anglican St. Lukes hospital and the National Hospital were built in 1900 and 1910 respectively.
In 891 AD, during the early centuries of Islamic rule, Nablus had a religiously diverse population of Samaritans, local Muslims and Christians.
Without abandoning their nominal military service, they acquired diverse properties to consolidate their presence and income such as soap and pottery factories, bathhouses, agricultural lands, grain mills and, olive and sesame oil presses.
Under Muslim rule, Nablus contained a diverse population of Arabs and Persians, Muslims, Samaritans, Christians and Jews.
Culturally, the city is known for its ''kanafeh'', a popular sweet throughout the Middle East, and its soap industry.
The university's faculties include seven in the humanities and nine in the sciences.
During the 16th century, the population was predominantly Muslim, with Jewish, Samaritan and Christian minorities.
The 1967 Six-Day War ended in the Israeli capture of Nablus.
After decades of upheavals and rebellions mounted by Arab tribes in the Middle East, the Ottomans attempted to reassert centralized control over the Arab ''vilayets''.
From 2000 until 2011, Israel maintained checkpoints such as Huwwara checkpoint which effectively cut off the city, severely curtailing social and economic travel.
As yet, there is no evidence attesting to a Jewish presence in ancient Neapolis.
He also mentions the large Samaritan population in the city.
Nablus is located  east of Tel Aviv, Israel,  west of Amman, Jordan and  north of Jerusalem.
The soap's sodium compound came from the barilla plant.
It retained this status until the rule of Trebonianus Gallus in 251 CE.
In 1596, the population consisted of 806 Muslim households, 20 Samaritan households, 18 Christian households, and 15 Jewish households.
In 484, the city became the site of a deadly encounter between the two groups, provoked by rumors that the Christians intended to transfer the remains of Aaron's sons and grandsons Eleazar, Ithamar and Phinehas.
Its main activities include promoting Palestinian culture through social events, ''dabke'' classes and field trips.
Prior to the 1860s, in the summertime, the barilla would be placed in towering stacks, burned, and then the ashes and coals would be gathered into sacks, and transported to Nablus from the area of modern-day Jordan in large caravans.
The cost of the damage was estimated at $80 million US.
The Nablus business developed from an ice-factory set up by Mohammad Anabtawi in the town centre in 1950.
Several leather tanneries, ''souks'', pottery and textile workshops line the Old City streets.
Since the removal of the Hawara roadblock, the casbah has become a vibrant marketplace.
At the 1931 census, the population was counted as 16,483 Muslims, 533 Christians, 6 Jews, 7 Druses and 160 Samaritans.
From Egypt, and particularly from Cairo and Damietta, Nablus merchants imported mainly rice, sugar, and spices, as well as linen, cotton, and wool textiles.
Founded in 1918 by the an-Najah Nabulsi School, it became a college in 1941 and a university in 1977.
Contrary to its centralization purpose, the 1657 campaign allowed the Arab ''sipahi'' officers to establish their own increasingly autonomous foothold in Nablus.
According to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 522 residents of Nablus and surrounding refugee camps, including civilians, were killed and 3,104 injured during IDF military operations from 2000 to 2005.
Today, ''qilw'' is still used in combination with lime.
