Purely mythological narratives are also found, like the "Legend of the Five Suns", the Aztec creation myth recounted in Codex Chimalpopoca.
By reduplicating the first syllable of a root a new word is formed.
Under Mexico's  ("General Law on the Linguistic Rights of Indigenous Peoples") promulgated in 2003, Nahuatl and the other 63 indigenous languages of Mexico are recognized as ''lenguas nacionales'' ("national languages") in the regions where they are spoken, enjoying the same status as Spanish within their region.
The prefixes indicate the person of the subject, and person and number of the object and indirect object, whereas the suffixes indicate tense, aspect, mood and subject number.
By the 11th century, Nahuatl speakers were dominant in the Valley of Mexico and far beyond, with settlements including Azcapotzalco, Colhuacan and Cholula rising to prominence.
It is prolifically a pro-drop language: it allows sentences with omission of all noun phrases or independent pronouns, not just of noun phrases or pronouns whose function is the sentence subject.
Many words from Nahuatl have been borrowed into Spanish, and since diffused into hundreds of other languages.
Uses of relational noun/postposition/locative ''-pan'' with a possessive prefix:
Texts from this period include histories, chronicles, poetry, theatrical works, Christian canonical works, ethnographic descriptions, and administrative documents.
Throughout the modern period the situation of indigenous languages has grown increasingly precarious in Mexico, and the numbers of speakers of virtually all indigenous languages have dwindled.
Some other English words from Nahuatl are: Aztec (from ''aztecatl''); cacao (from Nahuatl ''cacahuatl'' 'shell, rind'); ocelot (from ''ocelotl'').
:"my houses" (Classical Nahuatl)
Instead, the timing of the Nahuatl influx was seen to coincide more closely with Teotihuacan's fall than its rise, and other candidates such as Totonacan identified as more likely.
Nahuan languages are defined as a subgroup of Uto-Aztecan by having undergone a number of shared changes from the Uto-Aztecan protolanguage (PUA).
The Nahuas of Durango call their language ''Mexicanero''.
The twelfth volume provides an indigenous perspective on the conquest itself.
:/''''/ "they fall (many people)"
Missionary grammarians undertook the writing of grammars, also called ''artes'', of indigenous languages for use by priests.
At present Nahuatl is mostly spoken in rural areas by an impoverished class of indigenous subsistence agriculturists.
Annals and chronicles recount history, normally written from the perspective of a particular ''altepetl'' (locally based polity) and often combining mythical accounts with real events.
The voiceless alveolar lateral affricate  is assimilated after  and pronounced .
The Nahuatl verb is quite complex and inflects for many grammatical categories.
expressing repetition), for example in Nahuatl of Tezcoco:
:''in yollohtli, in eztli''
Through a very long period of coexistence with the other indigenous Mesoamerican languages, they have absorbed many influences, coming to form part of the Mesoamerican language area.
Many varieties of Nahuatl have productive reduplication.
This orthography did not achieve a wide following outside of the Jesuit community.
It appears that the preconquest Nahua had a distinction much like the European distinction between "prose" and "poetry", the first called ''tlahtolli'' "speech" and the second ''cuicatl'' "song".
The orthography most accurately representing the phonemes of Nahuatl was developed in the 17th century by the Jesuit Horacio Carochi, building on the insights of another Jesuit, Antonio del Rincon.
The table below shows the phonemic inventory of Classical Nahuatl as an example of a typical Nahuan language.
On the issue of geographic origin, linguists during the 20th century agreed that the Uto-Aztecan language family originated in the southwestern United States.
:"in/on it" (Classical Nahuatl)
: not can he-enter-PAST in house because it-closed-was the door
This article focuses on describing the general history of the group and on giving an overview of the diversity it encompasses.
"Nahuatl" denotes at least Classical Nahuatl together with related modern languages spoken in Mexico.
:"the heart, the blood" – meaning "cacao"
In all dialects, possessed nouns take a prefix agreeing with number and person of its possessor.
According to the Mexican national statistics institute, INEGI, 51% of Nahuatl speakers are involved in the farming sector and 6 in 10 receive no wages or less than the minimum wage.
Since the Spanish made alliances with first the Nahuatl speakers from Tlaxcala and later with the conquered Mexica of Tenochtitlan or Aztecs, the Nahuatl language continued spreading throughout Mesoamerica in the decades after the conquest.
From the early 20th century to at least the mid-1980s, educational policies in Mexico focused on the hispanicization ''(castellanización)'' of indigenous communities, teaching only Spanish and discouraging the use of indigenous languages.
Most of these loanwords denote things indigenous to central Mexico which the Spanish heard mentioned for the first time by their Nahuatl names.
Some have introduced completely new vowel qualities to compensate, as is the case for Tetelcingo Nahuatl.
::"I shall make somebody give something to you" (Classical Nahuatl)
Plural animate noun w. reduplication:
From the 1990s onward, the alternative designation "Nahuan" has been frequently used as a replacement especially in Spanish-language publications.
It allows certain kinds of syntactically discontinuous expressions.
The Pipil people of El Salvador do not call their own language "Pipil", as most linguists do, but rather ''nawat''.
These works are sometimes evidently based on pre-Columbian pictorial year counts that existed, such as the Cuauhtitlan annals and the Anales de Tlatelolco.
The verb is composed of a root, prefixes, and suffixes.
Classical Nahuatl was rich in such diphrasal metaphors, many of which are explicated by Sahagún in the Florentine Codex and by Andrés de Olmos in his ''Arte''.
Among the indigenous languages of the Americas, the extensive corpus of surviving literature in Nahuatl dating as far back as the 16th century may be considered unique.
Some varieties add progressive or habitual aspects.
In verbs reduplication is often used to form a reiterative meaning (i.e.
;  Before reaching the Mexican Plateau, pre-Nahuan groups probably spent a period of time in contact with the Corachol languages Cora and Huichol of northwestern Mexico (which are also Uto-Aztecan).
:''newal no-nobia''
Michel Launey argues that Classical Nahuatl had a verb-initial basic word order with extensive freedom for variation, which was then used to encode pragmatic functions such as focus and topicality.
In particular, the federal ''Ley General de Derechos Lingüísticos de los Pueblos Indígenas'' "General Law on the Language Rights of the Indigenous Peoples", promulgated 13 March 2003 recognizes all the country's indigenous languages, including Nahuatl, as "national languages" and gives indigenous people the right to use them in all spheres of public and private life.
Several practical orthographies were developed to transcribe the language, many using the Americanist transcription system.
The survival of Nahuatl as a whole is not imminently endangered, but the survival of certain dialects is, and some dialects have already become extinct within the last few decades of the 20th century.
in some ways these locative constructions resemble and can be thought of as locative case constructions.
* whether and how to represent vowel length, e.g.
Traditionally, Pre-Columbian Aztec writing has not been considered a true writing system, since it did not represent the full vocabulary of a spoken language in the way that the writing systems of the Old World or the Maya Script did.
In Mesoamerica the Mayan, Oto-Manguean and Mixe–Zoque languages had coexisted for millennia.
Speakers of Nahuatl of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec call their language ''mela'tajtol'' ("the straight language").
Current subclassification of Nahuatl rests on research by   and .
Since literacy was confined mainly to these higher social classes, most of the existing prose and poetical documents were written in this style.
Some also have specific inflectional categories showing purpose and direction and such complex notions as "to go in order to" or "to come in order to", "go, do and return", "do while going", "do while coming", "do upon arrival", or "go around doing".
This early literary language based on the Tenochtitlan variety has been labeled Classical Nahuatl, and is among the most studied and best-documented languages of America.
One example of the latter is the case for Nahuatl spoken in Tetelcingo, whose speakers call their language ''mösiehuali''.
For a time, the linguistic situation in Mesoamerica remained relatively stable, but in 1696, Charles II of Spain issued a decree banning the use of any language other than Spanish throughout the Spanish Empire.
Three kinds of signs were used in the system: pictures used as mnemonics (which do not represent particular words), logograms which represent whole words (instead of phonemes or syllables), and logograms used only for their sound values (i.e.
Other changes in the syntax of modern Nahuatl include the use of Spanish prepositions instead of native postpositions or relational nouns and the reinterpretation of original postpositions/relational nouns into prepositions.
:its-in house-ABSOLUTIVE
Although the absolute number of Nahuatl speakers has actually risen over the past century, indigenous populations have become increasingly marginalized in Mexican society.
The modern influx of Mexican workers and families into the United States has resulted in the establishment of a few small Nahuatl speaking communities in that country, particularly in California, New York, Texas, New Mexico and Arizona.
The Mexican Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas (National Institute of Indigenous Languages) recognize 30 different individual varieties within the "language group" labeled Nahuatl.
With the establishment of Mexico's Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas in 2004, new attempts to create standardized orthographies for the different dialects were resumed; however to this day there is no single official orthography for Nahuatl.
Nahuatl has been spoken in central Mexico since at least the seventh century CE.
In nouns this is often used to form plurals, e.g.
By 1645 four more had been published, authored respectively by Alonso de Molina (1571), Antonio del Rincón (1595), Diego de Galdo Guzmán (1642), and Horacio Carochi (1645).
The 1990s saw the onset of diametric changes in official Mexican government policies towards indigenous and linguistic rights.
However the applicative and causative voices are found in many modern dialects.
Its volumes cover a diverse range of topics: Aztec history, material culture, social organization, religious and ceremonial life, rhetorical style and metaphors.
Use with a preceding noun stem:
Nahua migrations into the region from the north continued into the Postclassic period.
* whether to follow Spanish orthographic practice and write  with ''c'' and ''qu'',  with ''cu'' and ''uc'',  with ''c'' and ''z'', or ''s'', and  with ''hu'' and ''uh'', or ''u''.
Nahuatl does not have grammatical case but uses what is sometimes called a relational noun to describe spatial (and other) relations.
Since 1978, the term "General Aztec" has been adopted by linguists to refer to the languages of the Aztecan branch excluding the Pochutec language.
Nahuan languages exhibit a complex morphology characterized by polysynthesis and agglutination.
The word ''Nahuatl'' is itself a Nahuatl word, probably derived from the word ''nāhuatlahtōlli''  ("clear language").
Many dialects have also undergone a degree of simplification of their morphology that has caused some scholars to consider them to have ceased to be polysynthetic.
In Classical Nahuatl the animacy distinction manifested with respect to pluralization, as only animate nouns could take a plural form, and all inanimate nouns were uncountable (as the words "bread" and "money" are uncountable in English).
The following verbal form has two verbal roots and is inflected for causative voice and both a direct and indirect object:
Some of these loans are restricted to Mexican or Central American Spanish, but others have entered all the varieties of Spanish in the world.
The absolutive suffix is not used on possessed nouns.
The people of the Toltec culture of Tula, which was active in central Mexico around the 10th century, are thought to have been Nahuatl speakers.
The major political and cultural center of Mesoamerica in the Early Classic period was Teotihuacan.
The proposed migration of speakers of the Proto-Nahuan language into the Mesoamerican region has been placed at sometime around AD 500, towards the end of the Early Classic period in Mesoamerican chronology.
:"in the house" (Classical Nahuatl)
Nouns that take the plural usually form the plural by adding one of the plural absolutive suffixes -''tin'' or -''meh'', but some  plural forms are irregular or formed by reduplication.
Most varieties have relatively simple patterns of sound alternation (allophony).
Nahuatl literature encompasses a diverse array of genres and styles, the documents themselves composed under many different circumstances.
:"house" (Classical Nahuatl)
This had given rise to the Mesoamerican language area ("language area" refers to a set of language traits have become common among the area's languages by diffusion and not by evolution within a set of languages belonging to a common genetic subgrouping).
In 1895, Nahuatl was spoken by over 5% of the population.
Also, "porque", a conjunction borrowed from Spanish, occurs in the sentence.
During the centuries preceding the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, the Aztecs had expanded to incorporate a large part of central Mexico, and its influence caused the variety of Nahuatl spoken by the residents of Tenochtitlan to become a prestige language in Mesoamerica.
The terminology used to describe varieties of spoken Nahuatl is inconsistently applied.
As a result of internal migrations within the country, Nahuatl speaking communities exist in all of Mexico's states.
Many modern dialects have also borrowed phonemes from Spanish, such as .
Today, a spectrum of Nahuan languages are spoken in an scattered areas stretching from the northern state of Durango to Tabasco in the southeast.
In this example from Mexicanero Nahuat, of Durango, the original postposition/relational noun -''pin'' "in/on" is used as a preposition.
The most common forms of the absolutive are ''-tl'' after vowels, ''-tli'' after consonants other than ''l'', and ''-li'' after ''l''.
The Spanish introduced the Latin script, which was used to record a large body of Aztec prose, poetry and mundane documentation such as testaments, administrative documents, legal letters, etc.
This urbanized variety of Tenochtitlan is what came to be known as Classical Nahuatl as documented in colonial times.
+Nahuatl speakers over 5 years of age in the ten states with most speakers (2000 census data).
One dialect, that of the Eastern Huasteca, has a distinction between two different plural suffixes for animate and inanimate nouns.
There are considerable differences among varieties, and some are mutually unintelligible.
As for the conquest of modern-day Central America, Pedro de Alvarado conquered Guatemala with the help of tens of thousands of Tlaxcaltec allies, who then settled outside of modern-day Antigua Guatemala.
:"you run" (Classical Nahuatl)
There are many more female than male monolinguals, and females represent nearly two thirds of the total number.
:"The flower, the song" – meaning "poetry"
Other common words such as coyote (from Nahuatl ''coyotl''), avocado (from Nahuatl ''ahuacatl'') and chile or chili (from Nahuatl ''chilli'').
Evidence from archaeology and ethnohistory supports a southward diffusion across the American continent thesis, specifically that speakers of early Nahuan languages migrated from Aridoamerica into central Mexico in several waves.
However, epigrapher Alfonso Lacadena has argued that by the eve of the Spanish invasion, one school of Nahua scribes, those of Tetzcoco, had  developed a fully syllabic script which could represent spoken language phonetically in the same way that the Maya script did.
:''ti-ya ti-k-wika ka tel''
As a result, today there is no group of Nahuatl speakers having attained general literacy in Nahuatl; while their literacy rate in Spanish also remains much lower than the national average.
The latter was marked by the use of a distinct rhetorical style.
The inclusion of Pipil into the group is debated.
Absolute and relative numbers.
:''in cuitlapilli, in atlapalli''
:''ye maca tipolihuican''
:''ye maca timiquican''
In the following example, from Michoacán Nahual, the postposition -''ka'' meaning "with" appears used as a preposition, with no preceding object:
Classical Nahuatl and many modern dialects have grammaticalised ways to express politeness towards addressees or even towards people or things that are being mentioned, by using special verb forms and special "honorific suffixes".
:I-them-something-eat-CAUSATIVE-FUTURE-want
In many Nahuatl dialects vowel length contrast is vague, and in others it has become lost entirely.
They have all been subject to varying degrees of influence from Spanish.
:"I want to feed them" (Classical Nahuatl)
The speakers of Nahuatl themselves often refer to their language as either ''Mexicano'' or some word derived from ''mācēhualli'', the Nahuatl word for "commoner".
The Ethnologue recognizes 28 varieties with separate ISO codes.
During the 16th and 17th centuries, Classical Nahuatl was used as a literary language, and a large corpus of texts from that period is in existence today.
Others have contracted syllable sequences, causing accents to shift or vowels to become long.
Their political and linguistic influence came to extend into Central America and Nahuatl became a lingua franca among merchants and elites in Mesoamerica, e.g., among the Maya K'iche' people.
The elaborate codices were essentially pictographic aids for memorizing texts, which include genealogies, astronomical information, and tribute lists.
Within the first twenty years after the Spanish arrival, texts were being prepared in the Nahuatl language written in Latin characters.
Developments of accords in the international rights arena combined with domestic pressures (such as social and political agitation by the Zapatista Army of National Liberation and indigenous social movements) led to legislative reforms and the creation of decentralized government agencies like National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoples (CDI) and Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas (INALI) with responsibilities for the promotion and protection of  indigenous communities and languages.
This means that in most states more than 95% of the Nahuatl speaking population are bilingual in Spanish.
All Nahuan languages are indigenous to Mesoamerica.
The Nahuan (Aztecan) branch of Uto-Aztecan is widely accepted as having two divisions: "General Aztec" and Pochutec.
According to this interpretation a phrase such as ''tzahtzi in conētl'' should not be interpreted as meaning just "the child screams" but, rather, "it screams, (the one that) is a child".
"man" →  "men", but also in some varieties to form diminutives, honorifics, or for derivations.
With this work Sahagún bestowed an enormous ethnographic description of the Nahua, written in side-by-side translations of Nahuatl and Spanish and illustrated throughout by color plates drawn by indigenous painters.
In some modern dialects basic word order has become a fixed subject–verb–object, probably under influence from Spanish.
As Tenochtitlan grew to become the largest urban center in Central America, it attracted speakers of Nahuatl from diverse areas giving birth to an urban form of Nahuatl with traits from many dialects.
The same has been argued for some contemporary varieties.
During the period of th Aztec empire centered in Mexico-Tenochtitlan the language came to be identified with the politically dominant ''mēxihcah''  ethnic group, and consequently the Nahuatl language was often described as ''mēxihcacopa''  (literally "in the manner of Mexicas") or ''mēxihcatlahtolli'' "Mexica language".
Classical Nahuatl and most of the modern varieties have fairly simple phonological systems.
Nahuatl has neither case nor gender, but Classical Nahuatl and some modern dialects distinguish between animate and inanimate nouns.
:/''''/ "he/she falls"
Canger introduced the scheme of a Central grouping and two Peripheral groups, and Lastra confirmed this notion, differing in some details.
:"are you going to carry it with you?"
Now, many speakers do not maintain this distinction and all nouns may take the plural inflection.
In Mexico many words for common everyday concepts attest to the close contact between Spanish and Nahuatl, so many in fact that entire dictionaries of "''mexicanismos''" (words particular to Mexican Spanish) have been published tracing Nahuatl etymologies, as well as Spanish words with origins in other indigenous languages.
Numbers may range anywhere from "perhaps a few hundred people, perhaps only a few dozen".
:"May we not perish"
:"coyote" (Classical Nahuatl)
As a part of their missionary efforts, members of various religious orders (principally Franciscan and Dominican friars and Jesuits) introduced the Latin alphabet to the Nahuas.
Familiar verbal form:
As a language label, the term "Nahuatl" encompasses a group of closely related languages or divergent dialects within the Nahuan branch of the Uto-Aztecan language family.
Even so, Nahuatl is still spoken by well over a million people, of whom around 10% are monolingual.
Most Nahuatl varieties have a number of ways to alter the valency of a verb.
They are also often called postpositions or locative suffixes.
Most Nahuatl dialects have stress on the penultimate syllable of a word.
Sahagún also made a point of trying to document the richness of the Nahuatl language, stating:
In most varieties of Nahuatl, nouns in the unpossessed singular form generally take an "absolutive" suffix.
Until Mexican Independence in 1821, the Spanish courts admitted Nahuatl testimony and documentation as evidence in lawsuits, with court translators rendering it in Spanish.
The first Nahuatl grammar, written by Andrés de Olmos, was published in 1547—three years before the first French grammar.
Sometimes the label also is used to include the Pipil language (''Nawat'') of El Salvador.
For details on individual varieties or subgroups, see the individual articles.
For example, the absolutive suffix has the variant forms ''-tli'' (used after consonants) and ''-tl'' (used after vowels).
The only obligatory inflections are for number (singular and plural) and possession (whether the noun is possessed, as is indicated by a prefix meaning 'my', 'your', etc.).
:"in the house" (Classical Nahuatl)
The language was formerly called "Aztec" because it was spoken by the Central Mexican peoples known as Aztecs .
Other researchers have argued that Pochutec should be considered a divergent variant of the western periphery.
Some nouns have competing plural forms.
Consonant clusters occur only word-medially and over syllable boundaries.
Some songs may have been preserved through oral tradition from pre-conquest times until the time of their writing, for example the songs attributed to the poet-king of Texcoco, Nezahualcoyotl.
Through contact with Spanish the Nahuatl language adopted many loan words, and as bilingualism intensified, even began changing the grammatical structure under influence by Spanish.
These morphemes cannot appear alone but must occur after a noun or a possessive prefix.
Since the 1970s, scholars working in a branch of Mesoamerican ethnohistory known as the New Philology have translated to English and analyzed a great number of this type of documentation.
Beginning in the 7th century Nahuan speakers rose to power in central Mexico.
In the past, the branch of Uto-Aztecan to which Nahuatl belongs has been called "Aztecan".
Now, the term "Aztec" is rarely used for modern Nahuan languages, but linguists' traditional name of "Aztecan" for the branch of Uto-Aztecan that comprises Nahuatl, Pipil, and Pochutec is still in use (although some linguists prefer "Nahuan").
It has been argued that Classical Nahuatl syntax is best characterised by "omnipredicativity", meaning that any noun or verb in the language is in fact a full predicative sentence.
the ''icnocuicatl'' ("sad song"), the ''xopancuicatl'' ("song of spring"), ''melahuaccuicatl'' ("plain song") and ''yaocuicatl'' ("song of war"), each with distinct stylistic traits.
An important feature of this high rhetorical style of formal oratory was the use of parallelism, whereby the orator structured their speech in couplets consisting of two parallel phrases.
In 1770 another decree, calling for the elimination of the indigenous languages, did away with Classical Nahuatl as a literary language.
In some dialects, the first consonant in almost any consonant cluster becomes .
A radical interpretation of Nahuatl syntactic typology, this nonetheless seems to account for some of the language's peculiarities, for example, why nouns must also carry the same agreement prefixes as verbs, and why predicates do not require any noun phrases to function as their arguments.
