However, many of the matatu vehicles have had their speed governors disabled, which is evident by them travelling at speeds well over .
During this period, Nairobi was established as a hub of soukous music.
Most common known food establishments include The Carnivore and The Tamarind Restaurants which have outlets in Langata, City Centre, and the Village Market.
This stadium is primarily used for football.
Nairobi is served primarily by Jomo Kenyatta International Airport.
The exchange is Africa's 4th largest in terms of trading volumes, and 5th largest in terms of Market Capitalization as a percentage of GDP.
Two areas that are seeing a growth in companies and office space are Upper Hill, which is located, approximately  from the Central Business District and Westlands, which is also about the same distance, away from the city centre.
Other notable slums include Mathare and Korogocho.
It handles small aircraft that generally operate within Kenya.
High-class residential apartments for living are coming up like Le Mac towers, a residential tower in Westlands Nairobi with 23 floors.
Consequently, no new matatus are licensed to operate from January 2011 while the current ones will be allowed to live out their lifespan; a move aimed at enhancing the safety of citizens and visitors as well.
More recently, Nairobi has become the centre of the Kenyan hip hop scene, with Kalamashaka, Gidi Gidi Majimaji being the pioneers of urban music in Kenyan.
The Kenyan Parliament buildings, the Holy Family Cathedral, Nairobi City Hall, Nairobi Law Courts, and the Kenyatta Conference Centre all surround the square.
Prominent international composers & DJs have graced their presence in these cities, including Kyau & Albert, Solarity, Ronski Speed, and Boom Jinx.
The neighbourhood in which she lived, Karen, is named after her.
These data fit remarkably closely (r^2 = 0.9994) to a logistic curve with t(0) = 1900, P(0)=8500, r = 0.059 and K = 8,000,000.
Power cuts and water shortages were a common occurrence, though in the past few years better city planning has helped to put some of these problems in check.
A large beautification project took place in the Central Business District, as the city prepared to host the 2006 Afri-Cities summit.
The film won 28 awards, including 7 Academy Awards.
The phrase is also the Maasai name of the Nairobi river, which in turn lent its name to the city.
The mean maximum temperature for this period is .
This is highlighted by the number of football clubs in the city, including Kenyan Premier League sides Gor Mahia, A.F.C.
As Nairobi is situated close to the equator, the differences between the seasons are minimal.
The location of the Nairobi railway camp was chosen due to its central position between Mombasa and Kampala.
The cloudiest part of the year is just after the first rainy season, when, until September, conditions are usually overcast with drizzle.
Most of the upmarket suburbs are situated to the west and north-central of Nairobi, where most European settlers resided during the colonial times AKA 'Ubabini'.
Today, many businesses are considering relocating and /or establishing their headquarters outside the Central Business District area.
This genre was originally developed in Kinshasa and Brazzaville.
A branch line will also be extended to Kisumu.
Kenyatta International Conference Centre
Uhuru Gardens, a national monument and the largest memorial park in Kenya, is also the place where the first Kenyan flag was raised at independence.
These include: Garden city mall, Thika road mall(TRM), the West Gate mall, Prestige Plaza, the Village Market, the Sarit Centre, the Junction.
Nairobi has an annual restaurant week (NRW) at the beginning of the year, January–February.
Up until the early 1990s, there were only a few film theatres and the repertoire was limited.
Over 5,000 houses, villas and apartments are being constructed at this development, including leisure, retail and commercial facilities.
In the United Nations report, it was stated that in 2001, nearly one third of all Nairobi residents experienced some form of robbery in the city.
Most of the roads are tarmacked and there are signs showing directions to certain neighbourhoods.
The second is the ''"Safari Capital of the World"'', which is used due to Nairobi's prominence as a hub for safari tourism.
Nairobi's western suburbs stretch all the way from the Kenyatta National Hospital in the south to the UN headquarters at Gigiri suburb in the north, a distance of about .
Much of the city has dense tree-cover and plenty of green spaces.
Matatus ama (or) mathree operate within Nairobi, its environs and suburbs and from Nairobi to other towns around the country.
According to the 2009 census, in the administrative area of Nairobi, 3,138,295 inhabitants lived within .
The continuous expansion of the city began to anger the Maasai, as the city was devouring their land to the south.
The sunniest and warmest part of the year is from December to March, when temperatures average the mid-twenties during the day.
Under the Lamu-South Sudan and Ethiopia Transport Corridor Project, the development of a railway component is among the priority projects.
According to this curve, the population of the city will be below 4 million in 2015, and will reach 5&nbsp;million in 2025.
Nairobi has experienced one of the highest growth rates of any city in Africa.
These youth also support many local EDM producers & DJs, such as Jahawi, Mikhail Kuzi, Barney Barrow, Jack Rooster, HennessyLive, Trancephilic5 As well as up and comers such as L.A Dave, Eric K, Raj El Rey, Tom Parker and more.
From a collection of gourmet restaurants offering local and international cuisine, Nairobi has something to offer to every age and pocket.
On 21 September 2013, Al-Shabaab-associated militants attacked the Westgate Mall.
Matatus are now limited to .
Jomo Kenyatta, Kenya's future president, was jailed for his involvement even though there was no evidence linking him to the rebellion.
After independence, Nairobi grew rapidly and this growth put pressure on the city's infrastructure.
'''Construction boom and real estate development projects''' (198m), Avic International Africa headquarters (176m), Prism tower (140m), Pan Africa insurance towers, Pallazzo offices, and many other projects.
Nairobi has two informal nicknames.
Traditional food joints such as the popular K'osewe's in the city centre and Amaica, which specialise in African delicacies are also widepsread.
This is because land is cheaper, and better facilities can easily be built and maintained elsewhere.
Recently, the airport was upgraded by the world aviation regulatory body, ICAO, and major plans are underway to expand the airport to accommodate growing air traffic and to cater for direct flights to far flung destinations such as the United States and Canada.
Virgin records became aware of the popularity of the genre and signed recording contracts with several soukous artists.
This prompted the colonial government to build several spectacular grand hotels in the city.
Nairobi Province was not divided into "districts" until 2007, when three districts were created.
As the British occupiers started to explore the region, they started using Nairobi as their first port of call.
A proposal has been passed for the construction of a commuter rail line.
Nairobi is also the setting of many of the novels of Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o, Kenya's foremost writer.
The airport is a major transit hub for passengers flying to the African Great Lakes' natural attractions, and other smaller cities in the region.
The Ngong Racecourse in Nairobi is the centre of horse racing in Kenya.
67 people were killed.
It also angered the Kikuyu people, who wanted the land returned to them.
The city is connected to the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport by the Mombasa Highway, which passes through Industrial Area, South B, South C and Embakasi.
In 1905, Nairobi replaced Mombasa as capital of the British protectorate, and the city grew around administration and tourism, initially in the form of big game hunting.
However, it is popularly known as the "Green City in the Sun", and is surrounded by several expanding villa suburbs.
Most of the skyscrapers in this region are the headquarters of businesses and corporations, such as I&M and the Kenyatta International Conference Centre.
The Kenchic franchise which specialises in old-school chicken and chips meals is also popular, particularly among the lower classes and students, with restaurants all over the city and its suburbs.
Most roads now, though, are well lit and surfaced with adequate signage.
The complex was completed in 1987, and was used to host the 1987 All Africa Games.
The majority of schools follow either the Kenyan Curriculum or the British Curriculum.
After the completion of the Syokimau Station, focus will be put on building other nine modern stations including those on Jogoo Road, Imara Daima and Makadara Estate.
The city and its surrounding area also form Nairobi County, whose current governor is Evans Kidero and Deputy Governor is Jonathan Mueke.
Leopards, Tusker and Mathare United.
The proposed Nairobi Bypasses are currently under construction by the Kenyan government and financed by Chinese Government.
KenGen, which is the largest African stock outside South Africa, is based in the city.
Passengers have a smartcard which they must swipe to gain access to the vehicle.
Other coffee chains include Art Caffe, Dormans Coffee House and Savannah, which is part of Sasini Tea.
Many Nairobi non-slum-dwellers live in relatively good housing conditions.
The premier sports facility in Nairobi and generally in Kenya is the Moi International Sports Centre in the suburb of Kasarani.
Nairobi is currently undergoing major road constructions to update its infrastructure network.
The genre has become very popular amongst local youth, and domestic musicians have become some of the most popular in the region.
The county is entirely urban.
Most wealthy Kenyans live in Nairobi, but the majority of Nairobians are average and poor.
NRW is managed by Eatout Kenya which is an online platform that lists and reviews restaurants in Nairobi, and provides a platform for Kenyan foodies to congregate and share.
The city is also home to the African Great Lakes region's largest newspapers: the ''Daily Nation'' and ''The Standard''.
It features many of Nairobi's important buildings, including the City Hall and Parliament Building.
The main administrative divisions of Nairobi are Central, Dagoretti, Embakasi, Kasarani, Kibera, Makadara, Pumwani,  and Westlands.
Most new Hollywood films are nowadays screened at Nairobi's cinemas.
Acts that have performed in Nairobi include Lost Boyz, Wyclef Jean, Shaggy, Akon, Eve, T.O.K, Sean Paul, Wayne Wonder, Alaine, Konshens, Ja Rule, and Morgan Heritage, and Cabo Snoop.
Rugby is also a popular sport in Nairobi with 8 of the 12 top flight clubs based here.
These constituencies are: Makadara, Kamukunji, Starehe, Langata, Dagoretti, Westlands, Kasarani, and Embakasi.
Uhuru (''Freedom'' in Swahili) Park is a centre for outdoor speeches, services, and rallies.
(Kibera comes from the Nubian word Kibra, meaning "forest" or "jungle").
After independence in 1963, Nairobi became the capital of the Republic of Kenya.
Large houses can be found in many of the upmarket neighbourhoods, especially to the west of Nairobi.
Other middle and high income estates include Parklands, Westlands, Hurlingham, Kilimani, Milimani, Spring Valley, Lavington, Rosslyn, Kitisuru, and Nairobi Hill.
The most popular clubbing spots are centred in upmarket Westlands which has come to be known as "Electric Avenue", Karen, Langata, Hurlingham, and "uptown" venues in the city centre.
The development is being marketed to families, as are most others within the city.
Earlier on, they were located in the Hill Park Building and CBA Building respectively(both also in Upper Hill), and prior to that in View Park towers in the Central Business District.
Central Park is adjacent to Uhuru Park, and includes a memorial for Jomo Kenyatta, the first president of Kenya.
In December 2010, the Government embarked on a policy to phase out matatus as a means of public transport.
The airport directly serves intercontinental passengers from Europe and Asia.
The broadcast headquarters of CCTV Africa are located in Nairobi.
Avic International is putting up a 30-level hotel tower of 141m in the Westlands.
New business parks are being built in the city, including the flagship Nairobi Business Park.
However, the matatus continue to occupy the road ways in large numbers contributing to the congestion of Nairobi.
It was also chosen because its network of rivers could supply the camp with water and its elevation would make it cool enough for residential purposes.
However, malaria was a serious problem, leading to at least one attempt to have the town moved.
The new station has a train that ferries passengers from Syokimau to the city centre cutting travel time by half.
It houses a large collection of artefacts portraying Kenya's rich heritage through history, nature, culture, and contemporary art.
Their construction seeks to ease congestion in Nairobi's downtown area and the surrounding suburbs.
Nairobi County has seventeen constituencies.
Both mountains are visible from Nairobi on a clear day.
For those more discerning travellers, one can choose from a wide array of local cuisine, Mediterranean, fast food, Ethiopian, and Arabian.
Kasarani, Eastlands, and Embakasi are connected by Thika Road, Jogoo Road, and Outer Ring Road.
The new systems of roads, flyovers, and bridges would cut outrageous traffic levels caused the inability of the current infrastructure to cope with the soaring economic growth in the past few years.
At first, this caused a furore amongst Matatu operators, but they were pressured by government and the public to make the changes.
A majority of music videos of leading local musicians are also filmed in the city.
The hotel tower will be operated by Marriot group.
Some airlines also offer flights to other destinations in East, Central and North-East Africa.
Art galleries in Nairobi include the Rahimtulla Museum of Modern Art (Ramoma), the Mizizi Arts Centre, and the Nairobi National Museum.
Historically, British occupiers have settled in Gigiri, Muthaiga, Langata and Karen.
The slums cover two square kilometres and are on government land.
In 2007, General Electric, Young & Rubicam, Google, Coca-Cola, IBM Services, Airtel, and Cisco Systems relocated their African headquarters to the city.
The Nairobi Java House is a coffee house and restaurant chain with branches located around the city including one at the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport.
The Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE) is one of the largest in Africa and the second-oldest exchange on the continent.
Film-making is still young in the country, but people like producer Njeri Karago and director Judy Kibinge are paving the way for others.
Nairobi is situated between the cities of Kampala and Mombasa.
Avic International is also putting up a total of four residential apartments on Waiyaki way: a 28-level tower, two 24-level towers, and a 25-level tower.
The line runs through Nairobi, from Mombasa to Kampala.
Shopping malls in Nairobi include the Greenspan Mall (Donholm), Yaya Centre (Hurlingham), Sarit Centre (Westlands), Westgate Shopping Mall (Westlands), ABC Place (Westlands), The Village Market (Gigiri), Junction Shopping Mall (Ngong Road), Prestige Plaza (Ngong Road), Crossroads Shopping Centre (Karen), T-Mall (Langata), Garden City Mall and Thika Road Mall (TRM).
Nairobi was founded in 1899 by the colonial authorities in British East Africa, as a rail depot on the Uganda Railway.
Highways connect the city with other major towns such as Mombasa, Machakos, Voi, (A109), Kisumu, Nakuru, Eldoret, Namanga Border Tanzania(A104) etc.
A number of morning and evening commuter trains connect the centre with the suburbs, but the city has no proper light rail, tramway, or rapid transit lines.
Successful artists based in Nairobi include Jua Cali, Nonini, Camp Mulla, Juliani, Eric Wainaina, Suzanna Owinyo and Nameless.
The rink, opened in 2005, covers  and can accommodate 200 people.
Other newer ones include the Crowne Plaza Hotel Nairobi in Upper Hill area, the Sankara Nairobi in Westlands, Tribe Hotel-Village Market, House of Wayne, The Eastland Hotel, Ole Sereni, and The Boma located along Mombasa Highway.
The country's third president since independence, President Mwai Kibaki on Tuesday, 13 November 2012 launched the Syokimau Rail Service marking a major milestone in the history of railway development in the country.
A variety of amenities are provided at these malls and include: cinemas, fashion and apparel retailers, bookshops, electronics and grocery stores, coffeehouses, restaurants and bars.
Coffee houses, doubling up as restaurants, mostly frequented by the upper middle classes, such as Artcaffe, Java Coffee House and Dormans have become increasingly popular in recent days.
The city's colonial past is commemorated by many English place-names.
Several projects have been completed (Syokimau Rail Station, the Eastern and Northern Bypasses) while numerous other projects are still underway.
The head of one development agency cited the notoriously high levels of violent armed robberies, burglaries, and carjackings.
Nairobi's restaurants offer dining packages at reduced prices.
Upscale restaurants specialising in specific cuisines, ranging from Italian, Lebanese, Ethiopian, French and seafood are more likely to be found in five star hotels and the wealthier suburbs in the West and South of the city.
Five-star hotels in Nairobi include the Nairobi Serena, Laico Regency (formerly Grand Regency Hotel), Windsor (Karen), Holiday Inn, Nairobi Safari Club (Lilian Towers), The Sarova Stanley Hotel, Safari Park & Casino, InterContinental, Panari Hotel, Hilton, and the Norfolk Hotel.
The development of these critical transport facilities will, besides reducing transport costs due to faster movement of goods and people within the region, also increase trade, improve the socio-economic welfare of Northern Kenya and boost the country's potential in attracting investments from all over the world.
The style is a fusion of jazz and Luo music forms.
The Best Western Premier-Nairobi and The Villa Rosa Kempinski have been completed and opened.
Upcoming establishments include Radisson Blu and the upscale boutique Bidwood Suite Hotel in Westlands, which are nearing completion.
The Nairobi province differs in several ways from other Kenyan regions.
The city lies on the River Athi in the southern part of the country, and has an elevation of  above sea level.
International chains apart from the Hilton, the Intercontinental group, and Serena Hotels are also setting up properties in Nairobi city.
In 2006, crime decreased in the city, due to increased security and an improved police presence.
Nairobi is also home to the largest ice rink in Africa: the Solar Ice Rink at the Panari Hotel's Sky Centre.
The most recent of these was ''The Constant Gardener'' (2005), a large part of which was filmed in the city.
Wilson Airport is a smaller and busy general aviation airport, which is located in a south-central suburb of Nairobi West.
Constituency name may differ from division name, such that Starehe Constituency is equal to Central Division, Lang'ata Constituency to Kibera division, and Kamukunji Constituency to Pumwani Division in terms of boundaries.
During Kenya's colonial period, the city became a centre for the colony's coffee, tea and sisal industry.
However, in 2004, a law was passed requiring all matatus to include seat belts and speed governors and to be painted with a yellow stripe.
East Africa Television Channel 5 is 24-hour music channel based in Dar es Salaam Tanzania and broadcasts in Uganda, Tanzania, and Kenya.
By the mid twentieth century, many foreigners settled in Nairobi from other British-occupied regions, primarily India and parts of (present-day) Pakistan.
These are circulated within Kenya and cover a range of domestic and regional issues.
It also includes the full remains of a homo erectus popularly known as the Turkana boy.
Major plans are being implemented in the need to decongest the city's traffic and the completion of Thika Road has given the city a much needed face-lift attributed to road's enhancement of global standards.
Kenya High School, one of the schools in Kenya, is located in Nairobi.
The low and lower income estates are located mainly in far eastern Nairobi.
Lupita is the daughter of Kenyan politician Peter Anyang' Nyong'o
Football is the most popular sport in the city by viewership and participation.
It is Africa's fourth-largest exchange in terms of trading volume, capable of making 10 million trades a day.
Completed in 1983, the stadium has a capacity of 30,000.
Since then, the government has taken measures to combat crime with heavy police presence in and around the city while US government has updated its travel warning for the country.
Opening of the station marks the completion of the first phase of the Sh24b Nairobi Commuter Rail Network that is geared at easing traffic congestion in Nairobi, blamed for huge economic losses.
The United States Embassy, then located in downtown Nairobi, was bombed in August 1998 by Al-Qaida, as one of a series of US embassy bombings.
Many nightclubs in and around the city have witnessed a growth in the population that exclusively listen to Electronic Dance Music, especially amongst the younger generations.
Nairobi is the centre of Kenya's music scene.
The oldest 18-hole golf course in the city is the Royal Nairobi Golf Club.
The growth rate of Nairobi is currently 4.1% a year.
Nairobi is served by highways that link Mombasa to Kampala in Uganda and Arusha in Tanzania.
Since its foundation in 1899, Nairobi has grown to become the second largest city in the African Great Lakes, despite being one of youngest cities in the region.
In 2011, the city was considered to be about 4 million residents.
Lupita received an Oscar award for best supporting actress in her role as Patsy in the film ''12 Years a Slave'' during the ''86th Academy Awards'' at the Dolby theatre in Los Angeles.
However, this idea has not yet been ratified and approved by the Cabinet of the Kenya government.
The park was to be built over by former President Daniel arap Moi, who wanted the 62-storey headquarters of his party, the Kenya African National Union, situated in the park.
In 2001, the United Nations International Civil Service Commission rated Nairobi as among the most insecure cities in the world, classifying the city as "status C".
Nairobi continued to grow under the British and many British subjects settled within the city's suburbs.
However, in November 2014 President Uhuru Kenyatta lifted the ban on the yellow stripe and allowed matatus to maintain the colourful graphics in an effort to support the youth in creating employment.
Nairobi has a large tourist industry, being both a tourist destination and a transport hub.
Fears spread over further promised retaliations by the Al-Shabaab group of rebels over Kenya's involvement in a coordinated operation with the Somalian military against the insurgent outfit.
Bob Marley's first-ever visit to Africa started in Nairobi.
The most notable ones include Avenue Park, Fedha, Pipeline, Donholm, Greenfields, Nyayo, Taasia, Baraka, Nairobi West, Madaraka, Siwaka, South B, South C, Mugoya, Riverbank, Hazina, Buru Buru, Uhuru, Harambee Civil Servants', Akiba, Kimathi, Pioneer, and Koma Rock to the centre-east and Kasarani to northeast area among others.
Artistes such as Esther Wahome, Eunice Njeri, Daddy Owen, Emmy Kosgei and the late Angela Chibalonza, among others, have a great pull over the general population while others like MOG, Juliani, Ecko dyda, DK Kwenye Beat have great influence over the younger generation.
Smartbus-Kenya is the latest bus operator in Kenya and serves Nairobi and the areas around it.
This takes a rectangular shape, around the Uhuru Highway, Haille Selassie Avenue, Moi Avenue, and University Way.
