The area receives a significantly greater amount of precipitation than the rest of the country, averaging around  per year.
Agriculture, herding, tourism and the mining industry – including mining for gem diamonds, uranium, gold, silver, and base metals – form the basis of its economy.
Since state foundation four Delimitation Commissions have delivered their work, the last one in 2013 under the chairmanship of Judge Alfred Siboleka.
In the late 19th century during European colonization, the German Empire established rule over most of the territory as a protectorate in 1884.
During the decades of German and South African occupation of Namibia, white commercial farmers, most of whom came as settlers from South Africa and represented 0.2% of the national population, came to own 74% of the arable land.
''Efundja'', the annual seasonal flooding of the northern parts of the country, often causes not only damage to infrastructure but loss of life.
From the late 18th century onwards, Oorlam people from Cape Colony crossed the Orange River and moved into the area that today is southern Namibia.
Namibia has one of the highest rates of income inequality in the world, due in part to the fact that there is an urban economy and a more rural cash-less economy.
Namibia does not have any enemies in the region but consistently spends more as a percentage of GDP on its military than all of its neighbours, except Angola.
The dry lands of Namibia were inhabited since early times by San, Damara, and Nama.
A dynamic member of the Southern African Development Community, Namibia is a vocal advocate for greater regional integration.
From 1948, with the National Party elected to power, South Africa applied apartheid also to what was known as South West Africa.
Taxation in Namibia includes personal income tax, which is applicable to total taxable income of an individual and all individuals are taxed at progressive marginal rates over a series of income brackets.
The United Nations Transitional Assistance Group (UNTAG)'s Kenyan infantry battalion remained in Namibia for three months after independence to help train the NDF and to stabilise the north.
This includes 298 schools that have no toilet facilities.
It administered it from 1919 onward as a League of Nations mandate territory (nominally under the British Crown).
According to The Namibia Tourism Exit Survey, which was produced by the Millennium Challenge Corporation for the Namibian Directorate of Tourism, 56% of all tourists visiting Namibia during the time period, 2012 – 2013, visited Windhoek.
He is also known for humanitarian activities in Namibia and beyond.
A combined UN civilian and peace-keeping force called UNTAG (United Nations Transition Assistance Group), led by Finnish diplomat Martti Ahtisaari, was deployed from April 1989 to March 1990 to monitor the peace process and elections, and to supervise military withdrawals.
Privately held One Africa TV has competed with NBC since the 2000s.
Average temperatures and temperature ranges increase further inland from the cold Atlantic waters, while the lingering coastal fogs slowly diminish.
Namibia has free education for both Primary and secondary education levels.
As the HIV/AIDS epidemic has reduced the working-aged population, the number of orphans has increased.
In 2001, there were an estimated 210,000 people living with HIV/AIDS, and the estimated death toll in 2003 was 16,000.
The Central Plateau already serves as a transportation corridor from the more densely populated north to South Africa, the source of four-fifths of Namibia's imports.
These areas do not overlap with constituency boundaries to get reliable data for election purposes as well.
It began to develop infrastructure and farming, and maintained this German colony until 1915, when South African forces defeated its military.
The Christian community makes up 80%–90% of the population of Namibia, with at least 75% being Protestant, and at least 50% Lutheran.
On their way further northwards, however, the Oorlam encountered clans of the Herero at Windhoek, Gobabis, and Okahandja, who resisted their encroachment.
Whites (mainly of Afrikaner, German, British and Portuguese origin) make up between 4.0 and 7.0% of the population.
There are offshore gas deposits in the Atlantic Ocean that are planned to be extracted in the future.
Namibia is the only country in Sub-Saharan Africa to provide water through municipal departments.
As a result, many Namibians prefer the traditional wells over the available water points far away.
*Legislature: Namibia has a bicameral Parliament with the National Assembly as lower house, and the National Council as the upper house.
Some of them settled in Namibia instead of continuing their journey.
flung into the bush.
Nearly all Portuguese settlers came to the country from the former Portuguese colony of Angola.
There are also a number of notable hotels in Windhoek such as Windhoek Country Club Resort and some international hotel chains also operate in Windhoek, such as Avani Hotels and Resorts and Hilton Hotels and Resorts.
Current affairs magazines include Insight Namibia, Vision2030 Focus magazine and Prime FOCUS.
Only four African countries made the Top 20 Emerging Markets list in the March 2013 issue of Bloomberg Markets magazine, and Namibia was rated ahead of Morocco (19th), South Africa (15th) and Zambia (14th).
The country had only 598 physicians in 2002.
However, while the President is both head of state and government, all members of the government are individually and collectively responsible to the legislature.
Namibia obtained full independence from South Africa in 1990.
By 2015, military expenditure was estimated at between 4% and 5% of GDP.
Golfer Trevor Dodds won on the PGA Tour in 1998 (The Greater Greensborough Open) and won 15 tournaments in his career.
Sport hunting is also a large, and growing component of the Namibian economy, accounting for 14% of total tourism in the year 2000, or $19.6&nbsp;million US dollars, with Namibia boasting numerous species sought after by international sport hunters.
Although arable land accounts for only 1% of Namibia, nearly half of the population is employed in agriculture.
Most of the white population speaks either German or Afrikaans.
The British formulated the plan for integrating these forces and began training the NDF, which consists of a small headquarters and five battalions.
Namibia has the second-lowest population density of any sovereign country, after Mongolia.
In Namibia's rural areas 13% of the population had more than basic
Angola also resolved its civil war.
During South African rule, the white bias continued, with mentionable influence of the Pretoria government on the "South West African" media system.
The most visited places include the capital city of Windhoek, Caprivi Strip, Fish River Canyon, Sossusvlei, the Skeleton Coast Park, Sesriem, Etosha Pan and the coastal towns of Swakopmund, Walvis Bay and Lüderitz.
Although the South African government wanted to annex 'South-West Africa' into its official territory, it never did so.
This was won by SWAPO although it did not gain the two-thirds majority it had hoped for; the South African-backed Democratic Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) became the official opposition.
The risk of death from malaria is also raised by approximately 50% with a concurrent HIV infection.
In 2013, global business and financial news provider, Bloomberg, named Namibia the top emerging market economy in Africa and the 13th best in the world.
The white minority of South-West Africa elected representatives to the whites-only Parliament of South Africa.
long distance between residences and water points in rural areas.
Namibia were participants in the 1999, 2003, 2007, 2011 and 2015 Rugby World Cups.
Namibia conducts a census every ten years.
It issued an amnesty for those who had fought on either side during the liberation war.
There are also a number of trade associations that represent the tourism sector in Namibia, such as the Federation of Namibia Tourism Associations (the umbrella body for all tourism associations in Namibia), the Hospitality Association of Namibia, the Association of Namibian Travel Agents, Car Rental Association of Namibia and the Tour and Safari Association of Namibia.
The Great Escarpment swiftly rises to over .
The majority of the Namibian population is of Bantu-speaking origin  – mostly of the Ovambo ethnicity, which forms about half of the population – residing mainly in the north of the country, although many are now resident in towns throughout Namibia.
Except for the largest newspaper, The Namibian, which is owned by a trust, the other mentioned private newspapers are part of the Democratic Media Holdings.
The  bad rainy season with rainfall far below the annual average occurred in summer 2006/07.
The Kalahari, while popularly known as a desert, has a variety of localised environments, including some verdant and technically non-desert areas.
The constitution of Namibia defined the role of the military as "''defending the territory and national interests.''"
But Walvis Bay and the Penguin Islands remained under South African control until 1994.
these resources due to the prohibitively high consumption cost and the
Their encounters with the nomadic Nama tribes were largely peaceful.
Business monopoly in some sectors causes higher profit bookings and further raising of prices.
Research has shown that in Namibia the risk of contracting malaria is 14.5% greater if a person is also infected with HIV.
As summer winds are forced over the Escarpment, moisture is extracted as precipitation.
As in other postcolonial African societies, the push for monolingual instruction and policy has resulted in a high rate of school drop-outs and of individuals whose academic competence in any language is low.
After a new round of negotiations, a second date was set, and the elections process began in earnest.
Namibia is divided into 14 regions and subdivided into 121 constituencies.
The Constitution of Namibia guarantees the separation of powers:
In calculated punitive action by the German occupiers, what has been called the 'first genocide of the Twentieth Century' was committed, as government officials ordered extinction of the natives.
Its capital city, Windhoek is currently ranked as the 150th most expensive place in the world for expatriates to live.
He achieved a career high world ranking of 78 in 1998.
The country seeks to become a regional transportation hub; it has an important seaport and several landlocked neighbours.
Namibia gained independence from South Africa on 21 March 1990, following the Namibian War of Independence.
In the late 19th century, Dorsland Trekkers crossed the area on their way from the South African Republic to Angola.
Media and journalists in Namibia are represented by the Namibian chapter of the Media Institute of Southern Africa and the Editors' Forum of Namibia.
Agreement has been reached on the privatisation of several more enterprises in coming years, with hopes that this will stimulate much needed foreign investment.
It varies between 100 and many hundreds of kilometres in width.
Where people do not live near perennial rivers or make use of the storage dams, they are dependent on groundwater.
The transition to independence finally started under a diplomatic agreement between South Africa, Angola and Cuba, with the USSR and the USA as observers.
The countries were also rated on areas of particular interest to foreign investors: the ease of doing business, the perceived level of corruption and economic freedom.
Although per capita GDP is five times the per capita GDP of Africa's poorest countries, the majority of Namibia's people live in rural areas and exist on a subsistence way of life.
Regional councillors are directly elected through secret ballots (regional elections) by the inhabitants of their constituencies.
Both rainy seasons occur in summer: the small rainy season between September and November, the big one between February and April.
Military expenditure rose from 2.7% of GDP in 2000 to 3.7% in 2009, and the arrival of 12 Chengdu J-7 Airguard jets in 2006 and 2008 made Namibia for a short time one of the top arms importers in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Several registered political parties are active and represented in the National Assembly, although the SWAPO has won every election since independence.
The nine private radio stations in the country are mainly English-language channels, except for Radio Omulunga (Oshiwambo) and Kosmos 94.1 (Afrikaans).
There is a large Chinese minority in Namibia.
Namibia has a highly developed banking sector with modern infrastructure, such as online banking and cellphone banking.
As a result, access to improved sanitation has not increased much since independence:
Both Afrikaans and English are used primarily as a second language reserved for public communication.
*Executive: Executive power is exercised by the President and the Government.
The use of open areas close to residential land to urinate and defecate is very common and has been identified as a major health hazard.
Most Africans were confined to so-called native territories, which later under South African rule post-1949 were turned into "homelands" (Bantustans).
Namibia is the driest country in sub-Saharan Africa and depends largely on groundwater.
According to "The Diamond Investigation", a book about the global diamond market, from 1978, De Beers, the largest diamond company, bought most of the Namibian diamonds, and would continue to do so, because "whatever government eventually comes to power they will need this revenue to survive".
The public broadcaster offers a TV station as well as a "National Radio" in English and nine language services in locally spoken languages.
The UN evaluated in 2011 that Namibia has improved its water access network significantly since independence
The pupil-teacher ratio in 1999 was estimated at 32:1, with about 8% of the GDP being spent on education.
Electricity is generated mainly by thermal and hydroelectric power plants.
Following the League's replacement by the United Nations in 1946, South Africa refused to surrender its earlier mandate.
In addition, extreme sports such as sandboarding, skydiving and 4x4ing have become popular, and many cities have companies that provide tours.
The country officially became independent on 21 March 1990.
Namibia is the home for one of the toughest footraces in the world, the Namibian ultra marathon.
The cost of living in Namibia is relatively high because most of the goods including cereals need to be imported.
Under this, South Africa agreed to withdraw and demobilise its forces in Namibia.
A large part of the population can not, however, make use of
According to the 2011 census, the most common languages are Oshiwambo (the most spoken language for 49% of households), Nama/Damara (11.3%), Afrikaans (10.4%), Kavango (9%), Otjiherero (9%).
There has been significant investment in uranium mining and Namibia is set to become the largest exporter of uranium by 2015.
Weather and climate in the coastal area are dominated by the cold, north-flowing Benguela current of the Atlantic Ocean, which accounts for very low precipitation (50&nbsp;mm per year or less), frequent dense fog, and overall lower temperatures than in the rest of the country.
Namibia is also classified as an Upper Middle Income country by the World Bank, and ranks 87th out of 185 economies in terms of ease of doing business.
The UN has identified a "sanitation crisis" in the country.
From 1904 to 1907, the Herero and the Namaqua took up arms against the Germans.
Sister Namibia Magazine stands out as the longest running NGO magazine in Namibia, while Namibia Sport is the only national sport magazine.
It falls to the government to provide education, food, shelter and clothing for these orphans.
Before its independence in 1990, the area was known first as German South-West Africa (''Deutsch-Südwestafrika''), then as South-West Africa, reflecting the colonial occupation by the Germans and the South Africans (technically on behalf of the British crown reflecting South Africa's dominion status within the British Empire).
The only perennial rivers are found on the national borders with South Africa, Angola, Zambia, and the short border with Botswana in the Caprivi.
He won four Olympic silver medals (1992, 1996) and also has medals from several World Athletics Championships.
Its sand dunes, created by the strong onshore winds, are the highest in the world.
The malaria problem seems to be compounded by the AIDS epidemic.
Over the past years, the country usually ranked in the upper quarter of the Press Freedom Index of Reporters without Borders, reaching position 21 in 2010, being on par with Canada and the best-positioned African country.
The dry lands of Namibia were inhabited since early times by the San, Damara, and Nama peoples.
Namibia formed the Namibian Defence Force (NDF), comprising former enemies in a 23-year bush war: the People's Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN) and South West African ''Territorial Force'' (SWATF).
With a small army and a fragile economy, the Namibian Government's principal foreign policy concern is developing strengthened ties within the Southern African region.
Namibia's primary tourism related governing body, the Namibia Tourism Board (NTB), was established by an Act of Parliament: the Namibia Tourism Board Act, 2000 (Act 21 of 2000).
The broadcasting sector is dominated by the state-run Namibian Broadcasting Corporation (NBC).
Since then the Bantu groups in total, known as the Ovambo people, have dominated the population of the country and since the late 19th century, have constituted a large majority.
Additionally, a mentionable amount of foreign media, especially South African, is available.
Today most Christians are Lutheran, but there also are Roman Catholic, Methodist, Anglican, African Methodist Episcopal, Dutch Reformed and Mormons (the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints).
Typically the sub-Tropical High Pressure Belt, with frequent clear skies, provides more than 300 days of sunshine per year.
In 1973 the UN recognised the South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO) as the official representative of the Namibian people; the party is dominated by the Ovambo, who are a large majority in the territory.
The country also contains some descendants of refugees from Angola.
For enumeration purposes the country is demarcated into 4,042 ''enumeration areas''.
Some other languages have received semi-official recognition by being allowed as medium of instruction in primary schools.
Other ethnic groups are the Herero and Himba people, who speak a similar language, and the Damara, who speak the same "click" language as the Nama.
There are also two smaller groups of people with mixed racial origins, called "Coloureds" and "Basters", who together make up 8.0% (with the Coloureds outnumbering the Basters two to one).
Worldwide, Namibia also fared better than Hungary, Brazil and Mexico.
Namibia enjoys high political, economic and social stability.
Humidity is low, and average rainfall varies from almost zero in the coastal desert to more than 600&nbsp;mm in the Caprivi Strip.
Multiparty democracy was introduced and has been maintained, with local, regional and national elections held regularly.
About 4,000, mostly white, commercial farmers own almost half of Namibia's arable land.
The African Media Barometer shows similarly positive results.
It was not until 1988 that South Africa agreed to end its occupation of Namibia, in accordance with a UN peace plan for the entire region.
Because of the location of the shoreline, at the point where the Atlantic's cold water reaches Africa's hot climate, often extremely dense fog forms along the coast.
Even today,  years after the end of the German colonial era, the German language plays a role as a commercial language.
The first newspaper in Namibia was the German-language ''Windhoeker Anzeiger'', founded 1898.
Local authorities in Namibia can be in the form of municipalities (either Part 1 or Part 2 municipalities), town councils or villages.
After the rise of the National Party in South Africa, it established apartheid in both areas.
In the later 20th century, uprisings and demands for political representation by native African political activists seeking independence resulted in the UN assuming direct responsibility over the territory in 1966, but South Africa maintained ''de facto'' rule.
Independent newspapers were seen as a menace to the existing order, critical journalists threatened.
Otherwise, surface water is restricted to a few large storage dams retaining and damming up these seasonal floods and their runoff.
South West Africa was formally recognised as Namibia by the UN; the General Assembly changed the territory's name by Resolution 2372 (XXII) of 12 June 1968.
It imposed its laws, including racial classifications and rules.
Even isolated communities and those economic activities located far from good surface water sources, such as mining, agriculture, and tourism, can be supplied from groundwater over nearly 80% of the country.
There are four teacher training universities, three colleges of agriculture, a police training college, and two universities: University of Namibia (UNAM) and Namibia University of Science and Technology (NUST).
Although Namibia's population is fairly small, the country has a diverse choice of media; two TV stations, 19 radio stations (without counting community stations), 5 daily newspapers, several weeklies and special publications compete for the attention of the audience.
The Women's inline hockey National Team participated in the 2008 FIRS World Championships.
resort to "flying toilets", plastic bags to defecate which after use are
The 2011 Population and Housing Census counted 2,113,077 inhabitants of Namibia.
During German rule, the newspapers mainly reflected the living reality and the view of the white German-speaking minority.
sanitation, up from 8% in 1990.
Professional cyclist and Namibian Road Race Champion Dan Craven represented Namibia at the 2016 Summer Olympics in both the road race and individual time trial.
The transition from the 15-year rule of President Sam Nujoma to his successor Hifikepunye Pohamba in 2005 went smoothly.
According to the 2011 UNAIDS Report, the epidemic in Namibia "appears to be leveling off."
They also elected their own local administration, the SWA Legislative Assembly.
The Namibian Constitution adopted in February 1990 incorporated protection for human rights, compensation for state expropriations of private property, and established an independent judiciary, legislature, and an executive presidency (the constituent assembly became the national assembly).
Namibia follows a largely independent foreign policy, with persisting affiliations with states that aided the independence struggle, including Cuba.
Compared to neighbouring countries, Namibia has a large degree of media freedom.
Over 50% of child deaths are related to lack of water, sanitation, or hygiene; 23% are due to diarrhea alone.
Namibia has rich coastal and marine resources that remain largely unexplored.
In 1993, the newly formed government of Namibia received funding from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) through its Living in a Finite Environment (LIFE) Project.
The Central Plateau and Kalahari areas have wide diurnal temperature ranges of up to 30&nbsp;°C.
There are many lodges and reserves to accommodate eco-tourists.
Upon the end of Apartheid in South Africa in 1994, the nation ceded Walvis Bay to Namibia.
Although it does not border Zimbabwe, a part of less than 200 metres of the Zambezi River (essentially a small bulge in Botswana to achieve a Botswana/Zambia micro-border) separates it from that country.
However, as in other countries, there is still mentionable influence of representatives of state and economy on media in Namibia.
According to the Namibia Labour Force Survey Report 2012, conducted by the Namibia Statistics Agency, the country's unemployment rate is 27.4%.
Near the coast there are areas where the dunes are vegetated with hammocks.
The worst floods  occurred in March 2011 and displaced 21,000 people.
In 1999, the national government successfully quashed a secessionist attempt in the northeastern Caprivi Strip.
"Strict unemployment" (people actively seeking a full-time job) stood at 20.2% in 2000, 21.9% in 2004 and spiraled to 29.4% in 2008.
Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 52.2 years in 2012 – among the lowest in the world.
The Ministry of Environment and Tourism, with the financial support from organisations such as USAID, Endangered Wildlife Trust, WWF, and Canadian Ambassador's Fund, together form a Community Based Natural Resource Management (CBNRM) support structure.
Providing 25% of Namibia's revenue, mining is the single most important contributor to the economy.
After the return of more than 46,000 SWAPO exiles, Namibia's first one-person one-vote elections for the constitutional assembly took place in November 1989.
In early 2010 the Government tender board announced that "henceforth 100 per cent of all unskilled and semi-skilled labour must be sourced, without exception, from within Namibia".
The data came from Bloomberg's own financial-market statistics, IMF forecasts and the World Bank.
The elections were peaceful and declared free and fair.
However, facilitation payments are occasionally demanded by customs due to cumbersome and costly customs procedures.
