Mitford's fiction, based on upper-class family life and mores, belongs to the genre of the comedy of manners.
It was published by Hamish Hamilton in May 1940, at a time when there was little public appetite for lighthearted war satire, and the book was a commercial failure.
Among them was Hamish St Clair Erskine, the second son of the 5th Earl of Rosslyn, an Oxford undergraduate four years Nancy's junior.
Before this experiment was discontinued, Nancy had become self-centred and uncontrollable; Hastings writes that her first years were "characterised by roaring, red-faced rages".
In 1932 her plight was overshadowed by a family scandal involving her younger sister Diana, who had married Bryan Guinness in 1928 and was the mother of two young sons.
Mitford was a prolific writer of articles, reviews, essays and prefaces, some of which were published in two collections: ''The Water Beetle'' (Hamish Hamilton, 1962) and ''A Talent to Annoy'' (Hamish Hamilton, 1986).
Mitford then began her first serious non-fiction work, a biography of Madame de Pompadour.
''The Pursuit of Love'' is a heavily autobiographical romantic comedy  in which many of her family and acquaintances appear in thin disguises.
Nancy, in full anti-fascist mode, had described her sister to the British Intelligence agency MI5 as "a ruthless and shrewd egotist, a devoted fascist and admirer of Hitler who sincerely desires the downfall of England and democracy in general."
After several years as a tea planter in Ceylon he fought in the Boer War of 1899–1902 and was severely wounded.
Thompson calls their relationship "one of the great literary friendships of the twentieth century".
Alone in London, Mitford moved to the family's Rutland Gate house where she remained during the London blitz.
In the 18th century William Mitford was a leading classical historian, responsible for the definitive history of ancient Greece.
Mitford's friends were dying, too, "in middle age", she informed her long-time friend Violet Hammersley.
The family stayed in Asthall Manor for seven years, and it became the basis of many of the family scenes which Nancy was later to portray in her semi-autobiographical novels.
Here Nancy learned French and other subjects, played organised games and joined a Girl Guide troop.
David had little interest in reading and knew nothing of business; thus, according to Nancy Mitford's biographer Selena Hastings, "a less congenial post&nbsp;... could hardly have been imagined".
At the end of 1972 she entered the Nuffield Clinic in London, where she was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the blood.
The book also included an abbreviated version of  Ross's original article, and  contributions from Waugh, Betjeman, Peter Fleming and  Christopher Sykes, It was a tremendous success; as Lovell records, "'U and Non-U' was the buzz phrase of the day&nbsp;... Nancy's comments made her the arbiter of good manners for several generations".
Mitford's meetings with him, which had become increasingly rare because of  his many political and social commitments, were now reduced to a single visit a year, supplemented with occasional letters.
From the late 1960s her health deteriorated, and she endured several years of painful illness before her death in 1973.
His great-grandson Algernon Bertram Mitford, born in 1837 and known as "Bertie", was a diplomat and traveller who held minor office in Disraeli's second ministry, from 1874 to 1880.
The novel's reception was even warmer than that of its predecessor; Waugh was one of the few critics to qualify his praise—he thought the descriptions were good but the conversations poor.
Her socialising, entertaining and working were interspersed with regular short visits to family and friends in England and summers generally spent in Venice.
She spent many hours reading in the Batsford House library where, according to Hastings,  the foundations of her intellectual life were laid.
Mitford again miscarried, with complications that led, in November 1941, to a hysterectomy.
''Frederick the Great'' was published later in 1970 to a muted reception.
Mitford herself had briefly flirted with this cause, although her enthusiasm was   short-lived  and she soon became a vociferous opponent of fascism.
A rebellious ex-Wellington schoolboy and avowed Communist, Romilly had been invalided home after fighting on the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War.
That winter, she embarked on a full-length novel, ''Highland Fling'', in which various characters—mostly identifiable among her friends, acquaintances and family—attend a Scottish house-party which develops chaotically.
This was a source of frustration for Nancy, whose lively intelligence required greater stimulus.
In March 1945 she was given three months' leave from the shop to write it.
Her first efforts, anonymous contributions to gossip columns in society magazines, led to occasional signed articles, and in 1930 ''The Lady'' engaged her to write a regular column.
Few recognised the tongue-in-cheek aspect; Mitford received hundreds of letters from  worried readers desperate to know if they were snobs or merely "common".
Laura Thompson, in her biography of Nancy, describes Hatherop as not so much  a school, "more a chaste foretaste of debutante life".
She drew on these experiences in her fourth novel, ''Pigeon Pie'', a comedy about spying.
This busy period in her writing life continued in 1951 with her third postwar novel, ''The Blessing'', another semi-autobiographical romance this time set in Paris, in which an aristocratic young Englishwoman is married to a libidinous French marquis.
It is unsurprising, says Thompson, that Mitford should first attempt to write a novel in the early 1930s, since many of her friends were doing the same thing.
The children had the run of the house and grounds, and were taught together in the schoolroom.
Amidst these personal upheavals Mitford continued writing.
According to Hastings, she developed many of her friendships far further on paper than she could have done through normal social intercourse.
Through the winter of 1937–38 Mitford's main literary task was editing the  letters of her cousins the Stanleys of Alderley, with whom she was connected through her great-grandmother Blanche Airlie.
In a spirit of mischief, Mitford incorporated the U and Non-U thesis into an article she was writing for ''Encounter'' on the English aristocracy.
A later Sir John held several important public offices during the late 14th and early 15th centuries, and the family maintained a tradition of public service for many generations.
She considered it her first truly grown-up work, and her best.
At times a more serious undertone, contrasting with the "bright, brittle, essentially ephemeral" nature of her early works, becomes evident; Olivia Laing in the ''Guardian'', discerns "a faint and beguiling pessimism about love's pursuit and its consequences" beneath the light superficiality.
They were married  on 4 December 1933, after which they settled into a cottage at Strand-on-the-Green on the western edges of London.
The book made little impact when it was published in March 1931, and she immediately began work on another, ''Christmas Pudding''.
In this judgement he was largely alone; other critics perceived in the anecdotal framework of the book an uncertainty as to what it was about.
A month later she was back for the funeral of her mother, Lady Redesdale, who died on 25 May.
In October 1969 she undertook a tour of East Germany, to visit former royal palaces and battlefields.
He rebuilt Batsford House, the family's country seat, served briefly as a Unionist MP in the 1890s, and otherwise devoted himself to  books, writings and travel.
Thompson adds that although Mitford was always a competent writer, it is in her letters, with their freedom of expression and flights of fancy, that her true character emerges.
She was a prolific letter writer, and kept contact with her large cohort of friends by a voluminous correspondence.
The gift for vivid characterisation, which Mitford developed in her fiction, was used to full effect in her four biographical works.
Mosley and Diana, who had married secretly in 1936, were detained under Defence Regulation 18B.
She was delighted by the former honour, and amused by the latter—which she remembered Waugh had called an "insult" and turned down.
The few months she spent there represented almost the whole of her formal schooling; in the autumn the family moved to a larger house in Victoria Road, Kensington, after which Nancy was educated at home by successive governesses.
Waugh's judgement was that those who criticised the book were "lazy brutes&nbsp;... who&nbsp;... can't bear to see a writer grow up".
When it was published in August 1966, among the many tributes to the book was that of President de Gaulle, who recommended it to every member of his cabinet.
7 rue Monsieur on the Left Bank, close to Palewski's residence.
An American reviewer wondered what parts were to be taken seriously: "What exactly goes on?&nbsp;... Can you always tell an Etonian, even when he goes beat?
In May Mitford joined him, and spent several weeks there as a relief worker.
In  these later novels Zoë Heller of the ''Daily Telegraph'' hears in the prose, behind a new level of care and artfulness.
Her own description of ''Voltaire in Love'' is "a Kinsey report of his romps with Mme de Châtelet and her romps with Saint-Lambert and his romps with Mme de Boufflers&nbsp;...
She was much affected by what she saw: "I have never cried so much in all my life".
A brief affair with a  Free French officer, André Roy, resulted in a third pregnancy.
She also established a reputation for herself as a writer of popular historical biographies.
She then returned to writing  fiction, with ''Don't Tell Alfred'', in which she revived Fanny Wincham, the narrator of ''The Pursuit of Love'' and ''Love in a Cold Climate'', and placed her in a Paris setting as wife of the British ambassador.
She wrote to her friend James Lees-Milne: "It's very curious, dying, and would have many a drôle amusing & charming side were it not for the pain".
Mitford's marriage to Peter Rodd in 1933 proved unsatisfactory to both (they divorced in 1957 after a lengthy separation), and during the Second World War she   formed a liaison with a Free French officer, Gaston Palewski.
In January 1909 a brother, Tom was born, and in June 1910 another sister, Diana, followed.
Rodd was engaged in an affair with  the wife of a friend, a situation that continued  into the new year, when the Mitford family was further  shaken by the 19-year-old Jessica's elopement with her cousin Esmond Romilly.
Growing up proved a difficult process for Nancy.
The affair between Erskine and Mitford continued intermittently.
In 1926 Asthall Manor was finally sold.
Having rejected the political extremes within her family, Mitford affected a stance of moderate socialism, though as Hastings points out, without much depth or conviction.
Similar questions were raised in the ''Times Literary Supplement''s review, in relation to Mitford's fictional output as a whole: "Would she have been a better novelist if she had 'tried harder', gone in further, dropped the pose of amateurishness, cut the charm, looked beyond the worlds that she knew and, more importantly, loved?"
Although this aspect formed only a small section of Mitford's article, when it was published in September 1955 it caused a major stir.
Mitford's remaining years were dominated by her illness, although for a time she enjoyed visits from her sisters and friends, and working in her garden.
After the cremation, she informed her sister Jessica, "the ashes were done up in the sort of parcel he used to bring back from London, rich thick brown paper & incredibly neat knots".
Summers were spent at the family's cottage near High Wycombe, in Buckinghamshire, or with the children's Redesdale grandparents at Batsford Park.
The play ran for 1,261 performances, and provided Mitford with a steady £300 per month in royalties.
In 1968 she began work on her final book, a biography of Frederick the Great.
Similar mixed comments greeted Mitford's final novel, ''Don't Tell Alfred'', Waugh again hailing it as her best, "clamouring for a sequel".
Nevertheless, she was deeply hurt by the news, although she affected a typical nonchalance.
In August 1962 Palewski was appointed a minister in Georges Pompidou's government, and returned to Paris.
The book, published in October 1960, was popular with the public, but received indifferent reviews.
This did not mean more regular or frequent meetings, and the affair with Mitford continued at arm's length.
While she often despaired of the relationship, she refused other offers of marriage, saying that she would "never marry anyone except Hamish."
Thomson describes this series as "a more sophisticated version of ''A Year in Provence'', bringing France to the English in just the way that they most like it".
Other biographers describe him as irresponsible, unfaithful, a bore and unable to hold down a regular job, and as the model for Waugh's unscrupulous, amoral character Basil Seal from ''Black Mischief''.
Blanche Ogilvy, Clementina's elder sister, became the wife of Sir Henry Montague Hozier, a soldier turned businessman.
Her translation of Madame Lafayette's romantic novel ''La Princess de Clèves'' was published in America in 1950, but was heavily criticised.
In 1948 Mitford completed a new novel, a sequel to ''The Pursuit of Love'' she called ''Love in a Cold Climate'', with the same country house ambience as the earlier book and many of the same characters.
Hamish Erskine is clearly identifiable in the character of "Bobby Bobbin", and John Betjeman is the basis for the supporting role of Bobby's tutor.
The pair met in 1928 and became unofficially engaged, despite his homosexuality (of which Nancy may not have been aware).
The premature deaths included that of Evelyn Waugh, who died on 10 April 1966.
Responsibility for Nancy's day-to-day upbringing was delegated to her nanny and nursemaid, within the framework of Sydney's short-lived belief that children should never be corrected or be spoken to in anger.
The couple's first child, a daughter, was born on 28 November 1904; they had intended to call her Ruby, but after she was born they changed their minds and named her Nancy.
Some of Mitford's friends disliked it, and she decided she would write no more fiction.
On 17 August 1916 Bertie Mitford died; David, still serving at the front, became the 2nd Baron Redesdale.
By this time, Mitford's relationship with Palewski had become dormant, and she recognised that the best days would never return.
Nancy Mitford's father, David Bertram Ogilvy Freeman-Mitford, was Bertie Mitford's second son, born on 13 March 1878.
The book sold 200,000 copies within a year of publication, and firmly established Mitford as a best-selling author.
After the operation she continued to suffer pain, although she was able to continue working on her book.
In 1954 Alan Ross, a University of Birmingham professor of linguistics, devised the terms "U" and "Non-U" to differentiate the speech patterns of the social classes in England.
I could go on for pages".
Mitford enjoyed a privileged childhood as the eldest daughter of the Hon.
The general view of the critics, when the book was published in March 1954, was that it was "marvellous entertainment, if hardly to be taken as history".
Harold Acton deems it her most accomplished novel, "permeated with her joyous love of France".
Almost alone of her family, Mitford offered her sister support, regularly visiting her and keeping her up to date with  family news and social gossip.
Ostensibly this was to establish a French branch of Heywood Hill but in reality she wished to be close to Palewski, who was now a member of de Gaulle's postwar provisional government.
After convalescence, at a loose end, she began working as an assistant at the Heywood Hill bookshop in Curzon Street.
In May 1915, Clement, David's older brother, was killed while serving with the 10th Royal Hussars, which made David heir to the Redesdale title and lands.
Not all her interactions with her siblings were hostile; for their amusement she edited and produced a magazine, ''The Boiler'', to which she contributed entertainingly gruesome murder stories.
The experience hardened her anti-fascism to the extent that she wrote: "I would join hands with the devil himself to stop any further extension of the disease".
Perhaps, says Thompson, her  publishers Thornton Butterworth  "liked the idea of this pretty, well-connected girl who wrote in the style ''du jour''".
In Acton's view it and its companion volume ''Love in a Cold Climate'' present an entirely authentic picture of country house life in England between the wars, and will long be consulted by historians of the period.
Nancy and Rodd supported the war; the Romillys had by this time departed for America, while the others either hoped for an Anglo-German détente or, as with Unity, were openly pro-Nazi.
She was back in London in December 1945 for the publication of ''The Pursuit of Love'' which was, Hastings records, "an instant and phenomenal success&nbsp;... the perfect antidote to the long war years of hardship and austerity, providing the undernourished public with its favourite ingredients: love, childhood and the English upper classes".
Nancy declared that "we hardly saw the light of day, except at dawn".
Mitford's initial delight in the marriage was soon tempered by money worries, Rodd's fecklessness and her dislike of his family.
Blanche told her friend Lady Londonderry, shortly before Clemmie's birth, that the father of the expected child was her own brother-in-law, Bertie Mitford; most historians believe that other candidates for the paternity are more likely.
4 rue d'Artois, Versailles, in January 1967.
In 1964 she began work on ''The Sun King'', a biography of King Louis XIV.
In a final letter after their parting, Mitford wrote to him: "I thought in your soul you loved me & that in the end we should have children & look back on life together when we are old".
She may have inherited some of her natural wit and sharpness of expression from her maternal grandfather Thomas Bowles, who in his youth during the Franco-Prussian War had provided dispatches which Acton describes as "extremely graphic and amusing".
"the unmistakeable Mitford trill, in whose light, bright cadences an entire hard-to-shock and easy-to-bore view of life is made manifest".
Mitford was later embarrassed by her prewar novels; Rachel Cooke, writing on their reissue in 2011, believes she had no reason to be: "There is a special kind of energy here, and its engine is the admirable and irresistible commitment of a writer who would rather die than be boring".
Against a backdrop of negativity from family and friends—Waugh  advised her to "dress better and catch a better man"— the affair endured sporadically for several years.
More recently, Philip Hensher and others have  argued that although the novel is immensely enjoyable and that Mitford's "marvellous voice" is undiminished, she is on less sure ground with her "Frenchness" than with the English country house ambience, and her picture of France as the embodiment of everything civilised is less than convincing.
The outbreak of war in September 1939 divided the Mitford family.
He was, according to Hastings, the least suitable partner of all, "the most shimmering and narcissistic of all the beautiful butterflies"—and the one most likely to offend Lord Redesdale.
Meanwhile  Mitford had completed her latest book,  ''Voltaire in Love'', an account of the love affair between Voltaire and the Marquise du Châtelet.
Do U-people really talk this way?"
Its writing had been hampered by painful headaches arising from her apparently failing eyesight and  worries that she might be going blind.
Mitford spent much of her time looking after these families, "so hard-working, clean and grateful".
This was intended as a short-term measure while a new house was built on land nearby.
In September 1942 she met Gaston Palewski, a French colonel attached to General Charles de Gaulle's London staff.
(Publisher details are for first publication only)
When the novel was published in 1935 it made little critical impact, while seriously offending members of her own family, particularly her sisters Diana and Unity, both of whom were supporters of Mosley's movement and devotees   of the German dictator Adolf Hitler.
Under pressure from her landlords to leave her rue Monsieur apartment—they had raised her rent "exorbitantly"— she decided to leave Paris and buy herself a house in Versailles.
Within a month of Erskine's departure, Mitford announced her engagement to Peter Rodd, the second son of Sir Rennell Rodd, a diplomat and politician who was ennobled that year as Baron Rennell.
Eventually Mitford found a comfortable apartment, with a maid, at No.
Taylor likened Mitford's evocation of 18th-century Versailles to "Alconleigh", the fictitious country house that formed the background to her recent best-selling novels, a comparison that she found offensive.
He became the love of her life, although the pair were never a formal couple.
Many have been published within collections; they are, according to ''The Independent''s reviewer: "a delight, full of the sparks of an abrasive and entertaining wit, refreshingly free from politeness".
Mitford had long accepted that Palewski would never marry her.
The shop became the centre of Mitford's daily activities, and was a favoured meeting place for London's literati.
Her later years were bitter-sweet, the success of her biographical studies of Madame de Pompadour, Voltaire and King Louis XIV contrasting with the ultimate failure of her relationship with Palewski.
"U" indicated upper-class usage, and "Non-U" the conventions of the lower strata of society.
Both Hozier and Blanche were promiscuous, and it is generally accepted by historians and family members that Hozier was not Clemmie's father, although  he was registered as such.
Many of her writings—for example, her introductions to the Stanley letter collections, and her "U–non-U" essay of 1955—are staunch defences of aristocratic traditions and values.
As a means of augmenting the meagre allowance provided by her father, Mitford began writing, encouraged by Waugh.
Bertie Mitford's marriage produced five sons and four daughters.
In April 1972 the French government made her a Chevalier of the Légion d'Honneur, and later that year the British government appointed her a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE).
She finished the book, but in April 1970 was back in hospital for further tests, which did not lead to either a diagnosis or effective treatment.
The thinly disguised caricatures pervading the book shocked Lady Redesdale, who thought it could not possibly be published under Mitford's own name.
While the new house at Swinbrook was made  ready, the female members of the family were sent for three months to Paris, a period which, says Hastings, began Nancy's "lifelong love affair" with France.
Despite the distraction of learning that her brother Tom had died fighting in Burma, she finished the book and, in September, went to Paris.
Her protagonists—typically, intelligent women surrounded by eccentric characters determined to find life amusing—are broadly autobiographical.
Thereafter the relationship was conducted mainly by letters and occasional phone calls, since Palewski was only intermittently in England before the end of the war.
The couple were married on 16 February 1904, after which they rented a house in Graham Street in West London.
Her publishers decided to issue it as a lavishly illustrated "coffee table" book.
Mitford did not regard herself as a journalist: nevertheless, her articles were popular, particularly those she contributed on Paris life to ''The Sunday Times''.
Critics generally place the postwar novels in a different league from the earlier efforts; Cooke describes ''The Pursuit of Love'' as "an immaculate novel that soars many miles above what came before".
Mitford moved to No.
Unity was in Munich when war was declared; in despair she attempted suicide by shooting herself in the head.
'''Nancy Freeman-Mitford'''  (28 November 1904&nbsp;– 30 June 1973), known as '''Nancy Mitford''',  was an English novelist, biographer and journalist.
During the "phoney war" of 1939–40, Nancy was briefly an Air Raid Precautions (ARP) driver, and later worked shifts at a first-aid post in Paddington.
In April 1963 Mitford was in England for the wedding of her cousin Angus Ogilvy to Princess Alexandra.
Sydney quickly took possession of Batsford House, much of which had been shut up for many years, and occupied the portion of it that she could afford to heat.
This was followed in June 1923 by her presentation at Court—a  formal introduction to King George V at Buckingham Palace—after which she was officially "out" and could attend the balls and parties that constituted the London Season.
Shortly after, she entered hospital for the removal of a tumour.
It was here that their fifth child was conceived, a daughter born in London on 8 August 1914 and christened Unity.
''Pigeon Pie''s failure had cooled Mitford's desire to write, but in 1944, with Waugh's encouragement, she began planning a new novel.
This remained her yardstick in her subsequent biographical writings.
He remained in this position for ten years.
Mitford's informal style was remarked on by the literary critic Cyril Connolly, who wrote that her facility for transforming unpromising source material into readable form was a skill that any professional historian might envy.
This early effort and the three that followed it created little stir; it was her two semi-autobiographical postwar novels, ''The Pursuit of Love'' (1945) and ''Love in a Cold Climate'' (1949), that established her reputation.
The Redesdale estates were extensive, but uneconomical.
What is surprising, Thompson adds, is the ease with which  she found a publisher for this first book.
At the end of the war Rodd returned home, but the marriage was essentially over; although remaining on friendly terms, the couple led separate lives.
She hoped for a girl: "2 Peter Rodds in 1 house is unthinkable", but in September she miscarried.
In the winter of 1913–14 David and Sydney visited Canada, prospecting for gold on a claim that David had purchased in Swastika, Ontario.
Mitford's visit to France in late 1945 had revived her longing to be there, and in April 1946, having given up working in the shop the previous month, she left London to make her permanent home in Paris; she never lived in England again.
The same year ''The Sunday Times'' asked her to contribute a regular column, which she did for four years.
She found him fascinating, and he became the love of her life—though her feelings were never fully reciprocated—and an inspiration for much of her future writing.
Published in 1957, it sold well, was taken seriously by the critics and  was warmly praised by Mitford's friends.
In 1921, after years of pleading for proper schooling, Nancy was allowed a year's boarding at Hatherop Castle, an informal private establishment for young ladies of good family.
Her preoccupation with this project—nine or ten hours a day, she informed her friend Robert Byron— further damaged her relationship with Rodd, who resented the time thus spent.
She lived for another six months, unable to look after herself and in almost constant pain, struggling to keep her spirits up.
Her own love affair with Erskine came to an abrupt end when, in June 1933, he informed her that he intended to marry the daughter of a London banker.
In 1934 Mitford began her third novel, ''Wigs on the Green'', a satire on Mosley's fascist "Blackshirt" movement.
For the sake of Mitford's reputation the affair was pursued with discretion, before Palewski left for Algeria in May 1943.
In March 1958 Mitford's father, Lord Redesdale, died.
This time Waugh (to whom the book was dedicated) had no criticism; he found the book "admirable, deliciously funny, consistent and complete, by far the best of your writings".
During the 1950s Mitford was identified with the concept of "U" (upper) and "non-U" language, whereby social origins and standing were identified by words used in everyday speech.
Unable to form a relationship with Pamela, the sister nearest to her in age, she was bored and irritated by her younger siblings, and vented her feelings by teasing and tormenting them.
