Most of Nanjing's major theatres are multi-purpose, used as convention halls, cinemas, musical halls and theatres on different occasions.
During this time, Nanjing was the international hub of East Asia.
These days, the most comprehensive source of nightlife information (in English) can be found on  HelloNanjing.net and  NanjingExpat.com.
This city would soon play a vital role in the following centuries.
A lack of cold air flow, combined with slow-moving air masses carrying industrial emissions, collected airborne pollutants to form a thick layer of smog over the region.
Possibly the best preserved of them is the ensemble of the Tomb of Xiao Xiu (475–518), a brother of Emperor Wu of Liang.
In 2005, in order to host The 10th National Game of People's Republic of China, there was a new stadium, Nanjing Olympic Sports Centre, constructed in Nanjing.
A dense wave of smog began in the central and east parts of China on 2 December 2013 across a distance of around , including Tianjin, Hebei, Shandong, Jiangsu, Anhui, Shanghai and Zhejiang.
*  Nanjing Baixia Hi-Tech Industrial Zone
The radish is also a typical food representing people of Nanjing, which has been spread through word of mouth as an interesting fact for many years in China.
The bridge was a source of pride and an important symbol of modern China, having been built and designed by the Chinese themselves following failed surveys by other nations and the reliance on and then rejection of Soviet expertise.
Inside the city of Nanjing, there are  of highways, with a highway coverage density of 3.38&nbsp;kilometres per hundred square&nbsp;kilometrs (5.44&nbsp;mi/100&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi).
As in most other Chinese cities, public transportation is the dominant mode of travel of the majority of the citizens.
As a major Chinese city, Nanjing is home to many professional sports teams.
The airport is connected by a 29-kilometre (18&nbsp;mi) highway directly to the city center, and is also linked to various intercity highways, making it accessible to the passengers from the surrounding cities.
The bus network, which is currently run by three companies since 2011, provides more than 370 routes covering all parts of the city and suburban areas.
Throughout glory and darkness in past centuries, Nanjing becomes a low-key city and enters into a high-speed development period.
In the spring, the radish tastes very juicy and sweet.
The two roads cross in the city center, Xinjiekou.
The birth rate was 8.86&nbsp;percent and the death rate was 6.88&nbsp;percent.
Nanjing Metro Line 1, started service on September 3, 2005, with 16 stations and a length of 21.72&nbsp;km.
The YOG aims to spread the Olympic spirit and encourage sports participation.
On 10 February 2010, the 122nd IOC session at Vancouver announced Nanjing as the host city for the 2nd Summer Youth Olympic Games.
This systematic mass murder of civilians occurred in Nanjing.
A monument to the huge human cost of some of the gigantic construction projects of the early Ming dynasty is the Yangshan Quarry (located some  east of the walled city and Ming Xiaoling mausoleum), where a gigantic stele, cut on the orders of the Yongle Emperor, lies abandoned, just as it was left 600&nbsp;years ago when it was understood it was impossible to move or complete it.
Nanjing's Gross Domestic Product ranked 12th in 2013 in China, and its overall competence ranked 6th in mainland and 8th including Taiwan and Hong Kong in 2009.
On April 23, the Communist People's Liberation Army (PLA) captured Nanjing.
As of October 2014, Nanjing had five bridges and two tunnels over the Yangtze River, which are tying districts north of the river with the city center on the south bank.
The two artery roads in Nanjing are Zhongshan Road and Hanzhong.
However, the Qing Empire controlled large regions to the north, so revolutionaries asked Yuan Shikai to replace Sun as president in exchange for the abdication of Puyi, the Last Emperor.
*  Nanjing Economic and Technological Development Zone
Children's Hospital outpatient services increased by 33&nbsp;percent; general incidence of bronchitis, pneumonia, upper respiratory tract infections significantly increased.
The area was successively part of Kuaiji, Zhang and Danyang prefectures in Qin and Han dynasty, and part of Yangzhou region which was established as the nation's 13 supervisory and administrative regions in the 5th year of Yuanfeng in Han dynasty (106 BC).
Assuming an average Nanjing household had about 5.1 people at that time, the city had more than 1.4&nbsp;million residents.
The following decade is known as the Nanking decade.
Under the Qing dynasty (1644–1911), the Nanjing area was known as '''Jiangning''' () and served as the seat of government for the Viceroy of Liangjiang.
Nanjing is endowed with rich natural resources, which include more than 40 kinds of minerals.
The sex ratio of the city population was 107.31 males to 100 females.
It is well-known that people in Nanjing like eating radish.
In 1937, the Empire of Japan started a full-scale invasion of China after invading Manchuria in 1931, beginning the Second Sino-Japanese War (often considered a theatre of World War II).
After the establishment of the People's Republic of China in October 1949, Nanjing was initially a province-level municipality, but it was soon merged into Jiangsu province and again became the provincial capital by replacing Zhenjiang which was transferred in 1928, and retains that status to this day.
The four seasons are distinct, with damp conditions seen throughout the year, very hot and muggy summers, cold, damp winters, and in between, spring and autumn are of reasonable length.
On June 6, Dodo's troops approached Nanjing, and the commander of the city's garrison, Zhao the Earl of Xincheng, promptly surrendered the city to them.
Both of these two are comprehensive sports centers, including stadium, gymnasium, natatorium, tennis court, etc.
They are Line 1, Line 2, Line 3, Line 10, Line S1 and Line S8.
The Tomb of the King of Boni, with a spirit way and ''a ''tortoise stele, was discovered in Yuhuatai District (south of the walled city) in 1958, and has been restored.''
Many China-based leading firms such as Huawei, ZTE and Lenovo have key R & D institutes in the city.
The major theatres include the People's Convention Hall and the Nanjing Arts and Culture Center.
The average urban resident's disposable income was RMB 36,200, while the average rural resident's net income was RMB 14,513.
The city also boasts an efficient network of public transportation, which mainly consists of bus, taxi and metro systems.
Over two centuries after the removal of the capital to Beijing, Nanjing was destined to become the capital of a Ming emperor one more time.
Traditionally Nanjing's nightlife was mostly centered around Nanjing Fuzimiao (Confucius Temple) area along the Qinhuai River, where night markets, restaurants and pubs thrived.
Smith, and Sharp have established their lines, and a number of multinationals such as Ford, IBM, Lucent, Samsung and SAP established research center there.
The first emperor of the Ming dynasty, Zhu Yuanzhang (the Hongwu Emperor), who overthrew the Yuan dynasty, renamed the city '''Yingtian''', rebuilt it, and made it the dynastic capital in 1368.
Nanjing is famous for human historical landscapes, mountains and waters such as Fuzimiao, Ming Palace, Chaotian Palace, Porcelain Tower, Drum Tower, Stone City, City Wall, Qinhuai River, Xuanwu Lake and Purple Mountain.
Other libraries, such as city-owned Jinling Library and various district libraries, also provide considerable amount of information to citizens.
Nanjing has been the educational center in southern China for more than 1700&nbsp;years.
He constructed a  long city wall around Yingtian, as well as a new Ming Palace complex, and government halls.
Nanjing was invaded by British troops during the close of the First Opium War, which was ended by the Treaty of Nanjing in 1842.
The period of division ended when the Sui Dynasty reunified China and almost destroyed the entire city, turning it into a small town.
Nanjing South Railway Station, which is one of the 5 hub stations on Beijing–Shanghai High-Speed Railway, has officially been claimed as the largest railway station in Asia and the second largest in the world in terms of GFA (Gross Floor Area).
Local people still very much enjoy street food, such as Turkish Kebab.
Nanjing also possesses abundant water resources, both from the Yangtze River and groundwater.
It took 200,000 laborers 21&nbsp;years to finish the project.
The KMT government retreated to Canton (Guangzhou) until October 15, Chongqing until November 25, and then Chengdu before retreating to Taiwan on December 10.
The total road coverage density of the city is 112.56&nbsp;kilometres per hundred square&nbsp;kilometres (181.15&nbsp;mi/100&nbsp;sq&nbsp;mi).
The expansion of the Metro network will greatly facilitate the intracity transportation and reduce the currently heavy traffic congestion.
It was the site of a Qing army garrison.
Lukou Airport was opened on 28 June 1997, replacing Nanjing Dajiaochang Airport as the main airport serving Nanjing.
Nanjing is the intersection of Yangtze River, an east-west water transport artery, and Nanjing–Beijing railway, a south-north land transport artery, hence the name “door of the east and west, throat of the south and north”.
Although as a city located in southern part of China becoming Chinese national capital as early as in Jin dynasty, the name Nanjing was designated to the city in Ming dynasty, about a thousand years later.
It has been serving as the capital city of Jiangsu province after the People's Republic of China was established, and is still the nominal capital of the Republic of China that accommodates many of its important heritage sites, including the Presidential Palace and Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum.
Shortly after the unification of the region, the Western Jin dynasty collapsed.
Big state-owned firms include Panda Electronics, Yangzi Petrochemical, Jinling Petrochemical, Nanjing Chemical, Nanjing Steel, Jincheng Motors, Jinling Pharmaceutical, Chenguang and NARI.
A railway Ninggao Intercity Line is being built to link the airport with Nanjing South Railway Station.
Nanjing has some of the oldest and finest museums in China.
After the fall of Beijing to Li Zicheng's rebel forces and then to the Manchu-led Qing dynasty in the spring of 1644, the Ming prince Zhu Yousong was enthroned in Nanjing in June 1644 as the Hongguang Emperor.
Furthermore, the west part of the Ningzhen range is in Nanjing; the Loong-like Zhong Mountain is curling in the east of the city; the tiger-like Stone Mountain is crouching in the west of the city, hence the name “the Zhong Mountain, a dragon curling, and the Stone Mountain, a tiger crouching”.
* China National Highway 328&mdash;Nanjing is the western terminus of G328, which motorists can follow to Hai'an County in eastern Jiangsu
* G25 Changchun–Shenzhen Expressway
The urban area had a population of 6.47&nbsp;million people.
A number of huge department stores such as Zhongyang Shangchang sprouted up, attracting merchants from all over China to sell their products in Nanjing.
The second and third largest minority groups were Manchu (2,311) and Zhuang (533) nationalities.
In 317, remnants of the Jin court, as well as nobles and wealthy families, fled from the north to the south and reestablished the Jin court in Nanjing, which was then called '''Jiankang''' (), replacing Luoyang.
There are 75 institutions of higher learning till 2013.
In 333 BC, after eliminating the State of Yue, the State of Chu built '''Jinling Yi''' () in the western part of present-day Nanjing.
Archaeological discovery shows that "Nanjing Man" lived in more than 500 thousand years ago.
Based on historical documents, the city had 280,000 registered households.
It renamed Jiangning (江寧) in Northern Song dynasty and renamed Jiankang in Southern Song dynasty.
Jiankang's textile industry burgeoned and thrived during the Song dynasty despite the constant threat of foreign invasions from the north by the Jurchen-led Jin dynasty.
Among all 17 railway stations in Nanjing, passenger rail service is mainly provided by Nanjing Railway Station and Nanjing South Railway Station, while other stations like Nanjing West Railway Station, Zhonghuamen Railway Station and Xianlin Railway Station serve minor roles.
Both the Qing viceroy and the Taiping king resided in buildings that would later be known as the Presidential Palace.
Other events include Nanjing Baima Peach Blossom and Kite Festival, Jiangxin Zhou Fruit Festival and Linggu Temple Sweet Osmanthus Festival.
* G40 Shanghai–Xi'an Expressway
The region is also known as Dongnan (東南, South East, the Southeast) and Jiangnan (江南, River South, south of Yangtze).
During the period of North–South division, Nanjing remained the capital of the Southern dynasties for more than two and a half centuries.
Nanjing Railway Station was first built in 1968.
'''National Highway''' (GXXX):
Among them, iron and sulfur reserves make up 40&nbsp;percent of those of Jiangsu province.
As in most of eastern China the ethnic makeup of Nanjing is predominantly Han nationality (98.56&nbsp;percent), with 50 other minority nationalities.
Since the Taiping Rebellion began, Qing forces allowed no rebels speaking its dialect to surrender.
Thus, one can see the statues of the famous teachers and educators of the past not too far from those of the courtesans who educated the young men in the other arts.
* China National Highway 205&mdash;motorists can either drive north to Shanhaiguan, Hebei or south to Shenzhen, Guangdong.
In 1940, a Japanese-collaborationist government known as the "Nanjing Regime" or "Reorganized National Government of China" led by Wang Jingwei was established in Nanjing as a rival to Chiang Kai-shek's government in Chongqing.
Dajiaochang Airport is still used as a military air base.
The area around Nanjing is called Hsiajiang (下江, Downstream River) region, with Jianghuai (江淮) stressing northern part and Jiangzhe (江浙) stressing southern part.
Mr. Sun Yet-sen spoke highly of Nanjing in the “Constructive Scheme for Our Country”, “The position of Nanjing is wonderful since mountains, lakes and plains all integrated in it.
The airport currently has 85 routes to national and international destinations, which include Japan, Korea, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, United States and Germany.
It is believed that Nanjing was the largest city in the world from 1358 to 1425 with a population of 487,000 in 1400.
* G42 Shanghai–Chengdu Expressway
The slogan of the 2014 Youth Olympic Games was “Share the Games, Share our Dreams”.
On average precipitation falls 115&nbsp;days out of the year, and the average annual rainfall is .
The statistics in 2011 estimated the total population to be 8.11&nbsp;million.
Nanjing borders Yangzhou to the northeast, one town downstream when following the north bank of the Yangtze, Zhenjiang to the east, one town downstream when following the south bank of the Yangtze, and Changzhou to the southeast.
The Manchus soon ordered all male residents of the city to shave their heads in the Manchu queue way.
There are two major areas where bars are densely located; one is in 1912 block; the other is along Shanghai road and its neighbourhood.
Nanjing Library, founded in 1907, houses more than 10 million volumes of printed materials and is the third largest library in China, after the National Library in Beijing and Shanghai Library.
It boasts some of the most prominent educational institutions in the region, some of which are listed as follows:
Port of Nanjing is the largest inland port in China, with annual cargo tonnage reached 191,970,000&nbsp;t in 2012.
The smog dissipated 12 December.
The port area is  in length and has 64 berths including 16 berths for ships with a tonnage of more than 10,000.
Residents in Nanjing all have the warmest affection for this city.
Later in 473 BC, the State of Yue conquered Wu and constructed the fort of '''Yuecheng''' () on the outskirts of the present-day Zhonghua Gate.
* G36 Nanjing–Luoyang Expressway
In the 1950s after PRC was established by CPC, the government invested heavily in the city to build a series of state-owned heavy industries, as part of the national plan of rapid industrialization, converting it into a heavy industry production center of east China.
Nanjing is particularly known as '''Jinling''' or '''Ginling''' (, literally "Gold Mountain") and the old name has been used since the Warring States Period in Zhou Dynasty.
Although conquered by the Western Jin dynasty in 280, Nanjing and its neighbouring areas had been well cultivated and developed into one of the commercial, cultural and political centers of China during the rule of East Wu.
From 1960s to 1980s there were Five Pillar Industries, namely, electronics, cars, petrochemical, iron and steel, and power, each with big state-owned firms.
Express highways such as Hu–Ning, Ning–He, Ning–Hang enable commuters to travel to Shanghai, Hefei, Hangzhou, and other important cities quickly and conveniently.
Nanjing, one of the nation's most important cities for over a thousand years, is recognized as one of the Four Great Ancient Capitals of China, and had been the world's largest city aggregately for hundreds of years, enjoyed peace and prosperity and suffering wars and disasters.
Begun in 1960 and opened to traffic in 1968, the bridge is a two-tiered road and rail design spanning 4,600&nbsp;metres on the upper deck, with approximately 1,580&nbsp;metres spanning the river itself.
* G2501 Nanjing Ring Expressway
In 2013, Nanjing airport handled 15,011,792 passengers and 255,788.6 tonnes of freight.
The Jianwen Emperor ruled from 1398 to 1402.
Nanjing first became a state capital in 229 AD, when the state of Eastern Wu founded by Sun Quan during the Three Kingdoms period relocated its capital to '''Jianye''' (), the city extended on the basis of Jinling Yi in 211 AD.
With monthly percent possible sunshine ranging from 37&nbsp;percent in March to 52&nbsp;percent in August, the city receives 1,926 hours of bright sunshine annually.
During the Ming dynasty, Nanjing's industry was further expanded, and the city became one of the most prosperous cities in China and the world.
Nanjing has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen ''Cfa'') and is under the influence of the East Asian monsoon.
Their troops occupied Nanjing in December and carried out the systematic and brutal Nanking Massacre (the "Rape of Nanking").
When being the capital of a state, for instance, the ROC, Jing () is adopted as the abbreviation of Nanjing.
It's the first time that the capital of the nation moved to southern part.
The city is  west-northwest of Shanghai,  south-southeast of Beijing, and  east-northeast of Chongqing.
Sun Quan relocated his capital to Nanjing after Liu Bei's suggestion as Liu Bei was impressed by Nanjing's impeccable geographic position when negotiating an alliance with Sun Quan.
Officials blamed the dense pollution on lack of wind, automobile exhaust emissions under low air pressure, and coal-powered district heating system in north China.
Days after Yangzhou fell to the Manchus in late May 1645, the Hongguang Emperor fled Nanjing, and the imperial Ming Palace was looted by local residents.
Since then four more bridges and two tunnels have been built.
It renamed Shengzhou (昇州) in Tang dynasty and resuscitated during the late Tang.
In 1999, On November 12, 1999, the station was burnt in a serious fire.
Nanjing Museum, formerly known as National Central Museum during ROC period, is the first modern museum and remains as one of the leading museums in China having 400,000 items in its permanent collection,.
Boating at night in the river was a main attraction of the city.
Most of the minority nationalities resided in Jianye District, comprising 9.13&nbsp;percent of the district's population.
It led in textiles, minting, printing, shipbuilding and many other industries, and was the busiest business center in East Asia.
As the center of the empire, early-Ming Nanjing had worldwide connections.
The Nanjing Massacre Memorial Hall was built in 1985 to commemorate this event.
From health perspective, eating radish can help to offset the stodgy food that people take during the Spring Festival".
Off the competition fields, an integrated culture and education programme focused on discussions about education, Olympic values, social challenges, and cultural diversity.
*  Nanjing New and High-Tech Industry Development Zone
One third of the city population worked in the service industry, .
Prevailing winds blew low-hanging air masses of factory emissions (mostly SO2) towards China's east coast.
After the Reform and Opening recovering market economy, the state-owned enterprises found themselves incapable of competing with efficient multinational firms and local private firms, hence were either mired in heavy debt or forced into bankruptcy or privatization and this resulted in large numbers of layoff workers who were technically not unemployed but effectively jobless.
As the capital of the brief-lived rebel Taiping Heavenly Kingdom (founded by the Taiping rebels in the mid-19th century, Nanjing was known as '''Tianjing''' (, "Heavenly Capital" or "Capital of Heaven").
The well-established "Nanjing 1912" district hosts a wide variety of recreational facilities ranging from traditional restaurants and western pubs to dance clubs.
Wutaishan Sports Center was established in 1952 and it was one of the oldest and most advanced stadiums in early time of People's Republic of China.
The number of National key laboratories, National key disciplines and the academicians of Chinese Academy of Sciences and Chinese Academy of Engineering all rank third in the nation.
Jiangsu Volleyball men and women teams are also traditionally considered as at top level in China volleyball league.
Zun, a kind of wine vessel, was found to exist in Beiyinyangying culture of Nanjing in about 5000 years ago.
* S38 Yanjiang Expressway
Nanjing remained the capital of the Ming Empire until 1421, when the third emperor of the Ming dynasty, the Yongle Emperor, relocated the capital to Beijing.
At present, Nanjing has a metro system with a grand total of 223.6 kilometers (138.9&nbsp;mi) of route and 121 stations.
Into the first half of the twentieth century after the establishment of ROC, Nanjing gradually shifted from being a production hub towards being a heavy consumption city, mainly because of the rapid expansion of its wealthy population after Nanjing once again regained the political spotlight of China.
Its gymnasium has capacity of 13,000, and natatorium of capacity 3,000.
The city also served as the seat of the rebel Taiping Heavenly Kingdom (1851–64) and the Japanese puppet regime of Wang Jingwei (1940–45) during the Second Sino-Japanese War, and suffered appalling atrocities in both conflicts, including the Nanjing Massacre.
Nanjing is also one of the fifteen sub-provincial cities in the People's Republic of China's administrative structure, enjoying jurisdictional and economic autonomy only slightly less than that of a province.
In the late period of Shang dynasty, Taibo of Zhou came to Jiangnan and established Wu state, and the first stop is in Nanjing area according to some historians based on discoveries in Taowu and Hushu culture.
in 2005 and hosted the 2nd summer Youth Olympic Games in 2014.
It was renamed Moling () during reign of Qin Shi Huang.
* S55 Nanjing–Gaochun Expressway
The Xinhai Revolution led to the founding of the Republic of China in January 1912 with Sun Yat-sen as the first provisional president and Nanking was selected as its new capital.
It has also been awarded the title of 2008 Habitat Scroll of Honour of China, Special UN Habitat Scroll of Honour Award and National Civilized City.
As elsewhere in Asia, Karaoke is popular with both young and old crowds.
The annual mean temperature is around , with the monthly 24-hour average temperature ranging from  in January to  in July.
The annual International Plum Blossom Festival held in Plum Blossom Hill, the largest plum collection in China, attracts thousands of tourists both domestically and internationally.
Instead, Nanjing, as a popular tourist destination, hosts a series of government-organised events throughout the year.
* China National Highway 312&mdash;motorists can either drive east to Shanghai or west to Khorgas, Xinjiang on the Kazakh border
* China National Highway 104&mdash;motorists can either drive northwest to Beijing or south to Fuzhou, Fujian.
It was chosen as the capital and called '''Jinling''' () during the Southern Tang (937–976), a state that succeeded Wu state.
The Nanjing Youth Olympic Games Organising Committee (NYOGOC) worked together with the International Olympic Committee (IOC) to attract the best young athletes from around the world to compete at the highest level.
Nanjing is the transportation hub in eastern China and the downstream Yangtze River area.
The registered urban unemployment rate was 3.02&nbsp;percent, lower than the national average (4.3&nbsp;percent).
Nanjing has been ranked seventh in the evaluation of "Cities with Strongest Comprehensive Strength" issued by the National Statistics Bureau, and second in the evaluation of cities with most sustainable development potential in the Yangtze River Delta.
By late 1949, the PLA was pursuing remnants of KMT forces southwards in southern China, and only Tibet was left.
According to the ''Sixth China Census'', the total population of the City of Nanjing reached 8.005&nbsp;million in 2010.
It had been visited by the Kangxi and Qianlong emperors a number of times on their tours of the southern provinces.
His short reign was described by later historians as the first reign of the so-called Southern Ming dynasty.
The Capital Theatre well known in the past is now a museum in theatre/film.
Jiangsu Art Gallery is the largest gallery in Jiangsu Province, presenting some of the best traditional and contemporary art pieces of China; many other smaller-scale galleries, such as Red Chamber Art Garden and Jinling Stone Gallery, also have their own special exhibitions.
Beset by factional conflicts, his regime could not offer effective resistance to Qing forces, when the Qing army, led by the Manchu prince Dodo approached Jiangnan the next spring.
They requisitioned a large section of the city for the bannermen's cantonment, and destroyed the former imperial Ming Palace, but otherwise the city was spared the mass murders and destruction that befell Yangzhou.
GDP growth rate significantly exceeds the average rate in China for decades, which also maintain a fast developing model.
At present, the full name of the government of Nanjing is "People's Government of Nanjing City" and the city is under the one-party rule of the CPC, with the CPC Nanjing Committee Secretary as the ''de facto'' governor of the city and the mayor as the executive head of the government working under the secretary.
