Ferdinand was forced to retreat and fled to Palermo, where he was protected by a British fleet.
Naples thus joined the Kingdom of Sicily, with Palermo as the capital.
Philosopher Giordano Bruno, who theorized the existence of infinite solar systems and the infinity of the entire universe, completed his studies at University of Naples.
The port serves over 6 million local passengers annually, plus a further 1 million international cruise liner passengers.
Naples has a total of 448 historical churches, making it one of the most Catholic cities in the world in terms of the number of places of worship.
The city's best known football club is SSC Napoli, which plays its home games at the Stadio San Paolo in Fuorigrotta.
Since 2007, Naples has been connected to Rome by a high-speed railway run by Treno Alta Velocità, with trains running at almost , reducing the journey time to under an hour.
*Pio Monte della Misericordia
Januarius, who would become Naples' patron saint, was martyred there in the fourth century AD.
This system of tunnels and cisterns underlies most of the city and lies approximately  below ground level.
Naples is internationally famous for its cuisine and wine; it draws culinary influences from the numerous cultures which have inhabited it over the course of its history, including the Greeks, Spanish and French.
Naples is well known for its sweet dishes, including colourful gelato, which is similar to ice cream, though more fruit-based.
For example, Naples was the location for some of the first Italian cinema masterpieces, like Assunta Spina, adapted from a theatrical drama by a novel of the writer Salvatore Di Giacomo.
Naples' 2,800-year-history has left it with a wealth of historical buildings and monuments, from medieval castles to classical ruins.
Neapolitan music has furthermore been highly influential, credited with the invention of the romantic guitar and the mandolin, as well as notable contributions to opera and folk standards.
The first music conservatories were established in the city under Spanish rule in the 16th century.
Numerous major Italian companies, such as MSC Cruises Italy S.p.A, are headquartered in Naples.
Naples is noted for its numerous stately villas, such as the Neoclassical Villa Floridiana, built in 1816.
During the early 20th century, efforts to industrialise the city were likewise hampered by administrative corruption and a lack of infrastructure.
During the 14th century, the Hungarian Angevin king Louis the Great captured the city several times.
Poet and philosopher Giacomo Leopardi visited the city in 1837 and then died there.
Naples has appeared in episodes of TV serials like ''The Sopranos'' and miniseries like the 1998 version of ''The Count of Monte Cristo'', starring Gérard Depardieu.
Partenope Rugby are the city's best-known rugby union side: the team has won the rugby union Serie A twice.
Naples is a full member of the Eurocities network of European cities.
*Santissima Annunziata Maggiore
Naples is also the leading location of the first Italian color movie, ''Carosello Napoletano'', despite the fact that oleographic slices of the city were entirely reconstructed in studios and not in live locations.
Naples is also the home of ''limoncello'', a popular lemon liqueur.
Another notable centre of education is the Istituto Universitario Orientale, which specialises in Eastern culture, and was founded by the Jesuit missionary Matteo Ripa in 1732, after he returned from the court of Kangxi, the Emperor of the Manchu Qing Dynasty of China.
Naples hosted the 6th World Urban Forum in September 2012 and the 63rd International Astronautical Congress in October 2012.
In 1501, Naples came under direct rule from France under Louis XII, with the Neapolitan king Frederick being taken as a prisoner to France; however, this state of affairs did not last long, as Spain won Naples from the French at the Battle of Garigliano in 1503.
In terms of international arrivals, Naples was the 166th-most-visited city in the world in 2008, with 381,000 visitors (a 1.6% decrease from the previous year), coming after Lille, but overtaking York, Stuttgart, Belgrade and Dallas.
: "testa") which in Naples indicates a large terracotta jar used to cultivate shrubs and little trees.
A popular traditional dance in Southern Italy and Naples is the Tarantella, originated in the Apulia region and spread next to all part of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.
The islands of Procida, Capri and Ischia can all be reached from Naples by hydrofoils and ferries.
During the Benito Mussolini era, the first structures of the city's "service center" were built, all in a Rationalist-Functionalist style, including the Palazzo delle Poste and the Pretura buildings.
The 2008 film ''Gomorrah'', based on the book by Roberto Saviano, explores the dark underbelly of the city of Naples through five intertwining stories about the powerful Neapolitan crime syndicate, the Camorra.
*San Gennaro extra Moenia
This system, or one very similar to it, has been in place since the invasion of Italy by Napoleonic forces in 1808.
Naples is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world.
The city co-hosted the EuroBasket 1969.
Landmarks such as the Temple of Dioscures were built, and many emperors chose to holiday in the city, including Claudius and Tiberius.
In the 20th century, philosophers like Benedetto Croce pursued the long tradition of philosophy studies in Naples, and personalities like jurist and lawyer Enrico De Nicola pursued legal and constitutional studies.
In early 2002, there were over 249,590 enterprises operating in the province registered in the Chamber of Commerce Public Register.
The Teatro di San Carlo, built in 1737, is the oldest working theatre in Europe, and remains the operatic centre of Naples.
The San Pietro a Maiella music conservatory is the city's foremost institution of musical education; the earliest Neapolitan music conservatories were founded in the 16th century under the Spanish.
Thereafter, in union with Sicily, it became the capital of the Two Sicilies until the unification of Italy in 1861.
Other noted Neapolitan writers and journalists include Antonio De Curtis, Curzio Malaparte, Giancarlo Siani and Roberto Saviano.
The economy of the area formerly known as the Two Sicilies collapsed, leading to an unprecedented wave of emigration, with an estimated 4 million people emigrating from the Naples area between 1876 and 1913.
After the Expedition of the Thousand led by Giuseppe Garibaldi, which culminated in the controversial Siege of Gaeta, Naples became part of the Kingdom of Italy in 1861 as part of the Italian unification, ending the era of Bourbon rule.
Cooked traditionally in a wood-burning oven, the ingredients of Neapolitan pizza have been strictly regulated by law since 2004, and must include wheat flour type "00" with the addition of flour type "0" yeast, natural mineral water, peeled tomatoes or fresh cherry tomatoes, mozzarella cheese, sea salt and extra virgin olive oil.
Influenced by the Spanish, Neapolitans became pioneers of classical guitar music, with Ferdinando Carulli and Mauro Giuliani being prominent exponents.
However, the disgruntled general populace chased him from the city, and instead elected Stephen III, a man who minted coins with his own initials, rather than those of the Byzantine Emperor.
Serao was an acclaimed novelist and writer during her day.
During the 850s, the city was sacked by Saracen raiders.
Three public elevators are in operation in the city – one within the bridge of Chiaia, one in via Acton and one near the Sanità Bridge.
As a coastal city, Naples is furthermore known for numerous seafood dishes, including ''impepata di cozze'' (peppered mussels), ''purpetiello affogato'' (octopus poached in broth), ''alici marinate'' (marinated anchovies), ''baccalà alla napoletana'' (salt cod) and ''baccalà fritto'' (fried cod), a dish commonly eaten during the Christmas period.
*Santa Caterina a Formiello
It was during this period that Christianity first arrived in Naples; the apostles Peter and Paul are said to have preached in the city.
The genre became a formal institution in 1835, after the introduction of the annual Festival of Piedigrotta songwriting competition.
The University of Naples Federico II, the first university in Europe dedicated to training secular administrators, was founded by Frederick II, making Naples the intellectual centre of the kingdom.
There are also large catacombs in and around the city, and other landmarks such as the Piscina Mirabilis, the main cistern serving the Bay of Naples during Roman times.
Services are also available to destinations further afield, such as Sicily, Sardinia, Ponza and the Aeolian Islands.
*Santa Maria Donna Regina Nuova
The years between 818 and 832 were tumultuous in regard to Naples' relations with the Byzantine Emperor, with numerous local pretenders feuding for possession of the ducal throne.
The service sector employs the majority of Neapolitans, although more than half of these are small enterprises with fewer than 20 workers; 70 companies are said to be medium-sized with more than 200 workers; and 15 have more than 500 workers.
Naples was the most-bombed Italian city during World War II.
Some of the city's smaller clubs include Sporting Neapolis and Internapoli, which play at the Stadio Arturo Collana.
The continental influence still ensures warm to hot temperatures, and Naples falls within the subtropical range with summer daily means of .
Statistics show that the vast majority of immigrants in Naples are female; this is because male immigrants in Italy tend to head to the wealthier north.
A revolution led by the local fisherman Masaniello saw the creation of a brief independent Neapolitan Republic in 1647, though this lasted only a few months before Spanish rule was reasserted.
The city also hosts NATO's Allied Joint Force Command Naples, the SRM Institution for Economic Research and the OPE Company and Study Centre.
*Sant'Antonio Abate
*San Pietro a Maiella
This was for the destitute and ill of the city; it also provided a self-sufficient community where the poor would live and work.
Poet Salvatore Di Giacomo was one of the most famous writers in the Neapolitan dialect, and many of his poems were adapted to music, becoming famous Neapolitan songs.
It was the forerunner of a much more ambitious project, the Bourbon Hospice for the Poor started by Charles III.
Facing a slumping economy, many poorer Neapolitans emigrated northwards, or headed overseas to the United States and Argentina.
*San Gregorio Armeno
In 1714, Spanish rule over Naples came to an end as a result of the War of the Spanish Succession; the Austrian Charles VI ruled the city from Vienna through viceroys of his own.
The most prominent forms of architecture visible in present-day Naples are the Medieval, Renaissance and Baroque styles.
Another Neapolitan musician of note was opera singer Enrico Caruso, one of the most prominent opera tenors of all time: he was considered a man of the people in Naples, hailing from a working-class background.
Special funding from the Italian government's Fund for the South was provided from 1950 to 1984, helping the Neapolitan economy to improve somewhat, with city landmarks such as the Piazza del Plebiscito being renovated.
Actors like prince Antonio de Curtis, Peppino De Filippo, Nino Taranto and many others begun their fame as comedians of Variety show (in Italian called "Varietà") touring in theatres along all Italy, then became famous as cinema actors and, in the end of their career, pioneered the TV in Italy.
In 1995, the historic centre of Naples was listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site, a United Nations programme which aims to catalogue and conserve sites of outstanding cultural or natural importance to the common heritage of mankind.
The kingdom of the Two Sicilies had been wealthy, and as many as 443.2 million ducats were taken from the old kingdom's banks as a contribution to the new Italian treasury.
A larger colony – initially known as Parthenope, Παρθενόπη – developed on the Island of Megaride around the ninth century BC, at the end of the Greek Dark Ages.
Another form of opera originating in Naples is ''opera buffa'', a style of comic opera strongly linked to Battista Pergolesi and Piccinni; later contributors to the genre included Rossini and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
The city's population rose from 621,000 in 1901 to 1,226,000 in 1971, before declining to 957,811 in 2011 as city-dwellers moved to the suburbs.
In 1976, there were theorised to be 7,047,399 native speakers of this group of dialects.
In recent times, there has been a move away from a traditional agriculture-based economy in the province of Naples to one based on service industries.
Spaghetti is also associated with the city and is commonly eaten with the sauce ''ragù'': a popular Neapolitan folkloric symbol is the comic figure Pulcinella eating a plate of spaghetti.
Brought to the city by the British during the early 20th century, the sport is deeply embedded in local culture: it is popular at every level of society, from the ''scugnizzi'' (street children) to wealthy professionals.
Football is by far the most popular sport in Naples.
Below is a selective list of Naples' major churches, chapels, monastery complexes and other religious structures:
With the help of the Austrian Empire and its allies, the Bonapartists were defeated in the Neapolitan War, and Ferdinand IV once again regained the throne and the kingdom.
Nowadays comedians like Massimo Troisi started their career in small theatres and cabarets or even discoteques and then emerged in TV entertainment and comedy shows.
Sailors from the Greek island of Rhodes established a small commercial port called Parthenope (''Παρθενόπη'') on the island of Megaride in the ninth century BC.
During the uprising of Masaniello in 1647, the Spanish took refuge in Sant'Elmo to escape the revolutionaries.
Naples currently has a higher birth rate than other parts of Italy, with 10.46 births per 1,000 inhabitants, compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.
The modern Academy offers courses in painting, decorating, sculpture, design, restoration, and urban planning.
Naples has played an important role in the history of Western European art music for more than four centuries.
*Madre del Buon Consiglio
Naples has an extensive public transport network, including trams, buses, funiculars and trolleybuses, most of which are operated by the municipally owned company Azienda Napoletana Mobilità (ANM).
Artists such as Domenico Morelli, Giacomo Di Chirico, Francesco Saverio Altamura, and Gioacchino Toma worked in Naples during this period, and many of their works are now exhibited in the Academy's art collection.
Popular Neapolitan pastry dishes include ''zeppole'' (more commonly called "'a Pasta Cresciuta" and "'e fFritt' 'e Viento") ''babà'', ''sfogliatelle'' and ''pastiera'', the latter of which is prepared specially for Easter celebrations.
Government measures to improve sanitary conditions in the Neapolitan slums in 1885 proved largely ineffective.
It is the largest airport in southern Italy, with around 140 national and international flights arriving or departing daily.
The Neapolitan tarantella is a courtship dance performed by couples whose "rhythms, melodies, gestures, and accompanying songs are quite distinct" featuring faster more cheerful music.
The Congress of Vienna in 1815 saw the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily combined to form the Two Sicilies, with Naples as the capital city.
Underneath Naples lies a series of caves and structures created by centuries of mining, and the city rests atop a major geothermal zone.
Nearby is the Teatro di San Carlo, which is the oldest opera house in Italy.
Young left a significant footprint in the cityscape and designed many urban projects, such as the city's first subway.
It is the world's 103rd-richest city by purchasing power, with an estimated 2011 GDP of US$83.6 billion.
The nutritional value of the napolitan cuisine was discovered by the American epidemiologist Ancel Keys in the 1950, being later often mentioned by epidemiologists as one of the best examples of the Mediterranean diet.
King Alfonso V of Aragon stated in 1442 that the Neapolitan language was to be used instead of latin in official documents.
The Accademia Nazionale di Scherma (National Academy and Fencing School of Naples) is the only place in Italy where the titles "Master of Sword" and "Master of Kendo" can be obtained.
Naples is one of the main centres of Italian literature.
In 2013, it was the host of the Universal Forum of Cultures.
*Santa Caterina a Chiaia
About 4 million people live in the Naples metropolitan area, one of the largest metropolises on the Mediterranean Sea.
Wars between the competing dynasties continued until the Peace of Caltabellotta in 1302, which saw Frederick III recognized as king of Sicily, while Charles II was recognised as king of Naples by Pope Boniface VIII.
Tourists began visiting Naples in the 18th century, during the Grand Tour.
*San Domenico Maggiore
Naples is noted for its numerous higher education institutes and research centres.
Much of the city's 20th-century periphery was constructed under Benito Mussolini's fascist government, and during reconstruction efforts after World War II.
The Vinaccia family also developed the mandolin.
The A3 runs southwards from Naples to Salerno, where the motorway to Reggio Calabria begins, while the A16 runs east to Canosa.
The term "Neapolitan language" is often used to describe the language of all of Campania, and is sometimes applied to the entire South Italian language; ''Ethnologue'' refers to the latter as ''Napoletano-Calabrese''.
There are furthermore various forms of music popular in Naples but not well known outside it, such as ''cantautore'' ("singer-songwriter") and ''sceneggiata'', which has been described as a musical soap opera; the most well-known exponent of this style is Mario Merola.
Time bombs planted throughout the city continued to explode into November.
The city's main railway station is Napoli Centrale, which is located in Piazza Garibaldi; other significant stations include the Napoli Campi Flegrei and Napoli Mergellina.
However, high unemployment and waste management problems continue to affect Naples; Italian media have attributed the city's waste disposal issues to the activity of the Camorra organised crime network.
The port of Naples is one of the most important in Europe, and has the world's second-highest level of passenger flow, after the port of Hong Kong.
*Santa Maria Donna Regina Vecchia
*Santa Maria La Nova
Naples is a major national and international tourist destination, being one of Italy and Europe's top tourist cities.
The music Opera genre of opera buffa was born in Naples in the 18th century and then spread to Rome and then in northern Italy.
In 2007, Silvio Berlusconi's government held senior meetings in Naples to demonstrate their intention to solve these problems.
Theoctistus was appointed without imperial approval; his appointment was later revoked and Theodore II took his place.
Naples has itself produced numerous prominent professional footballers, including Ciro Ferrara and Fabio Cannavaro.
By the end of the 19th century, party politics had begun to emerge; during the fascist era, each commune was represented by a ''podestà''.
The historic centre of Naples is listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site.
There are also a number of ancient Greco-Roman reservoirs dug out from the soft tufo stone on which, and from which, much of the city is built.
The earliest Greek settlements were established in the Naples area in the second millennium BC.
There are few non-Europeans, although there are small Sri Lankan and East Asian immigrant communities.
Naples is also known for its theatres, which are among the oldest in Europe – the Teatro di San Carlo opera house dates back to the 18th century.
Various buildings inspired by the Gothic Revival are extant in Naples, due to the influence that this movement had on the Scottish-Indian architect Lamont Young, one of the most active Neapolitan architects in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
The team has also won the UEFA Cup, and once named FIFA Player of the Century Diego Maradona among its players.
2014 largest resident foreign-born groups
By August 2011, the number of unemployed in the Naples area had risen to 250,000, sparking public protests against the economic situation.
It lies between two notable volcanic regions, Mount Vesuvius and the Campi Flegrei (en: ''Phlegraean Fields'').
Naples remained influential after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, serving as the capital city of the Kingdom of Naples between 1282 and 1816.
Culinarily, Naples is synonymous with pizza, which originated in the city.
In the 18th century Naples, together with Milan, became one of the most important sites from which the Enlightenment penetrated into Italy.
It is host to the Botanical Garden of Naples, which was opened in 1807 by Giuseppe Bonaparte, using plans drawn up under the Bourbon king Ferdinand IV.
Naples is also the home of the artistic tradition of Capodimonte porcelain.
Some of the best-known recording artists in this field include Roberto Murolo, Sergio Bruni and Renato Carosone.
In 1935, the Rationalist architect Luigi Cosenza created a new fish market for the city.
Naples is also served by the Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, a modern university which opened in 1989, and which, despite its name, has strong links to the nearby province of Caserta.
The climate is a crossover between marine and continental features, as typical of peninsular Italy.
Then in 1884, Naples fell victim to a major cholera epidemic, caused largely by the city's poor sewerage infrastructure.
The last emperor of the Western Roman Empire, Romulus Augustulus, was exiled to Naples by the Germanic king Odoacer in the fifth century AD.
However, the War of the Polish Succession saw the Spanish regain Sicily and Naples as part of a personal union, with the 1738 Treaty of Vienna recognising the two polities as independent under a cadet branch of the Spanish Bourbons.
According to different sources, Naples' metropolitan area is either the second-most-populated metropolitan area in Italy after Milan (with 4,434,136 inhabitants according to Svimez Data) or the third (with 3.1 million inhabitants according to the OECD).
His works influenced Francesco de Sanctis who made his studies in Naples, and then eventually became Minister of Instruction during the Italian kingdom.
The Naples International Airport is located in the suburb of San Pietro a Patierno.
Having a great interest in architecture, Charles I imported French architects and workmen and was personally involved in several building projects in the city.
The team plays in the Serie A league and has won the ''Scudetto'' twice, the Coppa Italia five times and the Supercoppa Italiana twice.
, the population of the ''comune di Napoli'' totals around 960,000.
In 1656, an outbreak of bubonic plague killed about half of Naples' 300,000 inhabitants.
*Santa Maria di Montesanto
Naples is a major cargo terminal, and the port of Naples is one of the Mediterranean's largest and busiest.
During the Punic Wars, the strong walls surrounding Neápolis repelled the invading forces of the Carthaginian general Hannibal.
The earliest six-string guitar was created by the Neapolitan Gaetano Vinaccia in 1779; the instrument is now referred to as the romantic guitar.
The gallery features paintings from the 13th to the 18th centuries, including major works by Simone Martini, Raphael, Titian, Caravaggio, El Greco, Jusepe de Ribera and Luca Giordano.
Since World War II, the political landscape of Naples has been neither strongly right-wing nor left-wing – both Christian democrats and democratic socialists have governed the city at different times, with roughly equal frequency.
*Sant'Anna dei Lombardi
Naples gained complete independence by the early ninth century.
Directly across from San Carlo is Galleria Umberto, a shopping centre and social hub.
Naples has long been a major cultural centre with a global sphere of influence, particularly during the Renaissance and Enlightenment eras.
Napoli, two-time Italian champions and winner of European trophies, who play at the San Paolo Stadium in the south-west of the city.
Its construction was begun by the Bonapartist king Joachim Murat and finished by the Bourbon king Ferdinand IV.
The Cathedral of Naples is the city's premier place of worship; each year on 19 September, it hosts the longstanding Miracle of Saint Januarius, the city's patron saint.
In 1282, after the Sicilian Vespers, the Kingdom of Sicily was divided into two.
Naples is Italy's fourth-largest economy after Milan, Rome and Turin, and is the world's 103rd-largest urban economy by purchasing power, with an estimated 2011 GDP of US$83.6 billion, equivalent to $18,749 per capita.
Public health conditions in the city were poor, with twelve epidemics of cholera and typhoid fever causing the death of some 48,000 people in the half century 1834–1884, and a high (for the time) death rate of 31.84 per thousand even in the epidemic-free period 1878–1883.
The university is among the most prominent in Italy, with around 100,000 students and over 3,000 professors in 2007.
It was directed both by neapolitan director Gustavo Serena one of the first directors of movies in Italy, and by Francesca Bertini (born in Florence, who spent her childhood in Naples), one of the first stars of cinema worldwide.
The Neapolitan Academy of Fine Arts, founded by Charles III of Bourbon in 1752 as the Real Accademia di Disegno (en: ''Royal Academy of Design''), was the centre of the artistic School of Posillipo in the 19th century.
The duchy was under the direct control of the Lombards for a brief period, after the capture by Pandulf IV of the Principality of Capua, a long-term rival of Naples; however, this regime lasted only three years before the Greco-Roman-influenced dukes were reinstated.
By the 17th century, Naples had become Europe's 2nd-largest city – second only to Paris – and the largest European Mediterranean city, with around 250,000 inhabitants.
Naples and its surroundings also gave birth to many of Italians directors and actors such as Vittorio De Sica (born in Sora, Academy Award winner), Sophia Loren (born in Pozzuoli, Academy Award winner), Gabriele Salvatores (Academy Award winner), Massimo Troisi (born in San Giorgio a Cremano),  Totò (stage name of Antonio de Curtis ), Eduardo De Filippo, Peppino De Filippo, Titina De Filippo, Nino Taranto, Tina Pica, Bud Spencer (stage name of Carlo Pedersoli), Aldo and Carlo Giuffré, Lina Sastri, Mario Merola, Nino D'Angelo, Pino Daniele, Mario Martone, Paolo Sorrentino, Toni Servillo (born in Afragola) and Pappi Corsicato.
The Tuscan poet Boccaccio lived for many years at the court of King Robert the Wise and used Naples as a setting for ''The Decameron'' and a number of his later novels.
Naples' sports scene is dominated by football and Serie A club S.S.C.
+Average sea temperature (Neapolitan Riviera):
*Sant'Eligio Maggiore
More modern Neapolitan films include ''Ricomincio da tre'', which depicts the misadventures of a young emigrant in the late 20th century.
However, Naples still suffers from political and economic corruption, and unemployment levels remain high.
Though a notable landmark, it is no longer a functioning hospital.
*Hermitage of Camaldoli
