Bonaparte returned from Egypt to France on 23 August 1799, and seized control of the French government on 9 November 1799 in the coup of 18 Brumaire replacing the Directory with the Consulate.
This policy aimed to eliminate the threat from Britain by closing French-controlled territory to its trade.
The British seized on this to demand satisfaction and security before evacuating Malta, which was a convenient stepping stone to Egypt.
He defeated the Austrians at Wagram, on 5–6 July.
A tactical draw at Eylau (7–8 February 1807), followed by capitulation at Danzig (24 May 1807) and the Battle of Heilsberg (10 June 1807), forced the Russians to withdraw further north.
When Spain failed to maintain the Continental System, the uneasy Spanish alliance with France ended in all but name.
Bonaparte, the main architect of victory in the last years of the First Coalition, had gone to campaign in Egypt.
Scholars disagree about when the French Revolutionary Wars ended and the Napoleonic Wars began.
By September, Marshal Guillaume Brune completed the occupation of Swedish Pomerania, allowing the Swedish army to withdraw with all its munitions of war.
Bonaparte's reign over Europe sowed the seeds for the founding of the nation-states of Germany and Italy by starting the process of consolidating city-states, kingdoms and principalities.
The percentage of French troops in the Grande Armee which Napoleon led into Russia was about 50% while the French allies also provided a significant contribution to the French forces in Spain.
The United States declared war on Britain because of British interference with American merchant ships and forced enlistment into the British Royal Navy.
By 1815, the British Army played the central role in the final defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo.
At the Battle of Leipzig in Saxony (16–19 October 1813), also called the "Battle of the Nations", 191,000 French fought more than 300,000 Allies, and the defeated French had to retreat into France.
In the same days, part of the French Army led by Marshal Nicolas Oudinot was stopped in the Battle of Polotsk by the right wing of the Russian Army, under command of General Peter Wittgenstein.
In the following weeks, the ''Grande Armée'' was dealt a catastrophic blow by the onset of the Russian Winter, the lack of supplies and constant guerrilla warfare by Russian peasants and irregular troops.
The Royal Navy disrupted France's extra-continental trade by seizing and threatening French shipping and colonial possessions, but could do nothing about France's trade with the major continental economies and posed little threat to French territory in Europe.
One can reasonably say that Napoleon could count on no more than 450,000 men in Germany—which left him outnumbered about four to one.
The Prussians had been more wary, concentrating  of their army in and around Ligny.
The British budget in 1814 reached £66 million, including £10 million for the Royal Navy, £40 million for the army, £10 million for the allies, and £38 million as interest on the national debt, which soared to £679 million, more than double the GDP.
There was one serious attempt to negotiate peace with France during the war, made by Charles James Fox in 1806.
In the Peninsular War, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, renewed the Anglo-Portuguese advance into Spain just after New Year in 1812, besieging and capturing the fortified towns of Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, and in the Battle of Salamanca (which was a damaging defeat of the French).
During the time of the Fifth Coalition, the Royal Navy won a succession of victories in the French colonies.
During this time Napoleon fought his Six Days' Campaign, in which he won multiple battles against the enemy forces advancing towards Paris.
France's strength peaked at around 2,500,000 full-time and part-time soldiers including several hundred thousand National Guardsmen who Napoleon could draft into the military if necessary.
Far from his supply lines, he faced a larger Austro-Russian army under the command of Mikhail Kutuzov, with the Emperor Alexander I of Russia personally present.
Malta had been captured by Britain during the war and was subject to a complex arrangement in the 10th article of the Treaty of Amiens where it was to be restored to the Knights of St. John with a Neapolitan garrison and placed under the guarantee of third powers.
The battle was the largest and bloodiest single-day action of the Napoleonic Wars, involving more than 250,000 men and resulting in at least 70,000 casualties.
Napoleon succeeded in bringing the imperial forces in the region to around 650,000—although only 250,000 came under his direct command, with another 120,000 under Nicolas Charles Oudinot and 30,000 under Davout.
Both nations enlisted large numbers of sedentary militia who were unsuited for campaigning, and were mostly employed to release regular forces for active duty.
In order to drag Prussia's attention towards the west and France, the Congress also gave the Rhineland and Westphalia to Prussia.
The failures of his marshals and a slow resumption of the offensive on his part cost him any advantage that this victory might have secured.
France lost the Peninsular War; Napoleon realised it had been a disaster for his cause, writing later, "That unfortunate war destroyed me&nbsp;... All the circumstances of my disasters are bound up in that fatal knot."
The Seventh Coalition (1815) pitted Britain, Russia, Prussia, Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, the Netherlands and several German states against France.
The French army did nothing to stop a rather leisurely retreat that took place throughout the night and into the early morning by the Prussians.
Logistical difficulties meant that French casualties could not be replaced, unlike Russian ones.
The scale of warfare dramatically enlarged during the Revolutionary and subsequent Napoleonic Wars.
McLynn concludes that in the long run it proved to be the right choice for Britain, because in the long run Napoleon's intentions were hostile to the British national interest.
This ensured that France could never consolidate its control over Europe in peace.
Its large army was overall quite homogeneous and solid and in 1813 operated in Germany (140,000 men), Italy and the Balkans (90,000 men at its peak, about 50,000 men during most of the campaigning on these fronts).
The increasing voice of the middle classes with rising commerce and industry meant that restored European monarchs found it difficult to restore pre-revolutionary absolutism, and had to retain many of the reforms enacted during Napoleon's rule.
After his defeat, Napoleon deplored the fact that his dream of a free and peaceful "European association" remained unaccomplished.
With the withdrawal of Austria from the war, stalemate ensued.
The battle at Auerstädt involved a single French corps defeating the bulk of the Prussian army.
Initially, French power rose quickly as the armies of Napoleon conquered much of Europe.
Austria achieved some initial victories against the thinly spread army of Marshal Berthier.
The smuggling of finished products into the continent undermined French efforts to ruin the British economy by cutting off markets.
Schroeder says Poland was "the root cause" of Napoleon's war with Russia but Russia's refusal to support the Continental System was also a factor.
There were many uprisings in Spanish America, leading to the wars of independence.
The Treaty of Paris ended the wars on 20 November 1815.
That included about 90,000 who marched with him to Moscow; few marched back.
The French army peaked in size in the 1790s with 1.5&nbsp;million Frenchmen enlisted although battlefield strength was much less.
The Allies rapidly gathered their armies to meet him again.
Most fighting ceased following Napoleon's final defeat at Waterloo on 18 June 1815, although skirmishing continued as late as 3 July 1815 at the Battle of Issy.
In his military career, Napoleon fought about 60 battles and lost seven, mostly at the end of his reign.
Later he actively participated in wars against his former Emperor.)
After defeats in Spain suffered by France, Napoleon took charge and enjoyed success, retaking Madrid, defeating the Spanish and forcing a withdrawal of the heavily out-numbered British army from the Iberian Peninsula (Battle of Corunna, 16 January 1809).
These regulars were highly drilled professional soldiers.
Over 250,000 sailors served in the Royal Navy.
The Poles supplied almost 100,000 men for the invasion force, but against their expectations, Napoleon avoided any concessions to Poland, having in mind further negotiations with Russia.
This constant retreat led to the unpopularity of Field Marshal Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly and a veteran, Prince Mikhail Kutuzov, was made the new Commander-in-Chief by Tsar Alexander I.
His march to the frontier achieved the surprise he had planned, catching the Anglo-Dutch Army in a dispersed arrangement.
During the successive conflicts, also known as the Coalition Wars, France defeated five consecutive coalitions arrayed against it, before suffering defeat against the sixth and seventh.
Once that was achieved he sent in infantry and cavalry.
Austria joined the alliance after the annexation of Genoa and the proclamation of Napoleon as King of Italy on 17 March 1805.
But...Napoleon was prepared to make no concessions.
The Napoleonic Wars were the direct cause of wars in the Americas and elsewhere.
About a million French soldiers became casualties (wounded, invalided or killed), a higher proportion than in the First World War.
The Austrians began the war by invading Bavaria with an army of about 70,000 under Karl Mack von Leiberich, and the French army marched out from Boulogne in late July 1805 to confront them.
Britain ended the uneasy truce created by the Treaty of Amiens when it declared war on France in May 1803.
Napoleon elevated the rulers of the two largest Confederation states, Saxony and Bavaria, to the status of kings.
Second was the emerging nationalism in France, Germany, Spain, and elsewhere that made these "people's wars" instead of contests between monarchs.
To Napoleon, penetration meant "You engage, and then you wait and see."
Both sides entered further conflicts in attempts to enforce their blockade; the British fought the United States in the War of 1812 (1812–15), and the French engaged in the Peninsular War (1808–14) to prevent smuggling into Spain.
The Austrians drove into the Duchy of Warsaw, but suffered defeat at the Battle of Raszyn on 19 April 1809.
Napoleon still expected to win the wars, and rejected the terms.
Protected by naval supremacy (in the words of Admiral Jervis to the House of Lords "I do not say, my Lords, that the French will not come.
Metternich in November 1813 offered Napoleon the Frankfurt proposals.
In Dutch historiography, it is common to refer to the seven major wars between 1792 and 1815 as the Coalition Wars (''coalitieoorlogen''), referring to the first two as the French Revolution Wars (''Franse Revolutieoorlogen'').
Historians have explored how the Napoleonic wars became total wars.
On 8 October 1806, Napoleon unleashed all the French forces east of the Rhine into Prussia.
One-and-a-half centuries later, and after two world wars several of these ideals re-emerged in the form of the European Union.
When the remnants of the Napoleon's army crossed the Berezina River in November, only 27,000 fit soldiers survived, with 380,000 men dead or missing and 100,000 captured.
The Battle of Marengo, which largely ended the War of the Second Coalition, was fought with fewer than 60,000 men on both sides.
The Bourbons returned to the throne of Naples on 20 May 1815.
During the campaign he had issued a decree for 900,000 fresh conscripts, but only a fraction of these materialised, and Napoleon's schemes for victory eventually gave way to the reality of his hopeless situation.
First was the ideological clash between revolutionary/egalitarian and conservative/hierarchical belief systems.
Out of 250,000 troops the Prussians sustained 25,000 casualties, lost a further 150,000 as prisoners, 4,000 artillery pieces, and over 100,000 muskets.
Many in the French government believed that cutting Britain off from the Continent would end its economic influence over Europe and isolate it.
Initially, Denmark-Norway declared itself neutral in the Napoleonic Wars, established a navy, and traded with both sides.
He again turned his attention to enemies on the Continent.
As well as the French Empire, Napoleon controlled the Swiss Confederation, the Confederation of the Rhine, the Duchy of Warsaw and the Kingdom of Italy.
It was supported by hundreds of thousands of investors and taxpayers, despite the higher taxes on land and a new income tax.
Even small nations now had armies rivalling the size of the Great Powers' forces of past wars but most of these were poor quality forces only suitable for garrison duties.
Napoleon abdicated on 6 April.
Thus around 900,000 Frenchmen in all theatres faced around 1,800,000 coalition soldiers (including the strategic reserve under formation in Germany).
In terms of economic damage to Great Britain, the blockade was largely ineffective.
British men-of-war supported the Swedish fleet during the Finnish War and won victories over the Russians in the Gulf of Finland in July 1808 and August 1809.
The Gunboat War effectively ended with a British victory at the Battle of Lyngør in 1812, involving the destruction of the last large Dano-Norwegian ship—the frigate ''Najaden''.
* the Kingdom of Westphalia (Jérôme Bonaparte, Napoleon's younger brother)
France had withdrawn its troops, but violent strife broke out against the government, which many Swiss saw as overly centralised.
Alexander I refused to capitulate, and the peace talks attempted by Napoleon failed.
Prussia never had more than 320,000 men under arms at any time.
In fighting, Napoleon focused on penetration, gaining a central position, and surrounding small groups of enemy forces.
On the continent, the British and Portuguese remained restricted to the area around Lisbon (behind their impregnable lines of Torres Vedras) and to besieged Cadiz.
As a consequence of the Salamanca campaign, the French were forced to end their long siege of Cadiz and to permanently evacuate the provinces of Andalusia and Asturias.
France's constant warfare with the combined forces of the other major powers of Europe for over two decades finally took its toll.
The Battle of Friedland which led to peace with Russia in 1807 involved about 150,000 men.
Rule by fiefdoms and aristocracy was widely replaced by national ideologies based on shared origins and culture.
Following Napoleon's final defeat, the Allies then reversed all French gains outside its 1789 borders at the Congress of Vienna.
In Italy, Bonaparte won a victory against the Austrians at Marengo in 1800.
Napoleon then turned north to confront the remainder of the Russian army and to try to capture the temporary Prussian capital at Königsberg.
Britain's first response to Napoleon's Continental System was to launch a major naval attack against Denmark.
After Britain, Austria proved the most persistent enemy of France; more than a million Austrians served during the long wars.
Another concept emerged from the Congress of Vienna  – that of a unified Europe.
Austria, previously an ally of France, took the opportunity to attempt to restore its imperial territories in Germany as held prior to Austerlitz.
It supplied most of the weapons used by the coalition powers throughout the conflicts.
Britain emerged as the most important economic power, and its Royal Navy held unquestioned naval superiority across the globe well into the 20th century.
Napoleon did well in when he was in direct charge, but that followed severe losses, and was followed by worse losses.
In most European countries, subjugation in the French Empire brought with it many liberal features of the French Revolution including democracy, due process in courts, abolition of serfdom, reduction of the power of the Catholic Church, and a demand for constitutional limits on monarchs.
160,000 French soldiers (increasing in number as the campaign went on) attacked Prussia, moving with such speed that they destroyed the entire Prussian army as an effective military force.
A complex plan to distract the British by threatening their possessions in the West Indies failed when a Franco-Spanish fleet under Admiral Villeneuve turned back after an indecisive action off Cape Finisterre on 22 July 1805.
In April 1805, Britain and Russia signed a treaty with the aim of removing the French from the Batavian Republic (roughly present-day Netherlands) and the Swiss Confederation.
Austria's forces peaked at about 576,000 (during the War of the Sixth Coalition) and had little or no naval component yet never fielded more than 250,000 men in field armies.
The war ended when General Napoleon Bonaparte forced the Austrians to accept his terms in the Treaty of Campo Formio.
Austria's attack prevented Napoleon from successfully wrapping up operations against British forces by necessitating his departure for Austria, and he never returned to the Peninsular theatre.
The British were increasingly angered by Napoleon's reordering of the international system in Western Europe, especially in Switzerland, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands.
As these small nations joined the coalition forces in 1813-1814, they provided a useful addition to the coalition while depriving Napoleon of much needed manpower.
* the Principality of Lucca and Piombino (under Elisa Bonaparte (Napoleon's sister) and her husband Felice Baciocchi);
His remaining ally Denmark-Norway became isolated and fell to the coalition.
Napoleon had succeeded in bringing most of Western Europe under one rule.
Saxony left Prussia, and together with small states from north Germany, allied with France.
When the Prussians arrived and attacked the French right flank in ever-increasing numbers, Napoleon's strategy of keeping the coalition armies divided had failed and a combined coalition general advance drove his army from the field in confusion.
Grouchy organised a successful and well-ordered retreat towards Paris, where Marshal Davout had 117,000 men ready to turn back the 116,000 men of Blücher and Wellington.
Greatly enlarged, Prussia became a permanent Great Power.
The first attempt to crush the French Republic came in 1793 when Austria, the Kingdom of Sardinia, the Kingdom of Naples, Prussia, Spain and the Kingdom of Great Britain formed the First Coalition.
In 1810, the French Empire reached its greatest extent.
He inflicted 25,000 casualties on a numerically superior enemy army while sustaining fewer than 7,000 in his own force.
In 1812, at the height of his power, Napoleon invaded Russia with a pan-European ''Grande Armée'', consisting of 650,000 men (270,000 Frenchmen and many soldiers of allies or subject areas).
These victories gave Napoleon's ''Grande Armée'' a sense of invulnerability, especially when it approached Moscow and occupied it after the Russians abandoned it.
The rest were necessary for garrisoning Ireland and the colonies, and providing security for Britain.
Only Great Britain remained opposed to the French Republic.
In Portuguese America, Brazil experienced greater autonomy as it now served as seat of the Portuguese Empire and ascended politically to the status of Kingdom.
He reorganised the French military and created a reserve army positioned to support campaigns either on the Rhine or in Italy.
By 1814, as the Allies were closing in on Paris, Napoleon did agree to the Frankfurt proposals, but it was too late and he rejected the new harsher terms proposed by the Allies.
The first two coalitions were defeated during the French Revolutionary Wars, while the third (at Austerlitz), the fourth (at Jena, Eylau, and Friedland) and the fifth coalition (at Wagram) were fought under the leadership of Napoleon.
It was indecisive; the French captured the main positions on the battlefield, but failed to destroy the Russian army.
But the British attacked and captured or destroyed large portions of the Dano-Norwegian fleet in the First Battle of Copenhagen (2 April 1801), and again in the Second Battle of Copenhagen (August–September 1807).
As late as 1808, the continental powers affirmed most of his gains and titles, but the continuing conflict with Britain led him to start the Peninsular War and the invasion of Russia which many scholars see as a dramatic miscalculation.
In response, Napoleon seriously considered an invasion of Great Britain, and massed 180,000 troops at Boulogne.
In August 1806, the Prussian king, Frederick William III, decided to go to war independently of any other great power.
The population of 4.3 million was released from occupation and by 1814 sent about 200,000 men to Napoleon's armies.
Another 200,000 served in the Russian Navy.
He amalgamated many of the smaller states into larger electorates, duchies, and kingdoms to make the governance of non-Prussian Germany smoother.
Ney failed to clear the cross-roads and Wellington reinforced the position.
As Napoleon proclaimed, "It is the soldier who founds a Republic and it is the soldier who maintains it."
Swiss resistance collapsed before anything could be accomplished, and after a month Britain countermanded the orders not to restore Cape Colony.
The belligerents declared an armistice from 4 June 1813 (continuing until 13 August) during which time both sides attempted to recover from the loss of approximately a quarter of a million men in the preceding two months.
Lacking support Napoleon abdicated again on 22 June 1815 and on 15 July, surrendered to the British squadron at Rochefort.
The success of the Russian army on the land forced Sweden to sign peace treaties with Russia in 1809 and with France in 1810 and to join the blockade against Britain.
After the retreat from Russia, the French forces were defeated by Russian winter weather and by the sixth coalition at Leipzig and in France itself, and by the seventh coalition at Waterloo.
The ''Grande Armée'' did not adjust its operational methods in response.
Poland had recently been partitioned by its three large neighbours, but Napoleon created the Grand Duchy of Warsaw, which depended on France from the very beginning.
The resulting union between Sweden and Norway gave Norway more independence than under Denmark and ended with Norway becoming an independent country in 1905.
The Polish army captured West Galicia following its earlier success.
Napoleon assumed personal command in the east and bolstered the army there for his counter-attack on Austria.
The victors exiled Napoleon to the island of Elba, and restored the French Bourbon monarchy in the person of Louis XVIII.
The Peninsular war proved a major disaster for France.
The global Spanish Empire began to unravel as French occupation of Spain weakened Spain's hold over its colonies, providing an opening for nationalist revolutions in Spanish America.
Denmark did however commit themselves to participate in a war against Sweden together with France and Russia.
But when he left, the guerrilla war against his forces in the countryside continued to tie down great numbers of troops.
Others were largely unfit for operations, except sieges.
Napoleon inflicted 40,000 casualties on the Allies at Lützen (2 May 1813) and Bautzen (20–21 May 1813).
In October, with no sign of clear victory in sight, Napoleon began the disastrous Great Retreat from Moscow.
Its growth spelled the beginning of some states and the end of others, as the map of Europe changed dramatically in the hundred years following the Napoleonic Era.
Historian David Gates called it the "Spanish ulcer."
Most historians argue that the escalation in size and scope came from two sources.
Travelling to Paris, picking up support as he went, he eventually overthrew the restored Louis XVIII.
This led to most of the losses of the main column of the ''Grande Armée'', which in one case amounted to 95,000 men, including deserters, in a week.
The ability and quality of the land forces governed these operations.
The Grand Duchy was dissolved in 1815 and Poland did not become a state until 1918.
Occasional military actions continued in Italy, Spain, and Holland in early 1814.
Concerned that there would be hostilities when Bonaparte found out that Cape Colony had been retained, the British began to procrastinate on the evacuation of Malta.
Napoleon was defeated in 1814, and sent into exile on the island of Elba; he then escaped and returned to power, only to be defeated at the Battle of Waterloo, and was exiled again, this time to Saint Helena.
Napoleon was not ready for war and so this was the best time for Britain to stop them.
France offered to place Malta in the hands of Russia to satisfy British concerns, pull out of Holland when Malta was evacuated, and form a convention to give satisfaction to Britain on other issues.
To add to the 90,000-strong standing army, he recalled well over a quarter of a million veterans from past campaigns and issued a decree for the eventual draft of around 2.5&nbsp;million new men into the French army, which was never achieved.
Russia used scorched-earth tactics, and harried the ''Grande Armée'' with light Cossack cavalry.
One, the Walcheren Expedition of 1809, involved a dual effort by the British Army and the Royal Navy to relieve Austrian forces under intense French pressure.
The British government paid out large sums of money to other European states, so that they could pay armies in the field against France.
Spain proved to be a major, long-term drain on money, manpower and prestige.
The British then sent in a fresh army under Sir Arthur Wellesley (later called the Duke of Wellington) whom the French could not stop.
Britain seized upon the Malta issue, refusing to follow the terms of the Treaty of Amiens and evacuate the island.
A key element in British success was its ability to mobilise the nation's industrial and financial resources and apply them to defeating France.
The Russians strongly opposed any move towards an independent Poland and one reason Napoleon invaded Russia in 1812 was to punish them.
Such a European association would share the same principles of government, system of measurement, currency and Civil Code.
The Fifth Coalition (1809) of Britain and Austria against France formed as Britain engaged in the Peninsular War in Spain and Portugal.
Napoleon took the reserve of the Army of the North, and reunited his forces with those of Ney to pursue Wellington's army, after he ordered Marshal Grouchy to take the right wing of the Army of the North and stop the Prussians re-grouping.
At the Congress of Erfurt (September–October 1808), France and Russia further agreed on the division of Sweden into two parts separated by the Gulf of Bothnia, where the eastern part became the Russian Grand Duchy of Finland.
Such a surprise attack would either produce a devastating effect on morale, or force him to weaken his main battle line.
