He hurried as quickly as he could back to Switzerland.
Napoleon III looked for diplomatic support.
More than a thousand visitors a day came to see now-famous paintings as Édouard Manet's ''Déjeuner sur l'herbe'' and James McNeill Whistler's Symphony in White, No.
French troops assisted Italian unification by fighting on the side of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia.
Karl Marx, in ''The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon'', famously mocked Napoleon III by saying "Hegel remarks somewhere that all great world-historical facts and personages appear, so to speak, twice.
It took France and Britain six months to organize a full-scale military expedition to the Black Sea.
Safe with an heir, Napoleon III resumed his "petites distractions" with other women.
The republicans on the left had always opposed him, believing he had usurped power and suppressed the Republic.
They brought Major General Jacques Leroy de Saint Arnaud, a former captain from the French Foreign Legion and a commander of French forces in Algeria, and other officers from the French army in North Africa, to provide military backing for the coup.
In Europe, he allied with Britain and defeated Russia in the Crimean War (1854–56).
He later often referred to what he had learned at "the University of Ham."
* Elisa Rachel Felix, the "most famous actress in Europe"
As for me, I defend myself, and I often capitulate."
In any war between France and Prussia, France would be entirely alone.
* Alexandrine Éléonore Vergeot, laundress at the prison at Ham, mother of his sons Alexandre Louis Eugène and Louis Ernest Alexandre
It was based on stability and balance of powers, whereas Napoleon attempted to rearrange the world map to France's favour even when it involved radical and potentially revolutionary changes in politics.
New shipping lines were created and ports rebuilt in Marseille and Le Havre, which connected France by sea to the USA, Latin America, North Africa and the Far East.
Despite the economic progress the country had made, domestic opposition to Napoleon III was slowly growing, particularly in the ''Corps législatif'' (Parliament).
It encouraged Napoleon III to make an even bolder foreign policy venture in Italy.
Napoleon's support for the Italian patriots and his confrontation with Pope Pius IX over who would govern Rome made him unpopular with fervent French Catholics, and even with Empress Eugénie, who was a fervent Catholic.
A few barricades appeared in the working-class neighborhoods of Paris.
In the spring of 1870 he was visited by an old friend from England, Lord Malmesbury.
The mobilization of the French army was chaotic.
The National Guard, whose members had sometimes joined anti-government demonstrations, was re-organized, and largely used only in parades.
He began with small projects, such as opening up two clinics in Paris for sick and injured workers, a program of legal assistance to those unable to afford it, and subsidies to companies which built low-cost housing for their workers.
It had two important diplomatic consequences; Alexander II became an ally of France, and Britain and France were reconciled.
In June 1848, the June Days Uprising broke out in Paris, led by the far left, against the conservative majority in the National Assembly.
Napoleon was originally buried at St Mary's, the Catholic Church in Chislehurst.
Ledru-Rollin, from his headquarters in the Conservatory of Arts and Professions, declared that Louis-Napoleon was no longer President and called for a general uprising.
The period was favorable for industrial expansion.
The results of the school reforms were dramatic: in 1852, over 40 percent of army conscripts in France were unable to read or write.
Among his numerous love affairs and mistresses were:
During his reign, the railway network of France expanded from 3&nbsp;500 kilometers to 20&nbsp;000 kilometers.
He was a supporter of popular sovereignty, and of nationalism.
One such project in the Gironde department drained and reforested 10&nbsp;000 square kilometers (3&nbsp;900 square miles) of moorland, creating the Landes forest, the largest maritime pine forest in Europe.
A formal treaty ending the war was signed on 11 November 1859.
In foreign policy, Napoleon III aimed to reassert French influence in Europe and around the world.
Count Cavour died a few weeks later, declaring that "Italy is made."
They agreed to join forces and drive the Austrians from Italy.
It had been damaged by his six years in prison at Ham; he had chronic pains in his legs and feet, particularly when it was cold, and as a result, he always lived and worked in overheated rooms and offices.
He began to plan a coup against King Louis-Philippe.
By his late forties, Napoleon started to suffer from numerous medical ailments, including kidney disease, bladder stones, chronic bladder and prostate infections, arthritis, gout, obesity, and the chronic effects of smoking.
Napoleon III had Luxembourg in mind.
Napoleon III proposed returning to Paris, realizing that he was doing no good for the army.
His father was Louis Bonaparte, the younger brother of Napoleon Bonaparte, who made Louis the King of Holland from 1806 until 1810.
On the evening of the 12th, after meeting with the Empress and with his foreign minister, Gramont, he decided to push his success a little further; he would ask King Wilhelm to guarantee the Prussian government would never again make such a demand for the Spanish throne.
In November the court moved to the Château de Compiègne, for forest excursions, dancing and more games.
Leboeuf responded that the French soldiers had a superior rifle to the Prussian rifle, that the French artillery was commanded by an elite corps of officers, and that the army "would not lack a button on its puttees."
He signed the treaty, without consulting with the Assembly, on 23 January 1860.
Despite the opposition of the church, Duruy opened schools for girls in each commune with more than five hundred residents, a total of eight hundred new schools.
In the event of a Prussian victory, France would recognize Prussia's annexation of smaller German states, and France, in exchange, would receive a portion of German territory, the Palatinate region north of Alsatia.
He also sponsored Viollet-le-Duc's restoration of the Château de Vincennes and the Château de Pierrefonds, In 1862, he closed the prison which had occupied the Abbey of Mont-Saint-Michel since the French Revolution, where many important political prisoners had been held, so it could be restored and opened to the public.
He was reunited with his older brother Napoléon Louis, and together they became involved with the Carbonari, secret revolutionary societies fighting Austria's domination of northern Italy.
The conservative Catholics were increasingly unhappy, because he had taken away most of the Papal States from the Pope, and because he had built up the public education system, which was a rival to the Catholic system.
The portion of the population active in agriculture dropped from 61 percent in 1851 to 54 percent in 1870.
When he had liberalized trade with England, he had not even consulted them.
Throughout his reign the emperor worked to alleviate the sufferings of the poor, on occasion breaching the 19th-century economic orthodoxy of freedom and laissez-faire and using state resources or interfering in the market.
Bazaine was willing to take over power in France after the Germans had defeated the republic in Paris.
His followers were mostly on the left; from the peasantry and working class.
In the meantime, the Germans had assembled a much larger army opposite Alsatia and Lorraine than the French had expected or were aware of.
His Majesty, wishing to let the public judge the legitimacy of these complaints, has decided that the works of art which were refused should be displayed in another part of the Palace of Industry."
On the other hand, more French people than ever were able to save money; the number of bank accounts grew from 742 889 in 1852 to 2 079 141 in 1870.
The direction of movement of MacMahon's army was supposed to be secret, but it was published in the French press and thus was quickly known to the German general staff.
His affairs were not trivial sideshows: they distracted him from governing, affected his relationship with the empress, and diminished him in the views of the other European courts.
He also made his first venture into foreign policy, in Italy, where as a youth he had joined in the patriotic uprising against the Austrians.
Louis-Napoléon broke with the Assembly and the conservative ministers opposing his projects in favour of the dispossessed.
On 23 April 1859 he sent an ultimatum to the government of Piedmont-Sardinia demanding that they stop their military preparations and disband their army.
Mayors in many regions threatened to publish the names of any electors who refused to vote.
He decided to go into exile in England.
On 15 June, the Prussian Army invaded Saxony, an ally of Austria.
Her beauty attracted Louis-Napoleon, who, as was his custom, tried to seduce her, but Eugénie told him to wait for marriage.
These two works increased the water supply of Paris from 87 000 to 400 000 cubic meters of water a day.
When the news of the French defeats reached Paris on 7 August, it was greeted with disbelief and dismay.
To avoid a confrontation between Garibaldi and the French soldiers, the Italian government arrested Garibaldi and put him in prison.
The new government of Spain considered several candidates, including Leopold, Prince of Hohenzollern, a cousin of King Wilhelm I of Prussia.
The Prince-President, without consulting his ministers, ordered his soldiers to fight if needed in support of the Pope.
As a consequence, he was prepared to sell out the Grand Duchy to France (thus legally committing high treason and perjury as he had sworn an oath on the Luxembourgish constitution).
In his memoirs written long after the war, Bismarck wrote: "I always considered that a war with France would naturally follow a war against Austria...
Bernard was in London, where, since he was a political exile, the British government refused to extradite him, but Orsini was tried, convicted and executed on 13 March 1858.
Here, work to extend the Rue de Rivoli continues at night by electric light (1854).
In exchange, Napoleon III asked for Savoy (the ancestral land of the King of Piedmont-Sardinia) and the then bilingual county of Nice, which had been taken from France after Napoleon's fall in 1815 and given to Piedmont-Sardinia.
There were also small uprisings in the more militant red republican towns in the south and center of France, but these were all put down by 10 December.
He smoked cigarette after cigarette.
After victory in the American Civil War in 1865, the United States made clear that France would have to leave.
In Italy, even without the French army, the process of Italian unification launched by Cavour and Napoleon III took on a momentum of its own.
Though a fervent Catholic and conservative on many other issues, she strongly advocated equality for women.
In 1863, he made Victor Duruy, the son of a factory worker and a respected historian, his new Minister of Public Education.
Louis-Napoleon thanked his Swiss hosts, and voluntarily left the country.
The Pope, furious, declared in a public address that Napoleon III was a "liar and a cheat".
The presence of Hortense and Louis-Napoleon in the hotel had become known, and a public demonstration of mourning for the Emperor took place on Place Vendôme in front of their hotel.
Napoleon and his foreign minister, Drouyn de Lhuys, expected a long war and an eventual Austrian victory.
The garrison of eight thousand French troops remained in Rome until August 1870, when they were recalled at the start of the Franco-Prussian War.
The new assembly included a small number of opponents of Louis-Napoleon, including 17 monarchists, 18 conservatives, two liberal democrats, three republicans and 72 independents.
The capital of Italy became Turin (in 1861) then Florence (in 1865), not Rome.
General Cavaignac, the leader of the army, first withdrew his soldiers from Paris to allow the insurgents to deploy their barricades, and then returned with overwhelming force to crush the uprising; from 24 to 26 June, there were battles in the streets of the working class districts of Paris.
Because of the weakening of the French overall position Bismarck lost interest in this option.
His regnal name treats Napoleon II, who never actually ruled, as a true Emperor (he had been briefly recognized as emperor from 22 June to 7 July 1815).
On 1 March, the newly elected assembly officially declared the removal of the Emperor from power, and placed all the blame for the French defeat squarely on him.
This battle was even longer and bloodier than Magenta; in a long series of bayonet charges against the Austrian line, forty thousand men died, including 17 500 French soldiers.
Napoleon, Eugénie, their son and their entourage settled at Camden Place, a large three-story country house in the village of Chislehurst, a half-hour by train from London.
Strode had also received money from the Emperor, possibly to buy Camden Place and maintain it as a bolt-hole.
File:Hugo2.jpg|A caricature of Victor Hugo by Honoré Daumier from July 1849.
A group of conspirators threw three bombs at the royal carriage as it made its way to the opera.
From 1869 onwards, the crises of his urinary tract were treated with opium, which made him seem lethargic, sleepy and apathetic.
Napoleon III also wanted to build new parks and gardens for the recreation and relaxation of the Parisians, particularly those in the new neighbourhoods of the expanding city.
This book was widely reprinted and circulated in France, and played an important part in his future electoral success.
A joint British-French fleet was sent to support Turkey.
Lamartine wrote back politely but firmly, asking Louis-Napoleon to leave Paris "until the city is more calm, and not before the elections for the National Assembly."
The Emperor was weak and ill, but the more extreme Bonapartists were prepared to show their strength against the republicans and monarchists in the parliament.
The battle was largely remembered because, soon after it was fought, patriotic chemists in France gave the name of the battle to their newly discovered bright purple chemical dye; the dye and the colour took the name magenta.
When the news was given to the Empress that the Emperor and the army were prisoners, she reacted by shouting at the Emperor's personal aide, "No!
Within days of the coup d'état Napoléon III's Minister of Public Works launched a project to build a railway line around Paris, connecting the different independent lines coming into Paris from around the country.
The prefecture was seized, and the prefect arrested.
The 239 inmates who were judged most severely were sent to the penal colony in Cayenne.
Finally, at one o'clock in the afternoon, Napoleon emerged from his reverie and gave the order for a white flag to be hoisted above the citadel.
She traveled to Egypt to open the Suez Canal and officially represented him whenever he traveled outside France.
At the end of the year the Emperor and Court returned to the Tuileries Palace, and gave a series of formal receptions, and three or four grand balls, with six hundred guests, early in the new year.
While in prison, he wrote poems, political essays, and articles on diverse topics.
The government was attacked by both the republicans and monarchist opposition, and by the ultra-bonapartists, for its weakness against Prussia.
He had an affair with the actress Rachel, the most famous French actress of the period, during her tours to England.
Napoleon III's new parks were inspired by his memories of the parks in London, especially Hyde Park, where he had strolled and promenaded in a carriage while in exile; but he wanted to build on a much larger scale.
He assured the Emperor that the French army could have four hundred thousand men on the Rhine in less than fifteen days.
In September 1868, Queen Isabella II of Spain had been overthrown and exiled to France.
File:Election france 1848.jpg|The 1848 Presidential campaign pitted Louis-Napoleon against General Cavaignac, the Minister of Defense of the Provisional Government, and the leaders of the socialists.
The opening of the first public school libraries by Napoleon III and the opening by Louis Hachette of the first bookstores in Napoleon's new train stations led to the wider circulation of books around France.
He approached Lord Derby, the Prime Minister and the British Government; Britain was against the war, but agreed to remain neutral.
Charles-Louis was baptized at the Palace of Fontainebleau on 5 November 1810, with Emperor Napoleon serving as his godfather and Empress Marie-Louise as his godmother.
Instead, the government took a very active role in building the infrastructure for economic growth: stimulating the stock market and investment banks (to provide credit); building railways, ports, canals and roads; and providing training and education.
The members of Parliament were particularly unhappy with him for dealing with them only when he needed money.
In 1862, Napoleon III sent troops to Mexico in an effort to establish an allied monarchy in the Americas, with Archduke Ferdinand Maximilian of Austria enthroned as Emperor Maximilian I.
"I believe," Louis Napoleon wrote, "that from time to time, men are created whom I call volunteers of providence, in whose hands are placed the destiny of their countries.
the Battle of Wörth; the French lost
The Ems telegram had exactly the effect that Bismarck had intended.
Visiting dignitaries and monarchs were frequent guests.
Louis Napoleon traveled first to London, then to Brazil, and then to New York.
In 1866, he encouraged the creation of a state insurance fund to help workers or peasants who became disabled, and to help their widows and families.
He contributed articles to regional newspapers and magazines in towns all over France, becoming quite well known as a writer.
File:Bois de Boulogne.jpeg|The Bois de Boulogne, transformed by Napoleon III between 1852 and 1858, was designed to give a place for relaxation and recreation to all the classes of Paris.
A few barricades appeared, and about 1,000 insurgents came out in the streets, but the army moved in force with 30,000 troops and the uprisings were swiftly crushed, with the killing of an estimated 300 to 400 opponents of the coup.
He went back to his studies at the British Museum.
The French army was rapidly defeated and Napoleon III was captured at the Battle of Sedan.
He could barely sit up in his armchair, and his drawn face expressed at the same time moral anguish and physical pain."
Strode bought Camden Place in 1860 and spent large sums of money transforming it into a French chateau.
He was received by London society and met the political and scientific leaders of the day, including Benjamin Disraeli and Michael Faraday.
Fortunately for Napoleon and the Piedmontese, the commander of the Austrians, General Giulay, was not very aggressive.
Luxembourg had regained its de jure independence in 1815 as a Grand Duchy.
He expected to see King William, but instead he was met by Bismarck and the German commander, General von Moltke.
His campaign appealed to both the left and right.
MacMahon arrived at Sedan with one hundred thousand soldiers not knowing that two German armies were closing in on the city, one from the west and one from the east, blocking any escape.
When France entered the war there were patriotic demonstrations in the streets of Paris, with crowds singing the ''Marseillaise'' and chanting "To Berlin!
The suffering of the army in the Crimea was carefully concealed from the French public by press censorship.
In return, in 1860 France received Savoy and the county of Nice.
As Cavour had promised, Savoy and the county of Nice were both returned to France in 1860, after a popular referendum; in Nice, 25,734 voted for union with France, just 260 against.
The 1851 constitution was retained, with the word "president" replaced by the word "emperor."
While he was traveling to see more of the United States, he received word that his mother was very ill.
Louis-Napoleon promptly announced his candidacy.
Many of his opponents returned to France and became members of the National Assembly.
He strolled in Hyde Park, which he later used as a model when he created the Bois de Boulogne in Paris.
But it also announced his intent "to give work to those unoccupied; to look out for the old age of the workers; to introduce in industrial laws those improvements which don't ruin the rich, but which bring about the well-being of each and the prosperity of all."
The signature architectural landmark was the Paris Opera, the largest theater in the world, designed by Charles Garnier, crowning the center of Napoleon III's new Paris.
According to Therborn, such a form of rule, ossified upon the point of crisis, proves fatal to such regimes once major external crises emerge, inevitable under Marxist exploitation theory.
Bismarck told Napoleon that Germany had no secret arrangement to give Veneto to Italy, and Napoleon assured him in turn that France had no secret understanding with Austria.
The Italians responded by demanding that France withdraw its troops who were protecting the Pope, in Rome.
He was the nephew  and heir of Napoleon I.
His conclusion: "The working class has nothing, it is necessary to give them ownership.
In 1863, the jury of the Paris Salon, the famous annual showcase of French painting, headed by the ultra-conservative director of the Academy of Fine Arts, the Comte de Nieuwerkerke, refused all submissions by avant-garde artists, including those by Édouard Manet, Camille Pissarro and Johan Jongkind.
He did not advocate the government getting directly involved in industry.
He had many mistresses.
The architect, Charles Garnier, described the style simply as "Napoleon the Third."
He had a mistress, a young woman from the nearby town named Éléonore Vergeot, who gave birth to two of his children.
His chief opponent, General Cavaignac, expected that Louis-Napoleon would come in first, but that he would receive less than fifty percent of the vote, which would mean the election would go to the National Assembly, where Cavaignac was certain to win.
The French troops came under fire from Garibaldi's soldiers.
Leopold, solicited by both his father and Bismarck, agreed.
Hortense joined her son and together they evaded the police and Austrian army and finally reached the French border.
He had been in Britain in 1846 when Prime Minister Robert Peel had lowered tariffs on imported grains, and he had seen the benefits to British consumers and the British economy.
In the 1860s, a new rival to French power in Europe appeared on the horizon; Prussia, and its chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, who had ambitions for Prussia to lead a unified Germany.
* Maria Anna Schiess (1812–80), of Allensbach (Lake Constance, Germany), mother of his son Bonaventur Karrer (1839–1921)
The Deputies quickly took advantage of their new rights; the Emperor's Italian policy was bitterly condemned in Parliament, and anti-government amendments by the pro-Catholic deputies were narrowly defeated by votes of 158 to 91 in the Corps législatif  and 79 to 61 in the Senate.
On 8 May 1870, French voters had overwhelmingly supported Napoleon III's program in a national plebiscite, with 7 358 000 votes yes against 1 582 000 votes no, an increase of support of two million votes since the legislative elections in 1869.
File:Palais Garnier.jpg|The Paris Opera was the centerpiece of Napoleon III's new Paris.
This version was communicated to governments, and the next day was in the French press.
More important for his future career, he had an affair with the wealthy heiress Harriet Howard (1823–65).
The French army arrived at the frontier equipped with maps of Germany, but without maps of France – where the actual fighting would take place – and without a specific plan of what it was going to do.
The socialists and "red" republicans, led by Ledru-Rollin and Raspail, also did well, winning two hundred seats.
In 1868, Bismarck signed an accord with Russia, giving Russia liberty of action in the Balkans in exchange for neutrality in the event of a war between France and Prussia.
Hundreds of barricades appeared in the working-class neighborhoods.
In the legislative elections of 31 May 1863, the pro-government candidates received 5 308 000 votes, while the opposition received 1 954 000 votes, three times more than in the previous elections.
In addition, the German soldiers were backed by a substantial reserve of the Landwehr (Territorial defence), with 340 000 men, and an additional reserve of 400 000 territorial guards.
Bismarck refused to acknowledge the former empress also as this had caused irritations with Britain and Russia.
The Count of Palikao named Maréchal François Achille Bazaine, the commander of the French forces in Lorraine, as the new military commander.
He won the votes of 55.6 percent of all registered voters, and won in all but four of France's departments.
In seven months, he had gone from an political exile in London to a highly-visible place in the National Assembly, as the government finished the new Constitution and prepared for the first election ever of a President of the French Republic.
It sent 50,000 troops under General Philip H. Sheridan to the U.S.-Mexico border, and helped resupply Juárez.
He soon had an opportunity; in early 1853, Czar Nicholas I of Russia put pressure on the weak Turkish government, demanding that Turkey give Russia a protectorate over the Christian countries of the Balkans as well as control over Constantinople and the Dardanelles.
"This text produced the effect of a red flag to the Gallic bull," Bismarck later wrote.
The socialist Ledru-Rollin received 376,834; the extreme left candidate Raspail received 37,106, and the poet Lamartine received only 17,000 votes.
Rome and the surrounding Latium region (in Italian: Lazio) remained in Papal hands, and therefore did not immediately become the capital of the newly created Kingdom of Italy, and Venetia was still occupied, but the rest of Italy had come under the rule of Victor Emmanuel.
The Cardinal-Archbishop of Rouen, Monseigneur Bonnechose, wrote: "True science is religious, while false science, on the other hand, is vain and prideful; being unable to explain God, it rebels against him."
Hortense wrote an appeal to the King, asking to stay in France, and Louis-Napoleon offered to volunteer as an ordinary soldier in the French Army.
Napoleon had limited funds; he sold properties and jewels, and arrived in England on 20 March 1871.
