A byproduct of the French occupation was a strong development in German nationalism.
His first language was Corsican, and he always spoke French with a marked Corsican accent and never learned to spell French properly.
Napoleon quickly knocked out Prussia at the battles of Jena and Auerstedt, then marched the Grand Army deep into Eastern Europe, annihilating the Russians in June 1807 at Friedland and forcing the defeated nations of the Fourth Coalition to accept the Treaties of Tilsit.
Napoleon made some of the first efforts at establishing a system of secular and public education.
He noted the influence of Catholicism's rituals and splendors.
Napoleon's rule greatly aided adoption of the new standard not only across France but also across the French sphere of influence.
General Melas had a numerical advantage, fielding about  Austrian soldiers while Napoleon commanded  French troops.
When he heard the news of her death while on exile in Elba, he locked himself in his room and would not come out for two full days.
The French suffered in the course of a ruinous retreat, including from the harshness of the Russian Winter.
He never returned to Spain after the 1808 campaign.
A series of artillery barrages and cavalry charges decimated the Austrian army, which fled over the Bormida River back to Alessandria, leaving behind  casualties.
As a result of these factors, Napoleon, rather than relying on infantry to wear away the enemy's defenses, now could use massed artillery as a spearhead to pound a break in the enemy's line that was then exploited by supporting infantry and cavalry.
This was in contrast to the complex uniforms with many decorations of his marshals and those around him.
His critics  charge that he was not troubled when faced with the prospect of war and death for thousands, turned his search for undisputed rule into a series of conflicts throughout Europe and ignored treaties and conventions alike.
On 15 September, Bonaparte was removed from the list of generals in regular service for his refusal to serve in the Vendée campaign.
Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras, but 18th-century operational mobility underwent change.
He also authorized the French to loot treasures such as the Horses of Saint Mark.
Enghien's execution infuriated royal courts throughout Europe, becoming one of the contributing political factors for the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars.
Moreover, Alexander's pretensions at friendship with Napoleon led the latter to seriously misjudge the true intentions of his Russian counterpart, who would violate numerous provisions of the treaty in the next few years.
The campaign witnessed the collapse of the Grand Army, the destruction of Russian lands and cities, and inspired a renewed push against Napoleon by his enemies.
The development of the code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system with its stress on clearly written and accessible law.
With a small cadre of followers, Napoleon dictated his memoirs and grumbled about conditions.
The couple married on 9 March 1796 in a civil ceremony.
He was compared to Adolf Hitler most famously by the historian Pieter Geyl in 1947 and Claude Ribbe in 2005.
He realigned the axis of his army and marched his soldiers towards the town of Eckmühl.
The Austrians enjoyed a comfortable numerical superiority over the French throughout the battle; on the first day, Charles disposed of  soldiers against only  commanded by Napoleon.
The soldiers quickly responded with, "Vive L'Empereur!"
During the Napoleonic Wars he was taken seriously by the British press as a dangerous tyrant, poised to invade.
By April 1805, Britain had also signed an alliance with Russia.
A few months into his exile, Napoleon learned that his ex-wife Josephine had died in France.
Napoleon chose divorce so he could remarry in search of an heir.
Bonaparte led these 13,000 French soldiers in the conquest of the coastal towns of Arish, Gaza, Jaffa, and Haifa.
Reduced to a minor character, the new fictional Napoleon became not a world historical figure but an intimate one, fashioned by individuals' needs and consumed as popular entertainment.
Historian David Chandler wrote of the Prussian forces: "Never has the morale of any army been more completely shattered."
After this campaign, Augustin Robespierre sent Bonaparte on a mission to the Republic of Genoa to determine that country's intentions towards France.
However, the Allies refused to accept this under prodding from Alexander, who feared that Napoleon might find an excuse to retake the throne.
Napoleon and the pope both found the Concordat useful.
He selected the bishops and supervised church finances.
From Ormea, they headed west to outflank the Austro-Sardinian positions around Saorge.
After clearing the last Spanish force guarding the capital at Somosierra, Napoleon entered Madrid on 4 December with 80,000 troops.
Napoleon had advanced as far as Fontainebleau when he learned that Paris was lost.
However, the plan unraveled after the British victory at the Battle of Cape Finisterre in July 1805.
The stock character of Napoleon is a comically short "petty tyrant" and this has become a cliché in popular culture.
Near-Carthaginian peaces intertwined whole national efforts, intensifying the Revolutionary phenomenon of total war.
Napoleon assumed command in Germany and inflicted a series of defeats on the Coalition culminating in the Battle of Dresden in August 1813.
He reconciled with the Catholic Church.
During the campaign, Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics.
Napoleon approached the regiment alone, dismounted his horse and, when he was within gunshot range, shouted to the soldiers, "Here I am.
The shocking French defeat at the Battle of Bailén in July gave hope to Napoleon's enemies and partly persuaded the French emperor to intervene in person.
Intractable differences with the British meant that the French were facing a Third Coalition by 1805.
In 1806, the Fourth Coalition took up arms against him because Prussia became worried about growing French influence on the continent.
Napoleon hoped to use religion to produce social stability.
He decided to focus his attention on the Kingdom of Portugal, which consistently violated his trade prohibitions.
Napoleon sent an expedition under General Leclerc designed to reassert control over Sainte-Domingue.
In February 1821, Napoleon's health began to deteriorate rapidly.
In a vaunted pursuit that epitomized the "peak of Napoleonic warfare," according to historian Richard Brooks, the French managed to capture 140,000 soldiers, over 2,000 cannons and hundreds of ammunition wagons, all in a single month.
He adopted a plan to capture a hill where republican guns could dominate the city's harbour and force the British to evacuate.
Vincent Cronin disagrees, stating that Napoleon was not overly ambitious for himself, "he embodied the ambitions of thirty million Frenchmen".
Napoleon had seen the massacre of the King's Swiss Guard there three years earlier and realised that artillery would be the key to its defence.
In May, he was admitted to a military academy at Brienne-le-Château.
The French army carried out Bonaparte's plan in the Battle of Saorgio in April 1794, and then advanced to seize Ormea in the mountains.
He left Paris three days later and settled at Josephine's former palace in Malmaison (on the western bank of the Seine about  west of Paris).
The treaty reaffirmed and expanded earlier French gains at Campo Formio.
Napoleon was then forced to announce his unconditional abdication only two days later.
These changes contributed to the development of nationalism and the nation state.
Napoleon continued to entertain a grand scheme to establish a French presence in the Middle East in order to put pressure on Britain and Russia, and perhaps form an alliance with the Ottoman Empire.
French forces in Southern Germany had been defeated by the Archduke Charles in 1796, but the Archduke withdrew his forces to protect Vienna after learning about Napoleon's assault.
Both sides inflicted about  casualties on each other.
The fall of Vienna provided the French a huge bounty as they captured  muskets, 500 cannons, and the intact bridges across the Danube.
Napoleon implemented a wide array of liberal reforms in France and across Europe, especially in Italy and Germany, as summarized by British historian Andrew Roberts:
I respond to his love sincerely.
The Continental System caused recurring diplomatic conflicts between France and its allies, especially Russia.
The French launched an invasion of Russia in the summer of 1812.
With Europe at peace and the economy recovering, Napoleon's popularity soared to its highest levels under the Consulate, both domestically and abroad.
Napoleon and Marie Louis remained married until his death, though she did not join him in exile on Elba and thereafter never saw her husband again.
While the Concordat restored much power to the papacy, the balance of church–state relations had tilted firmly in Napoleon's favour.
Bonaparte and his family fled to the French mainland in June 1793 because of the split with Paoli.
Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill he had carried after nearly being captured by the Russians during the retreat from Moscow.
That meant that France could retain control of Belgium, Savoy and the Rhineland (the west bank of the Rhine River), while giving up control of all the rest, including all of Spain and the Netherlands, and most of Italy and Germany.
His rising ambition inspired him to go further, and in 1804 he became the first ''Emperor of the French''.
The Spanish and the Portuguese revolted with British support.
There were also subversive activities celebrating anniversaries of Napoleon's life and reign and disrupting royal celebrations—they demonstrated the prevailing and successful goal of the varied supporters of Napoleon to constantly destabilize the Bourbon regime.
Both sides committed the worst atrocities of the Napoleonic Wars during this phase of the conflict.
He was promoted to captain in the regular army in July 1792, despite exceeding his leave of absence and leading a riot against a French army in Corsica.
Charles pressed the left wing of the French army and hurled his men towards the III Corps of Marshal Davout.
Napoleon was born on 15 August 1769, to Carlo Maria di Buonaparte and Maria Letizia Ramolino, in his family's ancestral home Casa Buonaparte in Ajaccio, the capital of the island of Corsica.
From 30 June to the early days of July, the French recrossed the Danube in strength, with more than  troops marching across the Marchfeld towards the Austrians.
The following day,  the Austrian army agreed to abandon Northern Italy once more with the Convention of Alessandria, which granted them safe passage to friendly soil in exchange for their fortresses throughout the region.
He reorganized France itself to supply the men and money needed for wars.
He also brought out 1,000 wounded men.
In 1861, Napoleon's remains were entombed in a porphyry sarcophagus in the crypt under the dome at Les Invalides.
In the first few months on Elba he created a small navy and army, developed the iron mines, oversaw the construction of new roads, issued decrees on modern agricultural methods, and overhauled the island's legal and educational system.
Napoleon shattered this coalition with decisive victories in the Ulm Campaign and a historic triumph at the Battle of Austerlitz, which led to the elimination of the Holy Roman Empire.
Napoleon saw his chance to recuperate the formerly wealthy colony when he signed the Treaty of Amiens.
Napoleon's baptism took place in Ajaccio on 21 July 1771; he was piously raised as a Catholic but he never developed much faith.
The hostility of devout Catholics against the state had now largely been resolved.
There was no secret ballot in 1802 and few people wanted to openly defy the regime; the constitution gained approval with over 99% of the vote.
McLynn states that, "He can be viewed as the man who set back European economic life for a generation by the dislocating impact of his wars."
Under the terms of Amiens, however, Napoleon agreed to appease British demands by not abolishing slavery in any colonies where the 1794 decree had never been implemented.
The victory boosted the morale of the French army.
Bonaparte began with an army of 13,000 men; 1,500 were reported missing, 1,200 died in combat, and thousands perished from disease—mostly bubonic plague.
Napoleon reorganised what had been the Holy Roman Empire, made up of more than a thousand entities,  into a more streamlined forty-state Confederation of the Rhine; this provided the basis for the German Confederation and the unification of Germany in 1871.
Upon graduating in September 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in ''La Fère'' artillery regiment.
Bonaparte wished to establish a French presence in the Middle East, with the ultimate dream of linking with Tipu Sultan, a Muslim enemy of the British in India.
Forshufvud and Weider observed that Napoleon had attempted to quench abnormal thirst by drinking large amounts of orgeat syrup that contained cyanide compounds in the almonds used for flavouring.
The myth of the "Napoleon Complex”—named after him to describe men who have an inferiority complex—stems primarily from the fact that he was listed, incorrectly, as 5 feet 2 inches (in French units) at the time of his death.
Napoleon's forces fought the Coalition armies, commanded by the Duke of Wellington and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher, at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815.
Napoleon was crowned Emperor on 2 December 1804 at Notre Dame de Paris in a ceremony presided over by Pope Pius VII.
There was a lull in fighting over the winter of 1812–13 while both the Russians and the French rebuilt their forces; Napoleon was able to field 350,000 troops.
The army was left in the charge of Jean Baptiste Kléber.
Seeking national reconciliation between revolutionaries and Catholics, the Concordat of 1801 was signed on 15 July 1801 between Napoleon and Pope Pius VII.
Despite these problems, the Treaties of Tilsit at last gave Napoleon a respite from war and allowed him to return to France, which he had not seen in over 300 days.
Napoleon's original death mask was created around 6 May, although it is not clear which doctor created it.
Pressburg took Austria out of both the war and the Coalition while reinforcing the earlier treaties of Campo Formio and of Lunéville between the two powers.
When he became First Consul and later Emperor, Napoleon eschewed his general's uniform and habitually wore the green colonel uniform (non-Hussar) of a colonel of the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that served as his personal escort many times, with a large bicorne.
Metternich's motivation was to maintain France as a balance against Russian threats, while ending the highly destabilizing series of wars.
Invasions of enemy territory occurred over broader fronts which made wars costlier and more decisive.
Napoleon arrived in Paris on 20 March and governed for a period now called the Hundred Days.
Napoleon's use of propaganda contributed to his rise to power, legitimated his régime, and established his image for posterity.
Napoleon entered the ceremony wearing the laurel wreath and kept it on his head throughout the proceedings.
His description of Napoleon in the months before his death led Sten Forshufvud in a 1961 paper in ''Nature'' to put forward other causes for his death, including deliberate arsenic poisoning.
On 1 August, the British fleet under Horatio Nelson captured or destroyed all but two French vessels in the Battle of the Nile, defeating Bonaparte's goal to strengthen the French position in the Mediterranean.
Napoleon took a retrograde step in 1812 when he passed legislation to introduce the ''mesures usuelles'' (traditional units of measurement) for retail trade—a system of measure that resembled the pre-revolutionary units but were based on the kilogram and the metre; for example the ''livre metrique'' (metric pound) was 500&nbsp;g instead of 489.5 g—the value of the ''livre du roi'' (the king's pound).
Antommarchi found evidence of a stomach ulcer; this was the most convenient explanation for the British, who wanted to avoid criticism over their care of Napoleon.
In early 1799, he moved an army into the Ottoman province of Damascus (Syria and Galilee).
He met Talleyrand, France's new Foreign Minister—who served in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon—and they began to prepare for an invasion of Britain.
The resulting Treaty of Schönbrunn in October 1809 was the harshest that France had imposed on Austria in recent memory.
At Rivoli, the Austrians lost up to 14,000 men while the French lost about 5,000.
The British army only landed at Walcheren on 30 July, by which point the Austrians had already been defeated.
Emperor Francis wanted to wait and see how the British performed in their theater before entering into negotiations with Napoleon.
A boy and girl were born before Joseph but died in infancy.
He also habitually wore (usually on Sundays) the blue uniform of a colonel of the Imperial Guard Foot Grenadiers (blue with white facings and red cuffs).
The dispute culminated in a declaration of war by Britain in May 1803; Napoleon responded by reassembling the invasion camp at Boulogne.
This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again but dependent on Bonaparte, who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria.
The Allies responded by forming a Seventh Coalition, which defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo in June.
Amiens called for the withdrawal of British troops from recently conquered colonial territories as well as for assurances to curtail the expansionary goals of the French Republic.
The scale of their defeat convinced the Russians to make peace with the French.
He fought the Battle of Shubra Khit against the Mamluks, Egypt's ruling military caste.
The decisive French triumph at Rivoli in January 1797 led to the collapse of the Austrian position in Italy.
Napoleon appointed his brother, Joseph Bonaparte, as the new King of Spain in the summer of 1808.
Unwilling to bear the economic consequences of reduced trade, the Russians violated the Continental System and enticed Napoleon into war.
One of his major objectives became enforcing the Continental System against the British.
The Russians again avoided battle, although in a few cases this was only achieved because Napoleon uncharacteristically hesitated to attack when the opportunity arose.
Napoleon then returned to France and prepared for war.
He arrived at Donauwörth on the 17th to find the ''Grande Armée'' in a dangerous position, with its two wings separated by  and joined together by a thin cordon of Bavarian troops.
Murat married one of Napoleon's sisters and became his brother-in-law; he also served under Napoleon as one of his generals.
A single corps properly situated in a strong defensive position could survive at least a day without support, giving the ''Grande Armée'' countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign.
Napoleon, expecting to win the war, delayed too long and lost this opportunity; by December the Allies had withdrawn the offer.
He was seen as so favourable to the Jews that the Russian Orthodox Church formally condemned him as "Antichrist and the Enemy of God".
General Bonaparte and his expedition eluded pursuit by the Royal Navy and landed at Alexandria on 1 July.
In 1809, the Austrians challenged the French again during the War of the Fifth Coalition, but Napoleon solidified his grip over Europe after triumphing at the Battle of Wagram in July 1809.
She became known as "Cleopatra."
Widespread rumors of Napoleon's return from St. Helena and Napoleon as an inspiration for patriotism, individual and collective liberties, and political mobilization manifested themselves in seditious materials, displaying the tricolor and rosettes.
Napoleon's maternal grandmother had married into the Swiss Fesch family in her second marriage, and Napoleon's uncle, the cardinal Joseph Fesch, would fulfill the role as protector of the Bonaparte family for some years.
Napoleon would remain as Emperor of France, but it would be reduced to its "natural frontiers."
He was promoted to brigadier general at the age of 24.
There is something very fetching and very eager about him that is impossible to resist."
Desperate to lure the Allies into battle, Napoleon gave every indication in the days preceding the engagement that the French army was in a pitiful state, even abandoning the dominant Pratzen Heights near the village of Austerlitz.
In early November Napoleon got concerned about loss of control back in France after the Malet coup of 1812.
Napoleon acknowledged one illegitimate son: Charles Léon (1806–1881) by Eléonore Denuelle de La Plaigne.
The force of his personality neutralized material difficulties as his soldiers fought with the confidence that with Napoleon in charge they would surely win.
Great Britain had broken the Peace of Amiens by declaring war on France in May 1803.
Joséphine had her daughter Hortense marry Napoleon's brother Louis.
At this time, he was a fervent Corsican nationalist, and wrote to Corsican leader Pasquale Paoli in May 1789, "As the nation was perishing I was born.
His death in 1821 at the age of 51 was received with surprise, shock and grief throughout Europe and left a memory that still persists.
Despite his divorce from Josephine, Napoleon showed his dedication to her for the rest of his life.
If he could not use his favourite envelopment strategy, he would take up the central position and attack two co-operating forces at their hinge, swing round to fight one until it fled, then turn to face the other.
The Continental System, which prohibited European nations from trading with Britain, was widely violated throughout his reign.
Napoleon was moved to Longwood House there in December 1815; it had fallen into disrepair, and the location was damp, windswept and unhealthy.
Two separate crowns were brought for the ceremony: a golden laurel wreath recalling the Roman Empire and a replica of Charlemagne's crown.
In the ensuing Battle of Wagram, which also lasted two days, Napoleon commanded his forces in what was the largest battle of his career up until then.
Britain now remained the only nation that was still at war with France.
In January 1779, he was enrolled at a religious school in Autun.
Napoleon could be considered one of the founders of modern Germany.
Political observers at the time assumed the eligible French voting public numbered about 5 million people, so the regime artificially doubled the participation rate to indicate popular enthusiasm for the Consulate.
The brazen reorganization of German territory by the French risked threatening Prussian influence in the region, if not eliminating it outright.
Twenty-nine French and approximately 2,000 Egyptians were killed.
He was christened ''Napoleone di Buonaparte'', probably named after an uncle (an older brother who did not survive infancy was the first of the sons to be called Napoleone).
In 1840, Louis Philippe I obtained permission from the British to return Napoleon's remains to France.
The system featured scholarships and strict discipline, with the result being a French educational system that outperformed its European counterparts, many of which borrowed from the French system.
Although critics have blamed Napoleon for several tactical mistakes preceding the battle, they have also praised his audacity for selecting a risky campaign strategy, choosing to invade the Italian peninsula from the north when the vast majority of French invasions came from the west, near or along the coastline.
France and Austria agreed to an armistice immediately and the Treaty of Pressburg followed shortly after on 26 December.
The Austrians launched a series of offensives against the French to break the siege, but Napoleon defeated every relief effort, scoring victories at the battles of Castiglione, Bassano, Arcole, and Rivoli.
He engineered a coup in November 1799 and became First Consul of the Republic.
With crisis after crisis at hand, he rarely rose to the occasion.
His role in the Haitian Revolution and decision to reinstate slavery in France's oversea colonies are controversial and affect his reputation.
He formally adopted her son Eugène and cousin Stéphanie and arranged dynastic marriages for them.
The war then settled into a complex and asymmetric strategic deadlock where all sides struggled to gain the upper hand.
By August 1805, Napoleon had realized that the strategic situation had changed fundamentally.
In the ''bataillon-carré'' system, the various corps of the ''Grande Armée'' would march uniformly together in close supporting distance.
However, on orders of the city's governor Feodor Rostopchin, rather than capitulation, Moscow was burned.
Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim surrendered after token resistance, and Bonaparte captured an important naval base with the loss of only three men.
On receipt of intelligence reports on Russia's war preparations, Napoleon expanded his ''Grande Armée'' to more than 450,000 men.
International Napoleonic Congresses take place regularly, with participation by members of the French and American military, French politicians and scholars from different countries.
On 13 March, the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw.
Catching the attention of the Committee of Public Safety, he was put in charge of the artillery of France's Army of Italy.
The two sides reached an agreement, the Erfurt Convention, that called upon Britain to cease its war against France, that recognized the Russian conquest of Finland from Sweden, and that affirmed Russian support for France in a possible war against Austria "to the best of its ability."
Bonaparte dispatched an impassioned defense in a letter to the commissar Salicetti, and he was subsequently acquitted of any wrongdoing.
The political effect of war increased; defeat for a European power meant more than the loss of isolated enclaves.
As in previous campaigns, his fundamental objective was to destroy one opponent before reinforcements from another could tip the balance of the war.
