''QB's Finest'' is a compilation album that featured Nas and a number of other rappers from Queensbridge projects, including Mobb Deep, Nature, Capone, the Bravehearts, Tragedy Khadafi, Millennium Thug and Cormega, who had briefly reconciled with Nas.
Kelis gave birth to Nas's first son on July 21, 2009, although the event was soured by a disagreement which ended in Nas announcing the birth of his son, Knight, at a gig in Queens, NY, against Kelis's wishes.
When they were not in the studio, Nas would go into the booth and record his own material.
He also appeared on DJ Khaled's album ''Major Key'', on a track simply titled "Nas Album Done", suggesting an upcoming album was not only completed, but also imminent.
After trading subliminal criticisms on various songs, freestyles and mixtape appearances, the highly publicized feud between Nas and Jay-Z became widely known to the public in 2001.
Nas was featured on the song "We Are" from Justin Bieber's fourth studio album, ''Purpose'', released in November 2015.
DiBella noticed that Nas also covered "politics, the state of hip-hop, Y2K, race, and religion with his own unique perspective" in the album besides autobiographical lyrics.
In 2014, Nas invested as part of a $2.8M round in viral video startup ViralGains another addition to Queens-bridge venture partners portfolio.
His debut album ''Illmatic'' (1994) received universal acclaim from both critics and the hip hop community and is frequently ranked as one of the greatest hip hop albums of all time.
In December 2002, Nas released the ''God's Son'' album including its lead single, "Made You Look" which utilized a pitched down sample of the Incredible Bongo Band's "Apache".
On April 16, 2014, on the 20th anniversary of ''Illmatic'', the documentary ''Nas: Time Is Illmatic'' was premiered which recounted circumstances leading up to Nas's debut album.
We heard your voice, we saw your marching, we heard your sermons.
In 1998, Nas co-wrote and starred in Hype Williams's 1998 feature film ''Belly''.
In 1995, Nas did guest performances on the albums ''Doe or Die'' by AZ, ''The Infamous'' by Mobb Deep, ''Only Built 4 Cuban Linx'' by Raekwon and ''4,5,6'' by Kool G Rap.
Called the new Rakim, his rhyming skills attracted a significant amount of attention within the hip-hop community.
During his ''Talking Points Memo'' segment for August 15, 2007, an argument erupted in which O'Reilly claimed that it was not only Nas's lyrical content that made him inappropriate for the event, citing the gun conviction on Nas's criminal record.
Steve Huey of AllMusic described Nas's lyrics on ''Illmatic'' as "highly literate" and his raps "superbly fluid regardless of the size of his vocabulary", adding that Nas is "able to evoke the bleak reality of ghetto life without losing hope or forgetting the good times".
Nas initially went by the nickname Kid Wave before adopting his more commonly known alias of Nasty Nas.
2 on their list of the ''Top 50 Lyricists of All Time''.
When host Henry Louis Gates showed Nas her bill of sale and told him more about the man who bought her, Nas remarked that he is considering buying the land where he lived.
He went on to say that it was "too early to tell the title or anything like that".
The album also featured guest appearances from Queensbridge hip-hop legends Roxanne Shanté, MC Shan, and Marley Marl.
The video featured Nas and Combs being crucified in a manner similar to Jesus; after the video was completed, Combs requested his crucifixion scene be edited out of the video.
Dre Presents the Aftermath''.
Nas's management worried that the album would not be sold by chain stores such as Wal-Mart, thus limiting its distribution.
O'Reilly repeated the claim another five times before cutting the segment short.
''The Lost Tapes'', a compilation of previously unreleased or bootlegged songs from 1997 to 2001, was released by Columbia in September 2002.
He educated himself about African culture through the Five Percent Nation and the Nuwaubian Nation.
In July 2013, he was honored by Harvard University, as the institution established the Nasir Jones Hip-Hop Fellowship, which will serve to fund scholars and artists who show potential and creativity in the arts in connection to hip hop.
Both progressive commentators, such as Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton, and the conservative news station Fox News were outraged; Jackson called on entertainers to stop using the epithet after comedian Michael Richards used it onstage in late 2006.
About.com ranked ''Illmatic'' as the greatest hip hop album of all time, and ''Prefix'' magazine praised it as "the best hip-hop record ever made".
About.com ranked him first on their list of the "50 Greatest MCs of All Time" in 2014, and a year later, Nas was featured on "The 10 Best Rappers of All Time" list by ''Billboard''.
Also in ''How to Rap'', 2Mex of The Visionaries describes Nas's flow as "effervescent", Rah Digga says Nas's lyrics have "intricacy", Bootie Brown of The Pharcyde explains that Nas does not always have to make words rhyme as he is "charismatic", and Nas is also described as having a "densely packed" flow, with compound rhymes that "run over from one beat into the next or even into another bar".
His great-great-great-grandmother, Pocahontas Little, was a slave who was sold for $830.
In 2005, Nas married R&B singer Kelis in Atlanta after a two-year relationship.
In July, Nas attained a shoe deal with Fila.
The album was ultimately released on July 15, 2008, untitled.
His matrilineal DNA haplogroup is of African origin, found among the Yoruba and Fulbe populations in Western Africa.
Both the feud and ''Stillmatic'' signalled an artistic comeback for Nas after a string of inconsistent albums.
'''Nasir bin Olu Dara Jones''' (; born September 14, 1973), better known by his stage name '''Nas''' , is an American hip hop recording artist, record producer, actor and entrepreneur.
Robert Christgau writes that "Nas has been transfiguring gangsta rap since ''Illmatic''".
However, none of it was ever released.
After announcing a possible release in 2010, a follow-up compilation to ''The Lost Tapes'' (2002) was delayed indefinitely due to issues between him and Def Jam.
Early in 2012 reports emerged that the IRS had filed papers in Georgia to garnish a portion of Nas's earnings from material published under BMI and ASCAP, until his delinquent tax bill is settled.
In October, Nas made a surprise appearance at Jay-Z's highly publicized I Declare War concert, where they reconciled their beef.
In October 2013, DJ Premier said that his collaboration album with Nas, would be released following his twelfth studio album.
Nas is often named as one of the greatest hip hop artists.
He is also an entrepreneur through his own record label; he serves as associate publisher of ''Mass Appeal'' magazine and is the owner of a Fila sneaker store.
His stuff is not really singing, or if he does, it comes off more hard, like on some street shit.
The Autobiography'' was completed in early 1999, and a music video was shot for its lead single, "Nas Is Like".
In late 1998, Nas began work on a double album, to be entitled ''I Am...
In 2005, New York-based rapper 50 Cent dissed Nas on the song "Piggy Bank", which brought his reputation into question in hip hop circles.
In the midst of his debate with author Bakari Kitwana (''The Hip Hop Generation''), who defended Nas, claiming that Fox News had "cherry picked" select fragments of the songs to make their case, O'Reilly shouted, "Even in his personal life, man, he's got a conviction for weapons, all right?
Within minutes of the broadcast, Combs and his bodyguards allegedly made their way into Steve Stoute's office and assaulted him, at one point apparently hitting Stoute over the head with a champagne bottle.
The son of jazz musician Olu Dara, Nas has released eight consecutive platinum and multi-platinum albums and sold over 25 million records worldwide since 1994.
As a young child, Nas and his family relocated to the Queensbridge Houses in the Long Island City neighborhood of Queens.
He's got a weapons conviction, sir!
Nas has also struck a business partner with the annual Rock The Bells music festival and a deal with the online retail company 12Society.com.
At the show, Jay-Z announced to the crowd, "It's bigger than 'I Declare War'.
Shan and Marley Marl both appeared on the lead single "Da Bridge 2001", which was based on Shan & Marl's 1986 recording "The Bridge".
''The Los Angeles Times'' reported that the album would be titled ''Distant Relatives''.
They released the track "I Am Somebody" in May, 2014.
In September 2009 the U.S. Internal Revenue Service filed a federal tax lien against Nas for over $2.5 million, seeking unpaid taxes dating back to 2006.
It featured production from Polow da Don, stic.man of Dead Prez, Sons of Light and J. Myers,
Nas said of the collaboration in an interview "I was a big fan of his father and of course all the children, all the offspring, and Damian, I kind of looked at Damian as a rap guy.
When announced that Nas was to perform, political commentator Bill O'Reilly and Fox News Channel denounced the concert and called for Nas's removal, citing "violent" lyrics on songs such as "Shoot 'Em Up", "Got Urself a Gun", and "Made You Look".
It was awarded best album of 1994 by ''The Source''.
He is currently signed to Mass Appeal Records.
I'd worked with people before from the reggae world but when I worked with Damian, the whole workout was perfect".
A portion of the profit is planned to go towards building a school in Africa.
Nas responded with "Ether", in which he compared Jay-Z to such characters as J.J. Evans from the sitcom ''Good Times'' and cigarette company mascot Joe Camel.
Nas was announced as one of the executive producers of the Netflix original series, ''The Get Down'', prior to its release in August 2016.
In his book ''Book of Rhymes: The Poetics of Hip Hop'' (2009), writer Adam Bradley states, "Nas is perhaps contemporary rap's greatest innovator in storytelling.
In May 2014 Nas partnered with job placement startup Koru to fund a scholarship for 10 college graduates to go through Koru's training program.
The couple's divorce was finalized on May 21, 2010.
In 2003, Nas was featured on the Korn song "Play Me", from Korn's ''Take a Look in the Mirror'' LP.
His father, Olu Dara (born Charles Jones III), is a jazz and blues musician, from Mississippi.
Although ''Street's Disciple'' went platinum, it served as a dropoff from Nas's previous commercial successes.
I always liked how reggae and hip-hop have always been intertwined and always kind of pushed each other, I always liked the connection.
As a teenager, Nas enlisted his best friend and upstairs neighbor Willy "Ill Will" Graham as his DJ.
As a businessman and investor, he invested an undisclosed six figure sum into Mass Appeal Magazine, where he will serve as the publication's associate publisher.
"Hero", the album's lead single, reached number 97 on the ''Billboard'' Hot 100 and number 87 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks.
His parents divorced in 1985, and he dropped out of school after the eighth grade.
Nas is a co-owner of a Cloud-based service known as LANDR.
Stoute pressed charges, but he and Combs settled out-of-court that June.
However, the unedited copy of the "Hate Me Now" video made its way to MTV.
Nas then joined him onstage, and the two performed Jay-Z's "Dead Presidents" (1996) together, a song that featured a prominent sample of Nas's "The World Is Yours" (1994).
In 2013, Nas was ranked fourth on MTV's "Hottest MCs in the Game" list.
In an interview with MTV News in July, Nas speculated that he might release two albums—one produced by DJ Premier and another by Dr. Dre—simultaneously the same day.
The double-sided single "Thief's Theme"/"You Know My Style" was released months before the album's release, followed by the single "Bridging the Gap" upon the album's release.
In September 2013, he invested in a technology startup company, a job search appmaker called Proven.
Two singles, "If I Ruled the World (Imagine That)" (featuring Lauryn Hill of The Fugees) and "Street Dreams", including a remix with R. Kelly were instant hits.
Landr automates "mastering", the final stage in audio production before music gets sent out to the world.
In June 2015, Nas expanded his business portfolio when he joined forces with New York City soul food restaurant Sweet Chick.
Nas is also shown the marriage certificate of his great-great-great-grandmother, Pocahontas and great-great-great-grandfather, Calvin.
His mother, Fannie Ann (Little) Jones, was a Postal Service worker from North Carolina.
In an article at the time, Joseph Jones of PopMatters stated, "Whether you like it or not, 'Ether' did this.
It's no more Jesse.
In 2012, ''The Source'' ranked him No.
After the album's release, he began helping The Bravehearts, made up of his younger brother Jungle and friend Wiz (Wizard), put together their debut album, ''Bravehearted''.
On March 15, 2012, Nas became the first rapper to have a personal verified account on Rap Genius where he explains all his own lyrics and commenting on the lyrics of other rappers he admires.
In May 2013, it was announced that Nas will open a sneaker store in Las Vegas called 12AM RUN (pronounced Midnight Run) as part of The LINQ retail development.
The album spawned several singles, including "The World Is Yours", "It Ain't Hard to Tell", and "One Love".
''God's Son'' was critical in the power struggle between Nas and Jay-Z in hip hop at the time.
Nas's former label, Columbia Records, released the compilation ''Greatest Hits'' in November.
You ain't helping nobody in the 'hood and that's the bottom line."
In January 2013 Nas announced he had begun working on his twelfth studio album, which will be his final album for Def Jam.
He plans to expand the restaurant brand nationally.
During the appearance, Nas sat on boxes of more than 625,000 signatures gathered by online advocacy organization Color of Change in support of a petition accusing Fox of race-baiting and fear-mongering.
The song was included on Nas's fifth studio album, ''Stillmatic'', released in December 2001.
Jay-Z, in his song "Takeover", criticized Nas by calling him "fake" and his career "lame".
''Nas, Foxy Brown, AZ, and Nature Present The Firm: The Album'' was finally released in 1997 to mixed reviews.
Signed to Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment label, The Firm began working on their debut album.
He has one sibling, a brother named Jabari Fret who is best known as "Jungle", a member of the hip hop group Bravehearts.
With ''God's Son'', Nas has the opportunity to cement his status as the King of N.Y., at least for another 3–4-year term, or he could prove that he is not the savior that hip-hop fans should be pinning their hopes on."
The album features guest appearances from Nas, Nashawn (Millennium Thug), Lil Jon, and Jully Black.
comments in the book ''How to Rap'': "Nas did the song backwards 'Rewind'... that was a brilliant idea".
In 2013, Nas was ranked fourth on MTV's "Hottest MCs in the Game" list.
It was produced by DJ Premier and contained vocal samples from "It Ain't Hard to Tell".
''God's Son'' also includes several songs dedicated to memory of Nas's mother, who died of cancer in April 2002, including "Dance".
The collection attained respectable sales and received rave reviews from critics.
During this period, Nas was one of four rappers (the others being B-Real, KRS-One and RBX) in the hip hop super-group Group Therapy, who appeared on the song "East Coast/West Coast Killas" from ''Dr.
His neighbor, Willy "Ill Will" Graham, influenced Nas's interest in hip hop by playing him records.
The reconciliation created the opportunity for Nas to sign a deal with Def Jam Recordings, of which Jay-Z was president at the time.
''Stillmatic'' peaked at number five on the U.S. ''Billboard'' 200 chart and featured the singles "Got Ur Self A..." and "One Mic".
In his book ''To the Break of Dawn: A Freestyle on the Hip Hop Aesthetic'', William Jelani Cobb writes of Nas's impact at the time:
In January 2012 Nas was involved in a dispute with a concert promoter in Angola, having accepted $300,000 for a concert in Luanda, Angola's capital for New Year's Eve and then not showing up.
In 2014, About.com ranked him first on their list of the "50 Greatest MCs of All Time".
By early 2011 this figure had ballooned to over $6.4 million.
Halfway through the production of the album, Cormega was fired from the group by Steve Stoute, who had unsuccessfully attempted to force Cormega to sign a deal with his management company.
His debut ''Illmatic'' is widely considered among the greatest hip hop albums of all time.
The signing included an agreement that Nas was to be paid about 3 million dollars, including a recording budget, for each of his first two albums with Def Jam.
Much of the LP was leaked into MP3 format onto the Internet and Nas and Stoute quickly recorded enough substitute material to constitute a single-disc release.
We'd talked about it and we had a good idea to call it ''Nas.Com''.
On the other hand, ''Illmatic'', which, while having numerous references to ''Scarface'' protagonist Tony Montana, was more about his life growing up in the projects.
His catalog includes songs narrated before birth ('Fetus') and after death ('Amongst Kings'), biographies ('UBR Unauthorized Biography of Rakim') and autobiographies ('Doo Rags'), allegorical tales ('Money Is My Bitch') and epistolary ones ('One Love'), he's rapped in the voice of a woman ('Sekou Story') and even of a gun ('I Gave You Power')."
These songs were promoted by big-budget music videos directed by Hype Williams, making Nas a common name among mainstream hip-hop.
On the opposite side of the spectrum, many of the most famous names in the entertainment industry expressed a sense of trust in Nas for using the racial epithet as the title of his full-length LP.
Nasir bin Olu Dara Jones was born September 14, 1973, in Brooklyn, New York.
Reviewing Nas's second album ''It Was Written'', Leo Stanley of allmusic believed the rhymes to be not as complex as those in ''Illmatic'' but still "not only flow, but manage to tell coherent stories as well".
''Life is Good'' would be nominated for Best Rap Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards.
Nas released his seventh studio album ''Street's Disciple'', a sprawling double album, on November 30, 2004.
It addressed subject matter both political and personal, including his impending marriage to recording artist Kelis.
But we decided that we should make it an album."
Controversy escalated as the album's impending release date drew nearer, going as far as to spark rumors that Def Jam was planning to drop Nas unless he changed the title.
In 2006, Nas was ranked fifth on MTV's "10 Greatest MCs of All Time" list.
In 2002, in the midst of the feud between the two New York rappers, Eminem cited both Nas and Jay-Z as being two of the best MCs in the industry, in his song 'Till I Collapse.
His father took his name "Olu Dara" from the Yoruba people.
He signed Nas in January 2006.
It also inspired reactions about the state of hip hop, particularly controversy with Southern hip hop artists who felt the album's title was a criticism at them.
In 1991, Nas performed on Main Source's "Live at the Barbeque".
Nas also parted ways with manager MC Serch, enlisted Steve Stoute, and began preparation for his second LP, ''It Was Written'', consciously working towards a crossover-oriented sound.
Nas has been praised for his ability to create a "devastating match between lyrics and production" by journalist Peter Shapiro, as well as creating a "potent evocation of life on the street", and he has even been compared to Rakim for his lyrical technique.
The album debuted on Def Jam and Nas new imprint at that label, The Jones Experience, at number one on the ''Billboard'' 200 charts, selling 355,000 copies—Nas's third number one album, along with ''It Was Written'' and ''I Am...''.
In an October 2014 episode of PBS's ''Finding Your Roots'' programme, Nas learned about five generations of his ancestry.
Nas also has a partnership with Hennessy and has been working with their "Wild Rabbit" campaign.
In June 2013, he also announced on Twitter that he was opening his own sneaker store, signalling his entrance into the retail industry.
Common said of the project in a 2011 interview, "At some point, we will do that.
The Autobiography''; he intended it as the middle ground between ''Illmatic'' and ''It Was Written'', with each track detailing a part of his life.
His musical career began in 1991 as featured artist on Main Source's "Live at the Barbeque".
In 2015, Nas was also named on Billboard's list of "The 10 Best Rappers of All Time."
Nas also briefly dated Mary J. Blige.
In 2012, ''The Source'' ranked him number two on their list of the "Top 50 Lyricists of All Time".
He also said of the album's title:
In 1994, Nas also recorded the song "One on One" for the soundtrack to the film ''Street Fighter''.
Though critics were not kind to the album, it did result in a minor hit, "You Owe Me".
In 2000, ''Nas & Ill Will Records Presents QB's Finest'', which is popularly known as simply ''QB's Finest'', was released on Nas's Ill Will Records.
On April 10, 2013, Nas ventured into the business of magazine publishing.
The album also expanded on Nas's Escobar persona, who lived more of a ''Scarface''/''Casino''-esque lifestyle.
Only after the US Embassy intervened were the promoter and his son allowed to leave jail—but were placed under house arrest at their hotel.
Nas also will be joining the startup as a guest coach.
MTV ranked him at number 5 on their list of "The Greatest MCs of All Time".
Also in 2003, a live performance in New York City, featuring Ludacris, Jadakiss, and Darryl McDaniels (of Run-D.M.C.
Warner Music Group, Nas and the Plus Eight Equity Fund (which is backed by Pete Tong, Richie Hawtin, Tiga and John Acquaviva) are among the participants in a $6.2 million funding round.
The promoter and his son were detained by the angry Angolan promoter at gunpoint and taken to an Angolan jail.
In 2011, Nas announced that he would release collaboration albums with Mobb Deep, Common, and a third with DJ Premier.
We don't want to hear that shit no more.
We don't need Jesse; I'm here.
On July 23, 2008, Nas appeared on ''The Colbert Report'' to discuss his opinion of O'Reilly and Fox News, which he accused of bias against the African-American community and re-challenged O'Reilly to a debate.
All you old niggas' time is up.
In response to "Ether", Jay-Z released the song "Supa Ugly", which Hot 97 radio host Angie Martinez premiered on December 11, 2001.
It was reported on September 10 that Nas has finished his last album with Def Jam.
His eleventh studio album, ''Life Is Good'' (2012) and was nominated for Best Rap Album at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards.
Vibe gave it four stars and The Source gave it four mics.
New York City hip-hop radio station Hot 97 issued a poll asking listeners which rapper made the better diss song; Nas won with 58% while Jay-Z got 42% of the votes.
Nas created a style of rapping that was more conversational than ever before".
Shaheem Reid of MTV News called ''Illmatic'' "the first classic LP" of 1994.
As of the end of the month Nas returned all $300,000 and after 49 days of travel ban the promoter Patrick Allocco and his son have both been released.
About two weeks later, Nas was interviewed by Shaheem Reid of MTV News, where he criticized O'Reilly, calling him uncivilized and willing to go to extremes for publicity.
Fans and critics feared that Nas's career was declining, artistically and commercially, as both ''I Am...'' and ''Nastradamus'' were criticized as inconsistent.
Responding to Jesse Jackson's remarks and use of the word "nigger", Nas called him "the biggest player hater", stating "His time is up.
On April 30, 2009, a spokesperson confirmed that Kelis filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences.
In 1994, Nas's debut album, ''Illmatic'', was finally released.
He owns his own clothing line called HSTRY.
Time Magazine named his album best hip-hop album of the year.
Nas also revealed that he will begin working on his tenth studio album following the release of ''Distant Relatives''.
That was actually going to be a mixtape at one point.
On September 6, 2007, Nas performed at a free concert for the Virginia Tech student body and faculty, following the school shooting there.
fame), was released on DVD as ''Made You Look: God's Son Live''.
On September 6, 2007, during his set at "A Concert for Virginia Tech", Nas twice referred to Bill O'Reilly as "a chump", prompting loud cheers by members of the crowd.
