Skylab was the United States' first and only independently built space station.
Until another US manned spacecraft is ready, crew members will travel to and from the International Space Station exclusively aboard the Soyuz.
This led to an agreement that a new federal agency mainly based on NACA was needed to conduct all non-military activity in space.
Other active spacecraft missions are Juno for Jupiter, Cassini for Saturn, New Horizons (for Jupiter, Pluto, and beyond), and Dawn for the asteroid belt.
Outside Mars, Jupiter was first visited by Pioneer 10 in 1973.
The agency is also responsible for the Launch Services Program (LSP) which provides oversight of launch operations and countdown management for unmanned NASA launches.
Long duration missions to the ISS are referred to as ISS Expeditions.
The percentage of federal budget that NASA has been allocated has been steadily dropping since the Apollo program and in 2012 it was estimated at 0.48% of the federal budget.
The ISS program is expected to continue until at least 2020, and may be extended beyond 2028.
It stands alone in sending manned missions beyond low Earth orbit, and landing humans on another celestial body.
The ten NASA field centers are:
The X-15 program employed mechanical techniques used in the later manned spaceflight programs, including reaction control system jets for controlling the orientation of a spacecraft, space suits, and horizon definition for navigation.
Additionally, the Exploration Sciences Building was awarded the LEED Gold rating in 2010.
The third administrator was James E. Webb (served 1961–1968), appointed by President John F. Kennedy.
This was the last US manned space flight until the first orbital flight of the Space Shuttle in April 1981.
Apollo set major milestones in human spaceflight.
In order to implement the Apollo program to achieve Kennedy's Moon landing goal by the end of the 1960s, Webb directed major management restructuring and facility expansion, establishing the Houston Manned Spacecraft (Johnson) Center and the Florida Launch Operations (Kennedy) Center.
On the horizon of NASA's plans is the MAVEN spacecraft as part of the Mars Scout Program to study the atmosphere of Mars.
Communication can be difficult with deep space travel.
The Authorization Act required a newly designed HLV be chosen within 90 days of its passing; the launch vehicle was given the name "Space Launch System".
Though the agency is independent, the survival or discontinuation of projects can depend directly on the will of the President.
In the early 1950s, there was challenge to launch an artificial satellite for the International Geophysical Year (1957–58).
The Space Launch System is planned to launch both Orion and other necessary hardware for missions beyond low Earth orbit.
NASA originally planned in the 1980s to develop ''Freedom'' alone, but US budget constraints led to the merger of these projects into a single multi-national program in 1993, managed by NASA, the Russian Federal Space Agency (RKA), the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), the European Space Agency (ESA), and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA).
Since May 2009, expedition crew size has been six crew members.
After this, the program was canceled, and Gemini caught up while spacecraft designer Sergei Korolev developed the Soyuz spacecraft, their answer to Apollo.
Despite being stored unused, the instruments are superior to the Hubble Space Telescope.
Expedition crew members typically spend approximately six months on the ISS.
The act officially canceled the Constellation program.
NASA's Space Shuttle program had 135 missions when the program ended with the successful landing of the Space Shuttle ''Atlantis'' at the Kennedy Space Center on July 21, 2011.
The external tank, which was bigger than the spacecraft itself, was the only major component that was not reused.
NASA addressed environmental concerns with its canceled Constellation program in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act in 2011.
Except under exceptional circumstances, NASA civil service employees are required to be citizens of the United States.
Three three-man crews stayed aboard the station for periods of 28, 59, and 84 days.
To date, NASA has launched a total of 166 manned space missions on rockets, and thirteen X-15 rocket flights above the USAF definition of spaceflight altitude, .
An effort for this was the American Project Vanguard.
The first was Mariner in the 1960s and '70s, which made multiple visits to Venus and Mars and one to Mercury.
Five subsequent Apollo missions also landed astronauts on the Moon, the last in December 1972.
Damaged during launch by the loss of its thermal protection and one electricity-generating solar panel, it was repaired to functionality by its first crew.
The first spacecraft to leave the solar system was Pioneer 10 in 1983.
More than 20 years later ''Galileo'' sent a probe into the planet's atmosphere, and became the first spacecraft to orbit the planet.
Throughout these six Apollo spaceflights, twelve men walked on the Moon.
NASA planned to have a Space Shuttle dock with it, and elevate Skylab to a higher safe altitude, but the Shuttle was not ready for flight before Skylab's re-entry on July 11, 1979.
Once more an American vehicle docked with a Russian craft, this time a full-fledged space station.
The new agency became operational on October 1, 1958.
File:SpaceX Dragon v2 Pad Abort Vehicle (16661791299).jpg|Dragon V2
Based on studies to grow the Mercury spacecraft capabilities to long-duration flights, developing space rendezvous techniques, and precision Earth landing, Project Gemini was started as a two-man program in 1962 to overcome the Soviets' lead and to support the Apollo manned lunar landing program, adding extravehicular activity (EVA) and rendezvous and docking to its objectives.
NASA has conducted many manned and unmanned spaceflight programs throughout its history.
Shortly before, the Soviets had sent an unmanned spacecraft around the Moon.
It used the Saturn rockets as launch vehicles, which were far bigger than the rockets built for previous projects.
Reacting to loss of national prestige and security fears caused by early leads in space exploration by the Soviet Union, in 1961 President John F. Kennedy proposed the ambitious goal "of landing a man on the Moon by the end of the 1960s, and returning him safely to the Earth."
On July 29, 1958, Eisenhower signed the National Aeronautics and Space Act, establishing NASA.
The mission took place in July 1975.
It is then planned to be upgraded to 105 mt and then eventually to 130 mt.
(In comparison, the Manhattan Project cost roughly $, accounting for inflation.)
The first person to stand on the Moon was Neil Armstrong, who was followed by Buzz Aldrin, while Michael Collins orbited above.
Some hypergolic rocket propellants, such as hydrazine, are highly toxic prior to combustion, but decompose into less toxic compounds after burning.
Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston is home to the Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center, where all flight control is managed for manned space missions.
The Soyuz spacecraft delivers crew members, stays docked for their half-year-long missions and then returns them home.
* George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama
On May 5, 1961, astronaut Alan Shepard became the first American in space aboard ''Freedom&nbsp;7'', launched by a Redstone booster on a 15-minute ballistic (suborbital) flight.
NASA science is focused on better understanding Earth through the Earth Observing System, advancing heliophysics through the efforts of the Science Mission Directorate's Heliophysics Research Program, exploring bodies throughout the Solar System with advanced robotic spacecraft missions such as ''New Horizons'', and researching astrophysics topics, such as the Big Bang, through the Great Observatories and associated programs.
On June 5, 2016, NASA and DARPA announced plans to build a series of new X-planes over the next 10 years.
* Advance aeronautics research
However, in 2009, the Augustine Committee found the program to be on a "unsustainable trajectory."
The X-15 was an NACA experimental rocket-powered hypersonic research aircraft, developed in conjunction with the US Air Force and Navy.
* Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland
The first manned Gemini flight, Gemini 3, was flown by Gus Grissom and John Young on March 23, 1965.
On May 8, 2003, Environmental Protection Agency recognized NASA as the first federal agency to directly use landfill gas to produce energy at one of its facilities—the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.
The Space Shuttle, before its retirement, was also used for cargo transfer and would often switch out expedition crew members, although it did not have the capability to remain docked for the duration of their stay.
However, reduction of the perceived threat and changing political priorities almost immediately caused the termination of most of these plans.
The SLS is to be upgraded over time with more powerful versions.
To save cost, NASA used one of the Saturn V rockets originally earmarked for a canceled Apollo mission to launch the Skylab.
The Soviet Union (USSR) competed with its own single-pilot spacecraft, Vostok.
Under the direction of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the USSR competed with Gemini by converting their Vostok spacecraft into a two- or three-man Voskhod.
A more recent Earth mission, not related to the Explorer program, was the Hubble Space Telescope, which as mentioned above was brought into orbit in 1990.
Shortly after the Space Race began, an early objective was to get a person into Earth orbit as soon as possible, therefore the simplest spacecraft that could be launched by existing rockets was favored.
The goal was to start building the moon base by 2020, and by 2024, have a fully functional base that would allow for crew rotations and in-situ resource utilization.
The development of these vehicles was under a fixed price milestone-based program, meaning that each company that received a funded award had a list of milestones with a dollar value attached to them that they didn't receive until after they had successful completed the milestone.
The James Webb Space Telescope is currently scheduled to launch in late 2018.
Some facilities serve more than one application for historic or administrative reasons.
One of the planes will reportedly be a supersonic vehicle that burns low-carbon biofuels and generates quiet sonic booms.
Contact with Pioneer 10 was lost in 2003.
The second manned mission, Apollo 8, brought astronauts for the first time in a flight around the Moon in December 1968.
When it began operations on October 1, 1958, NASA absorbed the 43-year-old NACA intact; its 8,000 employees, an annual budget of US$100&nbsp;million, three major research laboratories (Langley Aeronautical Laboratory, Ames Aeronautical Laboratory, and Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory) and two small test facilities.
In December 1958, NASA gained control of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, a contractor facility operated by the California Institute of Technology.
In February 2010, President Barack Obama's administration proposed eliminating public funds for the Constellation program and shifting greater responsibility of servicing the ISS to private companies.
On May 24, 1972, US President Richard M. Nixon and Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin signed an agreement calling for a joint manned space mission, and declaring intent for all future international manned spacecraft to be capable of docking with each other.
* John H. Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Pioneers 10 and 11 and both Voyager probes carry messages from the Earth to extraterrestrial life.
The CRS program now provides for all America's ISS cargo needs; with the exception of a few vehicle-specific payloads that are delivered on the European ATV and the Japanese HTV.
The New Horizons mission to Pluto was launched in 2006 and successfully performed a flyby of Pluto on July 14, 2015.
At the creation of NASA the Explorer project was transferred to this agency and still continues to this day.
The initial capability of SLS is required to be able to lift 70 mt into LEO.
Skylab's habitable volume was , which was 30.7 times bigger than that of the Apollo Command Module.
Crew size is expected to be increased to seven, the number the ISS was designed for, once the Commercial Crew Program becomes operational.
* Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California
Some missions include both manned and unmanned aspects, such as the Galileo probe, which was deployed by astronauts in Earth orbit before being sent unmanned to Jupiter.
John Glenn became the first American to be launched into orbit by an Atlas launch vehicle on February 20, 1962 aboard ''Friendship&nbsp;7''.
It is currently being assembled in Low Earth Orbit.
For Fiscal Year 2015, NASA received an appropriation of  from Congress—$549 million more than requested and approximately $350 million more than the 2014 NASA budget passed by Congress.
The highest number of people occupying the ISS has been thirteen; this occurred three times during the late Shuttle ISS assembly missions.
In 2010, President Barack Obama halted existing plans, including the Moon base, and directed a generic focus on manned missions to asteroids and Mars, as well as extending support for the International Space Station.
Nine missions followed in 1965 and 1966, demonstrating an endurance mission of nearly fourteen days, rendezvous, docking, and practical EVA, and gathering medical data on the effects of weightlessness on humans.
The International Space Station (ISS) combines NASA's ''Space Station Freedom'' project with the Soviet/Russian ''Mir-2'' station, the European ''Columbus'' station, and the Japanese Kibō laboratory module.
The JPL worked together with ABMA, one of the agencies behind Explorer 1, the first American space mission.
NASA plans to build full scale deep space habitats as part of its Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships (NextSTEP) program.
Eight of the pilots were awarded Air Force astronaut wings for flying above , and two flights by Joseph A. Walker exceeded , qualifying as spaceflight according to the International Aeronautical Federation.
Manned programs sent the first Americans into low Earth orbit (LEO), won the Space Race with the Soviet Union by landing twelve men on the Moon from 1969 to 1972 in the Apollo program, developed a semi-reusable LEO Space Shuttle, and developed LEO space station capability by itself and with the cooperation of several other nations including post-Soviet Russia.
Since 2011, NASA's strategic goals have been
In the 1990s, funding was approved for NASA to develop a permanent Earth orbital space station in cooperation with the international community, which now included the former rival, post-Soviet Russia.
Twelve pilots were selected for the program from the Air Force, Navy, and NACA (later NASA).
As of March 2012, the destination for EM-3 and the intermediate focus for this new program is still in-flux.
Many objects and artifacts from the program are on display at various locations throughout the world, notably at the Smithsonian's Air and Space Museums.
In 2011, the winners of the second phase of the program were announced, $270&nbsp;million was divided among four companies.
It included a laboratory for studying the effects of microgravity, and a solar observatory.
Like COTS, CCDev is also a fixed price milestone-based developmental program that requires some private investment.
They sent the first man in space, by launching cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin into a single Earth orbit aboard Vostok 1 in April 1961, one month before Shepard's flight.
Both Voyager probes continue to operate as they explore the outer boundary between the Solar System and interstellar space.
Another famous series of missions were the launch and later successful repair of the Hubble Space Telescope in 1990 and 1993, respectively.
The ownership and use of the space station is established in intergovernmental treaties and agreements which divide the station into two areas and allow Russia to retain full ownership of the Russian Orbital Segment (with the exception of Zarya), with the US Orbital Segment allocated between the other international partners.
In 2009, President Barack Obama nominated Charles Bolden as NASA's twelfth administrator.
The reentry and landing data collected were valuable to NASA for designing the Space Shuttle.
In 2010, NASA announced the winners of the first phase of the program, a total of $50&nbsp;million was divided among five American companies to foster research and development into human spaceflight concepts and technologies in the private sector.
The first to launch, ''Columbia'', did so on April 12, 1981, the 20th anniversary of the first known human space flight.
The shuttle could orbit in altitudes of 185–643&nbsp;km (115–400 miles) and carry a maximum payload (to low orbit) of 24,400&nbsp;kg (54,000&nbsp;lb).
Administrator Bolden is one of three NASA administrators who were astronauts, along with Richard H. Truly (served 1989–1992) and Frederick D. Gregory (acting, 2005).
The development of the Commercial Resupply Services (CRS) vehicles began in 2006 with the purpose of creating American commercially operated uncrewed cargo vehicles to service the ISS.
File:CST-100.jpg|Computer rendering of CST-100 in orbit
A total of 199 flights were made between 1959 and 1968, resulting in the official world record for the highest speed ever reached by a manned powered aircraft (current ), and a maximum speed of Mach 6.72, .
This is a technique where the satellite takes advantage of the gravity and velocity of planets to reach its destination.
Orbital Sciences uses its Antares rocket and Cygnus spacecraft.
The altitude record for X-15 was 354,200 feet (107.96&nbsp;km).
The new law also required the construction of a beyond low earth orbit spacecraft.
Pioneer 11 became the first spacecraft to visit Saturn in 1979, with Voyager 2 making the first (and so far only) visits to Uranus and Neptune in 1986 and 1989, respectively.
More than 1,000 unmanned missions have been designed to explore the Earth and the solar system.
In September 2011, NASA announced the start of the Space Launch System program to develop a human-rated heavy lift vehicle.
The first Dragon resupply mission occurred in May 2012.
This goal was met in 1969 by the Apollo program, and NASA planned even more ambitious activities leading to a manned mission to Mars.
In 2014, the winners of the final round were announced.
Elements of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency and the United States Naval Research Laboratory were incorporated into NASA.
Private companies were also required to have some "skin in the game" which refers raising an unspecified amount of private investment for their proposal.
NASA continued to support ''in situ'' exploration beyond the asteroid belt, including Pioneer and Voyager traverses into the unexplored trans-Pluto region, and Gas Giant orbiters Galileo (1989–2003), Cassini (1997–), and Juno (2011–).
The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was created in February 1958 to develop space technology for military application.
It cost more than $20 billion in 1960s dollars or an estimated $ in present-day US dollars.
The program spurred advances in many areas of technology peripheral to rocketry and manned spaceflight, including avionics, telecommunications, and computers.
The on-orbit assembly began in 1998, the completion of the US Orbital Segment occurred in 2011 and the completion of the Russian Orbital Segment is expected by 2016.
Topics covered by experiments performed included soil mechanics, meteoroids, seismology, heat flow, lunar ranging, magnetic fields, and solar wind.
Rockets using hydrocarbon fuels, such as kerosene, release carbon dioxide and soot in their exhaust.
NASA turned its attention to an Apollo-derived temporary space laboratory, and a semi-reusable Earth orbital shuttle.
They succeeded in launching two manned flights before Gemini's first flight, achieving a three-cosmonaut flight in 1963 and the first EVA in 1964.
File:James Webb Space Telescope 2009 top.jpg|James Webb Space Telescope
President Dwight D. Eisenhower established NASA in 1958 with a distinctly civilian (rather than military) orientation encouraging peaceful applications in space science.
The inner Solar System has been made the goal of at least four unmanned programs.
The initial expedition crew size was three, temporarily decreased to two following the Columbia disaster.
Another major facility is Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama at which the Saturn 5 rocket and Skylab were developed.
NASA's facilities are research, construction and communication centers to help its missions.
In August 1962, they achieved an almost four-day record flight with Andriyan Nikolayev aboard Vostok 3, and also conducted a concurrent Vostok 4 mission carrying Pavel Popovich.
By 1958, the space plane concepts were eliminated in favor of the ballistic capsule.
From 1946, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) had been experimenting with rocket planes such as the supersonic Bell X-1.
During a speech at the Kennedy Space Center on April 15, 2010, Obama proposed a new heavy-lift vehicle (HLV) to replace the formerly planned Ares V. In his speech, Obama called for a manned mission to an asteroid as soon as 2025, and a manned mission to Mars orbit by the mid-2030s.
Twenty years later a rover was landed on Mars by Mars Pathfinder.
After the Soviet launch of the world's first artificial satellite (''Sputnik 1'') on October 4, 1957, the attention of the United States turned toward its own fledgling space efforts.
John F. Kennedy Space Center (KSC), is one of the best-known NASA facilities.
* Jet Propulsion Laboratory, near Pasadena, California
The design featured a slender fuselage with fairings along the side containing fuel and early computerized control systems.
The Space Launch System is intended to launch the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle and other elements towards the Moon, near-Earth asteroids, and one day Mars.
Spacelab was not designed for independent orbital flight, but remained in the Shuttle's cargo bay as the astronauts entered and left it through an airlock.
It was occupied for a total of 171 days by 3 successive crews in 1973 and 1974.
The Moon landing marked the end of the space race; and as a gesture, Armstrong mentioned mankind when he stepped down on the Moon.
The US Congress, alarmed by the perceived threat to national security and technological leadership (known as the "Sputnik crisis"), urged immediate and swift action; President Dwight D. Eisenhower and his advisers counseled more deliberate measures.
NASA expects these vehicles to begin transporting humans to the ISS in 2017.
These missions returned a wealth of scientific data and  of lunar samples.
In 2012, the winners of the third phase of the program were announced, NASA provided $1.1 billion divided among three companies to further develop their crew transportation systems.
For missions beyond low Earth orbit (BLEO), NASA has been directed to develop the Space Launch System (SLS), a Saturn-V class rocket, and the two to six person, beyond low Earth orbit spacecraft, Orion.
The first manned flight of Orion and SLS, Exploration Mission 2 (EM-2) is to launch between 2019 and 2021; it is a 10- to 14-day mission planned to place a crew of four into Lunar orbit.
During his term he brought together the disparate projects in American space development research.
SpaceX's Dragon V2 (planned to be launched on a Falcon 9 v1.1) received a contract valued up to $2.6 billion and Boeing's CST-100 (to be launched on an Atlas V) received a contract valued up to $4.2 billion.
The Space Shuttle became the major focus of NASA in the late 1970s and the 1980s.
For a time it was the most distant spacecraft, but it has since been surpassed by both Voyager 1 and Voyager 2.
Apollo was one of the most expensive American scientific programs ever.
Apollo sparked interest in many fields of engineering and left many physical facilities and machines developed for the program as landmarks.
* Extend and sustain human activities across the solar system
Exploration Mission-1 (EM-1) is the unmanned initial launch of SLS that would also send Orion on a circumlunar trajectory, which is planned for 2017.
The Orion spacecraft, which was being developed as part of the Constellation program, was chosen to fulfill this role.
It has been the launch site for every United States human space flight since 1968.
On December 23, 2008, NASA awarded Commercial Resupply Services contracts to SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation.
The Orion MPCV conducted an unmanned test launch on a Delta IV Heavy rocket in December 2014.
The missions have been launched directly from Earth or from orbiting space shuttles, which could either deploy the satellite itself, or with a rocket stage to take it farther.
The agency's leader, NASA's administrator, reports to the President of the United States and serves as the President's senior space science adviser.
Earlier research efforts within the US Air Force and many of ARPA's early space programs were also transferred to NASA.
The first US unmanned satellite was Explorer 1, which started as an ABMA/JPL project during the early part of the Space Race.
On August 27, 2012, ''Curiosity'' transmitted the first pre-recorded message from the surface of Mars back to Earth, made by Administrator Charlie Bolden:
Missions could last from 5 to 17 days and crews could be from 2 to 8 astronauts.
Currently, NASA is supporting the International Space Station and is overseeing the development of the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle, the Space Launch System and Commercial Crew vehicles.
The strength of their cooperation on this project was even more evident when NASA began relying on Russian launch vehicles to service the ISS during the two-year grounding of the shuttle fleet following the 2003 Space Shuttle ''Columbia'' disaster.
The Commercial Crew Development (CCDev) program was initiated in 2010 with the purpose of creating American commercially operated crewed spacecraft capable of delivering at least four crew members to the ISS, staying docked for 180 days and then returning them back to Earth.
Although such flights are currently on pause, KSC continues to manage and operate unmanned rocket launch facilities for America's civilian space program from three pads at the adjoining Cape Canaveral Air Force Station.
NASA's ongoing investigations include in-depth surveys of Mars (Mars 2020 and InSight) and Saturn and studies of the Earth and the Sun.
Conceived in 1965 as a workshop to be constructed in space from a spent Saturn IB upper stage, the  station was constructed on Earth and launched on May 14, 1973 atop the first two stages of a Saturn V, into a  orbit inclined at 50° to the equator.
