Operation ''Counter Punch'', Operation ''Strikeback'', and Operation ''Deep Water'' were the most ambitious military undertaking for the alliance to date, involving more than 250,000 men, 300 ships, and 1,500 aircraft operating from Norway to Turkey.
In 2009, US President Barack Obama proposed using the ship-based Aegis Combat System, though this plan still includes stations being built in Turkey, Spain, Portugal, Romania, and Poland.
By the end of the mission in October 2011, after the death of Colonel Gaddafi, NATO planes had flown about 9,500 strike sorties against pro-Gaddafi targets.
Doubts over the strength of the relationship between the European states and the United States ebbed and flowed, along with doubts over the credibility of the NATO defence against a prospective Soviet invasion—doubts that led to the development of the independent French nuclear deterrent and the withdrawal of France from NATO's military structure in 1966 for 30 years.
The operation seeks to dissuade and interrupt pirate attacks, protect vessels, and abetting to increase the general level of security in the region.
In March 2004, NATO's Baltic Air Policing began, which supported the sovereignty of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia by providing jet fighters to react to any unwanted aerial intrusions.
On 30&nbsp;May 1982, NATO gained a new member when, following a referendum, the newly democratic Spain joined the alliance.
He wanted to give France, in the event of an East German incursion into West Germany, the option of coming to a separate peace with the Eastern bloc instead of being drawn into a larger NATO–Warsaw Pact war.
Ukraine's president subsequently signed a bill dropping his nation's nonaligned status in order to pursue NATO membership, but signaled that it would hold a referendum before seeking to join.
The PfP programme is considered the operational wing of the Euro-Atlantic Partnership.
The September 11th attacks in the United States caused NATO to invoke Article&nbsp;5 of the NATO Charter for the first time in the organization's history.
Following extensive debate, the term "Contact Countries" was agreed by the Allies in 2000.
Due to the intensity of the fighting in the south, in 2011 France allowed a squadron of Mirage 2000 fighter/attack aircraft to be moved into the area, to Kandahar, in order to reinforce the alliance's efforts.
NATO's expansion efforts are often seen by Moscow leaders as a continuation of a Cold War attempt to surround and isolate Russia, though they have also been criticised in the West.
While the mission was extended into September, Norway that day announced it would begin scaling down contributions and complete withdrawal by 1&nbsp;August.
Operation ''Allied Force'' targeted the military capabilities of what was then the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
In April 1951, Allied Command Europe and its headquarters (SHAPE) were established; later, four subordinate headquarters were added in Northern and Central Europe, the Southern Region, and the Mediterranean.
Between 1994 and 1997, wider forums for regional cooperation between NATO and its neighbors were set up, like the Partnership for Peace, the Mediterranean Dialogue initiative and the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council.
Recognizing the post-Cold War military environment, NATO adopted the Alliance Strategic Concept during its Washington summit in April 1999 that emphasized conflict prevention and crisis management.
Following the lead of its member nations, NATO began to award a service medal, the NATO Medal, for these operations.
The Falklands War between the United Kingdom and Argentina did not result in NATO involvement because article 6 of the North Atlantic Treaty specifies that collective self-defence is only applicable to attacks on member state territories north of the Tropic of Cancer.
The Chairman of the NATO Military Committee is Petr Pavel of the Czech Republic, since 2015.
At this time, NATO could call on about fifteen ready divisions in Central Europe, and another ten in Italy and Scandinavia.
Greece and Turkey also joined the alliance in 1952, forcing a series of controversial negotiations, in which the United States and Britain were the primary disputants, over how to bring the two countries into the military command structure.
This means that any cyber attack on NATO members can trigger Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty.
No military operations were conducted by NATO during the Cold War.
The European Union (EU) signed a comprehensive package of arrangements with NATO under the Berlin Plus agreement on 16&nbsp;December 2002.
In June 2013, Colombia and NATO signed an Agreement on the Security of Information to explore future cooperation and consultation in areas of common interest; Colombia became the first and only Latin American country to cooperate with NATO.
NATO began officially enforcing the UN resolution on 27&nbsp;March 2011 with assistance from Qatar and the United Arab Emirates.
Membership went on expanding with the accession of seven more Central and Eastern European countries to NATO: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, and Romania.
Political dialogue with Japan began in 1990, and since then, the Alliance has gradually increased its contact with countries that do not form part of any of these cooperation initiatives.
This transitioned into the smaller SFOR, which started with 32,000 troops initially and ran from December 1996 until December 2004, when operations were then passed onto European Union Force Althea.
The membership of the organization at this time remained largely static.
Members' defence spending is supposed to amount to 2 percent of GDP.
On 31&nbsp;July 2006, the ISAF additionally took over military operations in the south of Afghanistan from a US-led anti-terrorism coalition.
Though the campaign was criticized for high civilian casualties, including bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade, Milošević finally accepted the terms of an international peace plan on 3&nbsp;June 1999, ending the Kosovo War.
The issue of Georgian and Ukrainian membership in NATO prompted harsh criticism from Russia, as did NATO plans for a missile defence system.
Almost 60,000 NATO troops were joined by forces from non-NATO nations in this peacekeeping mission.
Russia continues to oppose further expansion, seeing it as inconsistent with understandings between Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev and European and American negotiators that allowed for a peaceful German reunification.
This differs from Article&nbsp;IV of the Treaty of Brussels, which clearly states that the response will be military in nature.
The staff at the Headquarters is composed of national delegations of member countries and includes civilian and military liaison offices and officers or diplomatic missions and diplomats of partner countries, as well as the International Staff and International Military Staff filled from serving members of the armed forces of member states.
Article&nbsp;5 of the North Atlantic treaty, requiring member states to come to the aid of any member state subject to an armed attack, was invoked for the first and only time after the September 11 attacks, after which troops were deployed to Afghanistan under the NATO-led ISAF.
In October 2003, the UN Security Council authorized the expansion of the ISAF mission throughout Afghanistan, and ISAF subsequently expanded the mission in four main stages over the whole of the country.
The four participants are also linked through the Gulf Cooperation Council.
* Economics and Security Committee
Members include all current and former members of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Problems in the current building stem from its hurried construction in 1967, when NATO was forced to move its headquarters from Porte Dauphine in Paris, France following the French withdrawal.
In early 2015, in the wake of the War in Donbass, meetings of NATO ministers decided that Multinational Corps Northeast would be augmented so as to develop greater capabilities, to, if thought necessary, prepare to defend the Baltic States, and that a new Multi-National Division Southeast would be established in Romania.
In March 2014, Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk reiterated the government's stance that Ukraine is not seeking NATO membership.
* Committee on the Civil Dimension of Security
The organization constitutes a system of collective defence whereby its member states agree to mutual defence in response to an attack by any external party.
NATO's headquarters are located in Haren, Brussels, Belgium, where the Supreme Allied Commander also resides.
Georgia was also named as an aspiring member, and was promised "future membership" during the 2008 summit in Bucharest, though in 2014, US President Barack Obama said the country was not "currently on a path" to membership.
The incorporation of West Germany into the organization on 9&nbsp;May 1955 was described as "a decisive turning point in the history of our continent" by Halvard Lange, Foreign Affairs Minister of Norway at the time.
An integrated military structure for NATO was first established in 1950 as it became clear that NATO would need to enhance its defences for the longer term against a potential Soviet attack.
The activities of the mission were coordinated with Iraqi authorities and the US-led Deputy Commanding General Advising and Training, who was also dual-hatted as the Commander of NTM-I.
The creation of NATO brought about some standardization of allied military terminology, procedures, and technology, which in many cases meant European countries adopting US practices.
The Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme was established in 1994 and is based on individual bilateral relations between each partner country and NATO: each country may choose the extent of its participation.
The US/UK side claimed that this would undermine the authority of the alliance, and they noted that Russia and China would have exercised their Security Council vetoes to block the strike on Yugoslavia, and could do the same in future conflicts where NATO intervention was required, thus nullifying the entire potency and purpose of the organization.
It was the first NATO summit to be held in a country that had been part of the Soviet Union.
Following the 2014 Crimean crisis, NATO committed to forming a new "spearhead" force of 5,000 troops at bases in Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria.
The outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 was crucial for NATO as it raised the apparent threat of all Communist countries working together, and forced the alliance to develop concrete military plans.
The '''North Atlantic Treaty Organization''' ('''NATO''' ; ; ''''), also called the '''North Atlantic Alliance''', is an intergovernmental military alliance based on the North Atlantic Treaty which was signed on 4&nbsp;April 1949.
In Istanbul, NATO launched the Istanbul Cooperation Initiative with four Persian Gulf nations.
The combined military spending of all NATO members constitutes over 70 percent of the global total.
On 11&nbsp;June, Milošević further accepted UN resolution 1244, under the mandate of which NATO then helped establish the KFOR peacekeeping force.
The German foreign ministry pointed to "a&nbsp;considerable German contribution to NATO and NATO-led operations" and to the fact that this engagement was highly valued by President Obama.
The body that sets broad strategic goals for NATO is the NATO Parliamentary Assembly (NATO-PA) which meets at the Annual Session, and one other during the year, and is the organ that directly interacts with the parliamentary structures of the national governments of the member states which appoint Permanent Members, or ambassadors to NATO.
During most of the Cold War, NATO's watch against the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact did not actually lead to direct military action.
This gave SACEUR the same prerogatives for automatic use of nuclear weapons as existed for the commander-in-chief of the US Strategic Air Command.
Other third countries also have been contacted for participation in some activities of the PfP framework such as Afghanistan.
It provides a "double framework" for the EU countries that are also linked with the PfP programme.
In September 1952, the first major NATO maritime exercises began; Exercise Mainbrace brought together 200 ships and over 50,000 personnel to practice the defence of Denmark and Norway.
The current arrangement is to separate responsibility between Allied Command Transformation (ACT), responsible for transformation and training of NATO forces, and Allied Command Operations (ACO), responsible for NATO operations worldwide.
France announced their return to full participation at the 2009 Strasbourg/ Kehl Summit.
Beginning on 17&nbsp;August 2009, NATO deployed warships in an operation to protect maritime traffic in the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean from Somali pirates, and help strengthen the navies and coast guards of regional states.
A report from the organization Human Rights Watch in May 2012 identified at least 72 civilians killed in the campaign.
The treaty was later clarified to include both the member's territory and their "vessels, forces or aircraft" above the Tropic of Cancer, including some Overseas departments of France.
Earlier that week it was reported Danish air fighters were running out of bombs.
On June 15, 2016, NATO officially recognized Cyberwarfare as an operational domain of war, just like land, sea and aerial warfare.
The organization has operated a range of additional roles since then, including sending trainers to Iraq, assisting in counter-piracy operations and in 2011 enforcing a no-fly zone over Libya in accordance with U.N. Security Council Resolution 1973.
Operation ''Ocean Shield'' focuses on protecting the ships of Operation ''Allied Provider'' which are distributing aid as part of the World Food Programme mission in Somalia.
The course of the Cold War led to a rivalry with nations of the Warsaw Pact, which formed in 1955.
This had been agreed in the Two Plus Four Treaty earlier in the year.
The Article says that an attack on any member shall be considered to be an attack on all.
With this agreement the EU was given the possibility to use NATO assets in case it wanted to act independently in an international crisis, on the condition that NATO itself did not want to act—the so-called "right of first refusal."
A new €750 million headquarters building is, , under construction across from the current complex, and is due for completion by 2016.
Ukraine and Georgia were also told that they could eventually become members.
Politically, the organization sought better relations with former Warsaw Pact countries, several of which joined the alliance in 1999 and 2004.
* Science and Technology Committee
During the original treaty negotiations, the United States insisted that colonies like the Belgian Congo be excluded from the treaty.
Although obliged to respond, they maintain the freedom to choose the method by which they do so.
The decision came at the request of Germany and the Netherlands, the two nations leading ISAF at the time of the agreement, and all nineteen NATO ambassadors approved it unanimously.
The NATO Training Mission-Iraq (NTM-I) was established at the request of the Iraqi Interim Government under the provisions of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1546.
In a memorandum sent to President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Prime Minister Harold Macmillan on 17 September 1958, he argued for the creation of a tripartite directorate that would put France on an equal footing with the US and the UK.
The NATO Response Force (NRF) was launched at the 2002 Prague summit on 21&nbsp;November, the first summit in a former Comecon country.
Together the Military Representatives form the Military Committee, a body responsible for recommending to NATO's political authorities those measures considered necessary for the common defence of the NATO area.
At the April 2008 summit in Bucharest, Romania, NATO agreed to the accession of Croatia and Albania and both countries joined NATO in April 2009.
Few members spend more than two percent of their gross domestic product on defence, with the United States accounting for three quarters of NATO defense spending.
On 16&nbsp;April a British Sea Harrier was shot down over Goražde by Serb forces.
In order to support each other in the process, new and potential members in the region formed the Adriatic Charter in 2003.
A&nbsp;coalition that included several NATO members began enforcing a no-fly zone over Libya shortly afterwards.
In 1996, Gorbachev wrote in his ''Memoirs'', that "during the negotiations on the unification of Germany they gave assurances that NATO would not extend its zone of operation to the east," and
It included the five Treaty of Brussels states plus the United States, Canada, Portugal, Italy, Norway, Denmark and Iceland.
Accession to the alliance is governed with individual Membership Action Plans, and requires approval by each current member.
The less potent Article 4, which merely invokes consultation among NATO members, has been invoked five times: by Turkey in 2003 over the Iraq War; twice in 2012 by Turkey over the Syrian Civil War, after the downing of an unarmed Turkish F-4 reconnaissance jet, and after a mortar was fired at Turkey from Syria; in 2014 by Poland, following the Russian intervention in Crimea; and again by Turkey in 2015 after threats by the Islamic State to its territorial integrity.
French Algeria was however covered until their independence on 3 July 1962.
By June, reports of divisions within the alliance surfaced as only eight of the 28 member nations were participating in combat operations, resulting in a confrontation between US Defense Secretary Robert Gates and countries such as Poland, Spain, the Netherlands, Turkey, and Germany to contribute more, the latter believing the organization has overstepped its mandate in the conflict.
Though NATO leaders gave assurances that the system was not targeting Russia, both presidents Vladimir Putin and Dmitry Medvedev criticized it as a threat.
The operation was  approved by the North Atlantic Council and involves warships primarily from the United States though vessels from many other nations are also included.
From the 1950s to 2003, the Strategic Commanders were the Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR) and the Supreme Allied Commander Atlantic (SACLANT).
During the crisis, NATO also deployed one of its international reaction forces, the ACE Mobile Force (Land), to Albania as the Albania Force (AFOR), to deliver humanitarian aid to refugees from Kosovo.
To secure Soviet approval of a united Germany remaining in NATO, it was agreed that foreign troops and nuclear weapons would not be stationed in the east, and there are diverging views on whether negotiators gave commitments regarding further NATO expansion east.
* Defence and Security Committee
One of its immediate results was the creation of the Warsaw Pact, which was signed on 14&nbsp;May 1955 by the Soviet Union, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Bulgaria, Romania, Albania, and East Germany, as a formal response to this event, thereby delineating the two opposing sides of the Cold War.
In 1998, NATO established a set of general guidelines that do not allow for a formal institutionalization of relations, but reflect the Allies' desire to increase cooperation.
On 28&nbsp;February 1994, NATO took its first wartime action by shooting down four Bosnian Serb aircraft violating the no-fly zone.
Like the Council, from time to time the Military Committee also meets at a higher level, namely at the level of Chiefs of Defence, the most senior military officer in each nation's armed forces.
The Treaty of Brussels, signed on 17&nbsp;March 1948 by Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, France, and the United Kingdom, is considered the precursor to the NATO agreement.
Some of these countries also have territory on multiple continents, which can be covered only as far south as the Tropic of Cancer in  the Atlantic Ocean, which defines NATO's "area of responsibility" under Article 6 of the North Atlantic Treaty.
Also at Lisbon, the post of Secretary General of NATO as the organization's chief civilian was created, and Lord Ismay was eventually appointed to the post.
The Structure of NATO evolved throughout the Cold War and its aftermath.
During its 2012 Chicago Summit, NATO endorsed a plan to end the Afghanistan war and to remove the NATO-led ISAF Forces by the end of December 2014.
Russia, China and South Korea have sent warships to participate in the activities as well.
The main headquarters of NATO is located on Boulevard Léopold&nbsp;III/Leopold III-laan, B-1110 Brussels, which is in Haren, part of the City of Brussels municipality.
The changes brought about by the collapse of the Soviet Union on the military balance in Europe were recognized in the Adapted Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty, which was signed in 1999.
In 1997, NATO reached agreement on a significant downsizing of its command structure from 65 headquarters to just 20.
The Mediterranean Dialogue was established in 1994 to coordinate in a similar way with Israel and countries in North Africa.
Twelve of these twenty-eight are original members who joined in 1949, while the other sixteen joined in one of seven enlargement rounds.
Eight multinational jet fighters are based in Lithuania, the number of which was increased from four in 2014.
The first NATO Secretary General, Lord Ismay, stated in 1949 that the organization's goal was "to keep the Russians out, the Americans in, and the Germans down."
Australia and New Zealand, both contact countries, are also members of the AUSCANNZUKUS strategic alliance, and similar regional or bilateral agreements between contact countries and NATO members also aid cooperation.
Jack Matlock, American ambassador to the Soviet Union during its final years, said that the West gave a "clear commitment" not to expand, and declassified documents indicate that Soviet negotiators were given the impression that NATO membership was off the table for countries such as Czechoslovakia, Hungary, or Poland.
The treaty does not require members to respond with military action against an aggressor.
Consequently, they agreed that, if an armed attack occurred, each of them, in exercise of the right of individual or collective self-defence, would assist the member being attacked, taking such action as it deemed necessary, including the use of armed force, to restore and maintain the security of the North Atlantic area.
The creation of NATO can be seen as the primary institutional consequence of a school of thought called Atlanticism which stressed the importance of trans-Atlantic cooperation.
The 2006 Riga summit was held in Riga, Latvia, and highlighted the issue of energy security.
Its operational emphasis was on training and mentoring.
Few states knew of the NATO nuclear sharing arrangements at that time, and they were not challenged.
The following week, the head of the Royal Navy said the country's operations in the conflict were not sustainable.
Ukraine is one of eight countries in Eastern Europe with an Individual Partnership Action Plan.
New NATO structures were also formed while old ones were abolished.
The deteriorating situation led to United Nations Security Council Resolution 816 on 9&nbsp;October 1992, ordering a no-fly zone over central Bosnia and Herzegovina, which NATO began enforcing on 12&nbsp;April 1993 with Operation ''Deny Flight''.
NATO's unity was breached early in its history with a crisis occurring during Charles de Gaulle's presidency of France.
Nicolas Sarkozy negotiated the return of France to the integrated military command and the Defence Planning Committee in 2009, the latter being disbanded the following year.
The Bosnian War began in 1992, as a result of the Breakup of Yugoslavia.
Until 2008 the Military Committee excluded France, due to that country's 1966 decision to remove itself from NATO's integrated military structure, which it rejoined in 1995.
Additionally, NATO cooperates and discusses their activities with numerous other non-NATO members.
Other standards such as the NATO phonetic alphabet have made their way beyond NATO into civilian use.
On 24&nbsp;March, NATO agreed to take control of the no-fly zone from the initial coalition, while command of targeting ground units remained with the coalition's forces.
Other major exercises that followed included Exercise Grand Slam and Exercise Longstep, naval and amphibious exercises in the Mediterranean Sea, Italic Weld, a combined air-naval-ground exercise in northern Italy, Grand Repulse, involving the British Army on the Rhine (BAOR), the Netherlands Corps and Allied Air Forces Central Europe (AAFCE), Monte Carlo, a simulated atomic air-ground exercise involving the Central Army Group, and Weldfast, a combined amphibious landing exercise in the Mediterranean Sea involving American, British, Greek, Italian and Turkish naval forces.
This was supposed to mean matching defences at the level rendered necessary by the Warsaw Pact's offensive capabilities without spurring a further arms race.
An additional 22&nbsp;countries participate in NATO's Partnership for Peace program, with 15&nbsp;other countries involved in institutionalized dialogue programmes.
This withdrawal forced the relocation of SHAPE from Rocquencourt, near Paris, to Casteau, north of Mons, Belgium, by 16&nbsp;October 1967.
Each country's delegation includes a Military Representative, a senior officer from each country's armed forces, supported by the International Military Staff.
This action led to peace movement protests throughout Western Europe, and support for the deployment wavered as many doubted whether the push for deployment could be sustained.
However this requirement was dropped the following year to roughly thirty-five divisions with heavier use to be made of nuclear weapons.
Negotiations under US Special Envoy Richard Holbrooke broke down on 23&nbsp;March 1999, and he handed the matter to NATO, which started a 78-day bombing campaign on 24&nbsp;March 1999.
In February 1959, France withdrew its Mediterranean Fleet from NATO command, and later banned the stationing of foreign nuclear weapons on French soil.
In 1998, the NATO-Russia Permanent Joint Council was established.
In NATO official statements, the Republic of Macedonia is always referred to as the "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia," with a footnote stating that "Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia under its constitutional name."
repeated this view in an interview in 2008.
They were first invited to start talks of membership during the 2002 Prague summit, and joined NATO on 29&nbsp;March 2004, shortly before the 2004 Istanbul summit.
The NATO countries, fearing that the Soviet Union's motive was to weaken the alliance, ultimately rejected this proposal.
The NATO Parliamentary Assembly is made up of legislators from the member countries of the North Atlantic Alliance as well as thirteen associate members.
During the Libyan Civil War, violence between protestors and the Libyan government under Colonel Muammar Gaddafi escalated, and on 17&nbsp;March 2011 led to the passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973, which called for a ceasefire, and authorized military action to protect civilians.
The Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) was first established on 29 May 1997, and is a forum for regular coordination, consultation and dialogue between all fifty participants.
This resulted in the taking of 150&nbsp;U.N. personnel hostage on 14&nbsp;April.
Such was the case in the lead up to Operation ''Iraqi Freedom''.
The new warheads were also meant to strengthen the western negotiating position regarding nuclear disarmament.
* Political Committee
Ukraine's relationship with NATO and Europe has been politically divisive, and contributed to "Euromaidan" protests that saw the ousting of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych in 2014.
In September 1950, the NATO Military Committee called for an ambitious buildup of conventional forces to meet the Soviets, subsequently reaffirming this position at the February 1952 meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Lisbon.
As part of post-Cold War restructuring, NATO's military structure was cut back and reorganized, with new forces such as the Headquarters Allied Command Europe Rapid Reaction Corps established.
Belgium is one of the 28 member states across North America and Europe, the newest of which, Albania and Croatia, joined in April 2009.
Following the end of the Cold War, the first operations, ''Anchor Guard'' in 1990 and ''Ace Guard'' in 1991, were prompted by the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
On 17 December 1954, the North Atlantic Council approved MC 48, a key document in the evolution of NATO nuclear thought.
Nearly one million refugees had fled Kosovo, and part of KFOR's mandate was to protect the humanitarian missions, in addition to deterring violence.
On 2 December 2015, NATO Foreign Ministers decided to invite Montenegro to start accession talks to become the 29th member of the Alliance.
NATO currently has three candidate countries that are in the process of joining the alliance: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and the Republic of Macedonia.
On 19&nbsp;June 2003, a further restructuring of the NATO military commands began as the Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic were abolished and a new command, Allied Command Transformation (ACT), was established in Norfolk, Virginia, United States, and the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE) became the Headquarters of Allied Command Operations (ACO).
The first post-Cold War expansion of NATO came with German reunification on 3&nbsp;October 1990, when the former East Germany became part of the Federal Republic of Germany and the alliance.
This policy was called the Dual Track policy.
ISAF was disestablished in December 2014 and replaced by the follow-on training Resolute Support Mission.
US Secretary of State Dean Rusk was later quoted as asking de Gaulle whether his order included "the bodies of American soldiers in France's cemeteries?"
The mission officially concluded on 17&nbsp;December 2011.
Three major exercises were held concurrently in the northern autumn of 1957.
In 1966, all French armed forces were removed from NATO's integrated military command, and all non-French NATO troops were asked to leave France.
In 1974, as a consequence of the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, Greece withdrew its forces from NATO's military command structure but, with Turkish cooperation, were readmitted in 1980.
Starting in late 2003 NATO has restructured how it commands and deploys its troops by creating several NATO Rapid Deployable Corps, including Eurocorps, I. German/Dutch Corps, Multinational Corps Northeast, and NATO Rapid Deployable Italian Corps among others, as well as naval High Readiness Forces (HRFs), which all report to Allied Command Operations.
The members agreed that an armed attack against any one of them in Europe or North America would be considered an attack against them all.
Though France showed solidarity with the rest of NATO during the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, de Gaulle continued his pursuit of an independent defence by removing France's Atlantic and Channel fleets from NATO command.
The handover of control to NATO took place on 11&nbsp;August, and marked the first time in NATO's history that it took charge of a mission outside the north Atlantic area.
A two-week NATO bombing campaign, Operation ''Deliberate Force'', began in August 1995 against the Army of the Republika Srpska, after the Srebrenica massacre.
This caused the United States to transfer two hundred military aircraft out of France and return control of the air force bases that had operated in France since 1950 to the French by 1967.
Ultimately unofficial bonds began to grow between NATO's armed forces, such as the NATO Tiger Association and competitions such as the Canadian Army Trophy for tank gunnery.
On 1&nbsp;July 1968, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty opened for signature: NATO argued that its nuclear sharing arrangements did not breach the treaty as US forces controlled the weapons until a decision was made to go to war, at which point the treaty would no longer be controlling.
NATO has twenty-eight members, mainly in Europe and North America.
On 8&nbsp;July 1997, three former communist countries, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and Poland, were invited to join NATO, which each did in 1999.
IPAPs began in 2002, and are open to countries that have the political will and ability to deepen their relationship with NATO.
