David Gordon notes, "When most people speak of natural law, what they have in mind is the contention that morality can be derived from human nature.
The concept of natural law was very important in the development of the English common law.
The jurisprudence of the Roman Empire was rooted in Cicero, who held "an extraordinary grip ... upon the imagination of posterity" as "the medium for the propagation of those ideas which informed the law and institutions of the empire."
i), were not esteemed sinful.
(See "Laws of Nature" First Paragraph Declaration of Independence) Within the American Declaration of Independence, building on natural law, philosophies such as Consent of the Governed replaced the older doctrine of the Divine right of kings.
Fortescue's definition of law (also found in Accursius and Bracton), after all, was 'a sacred sanction commanding what is virtuous ''honesta'' and forbidding the contrary.'"
* The twelfth law is ''that such things as cannot be divided, be enjoyed in common, if it can be; and if the quantity of the thing permit, without stint; otherwise proportionably to the number of them that have right.''
Hale wrote a treatise on natural law that circulated among English lawyers in the eighteenth century and survives in three manuscript copies.
Historian Knud Haakonssen has noted that in the eighteenth century, Cumberland was commonly placed alongside Alberico Gentili, Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf "in the triumvirate of seventeenth-century founders of the 'modern' school of natural law."
The stoics felt that there was a way in which the universe had been designed and natural law helped us to harmonise with this.
This reason is believed to be embodied, in its most abstract form, in the concept of a primary precept: "Good is to be sought, evil avoided."
Aristotle's association with natural law may be due to the interpretation given to his works by Thomas Aquinas.
Sir Edward Coke was the preeminent jurist of his time.
In particular, his writings on freedom of the seas and just war theory directly appealed to natural law.
There is considerable debate about whether his conception of natural law was more akin to that of Aquinas (filtered through Richard Hooker) or Hobbes' radical reinterpretation, though the effect of Locke's understanding is usually phrased in terms of a revision of Hobbes upon Hobbesean contractualist grounds.
And even John Locke, when talking about the foundations of natural law and explaining what he thought when citing "reason", said: "By reason, however, I do not think is meant here that faculty of the understanding which forms traint of thought and deduces proofs, but certain definite principles of action from which spring all virtues and whatever is necessary for the proper moulding of morals."
Al-Maturidi gives the example of stealing, which is known to be evil by reason alone due to man's working hard for his property.
The purpose of positive laws is to provide for "the safety of citizens, the preservation of states, and the tranquility and happiness of human life."
In the ''Republic'', the ideal community is, "...a city which would be established in accordance with nature."
Of these, Aristotle is often said to be the father of natural law.
* The sixth Law is ''that upon caution of the future time, a man ought to pardon the offences past of them that repenting, desire it.''
Hale's definition of the natural law reads: "It is the Law of Almighty God given by him to Man with his Nature discovering the morall good and moral evill of Moral Actions, commanding the former, and forbidding the latter by the secret voice or dictate of his implanted nature, his reason, and his concience."
Specifically, he quotes Sophocles and Empedocles:
This is also the position of the Ashari school, the largest school of Sunni theology.
This natural-law treatise has been published as ''Of the Law of Nature'' (2015).
The legal historian Charles F. Mullett has noted Bracton's "ethical definition of law, his recognition of justice, and finally his devotion to natural rights."
* The eighteenth law is that no man should serve as a judge in a case if ''greater profit, or honour, or pleasure apparently ariseth for him out of the victory of one party, than of the other.''
general principle to a particular point of practice, on account of concupiscence or some
The motive must coincide with the cardinal or theological virtues.
St. Germain informs his readers that English lawyers generally don't use the phrase "law of nature," but rather use "reason" as the preferred synonym.
The will of the duly authorized legislator is then wholly unfettered and guided solely by his concrete interests".
The concept of ''Istislah'' in Islamic law bears some similarities to the natural law tradition in the West, as exemplified by Thomas Aquinas.
'''Natural law''' is a philosophy that certain rights or values are inherent by virtue of human nature and can be universally understood through human reason.
One of the consequences is that as all humans are created equally free, governments need the consent of the governed.
the Decalogue) which Christ confirmed and therefore were still valid.
The 19th-century anarchist and legal theorist, Lysander Spooner, was also a figure in the expression of modern natural law.
And so Empedocles, when he bids us kill no living creature, he is saying that to do this is not just for some people, while unjust for others:
Norman Doe notes that St. Germain's view "is essentially Thomist," quoting Thomas Aquinas's definition of law as "an ordinance of reason made for the common good by him who has charge of the community, and promulgated."
Coke defined law as "perfect reason, which commands those things that are proper and necessary and which prohibits contrary things."
Some add also "honour".
* Theft is wrong because it destroys social relations, and man is by nature a social animal (i.e., does not support the subsidiary precept of living in society).
Cicero's conception of natural law "found its way to later centuries notably through the writings of Saint Isidore of Seville and the Decretum of Gratian."
The objective of every legislator is to dispose people to virtue.
(''De iure belli ac pacis'', Prolegomeni XI).
The Scottish moral philosopher Francis Hutcheson, as a student at Glasgow, "was attracted most by Cicero, for whom he always professed the greatest admiration."
A century later, St. Thomas Aquinas in his ''Summa Theologica'' I-II qq.
There are five important principles: to live, to learn, to reproduce, to worship God, and to live in an ordered society.
The first two are expounded in chapter XIV of Leviathan ("of the first and second natural laws; and of contracts"); the others in chapter XV ("of other laws of nature").
After the Church of England broke from Rome, the English theologian Richard Hooker adapted Thomistic notions of natural law to Anglicanism.
As the legal historian Norman Doe explains: "Fortescue follows the general pattern set by Aquinas.
Some critics believe that the context of this remark suggests only that Aristotle advised that it could be rhetorically advantageous to appeal to such a law, especially when the "particular" law of one's own city was averse to the case being made, not that there actually was such a law; Moreover, they claim that Aristotle considered two of the three candidates for a universally valid, natural law provided in this passage to be wrong.
Cumberland argues that the mature development ("perfection") of human nature involves the individual human willing and acting for the common good.
other passion, as stated above (77, 2).
natural law can be blotted out from the human heart, either by evil persuasions, just as in
Against the conventionalism that the distinction between nature and custom could engender, Socrates and his philosophic heirs, Plato and Aristotle, posited the existence of natural justice or natural right (''dikaion physikon'', ''δικαιον φυσικον'', Latin ''ius naturale'').
Cardinal virtues are acquired through reason applied to nature; they are:
The natural law was how a rational human being, seeking to survive and prosper, would act.
Therefore, for a deontological ethical theory they are open to a surprisingly large amount of interpretation and flexibility.
Whereas the "higher" law that Aristotle suggested one could appeal to was emphatically natural, in contradistinction to being the result of divine positive legislation, the Stoic natural law was indifferent to either the natural or divine source off the law: the Stoics asserted the existence of a rational and purposeful order to the universe (a divine or eternal law), and the means by which a rational being lived in accordance with this order was the natural law, which spelled out action that accorded with virtue.
and secondly, certain secondary and more detailed precepts, which are, as it were,
Bracton's work was the second legal treatise studied by the young apprentice lawyer Thomas Jefferson.
It is in this sense that St Paul's words are taken by the Fathers of the fourth and fifth centuries like St Hilary of Poitiers, St Ambrose, and St Augustine, and there seems no reason to doubt the correctness of their interpretation."
The British polemicist Thomas Gordon "incorporated Cicero into the radical ideological tradition that travelled from the mother country to the colonies in the course of the eighteenth century and decisively shaped early American political culture."
Simply doing the right thing is not enough; to be truly moral one's motive must be right as well.
The observers of this law may be called sociable; the contrary, stubborn, insociable, forward, intractable.
More generally in eighteenth-century Great Britain, Cicero's name was a household word among educated people.
Historian Jon Parkin likewise describes Cumberland's work as "one of the most important works of ethical and political theory of the seventeenth century."
Jefferson described Cicero as "the father of eloquence and philosophy."
Greek philosophy emphasized the distinction between "nature" (''physis'', ''φúσις'') on the one hand and "law", "custom", or "convention" (''nomos'', ''νóμος'') on the other.
About natural law itself, he wrote that "even the will of an omnipotent being cannot change or abrogate" natural law, which "would maintain its objective validity even if we should assume the impossible, that there is no God or that he does not care for human affairs."
The breach of this precept is arrogance, and observers of the precept are called modest.
What the law commanded would be expected to vary from place to place, but what was "by nature" should be the same everywhere.
There is no change in political theory so startling in its completeness as the change from the theory of Aristotle to the later philosophical view represented by Cicero and Seneca.... We think that this cannot be better exemplified than with regard to the theory of the equality of human nature."
He argued that the antagonism between human beings can only be overcome through a divine law, which he believed to have been sent through prophets.
All have tried to construct a new version of natural law.
Heinrich A. Rommen remarked upon "the tenacity with which the spirit of the English common law retained the conceptions of natural law and equity which it had assimilated during the Catholic Middle Ages, thanks especially to the influence of Henry de Bracton (d. 1268) and Sir John Fortescue (d. cir.
Those who see biblical support for the doctrine of natural law often point to Paul's Epistle to the Romans: "For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto themselves: Which shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another.
Natural law, therefore, was discovered by considering humankind's natural rights, whereas previously it could be said that natural rights were discovered by considering the natural law.
Natural law theories have exercised a profound influence on the development of English common law.
Natural law is often contrasted with the human-made laws (positive law) of a given political community, society, or state.
Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya also posited that human reason could discern between 'great sins' and good deeds.
In Hobbes' opinion, the only way natural law could prevail was for men to submit to the commands of the sovereign.
Ludwig von Mises states that he relaid the general sociological and economic foundations of the liberal doctrine upon utilitarianism, rather than natural law, but R.A. Gonce argues that "the reality of the argument constituting his system overwhelms his denial."
For Cicero, natural law obliges us to contribute to the general good of the larger society.
In this law of nature consisteth the fountain and original of justice... when a covenant is made, then to break it is unjust and the definition of injustice is no other than the not performance of covenant.
Natural law jurisprudence is currently undergoing a period of reformulation (as is legal positivism).
St. Thomas explains that:
Law, for Cicero, "ought to be a reformer of vice and an incentive to virtue."
According to William Blackstone, however, natural law might be useful in determining the content of the common law and in deciding cases of equity, but was not itself identical with the laws of England.
In a similar way, Samuel Pufendorf gave natural law a theological foundation and applied it to his concepts of government and international law.
Natural law did, however, serve as authority for legal claims and rights in some judicial decisions, legislative acts, and legal pronouncements.
Aristotle notes that natural justice is a species of political justice, viz.
Natural law theories have featured greatly in the philosophies of Thomas Aquinas, Alberico Gentili, Francisco Suárez, Richard Hooker, Thomas Hobbes, Hugo Grotius, Samuel von Pufendorf, Matthew Hale, John Locke, Francis Hutcheson, Jean Jacques Burlamaqui, Emmerich de Vattel, Cesare Beccaria and Francesco Mario Pagano.
In particular, Bracton turned the imperial Roman maxim that "the will of the prince is law" on its head, insisting that the king is ''under'' the law.
Within humans is a "divine spark" which helps them to live in accordance with nature.
In doing so, Cumberland de-emphasized the overlay of Christian dogma (in particular, the doctrine of "original sin" and the corresponding presumption that humans are incapable of "perfecting" themselves without divine intervention) that had accreted to natural law in the Middle Ages.
* The sixteenth law is ''that they that are at controversie, submit their Right to the judgement of an Arbitrator.''
Thomas Aquinas, in his summary of medieval natural law, quoted Cicero's statement that "nature" and "custom" were the sources of a society's laws.
Some jurists and scholars use natural law synonymously with natural justice or natural right (Latin ''ius naturale''), while others distinguish between natural law and natural right.
The most prominent contemporary natural law jurist, Australian John Finnis, is based in Oxford, but there are also Americans Germain Grisez, Robert P. George, and Canadian Joseph Boyle and Brazil Emídio Brasileiro.
Unbroken it stretcheth, and over the earth's immensity."
The Renaissance Italian historian Leonardo Bruni praised Cicero as the man "who carried philosophy from Greece to Italy, and nourished it with the golden river of his eloquence."
Because of the intersection between natural law and natural rights, natural law has been cited as a component in the United States Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States, as well as in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
Cicero wrote in his De Legibus that both justice and law originate from what nature has given to man, from what the human mind embraces, from the function of man, and from what serves to unite humanity.
However, a secular critique of the natural law doctrine was stated by Pierre Charron in his ''De la sagesse'' (1601): "The sign of a natural law must be the universal respect in which it is held, for if there was anything that nature had truly commanded us to do, we would undoubtedly obey it universally: not only would every nation respect it, but every individual.
Some, like procreation, are common to other animals, while others, like the pursuit of truth, are inclinations peculiar to the capacities of human beings.
there belongs to the natural law, first, certain most general precepts, that are known to all;
There are a number of theories of natural law, that differ from each other with respect to the role that morality plays in determining the authority of legal norms.
the scheme of distributive and corrective justice that would be established under the best political community; were this to take the form of law, this could be called a natural law, though Aristotle does not discuss this and suggests in the ''Politics'' that the best regime may not rule by law at all.
The state, in being bound by the natural law, was conceived as an institution whose purpose was to bring its subjects to true happiness.
Nonetheless, the implication of natural law in the common law tradition has meant that the great opponents of natural law and advocates of legal positivism, like Jeremy Bentham, have also been staunch critics of the common law.
However, whereas natural law deems good what is self-evidently good, according as it tends towards the fulfilment of the person, ''istislah'' calls good whatever is connected to one of five "basic goods".
Due to his lack of self-control and desire for pleasure, despite his good intentions, he will find himself swaying from the moral path.
For them, no one can have the knowledge necessary to plan society, and this "natural" or "spontaneous" order of society shows how it can efficiently "plan" bottom-up.
By way of contrast to Hobbes's multiplicity of laws, Cumberland states in the very first sentence of his ''Treatise of the Laws of Nature'' that "all the Laws of Nature are reduc'd to that one, of Benevolence toward all Rationals."
The Form of the Good is the cause of all things, and when it is seen it leads a person to act wisely.
The most notable among these was Augustine of Hippo, who equated natural law with man's prelapsarian state; as such, a life according to nature was no longer possible and men needed instead to seek salvation through the divine law and grace of Jesus Christ.
The legal culture of Elizabethan England, exemplified by Sir Edward Coke, was "steeped in Ciceronian rhetoric."
John Locke incorporated natural law into many of his theories and philosophy, especially in ''Two Treatises of Government''.
This is the famous argument ''etiamsi daremus'' (''non esse Deum''), that made natural law no longer dependent on theology.
Breach of this law is called ingratitude.
According to some, Aquinas conflates natural law and natural right, the latter of which Aristotle posits in Book V of the ''Nicomachean Ethics'' (Book IV of the ''Eudemian Ethics'').
Declaration of Independence states that it has become necessary for the people of the United States to assume "the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them".
However, while the primary and immediate precepts cannot be "blotted out", the secondary precepts can be.
According to this interpretation, Aquinas's influence was such as to affect a number of early translations of these passages in an unfortunate manner, though more recent translations render those more literally.
"New Natural Law" as it is sometimes called, originated with Grisez.
* The second Law of nature is ''that a man be willing, when others are so too, as far forth, as for peace, and defence of himself he shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all things; and be contented with so much liberty against other men, as he would allow other men against himself.''
Moreover, they were useful in explaining the content of natural law.
The Catholic Church understands human beings to consist of body and mind, the physical and the non-physical (or soul perhaps), and that the two are inextricably linked.
It focuses on "basic human goods," such as human life, knowledge, and aesthetic experience, which are self-evidently and intrinsically worthwhile, and states that these goods reveal themselves as being incommensurable with one another.
Sir Alberico Gentili and Hugo Grotius based their philosophies of international law on natural law.
In Grotius' view, the Old Testament contained moral precepts (e.g.
Some early Church Fathers, especially those in the West, sought to incorporate natural law into Christianity.
To Locke, the content of natural law was identical with biblical ethics as laid down especially in the Decalogue, Christ's teaching and exemplary life, and St. Paul's admonitions.
Bracton considered justice to be the "fountain-head" from which "all rights arise."
These philosophies like social contract theory came of age during the age of enlightenment through individuals such as John Locke, but these ideas can be found in Roman law, Greek philosophy and ancient Buddhist texts.
To support these findings, the assembled judges (as reported by Coke, who was one of them) cited as authorities Aristotle, Cicero, and the Apostle Paul; as well as Bracton, Fortescue, and St. Germain.
The eighteenth-century philosophers Shaftesbury and Hutcheson "were obviously inspired in part by Cumberland."
The basis of this orderly universe or nature are the forms, most fundamentally the Form of the Good, which Plato describes as "the brightest region of Being".
Parkin observes that much of Cumberland's material "is derived from Roman Stoicism, particularly from the work of Cicero, as "Cumberland deliberately cast his engagement with Hobbes in the mould of Cicero's debate between the Stoics, who believed that nature could provide an objective morality, and Epicureans, who argued that morality was human, conventional and self-interested."
At this point, the natural law was not only used to pass judgment on the moral worth of various laws, but also to determine what those  laws meant in the first place.
Although natural law is often conflated with common law, the two are distinct.
Luis Molina, for example, when referred to the 'natural' price, explained that it is "so called because 'it results from the thing itself without regard to laws and decrees, but is dependent on many circumstances which alter it, such as the sentiments of men, their estimation of different uses, often even in consequence of whims and pleasures".
Thomas Hobbes instead founded a contractualist theory of legal positivism on what all men could agree upon: what they sought (happiness) was subject to contention, but a broad consensus could form around what they feared (violent death at the hands of another).
* The fourteenth law is that ''those things which cannot be enjoyed in common, nor divided, ought to be adjudged to the first possessor; and in some cases to the first born, as acquired by lot.''
Economist and philosopher F. A. Hayek said that, originally, "the term 'natural' was used to describe an orderliness or regularity that was not the product of deliberate human will.
Instead there is nothing in the world that is not subject to contradiction and dispute, nothing that is not rejected, not just by one nation, but by many; equally, there is nothing that is strange and (in the opinion of many) unnatural that is not approved in many countries, and authorized by their customs."
* The third Law is ''that men perform their covenants made.''
Natural moral law is concerned with both exterior and interior acts, also known as action and motive.
On this understanding of natural law, natural law can be invoked to criticize judicial decisions about what the law says, but not to criticize the best interpretation of the law itself.
The best evidence of Aristotle's having thought there was a natural law comes from the ''Rhetoric'', where Aristotle notes that, aside from the "particular" laws that each people has set up for itself, there is a "common" law that is according to nature.
"Nay, but, an all-embracing law, through the realms of the sky
(See also Biblical law in Christianity.)
For example, consider a man who possesses the virtues of justice, prudence, and fortitude, yet lacks temperance.
* The seventeenth law is ''that no man is a fit Arbitrator in his own cause.''
Hobbes's philosophy includes a frontal assault on the founding principles of the earlier natural legal tradition, disregarding the traditional association of virtue with happiness, and likewise re-defining "law" to remove any notion of the promotion of the common good.
For Coke, human nature determined the purpose of law; and law was superior to any one man's reason or will.
Thomas Jefferson "first encountered Cicero as a schoolboy while learning Latin, and continued to read his letters and discourses throughout his life.
"Not of to-day or yesterday it is,
In this case the judges found that "the ligeance or faith of the subject is due unto the King by the law of nature: secondly, that the law of nature is part of the law of England: thirdly, that the law of nature was before any judicial or municipal law: fourthly, that the law of nature is immutable."
Christopher St. Germain's ''Doctor and Student'' was a classic of English jurisprudence, and it was thoroughly annotated by Thomas Jefferson.
Abu Mansur al-Maturidi stated that the human mind could know of the existence of God and the major forms of 'good' and 'evil' without the help of revelation.
* The ninth Law is ''that every man acknowledge another for his equal by nature.''
As to those general principles, the
According to Aquinas, to lack any of these virtues is to lack the ability to make a moral choice.
In the ''Symposium'', Plato describes how the experience of the Beautiful by Socrates enabled him to resist the temptations of wealth and sex.
It is this that Sophocles' Antigone clearly means when she says that the burial of Polyneices was a just act in spite of the prohibition: she means that it was just by nature:
Jeremy Bentham's modifications on legal positivism further developed the theory.
Natural law first appeared among the stoics who believed that God is everywhere and in everyone.
Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī, an Islamic scholar and polymath scientist, understood natural law as the survival of the fittest.
He viewed natural law as antecedent, preparatory, and subsequent to civil government, and stated that human law "cannot forbid what the Law of Nature injoins, nor Command what the Law of Nature prohibits."
conclusions following closely from first principles.
Rather, the "proper moral love of humanity" is "a disinterested love of God through love of humanity in ourselves as well as others."
This principle laid the seed for possible societal tension with reference to tyrants.
It is by means of law that this is accomplished.
In this view, "wicked and unjust statutes" are "anything but 'laws,'" because "in the very definition of the term 'law' there inheres the idea and principle of choosing what is just and true."
This idea is wrong because law cannot be just a product of "reason": "no system of articulated law can be applied except within a framework of generally recognized but often unarticulated rules of justice".
The intellectual historian A. J. Carlyle has commented on this passage, "There can be little doubt that St Paul's words imply some conception analogous to the 'natural law' in Cicero, a law written in men's hearts, recognized by man's reason, a law distinct from the positive law of any State, or from what St Paul recognized as the revealed law of God.
He cites "reason" as the authority for his conclusion that happiness consists in "the most extensive Benevolence," but he also mentions as "Essential Ingredients of Happiness" the "Benevolent Affections," meaning "Love and Benevolence towards others," as well as "that Joy, which arises from their Happiness."
Robert Lowry Clinton argues that the U.S. Constitution rests on a common law foundation and the common law, in turn, rests on a classical natural law foundation.
Political philosopher Jeremy Waldron has pointed out that Locke's political thought was based on "a particular set of Protestant Christian assumptions."
And whatsoever is not unjust is just.
But whether Aquinas correctly read Aristotle is in dispute.
Fortescue stressed "the supreme importance of the law of God and of nature" in works that "profoundly influenced the course of legal development in the following centuries."
The breach of which law is commonly called contumely.
The English cleric Richard Cumberland wrote a lengthy and influential attack on Hobbes's depiction of individual self-interest as the essential feature of human motivation.
The development of this tradition of natural justice into one of natural law is usually attributed to the Stoics.
For example, helping an old lady across the road (good exterior act) to impress someone (bad interior act) is wrong.
Its use in this sense had been inherited from the stoic philosophy, had been revived in the twelfth century, and it was finally under its flag that the late Spanish Schoolmen developed the foundations of the genesis and functioning of spontaneously formed social institutions."
* The tenth law is ''that at the entrance into the conditions of peace, no man require to reserve to himself any right, which he is not content should be reserved to every one of the rest.''
* The eleventh law is that ''if a man be trusted to judge between man and man, that he deal equally between them.''
Fortescue cited the great Italian Leonardo Bruni for his statement that "virtue alone produces happiness."
As used by Thomas Hobbes in his treatises ''Leviathan'' and ''De Cive'', natural law is "a precept, or general rule, found out by reason, by which a man is forbidden to do that which is destructive of his life, or takes away the means of preserving the same; and to omit that by which he thinks it may best be preserved."
Although Plato did not have an explicit theory of natural law (he rarely used the phrase 'natural law' except in ''Gorgias'' 484 and ''Timaeus'' 83e), his concept of nature, according to John Wild, contains some of the elements found in many natural law theories.
* Drunkenness is wrong because it injures one's health, and worse, destroys one's ability to reason, which is fundamental to man as a rational animal (i.e., does not support self-preservation).
* The first Law of nature is ''that every man ought to endeavour peace, as far as he has hope of obtaining it; and when he cannot obtain it, that he may seek and use all helps and advantages of war''.
further developed a philosophy of natural law.
To know what is right, one must use one's reason and apply it to Aquinas' precepts.
Aristotle's paternity of natural law tradition is consequently disputed.
In the struggles between Parliament and the monarch, Parliament often made reference to the Fundamental Laws of England, which were at times said to embody natural law principles since time immemorial and set limits on the power of the monarchy.
