Wilderness areas can be found in preserves, estates, farms, conservation preserves, ranches, national forests, national parks, and even in urban areas along rivers, gulches, or otherwise undeveloped areas.
Nature and wildness have been important subjects in various eras of world history.
Some, such as E. O. Wilson of Harvard University, predict that human destruction of the biosphere could cause the extinction of one-half of all species in the next 100&nbsp;years.
The study of nature is a large part of science.
A stream is a flowing body of water with a current, confined within a bed and stream banks.
Even at the extremes, the amount of natural environment that is free of discernible human influence is diminishing at an increasingly rapid pace.
They include Bacteria, Fungi, Archaea, and Protista.
Sometimes a river is said to be larger than a creek, but this is not always the case, due to vagueness in the language.
Since the Cambrian explosion there have been five distinctly identifiable mass extinctions.
These life forms are found in almost every location on the Earth where there is liquid water, including in the Earth's interior.
Also, without the redistributions of heat energy by the ocean currents and atmosphere, the tropics would be much hotter, and the polar regions much colder.
As DNA is readily damaged by UV light, this serves to protect life at the surface.
Deformation typically occurs as a result of horizontal shortening, horizontal extension, or side-to-side (strike-slip) motion.
''Natura'' is a Latin translation of the Greek word ''physis'' (φύσις), which originally related to the intrinsic characteristics that plants, animals, and other features of the world develop of their own accord.
Despite the wide regional variations in climate by latitude and other geographic factors, the long-term average global climate is quite stable during interglacial periods, and variations of a degree or two of average global temperature have historically had major effects on the ecological balance, and on the actual geography of the Earth.
Human-made analogs of life may also be considered to be life.
Based on historical records, the Earth is known to have undergone drastic climate changes in the past, including ice ages.
All lakes are temporary over geologic time scales, as they will slowly fill in with sediments or spill out of the basin containing them.
Species that were unable to adapt to the changing environment and competition from other life forms became extinct.
Approximately 71% of the Earth's surface (an area of some 361 million square kilometers) is covered by ocean, a continuous body of water that is customarily divided into several principal oceans and smaller seas.
The thin layer of gases that envelops the Earth is held in place by gravity.
Precipitation varies widely with location, from several metres of water per year to less than a millimetre.
Convective motion in the core generates electric currents through dynamo action, and these, in turn, generate the geomagnetic field.
A river is part of the hydrological cycle.
These features distinguish a pond from many other aquatic terrain features, such as stream pools and tide pools.
Eugene Odum, a founder of ecology, stated: "Any unit that includes all of the organisms (ie: the "community") in a given area interacting with the physical environment so that a flow of energy leads to clearly defined trophic structure, biotic diversity, and material cycles (i.e.
During the Neoproterozoic era covered much of the Earth in glaciers and ice sheets.
Condensing water vapor, most or all of which came from ice delivered by comets, produced the oceans and other water sources.
In spite of this progress, however, the fate of human civilization remains closely linked to changes in the environment.
Rock units are first emplaced either by deposition onto the surface or intrude into the overlying rock.
It is often taken to mean the "natural environment" or wilderness–wild animals, rocks, forest, and in general those things that have not been substantially altered by human intervention, or which persist despite human intervention.
Because of the extent of human influence, the boundaries between what humans regard as nature and "made environments" is not clear cut except at the extremes.
The eukaryotic cells possessed by all animals are surrounded by a characteristic extracellular matrix composed of collagen and elastic glycoproteins.
"Nature" can refer to the phenomena of the physical world, and also to life in general.
Ecosystems are composed of a variety of abiotic and biotic components that function in an interrelated way.
Roughly 750&nbsp;million years ago, the earliest known supercontinent Rodinia, began to break apart.
Astronomers have started to discover extrasolar Earth analogs – planets that lie in the habitable zone of space surrounding a star, and therefore could possibly host life as we know it.
There is no discrete boundary between the Earth's atmosphere and space, as the atmosphere gradually attenuates with increasing altitude.
Within the various uses of the word today, "nature" often refers to geology and wildlife.
'''Water''' is a chemical substance that is composed of hydrogen and oxygen and is vital for all known forms of life.
Since then, it has become clear that the Plantae as originally defined included several unrelated groups, and the fungi and several groups of algae were removed to new kingdoms.
Before that, paintings had been primarily of religious scenes or of human beings.
Over nine-tenths of the total biomass on Earth is plant life, on which animal life depends very heavily for its existence.
Climate is a measure of the long-term trends in the weather.
Various factors are known to influence the climate, including ocean currents, surface albedo, greenhouse gases, variations in the solar luminosity, and changes to the Earth's orbit.
At any given time, regardless of season, the northern and southern hemispheres experience opposite seasons.
There is also some gas, plasma and dust, and small meteors.
This artistic movement also coincided with the Transcendentalist movement in the Western world.
Their reproduction is both rapid and profuse.
Water within a river is generally collected from precipitation through surface runoff, groundwater recharge, springs, and the release of stored water in natural ice and snowpacks (i.e., from glaciers).
The remainder is believed to consist of 26.8 percent cold dark matter and 68.3 percent dark energy.
Although humans are part of nature, human activity is often understood as a separate category from other natural phenomena.
Additionally, a minute amount of the Earth's water is contained within biological bodies and manufactured products.
Earth is the only planet known to support life, and its natural features are the subject of many fields of scientific research.
Although the Earth is the only body within the solar system known to support life, evidence suggests that in the distant past the planet Mars possessed bodies of liquid water on the surface.
Some of this debris re-enters the atmosphere periodically.
But it has been conjectured that Europa, the fourth-largest moon of Jupiter, may possess a sub-surface ocean of liquid water and could potentially host life.
Ranging from food production to energy, nature influences economic wealth.
Among the many ways of classifying plants are by regional floras, which, depending on the purpose of study, can also include ''fossil flora'', remnants of plant life from a previous era.
: exchange of materials between living and nonliving parts) within the system is an ecosystem."
Natural lakes on Earth are generally found in mountainous areas, rift zones, and areas with ongoing or recent glaciation.
As David Rothenburg writes, "The beautiful is the root of science and the goal of art, the highest possibility that humanity can ever hope to see".
The tradition of representing nature ''as it is'' became one of the aims of Chinese painting and was a significant influence in Asian art.
Cells within colonies became increasingly specialized, resulting in true multicellular organisms.
Within the solar system, it is third closest to the sun; it is the largest terrestrial planet and the fifth largest overall.
Weather is also influenced by the seasons, which result from the Earth's axis being tilted relative to its orbital plane.
Central to the ecosystem concept is the idea that living organisms interact with every other element in their local environment.
The outer surface is divided into several gradually migrating tectonic plates.
The moon formed roughly 20&nbsp;million years later.
For a brief period in Mars' history, it may have also been capable of forming life.
A latitudinal band of the surface with similar climatic attributes forms a climate region.
While currents in streams are easily observed, ponds and lakes possess thermally driven micro-currents and moderate wind driven currents.
This usage continued during the advent of modern scientific method in the last several centuries.
Within the ecosystem, species are connected and dependent upon one another in the food chain, and exchange energy and matter between themselves as well as with their environment.
Beauty in nature has historically been a prevalent theme in art and books, filling large sections of libraries and bookstores.
The present era is classified as part of a mass extinction event, the Holocene extinction event, the fastest ever to have occurred.
The climate of a region depends on a number of factors, especially latitude.
The visible components of the universe are now believed to compose only 4.9 percent of the total mass.
The biological habitat in the immediate vicinity of a stream is called a riparian zone.
The field is a major academic discipline, and is also important for mineral and hydrocarbon extraction, knowledge about and mitigation of natural hazards, some Geotechnical engineering fields, and understanding past climates and environments.
Some nature writers believe wilderness areas are vital for the human spirit and creativity, and some Ecologists consider wilderness areas to be an integral part of the Earth's self-sustaining natural ecosystem (the biosphere).
These life forms possessed the basic traits of self-replication and inheritable traits.
The study of streams and waterways in general involves many branches of inter-disciplinary natural science and engineering, including hydrology, fluvial geomorphology, aquatic ecology, fish biology, riparian ecology, and others.
Ponds and lakes are distinguished from streams via current speed.
The advent of photosynthesis in very basic forms of plant life worldwide allowed the sun's energy to be harvested to create conditions allowing for more complex life.
Also in the realm of ideas about beauty in nature is that the perfect is implied through perfect mathematical forms and more generally by patterns in nature.
Given the status of the ongoing Holocene extinction, streams play an important corridor role in connecting fragmented habitats and thus in conserving biodiversity.
The exact arrangement of these components is still unknown and is under intensive investigation by physicists.
The interior remains active, with a thick layer of plastic mantle and an iron-filled core that generates a magnetic field.
according to their relationship to human life.
They may also preserve historic genetic traits and that they provide habitat for wild flora and fauna that may be difficult to recreate in zoos, arboretums, or laboratories.
They are also distinguished from plants, algae, and fungi by lacking cell walls.
Several million years ago, a species of small African ape gained the ability to stand upright.
That nature has been depicted and celebrated by so much art, photography, poetry, and other literature shows the strength with which many people associate nature and beauty.
A '''pond''' is a body of standing water, either natural or man-made, that is usually smaller than a lake.
This more traditional concept of natural things which can still be found today implies a distinction between the natural and the artificial, with the artificial being understood as that which has been brought into being by a human consciousness or a human mind.
It is not known if Titan's lakes are fed by rivers, though Titan's surface is carved by numerous river beds.
Average oceanic salinity is around 35 parts per thousand (ppt) (3.5%), and nearly all seawater has a salinity in the range of 30 to 38 ppt.
Thus, at any given time during the summer or winter, one part of the Earth is more directly exposed to the rays of the sun.
These structural regimes broadly relate to convergent boundaries, divergent boundaries, and transform boundaries, respectively, between tectonic plates.
Current fossil and DNA evidence shows that all existing species can trace a continual ancestry back to the first primitive life forms.
The extent of the current extinction event is still being researched, debated and calculated by biologists.
The mathematical expressions of the laws of physics employ a set of twenty physical constants that appear to be static across the observable universe.
Initially molten, the outer layer of the Earth cooled, resulting in the solid crust.
They are heterotrophic, generally digesting food in an internal chamber, which separates them from plants and algae.
William Wordsworth's poetry described the wonder of the natural world, which had formerly been viewed as a threatening place.
In typical usage, ''water'' refers only to its liquid form or state, but the substance also has a solid state, ice, and a gaseous state, water vapor, or steam.
For example, a microsystem can be a stone and all the life under it.
The concept of nature as a whole, the physical universe, is one of several expansions of the original notion; it began with certain core applications of the word φύσις by pre-Socratic philosophers, and has steadily gained currency ever since.
It constitutes the observable universe.
The major oceanic divisions are defined in part by the continents, various archipelagos, and other criteria: these divisions are (in descending order of size) the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, the Indian Ocean, the Southern Ocean, and the Arctic Ocean.
Geology is the science and study of the solid and liquid matter that constitutes the Earth.
Water covers 71% of the Earth's surface.
With a few exceptions, most notably the sponges (Phylum Porifera), animals have bodies differentiated into separate tissues.
Earth is estimated to have formed 4.54&nbsp;billion years ago from the solar nebula, along with the Sun and other planets.
This hypothesis has been termed the "Snowball Earth", and it is of particular interest as it precedes the Cambrian explosion in which multicellular life forms began to proliferate about 530–540&nbsp;million years ago.
By comparison, the Great Oxygenation Event, produced by the proliferation of algae during the Siderian period, required about 300&nbsp;million years to culminate.
Many names for small rivers are specific to geographic location; one example is ''Burn'' in Scotland and North-east England.
From the broadest geophysiological point of view, the biosphere is the global ecological system integrating all living beings and their relationships, including their interaction with the elements of the lithosphere (rocks), hydrosphere (water), and atmosphere (air).
They form an essential part of the planetary ecosystem.
Reasons why this association exists, and what the association consists of, are studied by the branch of philosophy called aesthetics.
Small rivers may also be called by several other names, including stream, creek, brook, rivulet, and rill; there is no general rule that defines what can be called a river.
Two notable examples of salt lakes are the Aral Sea and the Great Salt Lake.
Although early humans gathered uncultivated plant materials for food and employed the medicinal properties of vegetation for healing, most modern human use of plants is through agriculture.
Man-made threats to the Earth's natural environment include pollution, deforestation, and disasters such as oil spills.
The values of these constants have been carefully measured, but the reason for their specific values remains a mystery.
Weather can have both beneficial and harmful effects.
This is an example of how human interaction with nature can blur the boundary of what is considered nature.
In the United States, a stream is classified as a watercourse less than  wide.
A wide variety of man-made bodies of water are classified as ponds, including water gardens designed for aesthetic ornamentation, fish ponds designed for commercial fish breeding, and solar ponds designed to store thermal energy.
The entire Earth contains over 75&nbsp;billion tons (150 ''trillion'' pounds or about 6.8×1013&nbsp;kilograms) of biomass (life), which lives within various environments within the biosphere.
The total number of species is in rapid decline.
Weather is a chaotic system that is readily modified by small changes to the environment, so accurate weather forecasting is limited to only a few days.
Terrestrial weather occurs almost exclusively in the lower part of the atmosphere, and serves as a convective system for redistributing heat.
Extremes in weather, such as tornadoes or hurricanes and cyclones, can expend large amounts of energy along their paths, and produce devastation.
Another category of plant has historically been carved out for ''weeds''.
There is also typically an internal digestive chamber.
Matter is commonly defined as the substance of which physical objects are composed.
The behavior of matter and energy throughout the observable universe appears to follow well-defined physical laws.
Streams are important as conduits in the water cycle, instruments in groundwater recharge, and they serve as corridors for fish and wildlife migration.
Some of the more important components are: soil, atmosphere, radiation from the sun, water, and living organisms.
Other lakes are found in endorheic basins or along the courses of mature rivers.
Outer space, also simply called ''space'', refers to the relatively empty regions of the universe outside the atmospheres of celestial bodies.
British artists John Constable and J. M. W. Turner turned their attention to capturing the beauty of the natural world in their paintings.
These laws have been employed to produce cosmological models that successfully explain the structure and the evolution of the universe we can observe.
Humans have contributed to the extinction of many plants and animals.
However, some microorganisms are pathogenic and can post health risk to other organisms.
These include muscles, which are able to contract and control locomotion, and a nervous system, which sends and processes signals.
The development of technology by the human race has allowed the greater exploitation of natural resources and has helped to alleviate some of the risk from natural hazards.
Surface vegetation has evolved a dependence on the seasonal variation of the weather, and sudden changes lasting only a few years can have a dramatic effect, both on the vegetation and on the animals which depend on its growth for their food.
A river is a natural watercourse, usually freshwater, flowing toward an ocean, a lake, a sea or another river.
There exists a highly complex feedback loop between the use of advanced technology and changes to the environment that are only slowly becoming understood.
A lake (from Latin ''lacus'') is a terrain feature (or physical feature), a body of liquid on the surface of a world that is localized to the bottom of basin (another type of landform or terrain feature; that is, it is not global) and moves slowly if it moves at all.
Some activities, such as hunting and fishing, are used for both sustenance and leisure, often by different people.
The atmosphere also retains heat during the night, thereby reducing the daily temperature extremes.
The highly energetic chemistry is believed to have produced a self-replicating molecule around 4&nbsp;billion years ago.
This may be calcified to form structures like shells, bones, and spicules, a framework upon which cells can move about and be reorganized during development and maturation, and which supports the complex anatomy required for mobility.
Although humans comprise only a minuscule proportion of the total living biomass on Earth, the human effect on nature is disproportionately large.
The first form of life to develop on the Earth were microbes, and they remained the only form of life until about a billion years ago when multi-cellular organisms began to appear.
In Linnaeus' system, these became the kingdoms Vegetabilia (later Plantae) and Animalia.
On Earth, a body of water is considered a lake when it is inland, not part of the ocean, is larger and deeper than a pond, and is fed by a river.
Wilderness areas and protected parks are considered important for the survival of certain species, ecological studies, conservation, solitude, and recreation.
This exposure alternates as the Earth revolves in its orbit.
At present though, most of the water remaining on Mars is frozen.
This iron core is composed of a solid inner phase, and a fluid outer phase.
71 percent of the Earth's surface is covered by salt-water oceans.
Animals are eukaryotic and usually multicellular (although see Myxozoa), which separates them from bacteria, archaea, and most protists.
The ozone layer plays an important role in depleting the amount of ultraviolet (UV) radiation that reaches the surface.
Some types of "native flora" actually have been introduced centuries ago by people migrating from one region or continent to another, and become an integral part of the native, or natural flora of the place to which they were introduced.
Outer space is sparsely filled with several dozen types of organic molecules discovered to date by microwave spectroscopy, blackbody radiation left over from the big bang and the origin of the universe, and cosmic rays, which include ionized atomic nuclei and various subatomic particles.
An ocean is a major body of saline water, and a principal component of the hydrosphere.
Ocean currents are another important factor in determining climate, particularly the major underwater thermohaline circulation which distributes heat energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions.
Its most prominent climatic features are its two large polar regions, two relatively narrow temperate zones, and a wide equatorial tropical to subtropical region.
Beyond certain basic characteristics that many philosophers agree about to explain what is seen as beautiful, the opinions are virtually endless.
The atmospheric pressure declines steadily with altitude.
Nature can refer to the general realm of living plants and animals, and in some cases to the processes associated with inanimate objects – the way that particular types of things exist and change of their own accord, such as the weather and geology of the Earth.
The origin of life on Earth is not well understood, but it is known to have occurred at least 3.5&nbsp;billion years ago, during the hadean or archean eons on a primordial Earth that had a substantially different environment than is found at present.
The structure and composition is determined by various environmental factors that are interrelated.
Originally Aristotle divided all living things between plants, which generally do not move fast enough for humans to notice, and animals.
Although natural wonders are celebrated in the Psalms and the Book of Job, wilderness portrayals in art became more prevalent in the 1800s, especially in the works of the Romantic movement.
On Earth, it is found mostly in oceans and other large water bodies, with 1.6% of water below ground in aquifers and 0.001% in the air as vapor, clouds, and precipitation.
With the ozone layer absorbing harmful ultraviolet radiation, life colonized the surface of Earth.
Similarly, animals are often categorized in ways such as ''domestic'', ''farm animals'', ''wild animals'', ''pests'', etc.
Over the past 66&nbsp;million years, mammalian life diversified.
The subsequent advent of human life, and the development of agriculture and further civilization allowed humans to affect the Earth more rapidly than any previous life form, affecting both the nature and quantity of other organisms as well as global climate.
Air is mostly nitrogen, oxygen, water vapor, with much smaller amounts of carbon dioxide, argon, etc.
The remainder consists of continents and islands, with most of the inhabited land in the Northern Hemisphere.
The biosphere is the part of Earth's outer shell&nbsp;– including land, surface rocks, water, air and the atmosphere&nbsp;– within which life occurs, and which biotic processes in turn alter or transform.
Animals as a category have several characteristics that generally set them apart from other living things.
Conditions on the other terrestrial planets, Mercury and Venus, appear to be too harsh to support life as we know it.
If life exists at all on Mars, it is most likely to be located underground where liquid water can still exist.
The last mass extinction occurred some 66 million years ago, when a meteorite collision probably triggered the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles, but spared small animals such as mammals.
Depending on the particular context, the term "natural" might also be distinguished from the unnatural or the supernatural.
Once life had appeared, the process of evolution by natural selection resulted in the development of ever-more diverse life forms.
A smaller unit of size is called a microecosystem.
The word ''nature'' is derived from the Latin word ''natura'', or "essential qualities, innate disposition", and in ancient times, literally meant "birth".
The atmospheric conditions have been significantly altered from the original conditions by the presence of life-forms, which create an ecological balance that stabilizes the surface conditions.
Variations of these factors will initiate dynamic modifications to the ecosystem.
For example, manufactured objects and human interaction generally are not considered part of nature, unless qualified as, for example, "human nature" or "the whole of nature".
Outer space within the Solar System is called interplanetary space, which passes over into interstellar space at what is known as the heliopause.
