Like other Apacheans, the Navajos were semi-nomadic from the 16th through the 20th centuries.
His daughter has continued the novel series after his death.
In addition, a small group of Mescalero Apachess, long enemies of the Navajos, had been relocated to the area resulting in conflicts.
Dippie adds that, "He became an object of 'burning hatred' among the very people whose problems so preoccupied him."
The Spanish first used the term ''Apachu de Nabajo'' in the 1620s to refer to the people in the Chama Valley region east of the San Juan River and northwest of present-day Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Only a few Navajos surrendered to Carson until he was joined by a large number of New Mexican militia volunteer citizens who aided in a scorched earth campaign against the Navajos.
Archaeological and historical evidence suggests the Athabaskan ancestors of the Navajos and Apaches entered the Southwest around 1400 CE.
Navajos made their hogans in the traditional fashion until the 1900s, when they started to make them in hexagonal and octagonal shapes.
These Chief's Blankets, so called because only chiefs or very wealthy individuals could afford them, were characterized by horizontal stripes and minimal patterning in red.
In the Diné Bahane', or the Navajo Creation Myth, the First, or Dark World is where the four Diyin Diné lived and where First Woman and First Man came into existence.
She writes, "even today, a solidly constructed, log walled Hogan is preferred by many Navajo families."
Beginning in the spring of 1864, around 9,000 Navajo men, women and children were forced to embark on a trek of over  to Fort Sumner, New Mexico for internment at Bosque Redondo.
The Navajos have claimed high rates of death and illness from lung disease and cancer resulting from environmental contamination.
He learned silversmithing from a Mexican man called ''Nakai Tsosi'' ("Thin Mexican") around 1878 and began teaching other Navajos how to work with silver.
Those who practice the Navajo religion regard the hogan as sacred.
While en route to this treaty signing, Narbona, a prominent Navajo peace leader, was killed resulting in hostility between the treaty parties.
By the 18th century the Navajos had begun to import Bayeta red yarn to supplement local black, grey, and white wool, as well as wool dyed with indigo.
In 2000 the documentary ''The Return of Navajo Boy'' was shown at the Sundance Film Festival.
In 1937, Mary Cabot Wheelright and Hastiin Klah, an esteemed and influential Navajo singer, or medicine man, founded The Wheelwright Museum of the American Indian in Santa Fe.
New Mexicans, on their part, together with Utes, continued to raid Navajo country, stealing livestock and taking women and children for sale as slaves.
As adults, men represent their mother's clan in tribal politics.
Ceremonies, such as healing ceremonies or the ''kinaaldá'', will take place inside a hogan.
Silversmithing is an important art form among Navajos.
The novels are noted for incorporating details about Navajo culture, and in some cases expand focus to include nearby Hopi and Zuni characters and cultures, as well.
It is a repository for sound recordings, manuscripts, paintings, and sandpainting tapestries of the Navajos.
The children are "born to" and belong to the mother's clan, and are "born for" the father's clan.
Some ceremonies cure people from curses.
The US government made leases for livestock grazing, took land for railroad development, and permitted mining on Navajo land without consultation with the tribe.
It has been suggested  that speakers of various other Athabaskan languages located in Canada can still comprehend the Navajo language despite the geographic and linguistic deviation of the languages.
Under these reforms, two new schools were built on the Navajo reservation.
B. Moore); oriental and Persian styles (almost always with natural dyes); "Wide Ruins", "Chinlee", banded geometric patterns; "Klagetoh", diamond-type patterns; "Red Mesa" and bold diamond patterns.
From there, they headed south and arrived in the Third World, or Yellow World.
In 1890, a local rancher refused to pay the Navajos a fine of livestock.
For the most part, the majority of their ceremonies are to cure diseases and corn pollen is used as a blessing and as an offering during prayer One half of major Navajo song ceremonial complex is the Blessing Way (''Hózhǫ́ǫ́jí)'', while the other half is the Enemy Way (''Anaʼí Ndááʼ'').
The long-term result was strong Navajo opposition to Collier's Indian New Deal.
In addition, the tribe was able to increase the size of the Navajo reservation from 3.5 million acres () to the 16 million acres () as it stands today; however, economic conflicts with non-Navajos continued for many years as civilians and companies exploited resources assigned to the Navajos.
The treaty acknowledged the jurisdiction of the United States and allowed forts and trading posts to be built on Navajo land.
It is closely related to the Apache language as the Navajos and Apaches are believed to have migrated from northwestern Canada and eastern Alaska, where the majority of Athabaskan speakers reside.
One of the songs describes the home of the thunderbirds:
Only three were active, and the owners wanted payment for their improvements before leaving.
In the Glittering World, true death came into existence as well as the creations of the seasons, the moon, stars, and the sun.
Some early European-American settlers moved in and set up trading posts, often buying Navajo rugs by the pound and selling them back east by the bale.
Times of day as well as colors are used to represent the four sacred mountains.
The capacity for sheep was about 500,000 but  they owned 2 million of them in 1931; they provided half the cash income for the individual Navajo.
Once the children arrived at the boarding school, their lifestyles changed dramatically.
Most Navajo members today live in apartments and houses in urban areas.
In 1861, Brigadier-General James H. Carleton, Commander of the Federal District of New Mexico, initiated a series of military actions against the Navajos.
In 1883, Lt. Parker, accompanied by ten enlisted men and two scouts, went up the San Juan River to separate Navajos and citizens who had encroached on Navajo land.
The United States, on its part, promised "such donations and such other liberal and humane measures, as it may deem meet and proper."
The Navajos believed Lt. Scott was there to drive off the whites who had settled on the reservation and had fenced off the river from the Navajos.
In the 1780s, the Spanish sent military expeditions against the Navajos in the Mount Taylor and Chuska Mountain regions of New Mexico.
Rough Rock Day School was run in the same militaristic style as Fort Defiance and did not implement the educational reforms.
Spiritual healing ceremonies are rooted in Navajo traditional stories.
Since the 1970s, legislation has helped to regulate the industry and reduce the toll, but the government has not yet offered holistic and comprehensive compensation.
Throughout religions, the importance of a specific number is emphasized and in the Navajo religion, the number four appears to be sacred to their practices.
The purpose of the Night Chant is to purify the patient and heal them through prayers to the spirit-beings.
The Beaver People gave Coyote logs and instructions on how to build the first hogan.
The First World beings had offended him and were asked to leave.
Many Navajo men volunteered for military service in keeping with their warrior culture, where they served in integrated units.
This report was the precursor to education reforms initiated under President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Women especially were hurt as many lost their only source of income.
Navajos also have several types of hogans for lodging and ceremonial use.
The four sacred mountains were found here but due to a great flood, First Woman, First Man, and The Holy People were forced to find another world to live in.
The traders encouraged the locals to weave blankets and rugs into distinct styles.
1918) is considered to be the first Navajo silversmith.
Hogans continue to be used as dwellings, especially by older Navajos, although they tend to be made with modern construction materials and techniques.
As part of their traditional economy, Navajo groups may have formed trading or raiding parties, traveling relatively long distances.
Many of these patterns exhibit a fourfold symmetry, which is thought to embody traditional ideas about harmony or ''hózhǫ́''.
Oral history also indicates a long relationship with Pueblo people and a willingness to adapt Puebloan ideas and linguistic variance into their culture, as well as long-established trading practices between the groups.
In the Second, or Blue World, the world was inhabited by a few of the mammals Earth People know today as well as the Swallow Chief, or Táshchózhii.
Male hogans are square or conical with a distinct rectangular entrance, while a female hogan is an eight-sided house.
The completion of the railroads dramatically changed Navajo weaving.
Atsidi Sani (c. 1830–c.
The ''Siláo'' ran the discipline aspect of the school.
A small group of Navajos used force to free the women and retreated to Beautiful Mountain with 30 or 40 sympathizers.
Many Navajo young people moved to work in urban factories in World War II.
Using an upright loom, the Navajos made extremely fine utilitarian blankets that were collected by Ute and Plains Indians.
Two Navajo men and all three whites died, but a woman and a child survived.
The language comprises two geographic, mutually intelligible dialects.
In 1846, following an invitation from a small party of American soldiers under the command of Captain John Reid who journeyed deep into Navajo country and contacted him, Narbona and other Navajos negotiated a treaty of peace with Colonel Alexander Doniphan on November 21, 1846, at Bear Springs, Ojo del Oso (later the site of Fort Wingate).
People may complain of witches who  do harm to the minds, bodies, and families of innocent people, though these matters are rarely discussed in detail with those outside of the community.
Four hundred Navajo Code Talkers played a famous role during World War II by relaying radio messages using a code based on their own language, which the Japanese were unable to understand.
This time, when they arrived, they stayed in The Fourth World.
In the same year, Lt. Scott went to the San Juan River with two scouts and 21 enlisted men.
Due to the fact that the world was so dark, life couldn't thrive there and they had to move on.
Eventually, the arrangement led to a gradual end in Navajo raids as the tribe was able to increase the size of livestock and crops.
By treaty, the Navajos were allowed to leave the reservation for trade with permission from the military or local Indian agent.
The states with the largest Navajo populations are Arizona (140,263) and New Mexico (108,306).
Daughters (or, if necessary, other female relatives) were traditionally the ones who received the generational property inheritance.
The Navajos tried to collect it, and whites in southern Colorado and Utah claimed that 9,000 of the Navajos were on a warpath.
Later, they added silver earrings, buckles, bolos, hair ornaments, pins and squash blossom necklaces for tribal use, and to sell to tourists as a way to supplement their income.
In 1887, citizens Palmer, Lockhart, and King fabricated a charge of horse stealing and randomly attacked a home on the reservation.
They refused to surrender to the agent, and local law enforcement and military refused the agent's request for an armed engagement.
After the Cherokee, they are the second largest federally recognized tribe in the United States with 300,460 enrolled tribal members .
The treaty was not honored by many young Navajo raiders who continued to steal livestock from New Mexican villages and herders.
There are also traditional rites of passage, and many ceremonies for blessings.
Rancher Bennett, whose horse was allegedly stolen, pointed out to Kerr that his horses were stolen by the three whites to catch a horse thief.
Additionally, some Navajos speak Navajo Sign Language, which is either a dialect or daughter of Plains Sign Talk, as well as some being speakers of Plains Sign Talk itself.
The Navajo language is spoken throughout the region with most Navajos speaking English as well.
Both are made of wood and covered in mud, with the door always facing east to welcome the sun each morning.
Agreeing with the analysis of his experts, he decided that the Navajos owned far too many sheep, goats, cattle and horses for the carrying capacity of their reservation.
:''In Tsegihi White House,''
The '''Navajos''' (British English: '''Navajo''',  or '''') are a Native American people of the Southwestern United States.
A small military detachment out of Fort Wingate restored white citizens to order.
Turquoise has been part of jewelry for centuries, but Navajo artists did not use inlay techniques to insert turquoise into silver designs until the late 19th century.
Kerr (with two Navajo scouts) examined the ground and then met with several hundred Navajos at Houcks Tank.
The museum was founded to preserve the religion and traditions of the Navajos, which Klah was sure would soon be lost forever.
The Navajos are speakers of a Na-Dené Southern Athabaskan language known as ''Diné bizaad'' (lit.
Change did not occur in these boarding schools until the Meriam Report was published in 1929 by the Secretary of Interior, Hubert Work.
European Americans taught the classes under an English-only curriculum and would punish any student caught speaking Navajo.
In the 18th century, the Spanish reported the Navajos' maintaining large herds of livestock and cultivating large crop areas.
For example, there were four original clans of Diné, four colors and four times of day, four Diyin Diné, and for the most part, four songs sung for a ritual.
Many older Navajos were against this education and would hide their children to keep them from being taken.
One of them, the Night Chant ceremony, is conducted over several days and involves up to 24 dancers.
Historian Brian Dippie notes that the Indian Rights Association denounced Collier as a 'dictator' and accused him of a "near reign of terror" on the Navajo reservation.
The Navajo people believe they passed through three worlds before arriving in this world, The Fourth World or The Glittering World.
This report discussed Indian boarding schools as being inadequate in terms of diet, medical services, dormitory overcrowding, under-educated teachers, restrictive discipline, and manual labor by the students to keep the school running.
The mother's eldest brother has a strong role in her children's lives.
Cheap blankets were imported, so Navajo weavers shifted their focus to weaving rugs for an increasingly non-Native audience.
Land erosion was worsening.
When Klah met Cabot in 1921, he had witnessed decades of efforts by the US government and  missionaries to assimilate the Navajos into mainstream society.
In the final episode of the third season of the FX reality TV show ''30 Days'', the show's producer Morgan Spurlock spends thirty days living with a Navajo family on their reservation in New Mexico.
During this period, Chief Manuelito founded the Navajo Tribal Police, which operated between 1872 and 1875 as an anti-raid task force working to maintain the peaceful terms of the 1868 Navajo treaty.
They gained firsthand experience with how they could assimilate into the modern world and many did not return to the overcrowded reservation with few jobs.
Children were sent away to Indian boarding schools, where they were forced to learn English and practice Christianity.
General Scott arrived, and with the help of Henry Chee Dodge, defused the situation.
The Navajo Livestock Reduction was imposed upon the Navajo Nation by the federal government in the 1930s.
Federal officials concluded that the only solution was to drastically reduce the livestock.
The program united the Navajos in opposition, but after Collier had opponents arrested they were unable to stop it.
Other conditions included inadequate food; overcrowding; manual labor in kitchens, fields, and boiler rooms; and military style uniforms and haircuts.
Through multiple interviews, the interviewees recalled being captured and disciplined by the ''Siláo'' if they tried to run away.
The Navajos came into contact with the United States Army in 1846, when General Stephen W. Kearny invaded Santa Fe with 1,600 men during the Mexican–American War.
The clan system is exogamous: people must date and marry partners outside their own clans, which for this purpose include the clans of their four grandparents.
The Navajos were not provided with much protection that other enemies of the Navajos would swoop in and take Navajo women and children back to their camps and force them to work as slaves.
''The Return of Navajo Boy'' allowed the Navajo to be more involved in the depictions of themselves.
In the same year, Lt. Lockett, with the aid of 42 enlisted soldiers, was joined by Lt. Holomon at Navajo Springs.
New Mexican citizen and militia raids increased rapidly in 1860–61 and became known as ''Naahondzood'', "the fearing time."
Military records cite this development as a precautionary measure to protect citizens and the Navajos from each other.
The Navajo oral tradition is said to retain references of this migration.
The tribe adopted crop farming techniques from the Pueblo peoples, growing mainly corn, beans, and squash.
Some are maintained specifically for ceremonial purposes.
Once married, a Navajo man would move to live with his bride in her dwelling and among her mother's people and clan.
:''In the house made of the evening light''
The War Department in 1940 rejected a proposal by the Bureau of Indian Affairs that segregated units be created for the Indians.
Carson and his forces swept through Navajo land, killing Navajos and destroying any crops, livestock, or dwellings they came across.
Large scale crop failure and disease were also endemic during this time, as well as raids by other tribes and civilians.
The Navajo Nation constitutes an independent governmental body that manages the Navajo reservation in the Four Corners area, including over 27,000 square miles of land in Arizona, Utah, and New Mexico.
When the Spanish arrived, the Navajos began herding sheep and goats as a main source of trade and food, with meat becoming an essential component of the Navajo diet.
Four of the novels have been adapted for film/TV.
From then into the early 21st century, the U.S. allowed mining without sufficient environmental protection for workers, waterways and land.
The term "squash blossom" was apparently attached to the name of the Navajo necklace at an early date, although its bud-shaped beads are thought to derive from Spanish-Mexican pomegranate designs.
The Navajo silversmiths also borrowed the "naja" (''najahe'' in Navajo) symbol to shape the silver pendant that hangs from the "squash blossom" necklace.
Collier's solution was to launch a program to purchase and remove over half of the livestock, despite the deep cultural ties the Navajos had to their livestock.
The Diné also had the expectation of keeping a positive relationship between them and the Diyin Diné.
As Earth People, the Diné must do everything within their power to maintain the balance between Mother Earth and man.
The Blessing Way rite was based on "peace, harmony, and good things exclusively" and the Enemy Way, or Evil Way rite was concerned with the opposite.
However, Spanish/Mexican-Navajo pattern of raids and expeditions continued.
Their extended kinship groups had seasonal dwelling areas to accommodate livestock, agriculture and gathering practices.
In the 1940s, large quantities of uranium were discovered in Navajo land.
Facing starvation and death, the last group of Navajos surrendered at Canyon de Chelly and were taken to Fort Defiance for internment on July 20, 1863.
'People's language').
According to Kehoe, this style of housing is distinctive to the Navajos.
Some Americans were strongly sympathetic to the Navajos.
By the 1640s, the Spanish began using the term "Navajo" to refer to the Diné.
A hogan, the traditional Navajo home, is built as a shelter for either a man or for a woman.
During the 1670s, the Spanish wrote that the Diné lived in a region known as '''', about sixty miles (100&nbsp;km) west of the Rio Chama valley region.
Educators found the Evangelical Missionary School curriculum to be much more beneficial to the Navajo children.
The Federal Government decided that the land of the Navajo Nation could not support the increasingly large flocks of sheep, goats cattle and horses.
The July 2008 show called "Life on an Indian Reservation", depicts the dire conditions that many Native Americans experience living on reservations in the United States.
The internment at Bosque Redondo was a failure for many reasons as the government failed to provide an adequate supply of water, wood, provisions, and livestock for 4,000–5,000 people.
Since they live in the arid Four Corners area, the houses are made of dried mud.
By 1880, Navajo silversmiths were creating handmade jewelry including bracelets, tobacco flasks, necklaces and bracers.
Navajo children were sent to boarding schools within the reservation and off the reservation.
While at Bosque Redondo the government did not provide the Navajos with food or shelter and some Navajos froze during the winter because of poor shelters that they had to make on their own.
Colonel Kit Carson was ordered by Carleton to conduct an expedition into Navajo land and gain their surrender.
It also featured exhibits to express the beauty, dignity, and logic of Navajo religion.
The ceremony requires for the dancers to wear buck skin masks, as do many of the other Navajo ceremonies, and they all represent specific gods.
The Evangelical Missionary School was opened next to Rough Rock Day School.
First Phase Chief's Blankets have only horizontal stripes, Second Phase feature red rectangular designs, and Third Phase feature red diamonds and partial diamond patterns.
The Holy People, or Diyin Diné, had instructed the Earth People to view the four sacred mountains as the boundaries of the homeland () they should never leave: Blanca Peak ( — Dawn or White Shell Mountain) in Colorado; Mount Taylor ( — Blue Bead or Turquoise Mountain) in New Mexico; the San Francisco Peaks ( — Abalone Shell Mountain) in Arizona; and Hesperus Mountain ( — Big Mountain Sheep) in Colorado.
Sheep also became a form of currency and status symbol among the Navajos based on the overall quantity of herds a family maintained.
In 1868, a treaty was negotiated between Navajo leaders and the Federal government allowing the surviving Navajos to return to a reservation on a portion of their former homeland.
The ceremonial leader proceeds by asking the Holy People to be present in the beginning of the ceremony, then identifying the patient with the power of the spirit-being, and describing the patient's transformation to renewed health with lines such as, "Happily I recover."
The first Spaniards to visit the region wrote about seeing Navajo blankets.
They were prohibited from using their own languages and religion.
Evidently, citizens of the surnames Houck and/or Owens had murdered a Navajo chief's son, and 100 armed Navajos were looking for them.
:''In the house made of the dawn,''
Navajo accounts of this school portray it as a family-like atmosphere with home-cooked meals; new or gently used clothing; humane treatment; and a Navajo-based curriculum.
It was written in response to an earlier film, ''The Navajo Boy'' which was somewhat exploitative of those Navajos involved.
The United States military continued to maintain forts on the Navajo reservation in the years following the Long Walk.
Navajos came to the southwest with their own weaving traditions; however, they learned to weave cotton on upright looms from Pueblo peoples.
A group of Navajos known as “Indian Scouts” were employed by the military as civilian police through 1895.
In 1933, John Collier was appointed Commissioner of what is now called the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA).
The Navajos' hallmark jewelry piece called the "squash blossom" necklace first appeared in the 1880s.
The first Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) school opened at Fort Defiance and led the way for eight others to be established.
In 1849, the military governor of New Mexico, Colonel John MacRae Washington—accompanied by John S. Calhoun, an Indian agent—led a force of 400 soldiers into Navajo country, penetrating Canyon de Chelly, and signed a treaty with two Navajo leaders who presented themselves as "Head Chief" and "Second Chief."
Over three-quarters of the Navajo population reside in these two states.
The Navajos construct hogans out of poles and brush covered with earth.
In addition, the practice of spinning and weaving wool into blankets and clothing became common and eventually developed into a form of highly valued artistic expression.
Spanish records from the mid-16th century speak of the Pueblos exchanging maize and woven cotton goods for bison meat, hides and stone from Athabaskans traveling to the pueblos or living in the vicinity of them.
