The victorious Allies outlawed the NSDAP and its subsidiary organisations.
But little other activity occurred until May, so the period became known as the "Phoney War".
The ''Waffen-SS'', the military branch of the SS, became a de facto fourth branch of the Wehrmacht.
A new organisation, the German Labour Front, was created and placed under NSDAP functionary Robert Ley.
Belgian Eupen-Malmedy, which had been part of German until 1919, was annexed directly.
This was in part due to the removal of women from the workforce.
The party used symbols such as the Blood Flag and rituals such as the Nazi Party rallies to foster unity and bolster the regime's popularity.
Movies were popular in Germany in the 1930s and 1940s, with admissions of over a billion people in 1942, 1943, and 1944.
On 20 August 1934, civil servants were required to swear an oath of unconditional obedience to Hitler; a similar oath had been required of members of the military several weeks prior.
Himmler envisioned the SS as being an elite group of guards, Hitler's last line of defence.
A new Reich Animal Protection Act became law in 1933.
Teachers had to take an oath of loyalty and obedience to Hitler, and those who failed to show sufficient conformity to party ideals were often reported by students or fellow teachers and dismissed.
Danzig was made a free city.
Hitler made a pact with Joseph Stalin and invaded Poland in September 1939, launching World War II in Europe.
Kressel writes, "Overwhelmingly&nbsp;... Germans speak with mystification of Hitler's 'hypnotic' appeal".
Together, the Hunger Plan and ''Generalplan Ost'' would have led to the starvation of 80 million people in the Soviet Union.
The demands of the SA for more political and military power caused anxiety among military, industrial, and political leaders.
They promised a strong central government, increased ''Lebensraum'' (living space) for Germanic peoples, formation of a national community based on race, and racial cleansing via the active suppression of Jews, who would be stripped of their citizenship and civil rights.
Hitler made peace overtures to the new British leader, Winston Churchill, and upon their rejection he ordered a series of aerial attacks on Royal Air Force airbases and radar stations.
They also replaced men in the wartime economy, especially on farms and in small family-owned shops.
People such as prostitutes and pickpockets were judged to be inherently criminal and a threat to the racial community.
The government controlled artistic expression, promoting specific art forms and banning or discouraging others.
Radio became very popular in Germany during the 1930s, with over 70 percent of households owning a receiver by 1939, more than any other country.
Himmler hoped it would eventually totally replace the existing police system.
To determine who should be killed, Himmler created the ''Volksliste'', a system of classification of people deemed to be of German blood.
The Germans reaffirmed their alliance with Italy and signed non-aggression pacts with Denmark, Estonia, and Latvia.
Between 1939 and 1941, German forces invaded Poland, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Belgium, and the Soviet Union.
On 2 May General Helmuth Weidling unconditionally surrendered Berlin to Soviet General Vasily Chuikov.
On 7 December 1941, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
Primary and secondary education focused on racial biology, population policy, culture, geography, and especially physical fitness.
Propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels made effective use of film, mass rallies, and Hitler's hypnotising oratory to control public opinion.
But enrolment in medical schools rose sharply; Jewish doctors had been forced to leave the profession, so medical graduates had good job prospects.
Nazi Germany's racial policy was based on their belief in the existence of a superior master race.
It denounced the systematic hostility of the regime toward the church.
By 1939 over two-thirds of the newspapers and magazines were directly owned by the Propaganda Ministry.
This court handed out over 5,000 death sentences until its dissolution in 1945.
The church continued to resist, and by early 1937 Hitler abandoned his hope of uniting the Protestant churches.
However, with the requirement that men be enlisted into the armed forces during the war, women comprised half of the enrolment in the post-secondary system by 1944.
Under the provisions of a law promulgated 14 July 1933, the Nazi regime carried out the compulsory sterilisation of over 400,000 individuals labelled as having hereditary defects.
Hitler's refusal to admit defeat and his repeated insistence that the war be fought to the last man led to unnecessary death and destruction in the closing months of the war.
Hitler routinely disregarded the Concordat, closing all Catholic institutions whose functions were not strictly religious.
The ''Generalplan Ost'' (General Plan for the East) called for deporting the population of occupied Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union to Siberia, for use as slave labour or to be murdered.
The government was not a coordinated, co-operating body, but a collection of factions struggling for power and Hitler's favour.
The governments of Denmark, Norway (''Reichskommissariat Norwegen''), and the Netherlands (''Reichskommissariat Niederlande'') were placed under civilian administrations staffed largely by natives.
Plans for the total eradication of the Jewish population of Europe—eleven million people—were formalised at the Wannsee Conference on 20 January 1942.
Military education became the central component of physical education, and education in physics was oriented toward subjects with military applications, such as ballistics and aerodynamics.
Hitler sent air and armoured units to assist General Francisco Franco and his Nationalist forces in the Spanish Civil War, which broke out in July 1936.
The previous day, the cabinet had enacted the "Law Concerning the Highest State Office of the Reich", which stated that upon Hindenburg's death, the office of president would be abolished and its powers merged with those of the chancellor.
At the Potsdam Conference in August 1945, the Allies arranged for the Allied occupation and denazification of the country.
Britain and France declared war on Germany two days later.
The NSDAP daily newspaper, the ''Völkischer Beobachter'' (Ethnic Observer), was edited by Alfred Rosenberg, author of ''The Myth of the Twentieth Century'', a book of racial theories espousing Nordic superiority.
This pause provided the Red Army with an opportunity to mobilise fresh reserves.
The Nazis used it to legitimize their regime as a successor state.
In contrast to the previous oath, which required allegiance to the constitution of the country and its lawful establishments, this new oath required members of the military to obey Hitler even if they were being ordered to do something illegal.
Political courts called ''Sondergerichte'' sentenced some 12,000 members of the German resistance to death, and civil courts sentenced an additional 40,000 Germans.
Several high-profile Catholic lay leaders were targeted in the 1934 Night of the Long Knives assassinations.
Everyone and everything was monitored in Nazi Germany.
Jews and people considered politically unreliable were prevented from working in the arts, and many emigrated.
The act allowed for the expropriation of privately owned land to create nature preserves and aided in long-range planning.
Conquered areas of Belgium and France were placed under control of the Military Administration in Belgium and Northern France.
Austrian and Czech foreign exchange reserves were soon seized by the Nazis, as were stockpiles of raw materials such as metals and completed goods such as weaponry and aircraft, which were shipped back to Germany.
With the issuance of the Berlin Declaration on 5 June 1945 and later creation of the Allied Control Council, the four Allied powers temporarily assumed governance of Germany.
The ideology of Nazism brought together elements of antisemitism, racial hygiene, and eugenics, and combined them with pan-Germanism and territorial expansionism with the goal of obtaining more ''Lebensraum'' for the Germanic people.
Upon seizing power, the Nazis took repressive measures against their political opposition and rapidly began the comprehensive marginalisation of persons they considered socially undesirable.
Education focused on racial biology, population policy, and fitness for military service.
Germany imported and enslaved some 12 million people from 20 European countries to work in factories and on farms; approximately 75 percent were Eastern European.
The book counted the Holy Roman Empire (962–1806) as the first Reich and the German Empire (1871–1918) as the second.
High numbers of suicides took place in many other locations, including Neubrandenburg (600 dead), Stolp in Pommern (1,000 dead), and Berlin, where at least 7,057 people committed suicide in 1945.
Poor living conditions led to high rates of sickness, injury, and death, as well as sabotage and criminal activity.
They quickly conquered Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and Belgium, and France surrendered on 22 June.
Against the judgement of many of his senior military officers, Hitler ordered an attack on France and the Low Countries, which began in May 1940.
Hitler, Nazism, and the Holocaust have become symbols of evil in the modern world.
Food supplies were precarious; production dropped in most areas of Europe, but not as much as during World War I. Greece experienced famine in the first year of occupation and the Netherlands in the last year of the war.
The unexpectedly swift defeat of France resulted in an upswing in Hitler's popularity and a strong upsurge in war fever.
Jewish pupils were removed from schools.
Müller resigned and Hitler appointed Hanns Kerrl as Minister for Church Affairs, to continue efforts to control Protestantism.
In addition to taking control of tens of thousands of previously privately run recreational clubs, it offered highly regimented holidays and entertainment experiences such as cruises, vacation destinations, and concerts.
People who were convicted of three or more offences—even petty ones—could be deemed habitual offenders and jailed indefinitely.
No production models were sold until after the war, when the vehicle was renamed the Volkswagen (people's car).
Hitler's leadership style was to give contradictory orders to his subordinates and to place them in positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped.
Removing women from the workforce did not have the intended effect of freeing up jobs for men.
Meanwhile, American and British bomber fleets, based in Britain, began operations against Germany.
Detailed National Socialist indoctrination of future holders of elite military rank was undertaken at Order Castles.
The regime promoted the concept of ''Volksgemeinschaft'', a national German ethnic community.
Polish civilians were subject to forced labour in German industry, internment, wholesale expulsions to make way for German colonists and mass executions.
Political offenders who were released from prison were often immediately re-arrested by the Gestapo and confined in a concentration camp.
Estimates of the total German war dead range from 5.5 to 6.9 million persons.
By November fuel coal was no longer reaching its destinations, and the production of new armaments was no longer possible.
As with other media, newspapers were controlled by the state, with the Reich Press Chamber shutting down or buying newspapers and publishing houses.
Composer Richard Strauss was appointed president of the ''Reichsmusikkammer'' (Reich Music Chamber) on its founding in November 1933.
The number of women enrolled in post-secondary schools dropped from 128,000 in 1933 to 51,000 in 1938.
As the market was experiencing a glut and prices for petroleum were low, in 1933 the Nazi government made a profit-sharing agreement with IG Farben, guaranteeing them a 5 percent return on capital invested in their synthetic oil plant at Leuna.
Roger Gill states, "His moving speeches captured the minds and hearts of a vast number of the German people: he virtually hypnotized his audiences."
A vast security network spied on the activities of clergy, and priests were frequently denounced, arrested, or sent to concentration camps – many to the dedicated clergy barracks at Dachau.
The goal was to implement ''Generalplan Ost'' after the conquest of the Soviet Union, but when the invasion failed, Hitler had to consider other options.
Under Hitler's rule, Germany was transformed into a fascist totalitarian state which controlled nearly all aspects of life.
Authors of books left the country in droves, and some wrote material highly critical of the regime while in exile.
The ''Lebensborn'' (Fountain of Life) association, founded by Himmler in 1935, created a series of maternity homes where single mothers could be accommodated during their pregnancies.
In January 1943 Hitler signed a decree requiring all women under the age of fifty to report for work assignments to help the war effort.
Franco's Nationalists were victorious in 1939 and became an informal ally of Nazi Germany.
On 2 August 1934, President von Hindenburg died.
Initially a force of a dozen men under the auspices of the SA, the ''Schutzstaffel'' (SS) grew to become one of the largest and most powerful groups in Nazi Germany.
During the Battle of Berlin (16 April 1945&nbsp;– 2 May 1945), Hitler and his staff lived in the underground ''Führerbunker'', while the Red Army approached.
The Christian churches were also oppressed, with many leaders imprisoned.
Influenced by the ''Völkisch'' movement, the regime was against cultural modernism and supported the development of an extensive military at the expense of intellectualism.
The ''Reichskulturkammer'' (Reich Chamber of Culture) was organised under the control of the Propaganda Ministry in September 1933.
Enrolment at German universities declined from 104,000 students in 1931 to 41,000 in 1939.
Large families received subsidies to help with their utilities, school fees, and household expenses.
Although the Nazis won the greatest share of the popular vote in the two Reichstag general elections of 1932, they did not have a majority, so Hitler led a short-lived coalition government formed by the NSDAP and the German National People's Party.
From 25 March 1939, membership in the Hitler Youth became compulsory for all children over the age of ten.
The ''Wehrmacht'' entered Austria the next day, to be greeted with enthusiasm by the populace.
He ordered savage reprisals, resulting in 7,000&nbsp;arrests and the execution of more than 4,900&nbsp;people.
In the midst of the Great Depression, the Nazis restored economic stability and ended mass unemployment using heavy military spending and a mixed economy.
Courses were offered on childrearing, sewing, and cooking.
Later Catholic protests included the 22 March 1942 pastoral letter by the German bishops on "The Struggle against Christianity and the Church".
When the stock market in the United States crashed on 24 October 1929, the effect in Germany was dire.
On 11 April a decree was promulgated that stated anyone who had even one Jewish parent or grandparent was considered non-Aryan.
The NSDAP anthem "Horst-Wessel-Lied" ("Horst Wessel Song") became a second national anthem.
The period is also known under the names the '''Third Reich''' () and the '''National Socialist Period''' (, abbreviated as ''NS-Zeit'').
The victorious Allies initiated a policy of denazification and put many of the surviving Nazi leadership on trial for war crimes at the Nuremberg trials.
Sex was sometimes used as a commodity to obtain, for example, better work from a foreign labourer.
In addition to eliminating Jews, the Nazis also planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by 30 million people through starvation in an action called the Hunger Plan.
A law promulgated 30 January 1934 abolished the existing ''Länder'' (constituent states) of Germany and replaced them with new administrative divisions of Nazi Germany, the ''Gaue'', headed by NSDAP leaders (''Gauleiters''), who effectively became the governor of their region.
Study of the era and a willingness to critically examine its mistakes has led to the development of a strong democracy in today's Germany, but with lingering undercurrents of antisemitism and neo-Nazi thought.
Catholic schools were required to reduce religious instruction and crucifixes were removed from state buildings.
Virtually every family suffered losses during the war or has a story to tell.
Financial demands were levied on the governments of the occupied countries as well; payments for occupation costs were received from France, Belgium, and Norway.
Pastor Martin Niemöller responded with the formation of the Confessing Church, from which some clergymen opposed the Nazi regime.
Barriers to trade led to hoarding, black markets, and uncertainty about the future.
The Reich Citizenship Law stated that only those of "German or related blood" were eligible for citizenship.
As a result of their defeat in World War I and the resulting Treaty of Versailles, Germany lost Alsace-Lorraine, Northern Schleswig, and Memel.
In alliance with Italy and smaller Axis powers, Germany conquered most of Europe by 1940 and threatened Great Britain.
Germany finalised her border with Poland by signing the Treaty of Warsaw (1970).
Perfunctory efforts were made to curb air pollution, but little enforcement of existing legislation was undertaken once the war began.
The treaty required the regime to honour the independence of Catholic institutions and prohibited clergy from involvement in politics.
Most Catholic youth groups refused to dissolve themselves and Hitler Youth leader Baldur von Schirach encouraged members to attack Catholic boys in the streets.
Hitler, believing the British would not actually take action, ordered an invasion plan should be readied for a target date of September 1939.
Hitler took a personal interest in architecture, and worked closely with state architects Paul Troost and Albert Speer to create public buildings in a neoclassical style based on Roman architecture.
The government took several measures to ensure the protection of animals and the environment.
Inaugurating and legitimising power for the Nazis was thus accomplished by their initial revolutionary activities, then through the improvisation and manipulation of the legal mechanisms available, through the use of police powers by the Nazi Party (which allowed them to include and exclude from society whomever they chose), and finally by the expansion of authority for all state and federal institutions.
Overy argues that the bombing strained the German war economy and forced it to divert up to one-fourth of its manpower and industry into anti-aircraft resources, which very likely shortened the war.
The change was never fully implemented, as the Länder were still used as administrative divisions for some government departments such as education.
Since most of the industrial areas were in the western zones, the Soviet Union was transferred additional reparations.
The productions were not always overtly propagandistic, but generally had a political subtext and followed party lines regarding themes and content.
''Reichskommissariats'' took control of conquered areas, and a German administration was established in what was left of Poland.
Common English terms are "Nazi Germany" and "Third Reich".
Many starved to death while being held in open-air pens at Auschwitz and elsewhere.
It seized Austria and Czechoslovakia in 1938 and 1939.
Some 26,000 railroad cars full of art treasures, furniture, and other looted items were sent back to Germany from France alone.
By January 1939, unemployment was down to 301,800, and it dropped to only 77,500 by September.
The Reich Forestry Office, under Göring, enforced regulations that required foresters to plant a wide variety of trees to ensure suitable habitat for wildlife.
Overy estimated in 2014 that in all about 353,000 civilians were killed by British and American bombing of German cities.
The courts issued and carried out far more death sentences than before the Nazis took power.
In concert with other aircraft manufacturers and under the direction of Aviation Minister Göring, production was immediately ramped up industry-wide.
Racism, especially antisemitism, was a central feature of the regime.
As part of the drive to remove Jewish influence from cultural life, members of the National Socialist Student League removed from libraries any books considered un-German, and a nationwide book burning was held on 10 May.
The party platform included removal of the Weimar Republic, rejection of the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, radical antisemitism, and anti-Bolshevism.
From that point forward, mayors were appointed by the Ministry of the Interior.
Emigrants to Palestine were allowed to transfer property there under the terms of the Haavara Agreement, but those moving to other countries had to leave virtually all their property behind, and it was seized by the government.
Real wages dropped by 25 percent between 1933 and 1938.
Nazi philosophy prevented large numbers of women from being hired to work in munitions factories in the build-up to the war, so foreign labourers were brought in.
Large-scale aerial bombing of Germany escalated in 1944, and the Axis powers were pushed back in Eastern and Southern Europe.
The Reichstag Fire Decree, imposed on 28 February 1933, rescinded most German civil liberties, including rights of assembly and freedom of the press.
The Reich Health Office took measures to try to limit smoking, including producing lectures and pamphlets.
In Germany itself, food rations had to be cut in 1942.
Officials were expected to "work towards the Führer"&nbsp;– to take the initiative in promoting policies and actions in line with his wishes and the goals of the NSDAP, without Hitler having to be involved in the day-to-day running of the country.
By the end of 1933 over a thousand books, most of them by Jewish authors or featuring Jewish characters, had been banned by the Nazi regime.
In spite of a ban on vivisection, the Ministry of the Interior readily handed out permits for experiments on animals.
Jazz music was singled out as being especially inappropriate, and foreign musicians of this genre left the country or were expelled.
Germany regained control of the Saarland via a referendum held in 1935 and annexed Austria in the Anschluss of 1938.
Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939.
Their initial assignment was to protect Nazi leaders at rallies and assemblies.
Further elections in November 1933, 1936, and 1938 were entirely Nazi-controlled and saw only the Nazis and a small number of independents elected.
The two largest film companies, Universum Film AG and Tobis, were purchased by the Propaganda Ministry, which by 1939 was producing most German films.
In November 1938, a young Jewish man requested an interview with the German ambassador in Paris.
By 1944 over a half million served as auxiliaries in the German armed forces, especially in anti-aircraft units of the Luftwaffe; a half million worked in civil aerial defence; and 400,000 were volunteer nurses.
Large expenditures were made on rearmament, in spite of growing deficits.
Goebbels recommended that the remaining authors should concentrate on books themed on Germanic myths and the concept of blood and soil.
On 6 June 1944, American, British, and Canadian forces established a western front with the D-Day landings in Normandy.
The caveat that the woman had to remain unemployed was dropped by 1937 due to a shortage of skilled labourers.
The total number of soldiers who served in the ''Wehrmacht'' from 1935 to 1945 was around 18.2 million, of whom 5.3 million died.
Any profits in excess of that amount would be turned over to the Reich.
Niemöller was arrested and confined, first in Sachsenhausen concentration camp and then at Dachau.
Leni Riefenstahl's ''Triumph of the Will'' (1935), documenting the 1934 Nuremberg Rally, and ''Olympia'' (1938), covering the 1936 Summer Olympics, pioneered techniques of camera movement and editing that influenced later films.
Recreation and tourism were organised via the Strength Through Joy program, and the 1936 Summer Olympics showcased the Third Reich on the international stage.
Officials viewed this option as being preferable to their citizens being deported to the Reich as forced labour.
Very heavy strategic bombing by the Allies targeted refineries producing synthetic oil and gasoline as well as the German transportation system, especially rail yards and canals.
Exports of German films plummeted, as their heavily antisemitic content made them impossible to show in other countries.
Some of the conquered territories were immediately incorporated into Germany as part of Hitler's long-term goal of creating a Greater Germanic Reich.
Up to 200 people were killed from 30 June to 2 July 1934 in an event that became known as the Night of the Long Knives.
When the notes were presented for payment, the Reichsbank printed money to do so.
The average class size increased from 37 in 1927 to 43 in 1938 due to the resulting teacher shortage.
This organisation coordinated groups throughout the country to promote motherhood and household activities.
The reaction among Germans was one of surprise and trepidation.
Members of the NSDAP or party supporters were appointed in their place.
The regime attempted to obtain this new territory by attacking Poland and the Soviet Union, intending to deport or kill the Jews and Slavs living there, who were viewed as being inferior to the Aryan master race and part of a Jewish Bolshevik conspiracy.
Both parents were examined for racial suitability before acceptance.
A puppet state was created in Slovakia.
Hundreds of camps of varying size and function were created by the end of the war.
In response, Goebbels renewed the regime's crackdown and propaganda against Catholics.
