Drexler followed the typical views of militant nationalists of the day, such as opposing the Treaty of Versailles, having antisemitic, anti-monarchist and anti-Marxist views, as well as believing in the superiority of Germans whom nationalists claimed to be part of the Aryan "master race" (''Herrenvolk''), but he also accused international capitalism of being a Jewish-dominated movement and denounced capitalists for war profiteering in World War I. Drexler saw the situation of political violence and instability in Germany as the result of the new Weimar Republic being out-of-touch with the masses, especially the lower classes.
In March 1932 Hitler ran for President against the incumbent President Paul von Hindenburg, polling 30.1% in the first round and 36.8% in the second against Hindenburg's 49 and 53%.
The major Nazi Party paramilitary groups were as follows:
Members of its executive committee, some of whom considered Hitler to be too overbearing, wanted to merge with the rival German Socialist Party (DSP).
Hitler began to make the party more public, and he organised their biggest meeting yet of 2000 people, on 24 February 1920 in the ''Staatliches Hofbräuhaus in München''.
Hitler became DAP member 555 (the party began counting membership at 500 to give the impression they were much larger than they actually were).
When the eagle is looking to its left shoulder, it symbolises the Nazi Party, and was called the ''Parteiadler''.
This ideology was explicitly antisemitic.
Though very small, Drexler's movement did receive attention and support from some influential figures.
Hitler in ''Mein Kampf'' directly attacked both left-wing and right-wing politics in Germany.
By November, Hitler had decided that the time was right for an attempt to seize power in Munich, in the hope that the ''Reichswehr'' (the post-war German military) would mutiny against the Berlin government and join his revolt.
This so-called Beer Hall Putsch attempt failed almost at once when the local ''Reichswehr'' commanders refused to support it.
The ''Gaue'' and ''Reichsgaue'' (state or province) were further sub-divided into ''Kreise'' (counties) headed by a ''Kreisleiter'', which were in turn sub-divided into ''Zellen'' (cells) and ''Blocken'' (blocks), headed by a ''Zellenleiter'' and ''Blockleiter'' respectively.
The war in Europe had come to an end.
Catholic Bavaria maintained its right-wing nostalgia for a Catholic monarch; and Westphalia, along with working-class "Red Berlin", were always the Nazis' weakest areas electorally, even during the Third Reich itself.
The party was formally abolished on 10 October 1945 by the Allied Control Council and denazification began, along with trials of major war criminals before the International Military Tribunal (IMT) in Nuremberg.
Many of these associated organizations were labour unions of various professions.
For the purpose of centralization in the ''Gleichschaltung'' process a rigidly hierarchal structure was established in the Nazi Party, which it later carried through in the whole of Germany in order consolidate total power under the person of Hitler (''Führerstaat'').
*''Schutzstaffel'' (SS): "Protection Squadron" (both Allgemeine SS and Waffen-SS)
The Hitler Youth was a paramilitary group divided into an adult leadership corps and a general membership open to boys aged fourteen to eighteen.
When it came to power in 1933, the Nazi Party had over  members.
The following day, 28 February, he persuaded Reich's President Paul von Hindenburg to issue the ''Reichstag'' Fire Decree, which suspended most civil liberties.
Under Comintern directives, the Communists maintained their policy of treating the SPD as the main enemy, calling them "social fascists", thereby splintering opposition to the Nazis.
In 1934, Hitler founded a separate body for the chairman, Chancellery of the Führer, with its own sub-units.
Nazi rallies were often held in beer halls, where downtrodden men could get free beer.
The flag with the ''centred'' disk continued to be used after 1935, but exclusively as the ''Parteiflagge'', the flag of the party.
The areas of strongest Nazi support were in rural Protestant areas such as Schleswig-Holstein, Mecklenburg, Pomerania, and East Prussia.
*National Socialist People's Welfare (NSV)
They held power and influence comparable to the Reich Ministers' in Hitler's Cabinet.
However, by 1936, the local governments had lost nearly all power to their Nazi counterparts or were now controlled by persons who held both government and Nazi titles alike.
Troops opened fire, and 16 Nazis were killed.
Certain nominally independent organizations had their own legal representation and own property, but were supported by the Nazi Party.
They imposed exclusionary segregation on homosexuals, Africans, Jehovah's Witnesses, and political opponents.
Later, both the SPD and the Communists accused each other of having facilitated Hitler's rise to power by their unwillingness to compromise.
*National Socialist Teachers League (NSLB)
Effectively, they lost most of their power to the ''Gaue'', that were originally just regional divisions of the party, but took over most competencies of the state administration in their respective sectors.
Nazi Germany had been established, yet the ''Reichswehr'' remained impartial: Nazi power over Germany remained virtual, not absolute.
The NSDAP won the parliamentary election on 5 March 1933 with 43.9 percent of votes, but failed to win an absolute majority.
Hitler's first speech was held in the Hofbräukeller on 16 October 1919, where he spoke in front of 111 people as the second speaker of the evening.
The Social Democrats and Communists were bitterly divided and unable to formulate an effective solution: this gave the Nazis their opportunity, and Hitler's message, blaming the crisis on the Jewish financiers and the Bolsheviks, resonated with wide sections of the electorate.
Hitler at this time saw the party as a revolutionary organization, whose aim was the overthrow of the Weimar Republic, which he saw as controlled by the socialists, Jews and the "November criminals" who had betrayed the German soldiers in 1918.
The League of German Girls was the equivalent group for girls.
The use of "Nazi Germany," and "Nazi regime," was popularised by anti-Nazis and German exiles abroad.
Impressed with Hitler's oratorical skills, Drexler invited him to join the DAP and Hitler accepted.
File:Flag of German Reich (1935–1945).svg|Flag with the ''off-centre'' swastika and disc.
In 1939, the membership total rose to 5.3 million with 81% being male and 19% being female.
By now the SA had 400,000 members, and its running street battles with the SPD and Communist paramilitaries (who also fought each other) reduced some German cities to combat zones.
These members were affiliated with local branches of the party, of which there were 1,378 throughout the country in 1928.
Nevertheless, it attracted the attention of the German authorities, who were suspicious of any organisation that appeared to have subversive tendencies.
Later in 1918, Karl Harrer (a journalist and member of the Thule Society), convinced Drexler and several others to form the ''Politischer Arbeiterzirkel'' (Political Workers' Circle).
Among the party's earlier members were Ernst Röhm of the Army's District Command VII; well-to-do journalist Dietrich Eckart, who has been called the spiritual father of National Socialism.
At first, Hitler spoke only to relatively small groups, but his considerable oratory and propaganda skills were appreciated by the party leadership.
In December 1920 the Nazi Party acquired a newspaper, the ''Völkischer Beobachter'', of which its leading ideologist Alfred Rosenberg became editor.
By 1929, the party had 130,000 members.
In contrast, when the eagle is looking to its right shoulder, it symbolises the country (''Reich''), and was therefore called the ''Reichsadler''.
In the following days, Hitler spoke to several packed houses and defended himself and Esser, to thunderous applause.
Beneath the Leadership Corps were the party's regional leaders, the ''Gauleiters'', each of whom commanded the party in his ''Gau'' ("region").
In 1933, when Adolf Hitler assumed power of the German government, usage of the designation "Nazi" diminished in Germany, although Austrian anti-Nazis continued to use the term derogatorily.
He accused them of having conspired to stage a coup d'état, but it is believed that this was only a pretence to justify the suppression of any intraparty opposition.
At this time, the Hitler salute (borrowed from the Italian fascists) and the greeting "Heil Hitler!"
The defeat of Germany in World War II marked the end of the Nazi Germany era.
On 23 March, the parliament passed the Enabling Act of 1933, which gave the cabinet the right to enact laws without the consent of parliament.
In German nationalist circles, the swastika was considered a symbol of an "Aryan race"; it symbolized the replacement of the Christian Cross with allegiance to a National Socialist State.
That year, the Nazi Party officially announced that only persons of "pure Aryan descent ''''" could become party members; if the person had a spouse, the spouse also had to be a "racially pure" Aryan.
File:Reichsmark.jpg|5-Reichsmark coins before (1936) and after adding the Nazi swastika (1938)
Hitler later declared that this was when he realised he could really "make a good speech".
The DAP was also deeply opposed to the Versailles Treaty.
Hitler released from prison
The National Socialist Program was a formulation of the policies of the party.
Julius Streicher in Nuremberg was an early recruit, and became editor of the racist magazine ''Der Stürmer''.
For Hitler and his principal lieutenants, national and racial issues were always dominant.
Hitler and his associates were given very lenient prison sentences.
File:Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg|''Parteiflagge'' ("party flag"), used 1920-45.
With the support of Anton Drexler, Hitler became chief of propaganda for the party in early 1920.
The votes that the Nazis received in the 1932 elections established the Nazi Party as the largest parliamentary faction of the Weimar Republic government.
After the Nazi Party came to national power in Germany, they replaced the traditional version of the German eagle with the modified party symbol throughout the country and all its institutions.
*National Socialist War Victim's Care (NSKOV)
In 1918, a league called the ''Freien Arbeiterausschuss für einen guten Frieden'' (Free Workers' Committee for a good Peace) was created in Bremen, Germany.
In January 1923, France occupied the Ruhr industrial region as a result of Germany's failure to meet its reparations payments.
Initially, Nazi political strategy focused on anti-big business, anti-bourgeois, and anti-capitalist rhetoric, although such aspects were later downplayed in order to gain the support of industrial entities, and in the 1930s the party's focus shifted to anti-Semitic and anti-Marxist themes.
*''Nationalsozialistisches Fliegerkorps'' (NSFK): "National Socialist Flyers Corps"
Hitler's considerable oratory and propaganda skills were appreciated by the party leadership as crowds began to flock to hear his speeches.
The given numbers were the official ordering numbers.
More information on the older ''Gaue'' is in the second table.
Translated simply as "Party Member", the ''Parteimitglieder'' could (and did) hold positions in other Nazi groups, such as the SS or Sturmabteilung.
Hitler was inspired by Mussolini and the Fascists, borrowing their use of the straight-armed salute as a Nazi salute.
Despite these strengths, the Nazi Party might never have come to power had it not been for the Great Depression and its effects on Germany.
The ''Reichstag'' fire on 27 February 1933 gave Hitler a pretext for suppressing his political opponents.
During 1931 and into 1932, Germany's political crisis deepened.
While attending a party meeting on 12 September 1919, Hitler became involved in a heated argument with a visitor, Professor Baumann, who questioned the soundness of Gottfried Feder's arguments against capitalism and proposed that Bavaria should break away from Prussia and found a new South German nation with Austria.
*German Faith Movement
The term was in use before the rise of the party as a colloquial and derogatory word for a backward peasant, characterising an awkward and clumsy person.
The committee was dissolved, and Hitler was granted nearly absolute powers as the party's sole leader.
But support for the Nazis had fallen to 33.1%, suggesting that the Nazi surge had passed its peak&nbsp;– possibly because the worst of the Depression had passed, possibly because some middle-class voters had supported Hitler in July as a protest, but had now drawn back from the prospect of actually putting him into power.
On 20 July 1932, the Prussian government was ousted by a coup, the ''Preussenschlag'', and a few days later at the July 1932 ''Reichstag'' election the Nazis made another leap forward, polling 37.4% and becoming the largest party in parliament by a wide margin.
University students, disappointed at being too young to have served in the War of 1914–1918, and attracted by the Nazis' radical rhetoric, also became a strong Nazi constituency.
To ease concerns among potential middle-class supporters, Drexler made clear that unlike Marxists, the party supported the middle-class, and that the party's socialist policy was meant to give social welfare to German citizens deemed part of the Aryan race.
By 1938 it had approximately 2 million members.
*Bund Deutscher Osten (BDO)
After the election, hundreds of thousands of new members joined the party for opportunistic reasons, most of them civil servants and white-collar workers.
This was a strictly hierarchical structure in which orders flowed from the top, and unquestioning loyalty was given to superiors.
Papen, his successor Kurt von Schleicher, and the nationalist press magnate Alfred Hugenberg spent December and January in political intrigues that eventually persuaded President Hindenburg that it was safe to appoint Hitler as Reich Chancellor, at the head of a cabinet including only a minority of Nazi ministers—which he did on 30 January 1933.
It contained 25 points and is, therefore, also known as the "25-point plan" or "25-point programme".
Following the defeat of the Third Reich at the conclusion of World War II in Europe, the party was "declared to be illegal" by the Allied powers, who carried out denazification in the years after the war.
He still faced some opposition from other members: Opponents of Hitler had Hermann Esser expelled from the party and they printed 3000 copies of a pamphlet attacking Hitler as a traitor to the party.
The Hitler Youth was formed for the children of party members, although it remained small until the late 1920s.
Only the SA retained some autonomy.
*Technical Emergency Relief (TENO)
His dismissal of Strasser and his appointment of Goebbels as the party's propaganda chief were major factors.
On the night of 8 November, the Nazis used a patriotic rally in a Munich beer hall to launch an attempted ''putsch'' (''coup d'état'').
The party also formed groups in other parts of Germany.
7% belonged to the upper class, another 7% were peasants, 35% were industrial workers and 51% were what can be described as middle class.
The Fascists, like the Nazis, promoted a national rebirth of their country; opposed communism and liberalism; appealed to the working-class; opposed the Treaty of Versailles; and advocated the territorial expansion of their country.
Hitler quickly became the party's most active orator, appearing in public as a speaker thirty-one times within the first year after his self-discovery.
On the morning of 9 November the Nazis staged a march of about 2,000 supporters through Munich in an attempt to rally support.
The Nazis interpreted the result as a warning that they must seize power before their moment passed.
In a sign of this, the party began to admit women.
Like other ''völkisch'' groups, the DAP advocated the belief that through profit-sharing instead of socialisation Germany should become a unified "people's community" (''Volksgemeinschaft'') rather than a society divided along class and party lines.
They were nicknamed the ''Märzgefallenen'' ("March victims").
The National Socialist Women's League was the women's organization of the party.
To protect the party from too many non-ideological turncoats who were viewed by the so-called "old fighters" ''(alte Kämpfer)'' with some mistrust, the party issued a freeze on admissions that remained in force from May 1933 to 1937.
In effect, this gave Hitler dictatorial powers.
The party recruited former World War&nbsp;I soldiers, to whom Hitler as a decorated frontline veteran could particularly appeal, as well as small businessmen and disaffected former members of rival parties.
The Nazis contested elections to the national parliament, the ''Reichstag'', and to the state legislatures, the ''Landtags'', from 1924, although at first with little success.
It derived from ''Ignaz'', being a shortened version of Ignatius, a common name in Bavaria, the area from which the Nazis emerged.
Joseph Goebbels began his ascent through the party hierarchy as ''Gauleiter'' of Berlin-Brandenburg in 1926.
In general, the manifesto was antisemitic, anti-capitalist, anti-democratic, anti-Marxist, and anti-liberal.
As Hitler became the recognized head of the German nationalists, other groups declined or were absorbed.
On 5 January 1919, Drexler created a new political party and proposed it be named the "German Socialist Worker's Party", but Harrer objected to the term "socialist"; the issue was settled by removing the term and the party was named the German Workers' Party (''Deutsche Arbeiterpartei'', DAP).
Black, white and red were in fact the colours of the old North German Confederation flag (invented by Otto von Bismarck, based on the Prussian colours black and white and the red used by northern German states).
To the very end of its existence, the Nazi Party claimed to respect the traditional government of Germany and, to that end, local and state governments were allowed to exist side-by-side with regional Nazi leaders.
*Reichsluftschutzbund (RLB)
Hitler returned to Munich on 11 July and angrily tendered his resignation.
+ NSDAP federal election results (1924-1933)
It continued to attract many more and by 1945 the party reached its peak of 8 million with 63% being male and 37% being female (about 10% of the German population of 80 million).
The only insignia for the ''Parteimitglieder'' was a Nazi Party lapel-pin; Nazi Party members who held no leadership posts had no specific designated uniform.
These rallies soon became massive displays of Nazi paramilitary power and attracted many recruits.
The SS increasingly exerted police functions, a development which was formally documented by the merger of the offices of ''Reichsführer-SS'' and Chief of the German Police on 17 June 1936; the position was held by Heinrich Himmler who derived his authority directly from Hitler.
Hitler's assignment was to influence other soldiers and to infiltrate the DAP.
In July 1919 while stationed in Munich, army ''Gefreiter'' Adolf Hitler was appointed a ''Verbindungsmann'' (intelligence agent) of the ''Reichswehr'' (army) by the head of the ''Education and Propaganda Department'' (Dept Ib/P) in Bavaria, Captain Mayr.
It was the official party programme, with minor changes, from its proclamation as such by Hitler in 1920, when the party was still the German Workers' Party, until its dissolution.
The statistics are from 1941, for which the ''Gau'' organization of that moment in time forms the basis.
The Italian Fascists used a straight-armed Roman salute and wore black-shirted uniforms.
This led to the continued existence of German titles such as ''Bürgermeister'', as well as the existence of German state legislatures (''Landesrat''), but without any real power to speak of.
The Nazis propagated the idea of a "people's community" (''Volksgemeinschaft'').
The committee agreed, and he rejoined the party on 26 July as member 3680.
A vast system of Nazi Party paramilitary ranks developed for each of the various paramilitary groups.
The DAP did not attempt to make itself public, and meetings were kept in relative secrecy, with public speakers discussing what they thought of Germany's present state of affairs, or writing to like-minded societies in Northern Germany.
Subsequently, the ''Law against the founding of new parties'' of 14 July 1933 legally established the Nazi Party's monopoly.
The reaction to these events was an upsurge of nationalist sentiment.
Chancellor Franz von Papen called another ''Reichstag'' election in November, hoping to find a way out of this impasse.
Hitler soon acquired the title ''Führer'' ("leader") and, after a series of sharp internal conflicts, it was accepted that the party would be governed by the ''Führerprinzip'' ("leader principle").
Officially, the Third Reich lasted only 12 years.
Party members could not be related either directly or indirectly to a so-called "non-Aryan".
Hitler always spoke about the same subjects: the Treaty of Versailles and the Jewish question.
The result was weak ministries governing by decree.
This was a post he would hold for the remainder of his life.
Party members found guilty of ''Rassenschande'' (racial defilement) were persecuted heavily, some members were even sentenced to death.
Overt antisemitism was played down in official Nazi rhetoric, but was never far from the surface.
This was partly because Hitler, who had no administrative ability, left the party organization to the head of the secretariat, Philipp Bouhler, the party treasurer Franz Xaver Schwarz, and business manager Max Amann.
State elections produced similar results.
The Nazis failed to remain unified in the German Party, as in the north, the right-wing Volkish nationalist supporters of the Nazis moved to the new German Völkisch Freedom Party, leaving the north's left-wing Nazi members, such as Joseph Goebbels retaining support for the party.
This deliberate technique and effective publicising of the party contributed significantly to his early success, about which a contemporary poster wrote 'Since Herr Hitler is a brilliant speaker, we can hold out the prospect of an extremely exciting evening'.
Used as the national flag of Germany after 1935, it was never used to represent the party.
Aside from Strasserist Nazis, they also murdered anti-Nazi conservative figures like former chancellor Kurt von Schleicher.
The cantons of St. Gallen, Thurgau und Appenzell were administered under ''Gau Ostschweiz'' (East Switzerland).
In vehemently attacking the man's arguments, he made an impression on the other party members with his oratory skills and, according to Hitler, the "professor" left the hall acknowledging unequivocal defeat.
*Reich Labour Service (RAD)
The small business class was receptive to Hitler's antisemitism, since it blamed Jewish big business for its economic problems.
Depressed working-class areas such as Thuringia also produced a strong Nazi vote, while the workers of the Ruhr and Hamburg largely remained loyal to the Social Democrats, the Communist Party of Germany, or the Catholic Centre Party.
Since both parties opposed the established political system, and neither would join or support any ministry, this made the formation of a majority government impossible.
It was derived in accordance with the German term ''Sozi'' (pronounced ), an abbreviation of ''Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands'' (Social Democratic Party of Germany).
After Hitler was candidate for presidency
To increase its appeal to larger segments of the population, on 24 February 1920, the same day as Hitler's ''Hofbräuhaus'' speech, the DAP changed its name to the ''Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei'' (National Socialist German Workers Party).
In any case, the economic and political situation had stabilized and the extremist upsurge of 1923 had faded, so there was no prospect of further revolutionary adventures.
The Chancellery of the Führer, officially an organisation of the Nazi Party, took over the functions of the Office of the President (a government agency), blurring the distinction between structures of party and state even further.
During Hitler's term as Chancellor of Germany
When the Fascists came to power in 1922 in Italy through their coup attempt called the "March on Rome", Hitler began planning his own coup.
This regulation was soon waived, however, and there is ample evidence that full Nazi Party members served in the ''Wehrmacht'' in particular after the outbreak of World War&nbsp;II.
This was symbolised by the adoption as the party emblem of the swastika or ''Hakenkreuz'', at the time widely used in the western world.
Nazi Party membership grew sharply, to about 20,000.
It is also known as the ''Iron Eagle.''
The general Nazi Party membership were known by the title of ''Parteimitglieder''.
were adopted throughout the party.
The irregular Swiss branch of the Nazi Party also established a number of Party ''Gaue'' in that country, most of them named after their regional capitals.
The party's nominal Deputy Leader was Rudolf Hess, but he had no real power in the party.
The ''Wehrmacht'' Reserves also saw a high number of senior Nazis enlisting, with Reinhard Heydrich and Fritz Todt joining the ''Luftwaffe'', as well as Karl Hanke who served in the army.
The party also owed its growth to the gradual fading away of competitor nationalist groups, such as the German National People's Party (DNVP).
Also used as the national flag between 1933 and 1935, interchangeably with the black-white-red horizontal tricolour.
The term ''Parteigenosse'' (party member) was commonly used among Nazis, with the feminine form ''Parteigenossin'' added when it was appropriate.
After this, the SA continued to exist, but lost much of its importance, while the role of the SS grew significantly.
*Nazi flags: The Nazi Party used a right-facing swastika as their symbol and the red and black colours were said to represent ''Blut und Boden'' ("blood and soil").
:The ''Parteiflagge'' design, with the centred swastika disc, served as the party flag from 1920.
Beneath the ''Gauleiter'' were lower-level officials, the ''Kreisleiter'' ("county leaders"), ''Zellenleiter'' ("cell leaders") and ''Blockleiter'' ("block leaders").
Formerly only a sub-organisation of the SA, it was created a separate organisation of the NSDAP in July 1934.
*National Socialist League for the Maintenance of the Law (NSRB, 1936–1945, earlier National Socialist German Lawyers' League)
Adolf Hitler was released from prison on 20 December 1924.
On 1 December 1933, the ''Law to secure the unity of party and state'' entered into force, which was the base for a progressive intertwining of party structures and state apparatus.
Thereafter, the term spread into other languages and eventually was brought back to Germany after the Second World War.
However, while Hitler was on a fundraising trip to Berlin in June 1921, a mutiny broke out within the Nazi Party in Munich.
