Hitler took a pragmatic position between the conservative and radical factions of the Nazi Party, in that he accepted private property and allowed capitalist private enterprises to exist so long as they adhered to the goals of the Nazi state.
Hitler considered Röhm's independent actions to be violating and threatening his leadership, as well as jeopardising the regime by alienating the conservative President Paul von Hindenburg and the conservative-oriented German Army.
He prescribed war as a necessity, saying "War is the eternal form of higher human existence and states exist for war: they are the expression of the will to war."
That is ''our'' freedom, freedom from the economic despotism of the individual."
Spengler considered the Western world as having succumbed to decadence of intellect, money, cosmopolitan urban life, irreligious life, atomised individualization, and was at the end of its biological and "spiritual" fertility.
Usually espousing a white supremacist ideology, many deliberately adopt the symbols of Nazi Germany.
The DNVP responded by denouncing the Nazis for their socialism, their street violence, and the "economic experiments" that would take place if the Nazis rose to power.
It also viewed a number of other peoples as dangerous to the well-being of the Aryan race.
The conservative Nazi Hermann Göring urged Hitler to conciliate with capitalists and reactionaries.
Hitler also said that the business bourgeoisie "know nothing except their profit.
Hitler was personally disgusted with the ruling bourgeois elites of Germany during the period of the Weimar Republic, who he referred to as "cowardly shits".
Private property rights were conditional upon the economic mode of use; if it did not advance Nazi economic goals then the state could nationalise it.
By the early 1920s, Adolf Hitler assumed control of the organization and renamed it the National Socialist German Workers' Party (''Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei'', NSDAP) to broaden its appeal.
The leader of the SA, Ernst Röhm, pushed for a "second revolution" (the "first revolution" being the Nazis' seizure of power) that would entrench the party's official socialist program.
The Nazis were initially highly hostile to Catholics because most Catholics supported the German Centre Party.
The term was in use before the rise of the NSDAP as a colloquial and derogatory word for a backwards peasant, characterizing an awkward and clumsy person.
This organisation oversaw charitable activities, and became the largest civic organization in Nazi Germany.
After the decrees were enacted, Himmler stated:
The ideological justification was Adolf Hitler's view of Sparta (11th century – 195 BC) as the original ''Völkisch'' state; he praised their dispassionate destruction of congenitally deformed infants in maintaining racial purity.
Aryan certificate) and non-Aryans were now punishable under the race laws as ''Rassenschande'' or "race defilement".
Hitler altered his political views in response to the Treaty of Versailles of June 1919, and it was then that he became an antisemitic, German nationalist.
Instead of the plurality that existed in democratic or parliamentary states, Nazism as a totalitarian system promulgated 'clear' solutions to the historical problems faced by Germany, levied support by de-legitimizing the former government of Weimar, and provided a politico-biological pathway to a better future, one free from the uncertainty of the past.
The Nazi notion of Slavs being inferior served as legitimising their goal for creating ''Lebensraum'' for Germans and other Germanic people in eastern Europe, where millions of Germans and other Germanic settlers would be moved into conquered territories of Eastern Europe, while the original Slavic inhabitants were to be annihilated, removed, or enslaved.
Nazism held racial theories based upon the belief of the existence of an Aryan master race that was superior to all other races.
After the war, his battalion was absorbed by the Bavarian Soviet Republic from 1918 to 1919, where he was elected Deputy Battalion Representative.
He denounced Marxism for seeking to train the proletariat to "expropriate the expropriator", the capitalist, and then to let them live a life of leisure on this expropriation.
One of the regulations stated that any Pole "who has sexual relations with a German man or woman, or approaches them in any other improper manner, will be punished by death".
Johann Gottlieb Fichte accused Jews in Germany of having been, and inevitably continuing to be, a "state within a state" that threatened German national unity.
The Nazis supported such revolutionary ''Völkisch'' nationalist policies and claimed that their ideology was influenced by the leadership and policies of German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck, the founder of the German Empire.
They publicly displayed an original of Luther's ''On the Jews and their Lies'' during the annual Nuremberg rallies.
Along this theme, Hitler once remarked of women, "with every child that she brings into the world, she fights her battle for the nation.
Following the Holocaust and German defeat in World War II, only a few fringe racist groups, usually referred to as neo-Nazis, still describe themselves as following National Socialism.
Although he opposed communist ideology, Hitler on numerous occasions publicly praised the Soviet Union's leader Joseph Stalin and Stalinism.
At the bottom of the racial scale of non-Aryans were Jews, Romani, Slavs and blacks.
Another radical Nazi, Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels had stressed the socialist character of Nazism, and claimed in his diary in the 1920s that if he were to pick between Bolshevism and capitalism, he said "in final analysis", "it would be better for us to go down with Bolshevism than live in eternal slavery under capitalism."
The Nazis because of this declared Slavs to be ''Untermenschen'' (subhumans).
Nazism subscribed to theories of racial hierarchy and Social Darwinism, identifying Germans as part of what Nazis regarded as an Aryan or Nordic master race.
As concentration camp prisoners, homosexual men were forced to wear pink triangle badges.
Chamberlain's work, ''The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century'' (1899), praised Germanic peoples for their creativity and idealism while asserting that the Germanic spirit was threatened by a "Jewish" spirit of selfishness and materialism.
Among National Socialist ideologues, marriage was valued not from moral considerations but because it provided an optimal breeding environment.
His four sons, including Prince Eitel Friedrich and Prince Oskar, became members of the Nazi Party, in hopes that in exchange for their support, the Nazis would permit the restoration of the monarchy.
Spengler's definition of socialism did not advocate a change to property relations.
Party members found guilty of ''Rassenschande'' were heavily punished; some members were even sentenced to death.
They also regarding the Slavs as having dangerous Jewish and Asiatic, that being Mongol, influences.
Contraception was discouraged for racially valuable women in Nazi Germany and abortion was forbidden through strict legal mandates, including prison sentences for those seeking them and for doctors performing them; whereas abortion for racially "undesirable" persons was encouraged.
Nazism rejected class conflict-based socialism and economic egalitarianism, favouring instead a stratified economy with social classes based on merit and talent, retaining private property, and the creation of national solidarity that transcends class distinction.
Röhm's SA began attacks against individuals deemed to be associated with conservative reaction.
Agrarian policies were particularly important to the Nazis since they corresponded not just to the economy but to their geopolitical conception of ''Lebensraum'' as well.
Hitler was also impressed with the populist antisemitism and anti-liberal bourgeois agitation of Karl Lueger, who as the mayor of Vienna during Hitler's time in the city used a rabble-rousing oratory style that appealed to the wider masses.
He said that the Roman Empire was having been developed by the Italics who were related to the Celts who were a Nordic people.
Initially, the post-World War I German far right was dominated by monarchists, but the younger generation, who were associated with ''Völkisch'' nationalism, were more radical and did not express any emphasis on the restoration of the German monarchy.
Prior to the Nazi ascension to power, Hitler often blamed moral degradation on ''Rassenschande'' (racial defilement), a way to assure his followers of his continuing antisemitism, which had been toned down for popular consumption.
Hitler spoke of workers as patriots who had built Germany's industrial strength, had honourably served in the war and claimed that they had been oppressed under economic liberalism.
Historian Michael Burleigh claims that Nazism used Christianity for political purposes, but such use required that "fundamental tenets were stripped out, but the remaining diffuse religious emotionality had its uses".
The Nazi Party Programme of 1920 guaranteed freedom for all religious denominations not hostile to the State and endorsed Positive Christianity to combat “the Jewish-materialist spirit”.
The 1873 stock market crash and ensuing depression resulted in a spate of attacks on alleged Jewish economic dominance in Germany and increased antisemitism.
Hitler also admitted that the Nazis' night rallies were inspired by the Catholic rituals he witnessed during his Catholic upbringing.
German women accused of race defilement were marched through the streets with her head shaven and a placard around her neck detailing her crime, those convicted were sent to a concentration camp.
He rejected reactionary conservatism, while proposing a new state, that he coined the "Third Reich", which would unite all classes under authoritarian rule.
In ''Mein Kampf'', Hitler never mentioned any service with the Bavarian Soviet Republic, and stated that he became an antisemite in 1913 in Vienna.
Some non-Aryans enlisted in Nazi organisations like the Hitler Youth and the ''Wehrmacht'', including Germans of African descent and Jewish descent.
During World War I, German sociologist Johann Plenge spoke of the rise of a "National Socialism" in Germany within what he termed the "ideas of 1914" that were a declaration of war against the "ideas of 1789" (the French Revolution).
To tie farmers to their land, selling agricultural land was prohibited.
He claimed that the Near Eastern race had been "bred not so much for the conquest and exploitation of nature as it was for the conquest and exploitation of people".
Hitler denounced the Old Testament as "Satan's Bible", and utilising components of the New Testament attempted to demonstrate that Jesus was Aryan and antisemitic, such as in John 8:44 where Hitler noted that Jesus is yelling at "the Jews", as well as Jesus saying to the Jews that "your father is the devil", and describing Jesus' whipping of the "Children of the Devil".
Hitler encouraged nationally supported projects like the construction of the ''Autobahn'', the introduction of an affordable people’s car (''Volkswagen'') and later, the Nazis bolstered the economy through the business and employment generated by military rearmament.
''The Protocols'' claimed that there was a secret international Jewish conspiracy to take over the world.
Marxism is anti-property; true Socialism is not."
True socialism, according to Spengler, would be in the form of corporatism, stating that: "local corporate bodies organised according to the importance of each occupation to the people as a whole; higher representation in stages up to a supreme council of the state; mandates revocable at any time; no organised parties, no professional politicians, no periodic elections".
Houston Stewart Chamberlain, an English proponent of racial theory, supported notions of Germanic supremacy and antisemitism in Germany.
To protect the German people and currency from volatile market forces, the Nazis also promised social policies like a national labour service, state-provided health care, guaranteed pensions, and an agrarian settlement program.
In ''Mein Kampf'', written in 1924, Hitler outlined the antisemitism and anti-communism at the heart of his political philosophy, as well as his disdain for parliamentary democracy and his belief in Germany’s right to territorial expansion.
Hitler's attitudes changed by the end of 1922, in which he then supported an alliance of Germany with Britain to destroy Russia.
As such racial groups were concentrated outside of Europe, the Nazis claimed that Jews were "racially alien" to all European peoples and did not have deep racial roots in Europe.
Prior to the induction of the Nuremberg Race Laws in 1935 by the Nazis, many German nationalists such as Roland Freisler strongly supported laws to ban ''Rassenschande'' between Aryans and Jews as racial treason.
He regarded the vanishing of the Nordic component of the populations in Greece and Rome led to their downfall.
While the ideologues of Nazism, much like those of Stalinism, abhorred democratic or parliamentary governance as practiced in the U.S. or Britain, their differences are substantial.
We may be inhumane, but if we rescue Germany we have achieved the greatest deed in the world.
We may be immoral, but if our people is rescued we have opened the way for morality.
Oswald Spengler, a German cultural philosopher, was a major influence on Nazism, although, after 1933, Spengler became alienated from Nazism and was later condemned by the Nazis for criticising Adolf Hitler.
Hitler in ''Mein Kampf'' directly attacked both left-wing and right-wing politics in Germany, saying:
Bonfires were made of school children's differently coloured caps as symbolic of the abolition of class differences.
However, if a capitalist private enterprise resisted Nazi goals, he sought to destroy it.
The League of German Girls was particularly regarded as instructing girls to avoid race defilement, which was treated with particular importance for young females.
Throughout the relationship between Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, a number of lower-ranking Nazis scornfully viewed fascism as a conservative movement that lacked a full revolutionary potential.
The Renaissance was claimed to have developed in the Western Roman Empire because of the Germanic invasions that brought new Nordic blood to the Empire's lands, such as presence of Nordic blood in the Lombards (referred to as Longobards in the book); that remnants of the western Goths were responsible for the creation of the Spanish Empire; and that heritage of Franks, Goths, and Germanic peoples in France was what was responsible for its rise to be a major power.
The seizure of power by Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini in the March on Rome in 1922 drew admiration by Hitler, who less than a month later had begun to model himself and the Nazi Party upon Mussolini and the Fascists.
Spengler wrote: "The meaning of socialism is that life is controlled not by the opposition between rich and poor, but by the rank that achievement and talent bestow.
He claimed that Jesus was not a Jew but of Aryan origin, and that Adolf Hitler was the new messiah.
Wilhelm Stapel, an antisemitic German intellectual, utilized Spengler's thesis on the cultural confrontation between Jews as whom Spengler described as a Magian people versus Europeans as a Faustian people.
However, historian Roger Griffin rejects the claim that Nazism was primarily pagan, noting that although there were some influential neo-paganists in the Nazi Party, such as Heinrich Himmler and Alfred Rosenberg, they represented a minority and their views did not influence Nazi ideology beyond its use for symbolism; it is noted that Hitler denounced Germanic paganism in ''Mein Kampf'' and condemned Rosenberg's and Himmler's paganism as "nonsense".
Sterilisation was also mandated for chronic alcoholism and other forms of social deviance.
However, Haeckel's works were later condemned and banned from bookshops and libraries by the Nazis as inappropriate for "National-Socialist formation and education in the Third Reich".
''Völkisch'' nationalism denounced soulless materialism, individualism, and secularized urban industrial society, while advocating a "superior" society based on ethnic German "folk" culture and German "blood".
In order to preserve the perceived racial purity of the Aryan race, a set of race laws were introduced in 1935 which came to be known as the Nuremberg Laws.
Therefore, the Nazis sought first to secure a command economy through general economic revival accompanied by massive military spending for rearmament, especially later through the implementation of the Four Year Plan, which consolidated their rule and firmly secured a command relationship between the German arms industry and the National Socialist government.
Hitler planned for the "surplus" Russian population living west of the Urals to be deported to the east of the Urals.
The regime believed that the only way to avoid a repeat of the disaster of 1918 was to secure workers' support for the German government.
The Nazis identified them as "sentinels" in the East against "Slavic chaos", though beyond that symbolism the influence of the Teutonic Knights on Nazism was limited.
Günther described that European peoples had a racially motivated aversion to peoples of Near Eastern racial origin and their traits, and showed as evidence of this multiple examples of depictions of satanic figures with Near Eastern physiognomies in European art.
Hitler declared that "every activity and every need of every individual will be regulated by the collectivity represented by the party" and that "there are no longer any free realms in which the individual belongs to himself".
Hitler commended Stalin for seeking to purify the Communist Party of the Soviet Union of Jewish influences, noting Stalin's purging of Jewish communists such as Leon Trotsky, Grigory Zinoviev, Lev Kamenev, and Karl Radek.
It aimed to overcome social divisions and create a homogeneous society, unified on the basis of "racial purity" (Volksgemeinschaft).
The Nazis demanded that Catholics declare their loyalty to the German state.
Since the 1920s, the Nazi Party publicly promoted the expansion of Germany into territories held by the Soviet Union.
Riehl’s influence is overtly discernible in the ''Blut und Boden'' (''Blood and Soil'') philosophy introduced by Oswald Spengler, which the Nazi agriculturalist Walther Darré and other prominent Nazis adopted.
Chamberlain used his thesis to promote monarchical conservatism while denouncing democracy, liberalism, and socialism.
Hitler claimed that the New Testament included distortions by Paul the Apostle, whom Hitler described as a "mass-murderer turned saint".
The name given after World War II for the euthanasia programme is Action T4.
He claimed that ancient Greek culture was developed by Nordics due to paintings of the time showing Greeks who were tall, light-skinned, light-eyed, blond-haired people.
In 1936, Himmler established the "Reichszentrale zur Bekämpfung der Homosexualität und Abtreibung" ("Reich Central Office for the Combating of Homosexuality and Abortion").
Aryan mysticism claimed that Christianity originated in Aryan religious tradition and that Jews had usurped the legend from Aryans.
For Hitler, the acquisition of land and soil was requisite in moulding the German economy.
He claimed that "Marxism is the capitalism of the working class" and not true socialism.
He believed that the "Spirit of 1914" manifested itself in the concept of the "People's League of National Socialism".
A further decree issued by Himmler on 7 December 1942 stated any "unauthorized sexual intercourse" would result in the death penalty.
Hitler's own opinion on the matter of women in Nazi Germany was that while other eras of German history experienced the development and liberation of the female mind, the National Socialist goal was essentially singular in that they wished for them to produce a child.
Adolf Hitler and other proponents officially portrayed Nazism as being neither left- nor right-wing, but syncretic.
Proponents of eugenics used Mendelian inheritance theory to demonstrate the transfer of biological illness and impairments from parents to children, including mental disability; others also utilised Mendelian theory to demonstrate the inheritance of social traits, with racialists claiming a racial nature of certain general traits such as inventiveness or criminal behaviour.
Stapel described Jews as a landless nomadic people in pursuit of an international culture whereby they can integrate into Western civilisation.
Today our left-wing politicians in particular are constantly insisting that their craven-hearted and obsequious foreign policy necessarily results from the disarmament of Germany, whereas the truth is that this is the policy of traitors ...
Bergmann, in his work, ''Die 25 Thesen der Deutschreligion'' (Twenty-five Points of the German Religion), held that the Old Testament and portions of the New Testament of the Bible were inaccurate.
Plenge advocated an authoritarian, rational ruling elite to develop National Socialism through a hierarchical technocratic state.
Other groups deemed "degenerate" and "asocial" who were not targeted for extermination, but received exclusionary treatment by the Nazi state, included homosexuals, blacks, Jehovah's Witnesses, and political opponents.
The Nazis later issued similar regulations against the Eastern Workers ''(Ost-Arbeiters)'', including the death penalty for sexual relations with a German person.
We may work injustice, but if we rescue Germany then we have removed the greatest injustice in the world.
One of Hitler's ambitions at the start of the war was to exterminate, expel, or enslave most or all Slavs from central and eastern Europe in order to make living space for German settlers.
Upon the Nazis achieving power, Röhm's SA began attacks against individuals deemed to be associated with conservative reaction, without Hitler's authorisation.
At this time period in the 1870s, German ''Völkisch'' nationalism began to adopt antisemitic and racist themes and was adopted by a number of radical right political movements.
Using the stab-in-the-back myth, the Nazis accused Jews—and other populaces it considered non-German—of possessing extra-national loyalties, thereby exacerbating German antisemitism about the ''Judenfrage'' (the Jewish Question), the far-right political canard popular when the ethnic Völkisch movement and their politics of Romantic nationalism for establishing a ''Großdeutschland'' were strong.
Many of the million members of the ''Sturmabteilung'' (SA) were committed to the party's official socialist program.
Notions of white supremacy and Aryan racial superiority combined in the 19th century, with white supremacists maintaining that certain groups of white people were members of an Aryan "master race" that is superior to other races, and particularly superior to the Semitic race, which they associated with "cultural sterility".
Proponents of this theory based their assertion on the similarity of European words and their meaning to those of Indo-Iranian languages.
He claimed that war to gain such resources was the only means to surpass the failing capitalist economic system.
It viewed Aryans as being in racial conflict with a mixed race people, the Jews, whom Nazis identified as a dangerous enemy of the Aryans.
This National Socialism was opposed to capitalism due to the components that were against "the national interest" of Germany, but insisted that National Socialism would strive for greater efficiency in the economy.
Günther applied a Nordicist conception that Nordics were the highest in the racial hierarchy.
In his book ''Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes'' (1922) ("Racial Science of the German People"), Günther recognised Germans as being composed of all five races, but emphasised the strong Nordic heritage among them.
The majority of scholars identify Nazism in practice as a form of far-right politics.
While unmarried until the very end of the regime, Hitler often made excuses about his busy life hindering any chance for marriage.
The Nazis endorsed the pro-Nazi Protestant German Christians organisation.
Spengler adopted the anti-English ideas addressed by Plenge and Sombart during World War I that condemned English liberalism and English parliamentarianism while advocating a national socialism that was free from Marxism and that would connect the individual to the state through corporatist organisation.
Many antisemites believed it was real and the Protocol became widely popular after World War I.
Hitler presented the Nazis as a form of German fascism.
The German Nazi Party supported German irredentist claims to Austria, Alsace-Lorraine, the region now known as the Czech Republic, and the territory known since 1919 as the Polish Corridor.
Strasser criticised the policy of ''Führerprinzip'' as being created by Mussolini, and considered its presence in Nazism as a foreign imported idea.
They were regarded as a race of men not inclined to a higher form of civilization, which were under an instinctive force that reverted them back to nature.
One antisemitic ideologue of the period, Friedrich Lange, even used the term "national socialism" to describe his own anti-capitalist take on the ''Völkisch'' nationalist template.
In its racial categorisation, Nazism viewed what it called the Aryan race as the master race of the world—a race that was superior to all other races.
Nazi ideology still viewed German gay men as part of the Aryan master race but attempted to force them into sexual and social conformity.
The Nazis aimed to unite all Germans living in historically German territory, as well as gain additional lands for German expansion under the doctrine of ''Lebensraum'', while excluding those deemed either to be community aliens or belonging to an "inferior" race.
In a private conversation in 1941 he said "the brown shirt would probably not have existed without the black shirt", the "brown shirt" referring to the Nazi militia and the "black shirt" referring to the Fascist militia.
Spengler claimed that socialistic Prussian characteristics existed across Germany, including creativity, discipline, concern for the greater good, productivity, and self-sacrifice.
Although the Nazis privatised public properties and public services, they also increased economic state control.
In ''Speeches to the German Nation'' (1808), written amid Napoleonic France's occupation of Berlin, Fichte called for a German national revolution against the French occupiers, making passionate public speeches, arming his students for battle against the French, and stressing the need for action by the German nation to free itself.
As the Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour did not permit capital punishment for race defilement, special courts were convened to allow the death penalty for some cases.
In 1908, amongst the twenty-nine wealthiest German families with aggregate fortunes of up to 55 million marks at the time, five were Jewish, and the Rothschilds were the second wealthiest German family.
The Nazis began to implement "racial hygiene" policies as soon as they came to power.
According to Plenge, the "ideas of 1789" that included rights of man, democracy, individualism and liberalism were being rejected in favour of "the ideas of 1914" that included "German values" of duty, discipline, law, and order.
Opponents seized on this and shortened the first word of the party's name, ''Nationalsozialistische'', to the dismissive "Nazi".
This younger generation desired to dismantle the Weimar Republic and create a new radical and strong state based upon a martial ruling ethic that could revive the "Spirit of 1914" that was associated with German national unity (''Volksgemeinschaft'').
Adolf Hitler, both in public and in private, expressed disdain for capitalism, arguing that it holds nations ransom in the interests of a parasitic cosmopolitan rentier class.
Heydrich issued a decree on 20 February 1942 that declared sexual intercourse between a German woman and a Russian worker or prisoner of war would result in the Russian man being punished by the death penalty.
Kaiser Wilhelm II, who was pressured to abdicate the throne and flee into exile amidst an attempted communist revolution in Germany, initially supported the Nazi Party.
German Jewish financiers and bankers played a key role in fostering Germany's economic growth from the 1871 to 1913, and such Jewish financiers and bankers benefited enormously from this boom.
The Nazis were strongly influenced by the post–World War I far-right in Germany, which held common beliefs such as anti-Marxism, anti-liberalism, and antisemitism, along with nationalism, contempt towards the Treaty of Versailles, and condemnation of the Weimar Republic for signing the armistice in November 1918 that later led to their signing of the Treaty of Versailles.
The Nazis stressed that Germany must honour its workers.
The Nazis sought to gain support of workers by declaring May Day, a day celebrated by organised labour, to be a paid holiday and held celebrations on 1 May 1933 to honour German workers.
Although the law was punishable to both genders, German women were targeted more for having sexual relations with foreign forced labourers in Germany.
Hitler served in World War I.
This may have been because of his "monist" atheistic, materialist philosophy, which the Nazis disliked.
''Berliner Morgenpost'' that had been strongly associated with the political left in the past praised the regime's May Day celebrations.
Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels frequently employed antisemitic rhetoric to underline this view: "The Jew is the enemy and destroyer of the purity of blood, the conscious destroyer of our race ... As socialists, we are opponents of the Jews, because we see, in the Hebrews, the incarnation of capitalism, of the misuse of the nation's goods."
During the era of Imperial Germany, ''Völkisch'' nationalism was overshadowed by both Prussian patriotism and the federalist tradition of various states therein.
Under Nazism, with its emphasis on the nation, individual needs were subordinate to those of the wider community.
Not only did the Nazis benefit early in the regime's existence from the first post-Depression economic upswing, their public works projects, job-procurement program, and subsidized home repair program reduced unemployment by as much as 40 percent in one year, a development which tempered the unfavourable psychological climate caused by the earlier economic crisis and encouraged Germans to march in step with the regime.
Burleigh claims that Nazism's conception of spirituality was "self-consciously pagan and primitive".
During the late 1930s and the 1940s, anti-communist regimes and groups that supported Nazism included the Falange in Spain; the Vichy regime and the 33rd Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Charlemagne (1st French) in France; and in Britain the Cliveden Set, Lord Halifax, the British Union of Fascists under Sir Oswald Mosley, and associates of Neville Chamberlain.
Hitler purged the party’s more socially and economically radical factions in the mid-1934 Night of the Long Knives and, after the death of President Hindenburg, political power was concentrated in his hands, as Führer or "leader".
From them, the term spread into other languages and was eventually brought back to Germany after World War II.
But the politicians of the Right deserve exactly the same reproach.
The Nazis claimed that Bismarck was unable to complete German national unification because of Jewish infiltration of the German parliament, and that their abolition of parliament ended the obstacle to unification.
While Hitler was supportive of Bismarck's creation of the German Empire, he was critical of Bismarck's moderate domestic policies.
The Nazis wanted all Germans take part in the May Day celebrations in the hope that this would help break down class hostility between workers and burghers.
Röhm claimed that the Nazis' rise to power constituted a national revolution, but insisted that a socialist "second revolution" was required for Nazi ideology to be fulfilled.
'Fatherland' is only a word for them."
Hitler primarily viewed the German economy as an instrument of power.
Hitler had been introduced to ''The Protocols'' by Alfred Rosenberg, and from 1920 onward, Hitler focused his attacks on claiming that Judaism and Marxism were directly connected, that Jews and Bolsheviks were one and the same, and that Marxism was a Jewish ideology.
According to the famous philosopher and political theorist, Hannah Arendt, the allure of Nazism as a totalitarian ideology (with its attendant mobilization of the German population), resided within the construct of helping that society deal with the cognitive dissonance resultant from the tragic interruption of the First World War, the economic and material suffering consequent the Depression, and brought to order the revolutionary unrest occurring all around them.
He claimed that the rise of the Russian Empire was due to its leadership by people of Norman descent.
Hitler declared that racial conflict against Jews was necessary to save Germany from suffering under them and dismissed concerns about such conflict being inhumane or an injustice:
The radical Nazi Joseph Goebbels hated capitalism, viewing it as having Jews at its core, and he stressed the need for the party to emphasise both a proletarian and national character.
He accused capitalism of holding nations ransom in the interests of a parasitic cosmopolitan rentier class.
The Nazis also categorized Slavs as Untermensch.
Gobineau's theories, which attracted a strong following in Germany, emphasised the existence of an irreconcilable polarity between Aryan (Germanic) and Jewish cultures.
The Catholic Church then ended its ban on members supporting the Nazi Party.
Arthur de Gobineau, a French racial theorist and aristocrat, blamed the fall of the ''ancien régime'' in France on racial degeneracy caused by racial intermixing, which he argued destroyed the purity of the Aryan race, a term which he reserved only for Germanic people.
Spengler's major thesis was that a law of historical development of cultures existed involving a cycle of birth, maturity, ageing, and death when it reaches its final form of civilisation.
The NSDAP briefly adopted the Nazi designation, attempting to reappropriate the term, but soon gave up this effort and generally avoided it while in power.
German Nazism emphasised German nationalism, including both irredentism and expansionism.
