Neanderthals inhabited that continent for a long period of time before the arrival of modern humans.
Senior members of their respective national paleontological institutes and among the most eminent paleoanthropologists of their time, both men argued that this "primitive" Neanderthal could not be a direct ancestor of modern man.
The earliest, the Mousterian stone tool culture, dates to about 160,000 years ago.
The researchers concluded that the constructions must have been made by early Neanderthals, as they were the only human species in the area at the time.
Mammal fossils of the same time period show cold-adapted animals were present alongside these Neanderthals in this region of the Eastern Mediterranean.
Neanderthal bodies were well suited for survival in a cold climate—their barrel chests and stocky limbs stored body heat better than the Cro-Magnons.
160,000-year-old hominid fossils at Jebel Irhoud in Morocco were previously thought to be Neanderthal, but it is now clear that they are early modern humans.
''Homo erectus'' that arrived in Europe in the second wave of colonization developed into Neanderthals through the intermediate ''Homo heidelbergensis''.
Compared to ''Homo sapiens,'' Neanderthals had a lower surface-to-volume ratio, with shorter legs and a bigger body in conformance with Bergmann's rule, as an energy-loss reduction adaptation to life in a high-latitude (i.e.
Neanderthals are generally classified by paleontologists as the species ''Homo neanderthalensis'', having separated from the ''Homo sapiens'' lineage 600,000 years ago, or alternatively, as a subspecies of ''Homo sapiens'' (''Homo sapiens neanderthalensis'').
"The proportion of Neanderthal-inherited genetic material is about 1 to 4 percent.
One study has asserted that the presence of Neanderthal or other archaic human genetic markers can be attributed to shared ancestral traits between the species originating from a 500,000-year-old common ancestor.
Others, for example University of Cambridge Professor Paul Mellars, say "no evidence has been found of cultural interaction".
This suggests a social structure where males remained in the same social group and females "married" out.
Since the three non-African genomes show a similar proportion of Neanderthal sequences, the interbreeding must have occurred early in the migration of modern humans out of Africa, perhaps in the Middle East.
A 2007 genetic study suggested some Neanderthals may have had red hair and blond hair, along with a light skin tone.
Raw material sourcing and the examination of faunal remains by Adler et al.
As Paul Jordan notes:  "A natural sympathy for the underdog and the disadvantaged lends a sad poignancy to the fate of the Neanderthal folk, however it came about."
The St. Césaire 1 skeleton discovered in 1979 at La Roche à Pierrot, France, showed a healed fracture on top of the skull apparently caused by a deep blade wound.
If contact between humans and Neanderthals occurred in Europe and Asia the first contact may have been devastating to the Neanderthal population, because they would have had little if any immunity to the African pathogens.
The obviously unbroken succession of fossil sites of both subspecies in Europe was considered evidence that there was a slow and gradual evolutionary transition from Neanderthals to modern humans.
At any rate, in North-East Africa the land immediately south of the Neanderthal range was possessed by modern humans ''Homo sapiens idaltu'' or ''Homo sapiens'', since at least 160,000 years before the present.
Recent studies also show that a few Neanderthals began mating with ancestors of modern humans long before the large "out of Africa migration" of the present day non-Africans, as early as 100,000 years ago.
They are believed to be a social group which was massacred about 50,000 years ago, and analysis of the mtDNA shows that the three adult males belonged to the same maternal lineage, while the three adult females belonged to different ones.
Artificial lighting would have been required as the cave is far beyond the reach of daylight, and 57 of the stalagmite pieces are reddened and 66 blackened by fire.
found that changes in the activity levels of the HOX cluster of genes were behind many of the morphological differences between Neanderthals and modern humans, including shorter limbs, curved bones and more.
A 2013 study of Neanderthal skulls suggests that their eyesight may have been better than that of modern humans, owing to larger eye sockets and larger areas of the brain devoted to vision.
'''Neanderthals''' or '''Neandertals''' ,  also -, --, -, -) (named for the Neandertal in Germany) were a species or subspecies of archaic human, in the genus ''Homo'', which became extinct around 40,000 years ago.
It ranged over Eastern and South Africa, Europe and Western Asia.
They calculated that the mating must have taken place about 100,000 years ago.
brain to body size ratio) as modern humans.
H. sapiens may have introduced a disease that contributed to the extinction of Neanderthals, and that may be added to other recent explanations for their extinction.
Contextual interpretations of similar excavation sites in Asia lead to the hypothesis of multiregional origin of modern man in the 1980s.
Remains left by Neanderthals include bone and stone tools, which are found in Eurasia, from Western Europe to Central, Northern, and Western Asia.
With 3 billion nucleotides sequenced, analysis of about ⅓ showed no sign of admixture between modern humans and Neanderthals, according to Pääbo.
The Molodova I archaeological site in eastern Ukraine suggests some Neanderthals built dwellings using animal bones.
The exact nature of biological and cultural interaction between Neanderthals and other human groups has been contested.
Neanderthal fossils have not been found to date in Africa, but there have been finds close to North Africa, both on Gibraltar and in the Levant.
On 16 November 2006, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory issued a press release suggesting Neanderthals and ancient humans probably did not interbreed.
Radiocarbon dating performed on charcoal in Gorham's Cave in Gibraltar in 2006 suggests that Neanderthals lived there 24,000 to 28,000 years ago.
Recent findings suggest there may be even more Neanderthal genes in non-African humans than previously expected: approximately 20% of the Neanderthal gene pool was present in a broad sampling of non-African individuals, though each individual's genome was on average only 2% Neanderthal.
This could explain why no modern man had to date been found with a Neanderthal Y chromosome.
The elaborate structures show that the Neanderthals responsible had a more sophisticated level of social organisation than previously thought possible.
Their energy needs were up to  more per day comparing to projected anatomically modern human males weighing  and females .
Vernot also noted that "Humans have been constantly migrating throughout their history - this makes it hard to say exactly where interactions with Neanderthals occurred.
Countries where their remains are known include most of Europe south of the line of glaciation, roughly along the 50th parallel north.
Genetic research has asserted that some admixture took place.
In the model from the paper, the ancestors of all non-Africans interbred with Neanderthals, and then split up into multiple groups that would later become Europeans, East Asians.
In 2015, researchers Benjamin Vernot and Joshua Akey at the University of Washington conclude in a paper in the American Journal of Human Genetics that the relatively greater quantity of Neanderthal-specific DNA in the genomes of individuals of East Asian descent (than those of European descent) cannot be explained by differences in selection.
The variant of microcephalin common outside Africa, which was suggested to be of Neanderthal origin and responsible for rapid brain growth in humans, was not found in Neanderthals.
Samples of 26 specimens in 2010 found an average weight of  for males and  for females.
Apparently these weather-induced population shifts took place before modern people secured competitive advantages over the Neanderthal, as these shifts in range took place well over ten thousand years before modern people totally replaced the Neanderthal, despite the recent evidence of some successful interbreeding.
One of the major findings focused on the limb morphology of Neanderthals.
Instead, more complex demographic scenarios, most likely involving multiple pulses of Neandertal admixture, are required to explain the data."
(2006) in the southern Caucasus region suggest that modern humans may have had a survival advantage during this period, being able to use social networks to acquire resources from a greater area.
In 2008 Richard E. Green et al.
This idea was reflected in an erroneous and inaccurate reconstruction of the Neanderthal findings of La Chapelle-aux-Saints, mounted in a crooked pose with a deformed and heavily curved spine and legs buckled.
Neanderthals' ambush techniques would have failed as grasslands replaced trees.
However, while they were largely carnivorous, new studies indicate Neanderthals also had cooked vegetables in their diet.
Shortly after they split up, the ancestors of East Asians interbred with Neanderthals just a little bit more."
Some 600,000 years ago a second propagation wave of African ''Homo erectus'' took place.
Studies published in March 2016 suggest that modern humans bred with hominins, including Neanderthals, on multiple occasions.
Other studies carried out since the sequencing of the Neanderthal genome have cast doubt on the level of admixture between Neanderthals and modern humans, or even as to whether the species interbred at all.
rhodesiensis'' may have lived much later than this period, depending on the method used to date the fossils, so this question remains open to debate.
More recent research suggests that Neanderthal-''Homo sapiens'' interbreeding appears to have occurred asymmetrically among the ancestors of modern-day humans, and that this is a possible rationale for differing frequencies of Neanderthal-specific DNA in the genomes of modern humans.
Their results show the genomes of modern humans and Neanderthals are at least 99.5% identical, but despite this genetic similarity, and despite the two species having coexisted in the same geographic region for thousands of years, Rubin and his team did not find any evidence of any significant interbreeding between the two.
was calculated by the molecular clock method.
Some experts suggest that this disparity alone was a major contributing factor to their ultimate replacement by ''Homo sapiens'', which may have outnumbered them by as much as 9 to 1 according to some estimates.
Because of the damaging effects the glacial period had on the Neanderthal sites, not much is known about the early species.
This implies Neanderthals were better adapted biologically to cold weather than modern humans and at times displaced them in parts of the Middle East when the climate got cold enough.
Early Neanderthals lived in the last glacial period for a span of about 100,000 years.
Current scientific ideas hold that both species evolved from a common African ancestor - ''Homo erectus''.
The Bontnewydd Palaeolithic site at Denbighshire, North Wales is the most north-western site of Neanderthal remains and one of the oldest remains in Britain (230,000 years ago).
"Those of us who live outside Africa carry a little Neanderthal DNA in us," said Pääbo, who led the study.
Neanderthals died out in Europe between 41,000 and 39,000 years ago which coincides with the start of a very cold period.
To date, the bones of over 400 Neanderthals have been found.
However, an analysis of a first draft of the Neanderthal genome by the same team released in May 2010 indicates interbreeding may have occurred.
The finding is that about 1 to 4 percent of the genes of the
This area probably was not occupied all at the same time.
At any rate, the populations in Eurasia underwent increasing "Neanderthalization" over time.
Some have suggested that ''H.
In British English, "Neanderthal" is pronounced with the /t/ as in German, but different vowels (IPA: ).
Some scholars have also posited that Neanderthals could be an Asian species which expanded into Europe, making Neanderthals a tropical species rather than cold adaptive.
In a subsequent interview, Dr. Lohmueller did note that these findings go against the commonly-held perception that Neanderthals were mostly localized to modern-day Europe and western Asia: "It’s very hard to put these findings into spatial context.
Classic Neanderthal fossils have been found over a large area, from northern Germany to Israel and Mediterranean countries like Spain and Italy in the south and from England and Portugal in the west to Uzbekistan in the east.
The genomes of all non-Africans include portions that are of Neanderthal origin, due to interbreeding between Neanderthals and the ancestors of Eurasians in Northern Africa or the Middle East prior to their spread.
About 55,000 years ago, the weather began to fluctuate wildly from extreme cold conditions to mild cold and back in a matter of a few decades.
Melanesians and Australoid populations show evidence of only one interbreeding event, possibly ~100,000 years ago, occurring in the Middle East, Europeans show a second event, which may also be of Middle Eastern origin, occurring possibly 50,000 years ago, while East Asians show an additional third interbreeding event possibly 30,000 years ago occurring in Siberia.
Quartz hand-axes, three-sided picks, and stone cleavers from Crete have also been recovered that date back about 170,000 years ago.
Heidelbergensis originated between 800,000 and 1,300,000 years ago, and continued until about 200,000 years ago.
Fossil and tool finds support the idea that during the first migration wave of around 2 million years ago small groups of ''Homo erectus'' left Africa via the Levant, the  Black Sea area into Georgia (fossils of Dmanisi) and possibly via North-western Africa towards southern Spain.
They gave the material to amateur naturalist Johann Carl Fuhlrott, who turned the fossils over to anatomist Hermann Schaaffhausen.
Early artistic reconstructions mostly presented Neanderthals as beastly creatures, emphasizing hairiness and rough, dark complexion.
Between 350,000 and 400,000 years ago the African branch is thought to have started evolving towards modern humans and the Eurasian branch towards Neanderthals.
A building was made of mammoth skulls, jaws, tusks and leg bones, and had 25 hearths inside.
Scientists do not agree when Neanderthals can first be recognised in the fossil record, with dates ranging between 200,000 and 300,000 years BP.
This genome was expected to be roughly the size of the human genome, three-billion base pairs, and share most of its genes.
Ötzi the iceman, Europe's oldest preserved mummy, was found to possess an even higher percentage of Neanderthal ancestry.
This research compared the genome of the Neanderthals to five modern humans from China, France, sub-Saharan Africa, and Papua New Guinea.
Anthropologist Pat Shipman, of Pennsylvania State University, suggested that domestication of the dog could have played a role in Neanderthals' extinction.
The practice of referring to "the Neanderthals" and "a Neanderthal" emerged in the popular literature of the 1920s.
From mtDNA analysis estimates, the two species shared a common ancestor about 500,000 years ago.
The northern border of their range, in particular, would have contracted frequently with the onset of cold periods.
Burnt organic material was also found.
John D. Hawks has argued that the genetic similarity to Neanderthals may indeed be the result of both structure and interbreeding, as opposed to just one or the other.
Separate developments in the human line, in other regions such as Southern Africa, somewhat resembled the Eurasian Neanderthals, but these people were not Neanderthals.
There were two annular (ring) structures, one 6.7 by 4.5 metres, and the other 2.2 by 2.1, with one to four layers of aligned broken stalagmites, and short pieces within the layers to support them.
Late Mousterian artifacts were found in Gorham's Cave on the south-facing coast of Gibraltar.
They calculated the common ancestor to be about 353,000 years ago, and a complete separation of the ancestors of the species about 188,000 years ago.
These interbreeding events could have been directly between Neanderthals and East Asians, maybe in some other indirect way."
This interpretation, however, is controversial.
rhodesiensis'' seems to have lived about 600,000 years ago, long before the time of classic Neanderthals.
It's possible, for example, that all of the interbreeding with Neanderthals occurred in the Middle East, before the ancestors of modern non-Africans spread out across Eurasia.
In 2016 researchers reported that they had found Human DNA in the genome of a female Neanderthal from the Altai mountains region near the border between Mongolia and Russia.
humans outside sub-Saharan Africa came from Neanderthals, compared to the baseline defined by the two sub-Saharan Africans.
When Neanderthal ancestors left Africa roughly 100,000 years earlier they adapted to the pathogens in their European environment, unlike modern humans who adapted to African pathogens.
This concurred with the work of Noonan from two years earlier.
These include shorter limb proportions, a wider, barrel-shaped rib cage, a reduced chin and, perhaps most notably, a large nose, which was much larger in both length and width, and started somewhat higher on the face, than in modern humans.
Neanderthal 1 was known as the "Neanderthal cranium" or "Neanderthal skull" in anthropological literature, and the individual reconstructed on the basis of the skull was occasionally called "the Neanderthal man".
An article appearing in the journal ''Nature'' has calculated the species diverged about 516,000 years ago, whereas fossil records show a time of about 400,000 years ago.
Skulls from that period found in Spain for example, suggest a brain volume of between 1100 ccm to 1450 ccm.
In April 2014, a first glimpse into the epigenetics of the Neanderthal was obtained with the publication of the full DNA methylation of the Neanderthal and the Denisovan.
A 2007 study pushes the point of divergence back to around 800,000 years ago.
from Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany, published the full sequence of Neanderthal mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and suggested "Neanderthals had a long-term effective population size smaller than that of modern humans."
In layman's American English, "Neanderthal" is pronounced with a /θ/ (the voiceless ''th'' as in ''thin'') and /ɔ/ instead of the longer British /aː/ (IPA: ), although scientists typically use the /t/ as in German.
Trinkaus claims various fossils as products of hybridized populations, including the child of Lagar Velho, a skeleton found at Lagar Velho in Portugal.
The size and distribution of Neanderthal sites, along with genetic evidence, suggests Neanderthals lived in much smaller and more sparsely distributed groups than their ''Homo sapiens'' contemporaries.
In addition, scientists reported having sequenced the entire genome of a Neanderthal for the first time.
Gene flow from modern humans to Neanderthals would not be expected if contact occurred between a small colonizing population of modern humans and a much larger resident population of Neanderthals.
In November 2011 tests conducted at the Oxford Radiocarbon Accelerator Unit in England on what were previously thought to be Neanderthal baby teeth, which had been unearthed in 1964 from the Grotta del Cavallo in Italy, were identified as the oldest modern human remains discovered anywhere in Europe, dating from between 43,000 and 45,000 years ago.
Furthermore, excavations at Ortvale Klde Rockshelter discovered that there was a clear break between the Late Middle Paleolithic and the Early Upper Paleolithic lithic assemblages, which were attributed to Neanderthals and modern humans respectively.
The bones of the El Sidron group show signs of defleshing, suggesting that they were victims of cannibalism, and as their bones also show signs that they suffered from food shortage, they may have been victims of "survival cannibalism" by another Neanderthal group.
rhodesiensis'' populations appeared to be on the road to modern ''H.
In 2010 a period between 440,000 - 270,000 years B.P.
Since then, more of the preparation work has been done in clean areas and 4-base pair 'tags' have been added to the DNA as soon as it is extracted so the Neanderthal DNA can be identified.
They had almost the same degree of encephalization (i.e.
They were closely related to modern humans, sharing 99.7% of DNA.
One study has found that Neanderthal brains were more asymmetric than other hominid brains.
The brain volume of fossils from the first propagation wave is however estimated only to be slightly above 1000 ccm.
However, the reliability of molecular clocks is questionable as dating determined by  stratigraphic methods varies considerably from those determined using the molecular clock.
This would have required a more advanced social structure than previously known for Neanderthals.
At some Levantine sites, Neanderthal remains date from after the same sites were vacated by modern humans.
Modern humans co-existed with them in Europe starting around 45,000 years ago and perhaps even earlier.
In December 2013, researchers reported evidence that Neanderthals practiced burial behavior and intentionally buried their dead.
More recent genetic studies seem to suggest that modern humans may have mated with "at least two groups" of ancient humans: Neanderthals and Denisovans.
Comparison of the DNA of Neanderthals and ''Homo sapiens'' suggests that they diverged from a common ancestor between 350,000 and 400,000 years ago.
While interbreeding is viewed as the most parsimonious interpretation of the genetic discoveries, the authors point out they cannot conclusively rule out an alternative scenario, in which the source population of non-African modern humans was already more closely related to Neanderthals than other Africans were, because of ancient genetic divisions within Africa.
In 2012 recalculation of the mutation rates revealed evidence of a much earlier separation between 800,000 and 400,000 years ago.
They found that in both the Late Middle Palaeolithic and Early Upper Palaeolithic more than 95% of stone artifacts were drawn from local material, suggesting Neanderthals were restricted to more local resources.
The genome was extracted from the toe bone of a 50,000-year-old Neanderthal found in a Siberian cave.
Svante Pääbo has tested more than 70 Neanderthal specimens.
Nevertheless, King's name had priority over the proposal put forward in 1866 by Ernst Haeckel, ''Homo stupidus''.
Since about 200,000 years ago in Africa the so-called early anatomically modern humans descended from the local ''Homo erectus'' through the intermediate ''Homo rhodesiensis''.
However, some researchers have argued that there is evidence of possible interbreeding between female Neanderthals and male modern humans.
Scientists have speculated that these watercraft may have been similar to dugout canoes, which are among the oldest known boats in the archaeological record.
Males stood  and females  tall.
However this has been disputed recently through studies of their cranial morphology and sinuses.
In a 2006 publication co-authored by Trinkaus, the fossils found in 1952 in the cave of Peștera Muierii, Romania, are likewise claimed as descendants of previously hybridized populations.
Neanderthals are known for their large cranial capacity, which at 1600&nbsp;cm3 is larger on average than that of modern humans.
In July 2006, the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology and 454 Life Sciences announced that they would sequence the Neanderthal genome over the next two years.
Evidence from mitochondrial DNA studies has been interpreted as evidence Neanderthals were not a subspecies of ''H.
It indicated that Neanderthal and modern human brains were the same size at birth, but that by adulthood, the Neanderthal brain was larger than the modern human brain.
Edward M. Rubin, director of the U.S. Department of Energy's Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the Joint Genome Institute (JGI), sequenced a fraction (0.00002) of genomic nuclear DNA (nDNA) from a 38,000-year-old Vindia Neanderthal femur.
It appears incorrect, based on present research and known fossil finds, to refer to any fossils outside Eurasia as true Neanderthals.
Neanderthal anatomy differed from modern humans in that they had a more robust build and distinctive morphological features, especially on the cranium, which gradually accumulated more derived aspects as it was described by Marcellin Boule, particularly in certain isolated geographic regions.
Mousterian stone tools discovered on the southern Ionian Islands suggests that Neanderthals were sailing the Mediterranean Sea as early as 110,000 years ago.
Detractors have argued and continue to argue that the signal of Neanderthal interbreeding may be due to ancient African substructure, meaning that the similarity is only a remnant of a common ancestor of both Neanderthals and modern humans and not the result of interbreeding.
Researchers have taken this as evidence of the presence of interpersonal violence among the Neanderthals.
Neanderthal man was classified as ''Homo sapiens neanderthalensis'' - an early subspecies of what was now called ''Homo sapiens sapiens''.
During the early 20th century the prevailing view has been heavily influenced by Arthur Keith and Marcellin Boule, who wrote the first scientific description of a nearly complete Neanderthal skeleton.
Recent evidence has extended the Neanderthal range by about  east into southern Siberia's Altai Mountains.
Several cultural assemblages have been linked to the Neanderthals in Europe.
The reconstructed DNA methylation map allowed researchers to assess gene activity levels throughout the Neanderthal genome and compare them to modern humans.
The Neanderthal genome is almost the same size as the human genome and is identical to ours to a level of 99.7% by comparing the accurate order of the nitrogenous bases in the double nucleotide chain.
The exact date of their extinction had been disputed but in 2014, a team led by Thomas Higham of the University of Oxford used an improved radiocarbon dating technique on material from 40 archaeological sites to show that Neanderthals died out in Europe between 41,000 and 39,000 years ago, with the last group disappearing from southern Spain 28,000 years ago.
It was hoped the comparison would expand understanding of Neanderthals, as well as the evolution of humans and human brains.
The bones of twelve Neanderthals were discovered at El Sidrón cave in the Atapuerca Mountains of Spain.
This coincides with the start of a very cold period in Europe and is 5,000 - 18,000 years after ''Homo sapiens'' reached the continent.
It is estimated that the total Neanderthal population across this habitat range numbered at around 70,000 at its peak.
rhodesiensis'' in general was ancestral to both modern humans and Neanderthals, and that at some point the two populations went their separate ways, but this argument presupposes that ''H.
Debated remains the period when the Neanderthal lineage separated from the lineage that lead to modern man.
Similar conclusions were reached in a paper published in the same publication by researchers Bernard Kim and Kirk Lohmueller at UCLA: "Using simulations of a broad range of models of selection and demography, we have shown that this hypothesis that the greater proportion of Neandertal ancestry in East Asians than in Europeans is due to the fact that purifying selection is less effective at removing weakly deleterious Neandertal alleles from East Asian populations cannot account for the higher proportion of Neandertal ancestry in East Asians than in Europeans.
In the same publication, it was disclosed by Svante Pääbo that in the previous work at the Max Planck Institute, "Contamination was indeed an issue," and they eventually realized that 11% of their sample was modern human DNA.
Evidence suggests they were much stronger than modern humans, with particularly strong arms and hands, while they were comparable in height; based on 45 long bones from at most 14 males and 7 females, Neanderthal males averaged  and females  tall.
On the other hand, the northern border of their range as represented by fossils may not be the real northern border of the area they occupied, since Middle Palaeolithic-looking artifacts have been found even farther north, up to 60° N, on the Russian plain.
Evidence that Neanderthal genomic material is often found amongst genes of the immune system suggests that some of the interbreeding may have secured resistance to diseases that Neanderthal populations had bred resistance to.
A very limited amount of interbreeding could explain the findings, if it occurred early enough in the colonization process.
They had a known range that possibly extended as far east as the Altai Mountains, but not farther to the east or south, and apparently not into Africa.
Some researchers suggest admixture of 3.4–7.9% in modern humans of non-African ancestry, rejecting the hypothesis of ancestral population structure.
This includes most of Western Europe, Central Europe, the Carpathians, and the Balkans, some sites in Ukraine and in western Russia, Central and Northern Asia up to the Altai Mountains, and Western Asia from the Levant up to the Indus River.
More recent historical events in Eurasia and the Americas show a similar pattern, where the unintentional introduction of viral, or bacterial pathogens to unprepared populations has led to mass mortality and local population extinction.
This section describes bones with Neanderthal traits in chronological order.
The workers who recovered this material originally thought it to be the remains of a bear.
There were also four stack structures, two within the large ring and two outside it.
seasonally cold) climate.
The Neanderthal genome project published papers in 2010 and 2014 stating that Neanderthals contributed to the DNA of modern humans, including most humans outside sub-Saharan Africa, as well as a few sub-Saharan Africa's populations, through interbreeding, likely between 50,000 and 60,000 years ago.
Rather than absorption of the Neanderthal population, this gene flow appears to have been of limited duration and limited extent.
This said, some researchers think that ''H.
Edward Rubin of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory states recent genome testing of Neanderthals suggests human and Neanderthal DNA are some 99.5% to nearly 99.9% identical.
In 2008, a group of scientists produced a study using three-dimensional computer-assisted reconstructions of Neanderthal infants based on fossils found in Russia and Syria.
