Prince Nicolas of Montenegro wrote a letter thanking him for his article.
Norman made sure that Gladstone read the article.
The geographical terms "Near East" and "Far East" referring to areas of the globe in or contiguous to the former British Empire and the neighboring colonies of the Dutch, Portuguese, Spanish and Germans, fit together as a pair based on the opposites of far and near, suggesting that they were innovated together.
It proved to be less acceptable to a colonial point of view that saw the entire region as one.
The Near East of the NESA is the same as the Middle East defined in the CIA-published on-line resource, ''The World Factbook''.
They are more historical than an accurate gauge of operations.
The scholars in the field of studies that eventually became Biblical archaeology attempted to define it on the basis of archaeology.
The Ottoman Porte was continuously under attack from some quarter in its empire, primarily the Balkans.
The United Nations formulates multiple regional divisions as is convenient for its various operations.
The archaeologists counted Iran as "the Near East" because Old Persian cuneiform had been found there.
They became immediately popular, supplanting "Levant" and "East Indies", which gradually receded to minor usages and then began to change meaning.
UNICEF recognizes the "Middle East and North Africa" region, where the Middle East is bounded by the Red Sea on the west and includes Iran on the east.
Most universities teaching the liberal arts have library and museum collections.
The book does not contain a single instance of "Near East."
However, "Near East" continues in some circles at the discretion of the defining agency or academic department.
Although the name of the CIA reflects the original advised intent of Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman, the government's needs for strategic services have frustrated that intent from the beginning.
Rethinking its policy the British government decided that the two polities under attack were necessary for the balance of power.
They appear together in the journals of the mid-19th century.
One was North Africa west of Egypt.
The last Roman emperor died fighting hand-to-hand in the streets of his capital, Constantinople, overwhelmed by the Ottoman military, in May, 1453.
Many of these focus on the Ancient Near East or Near East in the sense of Ancient Near East.
They further defined the nations as:
Ptolemy's ''Geography'' divided Asia on a similar basis.
Parallel with the growth of specialized agencies for conducting or supporting statescraft in the second half of the 20th century has been the collection of resources for scholarship and research typically in university settings.
In defense of the Bible as history they said:
Hogarth gives no evidence of being familiar with the contemporaneous initial concept of the Middle East.
The term has fallen into disuse in English and has been replaced by the term ''Middle East''.
It was, however, already there to be seen.
In a few years these alignments became the Triple Entente and the Triple Alliance (already formed in 1882), which were in part a cause of World War I.
Elizabeth I of England, primarily interested in trade with the east, collaborated with English merchants to form the first trading companies to the far-flung regions, using their own jargon.
This community is currently under the leadership (in addition to all its other leadership) of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.
As the name indicates, that region is a combination of State Department regions; however, NESA is careful to identify the State Department region.
Both terms were used before then with local British and American meanings: the near or far east of a field, village or shire.
Their domain became the Ancient Near East, which could no longer be relied upon to be the Near East.
He won Ottoman confidence as a junior officer in the Crimean War.
The result is multiple definitions.
Towards the southeast, the boundaries are even more shadowy.
For his authority Miller invokes the people, citing the "collective wisdom" of Europe, and introducing a concept to arise many times in the decades to follow under chilling circumstances:
They are not generally considered distinct regions as they were at their original definition.
It differs from the Ottoman Empire of the times in including Greece and Iran.
The demise of the sick man of Europe left considerable confusion as to what was to be meant by "Near East".
Army intelligence did not come to an end; in fact, all the branches of the Armed Forces retained their intelligence services.
His analysis is geopolitical.
The United States is the chief remaining nation to assign official responsibilities to a region called the Near East.
Before them the Greeks had the habit, which appears in Linear B, the oldest known script of Europe, referring to the near province and the far province of the kingdom of Pylos.
Otherwise there is but little basis except for history and convention to lump together peoples of multiple, often unrelated languages, governments, loyalties and customs.
England had "turned her back."
One such institution is the Centre for the Study of Ancient Documents (CSAD) founded by and located centrally at Oxford University, Great Britain.
In the 1890s the term tended to focus on the conflicts in the Balkan states and Armenia.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) describes its entire theatre of operations as the Near East, but then assigns many of its members to other regions as well; for example, Cyprus, Malta and Turkey are in both the European and the Near Eastern regions.
Its definition of Middle East corresponds to that of the State Department, which officially prefers the term Near East.
The victors inherited his remaining territory in the Balkans.
Expertise on the modern Middle East is almost never mixed or confused with studies of the Ancient Near East, although often "Ancient Near East" is abbreviated to "Near East" without any implication of modern times.
Strategic services are officially provided by some 17 agencies called the Intelligence Community.
If the British Empire was now going to side with the Russian Empire, the Ottoman Empire had no choice but to cultivate a relationship with the Austro-Hungarian Empire, which was supported by the German Empire.
If the Ottoman Empire had been a sick man, then:"There has been something pathological about the history of this Near Eastern World.
Starting in 1894 the Ottomans struck at the Armenians on the explicit grounds that they were a non-Muslim people and as such were a potential threat to the Muslim empire within which they resided.
In the last years of the 19th century the term "Near East" acquired considerable disrepute in eyes of the English-speaking public as did the Ottoman Empire itself.
In the United States the now aging Julia Ward Howe, author of the Battle Hymn of the Republic, leaped into the war of words and joined the Red Cross.
It has had an undue share of political misfortunes, and had lain for centuries in a kind of spiritual paralysis between East and West—belonging to neither, partaking paradoxically of both, and wholly unable to rally itself decidedly to one or the other...."
In 1916 Captain T.C.
Having supposed that it was sick, he kills it off:"The Near East has never been more true to itself than in its lurid dissolution; past and present are fused together in the flare."
Someone had to reconcile the present with the past.
Iran was included because it could not easily be reached except through the Ottoman Empire or neighboring Russia.
The two terms were now compound nouns often shown hyphenated.
It has pleased western historians to write of a decline of the Ottoman Empire as though a stable and uncontested polity of that name once existed.
The new wave of diplomats often came from those programs.
The Egypt and the Near East region besides Egypt includes Cyprus, Persia and Afghanistan but not Asia Minor (a separate region).
In the north is "Scythia this side of the Himalayas" and "Scythia beyond the Himalayas".
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Greece conducts "bilateral relationships" with the countries of the "Mediterranean – Middle East Region" but has formulated no Near East Region.
The cause of the onus was the Hamidian Massacres of Armenians because they were Christians, but it seemed to spill over into the protracted conflicts of the Balkans.
The living Near East is primarily what the agencies say it is.
Working closely in conjunction with the definition of the Near East provided by the State Department is the Near East South Asia Center for Strategic Studies (NESA), an educational institution of the United States Department of Defense.
On the other hand, Congress oversees its operations through a committee.
A second strategic personality from American diplomatic and military circles, Alfred Thayer Mahan, concerned about the naval vulnerability of the trade routes in the Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean, commented in 1902:"The middle East, if I may adopt a term which I have not seen, will some day need its Malta, as well as its Gibraltar; it does not follow that either will be in the Gulf.
Gordon, a published author, had not used the term previously, but he was to use it from then on.
The Crimean War brought a change in vocabulary with the introduction of terms more familiar to the late 19th century.
The Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, a division of the United States Department of State, is perhaps the most influential agency to still use the term Near East.
The United Nations Statistics Division defines Western Asia to contain the countries included elsewhere in the Middle East.
For example, ''The London Review'' of 1861 (Telford and Barber, unsigned) in reviewing several works by Rawlinson, Layard and others, defined themselves as making:
The fall of the Ottoman Empire ultimately enmeshed all the others as well.
Furthermore, "Greece shook off the turbaned destroyer of her people" and so on.
In 1582, the ship ''The Great Susan'' transported the first ambassador, William Harebone, to the Ottoman Porte (government of the Ottoman Empire) at Constantinople.
Serbia was created by the Serbian Revolution, 1815–1833.
It regards its target countries as the Middle East but adopts the convention of calling them the Near East to be in conformance with the practices of the State Department.
The most influential agencies in the United States still using Near East as a working concept are as follows.
On the one hand its director is appointed by the president.
The Directorate of Intelligence, one of four directorates into which the CIA is divided, includes the Office of Near Eastern and South Asian Analysis (NESA).
They undoubtedly saw a need to separate the Biblical lands from the terrain of the Ottoman Empire.
To the south is "India on this side of the Ganges" and "India beyond the Ganges".
On the north-west, Vienna is the most conspicuous boundary-mark, but one might almost equally well single out Trieste or Lvov or even Prag.
The total super-region consisted of "India, Afghanistan, Persia, Arabistan, Asia Minor, and last, but not least, Egypt."
Archaeology on the international scene, although very much of intellectual interest to the major universities, fell into the shadow of international relations.
The term "Far East" appeared contemporaneously meaning Japan, China, Korea, Indonesia and Viet Nam; in short, the East Indies.
Resorting to this verbal device, however, did not protect the "Ancient Near East" from the inroads of "the Middle East."
The Russians were suddenly liberators of oppressed Balkan states.
Norman published the gist of his planned travel book curiously mixed with vituperation against the Ottoman Empire in an article in June, 1896, in Scribner's Magazine.
It now became relevant to define the east of the eastern question.
The result was the Crimean War, 1853–1856, in which the British Empire and the French Empire supported the Ottoman Empire in its struggle against the incursions of the Russian Empire.
An uncountable number of places appear to have had their middle easts from gardens to regions, including the United States.
It is now generally used only in historical contexts, to describe the countries of Western Asia from the Mediterranean to (or including) Iran.
To Toynbee the Near East was a spiritual being of a "Janus-character," connected to both east and west:The limits of the Near East are not easy to define.
These regions were occupied by "the brown men," with the yellow in the Far East and the black in Africa.
The difference was the Hamidian Massacres, which were being conducted even as the couple traveled the Balkans.
The use of the term Middle East as a region of international affairs apparently began in British and American diplomatic circles quite independently of each other over concern for the security of the same country: Iran, then known to the west as Persia.
The innovation of the term "Near East" to mean the holdings of the Ottoman Empire as early as the Crimean War had left a geographical gap.
His own term revives "the Nearer East" as opposed to "the Far East."
As for the natives of the Balkans, they were "a semi-civilized people".
For example, "Near Eastern Languages" in the ancient sense includes such languages as Sumerian and Akkadian.
It is perhaps best to equate them with the frontiers of the Arabic language, yet the genius of the Near East overrides linguistic barriers, and encroaches on the Arabicspeaking world on the one side as well as on the German-speaking world on the other.
The Ottoman Empire was created from the lands of the former eastern Roman Empire on the occasion of the latter's violent demise.
"Near East" applied to what had been mainly known as the Levant, which was in the jurisdiction of the Ottoman Porte, or government.
Within the government the State Department has been most influential in promulgating the Near Eastern regional system.
The geographical ranges in each case are identical.
The ancient Near East is frozen in time.
Mrs. Norman, a writer herself, wrote glowing letters of the home and person of Mme.
Meadows' terminology must represent usage by that administration.
There was a linguistic predisposition to use such terms.
'''Near East''' () is a geographical term that roughly encompasses Western Asia.
Although racial and colonial definitions of the Middle East are no longer considered ideologically sound, the sentiment of unity persists.
The WINEP bundles the countries of Northwest Africa together under "North Africa."
In 1853 the Russian Empire on behalf of the Slavic Balkan states began to question the very existence of the Ottoman Empire.
Geography alone was not a sufficient explanation of the terms, he believed.
Paradoxically it now aligned itself with the west rather than with the east.
The Ottoman Empire, for example, was the far East as much as the East Indies.
Details can be found in ''Policy Focus #65''.
If Norman was apparently attempting to change British policy, it was perhaps William Miller (1864–1945), journalist and expert on the Near East, who did the most in that direction.
The borders did expand and contract but they were always dynamic and always in "question" right from the beginning.
Its author, an "official Chinese interpreter of 10 years' active service" and a member of the Oriental Club, Thomas Taylor Meadows, was replying to the suggestion by another interpreter that the British Empire was wasting its resources on a false threat from Russia against China.
Apart from the fact that he attended Oxford and played Rugby not many biographical details have been promulgated.
Beyond the Ganges and Himalayas (including the Tien Shan) were Serica and Serae (sections of China) and some other identifiable far eastern locations known to the voyagers and geographers but not to the general European public.
Until about 1855 the words near east and far east did not refer to any particular region.
The far East, a phrase containing a noun, East, qualified by an adjective, far, could be at any location in the "far east" of the speaker's home territory.
They needed a regional term.
All official Middle Eastern affairs are referred to this bureau.
That "east" in turn was only an English translation of Latin ''Oriens'' and ''Orientalis'', "the land of the rising Sun", used since Roman times for "east".
The CIA was first formed under the National Security Act of 1947 from the army's Office of Strategic Services (OSS), which furnished both military intelligence and clandestine military operations to the army during the crisis of World War II.
In 1894, Sir Henry Norman, 1st Baronet, a journalist, traveled to the Far East, afterwards writing a book called ''The Peoples and Politics of the Far East'', which came out in 1895.
The threat that caused Gordon, diplomat and military officer, to publish the article was resumption of work on a railway from Russia to the Persian Gulf.
Its division "does not forcibly reflect geography" but "refers to the execution of regional activities."
The Romans had used them in near Gaul / far Gaul, near Spain / far Spain and others.
Under these complex circumstances regional names are less useful.
The British Navy should have the facility to concentrate in force, if occasion arise, about Aden, India, and the Gulf."
Instead, the entire region is considered "the Middle East."
Usually these terms were given with reference to a geographic feature, such as a mountain range or a river.
The change is evident in the reports of influential British travelers to the Balkans.
The Hungarians had thrown off Turkish rule by 1688.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey also does not use the term Near East.
The book was never published.
The Ottoman Empire ended at the eastern border of Iraq.
It teaches courses and holds seminars and workshops for government officials and military officers who will work or are working within its region.
This view reveals a somewhat less than altruistic Christian intent of the British Empire; however, it was paradoxical from the beginning, as Simpson and most other writers pointed out.
In 1855 a reprint of a letter earlier sent to ''The Times'' appeared in ''Littel's Living Age''.
Their original Middle East consumed the Near East as far as the Red Sea, ceded India to the Asia and Oceania region, and went into partnership with North Africa as far as the Atlantic.
The East Indies, or "Far East," derived ultimately from Ptolemy's "India Beyond the Ganges."
Eventually, the Ottoman Empire lost control of the Balkan region.
A dedicated Christian, he spent his time between assignments living among the poor and donating his salary on their behalf.
Bertram Lenox Simpson, a colonial officer killed eventually in China, uses the terms together in his 1910 book, ''The Conflict of Color'', as "the Near and Middle East."
Its regions include the Middle East, the Balkans and others.
These are not new; however, the erection of these into "centres" of national and international interest in the second half of the 20th century have created larger databases not available to the scholars of the past.
For example, its region includes Mauritania, a member of the State Department's Africa (Sub-Sahara).
For example, a high point in the use of "Ancient Near East" was for Biblical scholars the ''Ancient Near Eastern Texts relating to the Old Testament'' by James Bennett Pritchard, a textbook of first edition dated 1950.
The term middle east as a noun and adjective was common in the 19th century in nearly every context except diplomacy and archaeology.
Woolley had completed it in 1960 two weeks before his death.
Miller's final pronouncements on the topic could not be ignored by either the British or the Ottoman governments:
Relations of minorities within the Ottoman Empire and the disposition of former Ottoman lands became known as the "Eastern Question", as the Ottomans were on the east of Europe.
Formerly part of the empire at its apogee.
In the 20th century after decades of intense warfare and political turmoil terms such as "Near East", "Far East" and "Middle East" were relegated to the experts, especially in the new field of political science.
Throughout this article Norman uses "Near East" to mean the countries where "the eastern question" applied; that is, to all of the Balkans.
This duty was inherited by various specialized agencies that were formed to handle specific aspects of international relations, now so complex as to be beyond the scope and abilities  of a diplomatic corps in the former sense.
Instead the Normans whirled off to New York.
According to Norman now, the empire had been established by "the Moslem horde" from Asia, which was stopped by "intrepid Hungary."
They include Iran, the Balkans, but not the Danube lands, Egypt, but not the rest of North Africa.
Many revisions and redefinitions have taken place since then.
By the time of John Seller's ''Atlas Maritima'' of 1670, "India Beyond the Ganges" had become "the East Indies" including China, Korea, southeast Asia and the islands of the Pacific in a map that was every bit as distorted as Ptolemy's, despite the lapse of approximately 1500 years.
In his later career he became a high official in the Ottoman Empire, working as Governor of Egypt for the Ottoman khedive for the purpose of conducting campaigns against slavers and slavery in Egypt and the Sudan.
Its total area extends further into Central Asia than that of most agencies.
The queen chartered the Company of Merchants of the Levant, shortened to  Levant Company, and soon known also as The Turkey Company, in 1581.
By 1916, when millions of Europeans were becoming casualties of imperial war in the trenches of eastern and western Europe over "the eastern question," Arnold J. Toynbee, Hegelesque historian of civilization at large, was becoming metaphysical about the Near East.
There is, however, no distinct Middle East.
Charles George Gordon is known as the saint of all British colonial officers.
The world map of Jodocus Hondius of 1590 labels all of Asia from the Caspian to the Pacific as ''India Orientalis'', shortly to appear in translation as the East Indies.
This is so absolutely true that no candid person will be inclined to dispute it."
The Balkan states, with the partial exception of Bosnia and Albania, were primarily Christian.
Explicitly excluded is India.
In about the middle of the 19th century "Near East" came into use to describe that part of the east closest to Europe.
The term "Near and Middle East," held the stage for a few years before World War I.
Similarly the journals associated with these fields of expertise include the words Near East or Near Eastern.
Also, on a number of occasions in the early 19th century, American and British warships had to attack the Barbary pirates to stop their piracy and recover thousands of enslaved Europeans and Americans.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations defines the region similarly, but also includes Afghanistan while excluding the countries of North Africa and the Palestinian territories.
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy (WINEP) is a non-profit organization for research and advice on Middle Eastern policy.
The countries of the former empires of the 19th century have in general abandoned the term and the subdivision in favor of Middle East, North Africa and various forms of Asia.
The East India Company (short for a much longer formal name) was chartered in 1600 for trade to the East Indies.
As the book was a big success, he was off to the Balkan states with his wife in 1896 to develop detail for a sequel, ''The People and Politics of the Near East'', which Scribners planned to publish in 1897.
Except for the Balkans, the region matches the later Middle East.
These were fighting words to be coming from a country that once insisted Europe needed Turkey and was willing to spill blood over it.
Simpson (under his pen-name, Weale) explains that this entire region "is politically one region – in spite of the divisions into which it is academically divided."
Its name, however, is not entirely accurate.
By "Far East" he meant Siberia, China, Japan, Korea, Siam and Malaya.
In 1900 Thomas Edward Gordon published an article, ''The Problem of the Middle East'', which began:"It may be assumed that the most sensitive part of our external policy in the Middle East is the preservation of the independence and integrity of Persia and Afghanistan.
