On 11 January 2011, ''Neighbours'' moved to Ten's digital channel, Eleven.
On 7 July 2014, Todd Spangler from ''Variety'' reported that FremantleMedia International had signed a deal with U.S. subscription service Hulu giving it exclusive rights to the most recent season of ''Neighbours''.
The TV2 website offers viewers the chance to watch episodes online with its OnDemand service.
In response to the criticism, Bower made a decision to add more ethnically diverse extras, small walk on roles and speaking parts, as well as introducing the character of Sunny Lee (played by Hany Lee) an exchange student from South Korea.
New York City station WWOR-TV showed ''Neighbours'' weekdays 5:30&nbsp;pm from 17 June to 17 September 1991.
The interior scenes are filmed at the Global Television studios in Forest Hill.
The Robinsons and the Ramsays had a long history in the street and they were often involved in an ongoing rivalry.
''Neighbours: Defining Moments'' was the first DVD box set released in 2002.
Towards the late 2000s, ''Neighbours'' was normally attracting an average of 3&nbsp;million viewers for its lunchtime showing and 2.6&nbsp;million viewers for its early-evening repeat.
Other Australian locations mentioned and sometimes seen in the series include the fictitious suburbs of West Waratah, Eden Hills, and Anson's Corner.
''Neighbours'' became Eleven's most-watched show and the third highest rating show on digital multichannels that night.
Despite the restrictive 6:30&nbsp;pm time slot, ''Neighbours'' has also covered many serious problems such as teenage pregnancy, marital breakdown, imprisonment, career problems, financial problems, pregnancy, abortion, eating disorders, alcoholism, adultery, drug use and drug trafficking, robbery, stalking, kidnapping, accidental death, hit-and-runs, murder, shootings, stabbings, and incest.
In addition, episode titles were abandoned, having been in use for the previous three years.
During 2008 Ten HD broadcast the previous week's episodes in an omnibus edition each Sunday.
The end of episode teasers returned and are now made in-house by the ''Neighbours'' production team.
Former ''City Homicide'' producer, Richard Jasek, took over Bower's role, while Alan Hardy took over the role of producer.
The show's storylines concern the domestic and professional lives of the people who live and work in Erinsborough, a fictional suburb of Melbourne, Victoria.
In Canada, CFMT-TV in Toronto broadcast ''Neighbours'' on weeknights at 11:00 pm, starting in September 1990.
Ten began screening ''Neighbours'' on 20 January 1986, taking off where the previous series left off and commencing with episode 171.
Network Ten's programmer, David Mott said "We believe ''Neighbours'' is perfectly suited to Eleven's audience strategy and will find a successful and enduring home on Eleven".
''Neighbours'' initially aired on Seven Network where it struggled to attract high ratings leading to its cancellation by the network four months after it premiered.
This marks Australian television history.
In the 2000s, rival soap opera ''Home and Away'' emerged as more popular than ''Neighbours'' in Australia.
The show eventually moved back to TV2.
This made producers nervous that viewing figures might decrease, so they implemented a series of plots to keep viewers interested.
Programming chief, David Mott stated "Last night's strong result for ''Neighbours'' already suggests the audience will follow the folks from Ramsay Street to their brand new neighbourhood on Eleven."
Bachelor Des Clarke (Paul Keane) invited Daphne Lawrence (Elaine Smith) to live at No.
In April, Channel 5 in the UK launched a search to find a female actress to play the part of Poppy Rogers.
In 1997, the show won an award for Best Episode in A Television Drama Serial at the Australian Film Institute Awards.
Ahead of the 25th anniversary the Erinsborough village set underwent a makeover.
The last remaining original character, Helen Daniels, departed the show in 1997 due to the ill-health of Anne Haddy.
The changes meant that the location manager and catering team were no longer required, studio shoots would be reduced from three cameras to two, and location shots will be mainly confined to the Ramsay Street and Lassiter's complex sets, with occasional filming in one-off places.
After the usual break in broadcast over the summer non ratings period the series made its debut on Ten in 1986.
In 2005, Darren Devlyn and Caroline Frost from the ''Herald Sun'' reported that Watson then took his idea to the Nine Network in 1982, but it was rejected.
We're not sure why it's not here in Australia but we're taking a real look at it."
Through its entire run in Australia, ''Neighbours'' has been screened as a 21-minute episode each weeknight in an early-evening slot.
Then Caroline Gillmer fell ill and her character Cheryl Stark was temporarily recast with former ''Prisoner'' actress Colette Mann.
Several titles for the show were discussed, including ''People Like Us'', ''One Way Street'', ''No Through Road'' and ''Living Together'' until the network programmers voted on ''Neighbours''.
In January 2010, ''Neighbours'' returned to Australian screens to an audience of 563,000.
These omnibus editions did not return in 2009 as Ten HD was replaced by One HD from March 2009.
When the show debuted on Network Ten in 1986 it screened at 7:00&nbsp;pm.
The same episode attracted 20 million viewers when it was aired in the United Kingdom.
2007 saw the show undergo a revamp, which included a switch to recording in HDTV, the introduction of a new family, the departure of several existing characters and a new version of the show's familiar theme song and opening titles.
The show currently airs at 6:30&nbsp;pm on Eleven.
The interior scenes are filmed at the Global Television studios in Forest Hill, the adjoining suburb in which Pin Oak Court is located.
Having said that, I'm really excited about the new role and thank FremantleMedia for this wonderful opportunity."
The Robinsons and the Ramsays had a long history and were involved in an ongoing rivalry.
A Network Ten spokesperson commented "Most of the show's budget is covered by its UK deal with Channel 5 and the 50-odd other countries it is seen in, so it's not a financial problem for Ten despite the low ratings.
However, the move boosted Channel 5's usual share for the 5.30&nbsp;pm slot by three and a half times.
''Neighbours: The Iconic Episodes Volume Two'' contains twenty-four episodes over three discs.
In 2012, early episodes of ''Neighbours'' were released on three DVD box sets in Germany.
Since moving to digital multichannel Eleven, ''Neighbours'' has traditionally rated between 250,000 and 350,000 viewers.
In April 2004, the show began broadcasting nationally on the television channel Oxygen.
It had, however, resulted in a more modest boost, with ratings hovering at about 800,000 a night.
The show was initially broadcast by TVNZ in 1988, but by 1996 it was removed from the schedule.
On 27 May 2013, episode 6651 of ''Neighbours'' was watched by an audience of 405,000 viewers, which was the highest rating the series had achieved in nearly two years.
The titles show characters in a variety of familiar settings around Erinsborough and ends with a look at Ramsay Street from above.
In 1994, Network Ten told ''TV Week'' that they would be introducing a "younger, livelier look with six regular characters under the age of 18" in a bid to generate interest.
''Neighbours'' was immediately bought by Seven's rival Network Ten.
Former Network Nine chief executive Ian Johnson commented that it was one of the "biggest missed opportunities" in his twenty-four years at the network.
The soap began airing from 14 July, with new episodes airing daily from Monday through to Friday, on Hulu and Hulu Plus services.
On 29 October 2010, ''Neighbours'' ratings dropped to a low figure of 386,000 viewers.
The first series was titled ''Steph in Prison'' and coincided with Stephanie Scully's (Carla Bonner) return to ''Neighbours'' in April 2013.
In 1986, the series was bought by the BBC as part of their new daytime schedule in the United Kingdom.
In August 2010, ''The Daily Telegraph'' reported that ''Neighbours'' would be moving to Ten's new digital channel, to make way for a new current affairs show.
The following year, ''Brennan on the Run'' focusing on Mark Brennan's (Scott McGregor) time in witness protection was released.
The rivalry between Sydney and Melbourne meant that scripts did not mention that Erinsborough was a suburb of the latter city, until 1994.
The show is produced by FremantleMedia and has been sold to over sixty countries around the world, making it one of Australia's most successful media exports.
''Neighbours''' main focus is the fictional Ramsay Street, a residential cul-de-sac in the fictional Melbourne suburb of Erinsborough.
2007 saw ''Neighbours'' debut an updated theme, a new logo and new "optimistic, contemporary" titles.
Pin Oak Court, in Vermont South, is the real cul-de-sac that doubles for Ramsay Street.
After announcing its cancellation, CFMT decided to keep ''Neighbours'' on its schedule throughout September 1994, following numerous letters and telephone calls.
This was half the number of viewers that watched it on Network Ten; the ''Herald Sun'' reported that it was a good result as "bosses were only expecting 133,000."
''Neighbours'' achieved 998,000 viewers and placed 6th for the night, ''Home And Away'' placed 7th.
The last five aired episodes shown are available to watch on the ''Neighbours'' official Australian website, as a part of Network Ten's Catch Up TV service.
It was later announced that an attempt on the life of long term regular, Paul Robinson (Stefan Dennis) would be the focus of the actual 6000th episode.
It was created by TV executive Reg Watson, who proposed the idea of making a show that focused on realistic stories and portrayed adults and teenagers who talk openly and solve their problems together.
Of the changes, FremantleMedia said "''Neighbours'' is undergoing a work flow upgrade to accommodate advances in technology and production techniques to ensure we are at the forefront of professionalism and efficiency."
Two ''Neighbours'' actors have been nominated for Rose D'Or awards, once in 2004 for Ryan Moloney and again in 2005 for Jackie Woodburne.
The 6,000th episode falls on a Friday so the whole week is a special one.
The new logo is a reimagined contemporary version of the original ''Neighbours'' logo from 1985.
From April 2012, Shock Entertainment began releasing DVD box sets of ''Neighbours'' episodes in broadcast order from the beginning.
The episodes started from the Scully family's arrival in 1999 and were aired for a six-week trial basis.
In the 2000s and 2010s, the show dealt with controversial issues such as homosexuality, gambling, prostitution, surrogacy, and exotic dancing.
It was frequently the highest-rating daytime programme in the UK, outside of news bulletins.
Six overlapping circles represent the six houses of Ramsay St and the off street cast members.
When storylines for certain characters become tired, the scriptwriters simply move one family out and replace it with a new one.
As of 2004, ''Neighbours'' was regularly attracting just under a million viewers per episode.
These included a cameo from Clive James and an explosion, which destroyed the doctor's surgery in the Lassiter's complex.
In 2004, original cast member Stefan Dennis returned to ''Neighbours'' full-time as Paul Robinson.
Single father, Jim Robinson (Alan Dale) lived next door with his children, Paul (Stefan Dennis), Julie (Vikki Blanche), Scott (Darius Perkins) and Lucy (Kylie Flinker).
Network Ten and Channel 5 aired a documentary special titled ''Neighbours 30th: The Stars Reunite'', which featured interviews with current and former cast members, including Kylie Minogue, Jason Donovan and Guy Pearce, reflecting on their time on the show.
Michael Grade, the channel's then controller, was advised by his daughter to move the series to 5:35&nbsp;pm, as she and her friends kept missing it due to being at school, which took place from January 1988.
Repeats of the previous day's episode of ''Neighbours'' were formerly shown at 2:30 pm weekdays and are now shown at 11.00 am weekdays.
The same viewing period had shown an increase in ratings for ''Home and Away'', which was now averaging 1.4&nbsp;million viewers every night.
Watson then took his idea to the Seven Network, who commissioned the show, following the success of his other Seven Network soap opera, ''Sons and Daughters''.
One disc is dedicated to the character of Charlene.
On 25 October 2011, it was announced Bower would be leaving ''Neighbours'' in December 2011 to move into a new international role with FremantleMedia.
The theme tune to ''Neighbours'' was composed by Tony Hatch whose then wife, Jackie Trent, wrote the lyrics.
The search was similar to the ''Dolly'' magazine competition in Australia.
It was later confirmed that the show would be moving to digital channel, Eleven.
On 4 December 2013, it was confirmed that Jasek would be leaving ''Neighbours'' and Jason Herbison had been promoted to series producer.
''Neighbours'' has received a wide variety of awards and nominations throughout its run.
Since the show's inception, several spin-offs have been produced, including books, music, DVDs and internet webisodes.
After a couple of months, the show moved to 3:50 pm weekdays.
Bower said "Last week I saw episode 6,000.
In 2008, the UK broadcast moved to rival channel Channel 5 following the BBC's decision not to keep the show after being asked to pay £300m over eight years by FremantleMedia (three times the show's usual fee).
Watson proposed the idea of making a show that would focus on more realistic stories and portray teens and adults who talk openly to each other and solve their problems together.
A new retro-inspired theme tune sung by Garth Ploog debuted on 5 January 2015 as part of the show's 30th anniversary celebrations.
Other locations include Erinsborough High School, a garage, hospital, and the Lassiter's complex, which contains the Lassiter's Hotel, Waterhole bar, Harold's Store cafe, the lawyers office Rebecchi Law, and the police station.
The episodes marked only the third time that the show has filmed scenes outside of Victoria.
The first episode of each week begins with a trailer previewing the week's events.
In September 2014, the show featured a natural disaster storyline, in which a tornado descended on Erinsborough and Ramsay Street.
It was screened on BBC One from 1986 until 2008.
''Neighbours'' began going through a ratings decline in 2016, with episodes now averaging below 200,000 viewers.
The song has been voted the world's most recognised television theme song and the lyrics were quoted by John Smith, then British Shadow Chancellor, in a House of Commons debate on Government economic policy.
''Neighbours'' was created in the early-to-mid-1980s by Australian TV executive Reg Watson.
Viewing numbers for Network Ten that night were down across all programmes.
A July 2010 report showed figures had dropped 20%, from having 1.2&nbsp;million viewers in 1991 to a low of 618,000 in 2010.
Visual Playground once again created and produced the titles.
Seven decided to commission the show following the success of Watson's ''Sons and Daughters'', which aired on the network.
Daniel Bennett, the new head of drama at Network Ten, announced that the crux of the Ramsay Street story would go "back to basics" and follow a less sensational path than of late with the emphasis on family relations and suburban reality.
The series primarily centres on the residents of Ramsay Street, a short cul-de-sac, and its neighbouring area, the Lassiters complex, which includes a bar, hotel, cafe, police station, lawyers' office and park.
It was first broadcast on the Seven Network on 18 March 1985.
The titles made their debut on 18 March 2010.
Ramsay Street is now a mixture of older characters like Paul Robinson (Stefan Dennis), Toadfish Rebecchi (Ryan Moloney),  Stephanie Scully (Carla Bonner),  and Karl (Alan Fletcher) and Susan Kennedy (Jackie Woodburne), as well as newer characters such as the Canning and Brennan families.
Tours to the cul-de-sac run throughout the year.
''Neighbours'' has since become the longest running drama series in Australian television and in 2005, it was inducted collectively into the Logie Hall of Fame.
In 1996, Kimberley Davies, who played Annalise Hartman, quit the series.
Kate (Ashleigh Brewer), Harry (Will Moore) and Sophie Ramsay (Kaiya Jones) made their first appearances in May 2009.
In February 2009, it was announced that producers would be introducing a new generation of the Ramsay family to the show, over a decade after the family had last appeared.
When the show began in 1985, the first season was broadcast on the Seven Network, at 5:30&nbsp;pm in Sydney, at 6:00&nbsp;pm in Melbourne and Adelaide and at 7:00&nbsp;pm in Brisbane.
In Belgium Neighbours airs Monday till Friday at 5.35pm.
A writer for Visual Playground explained that they "invented a bokeh graphic device that uses the play of light in a formation to locate the houses in the cul-de-sac.
A new retro-inspired logo, theme tune and opening titles debuted on 5 January 2015 as part of the show's 30th anniversary celebrations.
A new set of opening titles made their debut on 15 April 2013, along with a new version of the theme tune.
A photo booth montage was played and characters were seen rowing boats, walking along piers and eating outside.
In Kenya, ''Neighbours'' is broadcast on the KTN network Monday to Friday at 12:30&nbsp;pm with an omnibus on Sunday mornings.
On 17 July 2009, during the aftermath of the Parker family's car accident and the dramatic death of Bridget Parker (Eloise Mignon), ''Neighbours'' achieved higher ratings than ''Home And Away''.
Watson said that he wanted to show three families living in a small street, who are friends.
He added "We moved too far into event-driven stories rather than the character-driven stories that made ''Neighbours'' what it is".
Pin Oak Court, in Vermont South, is the real cul-de-sac that has doubled for Ramsay Street since 1985.
Ten began screening the series with episode 171 on 20 January 1986.
In September 2009, Susan Bower announced that ''Neighbours'' would introduce new opening titles for the 25th anniversary and they would feature a bit of "bling".
On 24 January 2011, ''Neighbours'' achieved 330,000 viewers and three days later 355,000 viewers tuned in, becoming the show's highest rating yet on Eleven at the time.
It may have had something to do with the fact we'd picked up ''Sale of the Century'' with Tony Barber in 1980 and it was doing huge business, so we didn't have a pressing need for a five-night-a-week show."
All the circles together reinforce the sense of community that makes up ''Neighbours''."
The first episode was broadcast on 18 March 1985 and reviews for the show were favourable.
Early cameos included former Skyhooks musician Red Symons, Warwick Capper, Molly Meldrum, Chris Lowe of Pet Shop Boys, and Clive James.
Repeat episodes of ''Neighbours'' episodes from the 1988–1991 period were broadcast between 2000 and June 2003 on Network Ten.
That version of the theme tune began airing from 15 April 2013.
Throughout its run, ''Neighbours'' has featured several guest appearances from celebrities playing themselves or characters.
Although successful in Melbourne, ''Neighbours'' underperformed in the Sydney market and struggled for months before Seven cancelled it.
His mother-in-law, Helen Daniels (Anne Haddy) also lived with him.
They added that the show's production model had been in place since 1985 and that it was time to evolve it.
UK viewers are able to catch up with episodes with Channel 5's video catch up service, Demand 5, similar to the catch up service in Australia.
In 2008, it moved to the UK's Channel 5.
In late 2010, TV Tonight reported that ''Neighbours'' would reduce crew operations in 2011 so production could be upgraded.
The relaunch failed to attract more viewers in Australia.
During the 2000s and 2010s, the series featured appearances from The Wiggles, Shane Warne, former Spice Girls singer Emma Bunton, ''Little Britain''s Matt Lucas and David Walliams, The Veronicas, André Rieu, wrestler Dave Batista, Lily Allen and Paula Abdul.
In 1985, ''Neighbours'' started out with three families created by Watson – the Ramsays, the Robinsons and the Clarkes.
He was the second ongoing homosexual character overall, following recurring character Lana Crawford's (Bridget Neval) introduction in 2004.
In 2002, ''Neighbours'' debuted an all new style of titles with a remixed version of the theme tune.
All of the houses featured are real and the residents allow the production to shoot external scenes in their yards.
''Neighbours'' began with three families created by Watson – the Ramsays, the Robinsons and the Clarkes.
In February 2013, Network Ten and FremantleMedia announced that they were searching across Australia and the United Kingdom for a singer to record a new version of the theme tune.
From mid-2016, the show also began airing every week-night on Nickelodeon as part of their Nick at Nite programming block, broadcasting the same episode that was earlier seen on Channel 5.
''Neighbours'' moved to Eleven on 11 January 2011, the channel's launch day.
As of October 2014, five box sets have been released.
The show then started attracting larger audiences, peaking in 1990 at over 21 million.
The titles were created by Visual Playground, who shot a series of scenes featuring the cast in settings familiar to viewers.
''Neighbours'' has also won three Australian Writers' Guild awards.
The show's highest figure of the week was 590,000 on 25 October 2010.
The episode featuring Scott and Charlene's wedding achieved the highest ever ratings for ''Neighbours'' and it became one of the highest rating soap episodes ever in Australia.
On 4 February 2009, ''Neighbours''' 5:30&nbsp;pm showing was seen by 1.94&nbsp;million viewers and by 2012, the teatime showing had averaged 1&nbsp;million viewers.
The show's transmission in other areas was varied and many regional channels declined to purchase the series.
It was then that they introduced the characters of Stonefish Rebecchi played by Anthony Engelman and Serendipity Gottlieb played by Raelee Hill.
Watson, who worked for the Grundy production company, decided to make his show appeal to both Australia and Britain.
''Neighbours'' made its debut on BBC1 on 27 October 1986 starting with the pilot episode.
The episodes were four weeks behind the Australian broadcast.
The 'younger' shows, like ''Neighbours'', will go on to one of Ten's digital channels".
The sequences often feature the characters in family or domestic groups.
On 14 March 2011, ''The Australian'' reported that ''Neighbours'' has become the first television show available to watch on a free iPhone application.
''Neighbours vs Zombies'' was launched in October 2014 and featured the returns of many former characters who had previously died in the show.
In 1988 ''Neighbours'' became the only television show to have its entire cast flown over to the UK to make an appearance at the Royal Variety Performance in front of the Queen.
It soon gained a loyal audience and the show became very popular within the student market and was watched by 16&nbsp;million viewers.
The episode, which had already aired in Australia, marked the first time an Australian show recorded extra scenes for a UK broadcaster.
The titles showed characters together in groups according to gender, a change from the previous ones which were taken outside.
In August 2009, ''Neighbours'' introduced a new titles format.
When the show began on Ten it initially attracted low ratings, so the Network worked hard to publicise the series.
On 13 June 2011, ''Neighbours'' was watched by 455,000 viewers, making it the highest rating show on digital multichannels that night and breaking its previous ratings record on the channel.
He further added, "We're all trying to figure out what we need to do in order to keep our audience."
On 20 January, the ratings fell to a low of 426,000, making it one of the programme's lowest ever ratings in Australia.
Max Ramsay (Francis Bell), his wife Maria (Dasha Blahova) and their sons Shane (Peter O'Brien) and Danny (David Clencie) lived at No.24 Ramsay Street.
''Neighbours'' is on air for approximately forty-four weeks per year.
The new network had to build replica sets when it took over production after Seven destroyed the original sets to prevent the rival network obtaining them.
In the United States, ''Neighbours'' premiered on KCOP-TV in Los Angeles on 3 June 1991 at 5:30&nbsp;pm weekdays.
By the end of 2007 it was reported that producers had hoped the ''Neighbours'' revamp would push the ratings up to between 900,000 to 1&nbsp;million an episode.
As Stefan Dennis – Paul Robinson – was in the first episode 25 years ago, it was decided that his character play a most important role in this very special event".
In 2015, Network Ten had broadcast an encore of the previous day's episode at 7:00 am weekdays.
