Armstrong threatened legal action against Sizemore unless he returned the hair or donated the proceeds to a charity of Armstrong's choosing.
The mission was planned to the minute, with the majority of photographic tasks to be performed by Armstrong with a single Hasselblad camera.
Dick Day, with whom Armstrong had worked closely at Edwards, saw the late arrival of the application and slipped it into the pile before anyone noticed.
These criticisms were unfounded; no malfunction procedures were written and it was possible to turn on only both RCS rings, not just one or the other.
On his first day at Edwards, Armstrong was tasked his first assignments, which were to pilot chase planes during releases of experimental aircraft from modified bombers.
See was scheduled to command ''Gemini 9'', but died in a T-38 crash in 1966 that also took the life of crewmate Charles Bassett.
John Glenn, the first American to orbit Earth, recalled Armstrong's legendary humility.
A 2016 peer-reviewed study again concluded Armstrong had included the article.
Those who flew for the Air Force tended to have a different opinion, especially people like Yeager and Pete Knight, who did not have engineering degrees.
In June 1961, daughter Karen was diagnosed with a malignant tumor of the middle part of her brain stem; X-ray treatment slowed its growth, but her health deteriorated to the point where she could no longer walk or talk.
Armstrong found Ford's analysis "persuasive."
He applied at the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) High-Speed Flight Station at Edwards Air Force Base, which was later redesignated as the ‘‘NASA Neil A. Armstrong Flight Research Center’’ in 2014.
When he moved to Edwards Air Force Base, he lived in the bachelor quarters of the base, while Janet lived in the Westwood district of Los Angeles.
In June, he made his first jet carrier landing on  and was promoted the same week from Midshipman to Ensign.
In his autobiography, Yeager wrote that he knew the lake bed was unsuitable for landings after recent rains, but Armstrong insisted on flying out anyway.
After they re-entered the LM, the hatch was closed and sealed.
Without radio communication, Armstrong flew south to Nellis Air Force Base, past the control tower, and waggled his wings, the signal for a no-radio approach.
They were married on January 28, 1956, at the Congregational Church in Wilmette, Illinois.
Between 1991 and 1993, he hosted ''First Flights with Neil Armstrong'', an aviation history documentary series on A&E.
Armstrong and Butchart brought the aircraft into a nose-down alignment to increase speed, then launched the Skyrocket.
Armstrong's authorized biography, ''First Man: The Life of Neil A. Armstrong'', was published in 2005.
Senators John Glenn (D-OH, 1974–1999) and Harrison Schmitt (R-NM, 1977–1983)), Armstrong was approached by political groups from both parties, but declined all offers.
Armstrong's final task was to remind Aldrin to leave a small package of memorial items to deceased Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin and Vladimir Komarov, and ''Apollo&nbsp;1'' astronauts Gus Grissom, Ed White and Roger B. Chaffee.
In a post-flight press conference, he said that he decided on the words "just prior to leaving the LM lunar module."
Out of contact with the ground, the docked spacecraft began to roll, and Armstrong attempted to correct this with the Orbital Attitude and Maneuvering System (OAMS) of the Gemini spacecraft.
Most people don't realize how difficult the mission was.
We're breathing again.
His first assignment was to Fleet Aircraft Service Squadron&nbsp;7 at NAS San Diego (now known as NAS North Island).
At the time of their meeting, the four men did not know about the hatch consideration.
While making a low bombing run at about , Armstrong's F9F Panther was hit by anti-aircraft fire.
In the fall of 1979, Armstrong was working at his farm near Lebanon, Ohio.
After Armstrong served as backup commander for ''Apollo 8'', Slayton offered him the post of commander of ''Apollo&nbsp;11'' on December 23, 1968, as ''Apollo 8'' orbited the Moon.
The lawsuit was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount of money which Armstrong donated to Purdue.
According to the couple, there was no real courtship, and neither could remember the exact circumstances of their engagement, except that it occurred while Armstrong was working at the NACA's Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory.
In a 2010 interview, Armstrong explained that NASA limited his Moon walk to two hours because they were unsure how the spacesuits would handle the extreme temperature of the Moon.
He later said he "would hope that history would grant me leeway for dropping the syllable and understand that it was certainly intended, even if it was not said—although it might actually have been".
This lasted almost 18 months, during which he qualified for carrier landing aboard  and .
The group included Armstrong, Edmund Hillary, Hillary's son Peter, Steve Fossett, and Patrick Morrow, and arrived on April 6, 1985.
While preparing for the liftoff from the lunar surface, Armstrong and Aldrin discovered that, in their bulky spacesuits, they had broken the ignition switch for the ascent engine; using part of a pen, they pushed the circuit breaker in to activate the launch sequence.
Since the rod did not fully extend, and the flag was tightly folded and packed during the journey, the flag ended up with a slightly wavy appearance, as if there were a breeze.
Gene Kranz wrote, "the crew reacted as they were trained, and they reacted wrong because we trained them wrong."
He also flew the modified bombers, and on one of these missions had his first flight incident at Edwards.
As he jumped off of the back of his grain truck, his wedding ring caught in the wheel, tearing off the tip of his ring finger.
Ford and James R. Hansen, Armstrong's authorized biographer, presented these findings to Armstrong and NASA representatives, who conducted their own analysis.
After a ten-second pause, Duke acknowledged the landing with, "We copy you down, ''Eagle''."
"I was elated, ecstatic and extremely surprised that we were successful", he later said.
Armstrong's second and last spaceflight was as commander of Apollo 11, the first manned Moon landing mission in July 1969.
After Armstrong retired from NASA in 1971, he acted as a spokesman for several businesses.
observed people at the 2002 Reno Air Races still trying to get signatures, with one person even claiming, "If you shove something close enough in front of his face, he'll sign."
Bill Dana said Armstrong "had a mind that absorbed things like a sponge."
Analysis after the mission showed that at touchdown there were 45 to 50 seconds of propellant burn time left.
Following his graduation from Purdue, Armstrong decided to become an experimental research test pilot.
He flew past the landing field at Mach&nbsp;3 () at over  in altitude, and ended up  south of Edwards.
He was also an aerospace engineer, naval aviator, test pilot, and university professor.
Although he was reportedly recovering well, he developed complications in the hospital and died on August 25, in Cincinnati, Ohio.
After sufficient descent, he turned back toward the landing area, and barely managed to land without striking Joshua trees at the south end.
His mother later said that Armstrong's religious views caused her grief and distress in later life as she was more religious.
He was the second person in his family to attend college.
After design and manufacturing delays in the Lunar Module (LM), ''Apollo&nbsp;9'' and ''Apollo&nbsp;8'' swapped crews.
The first company to successfully approach him was Chrysler, for whom he appeared in advertising starting in January 1979.
Replacing Aldrin with Lovell would have made Lovell the Lunar Module Pilot, unofficially the lowest ranked member, and Armstrong could not justify placing Lovell, the commander of ''Gemini 12'', in the number&nbsp;3 position of the crew.
After his death, Armstrong was described, in a statement released by the White House, as "among the greatest of American heroes—not just of his time, but of all time".
The objective of ''Apollo&nbsp;11'' was to land safely rather than to touch down with precision on a particular spot.
Armstrong married his first wife Janet Shearon on January 28, 1956.
As an adult, he was recognized by the Boy Scouts of America with its Distinguished Eagle Scout Award and Silver Buffalo Award.
About 20&nbsp;minutes after the first step, Aldrin joined Armstrong on the surface and became the second human to set foot on the Moon, and the duo began their tasks of investigating how easily a person could operate on the lunar surface.
Armstrong thought they had a strong engineering division, plus they were in financial difficulty.
Armstrong graduated in 1955 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Aeronautical Engineering.
In 1986, President Ronald Reagan appointed him to the Rogers Commission which investigated the Space-shuttle ''Challenger'' disaster of that year.
Houston replied: "Thank you, Apollo&nbsp;11.
He flew to a height of over , (the highest he flew before Gemini 8), but the aircraft nose was held up too long during descent and the X-15 bounced off the atmosphere back up to .
Although the committee had no open positions, it forwarded his application to the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in Cleveland, where Armstrong began working in March 1955.
Early on, they unveiled a plaque commemorating their flight, and also planted the flag of the United States.
He performed the first docking of two spacecraft, with pilot David Scott.
So it didn't seem to me there was much point in thinking of something to say if we'd have to abort landing."
He later acted as a spokesman for other companies, including General Time Corporation and the Bankers Association of America.
In the months after the announcement that applications were being sought for the second group of NASA astronauts, Armstrong became more and more excited about the prospects of both the Apollo program and of investigating a new aeronautical environment.
On April 5, 1967, the same day the ''Apollo&nbsp;1'' investigation released its report on the fire, Armstrong assembled with 17 other astronauts for a meeting with Deke Slayton.
The first occurred during his sixth X-15 flight on April 20, 1962, while Armstrong tested a self-adjusting control system.
Many of the test pilots at Edwards praised Armstrong's engineering ability.
Aldrin and Armstrong celebrated with a brisk handshake and pat on the back before quickly returning to the checklist of tasks needed to ready the lunar module for liftoff from the Moon should an emergency unfold during the first moments on the lunar surface.
According to Eugene Cernan, Armstrong showed no reaction to the statement.
"He didn't feel that he should be out huckstering himself," the former Ohio senator told CNN.
A tribute was held in Armstrong's honor on September 13 at Washington National Cathedral, whose Space Window depicts the ''Apollo 11'' mission and holds a sliver of Moon rock amid its stained-glass panels.
At the end of the day, he was surprised to view delayed video of the launch of Soyuz 9—it had not occurred to Armstrong that the mission was taking place, even though Valentina Tereshkova had been his host and her husband, Andriyan Nikolayev, was on board.
After thinking it over for a day, Armstrong told Slayton he would stick with Aldrin, as he had no difficulty working with him and thought Lovell deserved his own command.
Knight said that pilot-engineers flew in a way that was "more mechanical than it is flying," and gave this as the reason why some pilot-engineers got into trouble: their flying skills did not come naturally.
Armstrong was the first American civilian in space, but the first civilian was Valentina Tereshkova of the Soviet Union, nearly three years earlier.
To give the astronauts experience with how the LM would fly on its final landing descent, NASA commissioned Bell Aircraft to build two Lunar Landing Research Vehicles, later augmented with three Lunar Landing Training Vehicles (LLTV).
Throughout the United States, there are more than a dozen elementary, middle and high schools named in his honor, and many places around the world have streets, buildings, schools, and other places named for Armstrong and/or Apollo.
President Jimmy Carter presented Armstrong the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978.
Deke Slayton called Armstrong on September 13, 1962, and asked whether he would be interested in joining the NASA Astronaut Corps as part of what the press dubbed "the New Nine"; without hesitation, Armstrong said yes.
Armstrong said he was curious to see what the North Pole looked like from ground level, as he'd only seen it from the Moon.
Michael Collins led prayers.
Armstrong tells a different version of events, where Yeager never tried to talk him out of it and they made a first successful landing on the east side of the lake.
Aldrin stated that he did so with the objective of facilitating re-docking with the CM should an abort become necessary, not realizing that it would cause the overflow condition.
Armstrong stated he would never make such a mistake, but after repeated listenings to recordings, he eventually admitted he must have dropped the "a".
He would eventually be awarded honorary doctorates by several universities.
Later from October 29–31, 1969 he and the rest of the Apollo 11 astronauts visited the city of Tehran, capital of Iran, where he met Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and the rest of the nation's royal family.
Bob Gilruth approved my decision."
It was the longest X-15 flight in both time and distance from the ground track.
The launch was on September 12, 1966, with Pete Conrad and Dick Gordon on board, who successfully completed the mission objectives, while Armstrong served as CAPCOM.
After helping to set up the Early Apollo Scientific Experiment Package, Armstrong went for a walk to what is now known as East Crater,  east of the LM, the greatest distance traveled from the LM on the mission.
It has since been claimed that acoustic analysis of the recording reveals the presence of the missing "a"; Peter Shann Ford, an Australia-based computer programmer, conducted a digital audio analysis and claims that Armstrong did, in fact, say "a man", but the "a" was inaudible due to the limitations of communications technology of the time.
A few weeks later on May 21, 1962, Armstrong was involved in what Edwards' folklore called the "Nellis Affair."
In attendance were Armstrong's Apollo 11 crewmates, Michael Collins and Buzz Aldrin; Eugene A. Cernan, the ''Apollo 17'' mission commander and last man to walk on the Moon; and former Senator and astronaut John Glenn, the first American to orbit the Earth.
Armstrong's call-up from the Navy arrived on January 26, 1949, requiring him to report to Naval Air Station Pensacola for flight training at age 18.
At Brooks Air Force Base at the end of June, Armstrong underwent a medical exam that many of the applicants described as painful and at times seemingly pointless.
The runway was again closed to clear it, and Bill Dana was sent to Nellis in a T-33 Shooting Star, but he almost landed long—and the Nellis base operations office decided that to avoid any further problems, it would be best to find the three NASA pilots ground transport back to Edwards.
You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue.
The press often asked Armstrong for his views on the future of spaceflight.
After returning to Purdue, he met Janet Elizabeth Shearon, who was majoring in home economics.
Along with Collins and Aldrin, Armstrong was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Richard Nixon.
For this reason, there was concern from mission control that the LM was running low on fuel.
He earned a student flight certificate on his 16th birthday, then soloed later in August; all before he had a driver's license.
Butchart and Armstrong were forced to shut down the number-three engine, due to damage, and the number-one engine, due to the torque it created.
Before becoming an astronaut, Armstrong was an officer in the U.S. Navy and served in the Korean War.
In 1969, folk songwriter and singer John Stewart recorded "Armstrong", a tribute to Armstrong and his first steps on the Moon.
The first was a code 1202 alarm, and even with their extensive training, neither Armstrong nor Aldrin was aware of what this code meant.
Armstrong had also publicly recalled his initial concerns about the ''Apollo&nbsp;11'' mission, when he had believed there was only a 50 percent chance of landing on the Moon.
Armstrong made seven flights in the X-15 from November 1960 to July 1962.
Slayton talked about the planned missions and named Armstrong to the backup crew for ''Apollo 9'', which at that stage was planned to be a medium Earth orbit test of the Lunar Module-Command/Service Module combination.
The ''Apollo 15'' commander, David Scott, spoke to the press; he recalled the ''Gemini 8'' mission with Armstrong when he spoke, possibly for the first time, about an incident in which glue spilled on his harness and prevented it from locking correctly minutes before the hatch had to be sealed or the mission aborted.
He ejected safely (later analysis suggested that if he had ejected half a second later, his parachute would not have opened in time).
In September 2012, the US Navy announced that the first  is named RV ''Neil Armstrong''.
He later flew the North American X-15 seven times; his penultimate flight reached an altitude of .
Flags were flown at half-staff on the day of Armstrong's funeral.
I'm sure that, if they didn't hear that, they'll get the word through the news.
Armstrong's colleague on the ''Apollo 11'' mission, Buzz Aldrin, said that he was "deeply saddened by the passing.
Use of Armstrong's name, image, and famous quote caused him problems over the years.
In the late 1950s, Armstrong applied at a local Methodist church to lead a Boy Scout troop.
On August 16, 1950, two weeks after his 20th birthday, Armstrong was informed by letter that he was a fully qualified Naval Aviator.
This mission was aborted after Armstrong used some of his reentry control fuel to prevent a dangerous spin caused by a stuck thruster, in the first in-flight space emergency.
During the landing, Armstrong's heart rate, at one point, reached 160 beats per minute, according to section 12-1 of the NASA Apollo 11 Mission Report.
He remained in the reserve for eight years, then resigned his commission on October 21, 1960.
The time spent on EVA during ''Apollo&nbsp;11'' was about two and a half hours, the shortest of any of the six Apollo lunar landing missions; each of the subsequent five landings were allotted gradually longer periods for EVA activities—the crew of ''Apollo&nbsp;17'', by comparison, spent over 22&nbsp;hours exploring the lunar surface.
The crew assignments for ''Gemini&nbsp;8'' were announced on September 20, 1965, with Armstrong as Command Pilot and David Scott as Pilot.
Armstrong then took part in Bob Hope's 1969 USO show, primarily to Vietnam.
The estimated global audience at that moment was 450&nbsp;million listeners, out of a then estimated world population of 3.631&nbsp;billion people.
In 1985, professional expedition leader Mike Dunn organized a trip to take the then "greatest explorers" to the North Pole.
A part of the confusion stems from the similarity between Armstrong's American residence in Lebanon, Ohio, and the country Lebanon which has a majority population of Muslims.
Armstrong decided the only course of action was to engage the Reentry Control System (RCS) and turn off the OAMS.
On November 18, 2010, at age 80, Armstrong said in a speech during the ''Science & Technology Summit'' in The Hague, Netherlands, that he would offer his services as commander on a mission to Mars if he were asked.
Slayton added, "Secondly, just on a pure protocol basis, I figured the commander ought to be the first guy out&nbsp;...
The Indonesian singer Suhaemi wrote a song called "''Gema Suara Adzan di Bulan''" ("The Resonant Sound of the Call to Prayer on the Moon") which described Armstrong's conversion; the song was discussed widely in various Jakarta news outlets in 1983.
Armstrong opposed the report's recommendation to re-design the service module's oxygen tanks, the source of the explosion.
As a research pilot, Armstrong served as project pilot on the F-100 Super Sabre A and C variants, F-101 Voodoo, and the Lockheed F-104A Starfighter.
Armstrong sued Hallmark Cards in 1994 after they used his name and a recording of the "one small step" quote in a Christmas ornament without permission.
Armstrong's stint at Cleveland lasted a couple of months, and by July 1955 he had returned to Edwards AFB for a new job.
To Armstrong it came as no surprise—the room was full of veterans of Project Gemini, the only people who could fly the lunar missions.
His father's last move was in 1944, back to Neil's birthplace, Wapakoneta, in Auglaize County.
The ship, christened on March 28, 2014, was launched on March 29, 2014, passed sea trials August 7, 2015 and delivered to the Navy on September 23, 2015.
He received the Air Medal for 20 combat missions, a Gold Star for the next 20, and the Korean Service Medal and Engagement Star.
He later completed graduate studies at the University of Southern California.
Along with spokesman duties, he also served on the board of directors of several companies, including Marathon Oil, Learjet, Cinergy (Cincinnati Gas & Electric Company), Taft Broadcasting, United Airlines, Eaton Corporation, AIL Systems and Thiokol.
Armstrong and the group spent the rest of the night drinking scotch and discussing what had happened.
The official job title he received at Cincinnati was University Professor of Aerospace Engineering.
On the second landing, they became stuck and according to Armstrong, Yeager was in fits of laughter.
'''Neil Alden Armstrong''' (August 5, 1930 – August 25, 2012) was an American astronaut and the first person to walk on the Moon.
While we mourn the loss of a very good man, we also celebrate his remarkable life and hope that it serves as an example to young people around the world to work hard to make their dreams come true, to be willing to explore and push the limits, and to selflessly serve a cause greater than themselves.
Successful applicants committed to two years of study, followed by two years of flight training and one year of service in the U.S. Navy as an aviator, then completion of the final two years of their bachelor's degree.
Armstrong's first wife, Janet, divorced him in 1994, after 38 years of marriage.
Milt Thompson said he was "the most technically capable of the early X-15 pilots."
The ''Justice of the Peace'' read from an unrepealed 400-year-old law that required him to hang any Armstrong found in the town.
Certainly appreciate that."
It was later thought that damaged wiring made one of the thrusters become stuck in the on position.
He had met his second wife, Carol Held Knight (b.
Nicknamed the "Flying Bedsteads", they simulated the Moon's one-sixth of Earth's gravity by using a turbofan engine to support the remaining five-sixths of the craft's weight.
In May 1970, Armstrong traveled to the Soviet Union to present a talk at the 13th annual conference of the International Committee on Space Research; after arriving in Leningrad from Poland, he traveled to Moscow where he met Premier Alexei Kosygin.
I know I am joined by millions of others in mourning the passing of a true American hero and the best pilot I ever knew.
Throughout the astronaut office there were a few people, most notably Walter Cunningham, who publicly stated that Armstrong and Scott had ignored the malfunction procedures for such an incident, and that Armstrong could have salvaged the mission if he had turned on only one of the two RCS rings, saving the other for mission objectives.
This ability to move around was suspected to be the reason why none of the ''Apollo 11'' crew suffered from space sickness, while members of previous crews did.
During these telephone calls, they learned of the deaths of Gus Grissom, Ed White and Roger Chaffee.
Since the early 1980s, Armstrong has been the subject of a hoax saying that he converted to Islam after hearing the ''adhan'', the Muslim call to prayer, while walking on the Moon.
The rendezvous and first-ever docking between two spacecraft was successfully completed after 6.5 hours in orbit.
Shortly after their flag planting, President Richard Nixon spoke to them by a telephone call from his office.
In February 1991, a year after his father had died, and nine months after the death of his mother, he suffered a mild heart attack while skiing with friends at Aspen, Colorado.
His college tuition was paid for under the Holloway Plan.
In return, Armstrong gave Wendt a ticket for a "space taxi" "good between two planets".
As they attempted a touch-and-go, the wheels became stuck and they had to wait for rescue.
Following the flight, President Lyndon B. Johnson asked Armstrong and his wife to take part in a 24-day goodwill tour of South America.
Eugene Cernan recalled Armstrong's low-fuel approach to the Moon: "When the gauge says empty we all know there's a gallon or two left in the tank!"
Armstrong then called on back-up pilot Pete Conrad to solve the problem, which he did, to continue the mission without stopping the countdown clock.
He was also accepted to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
In 2012, brother Dean Armstrong claimed that Neil had shown him a note with a draft of the line months before the launch, although historian Andrew Chaikin, who had interviewed the astronaut in 1988 for his book ''A Man on the Moon'', disputed that he had ever claimed coming up with the line spontaneously during the mission.
Mission rules dictated that once this system was turned on, the spacecraft would have to reenter at the next possible opportunity.
Their first son Eric was born in 1957, followed by daughter, Karen, in 1959.
Based on the normal crew rotation scheme, Armstrong would command ''Apollo&nbsp;11''.
In 1947, at age 17, Armstrong began studying aeronautical engineering at Purdue University.
He misjudged his altitude, and also did not realize that the landing gear had not fully extended.
The flag used on this mission had a metal rod to hold it horizontal from its pole.
Purdue University announced in October 2004 that its new engineering building would be named ''Neil Armstrong Hall of Engineering'' in his honor; the building cost $53.2&nbsp;million and was dedicated on October 27, 2007, during a ceremony at which Armstrong was joined by fourteen other Purdue Astronauts.
Armstrong and his former crewmates received the Congressional Gold Medal in 2009.
The selections were kept secret until three days later, although newspaper reports had been circulating since earlier that year that he would be selected as the "first civilian astronaut."
At that altitude, the air is so thin that aerodynamic surfaces have almost no effect.
A press conference held on April 14, 1969, gave the design of the LM cabin as the reason for Armstrong's being first; the hatch opened inwards and to the right, making it difficult for the lunar module pilot, on the right-hand side, to exit first.
A textile worker and amateur parachutist, she was aboard Vostok 6 when it launched on June 16, 1963.
1945), in 1992 at a golf tournament, where they were seated together at the breakfast table.
He also flew the Bell X-1B, Bell X-5, North American X-15, F-105 Thunderchief, F-106 Delta Dart, B-47 Stratojet, KC-135 Stratotanker, and was one of eight elite pilots involved in the paraglider research vehicle program (Paresev).
He sat in the right-hand pilot seat while the left-hand seat commander, Stan Butchart, flew the B-29.
