He was fond of Indian cuisine, and had a lifelong interest in archaeology and boxing.
Operating through a cell structure, MK planned to carry out acts of sabotage that would exert maximum pressure on the government with minimum casualties; they sought to bomb military installations, power plants, telephone lines, and transport links at night, when civilians were not present.
In 1969, an escape plan for Mandela was developed by Gordon Bruce, but it was abandoned after the conspiracy was infiltrated by an agent of the South African Bureau of State Security (BOSS), who hoped to see Mandela shot during the escape.
Despite maintaining a low profile during the event due to ill-health, Mandela made his final public appearance during the World Cup closing ceremony, where he received much applause.
He was repeatedly arrested for seditious activities and was one of the activists unsuccessfully prosecuted in the 1956 Treason Trial.
Soon after, Mandela and de Klerk were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in Norway.
Initially classified as the lowest grade of prisoner, Class D, he was permitted one visit and one letter every six months, although all mail was heavily censored.
They had first met in July 1990 when she was still in mourning, but their friendship grew into a partnership, with Machel accompanying him on many of his foreign visits.
In Cuba, he met President Castro, whom he had long admired, with the two becoming friends.
He could be stern and demanding of his children, although he was more affectionate with his grandchildren.
Encouraging foreign countries to support sanctions against the apartheid government, in France he was welcomed by President François Mitterrand, in Vatican City by Pope John Paul II, and in the United Kingdom by Thatcher.
Recovering from tuberculosis exacerbated by the dank conditions in his cell, in December 1988 Mandela was moved to Victor Verster Prison near Paarl.
Sisulu secured him a job as an articled clerk at law firm Witkin, Sidelsky and Eidelman, a company run by a liberal Jew, Lazar Sidelsky, who was sympathetic to the ANC's cause.
In late 1994, he attended the 49th conference of the ANC in Bloemfontein, at which a more militant national executive was elected, among them Winnie Mandela; although she expressed an interest in reconciling, Nelson initiated divorce proceedings in August 1995.
On 13 April 1992, Mandela publicly announced his separation from Winnie.
Sampson commented that even during his life, this myth had become "so powerful that it blurs the realities", converting Mandela into "a secular saint".
Critics like Edwin Cameron accused Mandela's government of doing little to stem the HIV/AIDS pandemic in the country; by 1999, 10% of South Africa's population were HIV positive.
He was met by "seven eminent persons", an international delegation sent to negotiate a settlement, but Botha's government refused to co-operate, in June calling a state of emergency and initiating a police crackdown on unrest.
She turned down Mandela's first marriage proposal, wanting to retain some independence and dividing her time between Mozambique and Johannesburg.
Mandela hoped to resolve the long-running dispute between Libya, and the US and Britain, over bringing to trial the two Libyans, Abdelbaset al-Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah Fhimah, who were indicted in November 1991 and accused of sabotaging Pan Am Flight 103.
Conditions at Pollsmoor were better than at Robben Island, although Mandela missed the camaraderie and scenery of the island.
He attempted to overcome the 'Two China Problem' by extending diplomatic recognition to both the People's Republic of China (PRC), who were growing as an economic force, and Taiwan, who were already longstanding investors in the South African economy.
He retained some involvement in international affairs.
Intending to gain skills needed to become a privy councillor for the Thembu royal house, in 1933 Mandela began his secondary education at Clarkebury Methodist High School, Engcobo, a Western-style institution that was the largest school for black Africans in Thembuland.
Following the murder of ANC activist Chris Hani, Mandela made a publicised speech to calm rioting, soon after appearing at a mass funeral in Soweto for Tambo, who had died of a stroke.
Mandela stated that they chose sabotage because it was the least harmful action, did not involve killing, and offered the best hope for racial reconciliation afterwards; he nevertheless acknowledged that should this have failed then guerrilla warfare might have been necessary.
Bush, addressed both Houses of Congress and visited eight cities, being particularly popular among the African-American community.
He attacked the US more generally, asserting that it had committed more "unspeakable atrocities" across the world than any other nation, citing the atomic bombing of Japan; this attracted international controversy, although he later reconciled his relationship with Blair.
Mandela was a private person who often concealed his emotions and confided in very few people.
The newly elected National Assembly's first act was to formally elect Mandela as South Africa's first black chief executive.
Mandela was widely considered a charismatic leader, with biographer Mary Benson describing him as having been "a born mass leader who could not help magnetizing people".
Approximately 90 representatives of foreign states travelled to South Africa to attend memorial events.
At night, he worked on his LLB degree which he was obtaining from University of London through a correspondence course with Wolsey Hall, Oxford, but newspapers were forbidden, and he was locked in solitary confinement on several occasions for possessing smuggled news clippings.
When this proved ineffective, he spoke out publicly against Mugabe in 2007, asking him to step down "with residual respect and a modicum of dignity."
In April 1952, Mandela began work at the H.M. Basner law firm, which was owned by a communist, although his increasing commitment to work and activism meant he spent less time with his family.
He was appointed patron of the multi-racial United Democratic Front (UDF), founded to combat reforms implemented by South African President P. W. Botha.
In 1996, the RDP was replaced with a new policy, Growth, Employment and Redistribution (GEAR), which maintained South Africa's mixed economy but placed an emphasis on economic growth through a framework of market economics and the encouragement of foreign investment; many in the ANC derided it as a neo-liberal policy that did not undermine social inequality, no matter how Mandela defended it.
His wife was rarely able to visit, being regularly imprisoned for political activity, and his daughters first visited in December 1975; Winnie got out of prison in 1977 but was forcibly settled in Brandfort, still unable to visit him.
Only free men can negotiate.
He agreed to do so on the conditions that all political prisoners be released, that Zulu traditional weapons be banned, and that Zulu hostels would be fenced off, the latter two measures intended to prevent further Inkatha attacks; de Klerk reluctantly agreed.
His public speeches were presented in a formal, stiff manner, and often consisted of clichéd set phrases.
He strongly opposed the 1999 NATO intervention in Kosovo and called it an attempt by the world's powerful nations to police the entire world.
In April 1982, Mandela was transferred to Pollsmoor Prison in Tokai, Cape Town along with senior ANC leaders Walter Sisulu, Andrew Mlangeni, Ahmed Kathrada, and Raymond Mhlaba; they believed that they were being isolated to remove their influence on younger activists at Robben Island.
Though attending Christian Sunday services, Mandela studied Islam.
Conversely, the biographer David Jones Smith stated that Mandela "embraced communism and communists" in the late 1950s and early 1960s, while the historian Stephen Ellis found evidence that Mandela had been an active member of the South African Communist Party.
Makgatho's son, Mandla Mandela, became chief of the Mvezo tribal council in 2007.
He also synthesized both counter-cultural and hegemonic views, for instance by drawing upon ideas from Afrikaner nationalism.
He believed that the ANC should form an armed group to channel some of this violence in a controlled direction, convincing both ANC leader Albert Luthuli – who was morally opposed to violence – and allied activist groups of its necessity.
The event was attended by 4,000 guests, including world leaders from disparate backgrounds.
In 1994, free healthcare was introduced for children under six and pregnant women, a provision extended to all those using primary level public sector health care services in 1996.
When the charter was adopted at a June 1955 conference in Kliptown, attended by 3,000 delegates, police cracked down on the event, but it remained a key part of Mandela's ideology.
Under pressure from an international lobby, multinational banks stopped investing in South Africa, resulting in economic stagnation.
Mandela was a practical politician, rather than an intellectual scholar or political theorist.
Boehmer described him as "a totem of the totemic values of our age: toleration and liberal democracy" and "a universal symbol of social justice".
Emphasising personal forgiveness and reconciliation, he announced that "courageous people do not fear forgiving, for the sake of peace."
He was raised in the Methodist denomination of Christianity, with the Methodist Church of Southern Africa claiming that he retained his allegiance to them throughout his life.
The second was Anthony Sampson's ''Mandela'', published in 1999.
A prisoner cannot enter into contracts."
He encouraged black South Africans to get behind the previously hated national rugby team, the Springboks, as South Africa hosted the 1995 Rugby World Cup.
The democratic process was threatened by the Concerned South Africans Group (COSAG), an alliance of far-right Afrikaner parties and black ethnic-secessionist groups like Inkatha; in June 1993, the white supremacist Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging (AWB) attacked the Kempton Park World Trade Centre.
Staying at the home of Desmond Tutu, in the following days Mandela met with friends, activists, and press, giving a speech to an estimated 100,000 people at Johannesburg's Soccer City.
Although considering Mandela a dangerous "arch-Marxist", in February 1985 Botha offered him a release from prison on condition that he "unconditionally rejected violence as a political weapon".
Mandela began studying law at the University of the Witwatersrand, where he was the only black African student in the faculty.
Although he had friends connected to the African National Congress (ANC) and the anti-imperialist movement who wanted South Africa to be independent of the British Empire, Mandela avoided any involvement with the movement, and became a vocal supporter of the British war effort when the Second World War broke out.
Senator Barack Obama.
He also studied Afrikaans, hoping to build a mutual respect with the warders and convert them to his cause.
In August, one charge was dropped, and in October the prosecution withdrew its indictment, submitting a reformulated version in November which argued that the ANC leadership committed high treason by advocating violent revolution, a charge the defendants denied.
Castro visited in 1998 to widespread popular acclaim, and Mandela met Gaddafi in Libya to award him the Order of Good Hope.
At the time he nevertheless considered the European colonialists not as oppressors but as benefactors who had brought education and other benefits to southern Africa.
Although Mbeki had not been his first choice for the job, Mandela grew to rely heavily on him throughout his presidency, allowing him to organise policy details.
In the United States, he met President George H.W.
Most early MK members were white communists who were able to hide Mandela in their homes; after hiding in communist Wolfie Kodesh's flat in Berea, Mandela moved to the communist-owned Liliesleaf Farm in Rivonia, there joined by Raymond Mhlaba, Slovo, and Bernstein, who put together the MK constitution.
Dominated by the National Party and ANC, little negotiation was achieved.
Mandela and his co-accused were transferred from Pretoria to the prison on Robben Island, remaining there for the next 18 years.
One of Ngubengcuka's sons, named Mandela, was Nelson's grandfather and the source of his surname.
From 1967, prison conditions improved; black prisoners were given trousers rather than shorts, games were permitted, and the standard of their food was raised.
In September 1970, he met British Labour Party MP Dennis Healey.
He later stated that he experienced no epiphany, but that he "simply found himself doing so, and could not do otherwise."
Aged 76, he faced various ailments, and although exhibiting continued energy, he felt isolated and lonely.
ANC prisoners elected him to their four-man "High Organ" along with Sisulu, Govan Mbeki, and Raymond Mhlaba, and he involved himself in a group representing all political prisoners on the island, Ulundi, through which he forged links with PAC and Yu Chi Chan Club members.
In April 1959, Africanists dissatisfied with the ANC's united front approach founded the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC); Mandela disagreed with the group's racially exclusionary views, describing them as "immature" and "naïve".
Commenting on communism, he later stated that he "found himself strongly drawn to the idea of a classless society which, to his mind, was similar to traditional African culture where life was shared and communal."
Senator Hillary Clinton and President George W. Bush and first met then-U.S.
Found guilty of "statutory communism", a term that the government used to describe most opposition to apartheid, their sentence of nine months' hard labour was suspended for two years.
He advocated the ultimate establishment of a classless society, with Sampson describing him as "openly opposed to capitalism, private land-ownership and the power of big money".
With the election set for 27 April 1994, the ANC began campaigning, opening 100 election offices and orchestrating People's Forums across the country, at which Mandela could appear, as a popular figure with great status among black South Africans.
Mandela headed a Government of National Unity dominated by the ANC – which alone had no experience of governance – but containing representatives from the National Party and Inkatha.
The ANC took over the cabinet positions formerly held by the Nationalists, with Mbeki becoming sole Deputy President.
Concerns were raised that the personal respect and authority he accrued were in contrast to the ideals of democracy that he promoted.
Thatcher attracted international attention for describing the ANC as "a typical terrorist organisation" in 1987, although she later called on Botha to release Mandela.
Disguised as a chauffeur, Mandela travelled the country incognito, organising the ANC's new cell structure and the planned mass stay-at-home strike.
After the Afrikaner minority government of the National Party established apartheid—a system of racial segregation that privileged whites—he was appointed President of the ANC's Transvaal branch, rising to prominence for his involvement in the 1952 anti-apartheid Defiance Campaign and the 1955 Congress of the People.
One biographer considered him "a modern democratic hero", while his popularity had resulted in a cult of personality building up around him.
Mandela's international fame had emerged during his incarceration in the 1980s, when he became the world's most famous prisoner, a symbol of the anti-apartheid cause, and an icon for millions who embraced the ideal of human equality.
Government financial reserves were nearly depleted, with a fifth of the national budget being spent on debt repayment, meaning that the extent of the promised Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) was scaled back, with none of the proposed nationalisation or job creation.
Concerned that COSAG would undermine the election, particularly in the wake of the conflict in Bophuthatswana and the Shell House Massacre – incidents of violence involving the AWB and Inkatha, respectively – Mandela met with Afrikaner politicians and generals, including P. W. Botha, Pik Botha and Constand Viljoen, persuading many to work within the democratic system, and with de Klerk convinced Inkatha's Buthelezi to enter the elections rather than launch a war of secession.
In 1952, the ANC began preparation for a joint Defiance Campaign against apartheid with Indian and communist groups, founding a National Voluntary Board to recruit volunteers.
The headmaster emphasised the superiority of English culture and government, but Mandela became increasingly interested in native African culture, making his first non-Xhosa friend, a speaker of  Sotho, and coming under the influence of one of his favourite teachers, a Xhosa who broke taboo by marrying a Sotho.
He took a soft diplomatic approach to removing Sani Abacha's military junta in Nigeria but later became a leading figure in calling for sanctions when Abacha's regime increased human rights violations.
One of the PAC-organised demonstrations was fired upon by police, resulting in the deaths of 69 protesters in the Sharpeville massacre.
At the same time he rejected other aspects of their thought, such as the anti-white sentiment of many African nationalists.
Mandela spurned the offer, releasing a statement through his daughter Zindzi stating, "What freedom am I being offered while the organisation of the people ANC remains banned?
He declined a second presidential term and in 1999 was succeeded by his deputy, Thabo Mbeki.
Among the latter was his estranged wife, Winnie, who accused the ANC of being more interested in appeasing the white community than in helping the black majority.
Mandela's administration was also perceived as having failed to deal with the problem of corruption.
Publicly, Mandela became more vocal in criticising Western powers.
Mandela belonged to MtDNA haplogroup L0d (previously known as L1d), a subgroup of Haplogroup L0 (mtDNA).
The Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) began in December 1991 at the Johannesburg World Trade Center, attended by 228 delegates from 19 political parties.
The duo agreed on an interim constitution based on a liberal democratic model, guaranteeing separation of powers, creating a constitutional court, and including a U.S.-style bill of rights; it also divided the country into nine provinces, each with its own premier and civil service, a concession between de Klerk's desire for federalism and Mandela's for unitary government.
There he became involved in anti-colonial and African nationalist politics, joining the ANC and co-founding its Youth League.
Mandela traces his direct maternal ancestry to the San people.
Further problems were caused by the exodus of thousands of skilled white South Africans from the country, who were escaping the increasing crime rates, higher taxes, and the impact of positive discrimination toward blacks in employment.
In a surprise move, Botha invited Mandela to a meeting over tea in July 1989, an invitation Mandela considered genial.
The couple had two daughters, both named Makaziwe Mandela (born 1947 and 1954); the first died at the age of nine months, the second, known as "Maki", survived Mandela.
Under Mandela's presidency, welfare spending increased by 13% in 1996/97, 13% in 1997/98, and 7% in 1998/99.
By the late 1960s, Mandela's fame had been eclipsed by Steve Biko and the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM).
The first was Fatima Meer's ''Higher Than Hope'', which was heavily influenced by Winnie and thus placed great emphasis on Mandela's family.
Mandela was married three times, fathered six children, and had seventeen grandchildren and at least seventeen great-grandchildren.
His political thought nevertheless exhibited tensions between his support for liberal democracy and pre-colonial African forms of consensus decision making.
Mandela's second wife, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, also came from the Transkei area, although they too met in Johannesburg, where she was the city's first black social worker.
His first marriage was to Evelyn Ntoko Mase in October 1944; they divorced after 13 years in 1957 under the multiple strains of his adultery and constant absences, devotion to revolutionary agitation, and the fact that she was a Jehovah's Witness, a religion requiring political neutrality.
In 1947, Mandela was elected to the executive committee of the ANC's Transvaal Province branch, serving under regional president C. S. Ramohanoe.
Botha's National Party government had permitted Coloured and Indian citizens to vote for their own parliaments, which had control over education, health, and housing, but black Africans were excluded from the system; like Mandela, the UDF saw this as an attempt to divide the anti-apartheid movement on racial lines.
Responding to the unrest, the government implemented state of emergency measures, declaring martial law and banning the ANC and PAC, while in March they arrested Mandela and other activists, imprisoning them for five months without charge in the unsanitary conditions of the Pretoria Local prison.
Mandela was heterosexual, with biographer Fatima Meer stating that he was "easily tempted" by women.
He used the event to criticise the "narrow, chauvinistic interests" of the Israeli government in stalling negotiations to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and urged India and Pakistan to negotiate to end the Kashmir conflict, for which he was criticised by both Israel and India.
At the ANC national conference of December 1951, he continued arguing against a racially united front, but was outvoted.
Instead, he devoted his spare time to gardening and reading until he resumed his LLB degree studies in 1980.
In describing his life, Mandela stated, "I was not a messiah, but an ordinary man who had become a leader because of extraordinary circumstances."
In September 1953, Andrew Kunene read out Mandela's "No Easy Walk to Freedom" speech at a Transvaal ANC meeting; the title was taken from a quote by Indian independence leader Jawaharlal Nehru, a seminal influence on Mandela's thought.
The first biography of Mandela was authored by Mary Benson, based on brief interviews with him that she had conducted in the 1960s.
Baptised a Methodist, Mandela was given the English forename of "Nelson" by his teacher.
Between 2005 and 2013, Mandela, and later his family, were embroiled in a series of legal disputes regarding money held in family trusts for the benefit of his descendants.
In December, Mandela was given a six-month ban from attending meetings or talking to more than one individual at a time, making his Transvaal ANC presidency impractical, and during this period the Defiance Campaign petered out.
However, under pressure from the PRC, in November 1996 he cut recognition of Taiwan, and in May 1999 paid an official visit to Beijing.
He was known for his ability to find common ground with very different communities.
Retaining his Houghton home, he also had a house built in his home village of Qunu, which he visited regularly, walking around the area, meeting with locals, and judging tribal disputes.
He stayed with a cousin in George Goch Township, who introduced Mandela to realtor and ANC activist Walter Sisulu.
Inspired by the region's economic boom, Mandela sought greater economic relations with East Asia, in particular with Malaysia, although this was scuppered by the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
The ANC was also victorious in seven provinces, with Inkatha and the National Party each taking another.
The other cabinet positions were taken by ANC members, many of whom – like Joe Modise, Alfred Nzo, Joe Slovo, Mac Maharaj and Dullah Omar – had long been comrades, although others, such as Tito Mboweni and Jeff Radebe, were much younger.
He spent much time trying to unify and build the ANC, appearing at a Johannesburg conference in December attended by 1600 delegates, many of whom found him more moderate than expected.
Isolated from non-political prisoners in Section B, Mandela was imprisoned in a damp concrete cell measuring  by , with a straw mat on which to sleep.
Various rumours have circulated suggesting that the authorities were tipped off with regard to Mandela's whereabouts, although Mandela himself gave these little credence.
By 1975, Mandela had become a Class A prisoner, allowing greater numbers of visits and letters; he corresponded with anti-apartheid activists like Mangosuthu Buthelezi and Desmond Tutu.
Arriving in Ethiopia, Mandela met with Emperor Haile Selassie I, and gave his speech after Selassie's at the conference.
He was replaced by Commander Willie Willemse, who developed a co-operative relationship with Mandela and was keen to improve prison standards.
Mandela took political ideas from other thinkers—among them Indian independence leaders like Gandhi and Nehru, African-American activists, and African nationalists like Nkrumah—and fitted them into the South African situation.
In January 1958, Oswald Pirow was appointed to prosecute the case, and in February the judge ruled that there was "sufficient reason" for the defendants to go on trial in the Transvaal Supreme Court.
According to Sampson, Mandela however never had "a strong religious faith", while Boehmer stated that Mandela's religious belief was "never robust".
Marks from making public appearances; unable to maintain his position, he recommended Mandela as his successor.
Mandela served 27 years in prison, initially on Robben Island, and later in Pollsmoor Prison and Victor Verster Prison.
Although a second daughter, Makaziwe Phumia, was born in May 1954, Mandela's relationship with Evelyn became strained, and she accused him of adultery.
In March 1956 he received his third ban on public appearances, restricting him to Johannesburg for five years, but he often defied it.
Although critics on the right denounced him as a communist terrorist and those on the radical left deemed him too eager to negotiate and reconcile with apartheid's supporters, he gained international acclaim for his activism.
It has been repeatedly suggested that Mandela would have preferred to develop a social democratic economy in South Africa but that this was not feasible as a result of the international political and economic situation during the early 1990s.
Mandela and de Klerk negotiated an end to apartheid and organised the 1994 multiracial general election in which Mandela led the ANC to victory and became President.
When Ramohanoe acted against the wishes of the committee by co-operating with Indians and communists, Mandela was one of those who forced his resignation.
Since the late 1980s, Mandela's image began to appear on a proliferation of items, among them "photographs, paintings, drawings, statues, public murals, buttons, t-shirts, refrigerator magnets, and more", items that have been characterised as "Mandela kitsch".
In 1989, Botha suffered a stroke, retaining the state presidency but stepping down as leader of the National Party, to be replaced by F. W. de Klerk.
Mandela enjoyed home life, welcoming his mother and his sister, Leabie, to stay with him.
Renowned for his mischievous sense of humour, he was known for being both stubborn and loyal, and at times exhibited a quick temper.
Mandela echoed Mbeki's calls for an "African Renaissance", and was greatly concerned with issues on the continent.
Entering a relationship and marrying in October 1944, they initially lived with her relatives until moving in to a rented house in the township of Orlando in early 1946.
While there, he was permitted many visitors and organised secret communications with exiled ANC leader Oliver Tambo.
When Mandela was about nine, his father came to stay at Qunu, where he died of an undiagnosed ailment which Mandela believed to be lung disease.
To continue his higher education, Mandela signed up to a University of South Africa correspondence course, working on his bachelor's degree at night.
He later stated that he did not join the Party because its atheism conflicted with his Christian faith, and because he saw the South African struggle as being racially-based rather than class warfare.
As widely expected, the ANC won a sweeping victory, taking 63% of the vote, just short of the two-thirds majority needed to unilaterally change the constitution.
De Klerk opposed the implementation of this constitution, and that month he and the National Party withdrew from the coalition government in protest, claiming that the ANC were not treating them as equals.
Jailed in Johannesburg's Marshall Square prison, Mandela was charged with inciting workers' strikes and leaving the country without permission.
Two authorised biographies were later produced by friends of Mandela.
In a speech marking the event, Mandela called for the rich to help the poor across the world.
Some voices in the ANC accused him of selling out for agreeing to enter negotiations with the apartheid government.
At a Durban rally on 22 June, Mandela addressed an assembled crowd of 10,000, initiating the campaign protests, for which he was arrested and briefly interned in Marshall Square prison.
Mandela also encouraged Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe to resign over growing human rights abuses in the country.
In June 2013, his lung infection worsened and he was rehospitalised in Pretoria in a serious condition.
Mandela was given an office in the newly purchased ANC headquarters at Shell House, Johannesburg, and moved into Winnie's large Soweto home.
Verbally and physically harassed by several white prison wardens, the Rivonia Trial prisoners spent their days breaking rocks into gravel, until being reassigned in January 1965 to work in a lime quarry.
His paternal ancestry is traced to the African Great Lakes region in East Africa.
Returning to Ethiopia, he began a six-month course in guerrilla warfare, but completed only two months before being recalled to South Africa.
Because Mandela was the king's child by a wife of the Ixhiba clan, a so-called "Left-Hand House", the descendants of his cadet branch of the royal family were morganatic, ineligible to inherit the throne but recognised as hereditary royal councillors.
After suffering from a prolonged respiratory infection, Mandela died on 5 December 2013 at the age of 95, at around 20:50 local time (UTC+2) at his home in Houghton, surrounded by his family.
In 1943, Mandela met Anton Lembede, an ANC member affiliated with the Africanist branch of African nationalism, which was virulently opposed to a racially united front against colonialism and imperialism or to an alliance with the communists.
In January 1995, Mandela heavily chastised him for awarding amnesty to 3,500 police officers just before the election, and later criticised him for defending former Minister of Defence Magnus Malan when the latter was charged with murder.
Retaining an interest in Libyan-UK relations, he visited Megrahi in Barlinnie prison and spoke out against the conditions of his treatment, referring to them as "psychological persecution".
Mandela praised the Commission's work, stating that it "had helped us move away from the past to concentrate on the present and the future".
Leading a broad coalition government which promulgated a new constitution, Mandela emphasised reconciliation between the country's racial groups and created the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate past human rights abuses.
Both his parents were illiterate, but being a devout Christian, his mother sent him to a local Methodist school when he was about seven.
His patrilineal great-grandfather, Ngubengcuka, was king of the Thembu people in the Transkeian Territories of South Africa's modern Eastern Cape province.
Gaining increasing influence in the ANC, Mandela and his cadres began advocating direct action against apartheid, such as boycotts and strikes, influenced by the tactics already employed by South Africa's Indian community.
In adopting this approach, Mandela's government adhered to the "Washington consensus" advocated by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
He was portrayed by Danny Glover in the 1987 HBO television film ''Mandela''.
Although the 1996 constitution allowed the president to serve two consecutive five-year terms, Mandela had never planned to stand for a second term in office.
In 1926, Gadla was also sacked for corruption, but Nelson was told that his father had lost his job for standing up to the magistrate's unreasonable demands.
To prevent the creation of martyrs, the Commission granted individual amnesties in exchange for testimony of crimes committed during the apartheid era.
The negotiations agreed that a multiracial general election would be held, resulting in a five-year coalition government of national unity and a constitutional assembly that gave the National Party continuing influence.
Mandela's 70th birthday in July 1988 attracted international attention, notably with a tribute concert at London's Wembley Stadium that was televised and watched by an estimated 200 million viewers.
Renewed international interest in his plight came in July 1978, when he celebrated his 60th birthday.
Mandela impressed them with his discussions of Afrikaner history, and the negotiations led to the Groot Schuur Minute, in which the government lifted the state of emergency.
