"What changes Neoplatonism is the transcendence of the First Principle."
It stands between the ''nous'' and the phenomenal world, and it is permeated and illuminated by the former, but it is also in contact with the latter.
Some works of Neoplatonism were attributed to Plato or Aristotle.
Cosimo subsequently appointed as head Marsilio Ficino, who proceeded to translate all Plato's works, the Enneads of Plotinus, and various other Neoplatonist works into Latin.
The pope banned his works because they were viewed as heretical - unlike Ficino, who managed to stay on the right side of the church.
Following St. John, Augustine's Logos "took on flesh" in Christ, in whom the logos was present as in no other man.
Eliot, among many more.
It was widely held that the soul possesses a "vehicle", accounting for the human soul's immortality and allowing for its return to the One after death.
It therefore occupies an intermediate position.
Some contemporary scholars, however, have taken issue with this assumption and have doubted that Neoplatonism constitutes a useful label.
So, too, evil is simply the absence of good.
It is simultaneously both being and thought, idea and ideal world.
They did not believe in an independent existence of evil.
Michael Psellos (1018–1078) a Byzantine monk, writer, philosopher, politician, and historian.
But, even there, it does not find the Highest, the One; it still hears a voice saying, "not we have made ourselves".
By assigning the First Principle to God, they are altering the definition to fit the definition of God determined by scripture.
After the closure, Neoplatonic and or secular philosophical studies continued in publicly funded schools in Alexandria.
The concept of "being" is derived by us from the objects of human experience and is an attribute of such objects, but the infinite, transcendent One is beyond all such objects and, therefore, is beyond the concepts which we can derive from them.
The last stage is reached when, in the highest tension and concentration, beholding in silence and utter forgetfulness of all things, it is able, as it were, to lose itself.
Porphyry is also known as an opponent of Christianity and as a defender of Paganism; of his Adversus Christianos (Against the Christians) in 15 books, only fragments remain.
An important feature that distinguishes Neoplatonism after Porphyry from earlier periods is that later Neoplatonists embraced a certain kind of spiritual exercise, called theurgy, as a means of developing the soul through a process called henosis.
Julian attempted to counteract Christianity by restoring and reforming pagan worship, using the Neoplatonism developed by Iamblichus to unify Hellenic worship in the empire.
Although it is unclear precisely when scholars began to disassociate the philosophy of the historical Plato from the philosophy of his Neoplatonic interpreters, they had clearly begun to do so at least as early as the first decade of the nineteenth century.
The legalization of Christianity by the Emperor Constantine had led to its widespread success within the Eastern Roman Empire and, to a lesser extent, the Western Roman Empire.
The university maintained an active philosophical tradition of Platonism and Aristotelianism, with the former being the longest unbroken Platonic school, running for close to two millennia until the 15th century In the Middle Ages, Neoplatonist ideas influenced Jewish thinkers, such as the Kabbalist Isaac the Blind, and the Jewish Neoplatonic philosopher Solomon ibn Gabirol, who modified it in the light of their own monotheism.
The Neoplatonists believed in the principle of reincarnation.
Islamic philosophers used the framework of Islamic mysticism in their interpretation of Neoplatonic writings and concepts.
They claim that merely marginal differences separate Plotinus' teachings from those of his immediate predecessors.
;The Language of Symbolic Allegory: "Mystical texts are often written in the allegorical language of tales."
Ammonius Saccas (birth unknown, death ca.
Hence, the soul must first pass through a spiritual curriculum.
"The greatest cluster of Neoplatonic themes is found in religious mystical writings, which in fact transform purely orthodox doctrines such as creation into doctrines such as emanationism, which allow for a better framework for the expression of Neoplatonic themes and the emergence of the mystical themes of the ascent and mystical union."
Augustine re-interpreted Aristotle and Plato in the light of early Christian thought.
Important figures that translated and shaped Islamic Neoplatonism were Avicenna (Ibn Sina), Ibn Arabi, al-Kindi, al-Farabi, and al-Himsi.
Although the revitalisation of Neoplatonism amongst Italian Renaissance thinkers such as Marsilio Ficino and Pico della Mirandola is perhaps more famous, Latin translations of Late Ancient Neoplatonic texts were first available in the Christian West much earlier, in the Middle Ages.
This eased the acceptance of Neoplatonic doctrines by Islamic philosophers.
Thought cannot attain to this, for thought reaches only to the ''nous'', and it itself is a kind of motion.
:Those who make Being, Nature, and Matter—including the gods known to us from classical religion.
While he was himself influenced by the teachings of classical Greek, Persian and Indian philosophy and Egyptian theology, his metaphysical writings later inspired numerous Christian, Jewish, Islamic and Gnostic metaphysicians and mystics over the centuries.
The term "Neoplatonism" implies that Plotinus' interpretation of Plato was so distinct from those of his predecessors that it should be thought to introduce a new period in the history of Platonism.
The Renaissance Platonist Marsilio Ficino, for instance, thought that the Neoplatonic interpretation of Plato was an authentic and accurate representation of Plato's philosophy.
into the works of Neoplatonism during the failed attempt to reconcile the East–West Schism at the council of Florence.
Porphyry's introduction (Isagoge) to Aristotle's ''Categoria'' was important as an introduction to logic, and the study of Aristotle became an introduction to the study of Plato in the late Platonism of Athens and Alexandria.
Plotinus (Greek: Πλωτῖνος) (c. 205 – c. 270) was a major Greco-Egyptian philosopher of the ancient world who is widely considered the father of Neoplatonism.
The efforts of Ficino and Pico to introduce Neoplatonic and Hermetic doctrines into the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church has recently been evaluated in terms of an attempted "Hermetic Reformation".
He was the last pagan Roman Emperor.
It is also a cornerstone of Neoplatonism to teach that all people return to the Source.
Neoplatonism has been referred to as orthodox Platonic philosophy by scholars like Professor John D. Turner; this reference may be due, in part, to Plotinus' attempt to refute certain interpretations of Platonic philosophy, through his Enneads.
In the nearly six centuries from Plato's time to Plotinus', there had been an uninterrupted tradition of interpreting Plato which had begun with Aristotle and with the immediate successors of Plato's academy and continued on through a period of Platonism which is now referred to as Middle Platonism.
The particular characteristic of Proclus' system is his insertion of a level of individual ones, called henads between the One itself and the divine Intellect, which is the second principle.
The most important forerunners of Neoplatonism are the Middle Platonists, such as Plutarch, and the Neopythagoreans, especially Numenius of Apamea.
There were three major reasons for the prominence of Neoplatonic influences in the Islamic world:
#Neoplatonism's mystical perspectives: Plotinus' system has similar content to Islamic mysticism, like Islamic Sufism.
Although the most pure and holy souls would dwell in the highest regions, the impure soul would undergo a purification, before descending again, to be reincarnated into a new body, perhaps into animal form.
He wrote many philosophical treatises such as ''De omnifaria doctrina''.
Things are good insofar as they exist; they are evil only insofar as they are imperfect, lacking some good which they should have.
The translations of the works which extrapolate the tenets of God in Neoplatonism present no major modification from their original Greek sources, showing the doctrinal shift towards monotheism.
Many other Christians were influenced by Neoplatonism, especially in their identifying the Neoplatonic One, or God, with Yahweh.
Between 1462 and 1469, Ficino translated these works into Latin, making them widely accessible, as only a minority of people could read Greek.
The commentaries of this group seek to harmonise Plato, Aristotle, and, often, the Stoa.
He wrote most of his philosophy during his time as a court politician at Constantinople in the 1030s and 1040s.
Islamic Neoplatonism differs from traditional Neoplatonism because of its incorporation of Islamic theology, most commonly through the change in definitions of the One and the First Principle.
They compared it to darkness, which does not exist in itself but only as the absence of light.
The lowest stage is that of the civil virtues, then follow the purifying, and last of all the divine virtues.
As a Neoplatonist, and later a Christian, Augustine believed that evil is a privation of good and that God is not material.
For Plotinus, the first principle of reality is an utterly simple, ineffable, unknowable subsistence which is both the creative source and the teleological end of all existing things.
If destitute of form and idea, it is evil; as capable of form, it is neutral.
Porphyry (Greek: Πορφύριος, c. A.D. 233– c. 309) was a Syrian Neoplatonist philosopher.
Plotinus believed the followers of Gnosticism had corrupted the original teachings of Plato and often argued against likes of Valentinus who, according to Plotinus, had given rise to doctrines of dogmatic theology with ideas such as that the Spirit of Christ was brought forth by a conscious god after the fall from Pleroma.
At Florence, Pletho met Cosimo de' Medici and influenced the latter's decision to found a new Platonic Academy there.
Instead, the most concise definition of Neoplatonism casts it as an historical term.
AD 265, Greek: Ἀμμώνιος Σακκᾶς) is a founder of Neoplatonism and the teacher of Plotinus.
He produced a biography of his teacher, Plotinus.
What Plotinus understands by the ''nous'' is the highest sphere accessible to the human ''mind'', while also being pure ''intellect'' itself.
As image, the ''nous'' corresponds perfectly to the One, but as derivative, it is entirely different.
He strongly influenced Early Medieval Christian Philosophy.
To the student of Greek philosophy, his commentaries are invaluable, as they contain many fragments of the older philosophers as well as of his immediate predecessors.
The human soul consists of a lower irrational soul and a higher rational soul (mind), both of which can be regarded as different powers of the one soul.
Perhaps the key subject in this was Logos.
Whether Neoplatonism is a meaningful or useful historical category is itself a central question concerning the history of the interpretation of Plato.
All things have force or potential (''dynamis'') as their essence.
Neoplatonism ostensibly survived in the Eastern Christian Church as an independent tradition and was reintroduced to the West by Plethon, an avowed pagan and opponent of the Byzantine Church, inasmuch as the latter, under Western scholastic influence, relied heavily upon Aristotelian methodology.
This world ought to be so pervaded by the soul that its various parts should remain in perfect harmony.
The soul, as a moving essence, generates the corporeal or phenomenal world.
It is only in a state of perfect passivity and repose that the soul can recognise and touch the primaeval Being.
And the reason for this state of things is that bodies rest on a substratum of matter.
Moslem philosophers changed the Neoplatonic characteristics of the One into those attributable to God as present in Islamic scripture, notably transferring the First Principle to God.
;The Way of Salvation: "Knowledge is embedded in the path of self-realization."
He is important in the history of mathematics because of his Life of Pythagoras and his commentary on Euclid's Elements, which Pappus used when he wrote his own commentary.
This is accomplished by the practice of virtue, which aims at likeness to God, and leads up to God.
Science fiction writer Philip K. Dick identified as a Neoplatonist and explores related mystical experiences and religious concepts in his theoretical work, compiled in The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick.
Plotinus refers to Thales in interpreting Logos as the principle of meditation, the interrelationship between the Hypostases (Soul, Spirit (nous) and the 'One').
Plotinus taught the existence of an ineffable and transcendent One, the All, from which emanated the rest of the universe as a sequence of lesser beings.
The religious philosophy of Plotinus for himself personally sufficed, without the aid of the popular religion or worship.
According to Plotinus, The One is not a conscious god with intent nor a godhead nor a conditioned existing entity of any kind, rather a requisite principle of totality which is also the source of ultimate wisdom.
It is an image - though a shadowy image - of the upper world, and the degrees of better and worse in it are essential to the harmony of the whole.
Porphyry stated in ''On the One School of Plato and Aristotle'', that Ammonius' view was that the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle were in harmony.
The Neoplatonist gods are omni-perfect beings and do not display the usual amoral behaviour associated with their representations in the myths.
As a Manichee, Augustine had held that evil has substantial being and that God is made of matter; when he became a Neoplatonist, he changed his views on these things.
On the one hand, it differentiates the philosophical doctrines of Plotinus and his successors from those of the historical Plato.
Transcendent and ineffable.
Plotinus doesn't believe in the idea of intelligent design of the universe by an omnipotent being.
Islamic philosophers adapted divine Intellect to reinforce scripture, in that God is a transcendent being, omnipresent and inalterable to the effects of creation.
He wrote widely on astrology, religion, philosophy, and musical theory.
Contemporary scholars often identify the German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher as an early thinker who took Plato's philosophy to be separate from that of his Neoplatonic interpreters.
Little is known of Ammonius Saccas other than that both Christians (see Eusebius, Jerome, and Origen) and pagans (see Porphyry and Plotinus) claimed him a teacher and founder of the Neoplatonic system.
However, Porphyry maintained, instead, that human souls were only reincarnated into other humans.
The earliest Christian philosophers, such as Justin and Athenagoras, who attempted to connect Christianity with Platonism, and the Christian Gnostics of Alexandria, especially Valentinus and the followers of Basilides, also mirrored elements of Neoplatonism, albeit without its rigorous self-consistency.
Passing trials advances one through stages until transcendence.
''De Mundo'', for instance, is thought not to be the work of a 'pseudo-Aristotle' though this remains debatable.
The civil virtues merely adorn the life, without elevating the soul.
A soul which has returned to the One achieves union with the cosmic universal soul and does not descend again, at least, not in this world period.
He famously said, "The gods have proclaimed Christ to have been most pious, but the Christians are a confused and vicious sect."
The demiurge (the ''nous'') is the energy, or ''ergon'' (does the work), which manifests or organises the material world into perceivability.
However, others have argued that the differentiation of Plato from Neoplatonism was the result of a protracted historical development that preceded Schleiermacher's scholarly work on Plato.
Plethon's Platonic revival, following the Council of Florence (1438–1439), largely accounts for the renewed interest in Platonic philosophy which accompanied the Renaissance.
#Availability of Neoplatonic texts: Arabic translations and paraphrases of Neoplatonic works were readily available to Moslem scholars greatly due to the availability of the Greek copies, in part, because the Muslims came to rule over some of the more important centres of Greek civilisation (Egypt and Syria).
''Nous'' is the most critical component of idealism, Neoplatonism being a pure form of idealism.
The most influential of these would be Origen, the pupil of Ammonius Saccas and the fifth-century author known as Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, (whose works were translated by John Scotus in the 9th century for the West) and proved significant for both the Eastern Orthodox and Western branches of Christianity.
Due to their belief being grounded in Platonic thought, the Neoplatonists rejected Gnosticism's vilification of Plato's demiurge, the creator of the material world or cosmos discussed in the Timaeus.
Julian (born c. 331 – died June 26, 363), was a Roman Emperor (361–363) of the Constantinian dynasty.
It must, first of all, return to itself.
Certain central tenets of Neoplatonism served as a philosophical interim for the Christian theologian Augustine of Hippo on his journey from dualistic Manichaeism to Christianity.
After bodily death, the soul takes up a level in the afterlife corresponding with the level at which it lived during its earthly life.
The One "cannot be any existing thing" and cannot be merely the sum of all such things (compare the Stoic doctrine of disbelief in non-material existence) but "is prior to all existents".
Simplicius of Cilicia (c. AD 530), a pupil of Damascius, is not known as an original thinker, but his remarks are thoughtful and intelligent, and his learning is prodigious.
So long as idea governs matter, or the soul governs the body, the world is fair and good.
Thinkers of this final period include Syrianus, Olympiodorus the Younger, Proclus and Damascius.
Beginning with the contemplation of corporeal things in their multiplicity and harmony, it then retires upon itself and withdraws into the depths of its own being, rising thence to the ''nous'', the world of ideas.
#Spatial and temporal proximity: "Plotinus and other Neoplatonists lived only a few centuries before the rise of Islam, and many of them were Egyptian Greeks."
The term "Neoplatonism" has a double function as a historical category.
In the Middle Ages, Neoplatonic ideas were integrated into the philosophical and theological works of many of the most important medieval Islamic, Christian, and Jewish thinkers.
The image and product of the motionless nous is the ''world-soul'', which, according to Plotinus, is immaterial like the ''nous''.
Porphyry says that on four occasions during the six years of their acquaintance, Plotinus attained to this ecstatic union with God.
But, in the actual phenomenal world, unity and harmony are replaced by strife or discord; the result is a conflict, a becoming and vanishing, an illusive existence.
Arabic scholars, like earlier Neoplatonic thinkers, read and philosophised the works of Plato and developed similar questions and conclusions.
Matter is the indeterminate: that with no qualities.
There are multiple ways to categorize the differences between the Neoplatonists according to their differing views, but one way counts three distinct phases in Neoplatonism after Plotinus: the work of his student Porphyry, that of Iamblichus and his school in Calchis, and the period in the fifth and sixth centuries, when the Academies in Alexandria and Athens flourished.
Various Arabic scholars and philosophers utilised the works of Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, and other Neoplatonist philosophers to evaluate, assess, and eventually adapt Neoplatonism to conform to the monotheistic constraints of Islam.
God is certainly in the truest sense nothing but the primaeval Being who is revealed in a variety of emanations and manifestations.
That is the office of the purifying virtues, by which the soul is freed from sensuality and led back to itself, and thence to the ''nous''.
Parviz Morewedge gives four suppositions about the nature of Islamic Mysticism:
Later, Thomas Taylor (not a Cambridge Platonist) was the first to translate Plotinus' works into English.
;The Unity of Being: "An inherent potential unity among all dimensions of world-experience."
In his ''Confessions'', he describes the Logos as the divine eternal Word.
Evil here is understood as a parasite, having no-existence of its own (parahypostasis), an unavoidable outcome of the Universe, having an "other" necessity, as a harmonizing factor.
The original Being initially emanates, or throws out, the ''nous'', which is a perfect image of the One and the archetype of all existing things.
For much of the history of Platonism, it was commonly accepted that the doctrines of the Neoplatonists were essentially the same as those of Plato.
The Source, Absolute, or One is what all things spring from and, as a superconsciousness (nous), is where all things return.
Philo, a forerunner of Neoplatonism, translated Judaism into terms of Stoic, Platonic and Neopythagorean elements, and held that God is "supra rational" and can be reached only through "ecstasy", and Philo held that the oracles of God supply the material of moral and religious knowledge.
Plotinus taught that there is a supreme, totally transcendent "One", containing no division, multiplicity, nor distinction; likewise, it is beyond all categories of being and non-being.
The henads serve both to protect the One itself from any hint of multiplicity and to draw up the rest of the universe towards the One, by being a connecting, intermediate stage between absolute unity and determinate multiplicity.
In defining the term "Neoplatonism", it is difficult to reduce the school of thought to a concise set of ideas that all Neoplatonic philosophers shared in common.
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463–94) was another excelling Neoplatonist during the Italian Renaissance.
The work of Neoplatonic philosophy involved describing the derivation of the whole of reality from a single principle, "the One".
In Plotinus' model of reality, the One is the cause of the rest of reality, which takes the form of two subsequent "hypostases", Nous and Soul.
Although the founder of Neoplatonism is supposed to have been Ammonius Saccas, the ''Enneads'' of his pupil Plotinus are the primary and classical document of Neoplatonism.
This is reached through contemplation of the primeval Being, the One — in other words, through an ecstatic approach to it.
In the early seventh century, the Neoplatonist Stephanus brought this Alexandrian tradition to Constantinople, where it would remain influential, albeit as a form of secular education.
He could not only speak and write in Latin and Greek, but he also had immense knowledge on the Hebrew and Arabic languages.
The notion of the divine Intellect is altered under Islamic Neoplatonism and is once again attributed to God.
By means of ascetic observances, the human becomes once more a spiritual and enduring being, free from all sin.
Although, properly speaking, there is no name appropriate for the first principle, the most adequate names are "the One" or "the Good".
Iamblichus had salvation as his final goal (see henosis).
Perhaps Aristotle might seem to be an exception; but it is probable that, if we still possessed a few such "exoteric" works as the ''Protreptikos'' in their entirety, we should find that the enthusiastic words in which he speaks of the "''blessed life''" in the ''Metaphysics'' and in the ''Ethics (Nicomachean Ethics)'' were less isolated outbursts of feeling than they appear now.
Although Neoplatonists after Plotinus adhered to his cosmological scheme in its most general outline, later developments in the tradition also departed substantively from Plotinus' teachings in regards to significant philosophical issues, such as the nature of evil.
But there is still a higher attainment; it is not enough to be sinless, one must become "God" (''henosis'').
Hypatia (c. AD 360 – 415) was a Greek woman who served as head of the Platonist school in Alexandria, Egypt, where she taught philosophy, mathematics and astronomy prior to her murder by a mob of anti-pagan Christians because she was defending the Christian ruler of Alexandria Orestes.
The term "Logos" was interpreted variously in neoplatonism.
When writing his treatise 'On True Religion' several years after his 387 baptism, Augustine's Christianity was still tempered by Neoplatonism.
The henads are beyond being, like the One itself, but they stand at the head of chains of causation (seirai or taxeis) and in some manner give to these chains their particular character.
The similarities between Neoplatonism and the Vedanta philosophies of Hinduism have led several authors to suggest an Indian influence in its founding, particularly on Ammonius Saccas, the teacher of Plotinus.
Later Neoplatonic philosophers, especially Iamblichus, added hundreds of intermediate beings such as gods, angels, demons, and other beings as mediators between the One and humanity.
:''The Neoplatonists were quite justified in regarding themselves as the spiritual heirs of Pythagoras; and, in their hands, philosophy ceased to exist as such, and became theology.
It can be said that all consciousness is wiped clean and is returned to a blank slate when returning to the Source.
In later days, Apollonios of Tyana showed in practice what this sort of thing must ultimately lead to.
The influence of Neoplatonism also extends into forms of culture beyond philosophy, and well into the modern era, for instance, in Renaissance Aesthetics, and in the work of modernist poets such as W. B. Yeats and T.S.
Marsilio Ficino (1433–99) was "chiefly responsible for packaging and presenting Plato to the Renaissance" (Hole).
Eusebius and Jerome claimed him as a Christian until his death, whereas Porphyry claimed he had renounced Christianity and embraced pagan philosophy.
Philosophers described God as free from Platonic forms and having divine omniscience and providence.
Rather, the creative principle of all things is ''beyond'' being, a notion which is derived from book VI of the ''Republic'', when, in the course of his famous analogy of the Sun, Plato says that the Good is beyond being (ἐπέκεινα τῆς οὐσίας) in power and dignity.
The theurgy and thaumaturgy of the late Greek schools were only the fruit of the seed sown by the generation which immediately preceded the Persian War.''
Plotinus is no dualist in the same sense as sects like the Gnostics; in contrast, he admires the beauty and splendour of the world.
The One is so simple that it cannot even be said to exist or to be a being.
In the ethics of Plotinus, all the older schemes of virtue are taken over and arranged in a graduated series.
:Those that make Essence, Life, and Soul
On the other, the term makes an assumption about the novelty of Plotinus' interpretation of Plato.
St. John introduces a relation between 'Logos' and the Son, Christ, whereas, St. Paul calls it 'Son', 'Image', and 'Form'.Victorinus subsequently differentiated the Logos interior to God from the Logos related to the world by creation and salvation.
And this tendency was at work all along; hardly a single Greek philosopher was wholly uninfluenced by it.
Plotinus believed that a soul may be reincarnated into another human or even a different sort of animal.
;The Mediator Figure: "The mediation between finite man and the ultimate being."
In that moment, it enjoys the highest indescribable bliss; it is, as it were, swallowed up by divinity, bathed in the light of eternity.
Neoplatonist ideas also influenced Islamic and Sufi thinkers such as al Farabi and Avicenna.
While the Neoplatonists generally shared some basic assumptions about the nature of reality, there were also considerable differences in their views and approaches, and so it can be difficult to summarize the philosophical content of Neoplatonism briefly.
They are also identified with the traditional Greek gods, so one henad might be Apollo and be the cause of all things apollonian, while another might be Helios and be the cause of all sunny things.
Despite the influence this pagan philosophy had on Christianity, Justinian I would hurt later Neoplatonism by ordering the closure of the refounded School of Athens.
Here, then, we enter upon the practical philosophy.
The Neoplatonists believed in the pre-existence, and immortality of the soul.
One of the characteristic features of Plotinus' system, which was also taken up by subsequent Neoplatonists, is the doctrine of "the One" beyond being.
After Plotinus' (around AD 205–270) and his student Porphyry (around AD 232–309) Aristotle's (non-biological) works entered the curriculum of Platonic thought.
