In order to meet future demand, it was estimated that Nepal needed to invest around US$135 million annually in its telecom sector.
Thus many Nepali citizens move to other countries in search of work.
The king was thereafter given 15 days to vacate Narayanhity Palace so it could reopen as a public museum.
Paradoxically, the perennial nature of Nepali rivers and the steep gradient of the country's topography provide ideal conditions for the development of some of the world's largest hydroelectric projects in Nepal.
In 2008, the Nepali government abolished the Haliya system of forced labour, freeing about 20,000 people.
This led to dissolution of the Constituent Assembly to pave way for new elections to strive for a new political mandate.
Nepal remains isolated from the world's major land, air and sea transport routes although, within the country, aviation is in a better state, with 47 airports, 11 of them with paved runways; flights are frequent and support a sizable traffic.
The executive power of Nepal shall rest with the Council of Ministers in accordance with the Constitution and law.The President shall appoint the parliamentary party leader of the political party with the majority in the House of Representatives as a Prime Minister, and a Council of Ministers shall be formed in his/her chairmanship
The ruling granted full rights for LGBT individuals, including the right to marry and now can get citizenship as a third gender rather than male or female as authorized by Nepal's Supreme Court in 2007.
Kathmandu is the nation's capital and largest city.
These dwellings remain cool in summer and retain warmth in winter.
The National Council had 60 members: ten nominated by the king, 35 elected by the House of Representatives, and the remaining 15 elected by an electoral college made up of chairs of villages and towns.
File:Hills Views.jpg|Hills view of Ghorahi, Dang
Around 500 BCE, small kingdoms and confederations of clans arose in the southern regions of Nepal.
Nevertheless, real GDP growth was estimated to increase to almost 5 percent for 2011–2012.
On 24 April 2006 the dissolved House of Representatives was reinstated.
The regional languages Maithili,
Based on a study published in 2014, of the Main Frontal Thrust, on average a great earthquake occurs every 750 ± 140 and 870 ± 350 years in the east Nepal region.
To  are the eastern and western Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows.
The Licchavi dynasty went into decline in the late eighth century, probably due to the Tibetan Empire, and was followed by a Newar or Thakuri era, from 879 CE (Nepal Sambat 1), although the extent of their control over the present-day country is uncertain.
In Nepal, the faiths share common temples and worship common deities.
In 2010, agriculture accounted for 36.1%, services comprised 48.5%, and industry 15.4% of Nepal's GDP.
Some fine scholarship has emerged in the post-1990 era.
The immediate livelihood benefits derived by rural households bolster strong collective action wherein local communities actively and sustainably manage forest resources.
Sex trafficking is particularly rampant within Nepal and to India, with as many as 5,000 to 10,000 women and girls trafficked to India alone each year.
The European Union has emerged the largest buyer of Nepali ready-made garments (RMG).
''Ancient and Indigenous Madhesis'' are descendents of Nepalese origin tribes while ''Indian origin Madhesis'' are the descendents of Nepalese migrants to Madhesh from Indian state of Bihar and Uttar pradesh; the Brahmin (Bahun) and Kshatriya (Chettri) caste groups are descendents of migrants from India's present Banaras, Kumaon, Garhwal and Kashmir regions, while other ethnic groups trace their origins to North Burma and Yunnan and Tibet, e.g., the Gurung and Magar in the west, Rai, Sunuwar and Limbu in the east (from Yunnan and north Burma via Assam), and Sherpa and Bhutia in the north (from Tibet).
The southern lowland plains or ''Terai'' bordering India are part of the northern rim of the Indo-Gangetic Plain.
There are roughly 30 independent TV channels registered, with only about half in regular operation.
The Provincial Head shall appoint the leader of the parliamentary party with majority in the Provincial Assembly as the Chief Minister and the Provincial Council of Ministers shall be formed under the chairpersonship of the Chief Minister.
On June 1, 2001, there was a massacre in the royal palace.
Every province shall have a Provincial Head as the representative of the Federal government.
However, the effectiveness of this has been questioned by the Asian Legal Resource Centre.
This is an improvement from the 3.5 percent GDP growth in 2010–2011 and would be the second-highest growth rate in the post-conflict era.
Progress on providing some minimum access had been good.
Most of the festivals in Nepal are Hindu.
Most of the festivals in Nepal are Hindu.
All commercial fossil fuels (mainly oil and coal) are either imported from India or from international markets routed through India and China.
The proportion of poor people has declined substantially since 2003.
The tourism sector contributed nearly 3% of national GDP in 2012 and is the second-biggest foreign income earner after remittances.
This correlated with the drop in sex ratio from 94.41 as compared to 99.80 for 2001.
Nepal's military consists of the Nepali Army, which includes the Nepali Army Air Service.
Since Dahal's resignation, the country has been in a serious political deadlock with one of the big issues being the proposed integration of the former Maoist combatants, also known as the People's Liberation Army, into the national security forces.
National Assembly shall be a permanent house.
Its workforce of about 10 million suffers from a severe shortage of skilled labor.
They have been reputed for their valour in World War I and World War II.
The war ended in the Sugauli Treaty, under which Nepal ceded recently captured portions of Sikkim and lands in Terai as well as the right to recruit soldiers.
The inflation rate has dropped to 2.9% after a period of higher inflation during the 1990s.
In 2009, the telecommunication sector alone contributed to 1% of the nation's GDP.
The Nepali rupee has been tied to the Indian rupee at an exchange rate of 1.6 for many years.
Not only has there been strong subscriber growth, especially in the mobile sector, but there was evidence of a clear vision in the sector, including putting a reform process in place and planning for the building of necessary telecommunications infrastructure.
The ''Skanda Purana'' has a separate chapter known as "Nepal Mahatmya" that explains in more details about the beauty and power of Nepal.
File:Terai nepal.jpg|A field in Terai
In the mid-18th century, Prithvi Narayan Shah, a Gorkha king, set out to put together what would become present-day Nepal.
With a higher poverty line of US$2 per-capita per day, poverty declined by one-quarter to 57.3%.
With wider availability of information technology, cyber crime is a growing trend.
The House of Representatives consisted of 205 members directly elected by the people.
Madhesis, having supported the East India Company during the war, had their lands gifted to Nepali.
The first round of voting, on 19 July 2008, saw Parmanand Jha win election as Nepali vice-president, but neither of the contenders for president received the required 298 votes and a second round was held two days later.
The main minorities are Tibetan Buddhists, Muslims, Kiratans and Christians.
The only practical seaport of entry for goods bound for Kathmandu is Kolkata in West Bengal state of India.
It is mentioned in Vedic texts that this region was called Nepal centuries ago.
Nepal's flag is the only national flag in the world that is not rectangular in shape.
"We have no other option but to go back to the people and elect a new assembly to write the constitution," he said in a nationally televised speech.
Exports to the EU accounted for "46.13 percent of the country's total garment exports".
The government of Nepal restricted Bhutanese refugees to seven camps in the Jhapa and Morang districts, and refugees were not permitted to work in most professions.
Beginning in the third century CE, the Licchavi Kingdom governed the Kathmandu Valley and the region surrounding central Nepal.
The bill came into force on 28 May 2008.
Of a total of 3,914 village development committees across the country, 306 were unserved by December 2009.
A dispute with Tibet over the control of mountain passes and inner Tingri valleys of Tibet forced the Qing Emperor of China to start the Sino-Nepali War compelling the Nepali to retreat and pay heavy reparations to Peking.
On 28 December 2007, a bill was passed in parliament to amend Article 159 of the constitution&nbsp;– replacing "Provisions regarding the King" by "Provisions of the Head of the State"&nbsp;– declaring Nepal a federal republic, and thereby abolishing the monarchy.
While agriculture and industry are contracting, the contribution by the service sector is increasing.
Nepal is home to at least four indigenous sign languages.
In 2013, Reporters Without Borders ranked Nepal at 118th place in the world in terms of press freedom.
It is separated from Bangladesh by a narrow Indian corridor and from Bhutan by the Indian state of Sikkim.
Nepal has aided China in the aftermath of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake, and China has provided economic assistance for Nepali infrastructure.
Nepal is the only Asian country where the possibility of same-sex marriage has been proposed in the high court and in the legislature although same-sex marriage currently does not exist in Nepal (see also LGBT rights in Nepal and Same-sex marriage in Nepal).
Since the establishment of the national team, Nepal has played its home matches on the Tribhuvan University International Cricket Ground.
These form a mosaic with the Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests, which occur from  and include the Inner Terai Valleys.
In February 2014, after consensus was reached between the two major parties in the constituent assembly, Sushil Koirala was sworn in as the new prime minister of Nepal.
In accordance with a long-standing treaty, Indian and Nepali citizens may travel to each other's countries without a passport or visa.
In the early 12th century, leaders emerged in far western Nepal whose names ended with the Sanskrit suffix ''malla'' ("wrestler").
Ram Baran Yadav of the Nepali Congress party defeated Maoist-backed Ram Raja Prasad Singh with 308 of the 590 votes cast.
Khanal was forced to step down as he could not succeed in carrying forward the Peace Process and the constitution writing.
Koirala submitted his resignation to the new president after Yadav's swearing-in ceremony on 23 July 2008.
Consequently, the US provided M16s, M4s and other Colt weapons to combat communist (Maoist) insurgents.
File:Panorama phoksumdo lake from camp.jpg|Phoksundo Lake
Nonetheless, political tensions and consequent power-sharing battles have continued in Nepal.
But Nepal failed to secure promotion to Division One and qualification to 2015–17 ICC Intercontinental Cup after finishing third in the round-robin stage.
Although citizens make up the majority of Nepalese, non-citizen residents, dual citizens, and expatriates may also claim a Nepalese identity.
It lies between latitudes 26° and 31°N, and longitudes 80° and 89°E.
Madhav Kumar Nepal of the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist) was made the Prime Minister of the coalition government.
In response to the 2006 democracy movement, King Gyanendra agreed to relinquish sovereign power to the people.
Another Malla dynasty beginning with Jayasthiti emerged in the Kathmandu valley in the late 14th century, and much of central Nepal again came under a unified rule.
According to the Nepal Telecommunication Authority MIS May 2012 report, there are seven operators and the total voice telephony subscribers including fixed and mobile are 16,350,946 which gives a penetration rate of 61.42%.
The Buddha's family surname is associated with Gautama Maharishi.
The form of governance of Nepal shall be a multi-party, competitive, federal democratic republican parliamentary system based on plurality.
At its maximum extent, Greater Nepal extended from the Teesta River in the east, to Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, across the Sutlej in the west as well as further south into the Terai plains and north of the Himalayas than at present.
Rivalry between Kingdom of Nepal and the East India Company over the annexation of minor states bordering Nepal eventually led to the Anglo-Nepali War (1815–16).
The Indian plate continues to move north relative to Asia at the rate of approximately  per year.
The Nepali government works in the framework of a representative democracy with seven federal provinces.
Among the earliest inhabitants were the Kirat of east mid-region, Newars of the Kathmandu Valley, aboriginal Tharus of Tharuhat, Madhesis of Madhesh and Maithils of Mithila region.
Nepal faced a decade-long Communist Maoist insurgency and mass protests against the authoritarian King Gyanendra in 2005, which led to the abolition of the monarchy in 2008.
However, the income distribution remains grossly uneven.
The Gorkha dominion reached its height when the North Indian territories of the Kumaon and Garhwal Kingdoms in the west to Sikkim in the east came under Nepal rule.
Nepal shares its boundaries with India and China
It is independent of the Nepali Army.
Besides having landlocked, rugged geography, few tangible natural resources and poor infrastructure, the ineffective post-1950 government and the long-running civil war are also factors in stunting the nation's economic growth and development.
The newly elected Assembly met in Kathmandu on May 28, 2008, and, after a polling of 564 constituent Assembly members, 560 voted to form a new government, with the monarchist Rastriya Prajatantra Party, which had four members in the assembly, registering a dissenting note.
Houses in the hills are usually made of unbaked bricks with thatch or tile roofing.
They have both Domestic and International surveillance unit which mainly deals with cross border terrorists, drug trafficking and money laundering.
Derived from Sanskrit, Nepali is written in Devanagari script.
If the progress of reducing poverty continues at this rate, then it is predicted that Nepal will halve the current poverty rate and eradicate it within the next 20 years.
From one of these, the Shakya polity, arose a prince who later renounced his status to lead an ascetic life, founded Buddhism, and came to be known as Gautama Buddha (traditionally dated 563–483 BCE).
At the lowest elevations is the Terai-Duar savanna and grasslands ecoregion.
They were formed and are fed by three major Himalayan rivers: the Kosi, the Narayani, and the Karnali as well as smaller rivers rising below the permanent snowline.
Despite these problems, in 2012 the number of international tourists visiting Nepal was 598,204, a 10% increase on the previous year.
In spite of these figures, improvements in health care have been made, most notably in maternal-child health.
Power cuts of up to 22 hours a day take place in peak demand periods of winter and the peak electricity demand is almost the double the capability or dependable capacity.
Northern Nepal is historically inhabited by Kirants Mongoloid, Rai and Limbu people.
These ecological belts run east-west and are vertically intersected by Nepal's major, north to south flowing river systems.
Two weeks later, on May 12, another earthquake with a magnitude of 7.3 hit Nepal, killing more than 150 people in Nepal and more than 200 people in total.
The position of the power sector remains unsatisfactory because of high tariffs, high system losses, high generation costs, high overheads, over staffing, and lower domestic demand.
As of 30 September 2012, Nepal has 1,828,700 Facebook users.
Based on 2010 World Health Organization (WHO) data, Nepal ranked 139th in life expectancy in 2010 with the average Nepali living to 65.8 years.
On 28 June 2014, the ICC awarded T20I status to Nepal, who took part and performed exceptionally well in the 2014 ICC World Twenty20.
Nepal is the learned Sanskrit form and Newar is the colloquial Prakrit form.
On 4 May 2009, Dahal resigned over on-going conflicts with regard to the sacking of the Army chief.
All the Nepali people collectively constitute the nation.
In the ''Pashupati Purana'', he is mentioned as a saint and a protector.
Nepal is one of the few countries in Asia to abolish the death penalty.
File:Wind erosion Kalopani Nepal.jpg|Wind erosion in Kalopani
The new constitution of Nepal has changed Nepal practically into a federal democratic republic by making 7 unnamed states.
Ratio (Male:Female)
More than one-third of its people live at least a two hours walk from the nearest all-season road; 15 out of 75 district headquarters are not connected by road.
Under the Chalukyas, Nepal's religious establishment changed as the kings patronised Hinduism instead of the Buddhism prevailing at that time.
Up until 1990, Nepal was a monarchy under executive control of the King.
The major languages of Nepal (percent spoken as native language) according to the 2011 census are Nepali (44.6%), Maithili (11.7%), Bhojpuri (Awadhi Language) (6.0%), Tharu (5.8%), Tamang (5.1%), Nepal Bhasa (3.2%), Bajjika (3%) and Magar (3.0%), Doteli (3.0%), Urdu (2.6%) and Sunwar.
The citizens of Nepal are known as Nepali or Nepalese.
The National Assembly shall consist of two 59 members as follows:
As it is believed that Ne Muni established Nepal, some important priests in Nepal are called "Tirthaguru Nemuni".
Life expectancy (Female)
The overall literacy rate (for population age 5 years and above) increased from 54.1% in 2001 to 65.9% in 2011.
They were greatly impressed by the valour and competence of their adversaries.
In 2007 there were just over  of paved roads, and  of unpaved road, and one  railway line in the south.
Kathmandu Valley, in the middle hill region, constitutes a small fraction of the nation's area but is the most densely populated, with almost 5 percent of the nation's population.
Prime Minister Baburam Bhattarai announced that new elections will be held on 22 November 2012.
The President shall appoint a Provincial Head for every province.
Since the loosening of exchange rate controls in the early 1990s, the black market for foreign exchange has all but disappeared.
Following the carnage, King Birendra's brother Gyanendra inherited the throne.
This region has a subtropical to tropical climate.
At that point, it was declared that Nepal had become a secular and inclusive democratic republic, with the government announcing a three-day public holiday from May 28–30.
The country receives foreign aid from the UK, India, Japan, the US, the EU, China, Switzerland, and Scandinavian countries.
Literacy Rate (Male)
Local dialects in the Terai and hills are mostly unwritten with efforts underway to develop systems for writing many in Devanagari or the Roman alphabet.
Mundhum, Christianity and Jainism are other minority faiths.
The staple Nepali meal is ''dal bhat''.
On 26 June 2008, the prime minister Girija Prasad Koirala, who had served as Acting Head of State since January 2007, announced that he would resign on the election of the country's first president by the Constituent Assembly.
The government's budget is about $1.153 billion, with an expenditure of $1.789 billion (FY 20005/06).
Nepal's exports of mainly carpets, clothing, hemp, leather goods, jute goods and grain total $822 million.
Differences between Hindus and Buddhists have been minimal in Nepal due to the cultural and historical intermingling of Hindu and Buddhist beliefs.
The country struggles with the transition from a monarchy to a republic.
They also qualified for the 2014 ICC World Twenty20 in Bangladesh.
These kings consolidated their power and ruled over the next 200 years, until the kingdom splintered into two dozen petty states.
Traditionally it is held to be the birthplace in about 563 B.C.
Nepal has seen rapid political changes during the last two decades.
The Ranas were staunchly pro-British and assisted them during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 (and later in both World Wars).
According to another explanation, the words "Newar" and "Newari" are vulgarisms arising from the mutation of P to V, and L to R.
Community forests also became the source of diversified investment capital and raw material for new market-oriented livelihoods.
Nepal won the 2014 ICC World Cricket League Division Three held in Malaysia and qualified for the 2015 ICC World Cricket League Division Two.
According to the 2011 census, the percentage of households possessing radio was 50.82%, television 36.45%, cable TV 19.33%, computer 7.23%.
Nepal was the world's last Hindu monarchy.
Islam is a minority religion in Nepal, with 4.2% of the population being Muslim according to a 2006 Nepali census.
File:Phulchowki Hill.jpg|Phulchowki Hill
At this measure of poverty the percentage of poor people declined from 53.1% in 2003/2004 to 24.8% in 2010/2011.
In Samudragupta's Allahabad Pillar it is mentioned as a bordering country.
Nepal is governed according to the Constitution of Nepal, which came into effect on September 20, 2015, replacing the Interim Constitution of 2007.
The outermost range of foothills called Sivalik Hills or Churia Range cresting at  marks the limit of the Gangetic Plain, however broad, low valleys called Inner Tarai Valleys (Bhitri Tarai Uptyaka) lie north of these foothills in several places.
Kathmandu, with a population of over 2.6 million (metropolitan area: 5 million), is the largest city in the country and the cultural and economic heart.
In September 20, 2015, a new constitution, the "Constitution of Nepal 2015"  was announced by President Ram Baran Yadav in the constituent assembly.
There has been a sharp increase in the seizure of drugs such as hashish, heroin and opium in the past few years; and there are indications that drug traffickers are trying to establish Nepal as a transit point.
Seven other of the world's "eight-thousanders" are in Nepal or on its border with China: Lhotse, Makalu, Cho Oyu, Kangchenjunga, Dhaulagiri, Annapurna and Manaslu.
The name ''Nepal'' is first recorded in texts from the Vedic Age, the era that founded Hinduism, the country's predominant religion.
The fixed telephone service account for 9.37%, mobile for 64.63%, and other services (LM, GMPCS) for 3.76% of the total penetration rate.
The constitution is the fundamental law of Nepal.
File:View of hills.jpg|View of mountains
On April 25, 2015, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck Nepal.
Basanta Regmi became the first bowler to take 100 wickets in the World Cricket League.
In August 2011 the Jhala Nath Khanal Government was toppled and Baburam Bhattarai of the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) was made the Prime Minister.
Under Regmi, the nation saw peaceful elections for the constituent assembly.
Public health and health care services in Nepal are provided by both the public and private sectors and fare poorly by international standards.
On August 2011, Maoist Babu Ram Bhattarai became third Prime Minister after the election of constituent assembly.
The contribution of growth by consumption fueled by remittances has declined since 2010/2011.
Many Nepali folktales are enacted through the medium of dance and music.
In 1991–92, Bhutan expelled roughly 100,000 Bhutanese citizens of Nepali descent, most of whom have been living in seven refugee camps in eastern Nepal ever since.
The electrification rate in urban areas is 90%, whereas the rate for rural areas is only 5%.
Nepal established relations with the People's Republic of China on 1 August 1955, and relations since have been based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence.
Jung Bahadur Kunwar emerged victorious and founded the Rana dynasty, later known as Jung Bahadur Rana.
Some parts of the Terai region populated with non-Nepali peoples were gifted to Nepal by the British as a friendly gesture because of her military help to sustain British control in India during the rebellion.
The distribution of wealth among the Nepali is consistent with that in many developed and developing countries: the highest 10% of households control 39.1% of the national wealth and the lowest 10% control only 2.6%.
