In the search for extrasolar planets, Neptune has been used as a metonym: discovered bodies of similar mass are often referred to as "Neptunes", just as scientists refer to various extrasolar bodies as "Jupiters".
Triton is the largest Neptunian moon, comprising more than 99.5% of the mass in orbit around Neptune, and it is the only one massive enough to be spheroidal.
Soon, ''Neptune'' became the internationally accepted name.
The mantle is equivalent to 10 to 15 Earth masses and is rich in water, ammonia and methane.
A new moon and the smallest yet, S/2004 N 1, was found in 2013.
Its sidereal rotation period (day) is roughly 16.11&nbsp;hours.
The long orbital period of Neptune means that the seasons last for forty Earth years.
In 1843, John Couch Adams began work on the orbit of Uranus using the data he had.
Deeper inside the layers of gas, the temperature rises steadily.
When Pluto was discovered it was considered a planet, and Neptune thus became the penultimate known planet, except for a 20-year period between 1979 and 1999 when Pluto's elliptical orbit brought it closer to the Sun than Neptune.
As with Uranus, this absorption of red light by the atmospheric methane is part of what gives Neptune its blue hue,
This occultation had been attributed to ring arcs, but when ''Voyager 2'' observed Neptune in 1989, Larissa was found to have caused it.
The focus would be on Neptune and its largest moon Triton to be investigated around 2029.
Neptune is 17 times the mass of Earth and is slightly more massive than its near-twin Uranus, which is 15 times the mass of Earth and slightly larger than Neptune.
Because Neptune was the Roman god of the sea, Neptune's moons have been named after lesser sea gods.
In 1989, the Great Dark Spot, an anti-cyclonic storm system spanning 13000&nbsp;×&nbsp;6600&nbsp;km, was discovered by NASA's ''Voyager 2'' spacecraft.
By contrast, Earth, Jupiter and Saturn have only relatively small quadrupole moments, and their fields are less tilted from the polar axis.
Eventually, an international consensus emerged that both Le Verrier and Adams jointly deserved credit.
At 70° S latitude, a high-speed jet travels at a speed of 300&nbsp;m/s.
In modern Greek the planet is called ''Poseidon'' (Ποσειδώνας, ''Poseidonas''), the Greek counterpart of Neptune.
In October, he sought to name the planet ''Le Verrier'', after himself, and he had loyal support in this from the observatory director, François Arago.
Because of the distance of Neptune from Earth, its angular diameter only ranges from 2.2 to 2.4&nbsp;arcseconds, the smallest of the Solar System planets.
An alternative concept is that they formed closer to the Sun, where the matter density was higher, and then subsequently migrated to their current orbits after the removal of the gaseous protoplanetary disc.
In Hebrew, "Rahab" (רהב), from a Biblical sea monster mentioned in the Book of Psalms, was selected in a vote managed by the Academy of the Hebrew Language in 2009 as the official name for the planet, even though the existing Latin term "Neptun" (נפטון) is commonly used.
The next-farthest out, Larissa, was originally discovered in 1981 when it had occulted a star.
Neptune's more varied weather when compared to Uranus is due in part to its higher internal heating.
Neptune's spectra suggest that its lower stratosphere is hazy due to condensation of products of ultraviolet photolysis of methane, such as ethane and ethyne.
Such a hypothetical mission is envisioned to be possible in the late 2020s or early 2030s.
The current most widely accepted explanation of the details of this hypothesis is known as the Nice model, which explores the effect of a migrating Neptune and the other giant planets on the structure of the Kuiper belt.
There do exist orbits within these empty regions where objects can survive for the age of the Solar System.
For pressures between one and five bars (100 and 500 kPa), clouds of ammonia and hydrogen sulfide are thought to form.
The stratosphere of Neptune is warmer than that of Uranus due to the elevated concentration of hydrocarbons.
Increasing concentrations of methane, ammonia and water are found in the lower regions of the atmosphere.
''Voyager 2'' is the only spacecraft that has visited Neptune.
Shortly after its discovery, Neptune was referred to simply as "the planet exterior to Uranus" or as "Le Verrier's planet".
French almanacs quickly reintroduced the name ''Herschel'' for ''Uranus'', after that planet's discoverer Sir William Herschel, and ''Leverrier'' for the new planet.
Triton was discovered by William Lassell just 17&nbsp;days after the discovery of Neptune itself.
Because of seasonal changes, the cloud bands in the southern hemisphere of Neptune have been observed to increase in size and albedo.
These loops carried it close to the 1846 discovery coordinates in April and July 2010 and again in October and November 2011.
On the evening of 23&nbsp;September 1846, the day Galle received the letter, he discovered Neptune within 1° of where Le Verrier had predicted it to be, about 12° from Adams' prediction.
The storm resembled the Great Red Spot of Jupiter.
The upper-level clouds lie at pressures below one bar, where the temperature is suitable for methane to condense.
Neptune's rotation period was determined using measurements of radio emissions and ''Voyager 2'' also showed that Neptune had a surprisingly active weather system.
Models suggest that Neptune's troposphere is banded by clouds of varying compositions depending on altitude.
Challis later realised that he had observed the planet twice, on 4 and 12&nbsp;August, but did not recognise it as a planet because he lacked an up-to-date star map and was distracted by his concurrent work on comet observations.
Because Neptune's atmospheric methane content is similar to that of Uranus, some unknown atmospheric constituent is thought to contribute to Neptune's colour.
''Voyager 2'' observed weather phenomena on Neptune during its 1989 flyby, but no comparable phenomena on Uranus during its 1986 fly-by.
Neptune's orbit has a profound impact on the region directly beyond it, known as the Kuiper belt.
Neptune differs from Uranus in its typical level of meteorological activity.
The general pattern of winds showed prograde rotation at high latitudes vs. retrograde rotation at lower latitudes.
The flyby also provided the first accurate measurement of Neptune's mass which was found to be 0.5 percent less than previously calculated.
These circumferential bands have widths of 50–150&nbsp;km and lie about 50–110&nbsp;km above the cloud deck.
Some Neptune trojans are remarkably stable in their orbits, and are likely to have formed alongside Neptune rather than being captured.
The stratosphere is also home to trace amounts of carbon monoxide and hydrogen cyanide.
This trend was first seen in 1980 and is expected to last until about 2020.
In July 2009, University of Melbourne physicist David Jamieson announced new evidence suggesting that Galileo was at least aware that the 'star' he had observed had moved relative to the fixed stars.
The 3:4, 3:5, 4:7 and 2:5 resonances are less populated.
Although Pluto crosses Neptune's orbit regularly, the 2:3 resonance ensures they can never collide.
The dipole component of the magnetic field at the magnetic equator of Neptune is about 14&nbsp;microteslas (0.14&nbsp;G).
The relative "hot spot" is due to Neptune's axial tilt, which has exposed the south pole to the Sun for the last quarter of Neptune's year, or roughly 40 Earth years.
The formation of the ice giants, Neptune and Uranus, has proven difficult to model precisely.
At high altitudes, Neptune's atmosphere is 80% hydrogen and 19% helium.
Over the age of the Solar System, certain regions of the Kuiper belt became destabilised by Neptune's gravity, creating gaps in the Kuiper belt's structure.
As with Uranus, the source of this heating is unknown, but the discrepancy is larger: Uranus only radiates 1.1 times as much energy as it receives from the Sun; whereas Neptune radiates about 2.61 times as much energy as it receives from the Sun.
The discovery of the Kuiper belt in 1992 led many astronomers to debate whether Pluto should be considered a planet or as part of the Kuiper belt.
This is interpreted as evidence for upwelling at the equator and subsidence near the poles.
Adams continued to work in 1845–46 and produced several different estimates of a new planet.
The first suggestion for a name came from Galle, who proposed the name ''Janus''.
Although Neptune lies over 50% further from the Sun than Uranus, and receives only 40% its amount of sunlight, the two planets' surface temperatures are roughly equal.
Most languages today, even in countries that have no direct link to Greco-Roman culture, use some variant of the name "Neptune" for the planet.
Because Neptune is not a solid body, its atmosphere undergoes differential rotation.
In June 1846, upon seeing Le Verrier's first published estimate of the planet's longitude and its similarity to Adams's estimate, Airy persuaded Challis to search for the planet.
Neptune trojans can be viewed as being in a 1:1 resonance with Neptune.
The boundary between the two, the tropopause, lies at a pressure of .
The thermosphere gradually transitions to the exosphere.
The upper regions of Neptune's troposphere reach a low temperature of .
Heinrich d'Arrest, a student at the observatory, suggested to Galle that they could compare a recently drawn chart of the sky in the region of Le Verrier's predicted location with the current sky to seek the displacement characteristic of a planet, as opposed to a fixed star.
Very-high-pressure experiments at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory suggest that the base of the mantle may comprise an ocean of liquid carbon with floating solid 'diamonds'.
In Roman mythology, Neptune was the god of the sea, identified with the Greek Poseidon.
Both sources are thought to originate from its rotating magnetic field.
Neptune's atmosphere is subdivided into two main regions: the lower troposphere, where temperature decreases with altitude, and the stratosphere, where temperature increases with altitude.
The thermosphere contains traces of carbon dioxide and water, which may have been deposited from external sources such as meteorites and dust.
In 1821, Alexis Bouvard published astronomical tables of the orbit of Neptune's neighbour Uranus.
The spacecraft performed a near-encounter with the moon Nereid before it came within 4400&nbsp;km of Neptune's atmosphere on 25 August, then passed close to the planet's largest moon Triton later the same day.
As Neptune slowly moves towards the opposite side of the Sun, the south pole will be darkened and the north pole illuminated, causing the methane release to shift to the north pole.
In 2003, there was a proposal in NASA's "Vision Missions Studies" for a "Neptune Orbiter with Probes" mission that does ''Cassini''-level science.
At the cloud tops, the prevailing winds range in speed from 400&nbsp;m/s along the equator to 250&nbsp;m/s at the poles.
Neptune orbits the Sun once every 164.8&nbsp;years at an average distance of .
This nickname first arose during the months leading up to the ''Voyager 2'' encounter in 1989, when they were observed moving at speeds faster than the Great Dark Spot (and images acquired later would subsequently reveal the presence of clouds moving even faster than those that had initially been detected by ''Voyager 2'').
Neptune's bow shock, where the magnetosphere begins to slow the solar wind, occurs at a distance of 34.9 times the radius of the planet.
Neptune's internal structure resembles that of Uranus.
Neptune, like Uranus, is an ice giant, a subclass of giant planet, due to their smaller size and higher concentrations of volatiles relative to Jupiter and Saturn.
In the Solar System, it is the fourth-largest planet by diameter, the third-most-massive planet, and the densest giant planet.
The difference in flow direction is thought to be a "skin effect" and not due to any deeper atmospheric processes.
This hypothesis of migration after formation is favoured, due to its ability to better explain the occupancy of the populations of small objects observed in the trans-Neptunian region.
The images relayed back to Earth from ''Voyager 2'' became the basis of a 1989 PBS all-night program, ''Neptune All Night''.
Struve came out in favour of the name ''Neptune'' on 29&nbsp;December 1846, to the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences.
In Nahuatl, the planet is called ''Tlāloccītlalli'', named after the rain god Tlāloc.
This field may be generated by convective fluid motions in a thin spherical shell of
Another, more recent proposal was for Argo, a flyby spacecraft to be launched in 2019, that would visit Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune, and a Kuiper belt object.
Neptune also has a temporary quasi-satellite, .
Neptune's second known satellite (by order of discovery), the irregular moon Nereid, has one of the most eccentric orbits of any satellite in the Solar System.
One is that the ice giants were not formed by core accretion but from instabilities within the original protoplanetary disc and later had their atmospheres blasted away by radiation from a nearby massive OB star.
Its gravity at 1 bar is 11.15&nbsp;m/s2, 1.14 times the surface gravity of Earth, and surpassed only by Jupiter.
The outermost ring, Adams, contains five prominent arcs now named ''Courage'', ''Liberté'', ''Egalité&nbsp;1'', ''Egalité&nbsp;2'' and ''Fraternité'' (Courage, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity).
Images taken from the W. M. Keck Observatory in 2002 and 2003 show considerable decay in the rings when compared to images by ''Voyager 2''.
The core of Neptune is composed of iron, nickel and silicates, with an interior model giving a mass about 1.2 times that of Earth.
The tail of the magnetosphere extends out to at least 72 times the radius of Neptune, and likely much farther.
Neptune also resembles Uranus in its magnetosphere, with a magnetic field strongly tilted relative to its rotational axis at 47° and offset at least 0.55&nbsp;radii, or about 13500&nbsp;km from the planet's physical centre.
The large quadrupole moment of Neptune may be the result of offset from the planet's centre and geometrical constraints of the field's dynamo generator.
Some of the earliest recorded observations ever made through a telescope, Galileo's drawings on 28 December 1612 and 27 January 1613, contain plotted points that match up with what is now known to be the position of Neptune.
It is named after the Roman god of the sea and has the astronomical symbol ♆.
More typically, by tracking the motion of persistent clouds, wind speeds have been shown to vary from 20&nbsp;m/s in the easterly direction to 325&nbsp;m/s westward.
The region between 40 and 42&nbsp;AU is an example.
As they are stable features that can persist for several months, they are thought to be vortex structures.
The first and so far only object identified as associated with Neptune's trailing  Lagrangian point is .
Astronomers now estimate that the arcs are corralled into their current form by the gravitational effects of Galatea, a moon just inward from the ring.
Dark spots may dissipate when they migrate too close to the equator or possibly through some other unknown mechanism.
Unlike all other large planetary moons in the Solar System, Triton has a retrograde orbit, indicating that it was captured rather than forming in place; it was probably once a dwarf planet in the Kuiper belt.
electrically conducting liquids (probably a combination of ammonia, methane and water) resulting in a dynamo action.
The spacecrafts closest approach to the planet occurred on 25&nbsp;August 1989.
On both occasions, Galileo seems to have mistaken Neptune for a fixed star when it appeared close—in conjunction—to Jupiter in the night sky; hence, he is not credited with Neptune's discovery.
The proposed ''New Horizons 2'' mission (which was later scrapped) might also have done a close flyby of the Neptunian system.
The abundance of methane, ethane and acetylene at Neptune's equator is 10–100 times greater than at the poles.
It will eventually be torn apart, in about 3.6&nbsp;billion years, when it reaches the Roche limit.
In 1845–46, Urbain Le Verrier, independently of Adams, developed his own calculations but aroused no enthusiasm in his compatriots.
Its small apparent size makes it challenging to study it visually.
The mantle may consist of a layer of ionic water in which the water molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions, and deeper down superionic water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions float around freely within the oxygen lattice.
Via Cambridge Observatory director James Challis, he requested extra data from Sir George Airy, the Astronomer Royal, who supplied it in February 1844.
Unlike Uranus, Neptune's composition has a higher volume of ocean, whereas Uranus has a smaller mantle.
In particular, it seems that the ''Liberté'' arc might disappear in as little as one century.
Temperatures at the planet's centre are approximately .
The object has been a quasi-satellite of Neptune for about 12,500 years and it will remain in that dynamical state for another 12,500 years.
These resonances occur when Neptune's orbital period is a precise fraction of that of the object, such as 1:2, or 3:4.
Neptune's mass of 1.0243&nbsp;kg is intermediate between Earth and the larger gas giants: it is 17 times that of Earth but just 1/19th that of Jupiter.
At a depth where the atmospheric pressure equals , the temperature is .
Hence, for the most part, ''Voyager 2'''s mission relied on preloaded commands for the Neptune encounter.
Neptune is the farthest planet from the Sun, yet its internal energy is sufficient to drive the fastest planetary winds seen in the Solar System.
A trace amount of methane is also present.
Prominent absorption bands of methane exist at wavelengths above 600&nbsp;nm, in the red and infrared portion of the spectrum.
For reasons that remain obscure, the planet's thermosphere is at an anomalously high temperature of about 750&nbsp;K. The planet is too far from the Sun for this heat to be generated by ultraviolet radiation.
The demand for a mythological name seemed to be in keeping with the nomenclature of the other planets, all of which, except for Earth, were named for deities in Greek and Roman mythology.
In 2006, the International Astronomical Union defined the word "planet" for the first time, reclassifying Pluto as a "dwarf planet" and making Neptune once again the outermost known planet in the Solar System.
Earth-based observations announced in 2005 appeared to show that Neptune's rings are much more unstable than previously thought.
although Neptune's vivid azure differs from Uranus's milder cyan.
In 1989, Triton was the coldest object that had yet been measured in the Solar System, with estimated temperatures of .
In 2004 and 2005, five new small satellites of Neptune with diameters between 38 and 61 kilometres were discovered.
The eccentricity of 0.7512 gives it an apoapsis that is seven times its periapsis distance from Neptune.
Although the second-most-massive Neptunian moon, it is only 0.25% the mass of Triton.
Most telescopic data was fairly limited until the advent of the ''Hubble Space Telescope'' and large ground-based telescopes with adaptive optics (AO).
The persistence of companion clouds shows that some former dark spots may continue to exist as cyclones even though they are no longer visible as a dark feature.
In Māori, the planet is called ''Tangaroa'', named after the Māori god of the sea.
Challis vainly scoured the sky throughout August and September.
The existence of arcs was difficult to explain because the laws of motion would predict that arcs would spread out into a uniform ring over short timescales.
Deeper clouds of water ice should be found at pressures of about , where the temperature reaches .
Because its axial tilt is comparable to Earth's, the variation in the length of its day over the course of its long year is not any more extreme.
That credit belongs only to the person who succeeded both in predicting the planet's place and in convincing astronomers to search for it."
The stratosphere then gives way to the thermosphere at a pressure lower than 10−5 to 10−4 microbars (1 to 10&nbsp;Pa).
Its atmosphere forms about 5% to 10% of its mass and extends perhaps 10% to 20% of the way towards the core, where it reaches pressures of about 10&nbsp;GPa, or about 100,000 times that of Earth's atmosphere.
High-altitude clouds on Neptune have been observed casting shadows on the opaque cloud deck below.
The Scooter is another storm, a white cloud group farther south than the Great Dark Spot.
Other candidates are gravity waves from the interior that dissipate in the atmosphere.
Neptune's dark spots are thought to occur in the troposphere at lower altitudes than the brighter cloud features, so they appear as holes in the upper cloud decks.
The Small Dark Spot is a southern cyclonic storm, the second-most-intense storm observed during the 1989 encounter.
Neptune has 14 known moons.
Weather does not occur in the higher stratosphere or thermosphere.
These altitudes are in the layer where weather occurs, the troposphere.
In the infrared part of the spectrum, Neptune's storms appear bright against the cooler background, allowing the size and shape of these features to be readily tracked.
This apparent backward motion is created when Earth's orbit takes it past an outer planet.
Neptune's equatorial radius of 24,764&nbsp;km is nearly four times that of Earth.
As a result, this planet experiences similar seasonal changes.
Current models suggest that the matter density in the outer regions of the Solar System was too low to account for the formation of such large bodies from the traditionally accepted method of core accretion, and various hypotheses have been advanced to explain their formation.
Neptune's weather is characterised by extremely dynamic storm systems, with winds reaching speeds of almost —nearly reaching supersonic flow.
Since 1966, Dennis Rawlins has questioned the credibility of Adams's claim to co-discovery, and the issue was re-evaluated by historians with the return in 1998 of the "Neptune papers" (historical documents) to the Royal Observatory, Greenwich.
Often associated with dark spots are brighter, persistent methane clouds that form around the tropopause layer.
One candidate for a heating mechanism is atmospheric interaction with ions in the planet's magnetic field.
This suggestion met with stiff resistance outside France.
Because Neptune was only beginning its yearly retrograde cycle, the motion of the planet was far too slight to be detected with Galileo's small telescope.
From July to September 1989, ''Voyager 2'' discovered six moons of Neptune.
After the ''Voyager 2'' flyby mission, the next step in scientific exploration of the Neptunian system, is considered to be a Flagship orbital mission.
Depending on the thermal properties of its interior, the heat left over from Neptune's formation may be sufficient to explain its current heat flow, though it is more difficult to simultaneously explain Uranus's lack of internal heat while preserving the apparent similarity between the two planets.
This fluid, which has a high electrical conductivity, is sometimes called a water–ammonia ocean.
Because this was the last major planet the spacecraft could visit, it was decided to make a close flyby of the moon Triton, regardless of the consequences to the trajectory, similarly to what was done for Voyager 1's encounter with Saturn and its moon Titan.
From its discovery in 1846 until the subsequent discovery of Pluto in 1930, Neptune was the farthest known planet.
Subsequent observations revealed substantial deviations from the tables, leading Bouvard to hypothesise that an unknown body was perturbing the orbit through gravitational interaction.
If, say, an object orbits the Sun once for every two Neptune orbits, it will only complete half an orbit by the time Neptune returns to its original position.
The Kuiper belt is a ring of small icy worlds, similar to the asteroid belt but far larger, extending from Neptune's orbit at 30&nbsp;AU out to about 55&nbsp;AU from the Sun.
Above a pressure of five bars, the clouds may consist of ammonia, ammonium sulfide, hydrogen sulfide and water.
Before ''Voyager 2'''s arrival at Neptune, it was hypothesised that Uranus's tilted magnetosphere was the result of its sideways rotation.
It is close enough to Neptune to be locked into a synchronous rotation, and it is slowly spiralling inward because of tidal acceleration.
Claiming the right to name his discovery, Le Verrier quickly proposed the name ''Neptune'' for this new planet, though falsely stating that this had been officially approved by the French Bureau des Longitudes.
The dipole magnetic moment of Neptune is about 2.2&nbsp;T·m3 (14&nbsp;μT·''R''''N''3, where ''R''''N'' is the radius of Neptune).
Underneath, clouds of ammonia and hydrogen sulfide may be found.
The wide equatorial zone rotates with a period of about 18&nbsp;hours, which is slower than the 16.1-hour rotation of the planet's magnetic field.
The pressure at the centre is 7&nbsp;Mbar (700 GPa), about twice as high as that at the centre of Earth, and the temperature may be 5,400&nbsp;K.
By contrast, the reverse is true for the polar regions where the rotation period is 12&nbsp;hours.
The magnetopause, where the pressure of the magnetosphere counterbalances the solar wind, lies at a distance of 23–26.5 times the radius of Neptune.
From Earth, Neptune goes through apparent retrograde motion every 367&nbsp;days, resulting in a looping motion against the background stars during each opposition.
The temperature differential is enough to let methane, which elsewhere is frozen in the troposphere, escape into the stratosphere near the pole.
The long orbital period of Neptune results in seasons lasting forty years.
