The boiling point of neptunium is not empirically known and the usually given value of 4174&nbsp;°C is extrapolated from the vapor pressure of the element.
It hydrolyzes in basic solutions to form the oxo and hydroxo ions NpO2OH+, , and .
Np3As4 is prepared by a similar procedure using iodine as a transporting agent.
NpC is a non-stoichiometric compound, and could be better labelled as NpC''x'' (0.82 ≤ ''x'' ≤ 0.96).
NpF6 was first prepared in 1943 by reacting NpF3 and gaseous fluorine at very high temperatures and the first bulk quantities were obtained in 1958 by heating NpF4 and dripping pure fluorine on it in a specially prepared apparatus.
Complex nitrate compounds are also known: the experimenters who produced them in 1986 and 1987 produced single crystals by slow evaporation of the Np(IV) solution at ambient temperature in concentrated nitric acid and excess 2,2′-pyrimidine.
Four binary neptunium fluoride compounds, NpF3, NpF4, NpF5, and NpF6, have been reported.
Thus actinides higher on the periodic table will more readily undergo hydrolysis.
Neptunium has five ionic oxidation states ranging from +3 to +7 when forming chemical compounds, which can be simultaneously observed in solutions.
As the first isotope of neptunium to be discovered has such a short half-life, McMillan and Abelson were unable to prepare a sample that was large enough to perform chemical analysis of the new element using the technology that was then available.
Each neptunium atom is coordinated to four others and the Np–Np bond lengths are 260&nbsp;pm.
Despite this, a neptunium atomic bomb has never been built: uranium and plutonium have lower critical masses than 235Np and 237Np, and 236Np is difficult to purify as it is not found in quantity in spent nuclear fuel and is nearly impossible to separate in any significant quantities from its parent 237Np.
Finally, the short-lived 240Np occurs as an intermediate in the decay chain of primordial 244Pu.
Many of the resulting compounds also have an equivalent compound that substitutes uranium for neptunium.
The greenish-brown NpO2 is very stable over a large range of pressures and temperatures and does not undergo phase transitions at low temperatures.
Trace amounts of the neptunium isotopes neptunium-237, -239, and -240 are found naturally as decay products from  transmutation reactions in uranium ores.
Np(VII) has not been well-studied and no neutral hydroxides have been reported.
NpOS was first prepared in 1985 by vacuum sealing NpO2, Np3S5, and pure sulfur in a quartz tube and heating it to 900&nbsp;°C for one week.
The most stable state in solution is +5, but the valence +4 is preferred in solid neptunium compounds.
Body-centered cubic
Np2O5 is black-brown in color and monoclinic with a lattice size of 418×658×409&nbsp;picometres.
However, the discovery of induced radioactivity by Irène and Frédéric Joliot-Curie in late 1933 opened up an entirely new method of researching the elements and inspired a small group of Italian scientists led by Enrico Fermi to begin a series of experiments involving neutron bombardment.
Np(V) does not bond as readily to soil particles in mildly acidic conditions as its fellow actinides americium and curium by nearly an order of magnitude.
Neptunium nitride (NpN) was first prepared in 1953 by reacting neptunium hydride and ammonia gas at around 750&nbsp;°C in a quartz capillary tube.
However, as the full extent of the reactions that occur between neptunium and oxygen has yet to be researched, it is not certain which of these claims is accurate.
Because it has isotopes with very long half-lives, it is of particular concern in the context of designing confinement facilities that can last for thousands of years.
Because the Np(V) ion  is very stable, it can only form a hydroxide in high acidity levels.
These are isostructural with the corresponding plutonium hydrides, although unlike PuH2+''x'', the lattice parameters of NpH2+''x'' become greater as the hydrogen content (''x'') increases.
It hydrolyzes in basic solutions to form NpO2OH and .
237Np is used in devices for detecting high-energy (MeV) neutrons.
This behavior enables it to migrate rapidly through the soil while in solution without becoming fixed in place, contributing further to its mobility.
Irradiating neptunium-237 with electron beams, provoking bremsstrahlung, also produces quite pure samples of the isotope plutonium-236, useful as a tracer to determine plutonium concentration in the environment.
The overwhelming majority of this is composed of the long-lived isotopes 236Np and 237Np since even the moderately long-lived 235Np (half-life 396&nbsp;days) would have decayed to less than one-billionth (10−9) its original concentration over the intervening decades.
It is relatively unstable and decomposes to NpO2 and O2 at 420-695&nbsp;°C.
NpF6 or neptunium hexafluoride is extremely volatile, as are its adjacent actinide compounds uranium hexafluoride (UF6) and plutonium hexafluoride (PuF6).
While neptunium itself has no commercial uses at present, it is widely used as a precursor for the formation of plutonium-238, used in radioisotope thermal generators to provide electricity for spacecraft.
Since then, most neptunium has been and still is produced by neutron irradiation of uranium in nuclear reactors.
All of the known isotopes except one that are heavier than this decay exclusively via beta emission.
All of the neptunium sulfides except for the β and γ forms of Np2S3 are isostructural with the equivalent uranium sulfide and several, including NpS, α−Np2S3, and β−Np2S3 are also isostructural with the equivalent plutonium sulfide.
Neptunium bromides NpBr3 and NpBr4 have also been created; the latter by reacting aluminium bromide with NpO2 at 350&nbsp;°C and the former in an almost identical procedure but with zinc present.
Although neptunium oxides have not been produced with neptunium in oxidations as high as those possible with the adjacent actinide uranium, neptunium oxides are more stable at lower oxidation levels.
Neptunium-237 is the most mobile actinide in the deep geological repository environment.
Some compounds that have been characterized include Na2Np2O7, Na4NpO5, Na6NpO6, and Na2NpO4.
The first of these claims was by Czech engineer Odolen Koblic in 1934 when he extracted a small amount of material from the wash water of heated pitchblende.
He quickly realized that one of the half-lives closely matched the known 23-minute decay period of uranium-239, but the other half-life of 2.3 days was unknown.
The densities of different isotopes of neptunium in the alpha phase are expected to be observably different: α-235Np should have density 20.303&nbsp;g/cm3; α-236Np, density 20.389&nbsp;g/cm3; α-237Np, density 20.476&nbsp;g/cm3.
As it is unclear what happens to the containment in that long time span, an extraction of the neptunium would minimize the contamination of the environment if the nuclear waste could be mobilized after several thousand years.
Both scientists began their work using the prevailing theory that element 93 would have similar chemistry to rhenium, but Segrè rapidly determined that McMillan's sample was not at all similar to rhenium.
β-neptunium takes on a distorted tetragonal close-packed structure.
As of 2009, the world production of neptunium-237 by commercial power reactors was over 1000 critical masses a year, but to extract the isotope from irradiated fuel elements would be a major industrial undertaking.
It is a strong Lewis acid and is the main neptunium ion encountered in solutions of pH&nbsp;3–4.
can also form the complex ions  (M = Al, Ga, Sc, In, Fe, Cr, Rh) in perchloric acid solution: the strength of interaction between the two cations follows the order Fe > In > Sc > Ga > Al.
In acidic solutions, the neptunium(III) to neptunium(VII) ions exist as Np3+, Np4+, , , and .
Other known neptunium cyclooctatetraenyl derivatives include Np(RC8H7)2 (R = ethanol, butanol) and KNp(C8H8)·2THF, which is isostructural to the corresponding plutonium compound.
This element also has at least four meta states, with the most stable being 236mNp with a half-life of 22.5 hours.
It reacts with excess carbon to form pure Np2C3.
A neptunium atom has 93 protons and 93 electrons, of which seven are valence electrons.
Np(IV) hydroxides exist mainly as the electrically neutral Np(OH)4 and its mild solubility in water is not affected at all by the pH of the solution.
237Np itself, being the beta-stable isobar of mass number 237, decays almost exclusively by alpha emission into 233Pa.
It is not soluble in water.
The coordination chemistry of neptunium(V) has been extensively researched due to the presence of cation–cation interactions in the solid state, which had been already known for actinyl ions.
Transition temperature
Some neptunium sulfates have been characterized, both aqueous and solid and at various oxidation states of neptunium (IV through VI have been observed).
It is the densest of all the actinides and the fifth-densest of all naturally occurring elements, behind only rhenium, platinum, iridium, and osmium.
It is the heaviest actinide that can lose all its valence electrons in a stable compound.
This occurrence in neptunium compounds is somewhat surprising because they often exhibit strong magnetism, which usually destroys superconductivity.
Some of these that have been characterized include CsNpF6, Rb2NpF7, Na3NpF8, and K3NpO2F5.
Additional compounds have been produced by reacting NpO3 and water with solid alkali and alkaline peroxides at temperatures of 400 - 600&nbsp;°C for 15–30 hours.
Np(V) is also reduced by humic acid if it is present on the surface of goethite, hematite, and magnetite.
While von Grosse's claim that Fermi was actually producing protactinium was quickly tested and disproved, Noddack's proposal that the uranium had been shattered into two or more much smaller fragments was simply ignored by most because existing nuclear theory did not include a way for this to be possible.
Calculated values of the critical masses of neptunium-235, -236, and -237 respectively are 66.2&nbsp;kg, 6.79&nbsp;kg, and 63.6&nbsp;kg: the neptunium-236 value is even lower than that of plutonium-239.
In basic solutions, Np4+ tends to hydrolyze to form the neutral neptunium(IV) hydroxide (Np(OH)4) and neptunium(IV) oxide (NpO2).
It does show a phase transition from face-centered cubic to orthorhombic at around 33-37GPa, although it returns to is original phase when pressure is released.
Np(IV) is absorbed efficiently by tuff, granodiorite, and bentonite; although uptake by the latter is most pronounced in mildly acidic conditions.
In early 1940, McMillan realized that his 1939 experiment with Segrè had failed to test the chemical reactions of the radioactive source with sufficient rigor.
Neptunium has also been used in detectors of high-energy neutrons.
(γ→liquid) 639&nbsp;°C
Being chemically stable, neptunium phosphates have been investigated for potential use in immobilizing nuclear waste.
This proved that the unknown radioactive source originated from the decay of uranium and, coupled with the previous observation that the source was different chemically from all known elements, proved beyond all doubt that a new element had been discovered.
Analogously to its neighbours, uranium and plutonium, the order of the neptunium ions in terms of complex formation ability is Np4+ >  ≥ Np3+ > .
Among the methods that are or have been used are: solvent extraction (using various extractants, usually multidentate β-diketone derivatives, organophosphorus compounds, and amine compounds), chromatography using various ion-exchange or chelating resins, coprecipitation (possible matrices include LaF3, BiPO4, BaSO4, Fe(OH)3, and MnO2), electrodeposition, and biotechnological methods.
In a new experiment, McMillan tried subjecting the unknown substance to HF in the presence of a reducing agent, something he had not done before.
It also exhibits a strong tendency to bind to colloidal particulates, an effect that is enhanced when in soil with a high clay content.
* 237U is also produced via an (n,2n) reaction with 238U.
This procedure also created trace amounts of an additional antimonide compound Np3Sb4.
NpO2F2 is a pinkish solid and can be prepared by reacting NpO3 · H2O and Np2F5 with pure fluorine at around 330&nbsp;°C.
The first reported such compound was initially characterized as ·''n''H2O in 1968, but was suggested in 1973 to actually have the formula ·2H2O based on the fact that Np(VII) occurs as  in aqueous solution.
The other claim, in 1938 by Romanian physicist Horia Hulubei and French chemist Yvette Cauchois, claimed to have discovered the new element via spectroscopy in minerals.
It probably exists mostly as .
When placed in a 0.1&nbsp;M sodium perchlorate solution, it does not react significantly for a period of months, although a higher molar concentration of 3.0&nbsp;M will result in it reacting to the solid hydroxide NpO2OH almost immediately.
This arrangement placed protactinium below tantalum, uranium below tungsten, and further suggested that element 93, at that point referred to as eka-rhenium, should be similar to the group 7 elements, including manganese and rhenium.
While the question of whether Fermi's experiment had produced element 93 was stalemated, two additional claims of the discovery of the element appeared, although unlike Fermi, they both claimed to have observed it in nature.
Neptunium reacts with hydrogen in a similar manner to its neighbor plutonium, forming the hydrides NpH2+''x'' (face-centered cubic) and NpH3 (hexagonal).
This reaction resulted in the sample precipitating with the HF, an action that definitively ruled out the possibility that the unknown substance was a rare earth.
Four atoms of neptunium make up a unit cell, and the Np–Np bond lengths are 276&nbsp;pm.
Once in the environment, neptunium generally oxidizes fairly quickly, usually to the +4 or +5 state.
Finely divided neptunium metal presents a fire hazard because neptunium is pyrophoric; small grains will ignite spontaneously in air at room temperature.
It is a stable ion and is the most common form of neptunium in aqueous solutions.
Several theoretical objections to the claims of Fermi's paper were quickly raised; in particular, the exact process that took place when an atom captured a neutron was not well understood at the time.
Some allotropes of the other actinides also exhibit similar behaviour, though to a lesser degree.
Neptunium has also been observed to bond with oxides of many additional elements in groups 3 through 7, although these are much less well studied.
Of these, Np2S3, prepared by reacting NpO2 with hydrogen sulfide and carbon disulfide at around 1000&nbsp;°C, is the most well-studied and three allotropic forms are known.
Neptunium(VI) compounds range from the simple oxalate  (which is unstable, usually becoming Np(IV)) to such complicated compounds as the green .
Since 1967, when neptunium(VII) was discovered, some coordination compounds with neptunium in the +7 oxidation state have been prepared and studied.
Neptunium also forms a large number of oxide compounds with a wide variety of elements, although the neptunate oxides formed with alkali metals and alkaline earth metals have been by far the most studied.
The β-Np/γ-Np/liquid triple point occurs at 725&nbsp;°C and 3200&nbsp;MPa.
γ (measured at 600&nbsp;°C)
All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 4.5 days, and the majority of these have half-lives that are less than 50 minutes.
Neptunium's unique radioactive characteristics allowed it to be traced as it moved through various compounds in chemical reactions, at first this was the only method available to prove that its chemistry was different from other elements.
Thorium, protactinium, and uranium, with their dominant oxidation states of +4, +5, and +6 respectively, fooled scientists into thinking they belonged below hafnium, tantalum, and tungsten, rather than below the lanthanide series, which was at the time viewed as a fluke, and whose members all have dominant +3 states; neptunium, on the other hand, has a much weaker, more unstable +7 state, with +4 and +5 being the most stable.
:NpF3 +  O2 + HF &#8594; NpF4 +  H2O&nbsp;&nbsp;(400°C)
Although he did not discover anything of note from this, McMillan did observe two new beta decay half-lives in the uranium trioxide target itself, which meant that whatever was producing the radioactivity had not violently repelled each other like normal fission products.
The vast majority is generated as a by-product in conventional nuclear power reactors.
Shortly after this, Abelson, who had received his graduate degree from the university, visited Berkeley for a short vacation and McMillan asked the more able chemist to assist with the separation of the experiment's results.
''a'' = 666.3''b'' = 472.3''c'' = 488.7
A neptunium atom has 93 electrons, arranged in the configuration Rn5f46d17s2.
NpN is isomorphous with uranium mononitride (UN) and plutonium mononitride (PuN) and has a melting point of 2830&nbsp;°C under a nitrogen pressure of around 1 MPa.
For the former, NpX2+ and  (X = Cl, Br) were obtained in 1966 in concentrated LiCl and LiBr solutions, respectively: for the latter, 1970 experiments discovered that the  ion could form sulfate complexes in acidic solutions, such as  and ; these were found to have higher stability constants than the neptunyl ion ().
Regardless of its oxidation state, the element exhibits a much greater mobility than the other actinides, largely due to its ability to readily form aqueous solutions with various other elements.
:NpO2 + 3 MO2 &#8594; M3NpO5&nbsp;(M = K, Cs, Rb)
Many neptunium(IV) coordination compounds have been reported, the first one being , which is isostructural with the analogous uranium(IV) coordination compound.
Animal tests showed that it is not absorbed via the digestive tract.
Np3P4 can be created by reacting neptunium metal with red phosphorus at 740&nbsp;°C in a vacuum and then allowing any extra phosphorus to sublimate away.
NpAs2 crystals are brownish gold and Np3As4 is black.
They and many other scientists attempted to accomplish this, including Otto Hahn and Lise Meitner who were among the best radiochemists in the world at the time and supporters of Fermi's claim, but they all failed.
Its position in the periodic table just after uranium, named after the planet Uranus, led to it being named after Neptune, the next planet beyond Uranus.
A month later, the almost totally unexpected discovery of nuclear fission by Hahn, Meitner, and Otto Frisch put an end to the possibility that Fermi had discovered element 93 because most of the unknown half-lives that had been observed by Fermi's team were rapidly identified as fission products.
In strongly acidic solution, Np(VII) is found as ; water quickly reduces this to Np(VI).
The first has a face centered cubic structure and is prepared by converting neptunium metal to a powder and then reacting it with phosphine gas at 350&nbsp;°C.
The oxides and hydroxides of neptunium are closely related to its ions.
The isotopes neptunium-235, -236, and -237 are predicted to be fissile; only neptunium-237's fissionability has been experimentally shown, with the critical mass being about 60&nbsp;kg, only about 10&nbsp;kg more than that of the commonly used uranium-235.
As research on nuclear fission progressed in early 1939, Edwin McMillan at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory of the University of California, Berkeley decided to run an experiment bombarding uranium using the powerful 60-inch (1.52 m) cyclotron that had recently been built at the university.
Research into the element did continue as a minor part of the project and the first bulk sample of neptunium was isolated in 1944.
As such, it is by far the most common isotope to be utilized in chemical studies of the element.
However, after the discovery of the long-lived 237Np isotope in 1942 by Glenn Seaborg and Arthur Wahl, forming weighable amounts of neptunium became a realistic endeavor.
The hydrides require extreme care in handling as they decompose in a vacuum at 300&nbsp;°C to form finely divided neptunium metal, which is pyrophoric.
Np(III) or Np3+ exists as hydrated complexes in acidic solutions, .
The neptunium carbides NpC, Np2C3, and NpC2 (tentative) have been reported, but have not characterized in detail despite the high importance and utility of actinide carbides as advanced nuclear reactor fuel.
Although by 1938 some scientists, including Niels Bohr, were still reluctant to accept that Fermi had actually produced a new element, he was nevertheless awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in November 1938 "''for his demonstrations of the existence of new radioactive elements produced by neutron irradiation, and for his related discovery of nuclear reactions brought about by slow neutrons''".
Other Np(IV) coordination compounds are known, some involving other metals such as cobalt (·8H2O, formed at 400&nbsp;K) and copper (·6H2O, formed at 600&nbsp;K).
After only about 80 million years, the concentration of even the longest lived isotope, 237Np, would have been reduced to less than one-trillionth (10−12) of its original amount; and even if the whole Earth had initially been made of pure 237Np (and ignoring that this would be well over its critical mass of 60&nbsp;kg), 2100 half-lives would have passed since the formation of the Solar System, and thus all of it would have decayed.
It is soluble in benzene and THF, and is less sensitive to oxygen and water than Pu(C5H5)3 and Am(C5H5)3.
The half-life of 239Np is very short, although the detection of its much longer-lived daughter 239Pu in nature in 1951 definitively established its natural occurrence.
Currently, commercial reprocessing plants use the Purex process, involving the solvent extraction of uranium and plutonium with tributyl phosphate.
It is not believed that an actual weapon has ever been constructed using neptunium.
These neutrons come from the spontaneous fission of uranium-238, naturally neutron-induced fission of uranium-235, cosmic ray spallation of nuclei, and light elements absorbing alpha particles and emitting a neutron.
;Phosphates, sulfates, and carbonates
The oxysulfides NpOS, Np4O4S, and Np2O2S have also been created, although the latter three have not been well studied.
Other neptunium chloride compounds have also been reported, including NpOCl2, Cs2NpCl6, Cs3NpO2Cl4, and Cs2NaNpCl6.
In the presence of oxygen, it is quickly oxidized to Np(IV) unless strong reducing agents are also present.
This latter behavior would later result in the beta decay of a neutron into a proton, thus moving the resulting isotope one place up the periodic table.
NpCl3 is created by reducing neptunium dioxide with hydrogen and carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and NpCl4 by reacting a neptunium oxide with CCl4 at around 500&nbsp;°C.
As a final step, McMillan and Abelson prepared a much larger sample of bombarded uranium that had a prominent 23-minute half-life from 239U and demonstrated conclusively that the unknown 2.3-day half-life increased in strength in concert with a decrease in the 23-minute activity through the following reaction:
238Pu also exists in sizable quantities in spent nuclear fuel but would have to be separated from other isotopes of plutonium.
The isotopes of neptunium range in atomic weight from 225.0339 u (225Np) to 244.068 u (244Np).
Extensive study has been performed on compounds of the form , where M represents a monovalent cation and An is either uranium, neptunium, or plutonium.
The trivalent cyclopentadienyl compound Np(C5H5)3·THF was obtained in 1972 from reacting Np(C5H5)3Cl with sodium, although the simpler Np(C5H5) could not be obtained.
α-neptunium takes on an orthorhombic structure, resembling a highly distorted body-centered cubic structure.
The lithium neptunate oxides Li6NpO6 and Li4NpO5 can be obtained with similar reactions of NpO2 and Li2O.
Tetravalent neptunium cyclopentadienyl, a reddish-brown complex, was synthesized in 1968 by reacting neptunium(IV) chloride with potassium cyclopentadienide:
The concentration of 237Np in seawater is approximately 6.5&nbsp;×&nbsp;10−5&nbsp;millibecquerels per liter: this concentration is between 0.1% and 1% that of plutonium.
This makes it and its predecessors such as americium-241 candidates of interest for destruction by nuclear transmutation.
The most stable isotope of neptunium, neptunium-237, is a by-product of nuclear reactors and plutonium production.
The behavior provides an additional aid in the element's observed high mobility.
It has found some limited uses as a radioactive tracer and a precursor for various nuclear reactions to produce useful plutonium isotopes.
It may be obtained from the reaction of neptunium hydride with graphite at 1400&nbsp;°C or by heating the constituent elements together in an electric arc furnace using a tungsten electrode.
Recovering uranium and plutonium from spent nuclear fuel for reuse is one of the major processes of the nuclear fuel cycle.
When exposed to air at normal temperatures, it forms a thin oxide layer.
Neptunium is a hard, silvery, ductile, radioactive actinide metal.
Np2S5 is made by heating a mixture of Np3S5 and pure sulfur to 500&nbsp;°C.
The neptunium iodide NpI3 has also been prepared by the same method as NpBr3.
However, even this fraction still amounts to more than fifty tons per year globally.
Ions of neptunium are prone to hydrolysis and formation of coordination compounds.
It is isomorphous to uranocene and plutonocene, and they behave chemically identically: all three compounds are insensitive to water or dilute bases but are sensitive to air, reacting quickly to form oxides, and are only slightly soluble in benzene and toluene.
Artificial 237Np metal is usually isolated through a reaction of 237NpF3 with liquid barium or lithium at around  1200 °C and is most often extracted from spent nuclear fuel rods in  kilogram amounts as a by-product in plutonium production.
In 1952, 237Np was identified and isolated from concentrates of uranium ore from the Belgian Congo: in these minerals, the ratio of neptunium-237 to uranium is less than or equal to about 10−12 to 1.
:NpO2 +  H2 + 3 HF &#8594; NpF3 + 2 H2O&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;(400°C)
γ-neptunium has a body-centered cubic structure and has Np–Np bond length of 297&nbsp;pm.
The purpose was to separate the various fission products produced by the bombardment by exploiting the enormous force that the fragments gain from their mutual electrical repulsion after fissioning.
Neptunium metal is similar to uranium in terms of physical workability.
Neptunium metal is very reactive.
About 81% of the excited 236U nuclei undergo fission, but the remainder decay to the ground state of 236U by emitting gamma radiation.
When Fermi's team bombarded uranium, they observed this behavior as well, which strongly suggested that the resulting isotope had an atomic number of 93.
:NpCl4 + 4&nbsp;KC5H5 → Np(C5H5)4 + 4&nbsp;KCl
Ternary neptunium oxides are generally formed by reacting NpO2 with the oxide of another element or by precipitating from an alkaline solution.
The most well known organoneptunium compounds are the cyclopentadienyl and cyclooctatetraenyl compounds and their derivatives.
The divalent ligands are more strongly complexing than the monovalent ones.
In 1992, the U.S. Department of Energy declassified the statement that neptunium-237 "can be used for a nuclear explosive device".
This suggests that the other Np(IV) hydroxide, , does not have a significant presence.
No neptunium−polonium compounds have been reported.
If accurate, this would give neptunium the largest liquid range of any element (3535&nbsp;K passes between its melting and boiling points).
The element occurs in three allotropic forms and it normally exhibits five oxidation states, ranging from +3 to +7.
In general, Np hydroxides at various oxidation levels are less stable than the actinides before it on the periodic table such as thorium and uranium and more stable than those after it such as plutonium and americium.
Np(V) is also readily absorbed by concrete, which because of the element's radioactivity is a consideration that must be addressed when building nuclear waste storage facilities.
Since these elements comprise a large percentage of fission products, Segrè and McMillan decided that the half-life must have been simply another fission product, titling the paper "An Unsuccessful Search for Transuranium Elements".
In forming compounds and ions, all the valence electrons may be lost, leaving behind an inert core of inner electrons with the electron configuration of the noble gas radon; more commonly, only some of the valence electrons will be lost.
Np(VI) or , the neptunyl ion, shows a light pink or reddish color in an acidic solution and yellow-green otherwise.
The lone exception, 240mNp, exhibits a rare (>0.12%) decay by isomeric transition in addition to the beta emission.
It will form the compound NpO3· H2O in the presence of ozone under various carbon dioxide pressures.
The crystal structures of neptunium, protactinium, uranium, and plutonium do not have clear analogs among the lanthanides and are more similar to those of the 3d&nbsp;transition metals.
