Nero's mother, Agrippina, lost favour with Caligula and was exiled in 39 after her husband's death.
Nero is portrayed as a tyrant, but those that replace him are not described as better.
He even composed songs that were performed by other entertainers throughout the empire.
Under Nero, restrictions were put on the amount of bail and fines.
Nero banned any magistrate or procurator from exhibiting public entertainment for fear that the venue was being used as a method to sway the populace.
The Parthian king Vologases I refused to remove his brother Tiridates from Armenia.
Ironically, he was later involved in a conspiracy to overthrow Nero and was executed.
According to Tacitus, Agrippina hoped that with her support, Britannicus, being the blood son of Claudius, would be seen as the true heir to the throne by the state over Nero.
Within Christian communities, these writings, along with others, fueled the belief that Nero would return as the Antichrist.
Tacitus was the son of a procurator, who married into the elite family of Agricola.
He was a senator under Commodus and governor of Smyrna after the death of Septimius Severus; and afterwards suffect consul around 205, and also proconsul in Africa and Pannonia.
Again, Rome and Parthia were at war and this continued until 63.
By the 4th century, a number of writers were stating that Nero killed Peter and Paul.
It is because of this position of power Agrippina felt jealous as Seneca in particular rose up in Nero's court as he offered the advice Nero wanted to hear unlike his mother.
Tacitus mentions that Christians confessed to the crime, but it is not known whether these confessions were induced by torture.
Later, Nero ordered the exile of Fabricius Veiento who slandered the Senate in a book.
He is known for many executions, including that of his mother, and the probable murder by poison of his stepbrother Britannicus.
Nero's father had been employed as a praetor and was a member of Caligula's staff when the latter travelled to the East (some apparently think Suetonius refers to Augustus's adopted son Gaius Caesar here, but this is not likely).
Houses after the fire were spaced out, built in brick, and faced by porticos on wide roads.
Enormous gladiatorial shows were also held.
Commander Corbulo responded and repelled most of the Parthian army that same year.
He cried, "Have I neither friend nor foe?"
The Talmud adds that the sage Reb Meir Baal HaNess, '''Rabbi Meir''' or '''Rabbi Meir Baal HaNes''' (Rabbi Meir the miracle maker) was a Jewish sage who lived in the time of the Mishna a prominent supporter of the Bar Kokhba rebellion against Roman rule.
In 64, Rome burned.
When Agrippina survived, he had her executed by Anicetus and framed it as a suicide.
Other tutors were less often mentioned, such as Alexander of Aegae.
He also thought that existing writing on them was unbalanced:
The Sibylline Oracles, Book 5 and 8, written in the 2nd century, speak of Nero returning and bringing destruction.
Seneca succeeded in having himself, Pallas and Burrus acquitted.
Claudius allowed Agrippina to return from exile.
Over time, Nero became progressively more powerful, freeing himself of his advisers and eliminating rivals to the throne.
Cassius Dio (c. 155–229) was the son of Cassius Apronianus, a Roman senator.
Pallas, along with Burrus, was accused of conspiring against the Emperor to bring Faustus Sulla to the throne.
Agrippina poisoned her second husband Passienus Crispus, so many ancient historians also accuse her of murdering her third husband, the emperor Claudius.
He reduced the weight of the denarius from 84 per Roman pound to 96 (3.85&nbsp;grams to 3.35&nbsp;grams).
In 49 AD, Claudius was married for a fourth time, to Nero's mother Agrippina, despite her being his niece.
Octavia was Augustus' elder sister.
As a competitor, Nero raced a ten-horse chariot and nearly died after being thrown from it.
Also, fees for lawyers were limited.
Augustine of Hippo wrote of the legend as a popular belief in 422.
The peace did not last and full-scale war broke out in 58.
This reworking of images is often explained as part of the way in which the memory of disgraced emperors was condemned posthumously (see damnatio memoriae).
In 64 AD, most of Rome was destroyed in the Great Fire of Rome.
There you will find that Nero was the first that persecuted this doctrine".
Although, what Suetonius may have meant is that he was in his seventeenth year as his date of birth, also listed by Suetonius, would have made him 16 at the time of Claudius' death.
Nero devalued the Roman currency for the first time in the Empire's history.
Tacitus, in book XIII of his Annals, describes Nero as being 'scarcely out of his boyhood' at the time he became emperor.
At the end of 66, conflict broke out between Greeks and Jews in Jerusalem and Caesarea.
He was consul four times between 55 and 60.
It was the first exploration of equatorial Africa from Europe in history.
Accusations of treason being plotted against Nero and the Senate first appeared in 62.
Tiridates retreated and Rome again controlled most of Armenia.
Corbulo tried to convince Nero to continue the war, but Nero opted for a peace deal instead.
Agrippina also attempted to influence the young Nero.
He was considered one of the greatest of the Tannaim of the third generation (139-163).
He states that Nero's persecution led to Peter and Paul's deaths, but that Nero did not give any specific orders.
The Senate convinced him this action would bankrupt the public treasury.
Nero divorced and banished Octavia on grounds of infertility, leaving him free to marry the pregnant Poppaea.
The civil war during the year of the Four Emperors was described by ancient historians as a troubling period.
Of other historians, he said:
Reportedly because a marriage to Poppaea and a divorce from Octavia did not seem politically feasible with Agrippina alive, Nero ordered the murder of his mother in 59.
In 55, Agrippina attempted to intervene in favor of Octavia and demanded that her son dismiss Acte.
In 310, Lactantius  wrote that Nero "suddenly disappeared, and even the burial place of that noxious wild beast was nowhere to be seen.
Nero enacted a public relief effort as well as significant reconstruction.
A number of modern historians find this an unlikely motive as Nero did not marry Poppaea until 62.
While in this position, Suetonius started writing biographies of the emperors, accentuating the anecdotal and sensational aspects.
Only fragments of these books remain and what does remain was abridged and altered by John Xiphilinus, an 11th-century monk.
These first histories at one time did exist and were described as biased and fantastical, either overly critical or praising of Nero.
At least three Nero imposters emerged leading rebellions.
Additionally, according to Suetonius, Poppaea did not divorce her husband until after Agrippina's death, making it unlikely that the already married Poppaea would be pressing Nero for marriage.
In this first year, he forbade others to refer to him with regard to enactments, for which he was praised by the Senate.
Tacitus mentions that Nero's death was welcomed by Senators, nobility and the upper class.
He also performed as an actor and a singer.
Ancient historians state that these projects and others exacerbated the drain on the State's budget.
The economic policy of Nero is a point of debate among scholars.
Nero's final words were "Too late!
During this period, some ancient historians speak fairly well of Nero and contrast it with his later rule.
With Agrippina's influence over her son severed, she reportedly began pushing for Britannicus, Nero's stepbrother, to become emperor.
It was said that the common Roman hailed Otho as Nero himself.
He entered his political life as a senator after Nero's death and, by Tacitus' own admission, owed much to Nero's rivals.
The original sources were also said to contradict on a number of events.
The Senate actually was still reluctant and deliberating on the right course of action as Nero was the last member of the Julio-Claudian Family.
Twenty years after Nero's death, during the reign of Domitian, there was a third pretender.
In the future, the king of Armenia was to be a Parthian prince, but his appointment required approval from the Romans.
Claudius died in 54 and Nero was established as Emperor.
According to Suetonius, Nero abandoned the idea when some army officers openly refused to obey his commands, responding with a line from Vergil's ''Aeneid'': "Is it so dreadful a thing then to die?"
Some questioned the large public expenditure on entertainment.
Shortly after Nero's accession to the throne in 54, the Roman vassal kingdom of Armenia overthrew their Iberian prince Rhadamistus and he was replaced with the Parthian prince Tiridates.
The men actually had the goal of returning Nero back to the Senate, where the Senate hoped to work out a compromise with the rebelling governors that would preserve Nero's life, so that at least a future heir to the dynasty could be produced.
Tacitus and Suetonius wrote their histories on Nero over fifty years after his death, while Cassius Dio wrote his history over 150 years after Nero's death.
Still, there are several references to Nero in Pliny's ''Natural Histories''.
Nero then toyed with the idea of fleeing to Parthia, throwing himself upon the mercy of Galba, or to appeal to the people and beg them to pardon him for his past offences "and if he could not soften their hearts, to entreat them at least to allow him the prefecture of Egypt".
In 68, the rebellion of Vindex in Gaul and later the acclamation of Galba in Hispania drove Nero from the throne.
Losing his nerve, he first begged for one of his companions to set an example by first killing himself.
Christian writer Tertullian (c. 155–230) was the first to call Nero the first persecutor of Christians.
The history of Nero by Pliny the Elder (c. 24–79) did not survive.
He is the third most frequently mentioned sage in the Mishnah.
It is not known how much Nero knew or if he was even involved in the death of Claudius.
The size of this complex is debated (from 100 to 300&nbsp;acres).
In 66, there was a Jewish revolt in Judea stemming from Greek and Jewish religious tension.
Nero enjoyed driving a one-horse chariot, singing to the lyre and poetry.
Books 61–63 of Dio's ''Roman History'' describe the reign of Nero.
The first text to suggest that Nero ordered the execution of an apostle is a letter by Clement to the Corinthians traditional dated to around 96 A.D.
Nero supported the freedmen and ruled that patrons had no such right.
A few of the contemporary historians are known by name.
According to Tacitus, upon hearing news of the fire, Nero returned to Rome to organize a relief effort, which he paid for from his own funds.
Travelling in disguise, Nero and four loyal freedmen, Epaphroditos, Phaon, Neophytus, and Sporus, reached the villa, where Nero ordered them to dig a grave for him.
This revolt is famous for Romans breaching the walls of Jerusalem and destroying the Second Temple of Jerusalem.
Boudica and her troops destroyed three cities before the army of Paulinus could return, receive reinforcements, and quell the rebellion in 61.
Vespasian was then dispatched to put down the rebellion.
When he called for a gladiator or anyone else adept with a sword to kill him, no one appeared.
After sleeping, he awoke at about midnight to find the palace guard had left.
She was given a state funeral.
To find the necessary funds for the reconstruction, tributes were imposed on the provinces of the empire.
After Nero's suicide in 68, there was a widespread belief, especially in the eastern provinces, that he was not dead and somehow would return.
Dispatching messages to his friends' palace chambers for them to come, he received no answers.
This included lush artificial landscapes and a 30-meter-tall statue of himself, the Colossus of Nero.
In 55, Nero began taking on a more active role as an administrator.
While the governor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus and his troops were busy capturing the island of Mona (Anglesey) from the druids, the tribes of the southeast staged a revolt led by queen Boudica of the Iceni.
Upon going to their chambers personally, he found them all abandoned.
In 54, Nero promised to give the Senate powers equivalent to those under Republican rule.
Fearing Paulinus himself would provoke further rebellion, Nero replaced him with the more passive Publius Petronius Turpilianus.
Members of the military were said to have mixed feelings, as they had allegiance to Nero, but were bribed to overthrow him.
According to the Talmud, Nero went to Jerusalem and shot arrows in all four directions.
Instead, it took the life of Agrippina's friend, Acerronia Polla.
He then asked a passing child to repeat the verse he had learned that day.
He also reduced the silver purity from 99.5% to 93.5%—the silver weight dropping from 3.83&nbsp;grams to 3.4&nbsp;grams.
Tacitus writes that the roots of the conspiracy led by Gaius Calpurnius Piso began in this year.
Nero was acclaimed in public for this initial victory.
Plutarch (c. 46–127) mentions Nero indirectly in his account of the Life of Galba and the Life of Otho.
These expelled "Jews" may have been early Christians, although Suetonius is not explicit.
Supposedly, he enlisted the services of Locusta, a woman who specialized in the manufacture of poisons.
Few surviving sources paint Nero in a favourable light.
Suetonius reports that the text of this speech was later found in Nero's writing desk, but that he dared not give it from fear of being torn to pieces before he could reach the Forum.
At last, the sound of approaching horsemen drove Nero to face the end.
and ran out as if to throw himself into the Tiber.
Nero was not expected to become Emperor because his maternal uncle, Caligula, had begun his reign at the age of 24 with enough time to produce his own heir.
Epictetus (c. 55–135) was the slave to Nero's scribe Epaphroditos.
He ordered Christians to be thrown to dogs, while others were crucified and burned.
Tiberius died, allowing him to escape these charges.
Indeed, most of the senators had served the imperial family all their lives and felt a sense of loyalty to the deified bloodline, if not to Nero himself.
Popular legend claims that Nero played the fiddle at the time of the fire, an anachronism based merely on the concept of the lyre, a stringed instrument associated with Nero and his performances.
Tacitus also said that Nero playing his lyre and singing while the city burned was only rumor.
After public protests, Nero was forced to allow Octavia to return from exile, but she was executed shortly after her return.
The cost to rebuild Rome was immense, requiring funds the state treasury did not have.
Of the Twelve one will be delivered into his hands" was interpreted to mean Nero.
He wrote, "so that in saying, 'For the mystery of iniquity doth already work,' he alluded to Nero, whose deeds already seemed to be as the deeds of Antichrist."
Tacitus, though, describes a more complicated political environment.
Though Nero faltered in his racing (in one case, dropping out entirely before the end) and acting competitions, he won these crowns nevertheless and paraded them when he returned to Rome.
Nero, however, did not know this, and at the news brought by the courier, he prepared himself for suicide, pacing up and down muttering "Qualis artifex pereo" which translates to English as "What an artist dies in me."
According to Suetonius, Nero tried to kill his mother through a shipwreck planned by his freedman tutor Anicetus.
During his reign, the redoubtable general Corbulo conducted a successful war and negotiated peace with the Parthian Empire.
Nero also established the quinquennial Neronia.
;Seneca the Younger
The Parthians began a full-scale invasion of the Armenian kingdom.
To lower the cost of food imports, merchant ships were declared tax-exempt.
Nero became very popular in the eastern provinces of Rome and with the Parthians as well.
Though he has a generally bad or dim view of Nero, he speaks of others' positive reception of Nero in the East.
In the wake of the fire, he made a new urban development plan.
Some modern historians question the reliability of ancient sources when reporting on Nero's tyrannical acts.
It is not surprising that Seneca (c. 4 BC–65), Nero's teacher and advisor, writes very well of Nero.
The concept of Nero as the Antichrist is often a central belief of Preterist eschatology.
Nero said, "He desires to lay waste His House and to lay the blame on me," whereupon he fled and converted to Judaism to avoid such retribution.
Dio Chrysostom (c. 40–120), a Greek philosopher and historian, wrote the Roman people were very happy with Nero and would have allowed him to rule indefinitely.
Fabius Rusticus, Cluvius Rufus and Pliny the Elder all wrote condemning histories on Nero that are now lost.
Nero's father, Gnaeus, was the son of Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (consul 16 BC) and Antonia Major.
Ancient historians strongly criticize his choice to perform, calling it shameful.
At first, Nero only performed for a private audience.
In an attempt to gain support from outside his own province, Vindex called upon Servius Sulpicius Galba, the governor of Hispania Tarraconensis, to join the rebellion and further, to declare himself emperor in opposition to Nero.
Caligula seized Nero's inheritance and sent him to be brought up by his less wealthy aunt, Domitia Lepida, who was the mother of Valeria Messalina, Claudius's third wife.
After the death of Britannicus, Agrippina was accused of slandering Octavia and Nero ordered her out of the imperial residence.
The child responded, "I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel" (Ez.
;The Pisonian Conspiracy of 65
Some sources, including some mentioned above, portray him as an emperor who was popular with the common Roman people, especially in the East.
However, after putting down this one rebel, Verginius' legions attempted to proclaim their own commander as Emperor.
Nero was proclaimed an adult in 51 at the age of 14.
In the beginning of 66, he married Statilia Messalina.
Champlin, however, doubts that the practice is necessarily negative and notes that some continued to create images of Nero long after his death.
His general Suetonius Paulinus crushed a revolt in Britain.
In imitation of the Greeks, Nero built a number of gymnasiums and theatres.
Realising that this bias may be apparent to others, Tacitus protests that his writing is true.
At any rate, after Claudius' death he vented on him every kind of insult, in act and word, charging him now with folly and now with cruelty; for it was a favourite joke of his to say that Claudius had ceased "to play the fool" among mortals, lengthening the first syllable of the word ''morari'', and he disregarded many of his decrees and acts as the work of a madman and a dotard.
Otho used "Nero" as a surname and reerected many statues to Nero.
It was said that Nero craved the attention, but historians also write that Nero was encouraged to sing and perform in public by the Senate, his inner circle and the people.
Corbulo was appointed governor of Syria as a reward.
Nero's mother was Agrippina the Younger, a great-granddaughter of Caesar Augustus and his wife Scribonia through their daughter Julia the Elder and her husband Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa.
Some modern historians theorize that Nero's execution of Agrippina was prompted by her plotting to set Rubellius Plautus on the throne.
Agrippina also is mentioned by ancient sources as "scheming for her son (Nero)".
The history of Nero's reign is problematic in that no historical sources survived that were contemporary with Nero.
However, the youth died suddenly and suspiciously on 12 February 55, the very day before his proclamation as an adult had been set.
Nero, with the support of Seneca, resisted the intervention of his mother in his personal affairs.
After persuading some to recognize him, he was captured and executed.
Despite riots from the people, Nero supported the Senate on their measure, and deployed troops to organise the execution of 400 slaves affected by the law.
Some modern biblical scholars such as Delbert Hillers (Johns Hopkins University) of the American Schools of Oriental Research and the editors of the Oxford & Harper Collins Study Bibles, contend that the number 666 in the Book of Revelation is a code for Nero, a view that is also supported in Roman Catholic Biblical commentaries.
These events led Claudius, Caligula's uncle, to become emperor.
Others considered that to have performers dressed in Greek clothing was old fashioned.
Peter is first said to have been crucified upside-down in Rome during Nero's reign (but not by Nero) in the apocryphal Acts of Peter (c. 200).
According to ancient historians, Nero's construction projects were overly extravagant and the large number of expenditures under Nero left Italy "thoroughly exhausted by contributions of money" with "the provinces ruined."
Additionally, there were many impeachments and removals of government officials along with arrests for extortion and corruption.
Nero also built a new palace complex known as the Domus Aurea in an area cleared by the fire.
