However, as of 843, it was divided into three parts—East, Middle, and West Francia.
Since World War II, the Netherlands has become a member of a large number of international organisations, most prominently the UN, NATO and the EU.
When the middle kingdom was partitioned, the lands north of the Alps passed to Lothair II and consecutively were named Lotharingia.
Coastal lands remained largely unpopulated for the next two centuries.
However, ''Niderlant'' was also the region between the Meuse and the lower Rhine in the late Middle Ages.
In 1954, the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands reformed the political structure of the Netherlands, which was a result of international pressure to carry out decolonisation.
Besides English, the standard modern languages are French and German, although schools can replace one of these modern languages with Spanish, Turkish, Arabic, or Russian.
The majority of Dutchmen that repatriated to the Netherlands after and during the Indonesian revolution are Indo (Eurasian), native to the islands of the Dutch East Indies.
According to a humorous source on Dutch culture, ''Their directness gives many the impression that they are rude and crude—attributes they prefer to call 'openness'''.
They are located east of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
It comprises territories from Frisia in the north to the Kingdom of Italy in the south.
Suriname followed in 1975.
This tradition of tolerance influences Dutch criminal justice policies on recreational drugs, prostitution, LGBT rights, euthanasia, and abortion, which are among the most liberal in the world.
The Netherlands is also a part of the Schengen Area.
From their new base in West Flanders and the Southwest Netherlands, they were raiding the English Channel.
Papiamento has a formal status in the special municipality of Bonaire.
Busy roads have received some 35,000&nbsp;km of dedicated cycle tracks, physically segregated from motorised traffic.
With the approval of the Franks, the Anglo-Saxon missionary Willibrord converted the Frisian people to Christianity.
By the 13th century windmills had come into use to pump water out of areas below sea level.
Dutch workers were conscripted for forced labour in Germany, civilians who resisted were killed in reprisal for attacks on German soldiers, and the countryside was plundered for food.
A main goal of the Delta project was to reduce the risk of flooding in South Holland and Zeeland to once per 10,000 years (compared to 1 per 4000 years for the rest of the country).
In the extended region, BrabantStad is part of the Eindhoven-Leuven-Aachen Triangle (ELAT).
In summer, the Windward Islands can be subject to hurricanes.
The Netherlands has, at some time in recent history, supplied one quarter of all of the world's exported tomatoes, and trade of one-third of the world's exports of chilis, tomatoes and cucumbers goes through the country.
The Netherlands is the country of philosophers Erasmus of Rotterdam and Spinoza.
The only exception are shows for children.
The government is investing billions of euros in energy efficiency, sustainable energy and CO2 reduction.
The provinces of North Brabant and Limburg have historically been strongly Roman Catholic, and their people still largely consider the Catholic Church as a base for their cultural identity.
With a population density of 408 people per km2 – 505 (July 2016) if water is excluded – the Netherlands is a very densely populated country.
The most important colonies were present-day Suriname and Indonesia.
This economic cooperation agreement between three cities in three countries has created one of the most innovative regions in the European Union (measured in terms of money invested in technology and knowledge economy).
West Frisian has a formal status for government correspondence in that province.
The Emperor sent in an army and the Netherlands became part of the French Empire until the autumn of 1813, when Napoleon was defeated in the Battle of Leipzig.
Agricultural transformation took place very gradually, between 4300 BC and 4000 BC.
But soon after VE day, the Dutch fought a colonial war against the new republic of Indonesia.
About 39% of the population is religiously affiliated and in 2010 fewer than 5.6% visited religious services regularly (once or more per month).
It is renowned for its many rich pastries, soups, stews and vegetable dishes and is often called Burgundian which is a Dutch idiom invoking the rich Burgundian court which ruled the Low Countries in the Middle Ages, renowned for its splendor and great feasts.
Universities such as the Royal Leiden University, founded in the 16th century, have developed into leading knowledge centres for Southeast Asian and Indonesian studies.
They are strongly linked to rivers and open water and were related to the southern Scandinavian Ertebølle culture (5300–4000 BC).
According to the 2006 US Census, more than 5&nbsp;million Americans claim total or partial Dutch ancestry.
The historical ties inherited from its colonial past still influence the foreign relations of the Netherlands.
The last coal mine was closed in 1974.
A politically neutral Delta Commission has formulated an action plan to cope with a sea level rise of  and a simultaneous land height decline of .
The Protestant Queen Elizabeth I of England sympathised with the Dutch struggle against the Spanish, and sent an army of 7,600 soldiers to aid the Dutch in their war with the Catholic Spanish.
Around 879, another Viking raided the Frisian lands, Godfrid, Duke of Frisia.
Federations for sports were established (such as the speed skating federation in 1882), rules were unified and sports clubs came into existence.
As a result, the islands of Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba (the BES islands) were to obtain closer ties with the Netherlands.
Almost as many kilometres are covered by bicycle as by train.
Dutch politics and governance are characterised by an effort to achieve broad consensus on important issues, within both the political community and society as a whole.
The Netherlands is a founding member of the EU, Eurozone, G-10, NATO, OECD and WTO, and a part of the trilateral Benelux Union.
The big winner of the 2010 elections was Geert Wilders, whose right wing PVV, the ideological successor to the LPF, more than doubled its number of seats.
Motorcycle racing at the TT Assen Circuit has a long history.
This is laid down in the ''Algemene Wet Bijzondere Ziektekosten'' ("General Law on Exceptional Healthcare Costs") which first came into effect in 1968.
Healthcare in the Netherlands is covered by two statutory forms of insurance:
* '''Saba''' and '''Sint Eustatius''' are part of the SSS islands.
The network is mostly focused on passenger rail services and connects virtually all major towns and cities.
A similar Holland Village is being built in Shenyang, China.
A high lifestyle is considered wasteful and suspect with most people.
The Leeward Antilles are warmer and drier than the Windward islands.
They meet regularly with government in the Social-Economic Council.
The plan encompasses the reinforcement of the existing coastal defenses like dikes and dunes with  of additional flood protection.
Premiums paid by the insured are about 100&nbsp;€ per month (about US$127 in Aug. 2010 and in 2012 €150 or US$196,) with variation of about 5% between the various competing insurers, and deductible a year €220 US$288.
Snap elections were held on 9 June 2010, with devastating results for the previously largest party, the CDA, which lost about half of its seats, resulting in 21 seats.
The Dutch agricultural sector is highly mechanised, and has a strong focus on international exports.
Amsterdam grew and in the 15th century became the primary trading port in Europe for grain from the Baltic region.
The Leeward Antilles have a mixed volcanic and coral origin.
Football is the most popular participant sport in the Netherlands, before field hockey and volleyball as the second and third most popular team sports.
That changed in World War II, when Nazi Germany invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940.
As a founding member of the euro, the Netherlands replaced (for accounting purposes) its former currency, the "gulden" (guilder), on 1 January 1999, along with 15 other adopters of the euro.
Long-term treatments, especially those that involve semi-permanent hospitalization, and also disability costs such as wheelchairs, are covered by a state-controlled mandatory insurance.
*Algemene Wet Bijzondere Ziektekosten (AWBZ) covers long-term nursing and care.
The south-western part of the Netherlands is to this day a river delta of these three rivers, the Rhine-Meuse-Scheldt delta.
Limburger Max Verstappen currently races in Formula One, and was the first Dutchman to win a Grand Prix.
Warm days (maximum temperature above ) in De Bilt are usually found in April to October, but in some parts of the country these warm days can also occur in March, or even sometimes in November or February (usually not in De Bilt, however).
There are close to 3&nbsp;million Dutch-descended Afrikaners living in South Africa.
All children in the Netherlands usually attend elementary school from (on average) ages 4 to 12.
Religion in the Netherlands is generally considered a personal matter and is not supposed to be propagated in public.
The executive power is formed by the council of Ministers, the deliberative council of the Dutch cabinet.
The Dutch Royal Family has historically been Reformed.
There was a strong religious difference between the Roman Catholic south and the Reformed north, remains of which are still in evidence.
The Randstad is the country's largest conurbation located in the west of the country and contains the four largest cities: Amsterdam in the province North Holland, Rotterdam and The Hague in the province South Holland, and Utrecht in the province Utrecht.
Because of the flooding, farming was difficult, which encouraged foreign trade, the result of which was that the Dutch were involved in world affairs since the early 14th/15th century.
Other activities include sailing, fishing, cycling, and bird watching.
Based on an aptitude test, the 8th grade teacher's recommendation and the opinion of the pupil's parents or caretakers, a choice is made for one of the three main streams of secondary education (after completing a particular stream, a pupil may still continue in the penultimate year of the next stream):
The economy experienced a slowdown in 2005, but in 2006 recovered to the fastest pace in six years on the back of increased exports and strong investment.
If one chooses the height of measurement to be  above ground instead of , one may even find such temperatures in the middle of the summer.
Doctoral candidates in the Netherlands are generally non-tenured employees of a university.
Amsterdam is the country's capital, while The Hague holds the Dutch seat of government and parliament.
The windmills were later used to drain lakes, creating the famous polders.
Of all the money that goes to research and development in the Netherlands, one third is spent in Eindhoven.
The largest cities in the Netherlands are Amsterdam, The Hague and Rotterdam.
The southern region became dominated by the Hilversum culture (1800–800 BC), which apparently inherited cultural ties with Britain of the previous Barbed-Wire Beaker culture.
With a total road network of 139,295&nbsp;km, which includes 2,758&nbsp;km of expressways, the Netherlands has one of the densest road networks in the world—much denser than Germany and France, but still not as dense as Belgium.
The Netherlands is one of the world's 10 leading exporting countries.
The Netherlands in its entirety is often referred to by the much older designation "Holland" (meaning ''holt land'', or wood land), though this refers only to North and South Holland, two of the nation's twelve provinces, formerly a single province and earlier the County of Holland.
It will also affect agriculture.
The Netherlands has a well developed television market, with both multiple commercial and non-commercial broadcasters.
The largest of these is the Protestant Church in the Netherlands (PKN) (10.2% of the population), a United church which is Reformed and Lutheran in orientation.
Philip II, the son of Charles V, was not prepared to let them go easily, and war continued until 1648, when Spain under King Philip IV finally recognised the independence of the seven north-western provinces in the Peace of Münster.
Artists with North African, Caribbean or Middle Eastern origins have strongly influenced this genre.
In 2009 this insurance covered 27% of all health care expenses.
The pace of job growth reached 10-year highs in 2007.
Notable towns would arise along the Limes Germanicus: Nijmegen and Voorburg.
In 1940, there were 290,000 Europeans and Eurasians in Indonesia, but most have since left the country.
The greenhouses can continue their production by becoming more water efficient (they are already disconnected from the groundwater, thereby not becoming more saline), though they will need to become more energy and water efficient.
This body advises government and its advice cannot be put aside easily.
The Netherlands has had many well-known painters.
In the mid 1990s Dutch language rap and hip hop (''Nederhop'') also came to fruition and has become popular in the Netherlands and Belgium.
Place names with ''Neder'' (or ''lage''), ''Nieder'', ''Nether'' (or ''low'') and ''Nedre'' are in use in various places in countries where a Germanic language is spoken, and has in French and Latin its respective counterparts in ''Bas'' or ''Inferior''.
The Dutch were also one of the last European countries to industrialise, in the second half of the 19th century.
Some 150,000 to 200,000 people living in the Netherlands are expatriates, mostly concentrated in and around Amsterdam and The Hague, now constituting almost 10% of the population of these cities.
The name ''Holland'' is also frequently and incorrectly used to refer informally to the whole of the country of the Netherlands.
Home doctors (''huisartsen'', comparable to General Practitioners) form the largest part of the first echelon.
Relatively high-lying swampland was drained to be used as farmland.
Centuries of extensive and poorly controlled peat extraction lowered an already low land surface by several metres.
Only Bangladesh, South Korea, and Taiwan have both a larger population and a higher population density.
Risk variances between private health insurance companies due to the different risks presented by individual policy holders are compensated through risk equalization and a common risk pool.
After the war the Netherlands left behind also an era of neutrality and gained closer ties with neighboring states.
During the occupation, over 100,000 Dutch Jews were rounded up and transported to Nazi extermination camps of whom only a few survived.
Towns grew around monasteries and castles, and a mercantile middle class began to develop in these urban areas, especially in Flanders and later also Brabant.
Frisian was spoken along the entire southern North Sea coast, and it is still the language most closely related to English among the living languages of continental Europe.
The Dutch East Indies, which later formed modern-day Indonesia, was one of the most valuable European colonies in the world and the most important one for the Netherlands.
The first of these regional languages is Low Saxon (''Nedersaksisch'' in Dutch) is recognised.
As part of its commitment to environmental sustainability, the Dutch government initiated a plan to establish over 200 recharging stations for electric vehicles across the country by 2015.
Dutch K-1 kickboxers have won the K-1 World Grand Prix 15 times out of 19 tournaments.
The Dukes of Burgundy, who ruled the Low Countries in the 15th century, used the term ''les pays de par deçà'' (~ the lands over here) for the Low Countries as opposed to ''les pays de par delà'' (~ the lands over there) for their original homeland: Burgundy in present-day east-central France.
Most of these are Indo-Surinamese.
During and after the Dutch Golden Age, the Dutch people built up a commercial and colonial empire.
In 1932 the ''Afsluitdijk'' ("Closure Dike") was completed, blocking the former ''Zuiderzee'' (Southern Sea) from the North Sea and thus creating the IJsselmeer (IJssel Lake).
Around 35,000 homes are said to be affected."
The North Sea Germanic Ingvaeones (or Istvaeones) inhabited the northern part of the Low Countries.
In the Dutch Golden Age, literature flourished as well, with Joost van den Vondel and P. C. Hooft as the two most famous writers.
The Dutch colonies of Surinam and Curaçao and Dependencies and the European country all became countries within the Kingdom, on a basis of equality.
The Netherlands has multiple music traditions.
Since 5 November 2012 they have formed the second Rutte cabinet.
One of these local nobles was Gerolf of Holland, who assumed lordship in Frisia after he helped to assassinate Godfrid, and Viking rule came to an end.
These insurance companies are obliged to provide a package with a defined set of insured treatments.
Dutch people, or descendants of Dutch people, are also found in migrant communities worldwide, notably in Canada, Australia, South Africa and the United States.
In 2015 the Netherlands has maintained its number one position at the top of the annual Euro health consumer index (EHCI), which compares healthcare systems in Europe, scoring 916 of a maximum 1,000 points.
This originally Frankish county emerged from the dissolved Frisian Kingdom and was, after the decline of Brabant, economically and politically the most important county in the region.
Economic growth in 2015 and 2016 (forecast) is about 2%.
There are large bicycle parking facilities, particularly in city centres and at train stations.
Approximately 4.5 million of the 16.8 million people in the Netherlands are registered to one of the 35,000 sports clubs in the country.
The port of Rotterdam is the largest port in Europe – as large as the next three largest combined – and was the world's largest port between 1962 and 2004.
These DJs also contribute to the world's mainstream pop music, as they frequently collaborate and produce for high profile international artists.
Even more specifically, the Netherlands is the only country in the world actively preparing for a sea level rise.
* The havo has 5 grades and allows for admission to the hbo.
The King's grave of Oss dating from around 500 BC was found in a burial mound, the largest of its kind in western Europe and containing an iron sword with an inlay of gold and coral.
The cabinet is responsible to the bicameral parliament, the States General, which also has legislative powers.
Themes can be light, but are often sentimental and include love, death and loneliness.
It is situated near Dam Square in the city's centre.
The estimated growth rate  is 0.44%.
It had the thirteenth-highest per capita income in the world in 2013 according to the International Monetary Fund.
While Dutch residents are automatically insured by the government for AWBZ, everyone has to take out their own basic healthcare insurance (basisverzekering), except those under 18 who are automatically covered under their parents' premium.
As Frankish settlement progressed from Flanders and Brabant, the area quickly became Old Low Franconian (or Old Dutch).
From the onset of the Protestant Reformation, the Dutch population became divided into about two-thirds Protestant (mostly Reformed) and one-third Roman Catholic believers.
By the 490s, Clovis I had conquered and united all these territories in the southern Netherlands in one Frankish kingdom, and from there continued his conquests into Gaul.
TV exports from the Netherlands mostly take the form of specific formats and franchises, most notably through internationally active TV production conglomerate Endemol, founded by Dutch media tycoons John de Mol and Joop van den Ende.
The farming Funnelbeaker culture extended from Denmark through northern Germany into the northern Netherlands, and erected the dolmens, large stone grave monuments found in Drenthe (built between 4100 BC and 3200 BC).
One euro was equivalent to 2.20371 Dutch guilders.
The Union of Utrecht is seen as the foundation of the modern Netherlands.
Not only is the rising sea a problem, but erratic weather patterns may cause the rivers to overflow.
Holland, Hainaut, Flanders, Gelre, Brabant, and the Utrecht were in a state of almost continual war or paradoxically formed personal unions.
In contrast to many other European systems, the Dutch government is responsible for the accessibility and quality of the healthcare system in the Netherlands, but not in charge of its management.
Those on low incomes receive compensation to help them pay their insurance.
It comprises eight grades, the first of which is facultative.
After the 2003 elections, in which the LPF lost most of its seats, a cabinet was formed by CDA, VVD, and D66.
Examples of international Dutch companies operating in Netherlands include Randstad, Unilever, Heineken, KLM, financial services (ING, ABN AMRO, Rabobank), chemicals (DSM, AKZO), petroleum refining (Royal Dutch Shell), electronical machinery (Philips, ASML), and car navigation (TomTom).
In 2007, the Betuweroute, a new fast freight railway from Rotterdam to Germany, was completed.
Windmills, tulips, wooden shoes, cheese, Delftware pottery, and cannabis are among the items associated with the Netherlands by tourists.
The policy brought the Dutch enormous wealth and made the colony self-sufficient.
The region lies within the Eindhoven-Leuven-Aachen Triangle (ELAT).
In 1996 conscription was suspended, and the Dutch army was once again transformed into a professional army.
When the land area of the provinces only is counted (), a number of  was reached in the first half of 2014.
The Bell Beaker cultures (2700–2100 BC) locally developed into the Bronze Age Barbed-Wire Beaker culture (2100–1800 BC).
The majority of the Dutch are irreligious and religion is in the Netherlands generally considered as a very personal matter which is not supposed to be propagated in public.
Around 1100 AD, farmers from Flanders and Utrecht began draining and cultivating uninhabited swampy land in the western Netherlands, and made the emergence of the County of Holland as center of power possible.
"Gas extraction has resulted in increasingly strong earth tremors, some measuring as much as 3.6 on the Richter scale.
Freezing days (minimum temperature below ) occur much more often, usually ranging from mid-November to late March, but not rarely measured as early as mid-October and as late as mid-May.
In April 2013, unemployment was at 8.2% (or 6.7% following the ILO definition) of the labour force.
Thus far, the nation has won 266 medals at the Summer Olympic Games and another 110 medals at the Winter Olympic Games.
Insurers have to offer a universal package for everyone over the age of 18 years, regardless of age or state of health – it's illegal to refuse an application or impose special conditions.
The field is operated by government-owned Gasunie and output is jointly exploited by the government, Royal Dutch Shell and Exxon Mobil through NAM (Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij).
Life expectancy is high in the Netherlands: 83.21 years for newborn girls and 78.93 for boys (2013 est).
A widening cultural divide grew with the Franks remaining in their original homeland in the north (i.e.
The few residents who lived in these so-called "overflow areas" have been moved to higher ground, with some of that ground having been raised above anticipated flood levels.
The rollout will be undertaken by Switzerland-based power and automation company ABB and Dutch startup Fastned, and will aim to provide at least one station within a 50-kilometre radius (30 miles) from every home in the Netherlands.
It is used synonymous with the more neutral and geopolitical term Benelux.
Most of these are owned by Staatsbosbeheer, the national department for forestry and nature conservation and Natuurmonumenten (literally 'Natures monuments'), a private organisation that buys, protects and manages nature reserves.
In the 1960s and 1970s the lyrics were mostly in English, and some tracks were instrumental.
In 2013, the European Cyclists' Federation ranked both the Netherlands and Denmark as the most bike-friendly countries in Europe, but more of the Dutch (31%) than of the Danes (19%) list the bike as their main mode of transport for daily activities.
This insurance covers 41% of all health care expenses.
* ''Koninklijke Landmacht'' (KL), the Royal Netherlands Army
However, his successor Boniface was murdered by the Frisians in Dokkum, in 754.
According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, the territory of the Netherlands belongs to the ecoregion of Atlantic mixed forests.
From the mid-sixteenth century on, the ''Low Countries'' or the "Netherlands" was&nbsp;– besides Flanders&nbsp;– probably the most commonly used name.
In June 2006, the cabinet fell after D66 voted in favour of a motion of no confidence against the Minister of Immigration and Integration, Rita Verdonk, who had instigated an investigation of the asylum procedure of Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a VVD MP.
Within this island group,
The Delta project is considered by the American Society of Civil Engineers as one of the seven wonders of the modern world.
A well known more serious source on Dutch etiquette is "Dealing with the Dutch" from Jacob Vossestein: ''Dutch egalitarianism is the idea that people are equal, especially from a moral point of view, and accordingly, causes the somewhat ambiguous stance the Dutch have towards hierarchy and status.''
