At the 2010 census, the town had 36,441 residents.
Calves are generally shipped to out-of-state feedlots in the fall to be fattened for market.
RTC RIDE operates a system of local transit bus service throughout the Reno-Sparks metropolitan area.
Females made up about 49.5% of the population.
However, the rich silver strike at Tonopah in 1900, followed by strikes in Goldfield and Rhyolite, again put Nevada's population on an upward trend.
However, Nevada is one of the states that allows for use of marijuana for medical reasons (though this remains illegal under federal law).
The area formed part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, and became part of Mexico when it gained independence in 1821.
:''"Nevada, in a burst of ingenuity, built an economy by exploiting its sovereignty.
Coached by Jerry Tarkanian, the Runnin' Rebels became one of the most elite programs in the country.
Quite a few of them do."''
The rural population is also less diverse in terms of race and ethnicity.
Nevada has 172 mountain summits with  of prominence.
But American versions are usually smaller, in part because they must ascend and descend some fairly steep mountain passes.
Data from 2000 and 2005 suggests the following figures:
UNLV reached the Final Four yet again, but lost their national semifinal against Duke 79–77.
Coyote Springs is a proposed community for 240,000 inhabitants in Clark and Lincoln counties.
I-215 and spur route I-515 also serve the Las Vegas metropolitan area.
A May 2015 educational reform law expanded school choice options to 450,000 Nevada students who are at up to 185% of the federal poverty level.
Corporations such as Apple Inc. allegedly have set up investment companies and funds in Nevada to avoid paying taxes.
Governor Fred B. Balzar's signature enacted the most liberal divorce laws in the country and open gambling.
The Nevada state parks comprise protected areas managed by the state of Nevada, including state parks, state historic sites, and state recreation areas.
Henderson and North Las Vegas are among the USA's top 20 fastest-growing cities of over 100,000.
The south sees the north as the "old guard" trying to rule as an oligarchy.
Resort areas like Las Vegas, Reno, Lake Tahoe, and Laughlin attract visitors from around the nation and world.
The native pronunciation is the de facto official one, since it is the one used by the state legislature.
Senators are Democrat Harry Reid, the Senate Minority Leader, and Republican Dean Heller.
In the event that None of These Candidates "wins" the election, the candidate with the next-highest total is still elected.
They comprise 56.5% of the Asian American population in Nevada and constitute about 4.3% of the entire state's population.
The transfer was prompted by the discovery of gold in the area, and it was thought by officials that Nevada would be better able to oversee the expected population boom.
Between 1990 and 2000, Nevada's population increased 66%, while the USA's population increased 13%.
Unregulated gambling was commonplace in the early Nevada mining towns but was outlawed in 1909 as part of a nationwide anti-gambling crusade.
Senior citizens (over age 65) and young children or teenagers (under age 18) form large sections of the Nevada population.
NSAWC consolidated three Command Centers into a single Command Structure under a flag officer on July 11, 1996.
Nevada is the 7th most extensive, the 35th most populous, and the 9th least densely populated of the 50 United States.
Nevada is home to many cultures and nationalities.
Despite its rich deposits, the cost of mining in Nevada is generally high, and output is very sensitive to world commodity prices.
Historically, northern Nevada has been very Republican.
According to the American Hotel and Lodging Association, there were 187,301 rooms in 584 hotels (of 15 or more rooms).
The tourism industry remains Nevada's largest employer, with mining continuing as a substantial sector of the economy: Nevada is the fourth-largest producer of gold in the world.
The state sales tax (similar to VAT or GST) in Nevada is variable depending upon the county.
The great majority of the state's elected officials are either from Las Vegas or Reno.
Interstate 80 crosses through the northern part of Nevada, roughly following the path of the Humboldt River from Utah in the east and the Truckee River westward through Reno into California.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that Nevada's total state product in 2010 was $126&nbsp;billion.
There are 68 designated wilderness areas in Nevada, protecting some  under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service, U.S. Forest Service, and Bureau of Land Management.
McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas is the busiest airport serving Nevada.
Over 80% of the state's area is owned by the federal government.
The valleys are often no lower in elevation than , while some in central Nevada are above .
Asian Americans lived in the state since the California Gold Rush of the 1850s brought thousands of Chinese miners to Washoe county.
Nevada has very liberal alcohol laws.
The Runnin' Rebels were the Associated Press pre-season No.
The Naval Strike Warfare Center (STRIKE "U") based at NAS Fallon since 1984, was joined with the Navy Fighter Weapons School (TOPGUN) and the Carrier Airborne Early Warning Weapons School (TOPDOME) which both moved from NAS Miramar as a result of a Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) decision in 1993 which transferred that installation back to the Marine Corps as MCAS Miramar.
The Reno-Tahoe International Airport (formerly known as the Reno Cannon International Airport) is the other major airport in the state.
The Union Pacific Railroad has some railroads in the north and south of Nevada.
The state is also home to the Las Vegas Motor Speedway, which hosts the Kobalt Tools 400.
With the Mexican War of Independence won in 1821, the province of Alta California became a territory (state) of Mexico, with small population.
It has a spur route, I-580.
As of December 2014, the state's unemployment rate was 6.8%.
The minimum Nevada sales tax rate changed on July 1, 2009.
Incorporated towns in Nevada, known as cities, are given the authority to legislate anything not prohibited by law.
Counties may impose additional rates via voter approval or through approval of the Legislature; therefore, the applicable sales tax will vary by county from 6.85 percent to 8.1 percent in Clark County.
Though, Mexicans are the majority of Latinos in the state, Nevada has a relatively diverse Hispanic/Latino population.
Native Nevadans pronounce the second syllable of their state name using the  vowel of "b'''a'''d".
Members of the Assembly serve for 2 years, and members of the Senate serve for 4 years.
Nevada's divorce rate tops the national average.
The state's per capita personal income in 2009 was $38,578, ranking nineteenth in the nation.
This includes a natural increase since the last census of 81,661 people (that is 170,451 births minus 88,790 deaths) and an increase due to net migration of 337,043 people into the state.
Over 90% of Nevada's  of cropland is used to grow hay, mostly alfalfa, for livestock feed.
This area includes most of what is now Clark County.
Nevada has no personal income tax or corporate income tax.
Administratively, the area of Nevada was part of the Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas in the Viceroyalty of New Spain.
Many current African-American Nevadans are newly transplanted residents from California.
Interstate 15 passes through the southern tip of the state, serving Las Vegas and other communities.
Eight days before the presidential election of 1864, Nevada became the 36th state in the union.
The Humboldt River crosses the state from east to west across the northern part of the state, draining into the Humboldt Sink near Lovelock.
Las Vegas has hosted several professional boxing matches, most recently at the MGM Grand Garden Arena with bouts such as Mike Tyson vs. Evander Holyfield, Evander Holyfield vs. Mike Tyson II, Oscar De La Hoya vs. Floyd Mayweather and Oscar De La Hoya vs. Manny Pacquiao.
The largest mountain range in the southern portion of the state is the Spring Mountain Range, just west of Las Vegas.
Nevada's capital is Carson City.
Nevada voters enacted a smoking ban ("The Nevada Clean Indoor Air Act") in November 2006 that became effective on December 8, 2006.
When permitted, brothels are only located in rural or isolated parts of counties.
Nevada is officially known as the "Silver State" due to the importance of silver to its history and economy.
Occasionally, moisture from the Arizona Monsoon will cause summer thunderstorms; Pacific storms may blanket the area with snow.
When Mark Twain lived in Nevada during the period described in ''Roughing It'', mining had led to an industry of speculation and immense wealth.
Ranching also has a long tradition in rural Nevada.
Several rivers drain from the Sierra Nevada eastward, including the Walker, Truckee, and Carson rivers.
* 3.6% Scandinavian (1.4% Norwegian, 1.4% Swedish, and 0.8% Danish).
The reforms came just eight days after the federal government presented the $49 million construction contract for Boulder Dam (now Hoover Dam).
In 1991, UNLV finished the regular season undefeated, a feat that would not be matched in Division I men's basketball for more than 20 years.
Cattle ranching is a major economic activity in rural Nevada.
Other desert towns like Indian Springs and Searchlight on the outskirts of Las Vegas have seen some growth as well.
Washoe County, home to Reno, has historically been strongly Republican, but has become more of a swing county at least at the federal level.
Similarly, many U.S. states have usury laws limiting the amount of interest a lender can charge, but federal law allows corporations to 'import' these laws from their home state.
This gives the state status as a political bellwether.
Smoking is also permitted in casinos, certain hotel rooms, tobacco shops, and brothels.
The town is being developed by Harvey Whittemore and has generated some controversy because of environmental concerns and allegations of political favoritism.
As of 2015, gay marriage is legal in Nevada.
Most other counties in the state do not have public transportation at all.
Each session of the Legislature meets for a constitutionally mandated 120 days in every odd-numbered year, or longer if the Governor calls a special session.
It is notable for having the harshest penalties for drug offenders in the country.
Nevada became the 36th state on October 31, 1864, as the second of two states added to the Union during the Civil War (the first being West Virginia).
The vegetation of Nevada is diverse and differs by state area.
In portions of the state outside of the Las Vegas and Reno metropolitan areas mining plays a major economic role.
Nevada's agricultural outputs are cattle, hay, alfalfa, dairy products, onions, and potatoes.
Nevada also is served by several U.S. highways: US 6, US 50, US 93, US 95 and US 395.
Areas south of the Great Basin are located within the Mojave Desert, while Lake Tahoe and the Sierra Nevada lie on the western edge.
The Seahawk Weapon School was added in 1998 to provide tactical training for Navy helicopters.
Nevada borders Oregon to the northwest, Idaho to the northeast, California to the west, Arizona to the southeast and Utah to the east.
Las Vegas is home to rapid-growing ethnic communities, including Scandinavians, Italians, Poles, Greeks, Spaniards and Armenians.
(The other is Missouri, which acquired additional territory in 1837 due to the Platte Purchase.)
The lodging tax rate in unincorporated Clark County, which includes the Las Vegas Strip, is 12%.
Tributaries of the Snake River drain the far north, while the Colorado River, which also forms much of the boundary with Arizona, drains much of southern Nevada.
Along with significant rises in popularity in mixed martial arts (MMA), a number of fight leagues such as the UFC have taken interest in Las Vegas as a primary event location due to the number of suitable host venues.
The state's lowest point is along the Colorado River, south of Laughlin.
In 2006, voters in Nevada defeated attempts to allow possession of 1&nbsp;ounce of marijuana (for personal use) without being criminally prosecuted, (55% against legalization, 45% in favor of legalization).
This has fostered some resentment, however, due to a term limit amendment passed by Nevada voters in 1994, and again in 1996, some of the north's hold over key positions will soon be forfeited to the south, leaving Northern Nevada with less power.
North Carolina is the only other team to accomplish that (2007–08, 2008–09).
In 2006, the crime rate in Nevada was about 24% higher than the national average rate, though crime has since decreased.
Mining shaped Nevada's economy for many years (see ''Silver mining in Nevada'').
Nye County and Humboldt County have a plurality of Germans; and Washoe County has many Irish Americans.
As it turned out, however, Lincoln and the Republicans won the election handily, and did not need Nevada's help.
Clark County, home to Las Vegas, has become increasingly Democratic.
In 2012, The University of Nevada, Reno joined its cross-state rival in the MW.
Nevada is the only U.S. state where prostitution is legal, though it is illegal in Las Vegas (Clark County) and Reno (Washoe County) as well as Carson City, which is an independent city.
Town Boards for unincorporated towns are limited local governments created by either the local county commission, or by referendum, and form a purely advisory role and in no way diminish the responsibilities of the county commission that creates them.
In 1866 another part of the western Utah Territory was added to Nevada in the eastern part of the state, setting the current eastern boundary.
Many of Nevada's counties have a system of county routes as well, though many are not signed or paved in rural areas.
This resulted in ''Williams v. North Carolina (1942)'', , in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that North Carolina had to give "full faith and credit" to a Nevada divorce.
Large numbers of new residents in the state originate from California, which led some locals to feel that their state is being "Californicated".
Filipino Americans form the largest Asian American group in the state, with a population of more than 113,000.
As a result of the Mexican–American War and the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, Mexico permanently lost Alta California in 1848.
Alternatively, families "can use funds in these accounts to also pay for textbooks and tutoring."
In FY08 the total of 266 casinos with gaming revenue over $1m for the year, brought in revenue of $12&nbsp;billion in gaming revenue, and $13&nbsp;billion in non-gaming revenue.
In 1940, with a population of just over 110,000 people, Nevada was by far the least populated state, with less than half the population of the next least-populated state.
The new areas acquired by the United States continued to be administered as territories.
According to the Census Bureau's 2015 estimate, Nevada had an estimated population of 2,890,845 which is an increase of 51,746, from the prior year and an increase of 190,294, or 7.05%, since the year 2010.
The more rural counties of the north are among the most conservative regions of the country.
The economy of Nevada is tied to tourism (especially entertainment and gambling related), mining, and cattle ranching.
Americans of English descent form pluralities in Lincoln County, Churchill County, Lyon County, White Pine County and Eureka County.
In Washoe County, which includes Reno, the sales tax rate is 7.725 percent, due to county option rates for flood control, the ReTRAC train trench project, mass transit, and an additional county rate approved under the Local Government Tax Act of 1991.
Nevada ranks second in the US, behind Alaska, and ahead of California, Montana, and Washington.
Although prostitution employs roughly 300 women as independent contractors, and not a major part of the Nevada economy, it is a very visible endeavor.
Already having legalized gaming and prostitution, Nevada continued the trend of boosting its profile by adopting one of the most liberal divorce statutes in the nation.
Finally, Sam Boyd Stadium, home to the UNLV football team, also hosts the country's biggest rugby event, the USA Sevens tournament in the World Rugby Sevens Series, as well as the AMA Supercross Championship.
Even prostitution is legal in Nevada, in any county that decides to allow it.
The Las Vegas Monorail line services several casino properties and the Las Vegas Convention Center on the east side of the Las Vegas Strip, running near Paradise Road, with a possible future extension to McCarran International Airport.
Smoking is permitted in bars, but only if the bar serves no food, or the bar is inside a larger casino.
Silver is a distant second, with  worth $69&nbsp;million mined in 2004 (see ''Silver mining in Nevada'').
Nevada is one of only two states to significantly expand its borders after admission to the Union.
The rural community of Mesquite located  northeast of Las Vegas was an example of micropolitan growth in the 1990s and 2000s.
Nevada is not well known for its professional sports teams, but the state takes pride in college sports, most notably its college football.
The Jewish community is represented by The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute and Chabad.
Immigration resulted in a net increase of 66,098 people, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 270,945 people.
Nuclear testing at the Nevada Test Site began with a  bomb dropped on Frenchman Flat on January 27, 1951.
The state is one of just a few in the country to allow semi-trailer trucks with three trailers—what might be called a "road train" in Australia.
Due to heavy growth in the southern portion of the state, there is a noticeable divide between politics of northern and southern Nevada.
By value, gold is by far the most important mineral mined.
The state is ranked just below California, Texas, Florida, and New York in total number of rooms, but those states have much larger populations.
Nevada has by far the most hotel rooms per capita in the United States.
Much of the northern part of the state is within the Great Basin, a mild desert that experiences hot temperatures in the summer and cold temperatures in the winter.
1 back to back (1989–90, 1990–91).
According to the 2000 US Census, 16.19% of Nevada's population aged 5 and older speak Spanish at home, while 1.59% speak Filipino, and 1% speak Chinese.
Nevada contains six biotic zones: alpine, sub-alpine, ponderosa pine, pinion-juniper, sagebrush and creosotebush.
The culture of these places differs significantly from that of the major metropolitan areas.
The Nevada Test Site,  northwest of the city of Las Vegas, was founded on January 11, 1951, for the testing of nuclear weapons.
Of the 14 counties that are permitted to legalize prostitution under state law, 8 have chosen to legalize brothels.
Additionally, a  monorail system provides public transportation in the Las Vegas area.
In addition, Nevada has no franchise tax, although it does require businesses to have a license for which the business has to pay the state.
They were followed by a few hundred Japanese farm workers in the late 19th century.
When the Mormons created the State of Deseret in 1847, they laid claim to all of Nevada within the Great Basin and the Colorado watershed.
Amtrak Thruway Motorcoaches also provide connecting service from Las Vegas to trains at Needles, California, Los Angeles, and Bakersfield, California; and from Stateline, Nevada, to Sacramento, California.
all state constitutional positions.
The north sees the high population south becoming more influential and perhaps commanding majority rule.
As of 2011, 63.6% of Nevada's population younger than age 1 were minorities.
In 2004,  of gold worth $2.84&nbsp;billion were mined in Nevada, and the state accounted for 8.7% of world gold production (see ''Gold mining in Nevada'').
At the 2010 census, 6.9% of the state's population were reported as under 5, 24.6% were under 18, and 12.0% were 65 or older.
This includes Nevada supporting Democrat Bill Clinton in 1992 and 1996, Republican George W. Bush in 2000 and 2004, and Democrat Barack Obama winning the state in both 2008 and 2012.
Nevada's industrial outputs are tourism, mining, machinery, printing and publishing, food processing, and electric equipment.
The religious makeup of Nevadans includes large communities of Mormons, Roman Catholics and Evangelicals; each is known for higher birth rates and a younger than national average age.
Other minerals mined in Nevada include construction aggregates, copper, gypsum, diatomite and lithium.
State Assemblyman Harry Mortenson proposed a bill to recognize the alternate (quasi-Spanish) pronunciation of Nevada, though the bill was not supported by most legislators and never received a vote.
Several hotels also run their own monorail lines between each other, which are typically several blocks in length.
The 1861 southern boundary is commemorated by Nevada Historical Markers 57 and 58 in Lincoln and Nye counties.
Instead, early settlers would homestead land surrounding a water source, and then graze livestock on the adjacent public land, which is useless for agriculture without access to water (this pattern of ranching still prevails).
The coldest recorded temperature was  set in San Jacinto in 1972, in the northeastern portion of the state.
Since 1912, Nevada has been carried by the presidential victor the most out of any state (25 of 26 elections).
Las Vegas has had no passenger train service since Amtrak's Desert Wind was discontinued in 1997, although there have been a number of proposals to re-introduce service to either Los Angeles or Southern California.
Other transit systems in the state include Carson City's JAC.
Nevada's state sales tax rate is 6.85 percent.
The United States annexed the area in 1848 after its victory in the Mexican–American War, and it was incorporated as part of Utah Territory in 1850.
Between them, they cast 87 percent of Nevada's vote, and elect a substantial majority of the state legislature.
A small percentage of Nevada's population lives in rural areas.
The Nevada Aerospace Hall of Fame provides educational resources and promotes the aerospace and aviation history of the state.
The agency is the largest transit agency in the state and operates a network of bus service across the Las Vegas Valley, including the use of The Deuce, double-decker buses, on the Las Vegas Strip and several outlying routes.
Property crimes accounted for about 85% of the total crime rate in Nevada, which was 21% higher than the national rate.
Sales tax in the other major counties: Carson at 7.745%, Washoe at 7.725%.
There are currently 24 state park units, including Van Sickle Bi-State Park which opened in July 2011 and is operated in partnership with the state of California.
Prostitution is legal in parts of Nevada in licensed brothels, but only counties with populations under 400,000 residents have the option to legalize it.
Nevada provides friendly environment for the formation of corporations, and many (especially California) businesses have incorporated in Nevada to take advantage of the benefits of the Nevada statute.
Clark and Washoe counties have long dominated the state's politics.
Las Vegas was a major destination for immigrants from South Asia and Latin America seeking employment in the gaming and hospitality industries during the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, but farming and construction are the biggest employers of immigrant labor.
Since Nevada does not collect income data it cannot share such information with the federal government, the IRS.
