The major source of potable water for the island is groundwater, obtained from 14 active wells.
Four other lava domes were constructed on the flanks of the volcano, one on the northeast flank (Madden's Mount), one on the eastern flank (Butlers Mountain), one on the northwest coast (Mount Lily) and one on the south coast (Saddle Hill, with a height of 375 metres).
This particular form is called "Bazzarding" by many locals.
Nevis had two seats and Anguilla one seat in the government.
When the Leeward Islands were separated from Barbados in 1671, Nevis became the seat of the Leeward Islands colony and was given the nickname "Queen of the Caribees".
Letters and other records from the era indicate that the English on Nevis hated and feared the Amerindians.
* Saint George Gingerland
He writes that the Tea Meetings were staged as theatrical "battles between decorum and chaos", decorum represented by the ceremony chairmen and chaos the hecklers in the audience, with a diplomatic King or a Queen presiding over the battle to ensure fairness.
Modernised classrooms and better equipped schools, as well as improvements in the educational system, have contributed to a leap in academic performance on the island.
Saint Kitts and Nevis are separated by a shallow  channel known as "The Narrows".
Between 1675 and 1730, the island was the headquarters for the slave trade for the Leeward Islands, with approximately 6,000-7,000 enslaved West Africans passing through en route to other islands each year.
The profits on sugar cultivation in Nevis was enhanced by the fact that the cane juice from Nevis yielded an unusually high amount of sugar.
After a decision of the High Court in favour of the Nevis Island Administration, the Prime Minister gave newspaper interviews stating that he "refused to accept the decision of the High Court".
Nonetheless, once the sugar industry was finally abandoned, vegetation on the leeward side of the island regrew reasonably well, as scrub and secondary forest.
Nevisian culture has since the 17th century incorporated African, European and East Indian cultural elements, creating a distinct Afro-Caribbean culture.
The soothing waters of the hotel's hot spring and the lively social life on Nevis attracted many famous Europeans including Antigua-based Admiral Nelson, and Prince William Henry, Duke of Clarence, (future William IV of the United Kingdom), who attended balls and private parties at the Bath Hotel.
* Saint Paul Charlestown
The economic and infrastructural development of the two smaller islands was not a priority to the colonial federal government.
Records indicate that the Spanish enslaved large numbers of the native inhabitants on the more accessible of the Leeward Islands and sent them to Cubagua, Venezuela to dive for pearls.
In 1996, four new bills were introduced in the National Assembly in Saint Kitts, one of which made provisions to have revenue derived from activities in Nevis paid directly to the treasury in Saint Kitts instead of to the treasury in Nevis.
"Carib Indians" was the generic name used for all groups believed involved in cannibalistic war rituals, more particularly, the consumption of parts of a killed enemy's body.
Hilton became the first Governor of Nevis.
Electricity was introduced in Nevis in 1954, when two generators were shipped in to provide electricity to the area around Charlestown.
On 1 August 1834, slavery was abolished in the British Empire.
Because of the early distribution of plots and because many of the planters departed from the island when sugar cultivation became unprofitable, a relatively large percentage of Nevisians already owned or controlled land at emancipation.
In 1780, 90 percent of the 10,000 people living on Nevis were black.
The major source of revenue for Nevis today is tourism.
Nevis was first sighted by Columbus in 1493; an island settled for more than two thousand years by Amerindian people.
Nevis was united with Saint Kitts and Anguilla in 1882, and they became an associated state with full internal autonomy in 1967, though Anguilla seceded in 1971.
The list included the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis, as well as Liechtenstein, Monaco, Luxembourg, the British Channel Islands, Israel, and Russia.
Nine distinct eruptive centres from different geological ages, ranging from mid-Pliocene to Pleistocene, have contributed to the formation.
Its area is  and the capital is Charlestown.
During the 17th century, the French, based on Saint Kitts, launched many attacks on Nevis, sometimes assisted by the Island Caribs, who in 1667 sent a large fleet of canoes along in support.
Nevis is also known by the sobriquet "Queen of the Caribees", which it earned in the 18th century, when its sugar plantations created much wealth for the British.
A 1678 census shows a community of Irish people – 22% of the population – existing as either indentured servants or freemen.
On Nevis, the English built Fort Charles and a series of smaller fortifications to aid in defending the island against Carib attacks.
The share going to the NIA, however, is subject to deductions (s. 110(2)), such as the cost of common services and debt charges, as determined by the Governor-General (s.110(3)) on the advice of the Prime Minister who can also take advice from the Premier of Nevis (s.110(4))."
Today, the building serves as government offices, and there are two outdoor hot-spring bathing spots which were specially constructed in recent years for public use.
It is not known who chose this name for the island, but it is a reference to the story of a 4th-century Catholic miracle: a snowfall on the Esquiline Hill in Rome.
It was not a name the Caribs called themselves.
In spite of the continued use of the labour force, the Nevisian slave owners were paid over £150,000 in compensation from the British Government for the loss of property, whereas the enslaved families received nothing for 200 years of labour.
He wrote that "the slaves' brave behaviour and defence there shamed what some of their masters did, and they do not shrink to tell us so."
With new regulations in place, Saint Kitts and Nevis were removed from the list in 2002.
A referendum on secession from the Federation of St. Kitts and Nevis was held in 1998.
The island was named ''Oualie'' ("Land of Beautiful Waters") by the Caribs and ''Dulcina'' ("Sweet Island") by the early British settlers.
In this regard, Nevis fared better than Anguilla, where there were no paved roads, no electricity and no telephones up until 1967.
In 1674 and 1683 they participated in attacks on Carib villages in Dominica and St. Vincent, in spite of a lack of official approval from the Crown for the attack.
The island outranked larger islands like Jamaica in sugar production in the late 17th century.
Often the parishes are referred to simply by their common names.
After the  Treaty of Madrid (1670) between Spain and England, Nevis became the seat of the British colony and the Admiralty Court also sat in Nevis.
Gilbert sailed on to Virginia to seek out survivors of the Roanoke settlement in what is now North Carolina.
There are visible wave-breaking reefs along the northern and eastern shorelines.
With the loss of the natural vegetation, the balance in runoff nutrients to the reef was disturbed, eventually causing as much as 80 percent of the large eastern fringing reef to become inactive.
Between 1776 and 1783, when the food supplies failed to arrive altogether due to the rebellion in North America, 300–400 enslaved Nevisians starved to death.
The prime minister and the cabinet are responsible to the Parliament.
A cursory proposal for constitutional reform was presented by the NRP in 1999, but the issue was not prominent in the 2006 election campaign and it appears a detailed proposal has yet to be worked out and agreed upon within the party.
'''Nevis'''  is a small island in the Caribbean Sea that forms part of the inner arc of the Leeward Islands chain of the West Indies.
The first part of the name is the name of the patron saint of the parish church, and the second part of the name is the traditional common name of the parish.
This was the voyage which founded Jamestown, the first permanent English settlement in the New World.
The sums recorded for 1676 as  "head tax on slaves", a tax payable in sugar, amounted to 384,600 pounds in Nevis, as opposed to 67,000 each in Antigua and Saint Kitts, 62,500 in Montserrat, and 5,500 total in the other five islands.
Examples of European forms appropriated to express Afro-Caribbean culture are the Nevisian and Kittitian ''Tea Meetings'' and ''Christmas Sports''.
During 2005, the Nevis Island Treasury collected $94.6 million in annual revenue, compared to $59.8 million during 2001.
(1) of the constitution states: "The Nevis Island Legislature may provide that the island of Nevis shall cease to be federated with the island of Saint Christopher and accordingly that this Constitution shall no longer have effect in the island of Nevis."
Nevis is roughly conical in shape with a volcano known as Nevis Peak at its centre.
Nevis has considerable autonomy in its legislative branch.
Another bill, The Financial Services Committee Act, contained provisions that all investments in Saint Kitts and Nevis would require approval by an investment committee in Saint Kitts.
Two famous Nevisian buildings from the 18th century are Hermitage Plantation, built of lignum vitae wood in 1740, the oldest surviving wooden house still in use in the Caribbean today, and the Bath Hotel, the first hotel in the Caribbean, a luxury hotel and spa built by John Huggins in 1778.
The political structure for the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis is based on the Westminster Parliamentary system, but it is a unique structure in that Nevis has its own unicameral legislature, consisting of Her Majesty's representative (the Deputy Governor General) and members of the Nevis Island Assembly.
The Spanish name means Our Lady of the Snows.
The colour of the sand on the beaches of Nevis is variable: on a lot of the bigger beaches the sand is a yellow grey in colour, but some beaches on the southern coast have darker, reddish, or even black sand.
The formation of the island began in mid-Pliocene times, approximately 3.45 million years ago.
* Saint John Figtree
Memories of the Nevisian maroons' struggle under the plantation system are preserved in place names such as Maroon Hill, an early centre of resistance.
The most developed beach on Nevis is the  6.5&nbsp;km  long Pinney's Beach, on the western or Caribbean coast.
The pass rate among the Nevisian students sitting for the Caribbean Examination Council (CXC) exams, the Cambridge General Certificate of Education Examination (GCE) and the Caribbean Advance Proficiency Examinations is now consistently among the highest in the English-speaking Caribbean.
The great wealth generated by the colonies of the West Indies led to wars between Spain, Britain, and France.
Even though no names were mentioned in these skits, the audience would usually be able to guess who the heckling message in the troupe's dramatised portrayals was aimed at, as it was played out right on the person's own front yard.
Nevis is of particular historical significance to Americans because it was the birthplace and early childhood home of Alexander Hamilton.
Although 62% voted in favor of a secession, a two-thirds majority would have been necessary for the referendum to succeed.
Due to the deteriorating relationship between the Nevis Island Administration and the Federal Government, a Constitutional Committee was appointed in April 1996 to advise on whether or not the present constitutional arrangement between the islands should continue.
The constitutional crisis initially developed when the newly appointed Attorney General refused to grant permission for the Nevis Island Administration to assert its legal right in the Courts.
Before 1967, the local government of Saint Kitts was also the government of Nevis and Anguilla.
This form of music is played throughout the villages during the Christmas and carnival seasons.
His party, the NRP, has historically been the strongest and most ardent proponent for Nevis independence; the party came to power with secession as the main campaign issue.
The offshore financial industry gained importance during the financial disaster of 1999 when Hurricane Lenny damaged the major resort on the island, causing the hotel to be closed down for a year and 400 of the 700 employees to be laid off.
Among the  Nevisians recorded were chantey-singing fishermen in a session organised in a rum shop in Newcastle; Santoy, the Calypsonian, performing calypsos by Nevisian ballader and local legend Charles Walters to guitar and cuatro; and string bands, fife players and drummers from Gingerland, performing quadrilles.
The CCM won three of the five seats in the Nevis Island Assembly, while the incumbent party, the Nevis Reformation Party (NRP), won two.
In the face of the invading force, the English militiamen of Nevis fled.
A majority of the funds assigned for the hospital could thus spent on the construction of a new official residence in Nevis.
Pyroclastic flows and mudflows were deposited on the lower slopes of the cone simultaneously.
Some of the maroons joined with the few remaining Caribs in Nevis to form a resistance force.
During the fighting, 3,400 enslaved Nevisians were captured and sent off to Martinique, but about 1,000 more, poorly armed and militarily untrained, held the French troops at bay, by "murderous fire" according to an eyewitness account by an English militiaman.
The committee recommended constitutional reform and the establishment of an island administration for Saint Kitts, separate from the Federal Government.
One such letter recounts that so much damage was done to the town that it was completely evacuated, and was engulfed by the sea.
The British Administrator in Saint Kitts, Charles Cox, was unmoved.
During an interview on Voice of America in March 1998, repeated in a government issued press release headlined "PM Douglas Maintains 1983 Constitution is Flawed", Prime Minister Denzil Douglas called the constitution a "recipe for disaster and disharmony among the people of both islands".
The structure of the Island Carib language has been linguistically identified as Arawakan.
Nevis was part of the Spanish claim to the Caribbean islands, a claim pursued until the Treaty of Madrid (1670), even though there were no Spanish settlements on the island.
With modern development, the existing freshwater springs are no longer enough to supply water to the whole island.
The official currency is the Eastern Caribbean dollar (EC$), which is shared by eight other territories in the region.
The Royal African Company brought all its ships through Nevis.
Incorporation of companies, international insurance and reinsurance, as well as several international banks, trust companies, asset management firms, have created a boost in the economy.
Under a microscope it becomes clear that Nevis sand is a mixture of tiny fragments of coral, many foraminifera, and small crystals of the various mineral constituents of the volcanic rock of which the island is made.
The formation of the United States can be said to be a partial by-product of these wars and the strategic trade aims that often ignored North America.
* Saint James Windward
No single model of the island's geological evolution can therefore be ascertained.
Section 110(1) states that the proceeds of all 'takes' collected in St. Kitts and Nevis under any law are to be shared between the federal government and the Nevis Island Administration based on population.
Presumably the white clouds that usually cover the top of Nevis Peak reminded someone of this story of a miraculous snowfall in a hot climate.
The religious part of a parish name is sometimes written or pronounced in the possessive: Saint George's Gingerland.
Karen Fog Olwig published her research about Nevis in 1993, writing that the areas where the Afro-Caribbean traditions were especially strong and flourishing relate to kinship and subsistence farming.
The acts thus functioned as social and moral commentaries on current events and behaviours in Nevisian society.
Nevis has continued developing its own legislation, such as The Nevis International Insurance Ordinance and the Nevis International Mutual Funds Ordinance of 2004, but calls for secession are often based on concerns that the legislative authority of the Nevis Island Administration might be challenged again in the future.
It was the enslaved Africans who held the French at bay by taking up arms to defend their families and the island.
The constitution actually empowers the Nevis Island Legislature to make laws that cannot be abrogated by the National Assembly.
It was the easy access to fresh water on the island and the rich food source represented by the ocean life sheltered by the reef that made it feasible for the Amerindians to settle this area around 600 BC.
An often repeated legend appears to suggest that a massive 1690 earthquake and tsunami destroyed the buildings of the original capital Jamestown on the west coast.
The official language is English and Saint Kitts Creole (known on the island as 'Nevisian' or 'Nevis creole') is also widely spoken.
One of the wealthiest planter families in Nevis, the Pinneys of Montravers Plantation, claimed £36,396 (worth close to £1,800,000 today) in compensation for the slaves on the family-owned plantations around the Caribbean.
In addition, Nevis has a constitutionally protected right to secede from the federation, should a two-third majority of the island's population vote for independence in a local referendum.
The sugar industry on the island never fully recovered and during the general depression that followed the loss of the West Indian sugar monopoly, Nevis fell on hard times and the island became one of the poorest in the region.
Due to the profitable Triangular trade and the high quality of Nevisian sugar cane, the island soon became a dominant source of wealth for Great Britain and the slave-owning British plantocracy.
Simeon Daniel, Nevis' first Premier and former leader of the Nevis Reformation Party (NRP) and Vance Amory, Premier and leader of the Concerned Citizens Movement (CCM), made sovereign independence for Nevis from the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis part of their parties' agenda.
Some planters burned the plantations, rather than letting the French have them, and hid in the mountains.
The gently-sloping coastal plain ( wide) has natural freshwater springs as well as non-potable volcanic hot springs, especially along the western coast.
In 2000, the Financial Action Task Force, part of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), issued a blacklist of 35 nations which were said to be non-cooperative in the campaign against tax evasion and money laundering.
The composite cone of Nevis volcano has two overlapping summit craters that are partially filled by a lava dome, created in recent, pre-Columbian time.
An ambitious infrastructure development programme has been introduced during the last 10 years, including a transformation of the Charlestown port, construction of a new deep-water harbour, resurfacing and widening the Island Main Road, a new airport terminal and control tower, and a major airport expansion, which required the relocation of an entire village in order to make room for the runway extension.
Joseph Parry, leader of the opposition, has indicated that he favours constitutional reform over secession for Nevis.
In ''Handbook of Federal Countries'' published by Forum of Federations, the authors consider the constitution problematic because it does not "specifically outline" the federal financial arrangements or the means by which the central government and Nevis Island Administration can raise revenue: "In terms of the NIA, the constitution only states (in s. 108(1)) that 'all revenues...raised or received by the Administration...shall be paid into and form a fund styled the Nevis Island Consolidated Fund.'
Finally, a letter of complaint to the metropolitan British Foreign Office gave result and the federal government in Saint Kitts was ordered by their superiors in London to take speedy action.
''Culturama'', the annual cultural festival of Nevis, is celebrated during the Emancipation Day weekend, the first week of August.
He stated that Nevis did not need a hospital since there had been no significant rise in the number of deaths during the time Nevisians had been without a hospital.
Examples of gossip about undesired behaviour that could surface in the skits for comic effect were querulous neighbours, adulterous affairs, planters mistreating workers, domestic disputes or abuse, crooked politicians and any form of stealing or cheating experienced in the society.
However, electricity did not become available island-wide on Nevis until 1971.
In Nevis, 8,815 slaves were freed.
The Christmas Sports included a form of comedy and satire based on local events and gossip.
* Saint Thomas Lowland
They were historically an important part of the Christmas celebrations in Nevis, performed on Christmas Eve by small troupes consisting of five or six men accompanied by string bands from different parts of the island.
The five parishes of Nevis are:
Several historical anthropologists have done field research Nevis and in Nevisian migrant communities in order to trace the creation and constitution of a Nevisian cultural community.
A crisis developed in 1984 when the People's Action Movement (PAM) won a majority in the Federal elections and temporarily ceased honouring the Federal Government's financial obligations to Nevis.
The slave quarters had been looted and burned as well, as the main reward promised the men fighting on the French side in the attack was the right to capture as many slaves as possible and resell them in Martinique.
After the 1650s the supply of white indentured servants began to dry up due to increased wages in England and less incentive to migrate to the colonies.
By the end of the 17th century, the population of Nevis consisted of a small, rich planter elite in control, a marginal population of poor whites, a great majority of African-descended slaves, and an unknown number of maroons, escaped slaves living in the mountains.
The Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis has a 14 or 15-member unicameral legislature or parliament (the Senate and House of Representatives sit and vote together): A Senate, with three or four members appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister and the leader of the opposition; and a popularly elected House of Representatives with 11 members, eight Saint Kitts seats and three Nevis seats.
The indigenous people of Nevis during these periods belonged to the Leeward Island Amerindian groups popularly referred to as Arawaks and Caribs, a complex mosaic of ethnic groups with similar culture and language.
Water is pumped from the wells, stored and allowed to flow by gravity to the various locations.
Twenty percent of the British Empire's total sugar production in 1700 was derived from Nevisian plantations.
The sounds of the so-called "Iron Band" are also popular within the culture; many locals come together using any old pans, sinks, or other kits of any sort; which they  use to create sounds and music.
However, she adds, Afro-Caribbean cultural impulses were not recognised or valued in the colonial society and were therefore often expressed through Euro-Caribbean cultural forms.
Nevis is located near the northern end of the Lesser Antilles archipelago, about 350&nbsp;km east-southeast of Puerto Rico and 80&nbsp;km west of Antigua.
The local creole is actually more widely spoken on Nevis than on the neighbouring island.
According to Vincent Hubbard, author of ''Swords, Ships & Sugar: History of Nevis'', the Spanish ruling caused many of the Arawak groups who were not ethnically Caribs to "be redefined as Caribs overnight".
The celebration was given a more organised form in 1974, including a Miss Culture Show and a Calypso Competition, as well as drama performances, old fashion Troupes (including Johnny Walkers, Giant and Spear, Bulls, Red Cross and Blue Ribbon), arts and crafts exhibitions and recipe competitions.
During the last ice age, when the sea level was 60&nbsp;m lower, the three islands of Saint Kitts, Nevis and Sint Eustatius (also known as Statia) were connected as one island.
Disagreements between the political parties in Nevis and between the Nevis Island Administration and the Federal Government have prevented the recommendations by the electoral committee from being implemented.
All three representatives from Nevis, including the leader of the opposition in the Nevis Island Assembly, objected to the introduction of these bills into the National Assembly in Saint Kitts, arguing that the bills would affect the ability of Nevis to develop its offshore financial services sector and that the bills would be detrimental to the Nevis economy.
The island remained poorer than Saint Kitts until 1991, when the fiscal performance of Nevis edged ahead of the fiscal performance of Saint Kitts for the first time since the French invasion.
According to a 1995 report by the Commonwealth Observer Group of the Commonwealth Secretariat, "the federal government is also the local government of St Kitts and this has resulted in a perception among the political parties in Nevis that the interests of the people of Nevis are being neglected by the federal government which is more concerned with the administration of St Kitts than with the federal administration."
Even though the 15 families in the wealthy planter elite no longer control the arable land, Saint Kitts still has a large, landless working class population.
There is also substantial support in Nevis for British Overseas Territory status similarly to Anguilla, which was formerly the third of the tri-state Saint Christopher-Nevis-Anguilla colony.
After d'Iberville's invasion in 1704, records show Nevis’ sugar industry in ruins and a decimated population begging the English Parliament and relatives for loans and monetary assistance to stave off island-wide starvation.
With less profitability for the absentee plantation owners, the import of food supplies for the plantation workers dwindled.
A gallon (3.79 litres) of cane juice from Nevis yielded 24 ounces (0.71 litres) of sugar, whereas a gallon from Saint Kitts yielded 16 ounces (0.47 litres).
The Federal Government in Saint Kitts fills both functions today and Saint Kitts does not have an equivalent to the Nevis Island Administration.
Therefore, no action was needed on behalf of the government, and besides, Cox continued, the Legislative Council regarded "Nevis and Anguilla as a drag on St. Kitts and would willingly see a separation".
The problematic political arrangement between the two islands therefore continues to date.
The wealth of the planters on the island is evident in the tax records preserved at the Calendar State Papers in the British Colonial Office Public Records, where the amount of tax collected on the Leeward Islands was recorded.
Registration and annual filing fees paid in 1999 by these entities amounted to over 10 percent of Nevis’ revenues.
Lennox Honychurch (D. Phil.
The final decision by the federal government was to not rebuild the old hospital after all, but to instead convert the old Government House in Nevis into a hospital, named Alexandra Hospital after Queen Alexandra, wife of King Edward VII.
Abrahams theorises that Christmas Sports are rooted in the pre-emancipation Christmas and New Year holiday celebrations, when the enslaved population had several days off.
The island is also known for "Jamband music", which is the kind of music performed by local bands during the "Culturama Festival" and is key to "Jouvert" dancing.
To the south and west, the reefs are located in deeper water and are suitable for scuba diving.
No alleged misconduct had taken place on Nevis, but the island was included in the blanket action against all offshore financial business centres, as such centres cause a considerable loss of tax revenue for the G7 countries.
During the 2003–2004 season, approximately 40,000 tourists visited Nevis.
This was controversial, because ever since 1983 the Nevis Island Administration had approved all investments for Nevis, on the basis that the constitution vests legislative authority for industries, trades and businesses and economic development in Nevis to the Nevis Island Administration.
Early maps do not, however, actually show a settlement called "Jamestown", only "Morton's Bay", and later maps show that all that was left of  Jamestown/Morton's Bay in 1818 was a building labelled "Pleasure House".
The introduction of new legislation has made offshore financial services a rapidly growing economic sector in Nevis.
One of the men in the troupe was dressed as a woman, playing all the female parts in the dramatisations.
Among the Nevisian men, women and children carried away on d'Iberville's ships, six ended up in Louisiana, the first persons of African descent to arrive there.
In the federal elections of 2010, the CCM won two of the three Nevis assigned Federal seats, while the NRP won one.
During this period, Nevis was the richest of the British Leeward Islands.
As the reef broke apart, it in turn provided less protection for the coastline.
After five years without any proper medical facilities, the leaders in Nevis initiated a campaign, threatening to seek independence from Saint Kitts.
The first Monday in August is celebrated as Emancipation Day and is part of the annual Nevis Culturama festival.
There are sheltered swimming beaches in Oualie Bay and Cades Bay.
In 1998, 17,500 international banking companies were registered in Nevis.
Folk tales say that the town sank beneath the ocean.
Of the eight Saint Kitts assigned federal seats, the St Kitts-Nevis Labour Party won six and the People's Action Movement (PAM) two.
During d'Iberville's invasion of Nevis, French buccaneers were used in the front line, infamous for being ruthless killers after the pillaging during the wars with Spain where they gained a reputation for torturing and murdering non-combatants.
Consequently, cheques issued by the Nevis Administration were not honoured by the Bank, public servants in Nevis were not paid on time and the Nevis Island Administration experienced difficulties in meeting its financial obligations.
His field trip to Nevis and surrounding islands resulted in the anthology ''Lomax Caribbean Voyage'' series.
The last activity took place about 100,000 years ago, but active fumaroles and hot springs are still found on the island, the most recent formed in 1953.
After 18 days of fighting, the French were driven off the island.
Nevis lies within the track area of tropical storms and occasional hurricanes.
The current name ''Nevis''  was derived from a Spanish name ''Nuestra Señora de las Nieves'' by a process of abbreviation and anglicisation.
In spite of the Spanish claim, Nevis continued to be a popular stop-over point for English and Dutch ships on their way to the North American continent.
Captain John Smith visited Nevis also on his way to Virginia in 1607.
According to the Nevis Department of Culture, the aim is to protect and encourage indigenous folklore, in order to make sure that the uniquely Caribbean culture can "reassert itself and flourish".
