The conference resumed at about 10&nbsp;pm and was mostly in the hands of a small drafting committee.
Runciman, a member of the Liberal National Party, was thought by Chamberlain to be lazy.
Hitler brushed aside the proposals of the previous meeting, saying "that won't do any more".
But Chamberlain decided that he would resign unless the Labour Party was willing to join his government, and so he met with Attlee later that day.
Chamberlain spoke emotionally, laying the blame for the conflict on Hitler.
By 1934, Chamberlain was able to declare a budget surplus and restore many of the cuts in unemployment compensation and civil servant salaries he had made after taking office.
De Valera sought not only to alter the constitutional status of Ireland, but to overturn other aspects of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, most notably the issue of partition, as well as obtaining full control of the three "Treaty Ports" which had remained in British control.
Before he left office in 1929, 21 of the 25 bills had passed into law.
Chamberlain is best known for his appeasement foreign policy, and in particular for his signing of the Munich Agreement in 1938, conceding the German-speaking Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia to Germany.
Chamberlain had disregarded rumours of a Soviet-German "rapprochement", and was dismissive of the publicly announced pact, stating that it in no way affected British obligations toward Poland.
On arrival in Munich the British delegation was taken directly to the ''Führerbau'', where Daladier, Mussolini and Hitler soon arrived.
He especially regretted the loss of Chequers as "a place where I have been so happy", though after a farewell visit there by the Chamberlains on 19 June, he wrote "I am content now that I have done that, and shall put Chequers out of my mind."
Chamberlain refused.
Before ill health forced him to resign he was an important member of Churchill's War Cabinet, heading it in the new premier's absence.
Parker also suggested that had Churchill held high office in the second half of the 1930s Churchill would have built a series of alliances which would have deterred Hitler, and perhaps would have caused Hitler's domestic opponents to procure his removal.
The response was a passionate demonstration, with members cheering Chamberlain wildly.
When, later that day, German Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop remonstrated with Hitler for signing it, the Führer replied, "Oh, don't take it so seriously.
The agreements were attacked by Conservative backbencher Winston Churchill in Parliament for surrendering the Treaty Ports, which Churchill described as the "sentinel towers of the Western Approaches".
The start of war in 1914 prevented implementation of his plans.
He restored Churchill to the Cabinet as First Lord of the Admiralty, with a seat in the War Cabinet.
Most historians in the generation following Chamberlain's death held similar views, led by Churchill in ''The Gathering Storm''.
Word leaked of the outcome of the meetings before Chamberlain's return, causing delight among many in London but gloom amongst Churchill and his adherents.
The de Valera government also sought to remove the remaining ties between Ireland and the UK, such as ending the King's status as Irish Head of State.
However several of his Cabinet members, led by the Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax, began to draw away from the appeasement policy.
Chamberlain had disliked what he considered to be an overly sentimental attitude of both Baldwin and MacDonald on Cabinet appointments and reshuffles.
Chamberlain proposed a 10% tariff on foreign goods and lower or no tariffs on goods from the colonies and the Dominions.
National Labour MP and diarist Harold Nicolson later wrote, "In those few minutes he flung away his reputation."
Future Labour Prime Minister Clement Attlee complained that Chamberlain "always treated us like dirt", and Chamberlain in April 1927 wrote:  "More and more do I feel an utter contempt for their lamentable ''stupidity''."
Though Cooper opened by setting forth the reasons for his resignation and Churchill spoke harshly against the pact, no Conservative voted against the government.
In the short time remaining to him, Chamberlain was angered by the "short, cold and for the most part depreciatory" press comments on his retirement, according to him written "without the slightest sign of sympathy for the man or even any comprehension that there may be a human tragedy in the background".
This Act was aimed at bettering working conditions in factories, and placed limits on the working hours of women and children.
Chamberlain died of bowel cancer on 9 November 1940 at the age of 71.
At 11:15&nbsp;am, Chamberlain addressed the nation by radio, stating that the United Kingdom was at war with Germany:
On 3 August, Walter Runciman (by now Lord Runciman) travelled to Prague as a mediator sent by the British government.
Twice in May 1940 Churchill broached the subject of bringing Lloyd George into the government.
Chamberlain's address met with the approval of the House.
Consequently, in March 1920 he was offered a junior post at the Ministry of Health by Bonar Law on behalf of the Prime Minister, but was unwilling to serve under Lloyd George.
Britain did send Berlin a strong note of protest.
When Bonar Law resigned as party leader Austen Chamberlain took his place as head of the Unionists in Parliament.
In an effort to recoup diminished family fortunes, Joseph Chamberlain sent his younger son to establish a sisal plantation on Andros Island in the Bahamas.
Chamberlain favoured Halifax as the next Prime Minister, but Halifax proved reluctant to press his own claims, and Churchill emerged as the choice.
Only between 20 and 30 abstained, including Churchill, Eden, Cooper and Harold Macmillan.
Lloyd George resigned, as did Austen Chamberlain, and Bonar Law was recalled from retirement to lead the Unionists as Prime Minister.
At 1:30&nbsp;am the Munich Agreement was ready for signing, though the signing ceremony was delayed when Hitler discovered that the ornate inkwell on his desk was empty.
On his return to England, Neville Chamberlain entered business, purchasing (with assistance from his family) Hoskins & Company, a manufacturer of metal ship berths.
In 1935, MacDonald stood down as Prime Minister, and Baldwin became Prime Minister for the third time.
Chamberlain sought the abolition of the elected Poor Law Boards of Guardians which administered relief—and which in some areas were responsible for rates.
Neville Chamberlain was educated at Rugby School.
There was tremendous tension in the final days before Hitler's speech on the last day of the Rally, as Britain, France, and Czechoslovakia all partially mobilised their troops.
Surgeons discovered that he was suffering from terminal bowel cancer, but they concealed it from him, instead telling him that he would not require further surgery.
The Import Duties Act 1932 passed Parliament easily.
Joseph Chamberlain had advocated a similar policy, "Imperial Preference".
Lord Runciman continued his work, attempting to pressure the Czechoslovak government into concessions.
Lord Dunglass later commented, "There were a lot of appeasers in Parliament that day."
German troops quickly overran much of the country.
Baldwin called a general election for 30 May 1929, which resulted in a hung parliament, with Labour holding the most seats.
Over the next two weeks, Runciman met separately with Henlein, the Czechoslovak President Edvard Beneš and other leaders, but made no progress.
On the evening of 27 September, Chamberlain addressed the nation by radio, and after thanking those who wrote to him, stated:
During the "Khaki election" of 1900 he made speeches in support of Joseph Chamberlain's Liberal Unionists.
Churchill returned the loyalty, refusing to consider Labour and Liberal attempts to expel Chamberlain from the government.
Within two weeks of his appointment as Minister of Health Chamberlain presented the Cabinet with an agenda containing 25 pieces of legislation he hoped to see enacted.
The Germans made considerable propaganda out of the incident, though the Prague government tried to conciliate them by dismissing Czech police who had been involved.
In July 1940, a polemic entitled ''Guilty Men'' was released by "Cato"—a pseudonym for three journalists (including future Labour leader Michael Foot).
The Prime Minister issued a press statement calling on Germany to abandon the threat of force in exchange for British help in obtaining the concessions it sought.
In 1906, as Governor of Birmingham's General Hospital, and along with  "no more than fifteen" other dignitaries, Chamberlain became a founding member of the national United Hospitals Committee of the British Medical Association.
Oxford historian R. A. C. Parker argued that Chamberlain could have forged a close alliance with France after the ''Anschluß'', in early 1938, and begun a policy of containment of Germany under the auspices of the League of Nations.
With no agreement in sight, war seemed inevitable.
Hitler was unmoved.
When the division took place, the government, which had a normal majority of over 200, prevailed by only 81, with 38&nbsp;MPs in receipt of the government whip voting against it, with between 20 and 25 abstaining.
During this break, Chamberlain adviser Sir Horace Wilson met with the Czechoslovaks; he informed them of the draft agreement and asked which districts were particularly important to them.
Chamberlain compensated for these shortcomings by devising the most sophisticated press management system employed by a Prime Minister up to that time, with officials at Number 10 led by his chief of press George Steward, convincing members of the press that they were colleagues sharing power and insider knowledge, and should espouse the government line.
Lloyd George, the only former Prime Minister remaining in the Commons, had been expected to speak, but absented himself from the proceedings.
Hitler replied favourably and word of this response came to Chamberlain as he was winding up a speech in the House of Commons which sat in gloomy anticipation of war.
Churchill depicted Chamberlain as well-meaning but weak, blind to the threat posed by Hitler, and oblivious to the fact that (according to Churchill) Hitler could have been removed from power by a grand coalition of European states.
Chamberlain once again returned to the Ministry of Health.
On 15 March 1939, Germany invaded the Czech provinces of Bohemia and Moravia, including Prague.
On 4 February 1932 Neville Chamberlain laid his bill before the House of Commons.
Chamberlain appointed Lord Halifax as Foreign Secretary in Eden's place.
The initial speeches, including Chamberlain's, were nondescript, but Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keyes, member for Portsmouth North, in full uniform, delivered a withering attack on the conduct of the Norway campaign, though he excluded Churchill from criticism.
Convinced that the French would not fight (Daladier was privately proposing a three-Power summit to settle the Sudeten question), Chamberlain decided to implement "Plan Z" and sent a message to Hitler that he was willing to come to Germany to negotiate.
After the fall of Austria, the Cabinet's Foreign Policy Committee considered seeking a "grand alliance" to thwart Germany, or alternatively, an assurance to France of assistance if the French went to war.
Baldwin and his government resigned and Labour leader Ramsay MacDonald (1866–1937) took office.
I was relying on him to look after the Home Front for me."
Many of the Boards were controlled by Labour, and such Boards had defied the government by distributing relief funds to the able-bodied unemployed.
Ever close to his family, the executors of Chamberlain's will were his cousins, Wilfred Byng Kenrick and Sir Wilfrid Martineau; both of whom, like Chamberlain, were Lord Mayors of Birmingham.
The leaders met again late on the evening of 23 September—a meeting which stretched into the early morning hours.
In addressing the Cabinet shortly after German forces crossed the border, Chamberlain placed blame on both Germany and Austria.
Britain, on the other hand, wished to retain the Treaty Ports, at least in time of war, and to obtain the money that Ireland had agreed to pay.
With the naval war the only significant front involving the British in the early months of the war, the First Lord's obvious desire to wage a ruthless, victorious war established him as a leader-in-waiting in the public consciousness and among parliamentary colleagues.
Unionist leaders were willing to fight the 1922 election in coalition with the Lloyd George Liberals, but on 19 October Unionist MPs held a meeting at which they voted to fight the election as a single party.
The King abdicated on 10 December, four days after the meeting.
Chamberlain replied that telephone difficulties were making it hard to communicate with Paris and tried to dispel fears that the French were weakening.
Chamberlain returned to London in triumph.
Public revulsion over the pogrom of ''Kristallnacht'' on 9 November 1938 made any attempt at a "rapprochement" with Hitler unacceptable, though Chamberlain did not abandon his hopes.
When criticisms of Chamberlain appeared in the press, and when Chamberlain learned that Labour intended to use an upcoming secret session of Parliament as a platform to attack him, he told Churchill that he could only defend himself by attacking Labour.
The Bill passed into law.
Chamberlain's fall from power left him deeply depressed; he wrote, "Few men can have known such a reversal of fortune in so short a time."
Though it was not known at the time, it later became clear that Germany had had no plans for a May invasion of Czechoslovakia.
According to Chamberlain, Hitler interjected "''Ja!
This belief was reinforced by a German official's conciliatory speech welcoming Ambassador Henderson back to Berlin after an absence for medical treatment in Britain.
The same year, A. J. P. Taylor, in his ''The Origins of the Second World War'', found that Chamberlain had adequately rearmed Britain for defence (though a rearmament designed to defeat Germany would have taken massive additional resources) and described Munich as "a triumph for all that was best and most enlightened in British life&nbsp;...  for those who had courageously denounced the harshness and short-sightedness of Versailles".
Apart from his father Joseph, five of Chamberlain's uncles had also attained the chief Birmingham civic dignity: they were Joseph's brother Richard Chamberlain, William and George Kenrick, Charles Beale, who had been four times Lord Mayor and Sir Thomas Martineau.
Chamberlain especially urged the strengthening of the Royal Air Force, realising that Britain's historical bulwark, the English Channel, was no defence against air power.
The meeting ended amicably, with Chamberlain confiding to Hitler his hopes they would be able to work out other problems in Europe in the same spirit.
The French agreed to the requirements.
Large crowds mobbed Heston, where he was met by the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Clarendon, who gave him a letter from King George VI assuring him of the Empire's lasting gratitude and urging him to come straight to Buckingham Palace to report.
He returned to his office on 9 September.
By now the Nationalists strongly had the upper hand in that war, and they completed their victory the following year.
Chamberlain resumed work in mid-August.
After initial anger, Chamberlain determined to fight.
Honorary Air Commodore, No 916 (County of Warwick) Balloon Squadron, Auxiliary Air Force – 1939
Chamberlain' like my father before me, unadorned by any title".
On 17 June 1939, Handley Page received an order for 200 Hampden twin-engined medium bombers, and by 3 September 1939, the chain of radar stations girdling the British coast was fully operational.
Chamberlain was confident that improvements in British defence since Munich would bring the dictator to the bargaining table.
The Prime Minister questioned whether the invasion of Czechoslovakia was "the end of an old adventure, or the beginning of a new" and whether it was "a step in the direction of an attempt to dominate the world by force".
In the years following the publication of Churchill's books, few historians questioned his judgment.
Chamberlain replied by offering to act as an intermediary with the Czechoslovaks, and suggested that Hitler put his demands in a memorandum which could be circulated to the French and Czechoslovaks.
If war seemed inevitable, Chamberlain would fly to Germany to negotiate directly with Hitler.
At age 68, he was the second-eldest person in the 20th century (behind Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman) to become Prime Minister for the first time, and was widely seen as a caretaker who would lead the Conservative Party until the next election, and then step down in favour of a younger man, with Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden a likely candidate.
However, his tenure was marked by conflict with Lloyd George and in August 1917, having received little support from the Prime Minister, Chamberlain resigned.
It attacked the record of the National Government, alleging that it had failed to prepare adequately for war.
In his two volumes, ''Chamberlain and Appeasement'' (1993) and ''Churchill and Appeasement'' (2000), Parker stated that Chamberlain, due to his "powerful, obstinate personality" and his skill in debate, caused Britain to embrace appeasement instead of effective deterrence.
Chamberlain is believed to have had a significant role in the 1936 abdication crisis.
He was the only son of the second marriage of Joseph Chamberlain, who later became Mayor of Birmingham and a Cabinet minister.
That afternoon Chamberlain addressed the House of Commons' first Sunday session in over 120 years.
The British Cabinet met late that morning and issued a warning to Germany that unless it withdrew from Polish territory Britain would carry out its obligations to Poland.
Under Chamberlain's direction Birmingham soon adopted one of the first town planning schemes in Britain.
Joseph Chamberlain then sent Neville to Mason College (the future University of Birmingham).
In common with the rest of the Cabinet, except Duff Cooper, he agreed with Baldwin that the King should abdicate if he married Simpson, and on 6 December he and Baldwin both stressed that the King should make his decision before Christmas; by one account, he believed that the uncertainty was "hurting the Christmas trade".
Still hoping for reconciliation with Germany, Chamberlain made a major speech in Birmingham on 28 January 1939 in which he expressed his desire for international peace, and had an advance copy sent to Hitler at Berchtesgaden.
The Prime Minister's opponents decided to turn the adjournment debate for the Whitsun recess into a challenge to Chamberlain, who soon heard about the plan.
Unforeseen by the Allies, however, Germany had itself planned to occupy Norway, and on 9 April German troops occupied Denmark and began an invasion of Norway.
The Colonial Secretary Malcolm MacDonald said, "whereas the Prime Minister was once a strong advocate of peace, he has now definitely swung around to the war point of view".
The two Prime Ministers urged quick acceptance by the Czechoslovaks of the agreement, since the evacuation by the Czechs was to begin the following day.
This incident caused unrest among the Sudeten Germans, and Germany was then said to be moving troops to the border.
The Commons discussed the Munich Agreement on 3 October.
The new First Lord proved to be a difficult Cabinet colleague, deluging the Prime Minister with a sea of lengthy memos.
Chamberlain sought to build an interlocking series of defence pacts among the remaining European countries as a means of deterring Hitler from war.
On 14 March, the day after the "Anschluß", Chamberlain addressed the House of Commons and strongly condemned the methods used by the Germans in the takeover of Austria.
It called for the removal of Chamberlain and other ministers who had allegedly contributed to the British disasters of the early part of the war.
Attlee was unwilling, but agreed to consult his National Executive then meeting in Bournemouth.
Later that month the new French Prime Minister, Édouard Daladier, came to London for talks with Chamberlain, and agreed to follow the British position on Czechoslovakia.
When Sir Arthur Griffith-Boscawen, the Minister of Health, lost his seat in the 1922 general election and failed to win a by-election in March 1923, Bonar Law offered the position within the Cabinet to Chamberlain.
Soon after the abdication Baldwin announced that he would remain until shortly after the coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth.
'''Arthur Neville Chamberlain''',  (18 March 1869 – 9 November 1940) was a British Conservative politician who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from May 1937 to May 1940.
Chamberlain also bypassed Eden while the Foreign Secretary was on holiday by opening direct talks with Italy, an international pariah for its invasion and conquest of Ethiopia.
However, Churchill was received coolly by the House.
He wrote to John Simon, who had served as Chancellor of the Exchequer in Chamberlain's government:
Two months later, Bonar Law was diagnosed with advanced, terminal throat cancer.
Chamberlain concluded his address by noting the appropriateness of his seeking to enact his father's proposal.
Chamberlain reduced the annual interest rate on most of Britain's war debt from 5% to 3.5%.
Defence spending had been heavily cut in Chamberlain's early budgets.
Chamberlain castigated Churchill for sending so many memos, as the two met in War Cabinet every day.
The Prime Minister was initially reluctant to accept; but as both men realised that Chamberlain would never return to work, Churchill finally allowed him to resign.
Churchill wished Chamberlain to return to the Exchequer, but he declined, convinced that this would lead to difficulties with the Labour Party.
He was rapidly promoted in 1923 to Minister of Health and then Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Chamberlain flew back to Germany, meeting Hitler in Bad Godesberg on 22 September.
Chamberlain was made chairman of the Town Planning Committee.
Nevertheless, Chamberlain is still unfavourably ranked amongst British Prime Ministers.
He doubled the size of the Territorial Army, created a Ministry of Supply to expedite the provision of equipment to the armed forces, and instituted peacetime conscription.
Hitler began to call for the union of the region with Germany.
Chamberlain's reputation was devastated by these attacks from the left.
His poor relations with the Labour Party later played a major part in his downfall as Prime Minister.
In 1929 Chamberlain initiated legislation to abolish the Poor Law boards entirely.
After working in business and local government and after a short spell as Director of National Service in 1916 and 1917, Chamberlain followed his father, Joseph Chamberlain, and older half-brother, Austen Chamberlain, in becoming a member of parliament in the 1918 general election at age 49.
The Anglo-Irish Trade War, sparked by the withholding of money that Ireland had agreed to pay the United Kingdom, had caused economic losses on both sides, and the two nations were anxious for a settlement.
Soon after attaining the premiership, Chamberlain obtained passage of the Factories Act 1937.
The Liberal Unionists were allied with the Conservatives and later merged with them under the name "Unionist Party", which in 1925 became known as the "Conservative and Unionist Party".
He made trips to Paris and Rome, hoping to persuade the French to hasten their rearmament and to persuade Mussolini to be a positive influence on Hitler.
This time, Chamberlain agreed to Lloyd George's appointment provided Lloyd George gave a personal assurance to put aside the feud.
In response to the report, Prague moved troops to the German border.
Conservative MP Iain Macleod's 1961 biography of Chamberlain was the first major biography of a revisionist school of thought on Chamberlain.
He said he would "prefer to die plain 'Mr.
After reporting to the King, Chamberlain and his wife appeared on the Palace balcony with the King and Queen.
However, later in October, he resisted calls to put industry on a war footing, convinced that such an action would show Hitler that the Prime Minister had decided to abandon Munich.
The following day Germany invaded the Low Countries and Chamberlain considered remaining in office.
On 24 August 1931 the Labour government resigned and MacDonald formed a National Government supported by most Conservative MPs.
Queen Elizabeth told Chamberlain that her daughter, Princess Elizabeth wept as she heard the broadcast.
According to historian David Dutton, "its impact upon Chamberlain's reputation, both among the general public and within the academic world, was profound indeed".
Chamberlain initially showed little interest in politics though his father and half-brother were in Parliament.
Instead, he accepted the post of Lord President of the Council with a seat in the shrunken five-member War Cabinet.
Chamberlain spoke in the Commons for two and a half hours on the second reading of the Bill, and when he concluded he was applauded by all parties.
Many of Chamberlain's family letters and his extensive personal papers were bequeathed by his family in 1974 to the Birmingham University Archives.
The Prime Minister asked if Chamberlain would accept the highest order of British chivalry, the Order of the Garter, of which his brother had been a member.
The face to face meeting lasted about three hours.
Under considerable pressure the Czechoslovaks also agreed, causing the Czechoslovak government to fall.
Another major law passed that year was the Holidays with Pay Act.
Depart, I say, and let us have done with you.
He extended his deadline for occupation of the Sudetenland to 1 October—the date he had long before secretly set for the invasion of Czechoslovakia.
Chamberlain hoped that a cancellation of the war debt owed to the United States could be negotiated.
Churchill wrote to express his gratitude for Chamberlain's willingness to stand by him in the nation's hour of need, and Lord Baldwin, the only living former Prime Minister besides Chamberlain and Lloyd George, wrote, "You have passed through fire since we were talking together only a fortnight ago, and you have come out pure gold."
The Unionists won the election, but Chamberlain declined to serve again as Chancellor, preferring his former position as Minister of Health.
He sought treatment, and later that month entered hospital for surgery.
These reports were to be integrated with the intent of co-ordinating the passage of legislation through the current Parliament, the term of which was to expire in November 1940.
As the tempest grew, Runciman concluded that there was no point in attempting further negotiations until after Hitler's speech.
From the start of Chamberlain's premiership a number of would-be successors were rumoured to be jockeying for position.
Dutton observes that Chamberlain's reputation, for good or ill, will probably always be closely tied to evaluation of his policy toward Germany:
There was no provision in the treaties for British access to the Treaty Ports in time of war, but Chamberlain accepted de Valera's oral assurance that in the event of war the British would have access.
Though Chamberlain struck a conciliatory note during the 1926 General Strike, in general he had poor relations with the Labour opposition.
Chamberlain went to Buckingham Palace to resign and advise the King to send for Churchill.
