No gun offense in New Jersey is graded less than a felony.
It is also the second wealthiest state according to the U.S. Census Bureau.
The New Jersey Turnpike, which runs between two major East Coast cities, New York City and Philadelphia, is also cited as a reason, as people who traverse through the state may only see its industrial zones.
It hosted the Breeders' Cup in 2007, and its turf course was renovated in preparation.
Corzine also signed a bill that would downgrade the Death Row prisoners' sentences from "Death" to "Life in Prison with No Parole."
The USDA Plant Hardiness Zone classification ranges from 6 in the northwest of the state, to between 7B and 8A near Cape May.
The Pirates have support in the predominantly Roman Catholic areas of the northern part of the state and the Jersey Shore.
New Jersey harvests the fourth-largest number of acres planted with asparagus.
*Filipinos in the New York City metropolitan region
Until 2010, the governor was the only statewide elected executive official in the state and appointed numerous government officials.
The Port Newark-Elizabeth Marine Terminal was the world's first container port and is one of the world's largest container ports.
Sports are divided between 3 seasons (fall, winter, and spring).
Amtrak also operates numerous long-distance passenger trains in New Jersey to and from neighboring states and around the country.
Some private bus carriers still remain in New Jersey.
Some mining activity of zinc, iron, and manganese still takes place in the area in and around the Franklin Furnace.
Credit for the development of submarine sandwiches is claimed by several states with substantial Italian American populations, including New Jersey.
*Filipinos in New Jersey
Depending on the county, the executive and legislative functions may be performed by the Board of Chosen Freeholders or split into separate branches of government.
(NJSIAA) ' Founded in 1918, the NJSIAA currently represents 22,000 schools, 330,000 coaches, and almost 4.5 million athletes.
All-time temperature extremes recorded in New Jersey include  on July 10, 1936 in Runyon, Middlesex County and  on January 5, 1904 in River Vale, Bergen County.
The university also fields rising basketball and baseball programs.
The area was named the Province of New Jersey.
The New Jersey Constitution of 1776 was passed July 2, 1776, just two days before the Second Continental Congress declared American Independence from Great Britain.
Atlantic City experienced a dramatic contraction in its stature as a gambling destination after 2010, including the closure of multiple casinos in 2014, spurred by competition from the advent of legalized gambling in other northeastern U.S. states.
'''8'''/'''1''' (46/34)
Additionally, the New Jersey Commerce, Economic Growth, & Tourism Commission divides the state into six distinct regions to facilitate the state's tourism industry.
The Dutch became the first Europeans to lay claim to lands in New Jersey.
New Jersey has seven tax brackets that determine state income tax rates, which range from 1.4% to 8.97%.
Major League Soccer
Average high and low temperatures in various cities of New Jersey '''°C''' (°F)
For example, Salem County, the same is true with Passaic County, with a highly populated Hispanic Democratic south (including Paterson, the state's third-largest city) and a rural, Republican north.
New Jersey is connected to New York City via various bridges and tunnels.
Hurricanes and tropical storms (such as Tropical Storm Floyd in 1999), tornadoes, and earthquakes are rare, although New Jersey was severely impacted by Hurricane Sandy on October 29, 2012 with the storm making landfall in the state at 90&nbsp;mph.
Other carriers include private charter and tour bus operators that take gamblers from other parts of New Jersey, New York City, Philadelphia, and Delaware to the casino resorts of Atlantic City.
Most of the day-to-day work in the New Jersey courts is carried out in the '''Municipal Courts''', where simple traffic tickets, minor criminal offenses, and small civil matters are heard.
Newark was the fourth poorest of U.S. cities with over 250,000 residents in 2008, but New Jersey as a whole had the second-highest median household income as of 2014.
* Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge
The Washington Crossing and Scudders Falls (on I-95) bridges near Trenton, as well as Trenton's Calhoun Street and Bridge Street ("Trenton Makes") bridges, are toll-free.
Its per capita income was the third highest in the nation with $51,358.
As of 2010, New Jersey is the eleventh-most populous state in the United States, and the most densely populated, at 1,185 residents per square mile (458 per km2), with most of the population residing in the counties surrounding New York City, Philadelphia, and along the eastern Jersey Shore, while the extreme southern and northwestern counties are relatively less dense overall.
New Jersey was inhabited by Native Americans for more than 2,800 years, with historical tribes such as the Lenape along the coast.
Factors for this include the large federal tax liability which is not adjusted for New Jersey's higher cost of living and Medicaid funding formulas.
New Jersey is one of only five states that elects its state officials in odd-numbered years.
New Jersey receives between 2,400 and 2,800 hours of sunshine annually.
It is also at the center of the Northeast megalopolis.
While the majority of residents lived in towns with individual landholdings of , a few rich proprietors owned vast estates.
The first Miss America Pageant was held in 1921 in Atlantic City, the Holland Tunnel connecting Jersey City to Manhattan opened in 1927, and the first drive-in movie was shown in 1933 in Camden.
All real property located in the state is subject to property tax unless specifically exempted by statute.
Each judge serves an initial seven-year term, after which he or she can be reappointed to serve until age 70.
'''11'''/'''2''' (51/35)
New Jersey does not assess an intangible personal property tax, but it does impose an inheritance tax.
New Jersey is the first state to pass such legislation since Iowa and West Virginia eliminated executions in 1965.
McClellan, a native Philadelphian, had New Jersey ties and formally resided in New Jersey at the time; he later became Governor of New Jersey (1878–81).
Long Beach Island ("LBI"), a barrier island along the eastern coast, has popular recreational beaches.
'''18'''/'''11''' (65/53)
Although the European principle of land ownership was not recognized by the Lenape, Dutch West India Company policy required its colonists to purchase the land that they settled.
Prominent geographic features include:
The New York Red Bulls of Major League Soccer play in Red Bull Arena, a soccer-specific stadium located in Harrison outside of downtown Newark.
*Koreatown, Palisades Park, also a Korean enclave in southeast Bergen County
The New Jersey Supreme Court consists of a Chief Justice and six Associate Justices.
The Faulkner Act, originally enacted in 1950 and substantially amended in 1981, offers four basic plans: Mayor-Council, Council-Manager, Small Municipality, and Mayor-Council-Administrator.
Prior to this bill, the state had no income tax.
Its comparatively low greenhouse gas emissions can be attributed to nuclear power.
PATCO operates a single elevated and subway line that runs from Lindenwold to Center City Philadelphia.
Currently, New Jersey Democrats have majority control of both houses of the New Jersey Legislature (Senate, 24–16, and Assembly, 47–33), a 6-6 split of the state's twelve seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, and both U.S. Senate seats.
Many urban areas extend far beyond the limits of a single large city, as New Jersey cities (and indeed municipalities in general) tend to be geographically small; three of the four largest cities in New Jersey by population have under 20 square miles of land area, and eight of the top ten, including all of the top five have land area under 30 square miles.
Because each candidate for lieutenant governor runs on the same ticket as the party's candidate for governor, the current Governor and Lieutenant Governor are members of the Republican Party.
New Jersey's geographic location at the center of the Northeast megalopolis, between Boston and New York City to the northeast, and Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington, D.C., to the southwest, fueled its rapid growth through the process of suburbanization in the second half of the 20th century.
* 68.6% White American
Unlike other states, all New Jersey land is part of a municipality.
A study by the Pew Research Center found that in 2013, New Jersey was the only U.S. state in which immigrants born in India constituted the largest foreign-born nationality, representing roughly 10% of all foreign-born residents in the state.
As of 2014, Jersey City's Census-estimated population was 262,146, with the largest population increase of any municipality in New Jersey since 2010, representing an increase of 5.9% from the 2010 United States Census, when the city's population was enumerated at 247,597.
* Gateway Region, encompassing Middlesex County, Union County, Essex County, Hudson County, Bergen County, and Passaic County.
In 1807, the legislature passed a bill interpreting the constitution to mean universal ''white male'' suffrage, excluding paupers; the constitution was itself an act of the legislature and not enshrined as the modern constitution.
New Jersey has a strong scientific economy and is home to major pharmaceutical and telecommunications firms.
She was elected on the Republican ticket with Governor-Elect Chris Christie in the November 2009 NJ gubernatorial election.
Millville Municipal Airport, in Cumberland County, is a general aviation airport popular with private and corporate aircraft, due to its proximity to the shore.
New Jersey was the site of several decisive battles during the American Revolutionary War in the 18th century.
In the early part of the 2000s, two light rail systems were opened: the Hudson–Bergen Light Rail in Hudson County and the River Line between Camden and Trenton.
During the Great Depression of the 1930s, the state offered begging licenses to unemployed residents, the zeppelin airship Hindenburg crashed in flames over Lakehurst, and the SS ''Morro Castle'' beached itself near Asbury Park after going up in flames while at sea.
After the crossing, he surprised and defeated the Hessian troops in the Battle of Trenton.
New Jersey is home to more scientists and engineers ''per square mile'' than anywhere else in the world.
In May 2009, the Local Unit Alignment Reorganization and Consolidation Commission began a study of about 40 small communities in South Jersey to decide which ones might be good candidates for consolidation.
'''13'''/'''4''' (55/39)
Residents of New Jersey are most commonly referred to as "New Jerseyans" or, less commonly, as "New Jerseyites".
According to the Energy Information Administration, nuclear power dominates New Jersey's electricity market, typically supplying more than one-half of State generation.
Although the Democratic Party is very successful statewide, the state had a Republican governor from 1994 to 2002, as Christie Todd Whitman won twice with 47% and 49% of the votes, and in the 2009 gubernatorial election, Republican Chris Christie defeated incumbent Democrat Jon Corzine with 48%.
The south, central, and northeast parts of the state have a humid subtropical climate, while the northwest has a humid continental climate (microthermal), with much cooler temperatures due to higher elevation.
Liberty Water Taxi in Jersey City has ferries from Paulus Hook and Liberty State Park to (BPC).
Justices serve an initial seven-year term, after which they can be reappointed to serve until age 70.
* Ellis Island National Monument
*Ironbound, a Portuguese and Brazilian enclave in Newark
This paradox is most pronounced in Bergen County, New Jersey's most populous county, whose more than 930,000 residents in 2014 inhabited 70 municipalities, the most populous being Hackensack, with 44,519 residents estimated in 2014.
* Centre Bridge-Stockton Bridge&nbsp;– (PA 263 / CR 523)
James then granted the land between the Hudson River and the Delaware River (the land that would become New Jersey) to two friends who had remained loyal through the English Civil War: Sir George Carteret and Lord Berkeley of Stratton.
The Dutch colony of New Netherland consisted of parts of modern Middle Atlantic states.
Approximately 30 New Jersey municipalities are designated as Urban Enterprise Zones, in which shoppers are charged a 3½% sales tax rate, half of the rate charged outside the UEZs.
In the 2008 election, President Barack Obama won New Jersey with approximately fifty-seven percent of the vote, compared to McCain's forty-one percent.
Nine of New Jersey's counties are in the wealthiest 100 of the country.
New Jersey's estimated taxpayer burden in 2011 was $37,000 per taxpayer, 49th in the nation.
John F. Kennedy in World War II, was built at the Elco Boatworks in Bayonne.
Most of the trains start at various points in the state and most end at either Pennsylvania Station, in New York City, or Hoboken Terminal in Hoboken.
Urban revitalization has continued in North Jersey in the 21st century.
Several casinos lie along the Atlantic City Boardwalk, the first and longest boardwalk in the world.
New Jersey ranks second among states in blueberry production, third in cranberries and spinach, and fourth in bell peppers, peaches, and head lettuce.
'''25'''/'''15''' (77/60)
The position of Governor of New Jersey has been considered one of the most powerful in the nation.
* 13.7% African American
'''6'''/'''−3''' (42/27)
BB guns and black-powder guns are all treated as modern firearms.
New Jersey has the highest cumulative tax rate of all 50 states with residents paying a total of $68 billion in state and local taxes annually with a per capita burden of $7,816 at a rate of 12.9% of income.
The double-decked George Washington Bridge carries the heaviest load of motor vehicle traffic of any bridge in the world, at 102 million vehicles per year, over fourteen lanes, from Fort Lee, New Jersey in Bergen County across the Hudson River to the Trans-Manhattan Expressway in the Washington Heights neighborhood of Upper Manhattan in New York City; Interstate 95 and U.S. Route 1/9 cross the Hudson River via the "GWB", while U.S. Route 46, which lies entirely within New Jersey, ends halfway across the bridge at the state border with New York.
Most of these carriers operate with state funding to offset losses and state owned buses are provided to these carriers of which Coach USA companies make up the bulk.
New Jersey lies entirely within the combined statistical areas of New York City and Philadelphia and is the third-wealthiest U.S. state by per capita income as of 2014.
(See Metropolitan Statistical Areas of New Jersey for details.)
'''4'''/'''−4''' (39/24)
The Lenape society was divided into matrilinear clans that were based upon common female ancestors.
* Morristown National Historical Park in Morristown
Through both World Wars, New Jersey was a center for war production, especially in naval construction.
The 1776 New Jersey State Constitution gave the vote to "all inhabitants" who had a certain level of wealth.
On February 26, 2013, Governor Chris Christie signed online gambling into law.
Iron mining was also a leading industry during the middle to late 19th century.
Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 384,687 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 438,617 people.
New Jersey was a crucial swing state in the elections of 1960, 1968, and 1992.
Around 18,000 years ago, the Ice Age resulted in glaciers that reached New Jersey.
As shown by the study, incomes tend to be higher in New Jersey, which puts those in higher tax brackets especially vulnerable to the alternative minimum tax.
Slightly more than a week after victory at Trenton, American forces gained an important victory by stopping General Cornwallis's charges at the Second Battle of Trenton.
* New Jersey Pinelands National Reserve
For its overall population and nation-leading population density, New Jersey has a relative paucity of classic large cities.
'''4'''/'''−6''' (39/22)
The United States Census Bureau, , estimated New Jersey's population at 8,958,013, which represents an increase of 166,119, or 1.89%, since the last census in 2010.
This included women and blacks, but not married women, because they could not own property separately from their husbands.
'''25'''/'''16''' (78/61)
In a 2009 Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll, a plurality supported same-sex marriage 49% to 43% opposed, while the proportion supporting gay marriage continued to increase thereafter.
By evading Cornwallis's army, Washington made a surprise attack on Princeton and successfully defeated the British forces there on January 3, 1777.
The River Line connects Trenton and Camden.
New Jersey also has the fourth largest Filipino population, and fourth largest Chinese population, per the 2010 U.S. Census.
Ferry service from Keyport and Perth Amboy have been also been proposed.
Summers are typically hot and humid, with statewide average high temperatures of  and lows of ; however, temperatures exceed  on average 25 days each summer, exceeding  in some years.
The standard sales tax rate is 7%, applicable to all retail sales unless specifically exempt by law.
Other major roadways include U.S. 1, New Jersey Route 4, U.S. 9, New Jersey Route 10, and New Jersey Route 17.
Several others ensued in 1967, in Newark and Plainfield.
More serious criminal and civil cases are handled by the '''Superior Court''' for each county.
Municipalities can also formulate their own unique form of government and operate under a Special Charter with the approval of the New Jersey Legislature.
Rutgers, which fields 24 teams in various sports, is nationally known for its excellent football and women's basketball programs.
* Appalachian National Scenic Trail
17.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino (of any race).
+ '''New Jersey Racial Breakdown of Population'''
Each of the 40 legislative districts elects one State Senator and two Assembly members.
Edison's Black Maria was the first motion picture studio.
On December 18, 1787, New Jersey became the third state to ratify the United States Constitution, which was overwhelmingly popular in New Jersey, as it prevented New York and Pennsylvania from charging tariffs on goods imported from Europe.
The chief tree of the northern forests is the oak.
On the night of December&nbsp;25–26, 1776, the Continental Army under George Washington crossed the Delaware River.
In 1708 he was recalled to England.
Newark Mayor Cory Booker was elected in October 2013 to join Robert Menendez to make New Jersey the first state with concurrent serving black and Latino U.S. senators.
The state is home to many diner manufacturers and has more diners than any other state: over 600.
New Jersey's economy is multifaceted but is nevertheless centered upon the pharmaceutical industry, the financial industry, chemical development, telecommunications, food processing, electric equipment, printing, publishing, and tourism.
'''6'''/'''−2''' (42/28)
In 1962, the world's first nuclear-powered cargo ship, the NS Savannah, was launched at Camden.
New Jersey's per capita gross state product in 2008 was $54,699, second in the U.S. and above the national per capita gross domestic product of $46,588.
The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of New Jersey was 8,958,013 on July 1, 2015, a 1.89% increase since the 2010 United States Census.
In 1702, the two provinces were reunited under a royal governor, rather than a proprietary one.
The act provides many choices for communities with a preference for a strong executive and professional management of municipal affairs and offers great flexibility in allowing municipalities to select the characteristics of its government: the number of seats on the Council; seats selected at-large, by wards, or through a combination of both; staggered or concurrent terms of office; and a mayor chosen by the Council or elected directly by voters.
Both sides, in several elections, claimed that the other side had had unqualified women vote and mocked them for use of "petticoat electors", whether entitled to vote or not; on the other hand, both parties passed Voting Rights Acts.
The Delaware Valley includes the southwestern counties of the state, which reside within the Philadelphia Metropolitan Area.
High Point, in Montague Township, Sussex County, is the highest elevation, at .
The Newark Light Rail is partially underground, and connects downtown Newark with other parts of the city.
In the summer of 1783, the Continental Congress met in Nassau Hall at Princeton University, making Princeton the nation's capital for four months.
Before 2010, New Jersey was one of the few states without a lieutenant governor.
* Uhlerstown-Frenchtown Bridge&nbsp;– (NJ 12)
The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that New Jersey's gross state product in 2010 was $487 billion.
The adjacent Newark Airport railroad station provides access to the trains of Amtrak and NJ Transit along the Northeast Corridor Line.
By number of adherents, the largest denominations in New Jersey, according to the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2010, were the Roman Catholic Church with 3,235,290; Islam with 160,666; and the United Methodist Church with 138,052.
*Jersey City#Community diversity
This includes a natural increase since the last census of 343,965 people (that is, 933,185 births minus 589,220 deaths) and a decrease due to net migration of 53,930 people out of the state.
A riot occurred in Camden in 1971.
The governor's appointments to cabinet and non-cabinet positions may be from either party; for instance, the Attorney General is a Democrat.
Other riots followed the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in April 1968, just as in the rest of the country.
* 0.3% Native American
In the Port of New York and New Jersey, New York Waterway has ferry terminals at Belford Harbor, Jersey City, Hoboken, Weehawken, and Edgewater Landing.
New Jersey currently has 565 municipalities; the number was 566 before Princeton Township and Princeton Borough merged to form the municipality of Princeton on January 1, 2013.
Northeastern New Jersey, the Gateway Region, lies closest to Manhattan in New York City, and up to a million residents commute daily into the city to work via automobile or mass transit.
There were an estimated 550,000 illegal immigrants in the state in 2010.
A 2005 amendment to the state Constitution prevents the Senate President from becoming Acting Governor in the event of a permanent gubernatorial vacancy without giving up her or his seat in the state Senate.
This was the fourth highest percentage of any state in the country.
'''6'''/'''−1''' (44/30)
SEPTA also has two lines that operate into New Jersey.
New Jersey was governed very briefly as two distinct provinces, East and West Jersey, for 28 years between 1674 and 1702, at times part of the Province of New York or Dominion of New England.
Assembly members are elected for a two-year term in all odd-numbered years; State Senators are elected in the years ending in 1, 3, and 7 and thus serve either four- or two-year terms.
The Meadowlands Racetrack along with Freehold Raceway in Freehold are two of the major harness racing tracks in North America.
*Little Bangladesh, a Bangladeshi enclave in Paterson
Governor Chris Christie suspended the credits in 2010, but the New Jersey State Legislature in 2011 approved the restoration and expansion of the tax credit program.
Industrialization accelerated in the northern part of the state following completion of the Morris Canal in 1831.
New Jersey has one of the highest tax burdens in the nation.
'''1'''/'''−9''' (34/16)
'''21'''/'''12''' (70/53)
* Thomas Edison National Historical Park in West Orange
This caused a shift to a more industrialized economy, one based on manufactured commodities such as textiles and silk.
New Jersey is also connected to Staten Island by three bridges&nbsp;— from south to north: the Outerbridge Crossing, Goethals Bridge, and Bayonne Bridge.
Socially, New Jersey is considered one of the more liberal states in the nation.
