The province also has a relatively high proportion of people who state that they can speak both official languages, with about 246,000 people, or 33.2% of the population reporting the ability to speak both English and French (though Francophones make up two-thirds of those who are bilingual).
Frank McKenna (premier, 1987–97), had been considered the Liberal Party of Canada leadership material.
After the Seven Years' War, most of present-day New Brunswick (and parts of Maine) were confirmed as part of the colony of Nova Scotia and designated as Sunbury County.
Richard Hatfield (premier, 1970–87) played an active role in the patriation of the Canadian constitution and creation of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
The ''Marco Polo'', a clipper ship holding the round-trip speed record between Liverpool and Australia, was launched from Saint John in 1851.
During the late 18th and early 19th centuries, some of the deported Acadians from Nova Scotia found their way back to "Acadie," where they settled mostly along the eastern and northern shores of the new colony of New Brunswick.
Mount Allison University in Sackville is currently ranked as the best undergraduate liberal arts university in Canada and has produced 51 Rhodes Scholars, more than any other liberal arts university in the Commonwealth.
The Court of Appeal of New Brunswick, which sits in Fredericton, hears appeals from the inferior courts, as well as various administrative tribunals.
An outpouring of Acadian art, literature, and music has pressed on unabated since that time.
The railway industry, meanwhile, provided for growth and prosperity in the Moncton region.
Education and health care were poorly funded, and in the 1940s and 1950s the rates of illiteracy and infant mortality were among the highest in Canada.
The rural primary economy is best known for forestry, mining, mixed farming, and fishing.
The western portion of the province was the traditional home of the Wolastoqiyik (Maliseet) people.
One of the provisions of the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713 was the surrender of Acadia (or Nova Scotia as it was called by the British) to Queen Anne.
It was created as a result of the partitioning of the British colony of Nova Scotia in 1784.
Maple syrup and sugar products earned New Brunswick's 191 farmers over $30 million gross in 2014.
Throughout the mid 19th century, shipbuilding on the Bay of Fundy shore, on the Petitcodiac River, at Chatham on the Miramichi River, and at Bathurst in the Bay of Chaleur, became a dominant industry in New Brunswick.
Its economy is principally based on the transportation, distribution, information technology, commercial, and retail sectors.
Grammar schools at the parish level followed in 1805 and again in 1816.
Elections are held at least every five years, but may be called at any time by the Lieutenant Governor (the viceregal representative) on consultation with the Premier.
Although the province has a Fiscal Responsibility and Balanced Budget Act, the governments of Shawn Graham and David Alward both ran large deficits to place their constituents in a precarious position.
Resource-based industries such as logging and farming were also important components of the New Brunswick economy during this time and railways were constructed throughout the province to serve them and link the rural communities.
New Brunswick is the eighth-most populous province in Canada with 751,171 residents as of the 2011 Census.
Of the 731,855 single responses to the census question concerning mother tongue, the most commonly reported languages were:
There is also a significant population with Irish ancestry, especially in Saint John and the Miramichi Valley.
The total land and water area of the province is , over 80 percent of which is forested.
Agricultural lands are found mostly in the upper Saint John River valley, with lesser amounts of farmland in the southeast of the province, especially in the Kennebecasis and Petitcodiac river valleys.
Some of the laid-off workers were given opportunities in Saskatchewan.
The Loyalist City, as it is often referred to, is the largest in the province and the oldest in the country.
Civil cases are similarly disposed.
The first European settlers, the Acadians, are today descendants of survivors of the Great Expulsion (1755), which drove thousands of French residents into exile in North America, Britain, and France for refusing to take an oath of allegiance to King George III during the Seven Years' War (French and Indian War).
David Adams Richards, born in the Miramichi, has become a well-respected Governor-General's Award-winning author.
The nationally-renowned poet and painter P.K.
Many politicians who supported confederation, such as Sir Samuel Leonard Tilley (New Brunswick's best-known Father of Confederation), found themselves without a seat after the next election; nevertheless, backers of the wider confederation eventually prevailed.
In addition, the Chief Justice chairs the committee tasked with recommending Order of New Brunswick recipients.
The Maliseet from their headquarters at Meductic on the Saint John River, participated in numerous guerilla raids and battles against New England during Father Rale's War and King William's War.
The most valuable seafood catches are lobster, scallops and snow crab.
During the 19th century Scottish Gaelic was also spoken in the Campbellton and Dalhousie area.
The Charlottetown Conference of 1864, which ultimately led to the confederation movement, originally had been intended to discuss only a Maritime Union, but concerns over the American Civil War as well as Fenian activity along the border led to an interest in expanding the scope of the proposed union.
Although the province was largely rural, the colony, prior to the middle of the century, was not self-sufficient in wheat or flour and imports were thus necessary.
The Premier is the leader of the party that holds the most seats in the legislature.
Canadian novelist, story-writer, biographer and poet, Raymond Fraser, grew up in Chatham and lives now in Fredericton.
The three most populous municipalities, which together composed as of 2016 slightly over one quarter of the province's population, are presented below.
It is the home of Canada's biggest oil refinery and an LNG terminal has also been constructed in the city.
The lack of a dominant urban centre in the province means that the government has to be responsive to issues affecting all areas of the province.
New Brunswick has been coined by many as Canada's 'Drive-thru Province.'
Because of the provinces's sizeable French speaking population, French-Canadian culture (specifically Acadian) permeates many parts of New Brunswick society.
Acadian cloggers and Irish and Scots step dancers competed at festivals to expressive fiddle and accordion music.
As a comparison, the minority language communities of Ontario and Quebec (Franco-Ontarians and Anglophone Quebeckers respectively) make up less than 10% of those provinces' populations.
These schools are segregated by government decree.
As described by the political historian Arthur Doyle, an invisible line separated the two founding European cultures, beginning on the eastern outskirts of Moncton and running diagonally across the province northwest towards Grand Falls.
Although it is possible that Vikings may have reached as far south as New Brunswick, the first known European exploration of New Brunswick was that of French explorer Jacques Cartier in 1534, who discovered and named the Bay of Chaleur.
Fort Anne (Fredericton) fell during the 1759 campaign, and following this, all of present-day New Brunswick came under British control.
New Brunswick changed from more than two-thirds rural before 1941 to predominantly urban by 1971.
Due to all this many Regional interests, were crested in New Brunswick.
The provincial flag features a ship superimposed on a yellow background with a yellow ''lion passant guardant'' on red pennon above it.
There are four publicly funded secular universities and four private degree-granting institutions with religious affiliation in the province.
Likewise, New Brunswick's proximity to the United States affects the everyday life of people that live close to the 'line'.
As local society was founded in forestry and seaborne endeavours, a tradition of lumber camp songs and sea shanties prevailed.
The economy of Fredericton is intimately tied to the governmental, military, and university sectors.
During the winter of 1838–39, the situation quickly deteriorated, with both Maine and New Brunswick calling out their respective militias.
The "Aroostook War" was bloodless (but politically very tense), and the boundary was subsequently settled by the Webster-Ashburton Treaty of 1842.
In fact, Governor Douglas saw a silver lining in the great 1825 Miramichi Fire; he is recorded to have declared that the fire had positive aspects, in that it cleared the forest so that residents might dedicate themselves to farming, instead of relying on the sale of timber in order to purchase imported foodstuffs.
Page spent the decade in Saint John, which also saw the arrival of Danish ceramicists Kjeld and Erica Deichmann, who introduced pottery as a serious art form.
Saint John is a historic city and popular port of call.
Farming is concentrated in the upper Saint John River valley (in the northwest portion of the province), where the most valuable crop is potatoes.
In the mid-1960s, forestry practices changed from the controlled harvests of a commodity to the cultivation of the forests.
In modern literature, writers Alfred Bailey and Alden Nowlan dominated the New Brunswick literary scene in the last third of the 20th century and world-renowned literary critic Northrop Frye was influenced by his upbringing in Moncton.
The New Brunswick Lowlands form the eastern and central portions of the province and are part of the Gulf of St. Lawrence lowland forests ecoregion.
The eastern boundary is formed by the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and Northumberland Strait.
Nova Scotia was therefore partitioned.
From time to time, other parties, such as the Confederation of Regions Party, have held seats in the legislature, but only on the strength of a strong protest vote.
'''Private degree-granting religious training institutions'''
Anglophone students from the northern part of the province must travel south to obtain education, whereas Francophone students have no courses offered in the southwest.
The Chief Justice of New Brunswick, currently the Honourable J. Ernest Drapeau, serves at the apex of this court structure.
The Probate Court deals with matters involving wills and estates of deceased persons, while the Provincial court is the entry point for all persons charged with offences under the Criminal Code or other federal or provincial legislation.
The colony relocated the following year across the Bay of Fundy to Port Royal, Nova Scotia.
Even writing was affected; see for example, Mi'kmaq hieroglyphic writing.
These sectors are reasonably equitably distributed in all three principal urban centres.
This is commemorated in the province's motto, ''Spem reduxit'' ("hope restored").
Influential Loyalists such as Harvard-educated Edward Winslow saw themselves as the natural leaders of their community and that they should be recognized for their rank and that their loyalty deserved special compensation.
Governor Charles Lawrence of Nova Scotia used the discovery of Acadian civilians helping in the defence of the fort to order the expulsion of the Acadian population from Nova Scotia.
Poets produced the first important literary contributions in the province.
Alex Colville and Lawren Harris later studied and taught art there and both Christopher Pratt and Mary Pratt were trained at Mount Allison.
In northwest New Brunswick and neighbouring Quebec and northern Maine, a separate French-speaking group, the Brayon, have fostered such important artists as Roch Voisine and Lenny Breau.
Because of this, New Brunswick's population centres tend to be less 'centralized' than in Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia.
Since 1960, the province has tended to elect a succession of young bilingual leaders.
The US state of Maine forms the western boundary.
Moncton has a sizeable Francophone Acadian minority population (35%) and became officially bilingual in 2002.
A major French fortification, the Fortress of Louisbourg, was also built on Île Royale (now Cape Breton Island) after Queen Anne's War, but the function of this fort was mostly to defend the approaches to the colony of Canada, not the lost province of Acadia.
On the other hand, New Brunswick, although having a significant seacoast, is sheltered from the Atlantic Ocean proper and has a large interior that is removed from oceanic influences.
The other major media group in the province is Acadie Presse, which publishes ''L'Acadie Nouvelle''.
Manufacturing gained strength with the construction of textile mills such as the St. Croix Cotton Mill; and in the crucial forestry sector, the sawmills that had dotted inland sections of the province gave way to larger pulp and paper mills.
Initial Loyalist population growth in the new colony extended along the Fundy coastline from Saint Andrews to Saint Martins and up the Kennebecasis and lower Saint John River valleys.
Braunschweig is the ancestral home of the British monarch George I and his successors (the House of Hanover).
The original First Nations inhabitants of New Brunswick were members of three distinct tribes.
Each person could choose more than one ethnicity.
During the French and Indian War (1754–63), the British completed their displacement of the Acadians over all of present-day New Brunswick.
Recurring debates have arisen in regards to interpretation of the provincial bilingualism policy, duality (the system of parallel French and English speaking public services), and specifics of implementation.
In addition, it has appellate jurisdiction over summary conviction offences from the Provincial Court.
The depopulation of the Acadian Peninsula and other areas in Northern New Brunswick are partially a result of French New Brunswickers seeking new opportunities in urban centres like Moncton and its sister city, Dieppe.
The University’s art gallery – which opened in 1895 and is named for its patron, John Owens of Saint John – is Canada’s oldest.
The province entered Confederation with a Legislative Council of 40 members holding their seats for life, a Legislative Assembly of 40 members and an Executive Council of nine members.
International Parks: Roosevelt Campobello International Park
New Brunswick's urban areas have modern, service-based economies dominated by the health care, educational, retail, finance, and insurance sectors.
The 2011 Canadian census showed a population of 751,171.
The three English-language dailies and the majority of the weeklies are owned and operated by Brunswick News, privately owned by J.K. Irving.
*Crandall University (Moncton), Anglophone
The program came into its own under John A. Hammond, who served from 1893 to 1916.
Additional immigration to New Brunswick in the early part of the 19th century was from Scotland; western England; and Waterford, Ireland, often after first having come through (or having lived in) Newfoundland.
Two influential families, the Irvings and the McCains, emerged from the Depression to begin to modernise and vertically integrate the provincial economy—especially in the vital forestry, food processing, and energy sectors.
The annual Frye Festival in that city celebrates his legacy.
French-speaking community continues to advocate for full funding of French-language public services and fair representation in public sector employment, while some Anglophones (and Francophones) fear that the system of duality is financially inefficient and its extent is not worthwhile, or that the provincial governments targets for bilingualism in public employment are hurting their chances to work for the government, as Anglophone are much less likely than Francophones to be proficient enough in both official languages to use them in employment.
Dr. Webster gave his art collection to the New Brunswick Museum in 1934, thereby endowing the museum with one of its greatest assets, James Barry's&nbsp;''Death of General Wolfe'', which ranks as a Canadian national treasure.
*St. Stephen's University (St. Stephen), Anglophone
The Battle of Fort Cumberland was the largest and most significant of these conflicts.
Government services were often not available in French, and the infrastructure in predominantly Francophone areas was noticeably less developed than in the rest of the province; this changed with the election of Premier Louis Robichaud in 1960.
There are also a number of private colleges for specialized training in the province, such as the Moncton Flight College, one of the top pilot-training academies in Canada.
*Mount Allison University (Sackville), Anglophone
These institutions have extensive postgraduate programs and Schools of Law.
Unlike Moncton and (to a lesser extent) Fredericton, Saint John does not have a significant French speaking population, making its cultural experience much more restricted akin to cities in PEI and Nova Scotia.
Fort Beauséjour (near Sackville), Fort Menagoueche and Fort Gaspareaux were captured by a British force commanded by Lt. Col. Robert Monckton in 1755.
The largest denominations by number of adherents according to the 2011 National Household Survey were the Roman Catholic Church, with 366,000 (52%); Baptists, with 70,990 (8%); the United Church of Canada, with 54,265 (7%); the Anglicans, with 51,365 (7%); the Pentecostals with 18,435 (3%).
The remainder of Acadia (including the New Brunswick region) was only lightly populated and poorly defended.
The three major urban centres are all in the southern third of the province.
He replaced Progressive Conservative David Alward.
In both these cases, many of the new settlers took up land that had originally belonged to displaced Acadians before the deportation.
Most smaller cities and towns also have one or two stations.
*New Brunswick Bible Institute (Hartland), Anglophone
Former Premier Bernard Lord (Progressive Conservative) once was touted as a potential leader of the Conservative Party of Canada.
The major river systems of the province include the St. Croix River, Saint John River, Kennebecasis River, Petitcodiac River, Magaguadavic River, Miramichi River, Nepisiguit River, and the Restigouche River.
On September 21, 2014, the Liberal Party won the provincial election making 32-year-old Brian Gallant the new Premier.
In addition, heavy industry and port facilities are found in Saint John; Fredericton is dominated by government services, universities, and the military; and Moncton has developed as a commercial, retail, transportation, and distribution centre with important rail and air terminal facilities.
During the period 1950-1980, 80% of New Brunswick's small farms disappeared, as the agroindustry took root.
One of Canada's largest military bases, CFB Gagetown, is located near suburban Oromocto; which is situated just east of Fredericton.
In this manner, the ebb and flow of New Brunswick provincial politics parallels the federal stage.
Other cultural expressions were found in family gatherings and the church; both French and English cultures saw a long and early influence of ecclesiastical architecture, with Western European and American influences dominating rather than a particular vernacular sense.
There were several actions on New Brunswick soil during the American Revolutionary War: the Maugerville Rebellion (1776), the Battle of Fort Cumberland (1776), the Siege of Saint John (1777) and the Battle at Miramichi (1779).
New Brunswick's relatively isolated location on the Bay of Fundy, away from the Atlantic coastline proper tended to discourage settlement during the postwar period.
New Brunswick since 1891 has had a unicameral legislature, with 49 seats contested in the 2014 election.
The art of storytelling, well-known to the native populations, passed on to the early settlers, and poetry—whether put to music or not—was a common form of commemorating shared events, as the voice of a masterful poet or soulful musician easily conquered the province's language barriers.
People of Scottish descent are scattered throughout the province, with higher concentrations in the Miramichi and in Campbellton.
New Brunswick's official languages are shown in '''bold'''.
Financed by shares sold in England, this company purchased large areas of Canadian land at low prices, promising to develop roads, mills and towns.
Oceanic effects therefore tend to define their climate, economy, and culture.
The Acadians of the recently captured Beaubassin and Petitcodiac regions were included in the expulsion order.
Aboriginal societies were gradually marginalized under the reserve system, and it was not until the late nineteenth century, through the work of Silas Rand, that the tales of Glooscap began to emerge.
''(See also "Music of New Brunswick)''
In the 2001 Canadian census, the most commonly reported ethnicities were 193,470 French (26.9%); 165,235 English (23.0%); 135,835 Irish (18.9%); 127,635 Scottish (17.7%); 27,490 German (3.8%); 26,220 Acadians (3.6%); 23,815 "North American Indian" (First Nations) (3.3%); 17,024 Asian Canadian (2.0%), 13,355 Dutch (Netherlands) (1.9%); and 7,620 Welsh (1.1%).
Following confederation, the fears of the anti-confederates were proven correct as new national policies and trade barriers were soon adopted by the central government, thus disrupting the historic trading relationship between the Maritime Provinces and New England.
The two comprehensive provincial universities are the University of New Brunswick and the Université de Moncton.
Both Saint John and the Miramichi region remain largely Irish today.
;Publicly funded provincial comprehensive universities
The English system developed out of a mixture of the British and American systems, reflecting the Loyalist background of so many early settlers.
The largest employers in the province are the Irving group of companies, several large multinational forest companies, the government of New Brunswick, and the McCain Foods group of companies.
New Brunswick has four daily newspapers (three of which are in English),  the ''Times & Transcript'', based in Moncton and serving eastern New Brunswick.
The northwestern border between Maine and New Brunswick had not been clearly defined by the Treaty of Paris (1783) that had ended the American Revolution.
A September 2010 report released by the Canadian Taxpayers Federation criticized the pensions made by members of the legislative assembly, which take 16 taxpayer dollars for every dollar contributed by the Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) and cost taxpayers $7.6 million annually.
Since the city's transition to bilingualism, Moncton has experienced an upsurge in French in-migration from elsewhere in the province.
Cousins Bliss Carman and Sir Charles G.D. Roberts found inspiration in the landscape, as would later writers as well.
The farming of Atlantic salmon in the Passamaquoddy Bay region is an important local industry.
Fredericton, the capital of the province, is home to the Beaverbrook Art Gallery, the University of New Brunswick, and St. Thomas University.
The dynamics of New Brunswick politics are different from those of other Canadian provinces.
Here, they lived in relative (and in many ways, self-imposed) isolation.
Saint John has become a major energy hub for the East Coast.
In 2012, New Brunswick francophones scored lower on the Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies than their anglophone counterparts in New Brunswick.
New Brunswick's 107 municipalities cover only  of the province's land mass but are home to  of its population.
Some of the Acadians in the Petitcodiac and Memramcook region escaped, and under the leadership of Joseph Broussard continued to conduct guerrilla action against the British forces for a couple of years.
'''Publicly funded undergraduate liberal arts universities'''
Section 18 has two paragraphs, the first regarding bilingual publication of the Canadian Parliaments work and laws, the second specifying that New Brunswick's legislature will publish its work in both French and English).
There were exceptions however, such as the coming of New England Planters to the Sackville region and the arrival of Pennsylvania Dutch settlers in Moncton in 1766.
Saint John is arguably the most 'Maritime' city in New Brunswick, both in terms of its culture and traditional industries.
Winslow pressed for the creation of a "Loyalist colony" – an asylum that could become "the envy of the American states".
The settlement patterns and the economy of New Brunswick are based more on the province's river systems than its seacoasts.
The expatriate British poet John Thompson, who settled outside Sackville, proved influential in his short-lived career.
In painting, individual artists such as Anthony Flower worked in obscurity, either through design or neglect, while others such as Edward Mitchell Bannister left the province before ever developing a local influence.
In the 2014-15 fiscal year, provincial debt reached $12.2 billion or 37.7 per cent of nominal GDP.
Western New Brunswick is served by WAGM-TV which broadcasts CBS and Fox stations into the province and covers New Brunswick news and weather on its ''NewsSource 8'' broadcasts.
One of the world's largest potash deposits is located in Sussex.
New Brunswick is Canada's only officially bilingual province, and it is the only province where both official language communities are heavily represented, with Anglophone New Brunswickers making up roughly two-thirds of the population, and the Acadien or Francophone New Brunswicker population representing over 30% of the population (people whose mother tongue is an officially recognized First Nations languages or non-official language together make up about 2% of New Brunswickers).
A large influx of settlers arrived in New Brunswick after 1845 from Ireland as a result of the Potato Famine; many of these people settled in Saint John or Chatham.
Therefore, 55 prominent merchants and professionals petitioned for  grants each.
Finally the Caledonia Highlands and St. Croix Highlands extend along the Bay of Fundy coast reaching elevations of more than .
Despite being within the same provincial boundaries, Moncton, Saint John, and Fredericton differ culturally, economically, and geographically in significant ways.
Dr. John Clarence Webster and Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook have made important endowments to provincial museums.
First Nations in New Brunswick include the Mi'kmaq and Maliseet (Wolastoqiyik).
Symphony New Brunswick, based in Saint John, also tours extensively in the province.
The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms has a number of New Brunswick specific articles and makes specific mention of New Brunswick in each section relating to language (ex.
While consistently polling approximately 10% of the electoral vote since the early 1980s, the New Democratic Party has elected few members to the Legislative Assembly.
Few 19th-century artists emerged, but those who did often benefited from fine arts training at Mount Allison University in Sackville, which began offering classes in 1854.
The system consists of eight Judicial Districts, loosely based on the counties.
New Brunswick has a comprehensive parallel system of Anglophone and Francophone public schools providing education to both the primary and secondary levels.
New Brunswick is bordered on the north by Quebec's Gaspé Peninsula and by Chaleur Bay.
The New Brunswick and Nova Scotia Land Company, a means of transferring land held by the Crown to individual owners, was chartered in New Brunswick in 1831.
The bulk of the Acadian population thus found themselves residing in the new British colony of Nova Scotia.
Inside Fort Beauséjour, the British forces found not only French regular troops, but also Acadian irregulars.
Of particular interest is Article 16.1, which declares that the French and English speaking communities of New Brunswick have equal rights and privileges, including community specific educational and cultural institutions.
There are also several weekly newspapers that are local in scope and based in the province's smaller towns and communities.
Forestry is important in all areas of the province but especially in the heavily forested central regions.
Each campus, however, tends to have areas of concentration to allow for specialization.
