In addition to responding to building types that range from wood-frame single family homes to high-rise structures, there are many secluded bridges and tunnels, as well as large parks and wooded areas that can give rise to brush fires.
New York City's numerical "in-season cycling indicator" of bicycling in the city hit an all-time high in 2013.
This would often be misperceived by speakers of other accents as a reversal of the ''er'' and ''oy'' sounds, so that ''girl'' is pronounced "goil" and ''oil'' is pronounced "erl"; this leads to the caricature of New Yorkers saying things like "Joizey" (Jersey), "Toidy-Toid Street" (33rd St.) and "terlet" (toilet).
The term "melting pot" was first coined to describe densely populated immigrant neighborhoods on the Lower East Side.
The first national college-level basketball championship, the National Invitation Tournament, was held in New York in 1938 and remains in the city.
Also within the metropolitan area are the New Jersey Devils, who play in nearby Newark, New Jersey.
In the first quarter of 2014, the average weekly wage in New York County (Manhattan) was $2,749, representing the highest total among large counties in the United States.
In the 19th century, the city was transformed by development relating to its status as a trading center, as well as by European immigration.
Filipinos were the largest Southeast Asian ethnic group at 0.8%, followed by Vietnamese, who made up 0.2% of New York City's population in 2010.
The New York City Charter School Center assists the setup of new charter schools.
For intercity rail, New York City is served by Amtrak, whose busiest station by a significant margin is Pennsylvania Station on the West Side of Manhattan, from which Amtrak provides connections to Boston, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. along the Northeast Corridor, and long-distance train service to other North American cities.
The city's National Basketball Association teams are the Brooklyn Nets and the New York Knicks, while the New York Liberty is the city's Women's National Basketball Association.
In 1626, the Dutch colonial Director-General Peter Minuit, acting as charged by the Dutch West India Company, purchased the island of Manhattan from the ''Canarsie'', a small Lenape band, for 60 guilders (about $1,000 in 2006).
Some attribute the phenomenon to new tactics used by the NYPD, including its use of CompStat and the broken windows theory.
The buildings have distinctive ornamentation, such as the eagles at the corners of the 61st floor on the Chrysler Building, and are considered some of the finest examples of the Art Deco style.
HHC operates 11 acute care hospitals, five nursing homes, six diagnostic and treatment centers, and more than 70 community-based primary care sites, serving primarily the poor and working class.
The New York metropolitan area hosts the most sports teams in these five professional leagues.
New York City remains the largest global center for trading in public equity and debt capital markets, driven in part by the size and financial development of the U.S. economy.
The wider New York City metropolitan statistical area, with over 20 million people, about 50% greater than the second-place Los Angeles metropolitan area in the United States, is also ethnically diverse, with the largest foreign-born population of any metropolitan region in the world.
New York's high rate of public transit use, over 200,000 daily cyclists , and many pedestrian commuters make it the most energy-efficient major city in the United States.
Christianity (59%), made up of Roman Catholicism (33%), Protestantism (23%), and other Christians (3%), was the most prevalently practiced religion in New York , followed by Judaism, with approximately 1.1 million Jews in New York City, over half living in Brooklyn.
In New York City, the city government is responsible for public education, correctional institutions, public safety, recreational facilities, sanitation, water supply, and welfare services.
In 2012, New York City had the lowest overall crime rate and the second lowest murder rate among the largest U.S. cities, having become significantly safer after a spike in crime in the 1970s through 1990s.
The song is the state song of New York.
The non-Hispanic white population was 6.6 million in 1940.
Also, by 2010, the city had 3,715 hybrid taxis and other clean diesel vehicles, representing around 28% of New York's taxi fleet in service, the most of any city in North America.
Verizon Communications, headquartered at 140 West Street in Lower Manhattan, was at the final stages in 2014 of completing a US$3 billion fiberoptic telecommunications upgrade throughout New York City.
Research conducted by Quinnipiac University showed that a majority of New Yorkers support the initiative.
The Stamp Act Congress met in New York in October 1765 as the Sons of Liberty organized in the city, skirmishing over the next ten years with British troops stationed there.
New York City is additionally a center for the advertising, music, newspaper, digital media, and publishing industries and is also the largest media market in North America.
Democratic Party candidates were consistently elected to local office, increasing the city's ties to the South and its dominant party.
New York's non-white population was 36,620 in 1890.
Mass transit in New York City, most of which runs 24 hours a day, accounts for one in every three users of mass transit in the United States, and two-thirds of the nation's rail riders live in the New York City Metropolitan Area.
The influx of non-European immigrants in recent decades has led to changes in this distinctive dialect, and the traditional form of this speech pattern is no longer as prevalent among general New Yorkers as in the past.
Plans have advanced to expand passenger volume at a fourth airport, Stewart International Airport near Newburgh, New York, by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
In April 2015, New York hosted the annual Cardistry-Con, a three-day cardistry convention and interactive conference for cardists all over the world.
The highest point in the city is Todt Hill on Staten Island, which, at  above sea level, is the highest point on the Eastern Seaboard south of Maine.
The city's black population reached more than 16,000 in 1840.
According to ''Forbes'', in 2014, Manhattan was home to six of the top ten zip codes in the United States by median housing price.
The city government pays the Pelham Public Schools to educate a very small, detached section of the Bronx.
The city also has other smaller private colleges and universities, including many religious and special-purpose institutions, such as St. John's University, The Juilliard School, Manhattan College, The College of Mount Saint Vincent, Fashion Institute of Technology, Parsons School of Design, The New School, Pratt Institute, The School of Visual Arts, The King's College, and Wagner College.
In 1625, construction was started on a citadel and Fort Amsterdam on Manhattan Island, later called New Amsterdam (''Nieuw Amsterdam'').
The New York Red Bulls play their home games at Red Bull Arena in nearby Harrison, New Jersey.
By 2015 estimates, the New York City metropolitan region remains by a significant margin the most populous in the United States, as defined by both the Metropolitan Statistical Area (20.2&nbsp;million residents) and the Combined Statistical Area (23.7&nbsp;million residents).
The larger economic boom generated construction of skyscrapers competing in height and creating an identifiable skyline.
Lower Manhattan has been experiencing a baby boom, with the area south of Canal Street witnessing 1,086 births in 2010, 12% greater than 2009 and over twice the number born in 2001.
Tourism is a vital industry for New York City, which has witnessed a growing combined volume of international and domestic tourists, receiving a sixth consecutive record of nearly 60 million visitors in 2015.
WNET is the city's major public television station and a primary source of national Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) television programming.
Islam ranks third in New York City, with official estimates ranging between 600,000 and 1,000,000 observers and including 10% of the city's public schoolchildren, followed by Hinduism, Buddhism, and a variety of other religions, as well as  atheism.
Several prominent American literary figures lived in New York during the 1830s and 1840s, including William Cullen Bryant, Washington Irving, Herman Melville, Rufus Wilmot Griswold, John Keese, Nathaniel Parker Willis, and Edgar Allan Poe.
The location at the mouth of the Hudson River, which feeds into a naturally sheltered harbor and then into the Atlantic Ocean, has helped the city grow in significance as a trading port.
Discovery of the African Burying Ground in the 1990s, during construction of a new federal courthouse near Foley Square, revealed that tens of thousands of Africans had been buried in the area in the colonial years.
The city's land has been altered substantially by human intervention, with considerable land reclamation along the waterfronts since Dutch colonial times; reclamation is most prominent in Lower Manhattan, with developments such as Battery Park City in the 1970s and 1980s.
The Bronx and Queens offices are in separate buildings.
Approximately 37% of the city's population is foreign born.
The Dutch would soon return the island to England under the Treaty of Westminster of November 1674.
The New York City Public Schools system, managed by the New York City Department of Education, is the largest public school system in the United States, serving about 1.1&nbsp;million students in more than 1,700 separate primary and secondary schools.
The city's two current Major League Baseball teams are the New York Mets, who play at Citi Field in Queens, and the New York Yankees, who play at Yankee Stadium in the Bronx.
Violent crime in New York City decreased more than 75% from 1993 to 2005, and continued decreasing during periods when the nation as a whole saw increases.
Extreme temperatures have ranged from , recorded on February 9, 1934, up to  on July 9, 1936.
The FDNY employs approximately 11,080 uniformed firefighters and over 3,300 uniformed EMTs and paramedics.
The Lincoln Tunnel, which carries 120,000 vehicles a day under the Hudson River between New Jersey and Midtown Manhattan, is the busiest vehicular tunnel in the world.
New York's airspace is the busiest in the United States and one of the world's busiest air transportation corridors.
In 2005, three out of five Manhattan residents were college graduates, and one out of four had a postgraduate degree, forming one of the highest concentrations of highly educated people in any American city.
New York has been described as the "Capital of Baseball".
The '''City of New York''', often called '''New York City,''' '''New York''', or simply '''The City''', is the most populous city in the United States.
The white working class had established dominance.
Public-minded members of the contemporaneous business elite lobbied for the establishment of Central Park, which in 1857 became the first landscaped park in an American city.
Many of the world's largest media conglomerates are also based in the city.
In New York, no single country or region of origin dominates.
The trademarked logo, owned by New York State Empire State Development, appears in souvenir shops and brochures throughout the city and state, some licensed, many not.
New York City's commuter rail network is the largest in North America.
The English promptly renamed the fledgling city "New York" after the Duke of York (the future King James II of England).
The five boroughs – Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, The Bronx, and Staten Island – were consolidated into a single city in 1898.
Amidst a resurgence of Puerto Rican migration to New York City, this population had increased to approximately 1.3 million in the metropolitan area .
The Mile, which contains one of the densest displays of culture in the world, is actually three blocks longer than one mile (1.6&nbsp;km).
The Condé Nast Building (2000) is a prominent example of green design in American skyscrapers and has received an award from the American Institute of Architects and AIA New York State for its design.
Manufacturing accounts for a significant but declining share of employment, although the city's garment industry is showing a resurgence in Brooklyn.
Bellevue is the designated hospital for treatment of the President of the United States and other world leaders if they become sick or injured while in New York City.
In 1911, the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire, the city's worst industrial disaster, took the lives of 146 garment workers and spurred the growth of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union and major improvements in factory safety standards.
The combined systems converge at Grand Central Terminal and Pennsylvania Station and contain more than 250 stations and 20 rail lines.
Additionally, Greek and French Americans numbered 65,000 each, with those of Hungarian descent estimated at 60,000 people.
In soccer, New York City is represented by New York City FC of Major League Soccer, who play their home games at Yankee Stadium.
The opening of the subway in 1904, first built as separate private systems, helped bind the new city together.
The Staten Island Railway rapid transit system solely serves Staten Island, operating 24 hours a day.
Many districts and landmarks in New York City have become well known, and the city received a record of nearly 60 million tourists in 2015, hosting three of the world's ten most visited tourist attractions in 2013.
Other features of the city's transportation infrastructure encompass more than 12,000 yellow taxicabs; various competing startup transportation network companies; and an aerial tramway that transports commuters between Roosevelt Island and Manhattan Island.
In October 2014, the Anbang Insurance Group, based in China, purchased the Waldorf Astoria New York for US$1.95 billion, making it the world's most expensive hotel ever sold.
This bridge was also the longest suspension bridge in the world from its opening until 1903, and is the first steel-wire suspension bridge.
New York was the last capital of the U.S. under the Articles of Confederation and the first capital under the Constitution of the United States.
By 1790, New York had surpassed Philadelphia as the largest city in the United States.
The European diaspora residing in the city is very diverse.
The city also has a comprehensive ethnic press, with 270 newspapers and magazines published in more than 40 languages.
New York City's public bus fleet is the largest in North America, and the Port Authority Bus Terminal, the main intercity bus terminal of the city, serves 7,000 buses and 200,000 commuters daily, making it the busiest bus station in the world.
The US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and US Court of International Trade are also based in New York, also on Foley Square in Manhattan.
Average winter snowfall between 1981 and 2010 has been ; this varies considerably from year to year.
The transfer was confirmed in 1667 by the Treaty of Breda, which concluded the Second Anglo-Dutch War.
In Staten Island, Gateway National Recreation Area includes Fort Wadsworth, with historic pre-Civil War era Battery Weed and Fort Tompkins, and Great Kills Park, with beaches, trails, and a marina.
The non-Hispanic white population has begun to increase since 2010.
Forty of the city's performing arts theaters, with more than 500 seats each, are collectively known as ''Broadway'', after the major thoroughfare that crosses the Times Square Theater District, sometimes referred to as "The Great White Way".
Approximately 12 million visitors to New York City were from outside the United States, with the highest numbers from the United Kingdom, Canada, Brazil, and China.
The FDNY's motto is ''New York's Bravest''.
Important new sectors, such as Silicon Alley, emerged in the city's economy.
This is in contrast to the rest of the United States, where about 90% of commuters drive automobiles to their workplace.
In the most old-fashioned and extreme versions of the New York dialect, the vowel sounds of words like "girl" and of words like "oil" became a diphthong .
The city is represented in the National Football League by the New York Giants and the New York Jets, although both teams play their home games at MetLife Stadium in nearby East Rutherford, New Jersey, which hosted Super Bowl XLVIII in 2014.
, New York City hosted 300,000 employees in the tech sector.
The New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation (HHC) operates the public hospitals and clinics in New York City.
The ongoing expansion of New York City Water Tunnel No.
In 2015, Silicon Alley generated over US$7.3 billion in venture capital investment across a broad spectrum of high technology enterprises, most based in Manhattan, with others in Brooklyn, Queens, and elsewhere in the region.
In contrast, New York City also has neighborhoods that are less densely populated and feature free-standing dwellings.
Two of the three national daily newspapers in the United States are New York papers: ''The Wall Street Journal'' and ''The New York Times'', which has won the most Pulitzer Prizes for journalism.
Major tabloid newspapers in the city include: ''The New York Daily News'', which was founded in 1919 by Joseph Medill Patterson and ''The New York Post'', founded in 1801 by Alexander Hamilton.
Under the Köppen climate classification, New York City features a humid subtropical climate (''Cfa''), and is thus the northernmost major city on the North American continent with this categorization.
Attendance in 2013–2014 stood at 12.21 million, representing a 5.5% increase from the 2012–2013 season's 11.57 million.
Over 200,000 were living in New York by 1860, upwards of a quarter of the city's population.
New York City is located on one of the world's largest natural harbors, and the boroughs of Manhattan and Staten Island are (primarily) coterminous with islands of the same names, while Queens and Brooklyn are located at the west end of the larger Long Island, and The Bronx is located at the southern tip of New York State's mainland.
The George Washington Bridge is the world's busiest motor vehicle bridge, connecting Manhattan to Bergen County, New Jersey.
Geographically co-extensive with New York County, the borough of Manhattan's 2015 population density of 72,033 people per square mile (27,812/km²) makes it the highest of any county in the United States and higher than the density of any individual American city.
New York City has more than 2,000 arts and cultural organizations and more than 500 art galleries of all sizes.
It is similar to a municipal agency  but has a Board of Directors.
The oldest public-access television channel in the United States is the Manhattan Neighborhood Network, founded in 1971.
Some 4,000 mobile food vendors licensed by the city, many immigrant-owned, have made Middle Eastern foods such as falafel and kebabs examples of modern New York street food.
54.6% of New Yorkers commuted to work in 2005 using mass transit.
A highly influential example of the international style in the United States is the Seagram Building (1957), distinctive for its façade using visible bronze-toned I-beams to evoke the building's structure.
The city government was a petitioner in the landmark ''Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency'' Supreme Court case forcing the EPA to regulate greenhouse gases as pollutants.
Stickball, a street version of baseball, was popularized by youths in the 1930s, and a street in the Bronx was renamed Stickball Boulevard in the late 2000s to memorialize this.
In 1614, the area between Cape Cod and Delaware Bay would be claimed by the Netherlands and called ''Nieuw-Nederland'' (New Netherland).
Times Square, iconic as the world's "heart" and its "Crossroads", is the brightly illuminated hub of the Broadway Theater District, one of the world's busiest pedestrian intersections, and a major center of the world's entertainment industry.
The Croton Watershed north of the city is undergoing construction of a US$3.2 billion water purification plant to augment New York City's water supply by an estimated 290 million gallons daily, representing a greater than 20% addition to the city's current availability of water.
New York became the most populous urbanized area in the world in the early 1920s, overtaking London.
To attract settlers, the Dutch instituted the patroon system in 1628, whereby wealthy Dutchmen ("patroons", or patrons) who brought 50 colonists to New Netherland would be awarded swathes of land in New Netherland, along with local political autonomy and rights to participate in the lucrative fur trade.
Central Asians, primarily Uzbek Americans, are a rapidly growing segment of the city's non-Hispanic white population, enumerating over 30,000, and including over half of all Central Asian immigrants to the United States, most settling in Queens or Brooklyn.
At 2.7 million in 2012, New York's non-Hispanic white population is larger than the non-Hispanic white populations of Los Angeles (1.1 million), Chicago (865,000), and Houston (550,000) combined.
Entrepreneurs were forming a "Chocolate District" in Brooklyn , while Godiva, one of the world's largest chocolatiers, continues to be headquartered in Manhattan.
The biotechnology sector is also growing in New York City, based upon the city's strength in academic scientific research and public and commercial financial support.
Uniquely among major American cities, New York is divided between, and is host to the main branches of, two different US district courts: the District Court for the Southern District of New York, whose main courthouse is on Foley Square near City Hall in Manhattan and whose jurisdiction includes Manhattan and the Bronx, and the District Court for the Eastern District of New York, whose main courthouse is in Brooklyn and whose jurisdiction includes Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island.
Universal Music Group also has offices in New York.
Ukrainian and Scottish Americans numbered 55,000 and 35,000, respectively.
New York City's higher education network comprises over 120 colleges and universities, including Columbia University, New York University, and Rockefeller University, which have been ranked among the top 35 in the world.
In 2013, the MSA produced a gross metropolitan product (GMP) of nearly US$1.39&nbsp;trillion, while in 2012, the CSA generated a GMP of over US$1.55&nbsp;trillion, both ranking first nationally by a wide margin and behind the GDP of only twelve and eleven countries, respectively.
The City of New York operates a public broadcast service, NYCTV, that has produced several original Emmy Award-winning shows covering music and culture in city neighborhoods and city government.
The Statue of Liberty greeted millions of immigrants as they came to the Americas by ship in the late 19th and early 20th centuries and is a symbol of the United States and its democracy.
The three major American broadcast networks are all headquartered in New York: ABC, CBS, and NBC.
In 1609, the English explorer Henry Hudson re-discovered the region when he sailed his ship the ''Halve Maen'' ("Half Moon" in Dutch) into New York Harbor while searching for the Northwest Passage to the Orient for the Dutch East India Company.
ParkScore ranks urban park systems by a formula that analyzes median park size, park acres as percent of city area, the percent of city residents within a half-mile of a park, spending of park services per resident, and the number of playgrounds per 10,000 residents.
The city's securities industry, enumerating 163,400 jobs in August 2013, continues to form the largest segment of the city's financial sector and an important economic engine, accounting in 2012 for 5 percent of the city's private sector jobs, 8.5 percent (US$3.8 billion) of its tax revenue, and 22 percent of the city's total wages, including an average salary of US$360,700.
Shortly after the British occupation began, the Great Fire of New York occurred, a large conflagration on the West Side of Lower Manhattan, which destroyed about a quarter of the buildings in the city, including Trinity Church.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt was the first person to drive through it.
The city's fashion industry provides approximately 180,000 employees with $11 billion in annual wages.
Situated on one of the world's largest natural harbors, New York City consists of five boroughs, each of which is a separate county of New York State.
The situation deteriorated into attacks on New York's elite, followed by attacks on black New Yorkers and their property after fierce competition for a decade between Irish immigrants and black people for work.
The classic version of this dialect is centered on middle and working-class people of European descent.
The New York City borough of Queens is home to the state's largest Asian American population and the largest Andean (Colombian, Ecuadorian, Peruvian, and Bolivian) populations in the United States, and is also the most ethnically diverse urban area in the world.
Born in Santo Domingo of Portuguese and African descent, he arrived in Manhattan during the winter of 1613–1614, trapping for pelts and trading with the local population as a representative of the Dutch.
Indians are the largest South Asian group, comprising 2.4% of the city's population, with Bangladeshis and Pakistanis at 0.7% and 0.5%, respectively.
The only attempt at a peaceful solution to the war took place at the Conference House on Staten Island between American delegates, including Benjamin Franklin, and British general Lord Howe on September 11, 1776.
The 1825 completion of the Erie Canal through central New York connected the Atlantic port to the agricultural markets and commodities of the North American interior via the Hudson River and the Great Lakes.
New York City also has an extensive web of expressways and parkways, which link the city's boroughs to each other and to northern New Jersey, Westchester County, Long Island, and southwestern Connecticut through various bridges and tunnels.
One out of ten private sector jobs in the city is with a foreign company.
It has been the country's largest city since 1790.
The city's total area is .
New York City is home to Fort Hamilton, the U.S. military's only active duty installation within the city.
In describing New York, author Tom Wolfe said, "Culture just seems to be in the air, like part of the weather."
Central European and Italian immigrants brought bagels, cheesecake, and New York-style pizza into the city, while Chinese and other Asian restaurants, sandwich joints, trattorias, diners, and coffeehouses have become ubiquitous.
The towers of the Brooklyn Bridge are built of limestone, granite, and Rosendale cement, and their architectural style is neo-Gothic, with characteristic pointed arches above the passageways through the stone towers.
of this is water and  is land.
As many as 10,000 escaped slaves crowded into the city during the British occupation.
The character of New York's large residential districts is often defined by the elegant brownstone rowhouses and townhouses and shabby tenements that were built during a period of rapid expansion from 1870 to 1930.
On August 24, 1673, during the Third Anglo-Dutch War, Dutch captain Anthony Colve seized the colony of New York from England at the behest of Cornelis Evertsen the Youngest and rechristened it "New Orange" after William III, the Prince of Orange.
A disproved legend claims that Manhattan was purchased for $24 worth of glass beads.
In 1785, the assembly of the Congress of the Confederation made New York the national capital shortly after the war.
The ten largest sources of foreign-born individuals in the city  were the Dominican Republic, China, Mexico, Guyana, Jamaica, Ecuador, Haiti, India, Russia, and Trinidad and Tobago, while the Bangladeshi immigrant population has since become one of the fastest growing in the city, counting over 74,000 by 2013.
Chocolate is New York City's leading specialty-food export, with up to US$234&nbsp;million worth of exports each year.
''I Love New York'' (stylized '''I ❤ NY''') is both a logo and a song that are the basis of an advertising campaign and have been used since 1977 to promote tourism in New York City, and later to promote New York State as well.
Anger at new military conscription laws during the American Civil War (1861–1865), which spared wealthier men who could afford to pay a $300 () commutation fee to hire a substitute, led to the Draft Riots of 1863, whose most visible participants were ethnic Irish working class.
In 2012, the NYPD came under scrutiny for its use of a stop-and-frisk program, which has undergone several policy revisions since then.
The public CUNY system is one of the largest universities in the nation, comprising 24 institutions across all five boroughs: senior colleges, community colleges, and other graduate/professional schools.
As a result of the watershed's integrity and undisturbed natural water filtration system, New York is one of only four major cities in the United States the majority of whose drinking water is pure enough not to require purification by water treatment plants.
Under such influential United States founders as Alexander Hamilton and John Jay, the New York Manumission Society worked for abolition and established the African Free School to educate black children.
Newtown Creek, a  a long estuary that forms part of the border between the boroughs of Brooklyn and Queens, has been designated a Superfund site for environmental clean-up and remediation of the waterway's recreational and economic resources for many communities.
The city government funds the arts with a larger annual budget than the National Endowment for the Arts.
Citibank sponsored the introduction of 10,000 public bicycles for the city's bike-share project in the summer of 2013.
The city and its surroundings came under English control in 1664 and were renamed ''New York'' after King Charles II of England granted the lands to his brother, the Duke of York.
During the Wisconsinan glaciation, the New York City region was situated at the edge of a large ice sheet over 1,000 feet in depth.
The Gaelic games are played in Riverdale, Bronx at Gaelic Park, home to the New York GAA, the only North American team to compete at the senior inter-county level.
During his tenure, the population of New Amsterdam grew from 2,000 to 8,000.
The New York metropolitan area is home to a self-identifying gay and bisexual community estimated at nearly 570,000 individuals, the largest in the United States and one of the world's largest.
There have been 35 Major League Baseball World Series and 73 pennants won by New York teams.
It was one of the worst incidents of civil unrest in American history.
It has generally been considered one of the most recognizable accents within American English.
, New York City was the second largest center for filmmaking and television production in the United States, producing about 200 feature films annually, employing 130,000 individuals; the filmed entertainment industry has been growing in New York, contributing nearly US$9 billion to the New York City economy alone as of 2015, and by volume, New York is the world leader in independent film production – one-third of all American independent films are produced in New York City.
Additionally, there have been 14 World Series in which two New York City teams played each other, known as a Subway Series and occurring most recently in .
Hurricanes and tropical storms are rare in the New York area, but they are not unheard of and always have the potential to strike the area.
Many of the world's most lucrative art auctions are held in New York City.
3, an integral part of the New York City water supply system, is the largest capital construction project in the city's history, with segments serving Manhattan and The Bronx completed, and with segments serving Brooklyn and Queens planned for construction in 2020.
New York City has not been carried by a Republican in a statewide or presidential election since President Calvin Coolidge won the five boroughs in 1924.
The Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH train) links Midtown and Lower Manhattan to northeastern New Jersey, primarily Hoboken, Jersey City, and Newark.
Located at the southern tip of the state of New York, the city is the center of the New York metropolitan area, one of the most populous urban agglomerations in the world.
It also houses the 1179th Transportation Brigade, the 722nd Aeromedical Staging Squadron, and a military entrance processing station.
