In the end the proposal failed.
During the New Deal the Communists established a network of a dozen or so members working for the government.
Instead of paying farmers for letting fields lie barren, this program instead subsidized them for planting soil enriching crops such as alfalfa that would not be sold on the market.
* Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA), 1933: raised farm prices by cutting total farm output of major crops and livestock; replaced by a new AAA because the Supreme Court ruled it unconstitutional.
While only 6% of economic historians who worked in the history department of their universities agreed with the statement, 27% of those that work in the economics department agreed.
In both countries the pressure to reform and the perception of the economic crisis were strikingly similar.
According to Kevin Passmore, lecturer in History at Cardiff University, the failure of fascism in the United States was due to the social policies of the New Deal that channelled anti-establishment populism into the left rather than the extreme right.
However, contemporaries such as Ira Katznelson have suggested that, due to certain conditions on the allocation of federal funds, namely that the individual states get to control them, the federal government managed to avoid any tension with states over their rights.
In Oregon sheep were slaughtered and left to the buzzards because meat prices were not sufficient to warrant transportation to markets.
Roosevelt initially favored balancing the budget, but soon found himself running spending deficits to fund his numerous programs.
Laurence Seidman noted that according to the assumptions of Cole and Ohanian the labor market clears instantaneously, which leads to the incredible conclusion that the surge in unemployment between 1929 and 1932 (before the New Deal) was, in their opinion, both optimal and solely based on voluntary unemployment.
As a result of this legislation, the average income of farmers almost doubled by 1937.
Hollywood managed to synthesize liberal and conservative streams, as in Busby Berkeley's ''Gold Digger'' musicals, where the storylines exalt individual autonomy while the spectacular musical numbers show abstract populations of interchangeable dancers securely contained within patterns beyond their control.
A fiscally conservative approach was supported by Wall Street and local investors and most of the business community; mainstream academic economists believed in it, as apparently did the majority of the public.
The bill established the persisting principle that retained corporate earnings could be taxed.
It was a "capital strike" said Roosevelt, and he ordered the Federal Bureau of Investigation to look for a criminal conspiracy (they found none).
The bill passed in 1937 with some Republican support to abolish slums.
Other writers interviewed elderly ex-slaves and recorded their stories.
From 1939 to 1944, however, wages and salaries more than doubled, with overtime pay and the expansion of jobs leading to a 70% rise in average weekly earnings during the course of the war.
* Abandonment of gold standard, 1933: gold reserves no longer backed currency; still exists
Cass Gilbert, a conservative who believed architecture should reflect historic traditions and the established social order, designed the new Supreme Court building (1935).
Compared with the social security systems in western European countries, the Social Security Act of 1935 was rather conservative.
Relief for the poor was the responsibility of families, private charity, and local governments, but as conditions worsened year by year, demand skyrocketed and their combined resources increasingly fell far short of demand.
As the first Republican president elected after FDR, Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–61) left the New Deal largely intact, even expanding it in some areas.
844,000 nonfarm mortgages had been foreclosed, 1930–33, out of five million in all.
Still, food prices remained well below the 1929 peak.
The most common arguments can be summarized as follows:
Before the New Deal, there was no insurance on deposits at banks.
Under the Federal Theater Project, headed by charismatic Hallie Flanagan, actresses and actors, technicians, writers, and directors put on stage productions.
The programs were not specifically targeted to alleviate the much higher unemployment rate of blacks.
In the 1960s, Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society used the New Deal as inspiration for a dramatic expansion of liberal programs, which Republican Richard M. Nixon generally retained.
* Civil Works Administration (CWA), 1933–34: provided temporary jobs to millions of unemployed
Roosevelt himself turned his attention to the war effort, and won reelection in 1940 and 1944.
One Federal Art Project paid 162 trained woman artists on relief to paint murals or create statues for newly built post offices and courthouses.
Child labour of children under the age of 16 was forbidden, children under 18 years were forbidden to work in hazardous employment.
The New Deal preserved democracy in the United States in a historic period of uncertainty and crises when in many other countries democracy failed.
Some will try to give you new and strange names for what we are doing.
The ratio of these numbers, times the number of jobs in 1932, means there was a need for 938,000 more 1937 jobs to maintain the same employment level.
The AAA paid land owners subsidies for leaving some of their land idle with funds provided by a new tax on food processing.
When Roosevelt took office a majority of the nine judges of the Supreme Court were appointed by Republican Party Presidents.
The original AAA did not provide for any sharecroppers or tenants or farm laborers who might become unemployed, but there were other New Deal programs especially for them.
The effects of federal public works spending were largely offset by Herbert Hoover's large tax increase in 1932, whose full effects for the first time were felt in 1933, and it was undercut by spending cuts, especially the Economy Act.
According to Shlaes, Roosevelt's experimentation frightened business into inaction and prevented recovery.
A separate set of programs operated in Puerto Rico, headed by the Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration.
He pointed out that between 1929 and 1932, the Federal Reserve allowed the money supply to fall by a third which is seen as the major cause that turned a normal recession into a Great Depression.
On May 27, 1935, the NRA was found to be unconstitutional by a unanimous decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in the case of ''Schechter v. United States''.
Thus in Frank Capra's famous films, including ''Mr.
Roosevelt allowed trade unions to take their place in labor relations and created the triangular partnership between employers, employees and government.
Politically, he realized that fiscal conservatism enjoyed a strong wide base of support among voters, leading Democrats, and businessmen.
The AAA used a system of ''domestic allotments'', setting total output of corn, cotton, dairy products, hogs, rice, tobacco, and wheat.
The Hoover administration started the system of funding state relief programs, whereby the states hired people on relief.
But, in so doing, they are trying to make very complex and theoretical something that is really very simple and very practical....
As the military grew, new labor sources were needed to replace the 12&nbsp;million men serving in the military.
The AAA was replaced by a similar program that did win Court approval.
In 1944 government spending on the war effort exceeded 40% of GNP.
Ira Katznelson has argued that although the federal government expanded its power and began providing welfare benefits on a scale previously unknown in the United States, it often allowed individual states to control the allocation of the funds provided for such welfare.
The Supreme Court declared the National Recovery Administration (NRA) and the first version of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (AAA) unconstitutional, however the AAA was rewritten and then upheld.
Shlaes said that the NRA was misguided because it used price setting to fix monetary problems.
The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 set maximum hours (44 per week) and minimum wages (25 cents per hour) for most categories of workers.
Large families that had been poor during the 1930s had four or more wage earners, and these families shot to the top one-third income bracket.
*the nation came through its greatest depression without undermining the capitalist system (Billington and Ridge)
Since then research on the New Deal has been less interested in the question of whether the New Deal was a "conservative", "liberal", or "revolutionary" phenomenon than in the question of constraints within which it was operating.
In 1933, the Administration launched the Tennessee Valley Authority, a project involving dam construction planning on an unprecedented scale to curb flooding, generate electricity, and modernize poor farms in the Tennessee Valley region of the Southern United States.
As Arthur A. Ekirch Jr. (1971) has shown, the New Deal stimulated utopianism in American political and social thought on a wide range of issues.
Though Stryker did not dictate to his photographers how they should compose the shots, he did send them lists of desirable themes, such as "church", "court day", "barns".
The case in Ohio became so detrimental to the federal government that Harry Hopkins, supervisor of the Federal Emergency Relief Administration, had to federalize Ohio relief.
Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes was one of the Roosevelt Administration's most prominent supporters of blacks and former president of the Chicago chapter of the NAACP.
Even the work programs of the "First New Deal" were just meant as immediate relief, destined to run less than a decade.
The emphasis was for war supplies as soon as possible, regardless of cost and inefficiencies.
Wilson, Rexford Tugwell, and George Peek.
in granting direct relief or benefits.
The AAA aimed to raise prices for commodities through artificial scarcity.
that the rapid growth in money supply beginning in 1933 can be traced back to a large unsterilized gold inflow to the US which was partly due to political instability in Europe but to a larger degree to the revaluation of gold through the Gold Reserve Act.
The New Deal sought to stimulate the private home building industry and increase the number of individuals who owned homes.
White collar workers did not typically receive overtime and therefore the gap between white collar and blue collar income narrowed.
While it is essentially consensus among historians and academics that the New Deal brought about a large increase in the power of the federal government, there has been some scholarly debate concerning the results of this federal expansion.
The Economy Act of 1933, passed early in the Hundred Days, was Douglas's great achievement.
Early in the year 1937, he asked Congress to pass the Judiciary Reorganization Bill of 1937.
In addition, during the course of the war, the proportion of the American population earning less than $3,000 (in 1968 dollars) fell by half.
Julian Zelizer (2000) has argued that fiscal conservatism was a key component of the New Deal.
The thesis is based on the observation that after years of deflation and a very severe recession important economic indiucators turned positive just in March 1933 when Roosevelt took office.
Though a downturn in 1937–38 raised questions about just how successful the policies were, the great majority of economists and historians agree that they were an overall benefit.
Since 1933, politicians and pundits have often called for a "new deal" regarding an object.
She warns that accepting Cowie and Salvatore's argument that conservatism's ascendancy is inevitable would dismay and discourage activists on the left.
In 1964  Barry Goldwater, an unreconstructed anti-New Dealer, was the Republican presidential candidate on a platform that attacked the New Deal.
Some people, he said:
Thus it gained support from both liberal and conservative Congressmen.
In that way Roosevelt hoped to preserve the New Deal legislation.
New Deal economists argued that cut-throat competition had hurt many businesses and that with prices having fallen 20% and more, "deflation" exacerbated the burden of debt and would delay recovery.
*produced a more equal distribution of wealth (Billington and Ridge)
But the Administration's other response to the 1937 dip that stalled recovery from the Great Depression had more tangible results.
They continued to believe that their party stood for Wilsonian ideals: regulated competition, states' rights, and individual freedom where it did not impinge upon the liberty of others," and saw themselves as "the true progressives and as the bulwarks of a party which they felt would have collapsed without them in the 1920's."
The opinions handed down in the spring of 1937, favorable to the government, also contributed to the downfall of the plan.
When jobs were scarce some employers even dismissed blacks to create jobs for whites.
Until 1935 there were just a dozen states that had old age insurance laws but these programs were woefully underfunded and therefore almost worthless.
Between 1933 and 1941 the average federal budget deficit was 3% per year.
At first the New Deal created programs primarily for men.
Economic indicators show the economy reached nadir in the first days of March, then began a steady, sharp upward recovery.
Such programs built or renovated 2,500 hospitals, 45,000 schools, 13,000 parks and playgrounds, 7,800 bridges,  of roads, 1,000 airfields and employed 50,000 teachers through programs that rebuilt the country's entire rural school system.
* United States bank holiday, 1933: closed all banks until they became certified by federal reviewers
After the end of the NRA quotas in the oil industry were fixed by the Railroad Commission of Texas with Tom Connally's federal Hot Oil Act of 1935, which guaranteed that illegal "hot oil" would not be sold.
In addition, well over 2&nbsp;million employers accepted the new standards laid down by the NRA, which had introduced a minimum wage and an eight-hour workday, together with abolishing child labor.
Under the Farmers' Relief Act of 1933, the government paid compensation to farmers who reduced output, thereby rising prices.
Later on some scholars such as Kiran Klaus Patel, Heinrich August Winkler and John Garraty came to the conclusion that comparisons of the alternative systems don´t have to end in an apology for Nazism since comparisons rely on the examination of both similarities and differences.
Douglas proved too inflexible, and he quit in 1934.
Former Supreme Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist noted that in this way the Constitution provides for ultimate responsibility of the Court to the political branches of government.
By the 1970s liberal historians were responding with a defense of the New Deal based on numerous local and microscopic studies.
The farmers themselves had a voice in the process of using government to benefit their incomes.
Enforcement of anti-discrimination laws in the South was virtually impossible, especially since most blacks worked in hospitality and agricultural sectors.
Prices fell by 20%, causing deflation that made repaying debts much harder.
It provided money for the building of housing for war workers as well as recreational facilities, water and sanitation plants, hospitals, day care centers, and schools.
John Garraty wrote that the National Recovery Administration (NRA) was based on economic experiments in Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, without establishing a totalitarian dictatorship.
Our task is not ... necessarily producing more goods.
As a result, the wages of 300,000 people were increased and the hours of 1.3&nbsp;million were reduced.
Almost an identical percent of the two groups (21% and 22%) agreed with the statement "with provisos" (a conditional stipulation), while 74% of those who worked in the history department, and 51% in the economic department disagreed with the statement outright.
In the 1920s farm production had increased dramatically thanks to mechanization, more potent insecticides and increased use of fertilizer.
In her essay "What ended the Great Depression?"
Keynesian economics rejected that view.
Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis, an influential adviser to many New Dealers, argued that "bigness" (referring, presumably, to corporations) was a negative economic force, producing waste and inefficiency.
It became a hunting ground for conservatives searching for Communist employees.
Plausible self-seekers and theoretical die-hards will tell you of the loss of individual liberty.
MacLean rejected the idea of a definitive political culture.
* Surplus Commodities Program (1936); gives away food to poor; still exists as Food Stamp Program
There was no attempt whatsoever to end segregation, or to increase black rights in the South.
Historians generally agree that during Roosevelt's 12 years in office, there was a dramatic increase in the power of the federal government as a whole.
In 1934, Roosevelt defended himself against those critics in a "fireside chat".
In 1929, federal expenditures accounted for only 3% of GNP.
Paid dividends were tax deductible by corporations.
In one sense, however, it succeeded: Justice Owen Roberts switched positions and began voting to uphold New Deal measures, effectively creating a liberal majority in ''West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish'' and ''National Labor Relations Board v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation'', thus departing from the ''Lochner v. New York'' era and giving the government more power in questions of economic policies.
Patterson has argued that the tension between the federal and state governments also, at least partly, resulted from the economic strain under which the states had been put by the federal government's various policies and agencies.
Between 1929 and 1933 40% of all banks (9,490 out of 23,697 banks) failed.
Secretary of Agriculture Wallace got rid of them all in a famous purge in 1935.
As the first Republican president elected after FDR, Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–61) built on the New Deal in a manner that embodied his thoughts on efficiency and cost-effectiveness.
According to Bernanke there was also a debt-deflation effect of the depression which was clearly offset by a reflation through the growth in money supply.
Stanley Payne, a historian of fascism, examined possible fascist influences in the United States by looking at the KKK and its offshoots, and movements led by Father Coughlin and Huey Long.
As Katznelson has observed, "furthermore, they state governments in the South had to manage the strain that potentially might be placed on local practices by investing authority in federal bureaucracies… To guard against this outcome, they key mechanism deployed was a separation of the source of funding from decisions about how to spend the new monies."
It included stimulus funds for the WPA to spend, and sought to raise prices, give more bargaining power for unions (so the workers could purchase more) and reduce harmful competition.
Paul Krugman stated that the institutions built by the New Deal remain the bedrock of the United States economic stability.
This group included politicians, intellectuals, writers, and newspaper editors of various philosophical persuasions including classical liberals and conservatives, both Democrats and Republicans.
While the AAA stipulated that a farmer had to share the payments with those who worked the land this policy was never enforced.
Roosevelt, however, gave a radio address, held in the atmosphere of a Fireside Chat, and explained to the public in simple terms the causes of the banking crisis, what the government will do and how the population could help.
The Securities Act of 1933 was enacted to prevent a repeated stock market crash.
The Federal Emergency Relief Administration provided $500&nbsp;million ($ billion today) for relief operations by states and cities, while the short-lived Civil Works Administration (CWA) gave localities money to operate make-work projects in 1933–34.
The first 100 days produced the Farm Security Act to raise farm incomes by raising the prices farmers received, which was achieved by reducing total farm output.
Lowell E. Gallaway and Richard K. Vedder argue on basis of Austrian school theory that the Great Depression was caused by too high wages which they say had caused a loss of depositor confidence which caused the bank runs.
The Wagner Act met Morgenthau's requirement because it strengthened the party's political base and involved no new spending.
If the regime change had not happened and the Hoover policy had continued, the economy would have continued its free fall in 1933, and output would have been 30 percent lower in 1937 than in 1933.
In this way, the Roosevelt Administration generated a set of political ideas—known as New Deal liberalism—that remained a source of inspiration and controversy for decades.
Both men and women were hired for the arts programs (such as music, theater and writing).
Films of the late New Deal era such as ''Citizen Kane'' (1941) ridiculed so-called "great men", while the heroism of the common man appeared in numerous movies, such as ''The Grapes of Wrath'' (1940).
This cooperation resulted in the government subsidizing business and labor through both direct and indirect methods.
Under the gold standard, the United States kept the Dollar convertible to gold.
According to their study, the "New Deal labor and industrial policies did not lift the economy out of the Depression but that the "New Deal policies are an important contributing factor to the persistence of the Great Depression."
* Judicial Reorganization Bill, 1937: gave the President power to appoint a new Supreme Court judge for every judge 70 years or older; failed to pass Congress
This prevailing social norm of the breadwinner failed to take into account the numerous households headed by women, but it soon became clear that the government needed to help women as well.
The New Deal produced a political realignment, making the Democratic Party the majority (as well as the party that held the White House for seven out of nine Presidential terms from 1933 to 1969), with its base in liberal ideas, the South, traditional Democrats, big city machines, and the newly empowered labor unions and ethnic minorities.
The CIO and AFL unions started battling each other more than corporations, and tax policy became more favorable to long-term growth.
* Homeowners Loan Corporation (HOLC) helped people keep their homes, the government bought properties from the bank allowing people to pay the government instead of the banks in installments they could afford, keeping people in their homes and banks afloat.
*raised the issue of how far economic regulation could be extended without sacrificing the liberties of the people (Billington and Ridge)
While existing antitrust laws clearly forbade such practices, organized business found a receptive ear in the Roosevelt Administration.
Eric Rauchway showed that Shlaes tried to diminish the economic growth by referring to the unrepresentative Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Federal regulation of agricultural production has been modified many times since then, but together with large subsidies is still in effect in 2012.
The controversial work of the National Recovery Administration was also part of the First New Deal.
Roosevelt also established the presidency as the prominent center of authority within the federal government.
State governments were often guilty of inhibiting or delaying federal policies.
Their deposits totalled $3.6&nbsp;billion; depositors lost a total of $540&nbsp;million, and eventually received on average 85 cents on the dollar of their deposits; it is a common myth that they received nothing back.
It survived into the 21st century with little controversy because it was seen to benefit the urban poor, food producers, grocers and wholesalers, as well as farmers.
While he could usually use the veto to restrain Congress, it could block any Roosevelt legislation it disliked.
In the end, Congress watered down the bill, setting the tax rates at 7 to 27% and largely exempting small enterprises.
Keynes visited the White House in 1934 to urge President Roosevelt to increase deficit spending.
The tickets were inexpensive or sometimes free, making theater available to audiences unaccustomed to attending plays.
''Fortune'''s Roper poll found in May 1939 that 39% of Americans thought the administration had been delaying recovery by undermining business confidence, while 37% thought it had not.
The United States Housing Act of 1937 created the United States Housing Authority within the U.S. Department of the Interior.
James T. Patterson has reiterated this argument, however he observes that this increased tension can be accounted for not just from a political perspective, but from an economic one, too.
This banking reform offered unprecedented stability: While throughout the 1920s more than five hundred banks failed per year; it was less than ten banks per year after 1933.
Between 1940 and 1980 there was the liberal consensus about the prospects for the widespread distribution of prosperity within an expanding capitalist economy.
The critics emphasize the absence of a philosophy of reform to explain the failure of New Dealers to attack fundamental social problems.
As the historian Isaiah Berlin wrote in 1955, "The only light in the darkness was the administration of Mr. Roosevelt and the New Deal in the United States."
* National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) / Wagner Act, 1935: set up National Labor Relations Board to supervise labor-management relations; In the 1930s, it strongly favored labor unions.
Roosevelt increasingly saw the issue of the Supreme Court as one of unelected officials stifling the work of a democratically elected government.
Recovery was steady and strong until 1937.
Additionally those reports had to be verified by independent auditors.
In 1935, Roosevelt called for a tax program called the ''Wealth Tax Act'' (Revenue Act of 1935) to redistribute wealth.
The WPA, NYA, and CCC relief programs allocated 10% of their budgets to blacks (who comprised about 10% of the total population, and 20% of the poor).
They brought ideas and experience from the government controls and spending of 1917–18.
His choice for Secretary of Labor, Frances Perkins, greatly influenced his initiatives.
But until 1937 Roosevelt had claimed responsibility for the excellent economic performance.
Historians generally agree that, apart from building up labor unions, the New Deal did not substantially alter the distribution of power within American capitalism.
According to Keynesians like Paul Krugman the New Deal therefore was not as successful in the short run as it was in the long run.
Under the New Deal, Americans had access to 30-year mortgages, and the standardized appraisal and construction processes helped open up the housing market to many more Americans of that time.
From 1929 to 1933 manufacturing output decreased by one third.
It is the soberer, less dramatic business of administering resources
It was Morgenthau who insisted on excluding farm workers and domestic servants from Social Security because workers outside industry would not be paying their way.
Due to an overproduction of agricultural products farmers faced a severe and chronic agricultural depression throughout the 1920s.
Millions of farmers left marginal operations, students quit school, and housewives joined the labor force.
While Katznelson has conceded that the expansion of the federal government had the potential to lead to federal-state tension, he has argued it was avoided as these states managed to retain some control.
Roosevelt had been cautious not to run large deficits.
Roosevelt's fiscal and monetary policy regime change helped to make his policy objectives credible.
In a private conversation with Raymond Moley, Roosevelt admitted that the purpose of the bill was "stealing Huey Long's thunder" by making Long's supporters his own.
In the end there were three times more African American workers on public assistance or relief than white workers.
